Water
a shared responsibility

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2

BERGHAHN BOOKS

Published in 2006 jointly by the
United Nations Educational, Scientific

Secretariat of United Nations Conventions
and Decades

and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
7, place de Fontenoy, 75007 Paris, France,
and Berghahn Books, 150 Broadway, Suite 812, New
York, NY 10038, United States of America.

Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertification
(CCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (CCC)

This Report has been published on behalf of the partners
of the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) with the support of the following countries and

Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (ISDR)

organizations:
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia,
France, Germany, International Commission for the
Protection of the Danube River Basin (ICPDR) in

© UNESCO-WWAP 2006
All rights reserved. Except for the quotation of short
passages for the purposes of criticism and review, no part
of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,

cooperation with the countries of the Danube River Basin
District, Japan, Kenya, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Paraguay,
Peru, Russian Federation, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,

recording, or any information storage and retrieval system
now known or to be invented, without the written
permission of UNESCO-WWAP and Berghahn Books.

Thailand, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay, United Kingdom.
United Nations Funds and Programmes

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the

United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNHABITAT)
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs

Library of Congress.

(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)

Library of Congress.

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the

ISBN UNESCO: 92-3-104006-5
ISBN Berghahn: 1-84545-177-5

United Nations University (UNU)
Specialized UN Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)

The designations employed and the presentation of
material throughout this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
World Health Organization (WHO)

UNESCO and WWAP concerning the legal status of any
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or the
delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO)

UNESCO Publishing: http://upo.unesco.org/
Berghahn Books: www.berghahnbooks.com

International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization

Printed in Barcelona.

(UNIDO)

Design & production
Andrew Esson, Baseline Arts Ltd, Oxford, UK

United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
(ESCAP)
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC)
Economic Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA)

All websites accessed in February 2006.

FOREWORD . V

Foreword
Water is an essential life-sustaining element. It pervades our lives and is deeply embedded
in our cultural backgrounds. The basic human needs of a secure food supply and freedom from
disease depend on it. Social development – endeavours such as the smooth functioning of
hospitals – likewise relies on the availability of clean water. Economic development requires energy
resources and industrial activities, and both are in turn water-dependent. The provision of
sanitation for girls in schools offers yet another example of water’s broader links – it has positive
effects on hygiene and health, keeps girls in school, and helps to safeguard the natural
environment. For these reasons and many more, access to safe drinking water and sanitation is
both a development target in its own right and integrally linked to achieving all the Millennium
Development Goals.
The United Nations World Water Development Report is the flagship publication of UN-Water,
the inter-agency mechanism established to coordinate the activities of all United Nations agencies
and entities working in the area of freshwater resources. First published in 2003 as a contribution
to the International Year of Freshwater, the Report is produced by UN-Water’s World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP). Working closely with governments, non-governmental
organizations, civil society groups and the private sector, WWAP monitors water problems,
provides recommendations for meeting future demand, and develops case studies in order to
promote informed discussion of freshwater issues.
This second edition of the World Water Development Report – Water, A Shared Responsibility –
shows that collective responsibility is essential for assessing and monitoring progress and for
meeting internationally-agreed targets and goals. As we move further into the International
Decade for Action, ‘Water for Life’ (2005–2015), I urge all partners to work more closely together
to promote respect for the natural ecosystems on which we depend, and to ensure that all people
enjoy access to safe water and the benefits it makes possible.

Kofi A. Annan
UN Secretary General

PRO LOGU E . V I I

Prologue
In March 2003, at the Third World Water Forum held in Kyoto, Japan, I had the pleasure of
introducing the first World Water Development Report, which is now being used as an
educational tool and as a guide for decision-makers in many countries around the world. Its
impact was such that it created a momentum at the international level for the creation of the
International Decade for Action, ‘Water for Life’ (2005-2015).
It gives me great pleasure, therefore, to introduce the second in this series of World Water
Development Reports – Water, A Shared Responsibility. Its publication is most timely, coming just
one year after the launch of the Decade and in time for the fourth World Water Forum in Mexico
City in March 2006. Subsequent editions of the Report are scheduled for production in 2009,
2012 and 2015, and will provide substantive content for the Decade’s agenda. They will assist in
monitoring progress towards achieving the targets set at the Millennium Summit and the World
Summit for Sustainable Development, many of which have timelines culminating in 2015.
Water, of course, is everyone’s business. Hardly a day goes by when we do not hear of
another flood, another drought or another pollution spill into surface waters or groundwaters.
Each of these issues has a direct or indirect impact not only on human security but also on
livelihoods and development. The issues involved range from those of basic human well-being
(food security and health), to those of economic development (industry and energy), to essential
questions about the preservation of natural ecosystems on which ultimately we all depend. These
issues are inter-related and have to be considered together in a holistic manner.
It is thus entirely appropriate that some twenty-four agencies and entities within the United
Nations system are involved, with a shared purpose, in producing a comprehensive and objective
global report on water issues and the measures being taken to address the related challenges
that beset humanity worldwide.
I am very proud that UNESCO, by housing the Secretariat for the World Water Assessment
Programme and providing a trust fund to help underwrite the costs of the production of the
Report, is facilitating the process of bringing the UN agencies together in common cause. I firmly
believe that understanding the many systems that underlie water issues – scientific and cultural,
economic and social – will enhance our ability to better manage this precious resource and will
help lead to poverty elimination and world peace.

Koïchiro Matsuura
UNESCO Director General

Perito Moreno glacier,
Argentina

PREFAC E . I X

Preface
In the three years since the launch of the first World Water Development Report at the Third
World Water Forum in Kyoto (March 2003), the world has witnessed considerable change. There
have been many instances of major water-related disasters: the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami; the
2004 and 2005 hurricanes in the Caribbean, the west Pacific and the United States; the 2005
floods in central and eastern Europe as well as in many other regions; and the extensive droughts
in Niger, Mali, Spain and Portugal. These are a constant reminder of both the destructive power of
water and the misery deriving from lack of it in so many regions of the world.
These extreme events are the most prominent illustrations of fundamental changes that are
affecting water resources worldwide. In many cases, this evolution is most probably linked to slow
but persistent changes in the global climate, a phenomenon supported by a growing body of
evidence. The combination of lower precipitation and higher evaporation in many regions is
diminishing water quantities in rivers, lakes and groundwater storage, while increased pollution is
damaging ecosystems and the health, lives and livelihoods of those without access to adequate,
safe drinking water and basic sanitation.
Major demographic changes are also seriously affecting the quality and quantity of available
freshwater on the planet. While the more developed countries enjoy relatively stable populations,
the less-developed regions of the world are generally experiencing rapid growth and population
shifts, particularly in towns, small cities and mega-cities. In many rapidly growing urban areas, it
is proving difficult to build the infrastructure necessary to deliver water supply and sanitation
facilities to service the population, leading to poor health, low quality of life and, in many cases,
to social unrest. To the urban demands for water must be added the increasing demands on
water for food production, energy creation and industrial uses.
Large shifts in the geographic distribution of populations occur in various contexts, often
adding to water supply problems and social tension. In areas, such as Darfur, there are both
internally displaced persons and transboundary refugees. Legal and illegal economic migrants are
swelling populations in parts of the United States, and Western Europe, as elsewhere. Increasing
tourism to many holiday destinations often exerts a strain on the water supplies of these regions.
Whether the result of continued unrest and warfare, terrorist activities or economic instability,
population movement is a factor that has a substantial impact on water availability in the world.

X . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

It is against these changes in the global situation – some rapid and very noticeable, others
insidious and yet persistent – that the governance of water resources must be assessed. This
second Report, Water, A Shared Responsibility, sets water issues against this evolving background
and places greater emphasis on governance issues.
It is proving extremely difficult for many governments to effectively confront the many
intertwined issues concerning water. Not only is it difficult for departments within national
governments to collaborate effectively, but problems are compounded when many management
decisions have to be taken at sub-national and community levels, as the linkage and cooperation
between different levels of government is often tenuous at best. The challenges for government
agencies to link to NGOs and the private sector for resolving water issues further complicate
management and decision-making. The task of managing water becomes even more complex
when rivers flow from one country to another. The building of cooperative upstream-downstream
relationships is becoming increasingly important with close to half of the world’s people living in
river basins or above aquifers that cross international borders.
An important goal of the World Water Assessment Programme – founded in 2000 at the
request of governments within the Commission on Sustainable Development – is therefore to
assist governments in developing their national water management plans. Thus, a number of case
studies have been developed and included in the Report. In the first Report, 7 case studies
involving 12 countries were included to illustrate the variety of circumstances in different regions
of the world. Since then, the number of case studies has grown to 17 involving 41 countries. In a
single volume, it is not possible to describe all case studies in detail. Thus we choose to
summarize the case studies in the Report and publish the details of each study on our website.
This strategy also allows us to make all the necessary updates as new data and information
become available.
As we move through the International Decade for Action, ‘Water for Life’, 2005-2015, the
World Water Development Reports will provide a series of assessments that will facilitate the
monitoring of change in the water sector, both on a global basis and within a growing number of
case study countries and river basins. The purpose of the Decade is to focus on the
implementation of water-related programmes and projects, while striving to ensure cooperation at
all levels, including the participation of women, to achieve the internationally-agreed waterrelated goals.

PREFAC E . X I

A number of issues identified by UN-Water as priorities for the Decade include coping with water
scarcity, access to drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, and disaster risk reduction, particularly
in Africa. The Decade aims to support countries in addressing the challenges and achieving the
water-related goals of Agenda 21, the UN Millennium Declaration and the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation, as well as those of the 12th and 13th sessions of the Commission on Sustainable
Development.
The triennial World Water Development Reports will provide substantive content for the
Decade’s agenda (subsequent editions of the Report are scheduled for production in 2009, 2012
and 2015) and lay the foundation for a continuous, global monitoring system, pooling the unique
perspectives and expertise of the 24 UN agencies that comprise UN-Water, in partnership with
governments and other entities concerned with freshwater issues.
We trust that you will find this Report both informative and stimulating.

Gordon Young
WWAP Coordinator

X I I . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Acknowledgements
This report would not have been possible without the generous and varied contributions of many individuals
and organizations from around the world. In addition to the twenty-four agencies that make up UN-Water,
numerous other UN organizations, universities, institutes, NGOs and national governments have contributed
invaluable input. We would especially like to thank the Government of Japan for its generous support and
the publishers, Berghahn Books and UNESCO Publishing.
Team for the preparation of WWDR2: Water, A Shared Responsibility
WWAP coordination
Gordon Young
Carlos Fernández-Jáuregui

Coordinator
Deputy coordinator

WWAP editorial team
Engin Koncagül
Deanna Donovan
Janine Treves-Habar
Sean Lee
Isabelle Brugnon
Kristin Pittman
Alejandra Núñez-Luna
Casey Walther
Alia Hassan

Programme officer, case studies
Programme officer, indicators
Editor-in-chief
Editor
Photo editor
Editorial assistant and CD preparation
Research assistant
Publicity and editorial support
Assistant

WWAP communications and administration
Cornelia Hauke
Assistant project coordinator
Georgette Gobina
Programme secretary
Pilar González Meyaui
Communications officer
Saskia Castelein
Project officer
Toshihiro Sonoda
Liaison officer
Maria Rosa Cárdenas
Communications assistant
Mustapha Boutegrabet
Technical assistant
External Contributors
Tony Milburn
Marie-Aude Bodin
David McDonald

Scientific editor
Proofreader
Assistant editor

Baseline Arts
Andrew Esson
Nicki Averill and Shirley Bolton
Sue Bushell

Design, typography and layout
Design, illustration and layout
Typesetter

Berghahn Books
Mark Stanton and Jen Cottrill
Caroline Richards
Jim Henderson

Proofreaders
Proofreader
Indexer

A C KN OW L E D G EM E N TS . X I I I

Chapter 1: Living in a Changing World
This chapter was drafted by Tony Milburn
(consultant) and the WWAP editorial team, with
contributions from UN-ECE and IOC.

Chapter 2: The Challenges of Governance
This chapter was coordinated and drafted by Håkan
Tropp (UNDP Water Governance Facility, Stockholm
International Water Institute).
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Nighisty
Ghezae, Karin Krchnak, Joakim Harlin, Melvyn Kay,
Alan Hall, Sebastian Silva Leander, David Trouba,
Rudolph Cleveringa and Thord Palmlund.

Chapter 3: Water and Human
Settlements in an Urbanizing World
This chapter draws from the second issue of UNHABITAT’s Water and Sanitation in the World’s Cities
(2006), which is currently under print, to be
published by Earthscan Publications, London. UNHABITAT gratefully acknowledges the contribution of
David Satterthwaite of IIED, London, and UN-HCR
for their contribution on refugees.

Chapter 5: Coastal and Freshwater
Ecosystems
The chapter was coordinated by S. Diop and P.
M’mayi (UNEP) and drafted by C. Revenga (The
Nature Conservancy-TNC), R. D. Robarts (UNEP-GEMS
/Water) and C. Zöckler (UNEP-WCMC).
The following individuals contributed to the chapter
either as working group members and/or workshop
and meeting participants, authors, reviewers or
editors: M. Adriaanse, K. Ambrose, N. Ash, S.
Barker, C. Bene, S. Butchart, W. Darwall, N.
Davidson, R. Davis, M. Diamond, N. Dudley, P.
Dugan, M. Dyhr-Nielsen, J. M. Faures, M. Finlayson,
D. Gerten, M. Hatziolos, R. Hirji, H. Hoff, N. Holmes,
C. Lacambra, B. Lankford, C. Leveque, E. McManus,
Muchina-Kreutzberg, C. Nilsson, S. Oppenheimer, C.
A. Reidy, M. Schomaker, K. Schuyt, D. Stroud and S.
Tomkins. The following individuals contributed to
the chapter as reviewers, contributors and/or
participants in meetings: A. Calcagno, G. Carr, M.
Cheatle, N. Cox, D. Daler, H. Drammeh, T. Goverse,
J. Heppeler, K. Hodgson, R. Johnstone (Editor), E.
Khaka, S. Koeppel, H. M. Lindblom, P. Manyara, F.
Masai, C. Ouma, W. Rast, M. Scheffer, D. Smith, K.
Vervuurt and R. G. Witt.

Chapter 4: The State of the Resource

Chapter 6: Protecting and Promoting
Human Health

This chapter was drafted by Keith Kennedy
(consultant) and supervised by Alice Aureli
(UNESCO) and Avinash Tyagi (WMO).

This chapter was coordinated by Robert Bos (WHO)
and drafted by Wim van der Hoek (IWMI) and Rolf
Luyendijk (UNICEF).

The following individuals contributed to the chapter
either as working group members and/or workshop
and meeting participants, authors, reviewers or
editors: Tommaso Abrate, Pradeep Aggarwal, Bo
Appelgren, Roger Barry, Åse Eliasson, Andy Fraser,
Regula Frauenfelder, Lindsey Higgs, Hege Hisdal,
Regine Hock, Jippe Hoogeveen, Kshitij Kulkarni,
Annukka Lipponen, Jean Margat, Datius Rutashobya,
Joop Steenvoorden, Mohammed Tawfik, Jac van der
Gun, Jaroslav Vrba, Bruce Webb and Gary Wright.

Chapter 7: Water for Food, Agriculture
and Rural Livelihoods
This chapter was coordinated and drafted by Wulf
Klohn and Jean-Marc Faurès (FAO).
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Melvyn Kay,
Karen Frenken, Rudolph Cleveringa, Cécile Brugère,
Jake Burke, Carlos Garces, Paul van Hofwegen,
Sasha Koo-Oshima, Audrey Nepveu de Villemarceau,
Åse Eliasson, David Molden, Daniel Renault, Uwe
Barg, Leon Hermans, Pasquale Steduto and Michael
Wales.

X I V . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Chapter 8: Water and Industry
This chapter was coordinated and drafted by Ania
Grobicki (consultant) on behalf of UNIDO.
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Pablo Huidobro,
Susanna Galloni, Takashi Asano and Karen Franz
Delgau.

Chapter 9: Water and Energy
This chapter was drafted by Ania Grobicki
(consultant) and coordinated by Robert Williams
(UNIDO).
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Richard Taylor,
Pravin Karki, Margaret McMorrow, Vestal Tutterow,
Michael Brown, Tong Jiandong, Lucille Langlois,
Ferenc Toth, John Topper, Gordon Couch and Drona
Upadhyay.

Chapter 10: Managing Risks: Securing
the Gains of Development
This chapter was coordinated and drafted by
Bastien Affeltranger (UNU-EHS).
The following individuals contributed as working
group members: Wolfgang Grabs (WMO) and Yuichi
Ono (UN-ISDR). And the following individuals
contributed as authors or reviewers: Mohammed
Abchir, Reid Basher, Janos Bogardi, Salvano Briceno,
Xiaotao Cheng, Ken Davidson, John Harding, Tarek
Merabtene, Tony Milburn, Buruhani Nyenzi, Pascal
Peduzzi, Erich Plate, Rajib Shaw, Slobodan
Simonovic, Caroline Sullivan, Mohamed Tawfik,
Avinash Tyagi and Junichi Yoshitani.

Tazi Sadeq, Raya Stefan, Volker Böge, Lars Wirkus,
Arjen Y. Hoekestra, Dipak Gyawali, Bruce Hooper,
Monica Porto, Eugene Stakhiv, and Waleed El
Zubeiri, Bozena Blix, András Szöllösi-Nagy, Alberto
Tejada-Guibert and Alice Aureli.

Chapter 12: Valuing and Charging
for Water
This chapter was drafted by Robert A. Young
(consultant) and M. Aslam Chaudhry (UNDESA) and
coordinated by M. Aslam Chaudhry (UNDESA).
The following individuals contributed as reviewers:
Manuel Dengo, Claude Sauveplane, Jean-Michel
Chene and Leon Hermans. The following individuals
provided background material and reports: Marcia
Brewster and Jacob Burke.

Chapter 13: Enhancing Knowledge
and Capacity
This chapter was coordinated and drafted by Jan
Luijendijk, Roland Price and Kyle Robertson
(UNESCO-IHE).
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Diego MejiaVelez, Guy J. F. R. Alaerts, Paul W. J. van Hofwegen,
Saba Bokhari, Claudio Caponi, Ralph Daley, Jac van
der Gun, Keith Kennedy, Kees Leendertse, Wouter
Lincklaen Arriens, Annukka Lipponen, Paul Taylor,
Alexey Volynets, Charles Vörösmarty and Jan Yap.

Chapter 14: Case Studies: Moving
Towards an Integrated Approach
This chapter was coordinated by Engin Koncagül.
Jean-Marie Barrat contributed to the African case
studies, and the chapter is based on information
provided by the following case study partners:

Chapter 11: Sharing Water
This chapter was drafted by Evan Vlachos (Colorado
State University) and coordinated by Léna Salamé
(UNESCO).
The following individuals contributed as authors,
reviewers, editors, working group members and/or
workshop and meeting participants: Shammy Puri, P.
B. Anand, Aaron T. Wolf, Joshua T. Newton, Houria

The Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country
Ana Isabel Oregi Bastarrika, Tomas Epalza Solano,
José María Sanz de Galdeano Equiza, Iñaki Arrate
Jorrín, Jasone Unzueta, Mikel Mancisidor and Iñaki
Urrutia Garayo.
The Danube River Basin
Ursula Schmedtje, Igor Liska and Michaela Popovici.

A C KN OW L E D G EM E N TS . X V

Ethiopia
Abera Mekonen, Teshome Workie, Tesfaye
Woldemihret, Michael Abebe, Mesfin Amare, Zeleke
Chafamo and Teshome Afrassa.
France
The Water Directorate at the French Ministry of
Ecology and Sustainable Development, its regional
services and the French Water Agencies.
Japan
Kouji Ikeuchi, Masaru Kunitomo, Satoru Ohtani,
Takashi Nimura, Hiroki Ishikawa, Junichi Yoshitani,
Tarek Merabtene, Daisuke Kuribayashi, Masato
Toyama, Katsutoshi Koga and Ken Yoneyama.
Kenya
George O. Krhoda, Simeon Ochieng, George K.
Chesang, Samuel Mureithi Kioni, Patrick Opondo
Oloo, Zablon N. Isaboke Oonge, Francis J. Edalia,
Bernard Imbambi Kasabuli, Andy Tola Maro, Josiah
W. Kaara, Peterson Nyaga Njiru, Evelyn M. Mbatia,
Simon Kariuki Mugera, Peter Musuva, Patrick O.
Hayombe, Daniel M. Mbithi, John Gachuki Kariuki
and Helen Musyoki.
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Basin
Estonia: Ago Jaani, Harry Liiv, Margus Korsjukov.
Russian Federation: Natalia P. Alexeeva, Vladimir F.
Budarin, Alla A. Sedova.
Lake Titicaca
Alberto Crespo Milliet, Jorge Molina Carpio and Julio
Sanjinez-Goytia.
Mali
Malick Alhousseni, Adama Tiémoko Diarra, Sidi
Toure, Housseini Maiga and Karaba Traore.
State of Mexico
Enrique Peña Nieto, Benjamín Fournier Espinosa,
José Manuel Camacho Salmón, Edgardo Castañeda
Espinosa, José Raúl Millán López, Mario Gerardo
Macay Lim, José Luis Luege Tamargo and Mónica
Salazar Balderrama.
Mongolia
Dr. Basandorj, G. Davaa, N. Jadambaa, N. Batsukh,
Z. Batbayar and Ramasamy Jayakumar.

La Plata
Victor Pochat, Silvia González, Elena Benítez, Carlos
Díaz, Miguel Giraut, Julio Thadeu Kettelhut, Luis
Loureiro, Ana Mugetti, Silvia Rafaelli, Roberto Torres,
Helio de Macedo Soares and the technical and
administrative staff of Comité Intergubernamental
Coordinador de los Países de la Cuenca del Plata.
South Africa
Fred Van Zyl and Eberhard Braune.
Sri Lanka
Maithripala Sirisena, B.V.R. Punyawardane, Ananda
Wijesuriya, B.J.P. Mendis, K.S.R. de Silva, M.H.
Abeygunawardane, A.P.R. Jayasinghe, W.A.N.
Somaweera, Amara Satharasinghe, Badra
Kamaladasa, T.J. Meegastenne, T.M. Abayawickrama,
Tissa Warnasuriya, A.D.S. Gunawardane, H.P.S.
Somasiri, B.M.S. Samarasekara, K.Athukorale, M.S.
Wickramarachchi, U.S. Imbulana, M. Wickramage,
Dayantha S. Wijeyesekara, Malik Ranasinghe, L.T.
Wijesuriya, P.P.G. Dias, C.R. Panabokke, A.P.G.R.L.
Perera, H.M. Jayatillake, L. Chandrapala, B.R.S.B.
Basnayake, G.H.P. Dharmaratne, R.S.C. George, K.W.
Nimal Rohana, C.K. Shanmugarajah, S.L. Weerasena,
A.R.M. Mahrouf, N.Senanayake, G.A.M.S.
Emitiyagoda, K.D.N. Weerasinghe, M.P. de Silva, U.
Wickramasinghe, R.N. Karunaratne, B.K.C.C.
Seneviratne, T.D. Handagama, S. Senaratne, U.R.
Ratnayake, G. Herath, M.M. Ariyabandu, B.M.S.
Batagoda, N.K. Atapattu, R.W.F. Ratnayake, N.T.S.
Wijesekara and B.R. Neupane.
Thailand
Department of Water Resources, Surapol Pattanee
and Sukontha Aekaraj.
Uganda
Patrick Kahangire, Nsubuga Senfuma, Sottie
Bomukama, Fred Kimaite, Justin Ecaat, Henry
Bidasala, Disan Ssozi, Mohammed Badaza, Abushen
Majugu, Joseph Epitu, Nicholas Azza, Joyce Ikwaput,
Joel Okonga, Callist Tindimugaya, Patrick Okuni and
Ben Torach.

Chapter 15: Conclusions and
Recommendations for Action
This chapter was drafted by the WWAP editorial team.

Water is the earth’s eye, looking into which the beholder
measures the depth of his own nature.
Henry David Thoreau

Contents
Foreword – Kofi Annan (UN Secretary General)
Prologue – Koïchiro Matsuura (UNESCO Director General)
Preface – Gordon Young (WWAP Coordinator)
Acknowledgements

v
vii
ix
xii

Section 1: Changing Contexts

1
2
3
5
43
87

Global Map 1: Index of Non-sustainable Water Use
Global Map 2: Urban Population Growth

Chapter 1: Living in a Changing World
Chapter 2: The Challenges of Water Governance (UNDP, with IFAD)
Chapter 3: Water and Human Settlements in an Urbanizing World (UN-HABITAT)
Section 2: Changing Natural Systems

115
116
117
119
159

Global Map 3: Relative Water Stress Index
Global Map 4: Sources of Contemporary Nitrogen Loading

Chapter 4: The State of the Resource (UNESCO & WMO, with IAEA)
Chapter 5: Coastal and Freshwater Ecosystems (UNEP)
Section 3: Challenges for Well-being and Development

199
200
201
203
243
275
305

Global Map 5: Domestic and Industrial Water Use
Global Map 6: Sediment Trapping by Large Dams and Reservoirs

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

6:
7:
8:
9:

Protecting and Promoting Human Health (WHO & UNICEF)
Water for Food, Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods (FAO & IFAD)
Water and Industry (UNIDO)
Water and Energy (UNIDO)

Section 4: Management Responses and Stewardship
Global Map 7: The Climate Moisture Coefficient of Variation
Global Map 8: The Water Reuse Index

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

10:
11:
12:
13:

Managing Risks: Securing the Gains of Development (WMO & UN-ISDR)
Sharing Water (UNESCO)
Valuing and Charging for Water (UNDESA)
Enhancing Knowledge and Capacity (UNESCO)

Section 5: Sharing Responsibilities
Chapter 14: Case Studies: Moving Towards an Integrated Approach
Chapter 15: Conclusions and Recommendations for Action
List of Boxes (by chapter and by region), Maps, Figures, and Tables
Acronyms and units of measurement
Credits (Global Maps and Photography)
Index
CD-ROM

337
338
339
341
371
399
433
465
467
519

530
540
547
550
inside back cover

Water distribution during
a drought in Mandera,
Kenya

SECTION 1

Changing Contexts
The key challenges of water management can only be understood
within the context of water’s role in the world today. Many of the
world’s socio-economic systems are becoming linked at an
unprecedented rate. Fast developing communications and
transportation systems – including television, Internet and mobile
phones – enable many of us to see first hand, and often in real
time, what is happening in the world and even take us there
should we wish. We are witnessing the impact of extreme climates
in floods and drought conditions as well as that of poverty,
warfare and disease, which still bedevil so many people of the
world, often in increasingly crowded urban conditions.
It is within this setting that the world’s water managers have to
manage what is an increasingly scarce resource. The pressures and
complexity that they face, in what is often a fast changing setting
where the available resources can vary greatly in time and space,
are huge. This section gives an overview of this and the
increasingly refined techniques necessary to secure the equitable
management of one of the planet’s most precious resources.
Global Map 1: Index of Non-sustainable Water Use
Global Map 2: Urban Population Growth

Chapter 1 – Living in a Changing
World

Emphasizing the central role of water
use and allocation in poverty
alleviation and socio-economic
development, this chapter discusses some of the many
ways in which demographic and technological change,
globalization and trade, climate variability, HIV/AIDS,
warfare, etc., affect and are impacted by water. Key
concepts of water management, sustainability and equity
are introduced, as is the pivotal role of the many
activities of the UN system in the water sector.
Chapter 2 – The Challenges of
Governance (UNDP with IFAD)

Recognizing that the water crisis is
largely a crisis of governance, this
chapter outlines many of the leading
obstacles to sound and sustainable water management:
sector fragmentation, poverty, corruption, stagnated
budgets, declining levels of development assistance and
investment in the water sector, inadequate institutions
and limited stakeholder participation. While the progress
towards reforming water governance remains slow, this
chapter provides recommendations for balancing the
social, economic, political and environmental dimensions
of water.
Chapter 3 – Water and Human
Settlements in an Urbanizing
World (UN-HABITAT)

Increasing population growth is
creating major problems worldwide.
Growing urban water supply and sanitation needs,
particularly in lower- and middle-income countries, face
increasing competition with other sectors. Rising incomes
in other portions of the world population fuel demand for
manufactured goods and environmental services and
amenities, all of which require water. This chapter
emphasizes the scale of the growing urban water
challenges, pointing out that nearly one-third of urban
dwellers worldwide live in slums.

Index of Non-sustainable Water Use
In general, human society has positioned itself in areas
with locally sustainable water supplies, in the form of
runoff, and/or river and stream flows (Postel et al., 1996;
Vörösmarty et al., 2005b). This map illustrates where
human water use (domestic, industrial and agricultural)
exceeds average water supplies annually. Areas of high
water overuse (highlighted in red to brown tones) tend to
occur in regions that are highly dependent on irrigated
agriculture, such as the Indo-Gangetic Plain in South Asia,
the North China Plain and the High Plains in North
America. Urban concentration of water demand adds a

highly localized dimension to these broader geographic
trends. Where water use exceeds local supplies society is
dependent on infrastructure that transports water over
long distances (i.e., pipelines and canals) or on
groundwater extraction — an unsustainable practice over
the long-term. Both the map and the graph below
understate the problem, as the impact of seasonal
shortages are not reflected. The consequences of overuse
include diminished river flow, depletion of groundwater
reserves, reduction of environmental flows needed to
sustain aquatic ecosystems, and potential societal conflict.

Water use in excess of natural supply (average annual)

High

Moderate

Low

Little or no use

Adequate supply

6000
Cumulative population
(millions) served by runoff

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

5111

The graph (left) shows that in 2000, of the world’s
total population 20% had no appreciable natural
water supply, 65% (85% minus the 20% with no
appreciable water supply mentioned above) shared
low-to-moderate supplies (<
— 50% of global runoff)
and only 15% enjoyed relative abundance (>50% of
global runoff).

3000

1150
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fraction of global runoff

Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

S EC TI O N 1 . C H A N G I N G CO N TEX TS . 3

Urban Population Growth
In less developed regions of the world, this increase has
been even more dramatic: in Africa and Asia the fraction
of urban population has nearly tripled in the last 50 years
(see graph below). Between 2000 and 2030, most
population growth is expected to occur within the urban
areas of less developed countries, while overall, rural
population is expected to decline slightly.

In 1950, the world’s population was about 2.5 billion
people; by 2000, global population was just over 6
billion, an increase of nearly 150 percent in only 50
years. During this time, the proportion of the global
population living in urban areas increased from 29 to 47
percent and it is estimated that by 2010, more than 50
percent of the global population will be urban dwellers
(UN, 2003).

Global Population Density, 2000

Global Rural Urban Mapping Project (GRUMP) alpha Centre for International Earth Science Information
Network (CIESIN) Columbia University in the City of New York
Persons per square km

<1

1–4

5–24

25–249

Proportion of total population that resides
in urban areas by region
Oceania
North America
Latin America
Europe

250–999

1000+

No data

Roughly 3% of the earth’s land surface is occupied
by urban areas, with the highest concentrations
occurring along the coasts and waterways. The
historical importance of water as a means of
transport as well as a resource has meant that
inland water and river corridors have been
important in determining the spatial organization
and distribution of human settlements.

Asia
Africa
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Sources: Center for International Earth Science Information Network, Columbia University, Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire
Data available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

Fishing on the Mekong
River in Viet Nam

Part 1. Changing Socio-economic
Contexts .................................................................7

Part 5. Management Responses and
Stewardship .......................................................24

1a. Poverty, water and development ........................7
Box 1.1: The particular problems of Africa
1b. Demographic changes..........................................8
Population growth and urbanization......................9
1c. Political and economic changes ........................10
Warfare and conflicts...........................................10
Box 1.2: Environmental refugees
Globalization........................................................10
Box 1.3: Tourism and globalization
Technological innovations and water...................11
Box 1.4: Mobile phones and the water sector

5a. Managing risks: dealing with increasing
frequency............................................................24
Box 1.9: Hurricane Katrina
Box 1.10: The tsunami disaster and future
preparedness
5b. Sharing water: Facing increased
competition ........................................................24
5c. Enhancing knowledge and capacity: At all
levels ..................................................................25
Box 1.11: Policy-making and scientific integrity
5d. Valuing and charging for water: Market vs.
non-market values .............................................28

Part 2. Governing Water: A Shared
Responsibility ...................................................12

2a.
2b.
2c.
2d.

Fig. 1.1: The reiterative policy-making process
Box 1.5: The EU and South Africa: Inclusive
water management
An integrated approach – IWRM .......................13
Box 1.6: Thirteen key IWRM change areas
Demand management .......................................14
Subsidiarity.........................................................15
Gender mainstreaming .......................................15

Part 3. Changing Natural Systems ...............17
3a. Human intervention ...........................................17
Threatened environmental resilience ...................17
3b. Climate variability and change ..........................18
Box 1.7: The particular problems of tropical
countries
3c. Ecological water management ..........................18

Part 4. Challenges for Well-being and
Development .....................................................20
4a. Water and health: Reducing infectious
diseases ..............................................................20
4b. Water and food: Facing growing demand and
competition ........................................................20
4c. Water for industry and energy: Aiming for
sustainability......................................................21
Box 1.8: Inland water transport

The confluence of two rivers, New Zealand

Part 6. Water and Global Targets:
Where Do We Stand?....................................29
6a. The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) ....29
Box 1.12: Water and the Millennium
Development Goals
Progress on global goals and targets ..................32
Box 1.13: Recommendations of the Millennium
Task Force on Water and Sanitation
6b. Indicator development and the World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP) ......................33
Fig. 1.2: The DPSIR framework of analysis
Table 1.1: Proposed WWDR2 indicators by
challenge area
6c. The crucial role of case studies.........................38
6d. Looking ahead: WWAP in the medium term .....39

References and Websites .................................41

1
CHAPTER 1

Living in a
Changing
World

Lead Agency:

UNDP
(United
Nations
Development
Programme)

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
At present, our society has not yet attained a level of sustainability whereby humanity honours and
respects life upon this planet and uses fairly and equitably the resources it provides. The UN system has
taken on a lead role in addressing this challenge through the setting of the Millennium Development Goals
and water has a crucial role to play in this. Forty percent of the world’s population live in situations of
extreme poverty and efforts are underway to lift them out of the poverty trap and to offer greater
protection from the natural hazards that still prevail. This introductory chapter will give a flavour of some
of the critical challenges involved in managing freshwater to enable poverty alleviation and socioeconomic development, within an environmentally-sound integrated framework.
■

Water is the primary life-giving resource. Its
availability is an essential component in socioeconomic development and poverty reduction.
Today, a number of significant factors have an
impact both on this resource and on managing
water in an integrated, sustainable and equitable
manner. These include widespread poverty,
malnutrition, the dramatic impacts of demographic
change, growing urbanization, the effects of
globalization – with the threats and opportunities
this brings – and the recent manifestations of
climate change. All these factors impinge on the
water sector in increasingly complex ways.

■

The defining characteristic of today’s world is
change. In almost every sector, including the
natural world, the pace of change is unprecedented
in recent history. Technological change, especially
in information and communications technology,
facilitates ‘globalization’, which in turn affects
virtually all aspects of our lives as physical and
cultural products move ever more easily around
the world. As internationalization and rapid
economic growth in many societies alter
traditional socio-economic structures, it is clear
that change, although virtually pervasive, is not
entirely positive. Many people, especially in the
developing world and especially those on urban
margins and in rural areas, are left behind in
poverty and mired in preventable disease. All the
chapters in this Report address this issue in one
form or another.

■

Exacerbating the challenge of economic
development is the issue of climate change,
which strongly influences the hydrological cycle.
Droughts and floods, intensified by climate

change, can lead to famine, loss of resources and
contamination of water supplies. Population
pressure on forest resources can accelerate land
degradation and compromise watershed
functions, increasing the vulnerability of the
poorest communities. Warming temperatures,
rising sea levels, uncertain effects on ecosystems,
and increased climatic variability are just some of
the changes expected to have a disproportionate
and significant impact on developing countries.
While climate may reduce poor people’s assets,
increased climate variability will increase their
vulnerability and undermine their resilience and
coping ability. Thus, climate variability and
change present a fundamental challenge to the
long-term development prospects of many
developing countries, and will make it difficult to
meet and sustain the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs).
■

In short, water is fundamental to our way of life,
at whatever point in the socio-economic
spectrum a community may be situated. It is
likewise crucial to the preservation of the
essential ecosystems upon which our lives
depend. Whatever development initiatives are
proposed over and above the provision of secure
access to water – and such initiatives are many
and varied – unless the requisite water services
are secured and provided, these initiatives will
not succeed. Access to secure water supplies is
essential. This seems self-evident. Yet, as this
Report shows, it is clear that the central role of
water in development is neither well understood
nor appreciated. Much more needs to be done by
the water sector to educate the world at large
and decision-makers in particular.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 7

Part 1. Changing Socio-economic
Contexts
Poverty impinges on individual households and families. In aggregate it affects approximately
1 billion people worldwide. This represents one-sixth of the total world population who,
through sickness, hunger, thirst, destitution and marginalization, find it nearly impossible to
climb out of the pit of extreme poverty. Very poor people struggle to pay for adequate food
and water, for housing, for medicines and drugs to treat sick family members, for transport to
get to places of work or carry sick family members to treatment centres, and for the
education of their children.

1a. Poverty, water and development
The extreme poor live hand to mouth – what they
earn, in an urban area on a good day, will buy food
and water for the family for that day. Very often,
the quantity of water needed for good personal
and domestic hygiene is too expensive to buy from
street water vendors, too far to carry in the case of
distant water sources, and often necessitates the
use of polluted water from nearby, heavily used,
rivers and streams. Rarely do they have access to
improved sanitation and, where this may be
available from a public facility in towns and cities,
the cost to the whole family may be prohibitive
(see Chapter 6). Many poor families occupy land
over which they have no formal legal rights – in a
squatter community or slum, often with little flood
protection infrastructure (see Chapters 3 and 10).
Many also farm on marginal lands owned by others
with limited access to reliable water (see Chapter 7).
Drainage systems for urban rain and storm water
are frequently inadequate, no formal systems for
solid waste collection are provided, and there is a
lack of paved areas, such as footpaths and roads.
The latter are important and not just for movement;
they also provide a location for the installation and
ready operation and maintenance of network utility
services such as water, drainage and electricity. The
payment structure for many utility services (e.g.
water, electricity), with their up-front connection
charges and monthly consumption charges (see
Chapter 12), are often too high for the poor to pay
them. On top of all of this, debt frequently adds to
the burdens of poor households.
In rural areas, the food and water needed by families
will be taken largely from the natural environment.
Water is carried from a distant spring or pool, some

not very nutritious food may be grown on marginally
productive land, or collected from forests and is most
often insufficient to satisfy hunger and provide
needed nourishment. The rural poor are often at the
end of irrigation systems, and at the whim of richer
upstream users for water, or pushed out onto land
dependent totally on what may be, with growing
climate variability, increasingly erratic rainfall. Deep
well water abstractions by richer farmers and waterusing industries can lower water tables to the extent
that poorer families and communities cannot then
access the groundwater. Untreated municipal and
industrial effluents also pollute the surface and
groundwater sources relied on by the poor for their
water supplies, without redress.
Unbridled competition from richer farmers and
industry, productive land, agriculture and fisheries
often puts the poor at a serious disadvantage. The
implementation of national food policies (through
subsidies, taxes, tariffs, food aid etc.) can distort
markets and marginalize the rural poor; and
inadequately organized and non pro-poor international
trade liberalization can exacerbate this. Because of the
difficulties poor families face in accumulating any
surpluses – food or financial – they find it difficult to
maintain consumption when their incomes are
interrupted or their crops fail. The poor are excluded
from many life-saving and livelihood opportunities,
either because of inadequate provision of basic
community services by local authorities – health care,
transport, education and training, emergency services
(e.g. fire-fighting) and law enforcement – or their
inability to pay for these services.
Perhaps at no stage in the poverty relief process
is water and sanitation more critical than at the

The rural poor
are often at the
end of irrigation
systems, and at
the whim of
richer upstream
users for
water...

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.1: THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS OF AFRICA
Africa is subject to famine, beset by disease and

however, high-yield staple crops (rice and

crisis have added to its burdens. Unlike Asia,

mostly isolated from contemporary international

wheat), introduced during the Asian green

which hosts coastal cities with good access to

trade. Bad governance and rapid population

revolution, enabled food production to grow

ports and sea routes, most African people live

growth add to the problems. Its very narrow

rapidly as the continent’s vast plains were well

inland, too far from ports to enable growth from

range of exports, restricted to agricultural

suited to irrigation. Agricultural income grew

industrial exports. Road, rail and inland water

commodities, some mineral resources and

rapidly, and production diversified. Surplus

transport infrastructure are poor and air travel is

hydrocarbons – all of which are subject to the

labour migrated to the cities, leading to rapid

cumbersome between African countries.

price vagaries of international markets – further

urbanization and industrialization. However,

restricts economic development. Africa is not

Africa does not have the same sort of irrigation

dissimilar to Asia around forty years ago. In Asia,

potential as Asia. Malaria and the growing AIDs

Child carrying water
across an open drain,
Ghana

beginning of movement out of abject poverty.
Access to a reliable nearby source of water
provides relief from the burden of carrying water
from distant springs and wells, freeing up time for
livelihood activities and, in the case of girls, for
school attendance. Having enough water to cover
drinking and domestic hygiene needs promotes
better health and well-being. Sanitation facilities
help to ensure the safe disposal of human waste
and reduce disease and death. Adequate water
supplies improve the prospects of new livelihood
activities, which are otherwise denied, and are often
a key step out of poverty. In many lower-income
countries, large parts of the population depend on
agriculture for their basic livelihood. Others, living
in great poverty on marginal land, struggle just
to survive. Access to reliable water sources, under
the control of the people concerned, reduces
crop-loss risks and leads to the possibility of
accumulating surpluses and the chance to invest
in more intensive agriculture (Moench et al.,
2003). Diversification into other activities becomes
possible, education opportunities for children grow
and, maybe, transition out of agriculture to more
profitable enterprises. Industry at all scales needs
reliable water resources to prosper and encourage
investment in industrial growth. Available water
resources and freedom from water-related disease
also encourage inward foreign investment.

Source: Sachs, 2005.

with short life expectancy and large families, to
longer life expectation and smaller families, is very
far from complete. Approximately one-third of all
countries are still in the early stages of the process,
all of which are low-income countries. In fact, of
the projected population growth to 8.1 billion by
2030 and some 8.9 billion by 2050, almost all will
be in low-income countries (Browne, 2005).
A growing problem, as covered in Section 3 of the
Report, is the increasing competition for freshwater
between agriculture and urban and industrial uses,
causing tension between rural and urban areas and
possibly threatening regional or national food
security. In fact nearly all malnutrition and low food
yield problems are found in low-income countries
in the tropics, where water scarcity in relation to
food, people and the environment are at their
greatest. The four principal demographic risk factors
currently challenging humanity – (1) the increasing
percentages of young adults, (2) rapid urbanization,
(3) reduced availability of freshwater and cropland
for food production, (4) HIV/AIDs – rarely occur
singly. More usually they occur in combination and
coupled with other obstacles, such as weak
institutions, unresponsive governments and historic
ethnic tensions. The resulting challenges to the
leadership of governments can reduce the ability of
countries to function effectively (Worldwatch
Institute, 2005), as explored in Chapter 2.

1b. Demographic changes
The present global population is around 6.4 billion
and growing at some 70 million per year, mostly in
low-income countries. What has been called the
global demographic transition, from populations

A particular problem of recent rapid population
growth is the so-called ‘youth bulge’, where young
people between the ages of 15 and 30 represent
over 40 percent of the total adult population. Many

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 9

people in this age group have no jobs and even the
educated can struggle to find meaningful work. As
things stand now, 85 percent of the world’s young
people are in low-income countries and the average
unemployment rate is four times the overall adult
rate. The potential consequences of this situation
are significant social and political unrest.
The problem is often worst in rural areas where
young men cannot inherit land because plot sizes,
subdivided through successive generations of
inheritance to large families, have become so small
that they are no longer viable. Thus, the men lack a
secure livelihood and reduced prospects of marriage
– a socially destabilizing situation. While the youth
bulge will decline as fertility rates continue to fall,
some countries (in sub-Saharan Africa and the
Middle East) are still experiencing rapid growth in
young adult populations. It is likely that these
countries will pose a challenge to the development
of their region and to international security
(Worldwatch Institute, 2005).

Population growth and urbanization
Back in 1970, about two-thirds of the total world
population lived in rural areas. By 2001, this had
dropped to just over 50 percent. On current
predictions, by 2020 this will have fallen to 44
percent with 56 percent of the population living in
urban areas. Until recently, Africa was considered
the least urbanized continent. This has changed.
By 2020, Africa’s urban population is estimated to
reach 500 million – up from 138 million in 1990.
Malawi is the current fastest urbanizing nation due
to population flight from severe flooding. Nigeria
has also seen tremendous urban growth while huge
slums are found in Johannesburg and Nairobi
(Worldwatch Institute, 2005).1

Urbanization can be a force for good, in terms of
economic growth and global integration. However,
some of the factors that helped to create wealth in
industrialized countries, such as youthful
populations, a middle class, nearness to political
power and ethnic/religious diversity, can be
potential sources of conflict in fast-growing but

Kibera slum, Nairobi,
Kenya

1. www.worldwatch.org

BOX 1.2: ENVIRONMENTAL REFUGEES
It is estimated that there are presently some 30

displacement by development projects, etc.

It has been suggested that the number of

million environmental refuges and a further 17

Large displacements of population can cause

environmental refugees could rise to 150 million

million other refugees and displaced persons

instability or conflict in the host country, country

by 2050 as one of the results of climate change.

from wars, persecution and other causes. The

of origin, or within a region. They entail

former have fled from resource scarcity, from

depletion of scarce resources, overcrowding,

deforestation and environmental degradation,

shortage of potable water and unsanitary

climate change impacts, overpopulation,

conditions that can lead to disease epidemics.

Source: Worldwatch Institute, 2005.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.3: TOURISM AND GLOBALIZATION
An increasing number of low-income countries

in water-scarce areas, especially where golf

water supplies has led to instances of water

have actively promoted a large increase in

courses are involved, an increase in marine

diversion from farmers, effectively driving them

tourism activities to foster their economic

pollution in coastal areas from inadequate

out of agriculture and their livelihoods.

development. While there are clear economic

wastewater treatment and loss of crucial marine

benefits, there is also a downside. Problems of

biodiversity, including coral reef destruction, have

Source: www.uneptie.org/pc/tourism/

excessive water consumption in tourist complexes

all occurred. Competition by tourism for scarce

sust-tourism/env-3main.htm

poor cities in developing countries. Statistics show
that countries with urban growth exceeding 4
percent per year are twice as likely as others to
experience civil disturbances (Population Action
International, 2003). Chapter 3 looks at the issues
of urbanization and human settlements in much
more detail, especially the challenges of providing
water and sanitation to improve both health and
livelihood activities. The food and water implications
related to demographic change and urbanization are
reviewed in Chapter 7.

1c. Political and economic changes
Otash camp for Internally
Displaced Persons (IDP),
Sudan

We are living in a period of rapid and significant
geopolitical change. Previously established empires
and countries have broken up (e.g. the Soviet
Union and Yugoslavia) while neighbouring groups
of countries seek closer economic collaboration
or consolidation (e.g. the European Union). The
former centrally controlled economy of the Soviet
Union is now a collection of nation states trying to
enter the global economy, without the experience
or institutions to cope effectively. Ethnic tensions
suppressed under former political systems within
the former Yugoslavia have erupted into armed
conflict in the Balkans. New nation states, wary
of sharing the water resources of transboundary
rivers and aquifers, become very defensive about
their perceived sovereignty over such resources,
especially as resources are pressured by increased
demand and deteriorating water quality.

Warfare and conflicts

2. www.unep.org/
Documents.Multilingual/
Default.asp?DocumentID=
65&ArticleID=1291&l=en

The Post Conflict Assessment Unit of the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has shown
that conflicts are almost always followed by
environmental crises: chemicals leaching into
waterways, damage to irrigation systems,
deforestation, the destruction of infrastructure and

collapses of governance systems – local and national.
Rebuilding economies, damaged lives, shattered
infrastructure including water and power systems,
rebuilding and restoring damaged irrigation systems,
removing landmines in post-conflict situations, absorb
27 percent of all Overseas Development Assistance
(Worldwatch Institute, 2005). The Convention on the
Prohibition of Military or any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques (ENMOD
Convention)2 seeks to prohibit acts such as weather
modification and harmful flood creation. The threat
posed by the release of toxic chemicals into the
environment has further prompted calls for a new
convention. It is no coincidence that many of the
countries yet to make progress on debt relief are
those recently emerged from conflict situations (World
in 2005). Chapters 2, 3 and 11 cover these and
other issues of warfare and refugees, and point to
the need for introduction of agreements and
conventions to address these problems.

Globalization
At present, the world is going through an
unprecedented process of integrating finance,
trade, communication and technology. By
eliminating tariffs and other barriers to trade, the
world’s economy is becoming increasingly
interlinked. This has advantages. Transaction costs
and investment risks can be reduced and greater
investment encouraged. The increased competition
encouraged by regional integration fosters
competition and innovation. Reduced costs in
telecommunications and energy infrastructure are
possible. For water, globalization enables economies
of scale through access to bigger markets,
facilitates improved cooperation over international
waters, and allows a benefits-based approach
towards regional water-resource systems and intercountry collaboration on water knowledge and skills

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 11

BOX 1.4: MOBILE PHONES AND THE WATER SECTOR
Current available evidence suggests that

GDP growth by 0.6 percentage points. Mobile

communities of floods, to get information and

promoting a widespread use of mobile phones

phones help reduce transaction costs, widen

help in treating water-related diseases and many

(cell phones) may be a sensible way to

trade networks and do away with the need for

more. The UN has set a target of access by 50

encourage bottom-up development. Mobile

intensive travelling. In terms of the water sector,

percent of the world population, although some

phones help to raise long-term growth rates –

in low-income countries they are used by fishers

three-quarters of that population already live

an extra ten phones per 100 people in a typical

and farmers to obtain the best prices for their

within range of a mobile telephone network.

lower-income country has been shown to raise

produce, to help provide early warnings to

Source: Economist, March 2005.

transfer. Disadvantages, however, may include
increased water scarcity and pollution, if water
demand and pollution control are not carefully
managed (World Development Report, 2005).
Countries with poor or weakly enforced
environmental regulations which allow pollution (air
or water) to flow across international boundaries
are of great concern (World Bank, 2005).
In some countries, there are moves to divert water
from the production of low-value staple crops to
higher-value cash crops such as vegetables, fruit and
flowers. As exporting grows, there are concerns that
the rules of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) and the World Trade Organization
(WTO) increase environmental risk due to their
restrictions on the use of the precautionary principle.3
Several critics of these organizations’ rules argue that
WTO, for example, has always put the interests of
commerce before environmental protection. This may
lead to countries bound by these trade rules to agree
to bulk exports of water to other countries against
their wishes (Figueres, 2003).
One of the consequences of globalization and the
increase of market-based economics is that rights
markets have been widely advocated as the way to
manage natural resources. Chapter 12 looks at
economic valuation techniques for water.

Technological innovations and water
Technology can offer significant opportunities for
the water sector. In water treatment, membrane
technology is an example. Membranes are
manufactured filtration systems that can separate a
wide and growing range of substances – both
organic and inorganic – which are present in water,
from the water itself. They can be used for

industrial and drinking water treatment, wastewater
treatment, desalination of salt water and brackish
water, and so on. The previous high costs are being
reduced substantially and the technology is now
increasingly available worldwide. The use of ultraviolet irradiation of waters for drinking water, in
industrial water treatment, and for reducing the
polluting burden of wastewater effluents, is
spreading. New understanding is emerging of onsite wastewater treatment and recycling and small
water and wastewater systems. This offers lower
overall costs for water supply and sanitation
systems and nutrient recovery options, as well as
reducing the complexity of large centralized
systems (Mathew and Ho, 2005). There is potential
for using these technological applications and
others in extending the provision of water supply
and sanitation services to communities, as is
covered in most chapters of the Report.
Much has been made of the digital divide, the
uneven distribution worldwide of communications
technology and access to, and use of, information.
The UN has responded to this by creating the
‘Digital Solidarity Fund’ in March 2005, intended to
enable people and countries presently excluded
from the information society to gain access to it.
Initiatives proposed include the construction and
operation of regional telecentres where people
have access to computers, the internet,
telephones, and so on. Over and above this, the
many applications of satellite surveillance and
modelling can have substantial potential in water
resources monitoring in lower-income countries, as
described in Chapters 4 and 13. At the same time,
focus needs to placed on basic knowledge and
capacity-building, which can be more easily shared
in this world of increased communications.

3. The Precautionary Principle,
adopted by the UN Conference
on the Environment and
Development (1992), states
that in order to protect the
environment, a precautionary
approach should be widely
applied, meaning that where
there are threats of serious or
irreversible damage to the
environment, lack of full
scientific certainty should
not be used as a reason
for postponing cost-effective
measures to prevent
environmental degradation
(from European
Environmental Agency website
glossary.eea.eu.int/
EEAGlossary/P/precautionary_
principle)

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Governing Water:
A Shared Responsibility
...water
managers
around the
world agree
that the only
way forward is
through an
inclusive and
integrated
approach to

In simple terms, the great challenge of this century is to find the means to develop human
capital (socio-economically, culturally and equitably), while at the same time preserving and
protecting natural capital. It is necessary to acknowledge that for far too long, the headlong
pursuit of material prosperity for the few has excluded far too many poor people from wellbeing, health, food and environmental security; has excluded the interests of the natural
environment; and has excluded adequate consideration of the interests of future
generations. We have come to realize that adopting an inclusive approach is essential to
securing the sustainability of all forms of life.
WWDR1 (2003) concluded that governance issues
form the central obstruction to sound and equitable
water sharing and management worldwide. Sharing
is at the heart of the governance issue and the title
of this Report reflects this. Given the complexity,
uncertainty and increasing vulnerability of both
natural and human systems, water managers around
the world agree that the only way forward is
through an inclusive and integrated approach to
water resources management (IWRM), which
recognizes the need to ensure a holistic protection

system. Chapter 2 on water governance leads off
this discussion by looking in greater detail at
obstacles connected to implementing an integrated
approach to water resources management,
thereafter taken up by most chapters of the Report.
Countries have to shift to a more inclusive set of
values in the overall interests of the entire planet.
Few have so far done so. Many of the richer
countries have used redistributive taxation,
education, equal opportunities and social welfare

water resources
management...

Figure 1.1: The reiterative policy-making process
Step 1:
Identify principal stakeholders
and participants

SocioCultural
Institutions

Step 2:
Situation analysis,
define problem and basic
principles

Government
Agencies

Water
Users

Step 10: Review

Step 9: Refine

Round
Table

Media

Step 3:
Agree on
and prioritize
1. goals
2. strategy
3. targets
4. criteria
5. indicators

Step 4:
Assess and modify
legal, institutional
and policy
environment

Private
Interests
Step 11: Revise
Scientific
Community

NGOs

Step 8:
Review results

Step 5:
Develop management
plans and secure funding

Other

Step 13: Re-evaluate
Step 7:
Monitor & evaluate
progress

Source: Derived from Gutrich et. al., 2005.

Step 12: Adjust
Step 6:
Implement plan
activities

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 13

BOX 1.5: THE EU AND SOUTH AFRICA: INCLUSIVE WATER MANAGEMENT
In the European Union (EU), redistributive

At the other end of the world, driven by South

population and the needs of the natural

taxation has transferred wealth from the richer

Africa’s reforming government, significant

environment. The water laws and regulations of

northern countries to the poorer south and is

changes are occurring in the southern African

both of these regions, especially at the core of

now beginning to do so to the new accession

region in both attitudes and techniques of water

them, are characterized by commitment to

states to the east, significantly raising their

management. The biggest changes are in South

equality of access to water for all and to

standards of living. The bigger market and

Africa itself but their ideas are spreading to

environmental protection of a more sophisticated

increased competition are driving wealth

adjacent countries. There are some limited

nature (relatively speaking in each case) than

generation. At the same time, one of the most

parallels with the EU in that change is being

almost anywhere else on the planet. Given the

comprehensive environmental protection

driven by a wealthier core nation with strong

present strong trend towards regional economic

regimes in the world is being put in place in

institutions and clearly articulated equitable

cooperation, reported later in this chapter, the

the EU, which will greatly enhance

values, and is rippling out from there. In both

experiences of these two regions are significant.

environmental protection and improved water

the EU and southern Africa, the process of

To what extent their inclusive approach will

management.

change is underpinned by institutional values

spread remains to be seen.

that emphasize inclusiveness of both the whole

programmes to release the wealth-generating,
creative and upwardly mobile-potential of their
citizens. They have put in place extensive
environmental protection/rehabilitation measures.
They have entrenched human and property rights
and established the clear rule of law. Multinational
companies based in these countries and aware of
the precious nature of their corporate reputations,
have shown an increased inclination to take
environmental and employment concerns seriously
when operating in lower-income countries. The
wealthier countries have produced cadres of
educated, competent people in relatively sound
(though by no means perfect) institutions and
organizations for water management, such as
in the European Union (EU), but such an overall
pattern of development is also observable in
South Africa, for example (see Box 1.5).

Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)
promotes not only cross-sectoral cooperation, but
the coordinated management and development of
land, water (both surface water and groundwater)
and other related resources, so as to maximize
the resulting social and economic benefits in an
equitable manner, without compromising ecosystem
sustainability. It is not only the watershed or basin
that must be considered in the IWRM approach, but
any adjacent coastal and marine environments, as
well as both upstream and downstream interests in
the basin (see Chapters 4, 5 and 11).
The socio-economic dimension, with its focus on
human concerns, is a crucial component of the
approach, taking full account of:
■

2a. An integrated approach – IWRM
Reference has already been made to the need
for an integrated and holistic approach to water
resources management. Fundamentally, this is a
response to the much-criticized, sector-by-sector
approach to water management (irrigation,
municipal, energy, etc.), highlighting instead the
benefits that an integrated, overall approach to
water management, on a catchment or basin
basis, can deliver.

stakeholders having input in the planning and
management of the resource, ensuring especially
that the interests of women and the poor are
fully represented

■

the multiple uses of water and the range of
people’s needs

■

integrating water plans and strategies into the
national planning process and water concerns
into all government policies and priorities, as well
as considering the water resource implications of
these actions

Girl collecting water from
a community supply,
Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Replacing old

■

water fittings
with new, more

■

efficient ones

the compatibility of water-related decisions taken
at a local level with a country’s national
objectives
the water quantity and quality needs of essential
ecosystems so that they are properly protected
(GWP, 2004).

can produce
good results in
domestic and
industrial water
systems

The 2002 World Summit on Sustainable
Development (WSSD) sought to move the water
sector worldwide towards more sustainable
approaches to water management, building
ecosystem considerations into overall IWRM
management paradigms and calling all countries
to produce IWRM and water-efficiency plans by
2005. Chapter 2 reports that some progress on
this is being made, but that many countries still
have much to do. As the organizing principle of
water management, IWRM is covered in most of
the chapters of the Report. Chapter 2 examines
water governance, while Chapters 8 and 9
examine how an integrated approach to water and
industrial energy management respectively can
provide big savings in all. Chapter 10 stresses
how disaster risk reduction has to be a key
component of IWRM, while Chapter 12 looks at
the use of economic valuation techniques and
pricing of water – important tools for IWRM.

2b. Demand management
Traditionally, the responses to pressures on water
availability were solved by increasing supply:
developing new sources and expanding and
increasing abstractions from existing ones. As this is
not sustainable, attention is switching rapidly
towards more efficient and equitable approaches.
The process of using water more efficiently and
fairly, improving the balance between present
supplies and demand, and reducing excessive use,
is known collectively as demand management.
Consumer attitudes and behaviours (wrongful and
wasteful use included) are a problem in which
information campaigns and consumer education
programmes can play important roles. Chapter 13
discusses some of these. Economic incentives, in
the form of water-use metering and the application
of tariff systems that discourage wasteful use can
be used to good effect, although allowances have
to be made to ensure the poor are not
disadvantaged (see Chapter 12). Replacing old
water fittings with new, more efficient ones can
produce good results in domestic and industrial
water systems. Fixing the leaks in urban water
distribution systems, where up to 60 percent or
more of the water supplied can be lost through
unrepaired leaks, offers much potential (see

BOX 1.6: THIRTEEN KEY IWRM CHANGE AREAS
The Global Water Partnership (GWP) has
identified 13 key IWRM change areas within
overall water governance, which together form
the process of moving towards a more integrated
water management approach. These key change

Institutional structure
4. Creating an organizational framework –
understanding resources and needs
5. Institutional capacity-building – developing
human resources.

equitable allocations and water use limits
12. Economic instruments – valuing and pricing
water for efficiency and equity
13. Information management and exchange –
improving knowledge for better water

areas are contained within a framework divided
into the enabling environment, institutional roles

11. Regulatory instruments – determining

Management instruments

and management instruments.

6. Water resources assessment –

Enabling environment

7. Plans for IWRM – combining development

management.

understanding resources and needs
1. Policies – setting goals for water use,
protection and conservation
2. Legislative framework – defining the rules
needed to achieve policies and goals
3. Financing and incentive structures –
allocating financial resources to meet water
needs.

options, resource use and human interaction
8. Demand management – using water more
efficiently
9. Social change instruments – encouraging a
water-oriented civil society
10. Conflict resolution – managing disputes and
ensuring the sharing of water

Source: GWP, 2004.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 15

Chapter 3). In agriculture, changing cropping
patterns, moving to more water-efficient crops,
precision application of irrigation water (see
Chapter 7), and improving the performance of
water delivery and distribution systems can
collectively produce improved water productivity.
Chapter 8 offers a detailed look at how industry
has access to a growing range of cost-effective
methods of optimizing water-use productivity
and minimizing harmful industrial emissions.
Combinations of all of these, as appropriate,
can be very effective (GWP, 2004).
A big expansion in water harvesting, at domestic
and community levels, is ongoing, particularly in
Asia. Water recycling and reuse, already very
prevalent in dry areas, is set to grow. Improvement
in knowledge and understanding of treatment at
different levels of sophistication is increasing,
which will help to minimize risks to workers and
consumers involved in the many different
applications of wastewater reuse. The world has
substantial deposits of brackish water, often in
underground aquifers. As the cost of desalination
is falling, because of technology improvements and
lower energy costs, the prospects of desalinating
brackish water – and also seawater in the case of
coastal communities – are becoming more attractive.
Allocative efficiency – seeking to ensure that water is
allocated to the highest value uses, while ensuring
the interests of the poor and ecosystems are not
neglected – may be sought through water rights,
water markets and appropriate cost-benefit analyses
(see Chapters 2 and 12). In low-income countries, it
is essential that the role of water in poverty
alleviation is fully factored in and that crucial
environmental flows are maintained (GWP, 2004).

2c. Subsidiarity
There is an increasing trend towards delegation of
water management responsibility to local
authorities and water user groups, thereby
promoting the principle of subsidiarity.
Devolution or decentralization of power from
national governments and agencies to regional
and/or local government authorities and
organizations –including responsibility for water – is
ongoing in many parts of the world. Examples of

this trend include new river basin management
arrangements; transfer of responsibility for water
supply and sanitation to municipal authorities,
NGOs or community groups; and irrigation
management transfer (IMT) to farmer/user groups
(see Chapter 7). The potential benefits are good,
as local management should better understand the
needs, resources and demands of the situation. A
degree of competition between local authorities can
stimulate innovation while cooperation between
stakeholders can be improved (World Bank, 2005).

A big expansion

The downside in practice is that many governments
transfer water management responsibilities to a
range of subnational entities that lack the capacity
and resources to cope. Also there are larger-scale
issues in water management that cannot readily
be dealt with at the local level – allocations,
pollution control, storage and others. Administrative
areas may not coincide with river basins and
watersheds. They may overlap adjacent basins,
or several administrative units may share a basin.
Some communities undergoing rapid socio-economic
development involving significant upward and
regional social mobility may find that membership
of community management arrangements is
unpopular, as people see no long-term advantage
in participating (Moench et al, 2003). Chapter 2
goes deeper into many of the problems associated
with devolving responsibility for water management
from central government to other entities and
organizations and Chapter 11 addresses the
issue of moving water and resolving conflicts
between countries, sectors, communities and
other stakeholders.

particularly in

2d. Gender mainstreaming
Of the 1.3 billion people living in abject poverty,
the majority are women and children. They also
happen to be the largest group systematically
under-represented in water management
arrangements. Water management is often gender
specific at its different scales, reflecting the
different ways men and women take responsibility.
Generally, men take care of longer-term needs.
Women, on the other hand, are mostly responsible
for household hygiene, food and water. Often, this
involves women and girls walking long distances to
obtain water. Not only is the heavy burden of the
water physically harmful, but the time lost means

in water
harvesting, at
domestic and
community
levels, is
ongoing,
Asia. Water
recycling and
reuse, already
very prevalent in
dry areas, is set
to grow

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...women
possess a lot
of knowledge
and experience

less available time for more productive purposes,
such as livelihood activities and enhanced childcare.
Ecosystems are frequently important food sources
for poorer families and it is generally women who
are involved in gathering food from them. Thus,
ecosystem damage and species loss hit poor
families and women particularly hard.

of management and
conservation of
natural
resources...

This community in
Rajapur village, western
Bangladesh, holds
monthly meetings to
discuss primary school
attendance and other
important issues

The pressing need of women for water supply and
sanitation for their families gives them in a key role
in community water service provision. Since many of
the farming activities in poor communities are
carried out by women, their needs for crop water
are essential for family nutrition. Women, children
and the elderly are also the most at risk from
water-related hazards. Yet, all too often, women are
excluded from important planning and decisionmaking in water management. This exclusion
inevitably makes water service provision, in its many
forms, less responsive to real need. Moreover, as
Agenda 21 noted, women possess a lot of
knowledge and experience of management and
conservation of natural resources – including local
water sources – as well as good water management
skills. However, significant barriers to their
participation in this role have arisen from a variety
of causes – legal, constitutional, social, behavioural,

cultural and economic. In some societies, men have
deep-seated insecurity about the idea of women
owning property, including land or water rights for
farming (Vyas, 2001).
Greater involvement of women in water matters
enables better demand responsiveness to water
provision and prevention of pollution. By ensuring
their voices are fully heard in the water planning
process, the effects on their subsistence and their
development needs can be acknowledged and their
interests protected. However, a number of issues
have to be considered. The different status of men
and women has to be acknowledged in its entirety;
they have different needs and priorities and their
life courses differ considerably. Equal treatment will
not necessarily produce equal results and a gender
equity approach is needed, requiring a good
understanding of the frequently complicated
relationships between domestic water use and its
use in agriculture, industry and energy. Men and
women often approach different decision-making
differently. In addition, the institutional structures
of general governance and water management
determine the roles, rights and responsibilities of
each sex in relation to control over and access to
resources. Gender equity also requires that both
sexes receive equitable benefits from any
decentralized management structures and from new
and improved infrastructure.
Gender issues in water management are well
understood at the international level and, as a
result, most guidelines produced by governments,
designs for new projects, and programme policies
now take account of gender issues. Gender
mainstreaming (including gender equity matters in
policies, programmes and procedures), gender
budgeting (analysing all projects and policies to
ensure equitable benefits for all), and affirmative
action (to secure fully equitable participation in
water planning and management), are all
acknowledged as essential for greater gender
equity and better water governance. However,
much still remains to be done at the local level, a
long-term task that will require persistence,
capacity development and high-level political
commitment. Despite all this, there is reason for
cautious optimism, as progress is being made
(Guerquin et al., 2003).

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 17

Part 3. Changing Natural Systems
The past twenty-five to thirty years have seen a substantial focus on the environmental
impacts of water resources infrastructure development. Rather less attention has been paid
to assessing the environmental impacts of water resource strategy. Recently, cooperation
between ecologists and water managers has led to attempts to integrate an ecosystem
approach into Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM), although this is at an early
stage. The task has been to conceptualize a catchment- or basin-based holistic approach,
which recognizes the multiple roles of water both in ecosystems and human socio-economic
systems. This involves consideration of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and the water
links between them. Water managers are challenged with increasing their understanding
of the biotic linkages between freshwater circulation and ecosystems. The process of
photosynthesis (which consumes vast quantities of water resources) and the very
significant changes in runoff from major land use changes, need to be better appreciated,
as indicated in Chapters 4 and 5.

3a. Human intervention
Humanity has embarked on a huge global ecological
engineering project, with little or no preconception,
or indeed full present knowledge, of the
consequences. In a very short space of time, in
planetary terms, we have sought to redesign and
impose a new order on natural planetary systems
built over aeons of time. In the water sector,
securing reliable and secure water supplies for
health and food, the needs of industrial and energy
production processes, and the development of
rights markets for both land and water have hugely
changed the natural order of many rivers worldwide
(see Sections 3 and 4 of Report). There is a vast
range of interactions between the biosphere and
landscapes, as a result of which great variability
results at a range of scales, and novel and
unexpected properties of the system emerge. This
variability is critical for the way ecosystems
function, sustain themselves and evolve, and we
never cease interfering with these natural systems.
Land-use changes, urban development, dam
construction and other river diversions all disrupt
the natural pattern and rhythm of natural
processes, without attention to the consequences
and the negative effects on biodiversity.

Threatened environmental resilience
Left undisturbed, natural ecosystems have great
resilience but a minimum composition of species
must be maintained to ensure that the relations
between the primary producers, consumers and
decomposers can be sustained. Only thus can they

continue the mediation of energy flow, the cycling
of elements, and the spatial and temporal patterns
of vegetation. Resilience is a buffer against
disturbances and this buffer is best provided
through maintaining biological diversity.
However, human impacts on the quantity and
quality of available water seriously inhibit this
resilience, leading to the risk of a retreat to a more
vulnerable state. Pollution from agriculture, industry
and domestic wastewater is making water
resources, both surface water and groundwater,
increasingly scarce and decreasingly poor in quality.
Loss of biodiversity is an important indicator of
lowered resilience and the current deterioration in
freshwater biodiversity (greater than either
marine or terrestrial systems) is of great concern,
as discussed in Chapter 5. Human reactions to
environmental changes are less direct than for
other species, because we are slow to become
aware of changes before responding. Human
resilience rests in the coping capacity of society
and its institutions. As any resilience declines,
whether social or ecological, it takes progressively
smaller external changes to cause big problems.
Reduced ecological resilience, from land degradation
and drought, can increase social and environmental
vulnerability, leading to the loss of livelihood and
creating tension and conflict over freshwater and
food. The key challenge facing water managers,
now and in the future, is to try to optimize
ecosystem resilience in response to human and

In a very short
space of time,
in planetary
terms, we have
sought to
redesign and
impose a new
order on natural
planetary
systems built
over aeons of
time

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

management

natural disturbances and protect this resilience with
catchment-level life-support systems – in particular
essential productivity functions (GWP, 2003).

and property

3b. Climate variability and change

...land-use

ownership
fragment the
natural
landscape in a
totally different
way from natural
ecosystem
processes

There is frequent confusion between climate change
and climate variability. Climate change is associated
with global warming and is a long-term change
with its origins in natural factors and, as is now
accepted, human activities. Climate variability, on
the other hand, has always been part of the Earth’s
climate system, although it has so far received
surprisingly little attention from the water sector. It
affects water resources by way of floods, droughts,
waterborne disease, and so on. It is not just the
extremes of climate variability that are of concern
to the water sector: the increasing and extreme
variability in the hydrological cycle and climate
systems, as is shown in Chapter 4, together with
the dynamic processes that lie behind it, impact on
countries’ water resources and can make it difficult
to meet the MDGs (Lenton, 2004).
Managing climate variability and the impacts of
climate extremes is one of the challenges of
sustainable development. In fact, the skills and
knowledge obtained in dealing with these
variability problems will be invaluable in
confronting the longer-term challenges of climate
change, as specifically discussed in Chapters 10
and 13. As ever, it is the poor who are at greatest
risk. Thus climate effects have to be built into
poverty reduction activities and included in national
development plans and national water resources
policies, using the IWRM approach. Both water
managers and decision-makers have to be
encouraged to engage in greater dialogue with
climate and development specialists to better
understand the climate-related challenges and how
to deal with them. At the same time, but on a
broader front, although there is a clear need to
learn to adapt to the challenges of climate
variability and change, all actions to mitigate the
anthropological impacts of this must continue.4

4. For more information on the
Dialogue on Water and Climate
see www.waterandclimate.org

On the broader issue of climate change several
concerns are apparent. The yields of staple crop
production (e.g. rice, corn and wheat) are sensitive
to temperature increase, the most vulnerable period
being during pollination, just before seed formation.

It had been thought that increased CO2 levels
would lead to higher grain yields, but the view is
now that negative effects of temperature increase
will outweigh this. Chapter 7 examines key issues
connected with the potential for climate effects to
alter food production patterns. Warming over land
will be greater than warming over the seas and this
effect will be greater in the higher latitudes,
affecting continental interiors more than coastal
regions. This has major implications for grainproducing regions. The headwaters of many large
Asian rivers originate in the Himalayas. The large
amount of freshwater traditionally stored in the
glaciers there is being reduced as glaciers shrink.
This will likely alter seasonal runoff patterns,
increasing flood extremes and affecting availability
of critical irrigation waters (Lenton, 2003).
Chapter 8 points out the growing risk of what it
calls ‘Natech’ disasters, where extreme climate
events can severely damage industrial installations,
reducing not only economic activity but also
releasing gross pollution into the environment.
Given the fact that much energy generation is
located in fossil-fuel-powered electricity generating
stations and that the very large greenhouse gas
emissions from these are believed to have a big
impact on climate, Chapter 9 looks at the issues
involved in connection with more sustainable energy
provision as related to water.

3c. Ecological water management
As discussed, land-use management and property
ownership fragment the natural landscape in a
totally different way from natural ecosystem
processes. Financial markets and global and
national business cycles have their own patterns
and cycles and the capitalistic approach needs
market advantage and security of tenure, which is
at variance with natural patterns and cycles. As a
result, much policy is made within overly simple
settings and fails to recognize the complexity of
these different cycles and their interactions. The
critical challenge is to recognize that the spatial
and temporal scales of variability within
ecosystems, society and the economy are strongly
linked, but are not congruent.
Global development must be equitable and inclusive
not only of the interests of humanity but also of

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 19

BOX 1.7: THE PARTICULAR PROBLEMS OF TROPICAL COUNTRIES
Climate impacts are particularly severe in low-

droughts on development is amplified. Climate

the environmental and social disruption of large

income countries in the tropics, which generally

variability can also increase vector-borne disease

dams. Balancing the high demand for irrigation

include those countries having the greatest

outbreaks (e.g. malaria) and the incidence of

water against other uses adds to the challenge

difficulties working towards the MDGs. The

diarrhoeal disease in the rainy season.

of obtaining greater water productivity from
irrigation waters (‘more crop per drop’). These

problem is exacerbated by rainflow and
streamflow, which are concentrated over a short

In addition, climate uncertainties lead to greater

storage and water productivity issues require

period of a few months. Very significant

risk aversion by farmers in crop selection,

further substantial research and development

seasonal and annual fluctuations around long-

planting and fertilization, as well as problems for

work (Lenton, 2004) See Chapter 7 for more on

term historical averages are reflected in long dry

reservoir managers responsible for irrigation and

the issue of storage.

periods and recurrent droughts and floods. Since

hydroelectrical production. Thus, the challenge is

these countries often rely substantially on

to greatly increase water storage to minimize the

natural resources, the impact of floods and

impact of climate variability, while trying to avoid

the natural planetary ecosystems that support us.
The task of water managers is therefore far from
easy. They must satisfy socio-economic needs,
minimize the pollution burden and accept the
consumptive use involved, including a better
understanding of the limits of the self-cleansing
capacities of ecosystems. Minimum ecological
criteria have to be met.
Catchments have to be viewed as socio-ecohydrological systems in which trade-offs are
needed or will have to be made socially acceptable
by appropriate institutions, regulations and finance.
A key entry point is defining minimum criteria or
‘bottom lines’ for terrestrial ecosystems. In order
to balance upstream and downstream interests,
work has to start downstream, identifying bottom
lines for the different components of the aquatic
ecosystems, for example, uncommitted environmental
flows and minimum water quality. Thereafter the
process is carried on upstream, section by section,
constantly seeking to identify resilience determinants
to avoid ecosystem collapse. Agricultural water
management and food production as major water
users have to be very sensitive to ecosystem
considerations to ensure sustainability.
Skills will have to be developed to achieve all of
this – to negotiate trade-offs and define ecological
bottom lines and sustainability, based on a fuller
understanding of both ecosystem and societal
resilience. Increased cooperation between
ecologists, water managers and social scientists

Source: Lenton, 2004.

is needed to make clear the water linkages
connecting terrestrial ecosystems, human communities
and resilience. Concepts of vulnerability and resilience,
coupled with a better appreciation of the crucial and
central role of both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
to humanity, must be understood by all parties –
technical specialists and other stakeholders alike,
including the water consumer base. The ways in
which these skills can be better developed are
covered in Chapter 13. The subsequent attitude
and behaviour changes that would follow such
improved understanding would go a long way to
furthering social, economic and environmental
sustainability and enhance the effectiveness of
IWRM (GWP, 2003). While IWRM is undoubtedly
the essential approach to effective and optimum
water management, implementing it can present
its own challenges.

Global
development
must be
equitable and
inclusive...

Fishermen fixing a net,
India

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. Challenges for Well-being and
Development
There are more
than 1 million
deaths each
year from
malaria, with
between 300
and 500 million
cases in total...

Balancing the increasing competition among the diverse and different water-using sectors –
irrigation, municipalities, industry, environmental flows – including the demands of upstream
and downstream users, is a challenge facing watersheds worldwide. Decisions on water
allocations have to be made at different scales and a wide range of transboundary and other
regulatory instruments and water and pollution management techniques need to be
developed and shared: local scale in particular catchments, full-river basin scale where the
geographical extent of the basin may well encompass several domestic political boundaries,
national level to ensure that the potential of water to stimulate socio-economic development
is realized, and at international level in the case of transboundary waters (Stockholm, 2002).

4a. Water and health: Reducing
infectious diseases
In terms of threats to human security from
premature death, infectious disease ranks at
number one, being responsible for 26 percent
of all premature deaths. The top five communicable
diseases worldwide in 2002, in rank order, in terms
of early mortality, were:
■

Respiratory infections caused around 4 million
deaths

■

HIV/AIDs with some 2.8 million deaths

■

Diarrhoea causing 1.8 million deaths

■

Tuberculosis, causing 1.6 million deaths

■

Malaria, accounting for 1.3 million deaths.

Although not all of these can be directly related to
water issues, they are closely connected with water
supply, sanitation and habitat challenges, which
as noted earlier, the Commission on Sustainable
Development wishes to be considered together in
future. As discussed in Chapter 6, it is increasingly
widely recognized that diarrhoea, the leading
cause of deaths in children of developing countries,
could be controlled by improving access to safe
drinking water and sanitation. There are more
than 1 million deaths each year from malaria,
with between 300 and 500 million cases in total,
affecting populations in tropical regions of Africa,
Asia and the Americas. Approximately 40 percent
of the total world population is at risk of infection,

particularly pregnant women, unborn babies and
children under 5 (Concern/Guardian, 2005).
Every year, around 10.8 million children die before
their fifth birthday and, of these, 4 million die
before they reach 1 month old. Some 92 percent of
all deaths of under-5 children occur in just fortytwo lower-income countries. It is estimated that 63
percent of all deaths of under-5 children can be
prevented using current knowledge and methods
including oral rehydration for diarrhoea, antibiotics
for pneumonia, mosquito nets and anti-malaria
drugs for malaria, better water supply sanitation
and domestic hygiene. The links between childhood
sickness and death and inadequate water and
sanitation availability, unsatisfactory hygiene, lack
of better water management practices are clear.

4b. Water and food: Facing growing
demand and competition
Over the last fifty years, agriculture has been facing
the great challenge of providing food to a global
population doubling in size. This has resulted in
water withdrawals that largely exceed those of any
other sector. However, 13 percent of the human
population is still underfed, the majority living in
rural areas of developing countries – the countries
most likely to support the biggest share of
demographic growth in the years to come.
Increased competition for water and the need to
integrate environmental issues threatens water for
food and is an issue that cannot be tackled through
a narrow sectoral approach. New forms of water
management in agriculture, including irrigation
management, must continue to be explored and

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 21

implemented with focus on livelihoods as well as on
productivity, as discussed in Chapter 7.
In agriculture, changing cropping patterns to lower
water use crops, precision application of irrigation
water at the critical point of the crop growing
cycle, and better water delivery and distribution
systems can collectively produce improved water
productivity. Improved irrigation water application
technologies enable a more precise and timely
application of water at critical points in the plant
life-cycle, improving irrigation water productivity
and efficiency. These technologies are well known
and widely applied by better resourced farmers.
However, innovations in micro-irrigation techniques
mean that these can now be made affordable to
poor farmers. Very low-cost drip irrigation systems
and treadle pumps allied to low-cost double walled
plastic water storage tanks, which rest in easily
dug earthen trenches, have now been developed.
This combination costs one-fifth of the price of
conventional ferro-cement tanks. These new
methods, when applied to the increasingly
smaller plots, enable them to produce a range
of higher-value cash crops and significantly
improve their income prospect (Polak, 2004).
In the growing competition for increasingly
scarce water resources, policy-makers are
looking to the value generated by water use.
As reforms to agriculture are forced to compete
with industry and service sector developments,
crop production has shifted from low-value
staple crops to high-value horticultural crops.

4c. Water for industry and energy:
Aiming for sustainability
Though not explicitly included in the MDGs, industry
and energy are both water-related issues vital to
socio-economic development. The World Summit on
Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg in
2002 proposed a Plan of Implementation that
makes a strong link between the related goals of
industrial development, improved access to energy
services, and poverty eradication and sustainable
natural resource management. Industry is a
significant engine of growth, accelerating
particularly in highly indebted countries, and making
up the bulk of the economy in East Asia and the
Pacific. But to be sustainable, economic
development also needs an adequate and steady

supply of energy, for which water is a key resource
– whether through hydropower, nuclear-based
energy generation, coal slurry technology, smallscale hydels or other sources, as discussed in
Chapter 8.
Both industrial growth and increased energy
production are demanding an enlarged share of
water resources. Currently, the total water
withdrawal by industry is much greater than the
water actually consumed. Industries have a dramatic
effect on the state of the world’s freshwater
resources, both by the quantity of water they
consume and their potential to pollute the water
environment by their discharge. Industrial discharge
returned without treatment has high organic
content, leading to rapid growth of algae, bacteria
and slime, oxygen-depleted water, and thermal
pollution. Discharge can affect a relatively large
volume of water and have numerous impacts on
human health. Polluted water may affect fishing
grounds, irrigated lands, municipalities located
downstream and even bathing water. It is also
recognized that water pollution can have significant
transboundary effects.
Energy-intensive water delivery systems can also
have dire impacts for areas with scarce water and
energy resources. Some sources of water supply are
more energy intensive than others, such as thermal
desalination, which requires more energy than
wastewater recycling. Pumping water is a major cost
element everywhere, and consumes significant
energy resources worldwide. Reducing the
inefficiencies that occur in energy production (e.g.
during electricity generation, transmissions,
distribution and usage) will reduce electric power
requirements, leading to higher water savings, as
discussed in Chapter 9. In addition, changing
environmental contexts demand that a greater
investment be made in renewable energies.
Improving environmental governance is central to
limiting industrial pollution and reducing the
inefficiencies that occur within energy production
and distribution systems. In industry, governance
initiatives now exist at international and national
levels, as well as at the level of industrial sectors
and individual companies. The Basel Convention on
the Control of Transboundary Movements of

Polluted water
may affect
fishing grounds,
irrigated lands,
municipalities
located
downstream and
even bathing
water

This self-propelled,
centre-pivot irrigation
machine drills for water
30 to 400 m below the
surface in Ma’an, Jordan.
A pivoting pipeline with
sprinklers irrigates 78
hectares of land.
Production of 1 ton of
grain requires about 1,000
tons of water. At the
current rate of use in
Jordan, subterranean
water reserves could dry
up before 2010

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.8: INLAND WATER TRANSPORT: A TOOL FOR PROMOTING ECONOMIC AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

A well-functioning transport system is crucial to

transport can relieve pressure on overloaded

landlocked countries of Bolivia and Paraguay.

the development of a strong and vibrant

road systems in densely populated regions, thus

Though the project is still in the planning stages,

economy, enabling ready access to both raw

reducing both traffic accidents and noise levels.

its legal framework was approved by all
associated riparian countries in 1996.

materials and markets. In the twentieth century,
road transport has come to be regarded as a

The financial and environmental advantages of

particularly effective mode of transport. Yet

water transport make it a smart investment for

Although IWT development is picking up speed

inland water transport (IWT), using rivers, canals

many regions. The Asian and Pacific region, for

on a global scale (particularly in Asia), vast

and lakes, has been historically important in

example, has at least 280,000 km of navigable

lengths of navigable water remain

economic development worldwide and offers

waterways, more than 340,000 large vessels

underdeveloped. In some areas, the potential

important environmental, economic and other

and millions of traditional craft, carrying over 1

of IWT may be greatly limited by natural

practical benefits that make it one of the most

billion tons of cargo and a half billion

constraints. Where long and harsh dry seasons

advantageous modes of transport even today.

passengers each year. In some countries, such

diminish water levels, IWT may be considered

as China, water transport is already well

an unreliable mode of transport. In Bangladesh,

In Europe, where more than 35,000 kilometres

developed. China has more than 5,600

for example, where an inland navigation

(km) of waterways connect hundreds of cities

navigable rivers, with a total navigable length of

network spans 24,000 km, the dry season

and industrial regions, 125 billion ton-kilometres

119,000 km, including the Yangtze River, which

(from December to May) limits access to the

of freight were transported by inland waterways

alone comprises 50 percent of the national

system to vessels of 100 deadweight tons or

in 2003 alone. In the United States, where more

total. The annual volume of IWT freight in China

below. Throughout Africa, seasonal climate

than 25,000 km of inland, coastal and

was about 690 million tons in 2000, the large

variation and unpredictable water depths limit

intracoastal waterways exist, water traffic

majority of which moved along the Yangtze.

the number of inland water bodies that are

represented 656 million tons in 2000. In fact,

Despite possessing vast IWT potential, other

navigable. There are only three rivers classified

many well-known and prosperous cities, such as

countries in the region have been slow in

as international waterways in Africa: the Congo,

Paris, San Francisco, Rotterdam, Shanghai and

putting it to use. Such is the case of India,

Nile and Zambezi rivers. Hydraulic work could,

London, developed as a result of their position

which has an extensive river system, including

however, increase the number of potentially

as water transport hubs. Building on the natural

14,500 km of navigable waterways, only 37

navigable rivers on the continent. Nigeria, for

advantages of geographic location and navigable

percent of which is currently utilized for

example, is estimated to have over 3,000 km of

waterways, developing countries may find IWT a

motorized transport. In 2001/02, IWT accounted

potentially navigable inland waterways were

cost-effective and sustainable way of developing

for a mere 0.1 percent of India’s total domestic

they to be developed.

transport infrastructure where constraints of land

surface transport (compared to 68 percent for

availability and cost inhibit the expansion of rail

road and 30 percent for rail).

Factors limiting the development of IWT systems
include the poor recognition of IWT potential,

and road infrastructure.
IWT is important in other regions as well. In

lack of technology, limited financial resources,

The environmental benefits of water transport,

Latin America, the Paraguay-Parana Waterway

exclusion of IWT from Integrated Water

when compared to other modes, are also

Project was proposed in the late 1980s as a

Resources Management (IWRM) planning,

apparent. Whereas road transport consumes

means to promote the economic development

insufficient institutional capacity, inadequate

large amounts of non-renewable energy and

and integration of countries within the La Plata

legal instruments, an absence of policies, limited

contributes significantly to air pollution, water

Basin. The Paraguay and Paraná rivers are

information sharing and poor public awareness.

transport is more energy efficient and

natural north–south transport corridors,

environment-friendly. Energy consumption for

extending through four countries (Argentina,

Despite the numerous advantages of water

water transport per ton-kilometre is half of that

Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay) and accessible to a

transport, it is not without negative

of rail and one-sixth that of road, while carbon

fifth (Uruguay), thus connecting the heart of

environmental impacts. Hydraulic work

dioxide emissions from IWT are approximately

South America to the Atlantic Ocean. Designed

undertaken to make rivers more navigable (e.g.

one-thirteenth of those of road freight

to expand navigation possibilities, the Project is

constructing dikes, straightening canals,

transport. Additionally, while vehicular transport

meant to reduce the cost of transport within the

destroying rapids, dredging and sometimes even

contributes to noise pollution and exacerbates

region, improve links between commercial

adding artificial waterways), can prove harmful

land congestion and road accidents, water

centres and provide an outlet to the sea for the

to an ecosystem’s balance and local biodiversity.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 23

BOX 1.8: continued

For example, over the past 150 years, regulation

integrated into overall IWRM plans. Although

challenges, such as climate change. Overall, IWT

work on the Danube River Basin has significantly

inland transport may carry some environmental

remains one of the most economically and

damaged historical floodplains (see Chapter 14).

risks, overall IWT accounts for comparatively less

environmentally sustainable modes of

Large dikes and disconnected meanders in this

environmental externalities than other modes of

transportation, and when integrated with other

area were found to suppress the linkage between

transport. In addition, Environmental Impact

transport development in the context of IWRM

surface water and groundwater, reducing the

Assessments of IWT projects can greatly help to

planning, it can help to re-establish a balance

recharge of aquifers important for local drinking

identify areas at risk so that mitigation measures

between the various modes of transport, making

water supplies. Concern has also been raised over

can be undertaken. There is an urgent need for

the transportation industry as a whole more

the impact of navigation channel repairs on

research as we need to find more

responsive to broader societal goals.

wetlands and biodiversity in the Niger Delta.

environmentally friendly means to maintain the
navigability of watercourses in addition to

In order to promote efficient and sustainable

learning more about how the world’s water

waterway projects, it is essential that IWT be

resources may be impacted by new environmental

Sources: EUROPA, 2005; US Army Corps of Engineers,
2004; ADB, 2003; River Bureau of the Ministry of Land,
Infrastructure and Transport of Japan, 2003; UNECA, 2002;
UNESCAP, 2003 and 2004.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal is a recent
example of an international mechanism aimed at
addressing issues of waste generation, movement,
management and disposal. Yet, as discussed in
Chapter 8, to be truly effective, efforts to curb
industrial water pollution require that such
agreements be translated into action through
national policies and at the industry/sectoral level.
Stepped water tariffs, subsidies for industries
implementing innovative environmental
technologies, and financial and advisory support for
new research are just a few examples of measures
that can be taken.

Environmental concerns, particularly over climate
change and nuclear waste disposal, as well as
safety and security of supply, are prompting
governments to introduce policies aimed at
accelerating the use of renewable energy and
Combined Heat and Power (CHP). Total worldwide
investment in renewable energy rose from $6 billion
in 1995 to approximately $22 billion in 2003, and is
increasing rapidly. This trend of investment in
renewable energies can not only help to increase
the production of more efficient energy, but is
critical to our ability to face future challenges
posed by environmental uncertainties.

Part 5. Management Responses
and Stewardship
Over the last century, there has been a significant rise in water-related disasters, affecting an
increasing number of people, particularly those living in developing countries. Resulting
damages to property and losses of life and livelihoods compromise the gains of development.

5a. Managing risks: Dealing with
increasing frequency

5b. Sharing water: Facing increased
competition

It is quite possible that climate change will not only
cause rises in global temperature, but also lead to
changes in the frequency of floods, droughts,
storms, fires – bringing about more and greater
unexpected effects. One example is the headwaters
of many large Asian rivers originating in the
Himalayas. The large amount of freshwater
traditionally stored in the glaciers there is being
reduced as glaciers shrink. This will likely alter
seasonal runoff patterns, increasing flood extremes
and affecting availability of critical irrigation waters
(Lenton, 2003).

Over 260 of the international or transboundary
basins, with over 50 percent of Earth’s surface and
40 percent of the global population, are shared by
one or more countries worldwide. Opinions vary as
to the likelihood of cooperation rather than conflict,
but experience has shown that cooperation is more
likely, despite that fact that wars over natural
resources – oil, minerals, metals, diamonds, timber,
water, and so on – have been a feature of almost a
quarter of recent wars. Given the importance of
international or transboundary water resources and
their potential for cooperation in development, plus
the need to avoid conflict, Chapter 11 explores in
more detail the cooperation possibilities, which can
produce benefits way beyond the water sector as
covered in Chapter 2.

Over the past decade, progress has been made in
risk management, thanks to scientific advancements
and the recognition of the various dimensions of
risk, including political, social and cultural issues.
As discussed in Chapter 10, however, technical
and organizational constraints remain high and slow
down the design and implementation of efficient
risk reduction.

Cooperation may arise spontaneously from
perceived threats or opportunities by riparian
states, or from without by concerned intermediaries,
for example, multilateral agencies and respected
statesmen. Threats may be associated with
increasing extremes of climate variability, while
opportunities could relate to the socio-economic

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 25

development potential of a cooperative approach.
Once the principle of cooperation is established,
trust-building measures such as cooperative
research, joint data collection, knowledge and
information sharing are important for building the
basis for collaborative planning and management.
There are compelling arguments that riparian
countries collect compatible data, which is analysed
and shared to facilitate efficient use of shared
water resources (Moench, 2003). Experience has
shown that, with shared water resources, the
greater the capacity to collect, process, interpret
and accept data, the greater the range of policy
options that can be generated – and the less
likelihood there is of disagreement and conflict
between riparian users. Data gathering may be best
delegated to a trusted neutral organization, as
suggested above. Alternatively, riparian states might
set up data collection arrangements under their
joint control. It is now widely accepted that jointly
controlled data generation and analysis is an
essential early step in building long-term riparian
cooperation over shared water resources.
Perceptions of fairness for all parties are essential
and it is important to recognize different riparian
views of the benefits on offer. Trust is a sine qua
non – riparian states need to move from their precooperation positions over the water itself to
fostering an interest in the benefits to be gained
from cooperation. Unequal capacity between
riparian states complicates negotiations. Selffinancing institutions for basin cooperation are
vital to pave the way for needed investment.
The trade-offs between environmental, political
and economic challenges have to be balanced.
This is no easy task, and the key to resolving
it lies in the choice of process and subsequent
commitment to it. A small but growing body of
needed expertise is now becoming available and
the prospects of furthering the benefits-based
approach set out above are improving (Grey, 2002).

5c. Enhancing knowledge and capacity:
At all levels
Deficiencies in some countries in data collection and
information sharing pose several challenges to
water resources management. There is a serious
dearth of detailed hydrometeorological data. Many

hydrometeorological measuring stations are
degraded as a result of both lack of maintenance
and skilled operating staff. Many of the instruments
are out of date and poorly calibrated. Network
characteristics and measured variables vary from
country to country. Systems for storing, processing
and managing data for water resources are often
rudimentary. To try to cope with these deficiencies,
a growing range of satellite-based remote sensing
systems are under development, as explored in
Chapters 4 and 13, although without a sound and
accessible knowledge base and capacity-building
efforts, these systems will not benefit the areas
most in need of attention. Indeed, there is the
matter of who collects the data, how it is to be
interpreted, and who has access to it, other than
the collection agency, and how people in lowerincome countries can access the vast and growing
literature and knowledge on solving problems that
is accumulating in agencies, archives and
organizations around the world.

There is an
increasing
trend towards
delegation

Hydrological conditions are highly variable from
season to season and year to year. Since much
hydrometeorological data is in such short supply,
the combination of these two factors means that
the nature of many emerging water problems and
the possible responses are often uncertain. Much
hydrometeorological information in some parts of
the world is held by hierarchically structured
government departments functioning in specific
water-using sectors, for example irrigation or water
supply. The way information is generated, analysed,
controlled and disseminated sets up the context in
which perspectives are formed and solutions
generated. Different organizations collect and
analyse the information that supports their
paradigm relating to the part of the water sector in
which they operate. Thus, there are arguments to
ensure that primary baseline information should be
produced by organizations that are institutionally
separated from executive functions in water.
As discussed earlier, there is an increasing trend
towards delegation of water management
responsibility to local authorities and water user
groups. They must, therefore, have access to
baseline data on water needs and availability. But
data itself is useless without the capacity to
interpret and analyse it meaningfully. A vast amount

of water
management
responsibility to
local authorities
and water user
groups

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.9: HURRICANE KATRINA
In August 2005, Katrina, a category-5 hurricane,

area; and 21 percent of New Orleans residents

been declared, the director of FEMA ‘urged all

ravaged the coastal regions of Florida, Alabama,

would stay in their homes (57,000 families did

fire and emergency services departments not to

Mississippi and Louisiana (especially in greater

not own a motor vehicle). This is likely linked to

respond to counties and states affected by

New Orleans). At least 1,336 lives were lost and

the fact that as of 1999, about 28 percent of

Hurricane Katrina without being requested and

over 4,000 people are still missing. Economic

residents were living below the poverty line.

lawfully dispatched by state and local

losses and infrastructure damages will exceed

Furthermore in Louisiana, the majority of all

authorities’. A lack of coordination and

US$75 billion, 200,000 homes and businesses

hurricane fatalities were over the age of 60.

communication between different levels of
government led to the exacerbation of an already

were severely damaged, and over 400,000 people
were displaced. It was the costliest and one of

Despite these concerns and efforts, the US was

serious situation. According to Dr. Harrald’s

the five deadliest hurricanes ever to hit the US.

not prepared for such a disaster, particularly with

testimony, there was ‘a failure to act creatively

regard to the local population, and especially

and quickly’. As a result, those stranded in New

The devastating effects of Katrina resulted from

the poor. The Director of the Institute for

Orleans were without food, water, sanitation and

several unfortunate events: the inability or

Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Management, Dr. John

police protection for several days.

failure of many people to evacuate; the twenty-

Harrald, testified in September 2005 to the

eight breaches of the New Orleans levees,

congressional Committee on Government

A more integrated approach to disaster

caused by under-engineering and insufficient

Reform that the US Government had ‘confused

prevention and management, in which federal,

maintenance; and the slow and inadequate

preparing the government with preparing the

state and local levels of government are better

emergency response.

society at large’. Many people were unable to

coordinated, is needed. According to Dr. van

evacuate, because they had nowhere to go and

Heeden, several medium- and long-term changes

no means to get there.

could help prevent or mitigate the effects of

The effects of Hurricane Katrina were not

disasters like Katrina: in the short term, the

unexpected. Since before 2000, hurricane and
natural disaster management specialists, the

There was also a breakdown in links between

revision of the levees’ structural design and

local and national press, and the Federal

federal, state and local response efforts. The

implementation, as well as the installation of

Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) had all

Department of Homeland Security’s 2004

floodgates to stop the water surge from moving

voiced concern. In July 2003, FEMA staged a

National Response Plan (NRP) stated in its

up the canals to Lake Pontchatrain; and in the

five-day exercise called Hurricane Pam that

Catastrophic Incident Annex that federal

long term, the protection of wetlands, which act

simulated 50 cm of rain and winds of over 190

response activities should begin even before a

as a buffer against tropical storms and

km per hour in the New Orleans area. In 2003, a

detailed situation and needs assessment is

hurricanes, protecting coastal settlements.

study conducted by Dr. van Heeden of Louisiana

available, which ‘may require mobilizing and

State University’s Center for the Study of Public

deploying assets before they are requested via

The openness of the American media has

Health Impacts of Hurricanes showed that in the

normal NRP protocols’.

allowed much information to be gleaned.
The technological and scientific task of

event of a major hurricane, about 69 percent of
New Orleans residents would evacuate the area;

However, on 29 August, the day Katrina hit New

prediction was successful: computer models

10 percent would leave their homes but not the

Orleans and after a state of emergency had

of the hurricane were able to predict the
hurricane’s path fairly accurately. However,
the social aspect of disaster management
needs to be better addressed. This would
entail a realistic approach to warning and
evacuation, taking into consideration the
inability of many people to evacuate because
of poverty, age or physical handicaps.

A house totally
destroyed by Hurricane
Katrina on Lake
Pontchatrain near New
Orleans

Sources: AGI, 2005; FEMA, 2006, 2005, 2004; Department
of Homeland Security, 2004; Harrald, 2005; Knabb et al.,
2005; State of Louisiana, 2005; Times Picayune, 2002; US
Census Bureau, 2005; US Senate Committee on Homeland
Security and Government Affairs, 2005; van Heeden, 2004,
2004/5; White House, 2005.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 27

BOX 1.10: THE TSUNAMI DISASTER AND FUTURE PREPAREDNESS
The earthquake and tsunami of 26 December

Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (PTWC) and

first in selected target areas, or cities and

2004 that swept through the Indian Ocean

the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) except

towns, rather than as comprehensive

coastal states killed more than 283,100 people,

Somalia, and most countries received these

national programmes.

according to the United States Geological Survey,

warnings at facilities with back-up systems for

making it one of the deadliest disasters in

receiving warning messages that operate

modern history. Beyond the loss of human lives,

around the clock. Few countries operate a

the tsunami also destroyed livelihoods,

national tsunami warning centre or have the

traumatized whole populations, and severely

capacity to receive or provide real-time

damaged habitats and freshwater resources.

seismic or sea-level data.

UNESCO is actively participating in the

■

international effort to assess the tsunami impact
and identify priority needs in the recovery and
reconstruction process. Particular focus is being
made on environmental, cultural as well as
educational damage assessment and
rehabilitation. Furthermore, through its

warning system (this system is on track for initial
completion by July 2006) and that significant

tsunamis or earthquakes. Much of the

progress in awareness raising and capacity-building

information and data needed to develop

has been achieved, but much work remains to build

these plans, such as post-event surveys,

the long-term capacities of countries for effective

inundation modelling, and tsunami hazard

early warning and risk management.

■

Many participating countries have assessed
preparedness and emergency response but

advisory information system, established as of

not community preparedness. Community

1 April 2005 under the aegis of UNESCO/IOC in

education and outreach programmes are

cooperation with the Pacific Tsunami Warning

being developed but have not been

Center (PTWC) in the US and the Japan

implemented in most participating countries.

building needs and support requirements for
developing an Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning

excellent progress has been made to establish the

signage or tested response procedures for

immediate response included an interim tsunami

Ocean were conducted to identify capacity-

26 December 2004 tsunami evaluated that
core technical elements of a regional tsunami early

local government capacity for disaster

assessments of sixteen countries in the Indian

warning systems in countries affected by the

tsunami emergency and evacuation plans and

a Tsunami Early Warning System. UNESCO’s

Between May and September 2005, national

and the IOC regarding the strengthening of early

Few participating countries have developed

be collected.

(IOC), UNESCO received a mandate to help

Meteorological Agency (JMA).

International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR)

and vulnerability assessment, has yet to

Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
Member States of the Indian Ocean rim establish

A recent evaluation by the United Nations

■

IOC is now coordinating the creation of regional
early warning systems for tsunamis and other
coastal hazards in all regions of the world – the
Indian Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, the North East
Atlantic, the Mediterranean and connected seas,
and the Caribbean Sea and adjacent region.
Intergovernmental Coordination Groups are
working in the Indian Ocean (ICG/IOTWS), the
Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (ICG/CARTWS),

Most countries have made progress in

the North Eastern Atlantic, and the Mediterranean

developing policies, assessing technological

and connected seas (ICG/NEAMTWS). These are

needs, and establishing coordination

joining the Pacific system (ICG/PTWS, formerly

mechanisms at a national level for tsunami

ITSU) established by IOC in 1965.

warning and mitigation. Local planning and
preparedness activities are being carried out

Source: A contribution of Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission of UNESCO.

System (IOTWS). The overall regional summary
indicates that:
■

Most countries have established or
strengthened their disaster management laws,
national platforms and national and local
coordination mechanisms to guide all-hazard
disaster risk reduction and to establish clearer
responsibilities for end-to-end early warning
systems. Not all have specifically addressed
the tsunami coordination aspect.

■

Mullaitivu, a town in
Northeastern Sri Lanka

All participating countries received

ravaged by the tsunami

international tsunami warnings from the

of 26 December 2004

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Charging is but
one policy
option, full-cost
subsidy is
another

of information is now available on solutions to
many of the world’s water problems. It seems
increasingly that, someone, somewhere, has an
answer with a potentially wide application.
However, this information is not well analysed,
collated and disseminated. It has been alleged that
twenty years is the average period of time for a
new idea to enter mainstream consciousness and
understanding – this certainly seems true of many
techniques developed for different parts of the
water sector. Much more could usefully be done to
collect and collate good international practice on
key aspects of water use and management and
disseminate it more widely, especially in lowerincome countries. Chapter 13 explores many of
these issues and challenges. As the problem of
data scarcity is widespread across all sectors of
water, all the chapters point to the additional
challenges that this poses, not only to water
managers but also to international, national and
local monitoring and policy-making.

5d. Valuing and charging for water:
Market vs. non-market values
The water sector requires reform if the MDGs are to
be met. Policy-makers must reform institutions,
reformulate water policies, and initiate new ways of
organizing water supply and sanitation. To select
among the different policy options and programme
initiatives on the table, policy-makers must have a
means of determining which are likely to bring
results that best meet society’s goals, recognizing
the many values of water.
Metering and charging
for water consumption
contribute to the
sustainable utilization of
water resources

The common method used for public policy analysis,
that is, to differentiate the various options, is
benefit-cost analysis (BCA). This method totals up
the pluses and minuses of each option so that the
net benefits of the different options may be
considered, and the trade-offs (the different level
of advantages and disadvantages associated with
various sub-elements of the programmes/projects)
between the different options may be clearly seen.
In preparing a BCA one needs to make an economic
valuation (calculate in monetary terms) of the
benefits and costs associated with each option. A
problem emerges when the benefits or costs
associated with a particular activity are not subject
to any market transaction, which in turn means that

there is no market price by which to measure it. In
such cases, economists have developed a variety of
non-market valuation techniques that can be used
to estimate surrogate (or shadow) prices that may
be used to value the goods and services in question.
Many of the goods or services that must be
evaluated in assessing alternative water policies are
secondary effects or externalities of the policy or
project in question and include social and
environmental impacts. In certain cases, some
members of the community may be resistant to
(even offended by) the attempts to put a monetary
value on certain social or environmental effects. In
such cases, BCA must be complemented by public
discourse open to all stakeholders and political
negotiations in order to reach consensus on the
most suitable policy/programme.
Charging for water is but one policy option (fullcost subsidy is another). It serves several objectives,
including cost recovery, revenue raising, and
demand management, all of which contribute to the
ultimate objective of sustainable utilization of water
resources respecting the societal principles of social
equity, environmental preservation and economic
efficiency. Determining the tariff structure – form
and level – is essentially a political decision, which
may also draw on the techniques of economic
valuation and BCA to elucidate the net result of
various options. Benefit capture analysis, that is,
more focused attention on who benefits and who
bears the costs is increasingly applied in order to
understand more clearly the distributional aspects
as well as the financial implications of various
policy options.
Private-public partnerships, payment for
environmental services and trade policies revised to
reflect the concept ‘virtual water’ are all policy
responses that recognize directly or indirectly the
increasing value of water, and in which the
valuation techniques described above would have
been employed to determine their suitability to a
particular situation. Chapter 12 examines all the
issues related to valuing and charging for water in
greater detail.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 29

BOX 1.11: POLICY-MAKING AND SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY
Responsible water resources management in

These problems manifest themselves to varying

policy. Scientists, both in the private and public

particular and good governance in general rely

degrees in many countries (both developed and

sectors, must be independent and not subject to

on sound policy decisions, which require the

developing) and can be found across the

political, financial or physical retribution in

objective collection and analysis of data and

spectrum of scientific endeavour, including

response to scientific findings that do not fall in

information. As scientific knowledge becomes

climate change, AIDS prevention, agricultural

line with a government’s or corporation’s policies

simultaneously wider in breadth and more

science, reproductive health, environmental

and ideology. And in the case of publicly funded

specialized in depth, governments, and the

protection, military intelligence, etc.

research, findings should be transparent and not
subject to political manipulation or suppression.

people these governments represent, rely
increasingly on the expert knowledge of

Due to the rapid pace of scientific advancement,

Scientists must maintain their integrity by

scientists.

a layman’s education is no longer sufficient to

resisting pressure from corporations,

evaluate many aspects of public policy, which

governments or other interested parties to

Today, however, the world is seeing a strong

means that the general public is increasingly

compromise their research.

politicization of natural and social science, which

dependent on the integrity of scientists and the

is detrimental to both good governance and

institutions for which these scientists work.

For more information, see UNESCO’s Ethics of
Science and Technology Programme

scientific inquiry. Political interference manifests
itself through corruption; conflicts of interest;

Transparency and scientific integrity are critical

(www.unesco.org/shs/est); the Union of

cronyism; the political vetting of scientific

for good, democratic governance. Policy-makers

Concerned Scientists (http://www.ucsusa.org/)

appointments; and governmental censorship,

and the electorate need accessible information in

and the International Council for Science

suppression and distortion of scientific findings.

order to make informed decisions about public

(www.icsu.org).

Part 6. Water and Global Targets:
Where Do We Stand?
Within the UN system, a clear wish has emerged to take a lead role in finding ways to share
the world’s available resources more equitably. Here we review some of the global targets
involved in the UN’s aspirations for poverty relief as they relate to water and WWAP’s
mandate, as the flagship programme of UN-Water – to undertake and report on assessment
processes and refine the thinking behind better-adapted monitoring tools and indicator
rationale for the water sector.

6a. The Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs)
Long experience has shown that setting targets is
vitally important for focusing attention and providing
incentives to mobilize action on key issues of
development. Recognizing the need to speed up
poverty alleviation and socio-economic development,
the 2000 UN General Assembly Millennium Meeting
established eight Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), with targets, to be achieved by 2015, from
a baseline of 1990 and with a major review in 2005.
The role played by water in achieving the goals is
summarized in Box 1.12.

The major UN conferences and other international
water meetings (e.g. the World Water Forums, see
WWDR1, 2003) have a history of global target
setting.5 However, all too frequently, these have
not included detailed enough implementation
plans or the necessary financial resources.
As a result, although good progress was made
on some early targets, they were rarely met in
full. Global targets are just that—global ambitions
that can only be met via the aggregate of local
actions in communities worldwide. Without local
commitment and the needed resources, targets
will never be met in full.

5. http://www.unesco.org/
water/wwap/index.shtml

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.12 WATER AND THE MILLENNIUM DEVELOPMENT GOALS
GOAL 1. ERADICATE EXTREME
POVERTY AND HUNGER*

GOAL 2. ACHIEVE UNIVERSAL
PRIMARY EDUCATION

Water is a factor of production in virtually all
enterprise, including agriculture, industry and the
services sector. Improved nutrition and food
security reduces susceptibility to diseases, including
HIV/AIDS, malaria among others. Access to
electricity is key to improving quality of life in the
modern age. Competition between the various
sectors must be balanced by policies that recognize
the ability and responsibility of all sectors to
address the issues of poverty and hunger.

Promotion of a healthy school environment is an
essential element of ensuring universal access to
education, and school enrolment, attendance,
retention and performance are improved; teacher
placement is improved. In this respect access to
adequate drinking water and sanitation is key.

Targets:
■ Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the
proportion of people whose income is less
than $1 a day
■ Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger
WWDR2 Water-related Indicators:
■ Percentage of undernourished people
■ Percentage of poor people living in rural
areas
■ Relative importance of agriculture
■ Irrigated land as percentage of cultivated
land
■ Relative importance of agriculture water
withdrawals in water balance
■ Extent of land salinized by irrigation
■ Importance of groundwater in irrigation
■ Dietary Energy Supply (DES)
See Chapter 7: Water for Food, Agriculture
and Rural Livelihoods
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Trends in industrial water use
Water use by sector
Organic pollution emissions by industrial
sector
Industrial water productivity
Trends in ISO 14001 certification, 1997-2002
Access to electricity and domestic use
Electricity generation by fuel, 1971-2001
Capability for hydropower generation, 2002
Total primary energy supply by fuel
Carbon intensity of electricity production,
2002
Volume of desalinated water produced

See Chapter 8: Water and Industry and
Chapter 9: Water and Energy

Target:
■ Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere,
boys and girls alike, will be able to complete
a full course of primary schooling
WWDR2 Water-related Indicator:
■ Knowledge Index
See Chapter 13: Enhancing Knowledge and
Capacity

GOAL 3. PROMOTE GENDER
EQUALITY AND EMPOWER WOMEN
Educating women and girls will permit them to
fulfil their potential as full partners in the
development effort.
Target:
■ Eliminate gender disparity in primary and
secondary education, preferably by 2015 and
in all levels of education no later than 2015
WWDR2 Water-related Indicator:
■ Access to information, participation and
justice in water decisions
See Chapter 2: Challenges of Governance

GOAL 4. REDUCE CHILD MORTALITY
Improvements in access to safe drinking water
and adequate sanitation will help prevent
diarrhoea, and lay a foundation for the control of
soil-transmitted helminths and schistosomiasis
among other pathogens.
Target:
■ Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and
2015, the under-five mortality rate
WWDR2 Water-related Indicators:
■ Mortality in children <5 yrs
■ Prevalence of underweight children <5 yrs
■ Prevalence of stunting among children <5 yrs
See Chapter 6: Protecting and Promoting
Human Health

GOAL 5. IMPROVE MATERNAL
HEALTH
Improved health and nutrition reduce
susceptibility to anaemia and other conditions
that affect maternal mortality. Sufficient
quantities of clean water for washing pre-andpost birth cut down on life-threatening infection.
Target:
■ Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990 and
2015, the maternal mortality rate
WWDR2 Water-related Indicator:
■ DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Year)
See Chapter 6: Protecting and Promoting
Human Health

GOAL 6. COMBAT HIV, AIDS,
MALARIA AND OTHER DISEASES
Improved water supply and sanitation reduces
susceptibility to/severity of HIV/AIDS and other
major diseases.
Targets:
■ Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse
the spread of HIV/AIDS
■ Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse
the incidence of malaria and other major
diseases
WWDR2 Water-related Indicator:
■ DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Year)
See Chapter 6: Protecting and Promoting
Human Health

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 31

BOX 1.12: continued
GOAL 7. ENSURE ENVIRONMENTAL
SUSTAINABILITY
Healthy ecosystems are essential for the
maintenance of biodiversity and human wellbeing. We depend upon them for our drinking
water, food security and a wide range of
environmental goods and services.
Target:
■ Integrate the principles of sustainable
development into country policies and
programmes and reverse the loss of
environmental resources
WWDR2 Water-related Indicators:
■ Water Stress Index
■ Groundwater development
■ Precipitation annually
■ TARWR volume (total annual renewable water
resources)
■ TARWR per capita
■ Surface water (SW) as a % TARWR
■ Groundwater (GW) as a % of TARWR
■ Overlap % TARWR
■ Inflow % TARWR
■ Outflow % TARWR
■ Total Use as % TARWR
See Chapter 4: The State of the Resource

■

Fragmentation and flow regulation of rivers
Dissolved nitrogen (NO3 + NO2)
■ Trends in freshwater habitat protection
■ Trends in freshwater species
■ Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD)
■

See Chapter 5: Coastal and Freshwater
Ecosystems
Targets:
■ Halve by 2015 the proportion of people
without sustainable access to safe drinking
water and basic sanitation
■ By 2020, to have achieved a significant
improvement in the lives of at least 100
million slum dwellers
WWDR2 Water-related Indicators:
■ Urban Water and Sanitation Governance Index
■ Index of Performance of Water Utilities
See Chapter 3: Water and Human
Settlements in an Urbanizing World
■

Access to safe drinking water
■ Access to basic sanitation
See Chapter 6: Protecting and Promoting
Human Health

GOAL 8. DEVELOP A GLOBAL
PARTNERSHIP FOR DEVELOPMENT*
Water has a range of values that must be
recognized in selecting governance strategies.
Valuation techniques inform decision-making for
water allocation, which promote sustainable
social, environmental and economic development
as well as transparency and accountability in
governance. Development agendas and
partnerships should recognize the fundamental
role that safe drinking water and basic sanitation
play in economic and social development.
Targets:
■ Develop further an open trading and financial
system that is rule-based, predictable and
non-discriminatory, includes a commitment to
good governance, development and poverty
reduction — nationally and internationally
■ Address the special needs of landlocked and
small island developing states
WWDR2 Water-related Indicators:
■ Water sector share in total public spending
■ Ratio of actual to desired level of public
investment in water supply
■ Rate of cost recovery
■ Water charges as a percent of household
income
See Chapter 12: Valuing and Charging for
Water
■

Water interdependency indicator
Cooperation indicator
■ Vulnerability indicator
■ Fragility indicator
■ Development indicator
■

See Chapter 11: Sharing Water
■

Disaster Risk Index
Risk and Policy Assessment Index
■ Climate Vulnerability Index
■

See Chapter 10: Managing Risks
■

Progress toward implementing IWRM

See Chapter 2: Challenges of Governance

* Only the most relevant targets have been listed for
this goal.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

3 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Taking
precautions at
household level
to prevent
water-related
disease through
sound domestic
hygiene
practices is a
challenge to the
individual family

Extending the provision of water supply and
sanitation facilities is a challenge to individual
communities. Making more effective use of modern
communications technology to speed up warnings
to communities at risk of flooding and other waterrelated hazards must be tackled by individual
governments and their agencies within particular
river basins. Expanding water use productivity in
both rainfed and irrigated croplands has to be done
by individual farmers, irrigation managers and water
user associations. Taking precautions at household
level to prevent water-related disease through
sound domestic hygiene practices is a challenge
to the individual family. Yet it is the aggregate of
all these many millions of actions which help to
realize the MDGs. Governments and NGOs must help
through the provision of needed resources, including
education and training, to improve knowledge and
skill and thus foster the development of the selfsufficiency and resilience needed to meet the MDGs.
Recognizing these problems, the UN has
established a number of initiatives to help meet
the MDG targets, as well as others. One such
initiative is the Millennium Research Project –
an independent advisory body set up by the UN
Secretary General to propose the best strategies
to meet the MDGs. In turn, the Project established
ten Millennium Task Forces, charged with
identifying what was needed to reach the MDG
targets. One of these, Millennium Task Force 7,
covers water supply and sanitation, and highlights
from its latest findings can be found in Chapter 6.
Chapter 10 reviews the linkages between the
Millennium Development Goals and disaster risk
reduction. The UN has instigated Millennium
Campaigns across the world, encouraging
industrialized countries to increase support
through aid, trade and debt relief. For lowerincome countries, the Campaigns focus on
engaging support for urgent action on the MDGs.

Progress on global goals and targets

6. hdr.undp.org/

Progress on the MDGs is monitored via the
Millennium Development Goal Reports, which build
on the national Human Development Reports,6 and
the UN Secretary General’s reports to the General
Assembly. The latest of these shows that, with only
ten years to go on the MDGs, progress has been
patchy and slow.

The 13th Commission on Sustainable Development
(CSD) sessions in April 2005 set out a number of
priority policy options designed to accelerate
progress towards achieving the MDGs on water and
sanitation and human settlements. It confirmed that,
in future, water, sanitation and human settlements
should be dealt with in an integrated manner. This is
logical since the challenge for the poor is essentially
one of securing acceptable habitation of which
water, sanitation and shelter are key components.
It recommended also that countries should identify
or establish an institutional base for sanitation and
prioritize investment for it where needs are greatest
and the impacts likely to be most substantial – in
health centres, schools and workplaces. Both
financial and human resources are required, as
discussed in Chapters 12 and 13. Greater resources
are needed for sanitation, together with more
community involvement and an emphasis on lowcost technology options. Issues of strengthening
national and local authority capacity to deliver and
maintain water supply and sanitation systems, the
contentious subject of cost recovery, approaches to
the provision of wastewater systems, use of debt
relief to mobilize resources for water and sanitation,
and the greater use of grant aid, were also covered.
A notable feature of the April meeting of the
Commission was the announcement by Mikhail
Gorbachev of Green Cross International, that he and
others are promoting an initiative for a global
convention on the right to water (Water 21, 2005).
The September 2005 meeting of the UN General
Assembly was set to review progress and to agree
an agenda for the next stage. This last point is
crucial since it is widely agreed that 2005 is
regarded as a make or break year for getting the
MDG project on course to deliver the targets.
Professor Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Millennium
Project, has submitted to the Secretary General a
plan showing how the MDGs can still be met. The
plan sets out a coordinated programme of proposed
investments in infrastructure, health and education
in low-income countries, plus additional overseas
development assistance (ODA) from the richer
countries and progress in the Doha negotiations of
the World Trade Organization (Sachs, 2005).
Importantly, the September meeting of the UN
General Assembly was able to reach agreement on

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 33

a commitment by countries to prepare, by 2006,
comprehensive national development strategies
designed to reach internationally agreed
development goals and objectives, which include
among them the MDGs.
Elsewhere, the UN Millennium Task Force 7 on
Water and Sanitation has indicated that the targets
for water and sanitation will not be met worldwide
at present rates of progress. Good progress is being
made with water supply but sanitation is lagging
substantially behind. The Task Force has set out five
guiding principles and ten critical actions (see Box
1.13 below). These are vital to achieving the water
and sanitation MDGs and ensuring that sound
management and development of water resources
are a fundamental component of the whole MDG
programme. The slow progress on sanitation is of
particular concern, since poor sanitation is
implicated in much-water related disease, as is
shown in Chapter 6.

6b. Indicator development and the
World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP)
In order to check on progress towards meeting goals
and targets, regular and reliable monitoring is
required. In recognition of this and the critical role
of water in poverty alleviation and socio-economic
development, WWAP was established in 2000 under
the auspices of the UN and charged with the
responsibility to monitor and report on water around
the world – its availability, condition and use, and
the world’s progress towards water-related targets
and goals. The identification of the most crucial
issues to monitor is a key part of the process as is
the development of indicators relevant to the data
and trends, goals and targets being monitored in
areas where freshwater plays a key role.7
Experience in many sectors has shown that, done
correctly, development and testing of indicators is a
lengthy process. Indicators have to meet well-defined
criteria and be selected through a carefully planned
and implemented process, including stakeholder
involvement. Understanding causal relationships in
complex, dynamic systems requires information that
is not always readily available. Indicator production
can involve time-consuming collection, collation and
systematization of large amounts of data. Because

the same indicator may need to satisfy often
conflicting but equally important social, political,
financial and scientific goals and objectives, deriving
indicators becomes an objective-maximization
exercise constrained by available time, resources
and partnership arrangements.

Data plotted

One critical challenge is to identify or develop
indicators applicable to as many situations as
possible so that cross-country and inter-regional
comparisons can be made. With data gathered
according to commonly agreed and standardized
norms, it could be possible to derive ‘lessons’ that
are relevant across many locations. Data plotted
over time can reveal developing trends, while
country-specific data collected in a common format
facilitate inter-area comparison. Inter-country and
inter-regional analyses illuminate success as well as
stagnation and enable decision-makers to discern
areas in need of attention. Selected to address the
key concerns of decision-makers, indicators provide
critical data for policy analysis, programme design
and fiscal planning. Thus, prepared from carefully
selected data, distilled into authoritative information
and presented clearly and concisely in a userfriendly format, indicators play a key role in
documenting global trends that are crucial to
sustainable development. A balance has to be struck
between the ‘ideal’ – indicators that are consistent
with theoretical definitions – and the ‘practical’ or
feasibly measurable variables that provide
acceptable approximations to the ideal. Striking a
balance is critically important in determining costefficient and cost-effective data collection.

trends, while

Indicator development within WWAP focuses on
utilizing and adapting existing knowledge, datasets
and indicators to formulate and develop easy-touse, easy-to-understand, yet robust and reliable
indicators. These promote better water resource
management by:
■

providing a clear assessment of the state of
water resources

■

identifying the emergence of critical water
resources issues

■

monitoring progress towards achieving water
policy objectives.

over time can
reveal
developing
country-specific
data collected in
a common
format facilitates
inter-area
comparison

7. The first edition of the WWDR
(WWDR1, 2003) provided an
assessment of the world’s
progress in meeting critical
water needs since the UNCED
in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
WWDR1 identified challenges
in eleven areas: meeting basic
needs, securing the food
supply; protecting ecosystems;
sharing water resources;
managing risks; valuing water,
water governance; water use
in industry and energy
production; providing water
for cities; and ensuring the
water knowledge base.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 1.13: RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MILLENNIUM TASK FORCE ON WATER AND SANITATION
At the end of a three-year project, the
UN Millennium Project Task Force on
Water and Sanitation identified five
guiding principles and ten critical actions
essential to reaching the water and
sanitation MDGs.
Five Guiding Principles
These are as follows:
1. There must be a deliberate
commitment by donors to increase
and refocus their development
assistance and to target aid to the
poorest countries.
2. There has to be deliberate
commitment by middle-income
country governments that do not
depend on aid, to reallocate their
resources so as to focus funding on
their un-served poor.
3. There have to be deliberate
activities to create support and
ownership for water supply and
sanitation initiatives among both
women and men in poor
communities.
4. There must be deliberate recognition
that basic sanitation in particular
requires community mobilization and
actions that support and encourage
such mobilization.
5. There must be deliberate planning
and investment in sound water
resources management and
infrastructure.
Ten Critical Actions
These actions are needed not only to
meet the water and sanitation targets but
also to facilitate the sound management
of water resources for all MDGs:

1. Governments and other stakeholders
must move the sanitation crisis to
the top of the agenda.
2. Countries must ensure that both
policies and institutions for water
supply and sanitation, and for water
resources management and
development, respond equally to the
different roles, needs and priorities
of women and men.
3. Governments and donor agencies must
act together to reform investments for
improved water supply, sanitation and
water management.
4. Actions to meet the water and
sanitation targets must focus on
sustainable service delivery and not
just on the construction of facilities.
5. Governments and donor agencies
must ensure that local authorities
and communities have the
authority, resources and
professional capacity required to
manage water supply and sanitation
service delivery.
6. Governments and utilities must
ensure that those who can pay for
services do pay, so that the
revenues to fund operation,
maintenance and service expansion
are available, while at the same time
ensuring that the needs of the
poorest households are met.
7. Within the context of national
poverty reduction strategies based
on the MDGs, countries must
produce coherent water resources
development and management
plans that will support the
achievement of the MDGs.

8. Governments and their civil society
and private sector partners must
support a wide range of water
and sanitation technologies and
service levels technically, socially,
environmentally and financially
appropriate.
9. Institutional, financial and
technological innovation must be
provided in strategic areas.
10. UN agencies and Member States
must ensure that the UN system
and its international partners
provide strong and effective
support for the achievement of
the water supply and sanitation
targets and for water resources
development and management.
In addition to these guiding principles
and critical actions, the Task Force report
sets out an Operational Plan specifying
the steps that the key players – national
and sub-national governments, donors,
civil and community organizations and
research institutions – need to follow in
support of achieving the MDGs
Source: ‘Health, Dignity and Development: What Will it Take?’
– a summary of the key recommendations of the UN
Millennium Task Force on Water and Sanitation’s Final Report,
prepared with the aid of the Stockholm International Water
Institute (SIWI) www.siwi.org

On-going research in a water-related
research centre, Delft, Netherlands

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 35

Indicators can be used to monitor performance and
track changes, not only in the natural environment,
such as the hydrological cycle, the aquatic
environment, water quality, water availability and
use, but also in the socio-economic and political
environment of the water world – in governance, in
sharing water and in water pricing and valuation,
among others. Indices attempt to pull together
variables or indicators from a variety of diverse
elements to provide a more comprehensive
assessment of a particular issue or challenge area.
WWAP seeks to make use of as many relevant
existing indicators and on-going indicator
development initiatives as possible. The indicator
development process involves close cooperation
with the members of UN-Water, interested UN
member countries, NGOs and universities. This
process follows the five-element DPSIR analytical
framework – Driving forces, Pressures, State,
Impacts and Responses – originally developed by
the European Environmental Agency (see Figure
1.2). Relevant indicators have been selected,

carefully examined according to jointly agreed
criteria and, where suitable, given support for
further refinement and development. The original
list of 176 indicators in the first WWDR (2003) has
been refined by UN agencies and specialists from
universities and NGOs and reduced to the present
63, although this number is by no means final.
The process has involved WWAP working with
participating countries to evaluate the original
set of indicators through testing and adaptation
(see Chapter 14) – a crucial part of the indicator
development process. The goal is to develop a set
of indicators that are accepted across the entire
UN system.
As a result of the work done to date, WWAP has
designated four categories of indicators:
■

Basic indicators, which provide fundamental
information not directly linked to policy goals
(e.g. water resources, GNP and population), are
well established, widely used and data is
generally widely available around the world.

Figure 1.2: The DPSIR framework of analysis

generate
DRIVING FORCES
Ultimate causes; root source
of change; basic sectoral trends
e.g. demographic trends

PRESSURSE
Activities most directly and immediately
influencing water resources and their use
e.g. domestic water consumption rates
eliminate,
reduce,
prevent

modify,
mediate

RESPONSES
Reaction of society to conditions
that have developed
e.g. formation of water
user associations

stimulate,
provoke

Source: Costantino et al., 2003.

restore, influence

compensate,
mitigate

IMPACTS
Effect of changed conditions on
human and environmental systems
e.g. reduced fish habitat, loss of
swimming areas

influence,
modify

STATE
Status or present conditions and
trends in the resource and its use
e.g. greater diversion and reduced
river flows

bring about,
cause

The goal is to
develop a set of
indicators that
are accepted
across the entire
UN system

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

3 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...political
relevance and

Table 1.1: Proposed WWDR2 indicators by challenge area
Challenge Area
Global

quantifiable
data are key
features in
indicator

Governance

selection...

Settlements

Resources

Ecosystems

Health

Agriculture

Industry

Energy

Risk

Indicators1
DPSIR aspect2
Index of non-sustainable water use
R
Urban and rural population
D
Relative Water Stress Index
S/P
Domestic and Industrial Water Use
D
Water Pollution Index
P
Sediment Trapping Efficiency Index
P
Climate Moisture Index (CMI)
D
Water Reuse Index (WRI)
P
Access to information, participation and justice
R
Progress toward implementing IWRM
R
Index of Performance of Water Utilities
S
Urban Water and Sanitation governance index
S
Slum Profile in Human Settlements
P
Precipitation annually
D
TARWR volume (total actual renewable water resources)
S
TARWR per capita
S
Surface water (SW) as a % of TARWR
S
Groundwater development (GW % of TARWR)
S
Overlap %TARWR
S
Inflow as % TARWR
S
Outflow as % TARWR
S
Total use as % TARWR
S
Fragmentation and flow regulation of rivers
S/I
Dissolved nitrogen (NO3+NO2)
S
Trends in freshwater habitat protection
S/R
Trends in freshwater species populations
S
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD)
S
DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Year)
I
Prevalence of underweight children < 5 years old
I
Prevalence of stunting in children < 5 years old
I
Mortality in children < 5 years old
I
Access to safe drinking water
S
Access to basic sanitation
S
Percentage of undernourished people
S
Percentage of poor people living in rural areas
S
Relative importance of agriculture in the economy
S
Irrigated land as a percentage of cultivated land
S/P
Relative importance of agriculture water withdrawals in
water balance
P
Extent of land salinized by irrigation
S
Importance of groundwater in irrigation
S/P
Trends in industrial water use
P
Water use by sector
S
Organic pollution emissions by industrial sector
I
Industrial water productivity
R
Trends in ISO 14001 certification, 1997-2002
R
Capability for hydropower generation, 2002
S
Access to electricity and water for domestic use
S
Electricity generation by fuel, 1971-2001
S
Total primary energy supply by fuel, 2001
S
Carbon intensity of electricity production, 2002
S
Volume of desalinated water produced
R
Disaster Risk Index
S
Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
P
Risk and Policy Assessment Index
R

Status3
K
B
K
B
K
K
K
K
D
K
D
D
D
B
K
D
D
K
D
D
D
D
K
K
K
K
K
K
D
D
D
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K
K

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 37

Table 1.1: continued
Challenge Area
Sharing4

Valuing

Knowledge

...well-designed
Indicators1
Water interdependency indicator
Cooperation indicator
Vulnerability indicator
Fragility indicator
Development indicator
Water sector share in total public spending
Ratio of actual to desired level of public investment in
water supply
Rate of cost recovery
Water charges as percent of household income
Knowledge Index

DPSIR aspect2
S
S
S
S
S
S

Status3
C
C
C
C
C
D

P
S
P
S

D
D
D
D

Notes:
1. Indicator Profile Sheet provides detailed definition and information on computation of indicator, and can be found on the
accompanying CD.
2. DPSIR is the UNECE analytical framework employed in the assessment of the challenge areas, specifically Driving force, Pressure,
State, Impact and Response.
3. Level of development, highest to lowest: B = basic indicator; K = key indicator, for which there is an Indicator Profile Sheet and
statistical data ; D = developing indicators for which there is an Indicator Profile Sheet* but not yet statistical presentation, and
C = conceptual indicator for which there is conceptual discussion only.
4. A total of 25 potential indicators were proposed as the basis for discussion at the ‘Indicators of Water Conflict and Cooperation
Workshop’ convened in Paris, November 2004, by UNESCO; here we present the few central indicators proposed for testing.

■

Key indicators, well defined and validated, have
global coverage, and are linked directly to policy
goals and convey important messages of the
present Report

■

Developing indicators are in a formative stage
and may evolve into key indicators, following
refinement of methodological issues or data
development and testing

■

Conceptual indicators require considerable
methodological advancement, resolution of
data issues and fieldwork before evolving into
key indicators.

Bringing all of this together, WWAP has produced a
catalogue of the indicator work done to date (see
Table 1.1 and the CD-ROM).
Each chapter of the present Report focuses only on
the policy-relevant indicators most directly
associated with their challenge area. Depending on
the particular nature of the challenge areas, some
chapters have more indicators than others. Since
political relevance and quantifiable data are key
features in indicator selection, it is easier to identify
quantifiable variables in health, agriculture, industry

and energy. Where institutional change is more
relevant than infrastructure development – for
example, in water governance, risk management,
sharing and valuing water – identifying qualitative
indicators that provide a meaningful measure of
progress towards sectoral goals and objectives is
more difficult. However, since qualitative aspects
can be the deciding factor as to whether goals are
achieved – despite being more challenging and
costly to monitor – development work on them
needs to continue. Furthermore, since indicator
development is an ongoing process, not all
indicators presented in the following chapters are
elaborated to the same degree.
Experience has shown that the WWAP indicator
development process has not only facilitated
countries’ utilization and testing of existing
indicators but has also helped them to develop their
own indicators. It is clear that both the product
(the information produced) and the process
(developing indicators and analysing the resulting
data) contribute to building needed individual as
well as organizational capacity.
As water management grows increasingly complex,
well-designed indicators will enable complex

indicators will
enable complex
information to
be presented in
a meaningful
and understandable way
both for
decision-makers
and the public

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

information to be presented in a meaningful and
understandable way both for decision-makers and
the public. Indicators have an especially important
role to play in IWRM, which requires information not
only on water resources but also a variety of socioeconomic factors and their impact on water systems.
Appropriate indicators, by simplifying complex
information, can provide better communication and
cooperation between stakeholders. The organization
of this second WWDR is such that its core chapters
address the challenge areas recognized to be critical
for effective IWRM.

6c. The crucial role of case studies
One of WWAP’s significant features is a range of
seventeen case studies in forty-one countries.
Collectively, these illustrate the many different types
of problems and challenges faced by policy-makers
and water managers. Chapter 14 introduces the
case studies (and much more detail can be found
on the WWAP website) and highlights their key
features. Virtually all of the many factors
influencing water resources management raised in
this introductory chapter, can be observed, in one
form or another, in the various case studies.
The case studies include profiles of highly
developed countries, such as Japan, and some of
the poorest countries in the world, such as
Ethiopia. The studies also reflect the challenges
in major transboundary river basins such as the
Danube River Basin, the second largest in Europe,
and the La Plata River Basin, the fifth largest
basin in the world. Almost all the case study
partners from WWDR1 have continued developing
their pilot projects and have contributed to
WWDR2 with national-scale case studies. In
addition, five case studies have been developed
in Africa to highlight the range of water
challenges confronting the continent. The
Mongolian case study has helped to provide a
more complete picture of water problems in Asia.
Efforts towards attaining global coverage will
continue in subsequent editions of the WWDR
as additional case study partners are sought.
The WWAP case studies clearly show that the
approach towards sustainable utilization of water
resources is evolving globally in the direction of
IWRM. Integrating surface water and groundwater

resources within a basin and balancing competing
sectoral interests with the needs of ecosystems
within the integrity of the hydrological unit are
becoming mainstream values that are increasingly
accepted around the globe. However, political
boundaries, which do not necessarily coincide with
the natural borders of basins, make cooperation a
necessity – cooperation not only in the international
context, but also at national, sub-national and local
levels. The WWAP case studies are in fact an
instrument for promoting and enhancing cooperation
among all relevant stakeholders, including NGOs,
IGOs, research institutions, universities and water
users themselves. Case study-related national
meetings often bring all relevant agencies together,
breaking the standard approach whereby each
organization works in isolation. This process has
helped WWAP’s case study partners identify
problems and reach consensus on the challenges
to be addressed in the water sector.
The WWAP case studies also serve to benchmark the
current situation and thus provide a basis on which
to analyse change (positive or negative) in the
water sector. They have facilitated the testing of the
indicators suggested in WWDR1, which are critical to
monitoring the impact of policy and programmes.
The case studies clearly highlight the diversity of
circumstances and various challenges and priorities
facing different regions. For example, in the Danube
River Basin, homogeneous implementation of the
Water Framework Directive among EU Members and
non-EU Member countries is a priority, whereas in the
La Plata Basin, poverty alleviation and curbing the
health burden of increasing environmental pollution is
high on the agenda. In Japan, thanks to the adoption
of proper waste management techniques, waterborne diseases are no longer considered a major
threat, whereas in Africa, water-related illnesses are
common and still claim a great number of lives every
year. In South Africa, due to the limited availability
of surface water, hydro-power is minimal, and coal
is the country’s major source of energy production,
whereas in the La Plata River Basin, the production of
hydropower is a regional priority (over 90 percent of
all energy used by Brazil comes from hydropower).
Perhaps one of the most important aspects of case
studies is how they illustrate the importance of

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 39

vertical integration. In other words, how the policies
developed at national and sub-national levels are
translated into action at the community level, and
how decisions taken at the local level affect the
decisions of higher management. For example, in
Mongolia, lack of public involvement at the local
level has limited the effectiveness of many policies
and programmes. Facilitating the involvement of
water users and stakeholders in managing water
resources remains a challenge in many developing
countries. Meanwhile, in countries such as Estonia,
where the Water Framework Directive is being
implemented, it is widely recognized that water
management must respond to local actions and
needs. A strong public information and consultation
component is therefore a prerequisite for the
preparation of river basin management plans.
The attainment of the MDGs remains high on the
global agenda. Although global progress is being
made, at present not all countries are on track. In
countries such as South Africa, where the water and
sanitation-related MDGs have already been attained,
the governments are trying to further improve the
livelihoods of their people. In other areas, for
example in the Lake Titicaca Basin, many people are
struggling with poverty and lack of access to safe
water and sanitation. As with WWDR1, the WWDR2
continues to be an important advocacy tool for
water supply and sanitation concerns. The WWAP
case studies demonstrate the close link between
inadequacies in the provision of water and sanitation
facilities and a lack of financial and human resources.
Low capacity in the water sector can be identified as
the main reason behind the failure of countries to
utilize water resources to contribute significantly to
socio-economic development.

hydrometeorological data. Thus WWAP is tasked to
develop simple objective indicators that can be
supported by available data or data that is relatively
easy to collect. WWAP will also refrain from the
trend elsewhere of merging variables into ostensibly
more comprehensive, yet, by their nature, more
subjective and complex indices. Developing good,
usable indicators is a slow, painstaking process.
The following specific areas are those on which
WWAP intends to concentrate in the next few years:
Cooperation with participating countries in
testing and evaluating indicators, improving
data sets and developing monitoring
programmes with indicators. Government officials,
and all users and stakeholders need to be
represented in the development process so that
indicators accurately reflect experience on the
ground. Indicator sets must be linked to nationaland local-level strategies for water resource
management and the targets and objectives from
which these emanate. WWAP’s intention is to work
to improve the involvement of UN member
countries in supplying data to the UN agencies and
in working with WWAP to help the world improve
the management of water resources.

6d. Looking ahead: WWAP in the
medium term

Development of methods to enhance stakeholder
participation at all levels in indicator development,
assessment and monitoring. Emphasizing the need
for stakeholder involvement in indicator development,
WWAP will seek to tackle the problems of commitment
to information production, reporting and application
to decision-making. Encouraging countries to view
indicator development within the wider context of
planning and management, WWAP will seek to
demonstrate how indicators are an important
management tool to identify and minimize
damage from environmental hazards.

Harmonizing indicators at a global level requires
considerable effort. Indicators developed for one
location may not be applicable worldwide or
suitable for scaling-up to a regional or global level.
High-quality data may not be available for a
theoretically relevant indicator. In fact data
availability is a serious limitation for some indicators
and some regions. For reasons reported in WWDR1
and re-emphasized here in Chapter 13, there is an
ongoing deterioration in the systems of collecting

Working with scientists to define and develop
indicators proposed by our partner agencies and
cooperating countries and identifying research
needed to clarify linkages and provide the
information needed to refine computer models.
WWAP is aware of initiatives by a number of
organizations – NGOs, institutes and universities –
whose work it will endeavour to incorporate as
applicable within the indicator development process.

The WWAP
case studies
demonstrate the
close link
between
inadequacies in
the provision of
water and
sanitation
facilities and a
lack of financial
and human
resources

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

4 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Moving forward with developing geo-referenced
data and mapping capability for the analysis of
water-related challenges among member
countries. The advent of spatially discrete, highresolution earth system data sets is poised to enable
a truly global picture of progressive changes to
inland water systems to be produced, monitoring of
water availability worldwide to be facilitated, and a
consistent, ‘political boundary-free’ view of the main
elements of the terrestrial water cycle to be
produced. WWAP has responded by commencing
assessment of the relevance of potentially useful
data sets that these new systems will generate.
Integrating the newly available information into its
indicator development programme will provide a
central challenge for WWAP, one which will require
extensive investment in GIS technology and training.

Wastewater treatment at
a bottling factory,
Indonesia

Working with UN partner agencies to develop a
corporate database and reconciling
inconsistencies and incompatibilities of current
data sets. UN-Water has identified the need to

develop a user-friendly, uniform and consistent UN
corporate database containing the key water
indicators – a process which has begun.
It has become increasingly clear throughout the
preparation of this Report that water resource
issues are extremely complex and transcend the
water sector. With the targets of the Millennium
Development Goals facing today’s water managers,
it is urgent that we extend the horizon of concern
to embrace the major social, cultural and economic
issues that are fundamental to the forces driving
the fast-paced change characteristic of our world
today. Given the magnitude of the challenges we
face if we will only meet the MDGs we recognize
that managing water is a shared responsibility.
Thus, we stress the importance of bringing together
all parties to address key governance issues raised
in this Report so that all may secure a better quality
of life not only in the short to medium term but
through sustainable development of water
resources over the long term.

LIVING IN A CHANGING WORLD . 41

References and Websites
AGI (American Geological Institute). 2005. Summary of hearings
on Hurricane Katrina. www.agiweb.org/gap/
legis109/katrina_hearings.html#sep14.
Asian Development Bank (ADB). 2003. Inland Water Transport

Flow for All, World Water Council, Water Actions Unit.
London, Earthscan.
Gutrich J., Donovan D., Finucane M., Focht W., Hitzhusen F.,
Manopimoke S., McCauley D., Norton B., Sabatier P.,

Development In India –the Role of the ADB. www.adb.org/

Salzman J., Sasmitawidjaja V. 2005. Science in the public

Documents/Speeches/2003/sp2003008.pdf.

process of ecosystem management: lessons from Hawaii,

Braga, B. P. F. 2003. The role of regulatory agencies in multiple
water use. Water Science Technology, Vol. 47, No. 6,
London, IWA Publishing.
Braga, B. and Granit, J. 2003. Criteria for priorities between

Southeast Asia, Africa and the US Mainland. Journal of
Environmental Management Vol. 76, No.3, pp.197–209.
GWP (Global Water Resources). 2004. Catalyzing Change: A
Handbook for Developing Integrated Water Resources

competing water interests in a catchment. Water Science

Management (IWRM) and Water Efficiency Strategies.

and Technology, Vol. 47, No. 6, London, IWA Publishing.

Stockholm, GWP Technical Committee.

Browne, L. 2005. Outgrowing the Earth: the Food Security
Challenge in an Era of Falling Water Tables and Rising
Temperatures. London, Earthscan.
Cincotta, R. P., Engelman, R. and Anastasion, D., 2003. The

———. 2003. Water Management and Ecosystems: Living with
Change. Draft document, Stockholm, GWP.
Harrald, J. R. 2005. Back to the drawing board: A first look at
lessons learned from Katrina. Testimony for the House

Security Demographic: Population and Civil Conflict after the

Committee on Government Reform Hearings, September 15,

Cold War. Washington DC, Population action International.

2005. Washington DC. reform.house.gov/

Concern Worldwide. 2005. Concern Worldwide and hunger: a
briefing paper prepared for the UN World Summit.
September. London, Concern Worldwide.
———. 2005. Looking into the future: a review of progress on
the MDGs, prepared for the September 2005 UN World
Summit. The Guardian, Manchester.
Costantino, C., Falcitelli, F., Femia, A. and Tudini, A. 2003.
Integrated environmental and economic accounting in Italy.
Paper. Workshop on Accounting Frameworks to Measure
Sustainable Development, 14–16 May 2003. Paris, OECD.
Department of Homeland Security. 2004. Catastrophic Incident
Annex. National Response Plan. Washington DC.
Economist. 2005. The real digital divide. The Economist, 12
March 2005. London, 2005.
———. 2004. World in 2005: a survey of key issues and likely
trends worldwide in 2005. The Economist, London.
EUROPA. 2005. Inland Water Transport. European Commission.
europa.eu.int/comm/transport/iw/index_en.htm.
European Commission. 2005. Opening the Door to
Development: Developing Country Access to EU Markets
1999-2003. Brussels, European Commission.
FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). 2006. By the

GovReform/Hearings/EventSingle.aspx?EventID=33985
Harris, G. 2002. Ensuring Sustainability: Paradigm Shifts and Big
Hairy Goals, opening speech for the Enviro 2002 joint
conference of the International Water Association and
Australian Water and Wastewater Association, Melbourne.
Hawken, P., Lovins, A. B., and Lovins, L. H. 1999. Natural
Capitalism: the Next Industrial Revolution. London, Earthscan.
Henderson, M. 2005. Rice genome is key to ending hunger. The
Times, London, 11 August 2005.
Knabb, R. D., Rhome, R. J. and Brown, D. P. 2005. Tropical
Cyclone Report: Hurricane Katrina – 23–30 August 2005.
National Hurricane Center. www.nhc.noaa.gov/
pdf/TCR-AL122005_Katrina.pdf
Lenton, R. 2004. Water and climate variability: development
impacts and coping strategies. Water Science and
Technology, Vol. 49, No. 7. London, IWA Publishing.
Mathew, K. and Ho, G. (eds). 2005. Onsite wastewater
treatment, recycling and small water and wastewater
systems. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 51, No. 8,
London, IWA Publishing.
Mbeki, M. 2005. Eye Witness; Sunday Times, 3 July 2005, London.
Moench, M., Dixit, A., Janakarajan, S., Rathotre, M. S. and

numbers: FEMA recovery update in Louisiana. Press release,

Mudrakarthe, S. 2003. The Fluid Mosaic: Water Governance

11 January. Washington DC.

in the Context of Variability, Uncertainty and Change. A

———. 2005. First responders urged not to respond to hurricane

Synthesis Paper; Institute of Development Studies (IDS),

impact areas unless dispatched by state, local authorities.

Institute for Social And Development Transition (ISET), Madras

Press release, 29 August 2005. Washington DC.

Institute of Development Studies (MIDS), Nepal Water

———. 2004. Hurricane Pam exercise concludes. Press release, 23
July 2004. Washington DC.
Figueres, C., Tortajada, C. and Rockstrom, J. 2003. Rethinking
Water Management: Innovative Approaches to
Contemporary Issues. London, Earthscan.
Grey, D. and Sadoff, C. 2003. Beyond the River: the Benefits of
Cooperation on International Rivers. Water Science and
Technology, Vol. 47, No. 6. London, IWA Publishing.
———. 2002. Water Resources and Poverty in Africa: Essential
Economic and Political Responses. Working paper prepared by
the World Bank for the African Regional Ministerial
Conference on Water (ARMCOW). Washington DC, World Bank.
Guerquin, F., Ahmed, T., Mi Hua Ikeda, T., Ozbilen, V. and
Schuttelaar, M. 2003. World Water Actions: Making Water

Conservation Foundation (NWCF), Vikram Sarabhai Centre for
Development Interaction (VIKSAT); NWCF, Kathmandu, Nepal
and ISCT, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Polak, P. Water and the other three revolutions needed to end
rural poverty. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 51, No.
8, London, IWA Publishing.
River Bureau of the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport of Japan. 2003. Water and Transport Theme,
Statement, Third World Water Forum. www.rfc.or.jp/IWT/
PDF/Statement%20_adE_.pdf.
Sachs, J. 2005. The End of Poverty: How We Can Make it
Happen in Our Lifetime. London, Penguin Books.
———. 2005. The African challenge: the mission. Sunday Times,
London, 3 July 2005.

Smith, D. 2005. Can the politicians do it? Sunday Times,
London, 3 July 2005.
State of Louisiana. 2005. State of Emergency – Hurricane
Katrina. Proclamation No. 48 KBB 2005. Baton Rouge, State
of Louisiana Executive Department.
Takahashi, K. 2004. Keynote address for the Stockholm Water
Symposium. Water Science and Technology Vol. 51, No. 8,
London, IWA Publishing.
———. 2001. Globalization and its challenges for water
management in the developing world. Water Science and
Technology, Vol. 45, No. 8, London, IWA Publishing.
Times-Picayune, The. 2002. Washing away. Five part series,
23–27 July 2002.
United Nations (UN) & World Water Assessment Programme.
2003. UN World Water Development Report: Water for
People, Water for Life. Paris, New York and Oxford, UNESCO
and Berghahn Books.
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Pacific (UNESCAP). 2004. Manual on Modernization of
Inland Water Transport for Integration within a Multimodal
Transport System. United Nations Publication, Bangkok.
Available Online at: www.unescap.org/ttdw/Publications/
TFS_pubs/Pub_2285/pub_2285_Ch5.pdf.
———. 2003. Review of Developments in Transport in the ESCAP
Region. United Nations Publications, New York. Available
Online at: www.unescap.org/ttdw/Publications/TPTS_pubs/
pub_2307/pub_2307_ch11.pdf.
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA). 2002.
The Way Forward. www.uneca.org/eca_programmes/
trade_and_regional_integration/THE%2520WAY%2520
FORWARD-FINAL.doc
United States Census Bureau. 2005. Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2004.
Washington DC, United States Department of Commerce,
Economics and Statistics Administration.
United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and
Government Affairs. 2005. Hurricane Katrina: Why did the
levees fail? United States Senate Hearing, Washington DC.
US Army Corps of Engineers. 2004. Inland Waterway Navigation
Value to the Nation. www.mvr.usace.army.mil/Brochures/
InlandWaterwayNavigation.asp.
van Heeden, I. 2004/5. Storm that drowned a city. Interviews
with Nova Science programming on National Public Radio.
19 October 2004, 10 September and 5 October 2005.
www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/orleans/vanheerden.html
———. 2004. Coastal land loss: Hurricanes and New Orleans. Baton
Rouge, Center for the Study of Public Health Impacts of
Hurricanes Louisiana State University Hurricane Center.
Vyas, JN. 2001. Dams environment and regional development:
harnessing the elixir of life: water. Water Science and
Technology Vol. 45, No. 8, London, IWA Publishing.
Water 21, 2005 – taken from articles in Water21, the magazine
of the International Water Association, issue June 2005;
publ. IWA Publishing, London, 2005.
White House. 2005. Statement on federal emergency assistance
for Louisiana. White House press release, 27 August 2005.
Washington DC, Office of the Press Secretary.
World Bank. 2004. World Development Report 2005: A Better
Investment Climate for Everyone. Washington DC, World Bank.
Worldwatch Institute. 2005. The State of the World 2005:
Global Security. London, Earthscan.

If the misery of our poor be caused not
by the laws of nature, but by our
institutions, great is our sin.
Charles Darwin

Part 1. Water Governance Today ......................45
1a. The water–poverty link........................................45
Box 2.1: Gender, poverty, improved governance
and water access in Punjab, Pakistan
1b. The four dimensions of water governance...........46
Fig. 2.1: Dimensions of water governance
Box 2.2: Criteria for effective governance
1c. Privatization, conflicts and democratization ......48
Improved governance and water shortages:
A double challenge ...............................................49
Box 2.3: Developing indicators for assessing
governance
1d. International responses to improve water
governance ..........................................................50
Box 2.4: Water in Poverty Reduction Strategy
Papers (PRSPs)

Part 2. Water Governance in Practice:
Trends in Reform and Rights.......................54
2a. National water policies in the making.................54
Box 2.5: Integrating land and water governance
Meeting the Johannesburg target on IWRM plans ...56
Table 2.1: Country readiness to meet the
Johannesburg target on IWRM planning by 2005
Box 2.6: The policy process: Decision-making
versus implementation
Water policies, politics and resistance ....................57
Water policy reform ahead: Where to begin?..........59
2b. Water rights ........................................................61
Custom and tradition in water rights ......................62
2c. Water as a human right .......................................63
Box 2.7: The right to water: General Comment 15
Does it make a difference to recognize water
as a human right?.................................................64
Box 2.8: Safeguarding water supply to low-income
groups
Box 2.9: Safeguarding the right to safe water
supply
2d. Is corruption draining the water sector? .............65
Corruption and its consequences for
development and water service provision ...............66

Line of buckets waiting to be filled by a slow tap
at a water distribution point in Kansay, near
Ngorongoro, Tanzania. People will carry these
buckets of water up to 3 miles each way to and
from their homes

Box 2.10: Corruption in the irrigation sector in
Pakistan
Box 2.11: Corruption in the water supply and
sanitation sectors in India
Abating corruption ................................................68
2e. Privatization of water services............................69
Box 2.12: Experiences in private sector involvement
in water supply and sanitation
Weak regulatory powers and poor governance .......71
Box 2.13: Improved governance for better
water services in Brazil
Untapped potentials — local small-scale water
companies ............................................................72
Box 2.14: The active role of water user
associations in Morocco

Part 3. Decentralization of Water Control
and Decision-making .....................................74
3a. Benefits of decentralization................................74
Box 2.15: Traditional systems under threat in
India
3b. Decentralization in practice.................................75
3c. Information, development and access .................77
3d. Degree of public participation in water
decision-making...................................................77
Table 2.2: Public participation rights in
constitutional and legal frameworks
Box 2.16: Access to information and public
participation in the water sector
3e. Access to water quality information....................78
Table 2.3: Quality and accessibility of water data,
selected countries

Part 4. Water Governance Ahead .....................81
4a. No blueprint for progress ....................................83

References and Websites ....................................84

2
CHAPTER 2

The
Challenges
of Water
Governance
By

UNDP

(United Nations
Development
Programme)

With

IFAD
(International Fund
for Agricultural
Development)

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
In many countries water governance is in a state of confusion: in some countries there is a total lack of
water institutions, and others display fragmented institutional structures or conflicting decision-making
structures. In many places conflicting upstream and downstream interests regarding riparian rights and
access to water resources are pressing issues that need immediate attention; in many other cases there
are strong tendencies to divert public resources for personal gain, or unpredictability in the use of laws
and regulations and licensing practices impede markets and voluntary action and encourage corruption.
■

■

Top: Hydraulic drilling
stations, equipped with
manual pumps, are
gradually replacing the
less sanitary, traditional
village wells, as seen here
in northern Côte d’Ivoire.
Above: Pipeline in the

■

outskirts of Gangtok,
Sikkim, India
Below: Fishermen
preparing their nets for
fishing on Surma River,
Bangladesh

■

Good water governance is a complex process,
influenced by a given country’s overall standard
of governance, its customs, mores, and politics
and conditions, events within and around it
(e.g. conflict) and by developments in the
global economy. There is no blueprint for good
water governance.
Reforms of water governance are being driven
by internal pressures on water resources and
environmental threats, growing population and
the focus of the international community on
poverty alleviation and socio-economic
development (e.g. Millennium Development
Goals). However the rate of reform is patchy
and slow.
There are significant and serious gaps in
developing countries between land and water use
policies and governance and between policymaking and its implementation, often due to
institutional resistance to change, corruption, etc.
In the water sector, as worldwide, corruption is
pervasive, though shortage of information about

its extent in the water sector prevents a full
picture from being obtained. It has had little
attention to date in the water sector and much
remains to be done.
■

Increasing recognition is accorded to the right to
water, in terms of a human right to a supply of
safe water, the role of water rights in helping to
deal with local competition for water and in dealing
with social, economic and environmental problems.

■

The privatization of water services displays uneven
results. Many multinational water companies are
currently decreasing their activities in developing
countries. The potential of local small-scale
companies and civil society organizations to help
improve water services has largely been
overlooked by governments and donors.

■

Many governments recognize the need to localize
water management but fail to delegate adequate
powers and resources to make it work. Local
groups and individuals are often without access
to information, are excluded from water decisionmaking, and thus lack a capacity to act.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 4 5

Part 1. Water Governance Today
A basic insight – which has not yet garnered enough attention – is that the insufficiency of water
(particularly for drinking water supply and sanitation), is primarily driven by an inefficient supply of
services rather than by water shortages. Lack of basic services is often due to mismanagement,
corruption, lack of appropriate institutions, bureaucratic inertia and a shortage of new investments in
building human capacity, as well as physical infrastructure. Water supply and sanitation have recently
received more international attention than water for food production, despite the fact that in most
developing countries agriculture accounts for 80 percent of total water use. It is increasingly agreed in
development circles that water shortages and increasing pollution are to a large extent socially and
politically induced challenges, which means that there are issues that can be addressed by changes in
water demand and use and through increased awareness, education and water policy reforms. The water
crisis is thus increasingly about how we, as individuals, and as part of a collective society, govern the
access to and control over water resources and their benefits.

In many places
of the world, a
staggering 30
to 40 percent
of water or
more goes
unaccounted
for due to
water leakages
in pipes and
canals and
illegal tapping

Water governance is an overarching theme of the World
Water Development Report. This chapter will present the
state of and trends in key governance variables, such as
ongoing water reform work and its implementation, the
impacts of corruption on water development and water
governance from below. Citizens and organized interests
are demanding much more transparency and influence in
water decision-making.
It will also illustrate that very complex and dynamic events
and processes external to the water sector define how we
relate to water. Changes in water use patterns are
continuously redefined through such things as culture,
macroeconomic and development trends, processes of
democratization and social and political stability or unrest.
This chapter will also look at how water governance is
undertaken in practice and discuss and analyse various
settings related to water and power politics. Examples are
provided that point at complex urban and rural water use
dynamics, the increasing need for integrated approaches
to water, the range of international targets for local
actions and the multitude of stakeholder interests. Finally,
some overarching challenges are identified, which are
taken up by the ensuing chapters and relate to specific
water governance issues, challenges and potential
solutions with respect to their fields.

1a. The water–poverty link
How societies choose to govern their water resources has
profound impacts on people’s lives and their ability to
prosper, as well as on environmental sustainability. On
the ground, this means that some groups or individuals
will benefit while others will lose out when water
allocation changes are made. Having a fair water

provision can, for many people, be a matter of daily
survival. How and for whom water is being governed has
impacts on river flows, groundwater tables and pollution
levels, affecting both upstream and tail-end water users.
The capacity of countries to pursue poverty reduction
strategies and Integrated Water Resources Management
(IWRM) plans, meet new demands and manage conflicts
and risks depends to a large extent on their ability to
promote and put into place sound and effective
governance systems.
Improved governance is essentially about improving
people’s livelihood opportunities, while providing the
backbone for governments worldwide to alleviate poverty
and increase the chances of sustainable development.
Box 2.1 provides an example of how governance,
development and livelihood opportunities can be linked
in practice.
One of the most striking features of the link between
water and poverty is that each year, thousands of African
and Asian children die from water- and sanitation-related
diseases (see Chapter 6). In the poorest countries, one
out of every five children fails to reach his or her fifth
birthday, mainly due to infectious and environmental
diseases that arise from poor water quality. Over the last
two decades, the number and scale of water-related
disasters – either too much water (floods) or too little
(droughts) – have increased greatly because of changing
climate patterns (see Chapters 4 and 10). Many countries
in sub-Saharan Africa and the Indian and Pacific oceans,
along with low-lying Small Island States, are the most
vulnerable to climate change, because widespread poverty
limits their capabilities to adapt to climate variability. Too

are strongly positively correlated across countries.
Better governance exerts a powerful effect on per
capita incomes. As recently as 200 years ago, per
capita incomes were not very different across
countries. Today’s wide income gaps across countries
reflect the fact that countries that are currently rich
have grown rapidly over the past two centuries, while
those that are poor have not. It has been suggested
that a substantial fraction of these vast income gaps is
due to ‘deep historical differences in institutional
quality’ (Kaufmann and Kraay, 2003). Water use
efficiency in developing countries is very low in both
urban and rural areas, and there is great room for
improving the water situation through improved water
distribution and management.

often, those affected by such disasters are the poor, who
do not have the means to escape poverty traps.

1b. The four dimensions of water governance

two decades,
the number and

■

The political empowerment dimension points at
granting water stakeholders and citizens at large equal
democratic opportunities to influence and monitor
political processes and outcomes. At both national and
international levels, marginalized citizens, such as
indigenous people, women, slum dwellers, etc., are
rarely recognized as legitimate stakeholders in waterrelated decision-making, and typically lack voices,
institutions and capacities for promoting their water
interests to the outside world (see Chapter 13).
Empowering women, as well as other socially,
economically and politically weak groups, is critical to
achieving more focused and effective water
management and actions to ensure greater equity.

■

The environmental sustainability dimension shows that
improved governance allows for enhanced sustainable
use of water resources and ecosystem integrity (see

scale of waterrelated disasters

■

(either too
much water or
too little) has
greatly
increased due to
changing
climate patterns

■

The social dimension points to the equitable use of
water resources. Apart from being unevenly distributed
in time and space, water is also unevenly distributed
among various socio-economic strata of society in both
rural and urban settlements. How water quality and
quantity and related services are allocated and
distributed have direct impacts on people’s health as
well as on their livelihood opportunities. It is estimated
that daily water use per inhabitant totals 600 L in
residential areas of North America and Japan and
between 250 L and 350 L in Europe, while daily water
use per inhabitant in sub-Saharan Africa averages just
10 L to 20 L. Currently, 1.1 billion people lack
sufficient access to safe drinking water, and 2.6 billion
people lack access to basic sanitation (see Chapter 6).
People in slums have very limited access to safe water
for household uses. A slum dweller may only have 5 L
to 10 L per day at his or her disposal (see Chapter 3).
A middle- or high-income household in the same city,
however, may use some 50 L to 150 L per day, if not
more. Similarly, water for food production often
benefits large-scale farmers to the detriment of smallscale and landless farmers (see Chapter 7).
The economic dimension draws attention to the
efficient use of water resources and the role of water
in overall economic growth (see Chapter 12).
Prospects for aggressive poverty reduction and
economic growth remain highly dependent on water
and other natural resources. Studies have illustrated
that per capita incomes and the quality of governance

Figure 2.1: Dimensions of water governance
Social Dimension

Equitable Use

Sustainable Use

Water
Governance

Equal Democratic
Opportunities

Political Dimension

Source: Tropp, 2005.

Efficient Use

Economic Dimension

Over the last

The conceptual development of water management has
paved the way for an IWRM approach (see Figure 2.1),
which is considered by many as an appropriate vehicle to
resolve the world’s water challenges. As defined by the
Global Water Partnership (GWP), IWRM is ‘a process which
promotes the co-ordinated development and management
of water, land and related resources in order to maximize
the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable
manner without compromising the sustainability of vital
ecosystems’ (GWP, 2000). IWRM should be seen as a
comprehensive approach to the development and
management of water, addressing its management both
as a resource and the framework for provision of water
services (see also Chapter 1).

Environmental Dimension

SECTION I: Changing Contexts

4 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 4 7

BOX 2.1: GENDER, POVERTY, IMPROVED GOVERNANCE AND WATER ACCESS IN PUNJAB, PAKISTAN

In Punjab, women and children are often the most

implied strict implementation of water fees. Both

activities. In addition, there is a reported 90

affected by the lack of access to water. The

men and women formed and were part of

percent decrease in water-related diseases and as

Government of Pakistan has implemented the

community-based organizations to implement the

much as an 80 percent increase in the enrolment

Punjab Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector

water-related activities and promote other

of school children in some communities. The

Project. The project has provided safe drinking

development and livelihood activities. The main

Punjab project demonstrates that it is possible to

water and drainage facilities to about 800,000

impact of the project was to free women and

combine an efficient and large-scale extension of

people by using a community-based, demand-

children from the hard labour of carrying water.

services with actions to improve governance and

driven approach, wherein the local people

Other positive impacts included increased

that it is critical for any development effort to

participated from planning through construction

household income by an average of 24 percent. It

involve both women and men.

and eventually became fully responsible for

was reported that 45 percent of the time saved

operation and maintenance work. The project also

from carrying water is spent on income-generating

Chapter 5). The sufficient flow of quality water is
critical to maintaining ecosystem functions and services
and sustaining groundwater aquifers, wetlands, and
other wildlife habitats. A worrisome sign is that water
quality appears to have declined worldwide in most
regions with intensive agriculture and large urban and
industrial areas (see Chapters 7 and 8). With the
reduction and pollution of natural habitats, the
diversity of freshwater flora and fauna is becoming
increasingly threatened. Poor people’s livelihood
opportunities, in particular, depend directly upon
sustained access to natural resources, including water
– especially since they tend to live in marginalized
areas that are prone to pollution, droughts and floods.
The essential role of water for maintaining a healthy
environment is being increasingly emphasized in the
change of attitudes towards wetlands, which is an
encouraging sign.
Decisions about water are being made by the minute
around the world within urban and rural households,
neighbourhoods, small businesses, corporate
boardrooms, and in the offices of local, state and
national governments, as well as on the international
scale. The particular settings vary, as do the people
and groups involved.
Water decisions are anchored in governance systems
across three levels: government, civil society and the
private sector. Facilitating dynamic interactions among
them is critical for developed and developing countries
alike.1 The water sector is a part of a broader society and
its politics and is thus affected by decisions that lie
outside of the water sector. The governance of water in

Source: Soussan, 2003.

particular can be said to be made up of the range of
political, social, economic and administrative systems that
are in place, which directly or indirectly affect the use,
development and management of water resources and
the delivery of water services at different levels of
society. Governance systems determine who gets what
water, when and how and decide who has the right to
water and related services and their benefits. The
representation of various interests in water decisionmaking and the role of politics are important components
in addressing governance dynamics.

Water is power,

Water is power, and those who control the flow of water
in time and space can exercise this power in various
ways. It is often claimed that clean water tends to
gravitate towards the rich and wastewater towards the
poor. Sandra Postel has aptly noted that ‘water grabs and
power plays are legendary in the western United States’.
The water tensions of the American west have been
captured in popular movies such as Chinatown, where
farmers were being ‘sucked dry’ by Los Angeles (Postel,
1999). As water demands and uses increase at
exponential rates due to population growth, stakes rise in
many parts of the world. As opportunities to expand
water supplies decrease, competition over current
supplies escalate, creating the need for improved
governance (see Chapter 11).

ways

The way in which societies govern their water resources
has profound impacts on settlements, livelihoods and
environmental sustainability, yet governance has
traditionally not received the same attention as technical
issues. Any water governance system must be able to
allocate water to ensure food and security but also be

and those who
control the flow
of water in time
and space can
exercise this
power in various

1. The United Nations
Development Programme
(UNDP) defines governance
as ‘the exercise of economic,
political and administrative
authority to manage a
country’s affairs at all levels.
It comprises the mechanisms,
processes and institutions,
through which citizens and
groups articulate their
interests, exercise their legal
rights, meet their obligations
and mediate their differences’.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

able to assess for whom and what purposes water is
provided. In practice, trade-offs have to be made and the
allocation of benefits and costs clarified. In short,
governance is about making choices, decisions and tradeoffs. Governance addresses the relationship between
organizations and social groups involved in water
decision-making, both horizontally, across sectors and
between urban and rural areas, and vertically, from local
to international levels. Operating principles include
downward and upward accountability, transparency,
participation, equity, rule of law, ethics and
responsiveness (see Box 2.2). Governance is therefore
not limited to ‘government’ but includes the roles of the
private sector and civil society. The character of
relationships (and the formal and informal rules and
regulations guiding such relationships) and the nature of
information flow between different social actors and
organizations are both key features of governance
(Rogers and Hall, 2003; GWP, 2003).

Annually,
between 1995
and 1999,
governments
around the
world privatized
an average of
thirty-six water
supply or
wastewater
treatment
systems

Water governance is sometimes equated with the actual
water policy in place, but governance is more; it is about
the exercise of power in policy-making and whether or
not to implement particular policies. Which actors were
involved in influencing the policy in question? Was the
policy developed in a participatory and transparent
fashion? Can revenues and public and bureaucratic
support be raised to implement the policy? These are just
some of the important questions involved, but they
indicate that governance is about the process of
decision-making, its content and the likelihood of policies
and decisions to be implemented. To be able to
understand why water is allocated in different ways, it is
necessary to look into the dynamics of policy and
decision-making, informal and formal legislation,
collective action, negotiation and consensus-building and
how these interact with other institutions.

1c. Privatization, conflicts and
democratization
The past decades have witnessed tremendous social,
political and economic changes. The end of the cold war
and the process of decolonization continue to shape
current societal events. Globalization and the increasing
speed of information exchange have had tremendous
impacts on societies. Terrorism has also had a major
impact on how countries interact with each other and on
how governments interact with their citizens. Some
commentators worry that we are heading towards a more
closed ‘barbed-wire’ society in an effort to keep out

threats, while others feel that our new means of
communication and economic growth make for more open
societies (see Chapter 1).
The way we perceive and govern our water resources is
also rooted in culture. But although water is considered
by most cultures to be something critical for all life, with
a prominent place in cultural and religious beliefs, it is
something of a paradox that water is often taken for
granted and is increasingly polluted, with many people
having limited access to clean drinking water and water
for productive activities.
The development of governance and management systems
within the water sector is closely related to overall
development trends in which the role of the state has
shifted from the provider to the enabler of development
and welfare (the ‘rolling back of the state’). By 2000,
national, provincial and local governments in ninety-three
countries had begun to privatize drinking water and
wastewater services. Between 1995 and 1999,
governments around the world privatized an average of
thirty-six water supply or wastewater treatment systems
annually (WRI, 2003). Despite the push for increased
privatization, the water-services sector remains one of the
last public ‘bastions’. Water still remains an area that is
generally heavily dependent on public investment and
regulations in developed and developing countries alike.
War and social and political unrest demolish people’s lives
and livelihood, as well as destroy important water
resources, disrupting water services and impacting
negatively on governance. Between 1990 and 2000,
118 armed conflicts worldwide claimed approximately
6 million lives. War will have long-term effects and will
continue to affect people’s livelihood opportunities and
access to natural resources and public services many
years after the actual conflict has ended. In 2001 it was
estimated that some 12 million refugees and 5 million
‘internally displaced persons’ were forced to settle in
resource-scarce areas, putting further pressure on people,
water and the environment (WRI, 2003). Recent conflicts
in Kosovo, Afghanistan and Iraq have led to the
destruction of economically vital water infrastructures,
and many people are deprived of safe drinking water and
basic sanitation as well as sufficient water for productive
uses (WRI, 2003; see also Chapters 1, 3 and 11).
The resolution of conflict and social and political
instability can sometimes yield unexpected opportunities

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 4 9

BOX 2.2: CRITERIA FOR EFFECTIVE GOVERNANCE
■ Participation: all citizens, both men and

■ Effectiveness and efficiency: processes and

■ Responsiveness: institutions and processes

women, should have a voice, directly or

institutions should produce results that meet

should serve all stakeholders and respond

through intermediary organizations

needs while making the best use of

properly to changes in demand and

representing their interests, throughout the

resources.

preferences, or other new circumstances.

processes of policy- and decision-making.
Broad-based participation hinges upon

■ Rule of law: legal frameworks should be fair

■ Integration: water governance should

national and local governments following an

and enforced impartially, especially laws on

enhance and promote integrated and holistic

inclusive approach.

human rights.

approaches.

■ Transparency: information should flow freely

■ Accountability: governments, the private

■ Ethical considerations: water governance has

in society. Processes, institutions and

sector and civil society organizations should

to be based on the ethical principles of the

information must be directly accessible to

be accountable to the public or the interests

societies in which it functions, for example,

those concerned.

they are representing.

by respecting traditional water rights.

■ Equity: all groups in society, both men and

■ Coherency: taking into account the increasing

women, should have the opportunities to

complexity of water resources issues,

improve their well-being.

appropriate policies and actions must be
coherent, consistent and easily understood.

for fundamental changes in society that can lead to
improved policy-making, which in turn can benefit a
nation’s water prospects (see Chapter 14). The political
changes in South Africa in the early 1990s and the
emergence of a democratic system have allowed for
reform of the water sector in the areas of policy,
organizational structure, water rights and legislation.
South African water reform is a very comprehensive and
innovative approach to water management, allowing for
more holistic, people-centred and ecological approaches
to the governance of water. It also aims at redistributing
water resources to the benefit of poor people.
Democratization, macroeconomic changes, population
growth and other demographic changes, and social and
political instability often have much greater impacts on
water use and demands than any water policy itself.
Global market conditions and trade regimes are factors
that affect crop choices and thus also have serious
implications for water use and demands in agriculture.
Market liberalization can contribute to improving the
water situation for many people but can also increase
pressures to overexploit water and the environment.
The importance for water professionals to increase
their understanding of social, economic and political
conditions external to the water sector that have both

Source: UN, 2003.

direct and indirect impacts on how water is being used
and governed is highlighted in Waterbury’s study of
cooperation among the Nile Basin countries (2002;
see also Chapter 11).

Improved governance and water shortages:
A double challenge
Increasing water demands will lead to a decline of per
capita supply in the future. Currently, an estimated
twenty-six countries with a combined population of more
than 350 million people are located in regions with
severe water scarcity where the available water resources
seem to be sufficient to meet reasonable water needs for
development activities, but only if these countries take
appropriate water demand and supply management
measures. In many countries, there will also be
additional, sometimes severe, local water scarcities, even
within countries that have sufficient aggregate water
resources, such as within the US and India.
A comparison of water shortages and governance
challenges shows that many countries, particularly in the
Middle East and North Africa, are facing a double
challenge. It is also evident that countries that have
bountiful water resources are facing governance
challenges to provide water and sanitation services and

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

protect water resources. For example, countries in Central
Africa, which have ample water resources, have not been
able to provide their citizens with a sufficient supply of
water; hence the point that water provision is often less a
question of available water resources than of properly
functioning institutions and proper infrastructure
management. Despite limited democratic provisions in
some countries, water can still be managed in more
democratic ways at the local level, such as through wateruser associations or other types of local organizations.

...partial
democratization,
without the
appropriate
checks and
balances can,
potentially lead
to an increase in
the exploitation
of water, land
and forests
through
patronage
politics

It has been suggested that partial democratization,
without the appropriate checks and balances, can, at
least in the short run, lead to an increase in the
exploitation of water, land and forests through patronage
politics. It has also been suggested that within wellestablished democratic polities, politicians can make
environmental ‘pay-offs’ to groups that financially
support the campaigns of a particular party or candidate.
These ‘pay-offs’ can include, for example, circumventing
certain environmental regulations and allowing the lax
enforcement of pollution control (WRI, 2003). Despite the
fact that democracy has flourished in Western Europe,
more than half of European cities are currently exploiting
groundwater at unsustainable rates. Chronic water
shortages already affect 4.5 million people in Catalonia,
where authorities are pressing for the construction of a
pipeline to divert water from the Rhone in France to
Barcelona. It is thus apparent that many water
development ‘principles’ – IWRM, participation,
transparency, community involvement and
decentralization – require improved governance in order
to be successfully implemented. It is unlikely that
effective participation and transparency within the water
sector will take place unless there are overall changes in
how societies and political systems function.
Water policy reform, IWRM implementation and meeting
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) all require that
we address issues in the water and development
interface, as well as issues that have traditionally been
considered outside the scope of water. If we wish to
increase stakeholder participation, make decentralization
more effective and hold water agencies and utilities
accountable, enhanced democratization is required. Yet
fairly little is known about the local and practical links
between water shortages and democratization. The
general notion is that democratization is beneficial to
improved water governance and would open up for more
transparency, decentralization and participation. But in

which ways? How big an impact would it make? And what
type of democratization makes the biggest impact? The
cases of India (low levels of water services) and southern
Spain (dwindling groundwater) indicate that democracy
itself is not sufficient. It also depends on how political
rights and civil liberties are exercised, as well as on other
factors, such as demographic development, economic
growth, institutional effectiveness and how welfare is
generated and distributed within and between societies.
This does not mean that water managers should refrain
from trying to make a difference, but rather underlines an
urgent need to collaborate with new actors outside the
water realm and establish more inclusive water
development networks. Political change has to begin
somewhere, and in some cases the promotion of
improved water governance may even serve as an avantgarde for inducing broad-based reform. It has been
pointed out that cooperative water development in the
Netherlands in the earlier part of the twentieth century
was an important part of nation-building for the modern
Dutch welfare state (Delli Priscoli, 2004).
Improved governance and impacts on water resources
management and related services are both complex and
dynamic. If a country lacks essential freedoms, like the
freedom of speech and the right to organize, promoting
participatory approaches in water development
programmes is compromised. If citizens cannot access
basic information on water quantity and quality, it
seriously curtails their chances of halting environmentally
unsound water projects or to hold relevant government
agencies accountable. In southern India, due to tensions
over sharing water from the Cauvery River between the
states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, information on basic
hydrological data is frequently withheld by the
responsible authorities (see Chapter 11).

1d. International responses to improve
water governance
The concept of water governance has gained a lot of
ground and evolved over the past decade. Within the
international political arena the concept has evolved from
a political taboo in North–South development cooperation
dialogue to gain wider acceptance as a critical issue at
international, national and local levels. The framing of
water challenges in terms of governance has allowed a
broadening of the water agenda to include the scrutiny
of democratization processes, corruption, power
imbalances between rich and poor countries and between
rich and poor people. Governance and politics are

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 5 1

BOX 2.3: DEVELOPING INDICATORS FOR ASSESSING GOVERNANCE

During recent years, the international water

The development and application of

foreign debt, trade balances, official

community has centre-staged governance as

appropriate water governance indicators will

reserves, and exchange rate stability.

the most important challenge to improve

make a major contribution to the type of

water management and services provision. A

water policy interventions that are required by

serious weakness is that very few, if any,

governments and the whole development

produced by the Global Governance group

robust indicators exist to monitor and assess

community. Here we highlight some attempts

at the World Bank Institute, rank seven

trends for water governance. A key challenge

and definitions of good governance.

aspects of governance: voice and
accountability, political stability, absence of

for all development actors is to publish
disaggregated data on water governance

■ Governance Matters: These data sets,

■ Country policy and institutional

violence, government effectiveness,

issues to assess if countries are on the right

assessments: The World Bank evaluates

regulatory quality, rule of law, and control

track in their reform efforts. Water

economic management (debt,

of corruption.

governance indicators should be useful to

macroeconomic and fiscal policies),

national stakeholders as a tool for priority

structural policies (trade, financial, private

setting, and strengthening the responsiveness

sector strategies), policies for social

Millennium Challenge Account was

of institutions and processes to the water

inclusion and equity and public sector

announced by the US Government in 2002

needs of water users.

management and institutions (rule of law,

as a new foreign aid programme to assist

financial management, efficiency of public

countries that are relatively well governed.

There has been great progress in quantifying

administration, transparency,

Governance is measured based on three

and standardizing governance indicators. The

accountability, corruption).

broad categories: ruling justly, investing in
people, and encouraging economic

progress in research, measurement and
indicator development has helped identify the

■ Millennium Challenge Account: The

■ Freedom House: The Freedom in the

freedoms. Ruling justly is measured by

many components of governance. Improved

World rankings measure political freedoms

scores on civil liberties, political freedoms,

governance can result in higher economic

and civil liberties. Political freedoms are

voice and accountability, government

growth, more productive investments, lower

measured by the right to vote, compete

effectiveness, rule of law, and control of

transaction costs and more effective

for public office, and elect representatives

corruption. Investing in people is measured

implementation of policies and legislation (UN

who have a decisive vote on public

by public spending devoted to health and

Millennium Project, 2005). Thus, if a country’s

policies. Civil liberties include the freedom

education, primary completion rates, and

governance is improved through increased

to develop opinions, institutions, and

immunization rates. Encouraging economic

transparency, strengthening of local

personal autonomy without interference

freedoms is measured by fiscal and trade

democracy, improvements in the judiciary

from the state.

balances and the investor climate.

system etc., such changes will also spill over
■ International Country Risk Guide: The

■ Transparency International: Transparency

research and indicator development there is

International Country Risk Guide ranks

International ranks countries on the basis

currently little evidence that can help us

political, economic, and financial risks.

of a Corruption Perceptions Index, a

understand to what extent and how this is

Political risks include government stability,

composite index that measures the degree

occurring. It is thus critical that the water

socio-economic conditions, investment

to which corruption is perceived to exist

governance knowledge base be enhanced on,

profile, corruption, conflict, quality of

among public officials, politicians and the

among other things: What type of governance

bureaucracy, democratic accountability,

private sector.

is favourable to improved water resources

law and order, and the presence of

management and water services provisions?

religion and the military in government.

Are some governance components more

Economic risk measurements include per

critical to address than others to improve

capita gross domestic product (GDP), GDP

water supply and sanitation coverage as well

growth, inflation, and fiscal policies.

as the sustainable use of water resources?

Financial risk measurements include

to the water sector. But due to limited

Source: UN Millennium Project, 2005. For additional
information on existing governance indicators see, UNDP,
2004c. This guide provides, among other things, an
outline of existing governance-related indicators.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

10 percent – or

increasingly viewed as an integral part of water crises and
thus as a part of resolving them (see Box 2.3).

some US $300
million – of the
total aid in the
water sector is
directed to
support the
development of
water policy,
planning and
programmes

Life on the Mekong
River, Viet Nam

An important part of the work of bilateral and multilateral
organizations has been to support the enhancement of
capacities to strengthen national and local water agendas
and policies, investment priorities, while providing useful
examples for scaling up activities. Despite these efforts,
water is not considered a main priority in most countries.
Investment in the water sector is still at a very low level
in developing countries, and despite promises of actionoriented outcomes by the world’s governments at the
WSSD, much remains to be done about water governance
issues in donor budgets.
According to statistics from the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD), total aid to the
water sector during recent years has averaged approximately
US $3 billion a year. An additional US $1 to 1.5 billion a year
is allocated to the water sector in the form of nonconcessional lending, mainly by the World Bank.
Over three-quarters of the aid to the water sector is
allocated to water supply and sanitation. The bulk of
the aid for water supply and sanitation is allocated to a
handful of large projects undertaken in urban areas. While
such support is, of course, much needed and desired, it is
disheartening from a governance point of view that only
about 10 percent – or some US $300 million – of the total
aid in the water sector is directed to support the
development of water policy, planning and programmes.

The statistics also show that many countries where a large
portion of the population have insufficient access to safe
water received very little of the aid. Only 12 percent of
total aid to the water sector in 2000–01 went to countries
where less than 60 percent of the population has access
to an improved water source, which includes most of the
least developed countries. On the positive side, aid
allocated to various types of low-cost and small-scale
technologies (for example, treadle pumps, gravity-fed
systems, rainwater harvesting, sustainable small-scale
sanitation, etc.) seems to be increasing (OECD, 2002).
In 1999, the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) started to develop a new framework for giving
low-interest loans and debt relief to forty-two of the
poorest countries in the world. The poor countries that
want to be a part of this must formulate and put in place
what is called a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
The strategy is supposed to indicate how a government will
use the funds for targeted poverty reduction in their
country. The process leading to a PRSP is also supposed to
be based on broad multi-stakeholder and participatory
processes for their design, implementation and monitoring.
It is seen as critical that PRSPs are driven and owned by
the forty-two countries in question. In essence, the PRSPs
represent a means of securing resources for development
priorities and serve as countries’ long-term development
strategy. Both multi- and bilateral donors are increasingly
using PRSPs to coordinate their development cooperation
and to achieve coherence in development objectives with
recipient governments. Considering the fact that PRSPs
represent long-term development strategies, it is worrisome
that water resources issues and related services have so far
received very low priority in their design. Two PRSP
assessments show that the key initial planning and resource
commitments needed to achieve water-related targets are
not being met. Water targets are not linked to key
strategies that prioritize and fund action (see Box 2.4).
Within the water sector, there is a widespread belief that
we now have most of the needed principles in place in
order to make a lasting improvement to the world’s water
resources situation, which will also make a major
contribution to the overall work of alleviating poverty.
What is lacking today are the concerted actions and the
means for effective implementation of various water
policies and development programmes. The
implementation of countries’ existing water policies would
go a long way in meeting the MDGs and the water
targets set in Johannesburg.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 5 3

BOX 2.4: WATER IN POVERTY REDUCTION STRATEGY PAPERS (PRSPs)
A recent study by the Overseas Development

governments and local communities within the

failure to fully appreciate the importance of

Institute (ODI) and WaterAid on the extent to

sector. In other words, water supply and

improved water resources management and

which water supply and sanitation (WSS) was

sanitation issues are under-represented in

water supply and sanitation for social and

given priority in PRSPs in sub-Saharan Africa

PRSPs, partly because the water sector has

economic development. A wider assessment of

concluded: ‘WSS had been inadequately

failed to articulate the needs and potential

forty interim and full PRSPs by the World Bank

reflected both in terms of the process of PRSP

impacts on poverty of investments in this sector

confirms this. The assessment showed that

preparation and the content of emerging

and partly due to critical national decision-

natural resources management and

PRSPs’. In total, seventeen African PRSPs were

makers’ limited understanding of the issues.

environmental protection were only included in
limited ways. There were some exceptions,

examined, and of these, only Uganda showed a
high level of priority to water supply and

A water resources assessment of nine Asian

however, like in Mozambique where the

sanitation (see Chapter 14). This is surprising,

PRSPs found similar results. In the Asian cases,

protection and management of environmental

given the international prominence given to

water resource issues, such as floods and

and natural resources was seen as being

these issues through the MDG on water and

droughts, as well as water supply and sanitation

prioritized. The assessment also indicated that

sanitation and a strong demand from rural and

and irrigation, were frequently present in the

the result for full or final PRSPs was slightly

urban communities to urgently improve water-

analysis of issues in the PRSPs but were more

better than for the interim version, suggesting

related services. There are several reasons that

rarely reflected in the programmes for action or

that priority issues of natural resources and

can explain this, including a limited

priorities for investment. The failure of key water

environment improved as consultations were

understanding of the social and economic

advocates and decision-makers has again been

wider and more thorough.

benefits of improved water and sanitation, weak

cited as the main reason for this. However, it is

poverty diagnosis and limited dialogue and

important not to forget key economic decision-

interaction between central ministries, local

makers outside the water sector, as well as their

Sources: Frans and Soussan, 2003; Bojö and Reddy, 2002;
Slaymaker and Newborne, 2004.

Training around a new water pump with an instructor during water and sanitation programme in Budari, Uganda

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Water Governance in Practice:
Trends in Reform and Rights

Water policies
and reforms
have too often
been driven by
assumptions
about the need
to increase
supplies through
investing in
physical infrastructure

Governance is one of the biggest challenges within the water sector: Why and how are certain decisions
made? What stakeholders are involved? What principles, rules and regulations (formal and informal
institutions) apply? Governance is process-oriented and thus intrinsically linked to politics and
preoccupied with how various actors relate to each other. Because of the varying characteristics of water
resources and the myriad socio-economic and political frameworks, governing mechanisms vary
considerably across countries, including differences such as the reformed items, the pace at which
countries are moving towards implementing water reforms, the level of the reform and the degree of
targeting environmental and social objectives.

2a. National water policies in the making
Reform of the water sector is now taking place in many
countries around the world. Reasons for reforms can vary
according to the particular situation. In most cases,
water reforms in a particular sector appear to be
associated with a larger reform agenda. For example,
pricing reforms are often complicated by financial
constraints and cost recovery affects the fiscal budget. In
Pakistan, the central government has to subsidize the
budgets of the irrigation departments and in Morocco
the public budget used to be the sole source of funding
of water services provided mainly by irrigation districts.
The Republic of Yemen, where macroeconomic measures
accompanied water reforms, provides a good example of
the importance of having a wide-ranging agenda for
reform (Wambia, 2000; Diao and Roe, 2000; Ward,
2000). In the case of South Africa, water reform was
made part and parcel of the overall political changes in
the early 1990s (see Chapter 14).
Water policies have too often been driven by assumptions
about the need to increase supplies through investing in
physical infrastructure. Current water sector reform,
particularly in developing countries, has increasingly tried
to balance issues of infrastructure and technology with
governance and management issues, such as multistakeholder participation, as well as measures for
enhancing demand management, decentralization and
various elements of integrated and basin management
approaches. Another example includes water reform in
Nicaragua, where current water legislation covers a wide
range of issues from water rights, participation and
economic incentive instruments to technology.
In recent water sector reform – in South Africa, Zimbabwe,
Kazakhstan and the European Union (EU) Water Framework

Directive management, for example – the basin level
constitutes an important component of improved
integrated management of water. Kazakhstan, for example,
has established eight river basin organizations that are
responsible for water resources governance and use,
water plan preparation, water allocation and permit
provision (see Chapter 14). The ongoing water reform in
Kazakhstan also includes provisions for public involvement
and decentralization that can take the form of local selfgovernance (UNDP – Kazakhstan, 2003). In many cases,
water management at the basin level also extends to the
management of river basins and groundwater aquifers
shared between sovereign states. The increased water
cooperation between nations will require building mutual
trust as well as long-term commitments from the parties
involved. Normally, this necessitates a whole sequence of
cooperative actions that can start off with agreeing on
methodologies and standards for collecting hydrological
data and joint monitoring plans. Other actions can include
the harmonization of water policies and joint water
management plans. It is important that transboundary water
management not stop with cooperation at a technical level,
but that such cooperation ‘spill-over’ to joint development
plans for a river basin or even to broader issues of sharing
the benefits of river basins and groundwater aquifers. There
is currently a wide range of various sub-regional river basin
commissions on all continents; however, their mandates and
impacts on water resources use efficiency and sustainability
vary to a great extent (see Chapter 11).
Despite the growing call for integrated approaches, there
is, in reality, limited practical experience of how it can be
implemented. In the overall context of IWRM, relevant
challenges to and opportunities for an improved
integration of land and water governance have,
surprisingly, received little attention. It has proven difficult

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 5 5

BOX 2.5: INTEGRATING LAND AND WATER GOVERNANCE
In spite of its obvious importance, the

for irrigation. In return, WLWRSA uses this

fishing groups and limited group membership

knowledge base on land and water governance

field experience to support its advocacy and

to those below a set poverty limit to protect

is weak. A recent study undertaken by the

increase its legitimacy.

the poor. All this encouraged investment in
the lakes, resulting in the improvement of

International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD, 2004) examined several case studies in

■ In Bangladesh, major reforms in the
governance of inland public water bodies,

fishermen’s incomes and infrastructure.

governance were identified as a key to

supported by several external agencies, have

Women also benefited by the introduction of

successful development.

significantly improved the livelihoods of poor

further reforms on ponds, which gave them

landless fishermen. Inland fisheries are

full access to inputs and benefits.

■ One typical, poor community in Zimbabwe

critically important for food security and

wished to improve livelihoods by investing in

livelihoods, but access to lakes by poor,

These and other cases indicate, among other

small-scale irrigation. However, they lacked

landless fishermen is problematic, because

things, that local participation and

the financial capital to do this and were

they require access rights to the shores as

empowerment are critical for making changes

unable to borrow money because they had

well. The wealthy tend to dominate the

and that external partners can play an

no collateral for the loan. Normally,

annual leasing arrangements, leaving most

important role in achieving the desired impact

ownership of the land is sufficient security

fishermen to work as share catchers with

on awareness and resulting policy changes.

for a loan but in Zimbabwe all land titles are

minimal reward. The lack of secure tenure

They also indicate that enhanced local

vested in the president, so this option was

means there is no incentive for them to

participation has made a positive difference

not available to them. To overcome this

invest in the lakes, so they remain in a poor,

for women, which has been beneficial for

investment problem, the community, with

unproductive state. Over the past fourteen

both equity and efficiency in the work of the

international support, sought technical

years, the situation has improved

communities.

assistance from a regional platform for

significantly following a package of reforms

advocacy, the Women’s Land and Water

that introduced long-term lake and shore

Rights in Southern Africa (WLWRSA), which

lease arrangements for the poor,

also helped to secure community water rights

decentralized resource management to

to integrate or coordinate land and water in a meaningful
way, particularly for the rural and urban poor who have
been socially and politically marginalized, and largely
excluded from access to land, water resources
management and related services. The benefits of
integrating land and water in decision-making are
illustrated in Box 2.5.
Similar challenges (not having proper tenure and access
to water services) are found within urban slums where
local authorities do not provide proper public services,
such as water, sanitation, transportation and electricity.
Major questions remain to be worked out to put effective
IWRM into practice, again in ways explicitly linked to
governance issues (Moench et al., 2003):
■

lake productivity, fish stocking levels,

which the links between land and water

Who is in charge of integration? Who implements
integration? What are the roles and responsibilities of
governments, the private sector and civil society and
the international community?

Sources: IFAD, 2004, www.ifad.org/events/water;
NRSP, 2004.

■

Who decides what interests should be reflected in
IWRM plans and policies? How should policy processes
be governed to ensure that relevant stakeholder
interests are duly reflected?

■

How should conflicting interests and disputes be
resolved? What are the appropriate formal and informal
institutions and conflict resolution mechanisms for
efficient and equitable water decisions?

■

Is there really a need to integrate all water issues?
Some water management issues, such as waste
disposal control from a sewage treatment plant, will
not need the same level of integrated decision-making
as a major water allocation decision to construct a
large-scale dam or irrigation scheme along a
transboundary river.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Meeting the Johannesburg target on
IWRM plans
Putting into place strategic and well-planned water
projects will help countries to set the right priorities and
undertake actions required to meet the Johannesburg
target. These plans can thus become critical instruments
for achieving domestic political targets as well as targets
agreed on in the international arena, like the MDGs or
regional transboundary water cooperation agreements. If
we take the status of the recent Johannesburg target to
‘develop integrated water resource management and
water efficiency plans by 2005, with support to
developing countries’ as a proxy for improved reform and
governance in the water sector, it reveals that progress is
taking place but that much remains to be done.
At the end of 2003, an ‘informal stakeholder baseline
survey’ was conducted by the GWP on the status of water
sector reform processes in various countries of the world.
The survey was conducted in 108 countries2 and provides
a number of qualitative elements allowing an assessment
of countries’ readiness to meet the 2005 Johannesburg
implementation plan target on IWRM Plan preparation. In
this respect, the level of awareness, political support and
the countries’ capacity to build on past and ongoing
processes relating to water-related reforms and rely on
existing multi-stakeholder platforms were some of the
components that were assessed.
The survey provides a snapshot of where countries stand in
terms of adapting and reforming their water management
systems towards more sustainable water management
practices. The pilot results show that of the 108 countries
surveyed to date, about 10 percent have made good
progress towards more integrated approaches and 50
percent have taken some steps in this direction but need
to increase their efforts, while the remaining 40 percent
remain at the initial stages of the process (see Table 2.1).

2. Forty-five in Africa, forty-one
in Asia and the Pacific and
twenty-two in Latin America.
For more information on this
assessment see:
www.gwpforum.org

Several countries have begun, or have already been
through, the process of putting into place IWRM
elements. South Africa, Uganda and Burkina Faso have,
with international assistance, gone through multi-year
IWRM planning processes resulting in new national
policies, strategies and laws for their water resources
development and management. Other countries in Africa
have also been identified as having good opportunities to
advance their water agenda. For example, water
legislation is being prepared in Congo-Brazzaville and
Malawi, where the opportunity can be seized to promote

integrated approaches towards water management.
Similar opportunities exist in Asia, such as with China’s
water policy work, and the water reform processes in
countries like Sri Lanka and Pakistan. Development has
also been rapid in Central Asia, where, for example,
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan have made headway towards
developing IWRM approaches. In Latin America, Brazil’s
wastewater reform is an example of IWRM processes.
Many of these are now in or on the verge of the
implementation stage. Other countries in Latin America
have also made headway (see Chapter 14). There are,
for example, favourable political and institutional
conditions in Honduras where the multi-stakeholder Water
Platform (Platforma del Agua de Honduras) provides
momentum to advance IWRM approaches and other
water-related issues.
This qualitative assessment does not, however, allow for
regional or country comparisons, as exemplified by the
cases of Viet Nam and Sierra Leone, which have both
been classified as in the initial stages of developing IWRM
approaches. Sierra Leone is a conflict-ridden country
where the main focus is on building peace and stability
and reconstructing basic services such as water supply
and sanitation; it is thus far from engaging in developing
IWRM approaches. Viet Nam, on the other hand, has
showed progress in recent years. In 1988, it adopted a
national water act and a National Water Resources
Council, and three river basin organizations were
established in 2000 and 2001. It is clear that water is
fairly high on the political agenda and Viet Nam is in a
good position to advance implementation as well as
incorporation of IWRM approaches.
The assessment indicated that the countries that have
made the most progress in adapting and reforming their
water management systems towards more sustainable
water management practices have often started by
focusing on specific water challenges, such as coping
with perennial droughts or finding ways to increase water
for agriculture while still ensuring access to domestic
water in burgeoning urban areas. South Africa, for
example, developed comprehensive policies, legislation
and strategies starting in 1994, focusing outward from
drinking water (and later on sanitation) to give expression
to the political, economic and social aspirations and
values of the new democratic political paradigm.
Recently, there have also been other IWRM plan
assessments initiated to measure how much progress

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 5 7

Table 2.1: Country readiness to meet the Johannesburg target on IWRM planning by 2005
Region

Number of countries
surveyed

Africa
Central Africa
Eastern Africa
Med (North Africa)
Southern Africa
West Africa
Total

7
5
5
12
16
45

Asia and Pacific
Central Asia
China
South Asia
Southeast Asia
Pacific
Total

8
1
6
8
18
41

Good progress

Some steps

Initial stage

1
1
2
2
6

3
2
3
5
4
17

4
2
1
5
10
22

It is more

4

2

realistic to

2
5

4
4
8
20

2
4
8
16

2
1
3
14

6
3
5
14
51

2
3
5
43

Latin America and the Caribbean
Caribbean
6
Central America
7
South America
9
Total
22
Total
108

2
1

It is important to stress that, even though many countries
lack IWRM elements in their water reform attempts and
aspirations, this should not refrain them from acting. It is
more realistic to implement reforms incrementally than to
await the ‘perfect’ policy document that may never get
past the drawing board. Box 2.6 highlights the fact that
making and implementing water policy can take very
different paths.

reforms
incrementally
than to await

Source: GWP, 2003.

countries have made towards adopting and implementing
IWRM. A 2005 study of the status of IWRM plans in the
Arab States indicated that progress is very uneven in the
region. Some places, such as Jordan, Egypt, the
Palestinian Autonomous Territories, Yemen and Tunisia,
have national water policies, plans or strategies in place
that incorporate many elements of IWRM. Eleven out of
the twenty-two countries included in the study need
major water policy enhancements to put IWRM plans in
place. For most of these eleven countries, the study
identified ambition and ongoing efforts to further
progress of developing IWRM plans. For six of the
countries included in the study the situation seems to be
less progressive, with some of the countries even lacking
ongoing efforts to develop IWRM plans (Arab Water
Council, 2005).

implement

the ‘perfect’
policy document
that may never

Water policies, politics and resistance
No reform is stronger than its weakest link, which is
to say, implementation. Recent years have seen the
development of sophisticated water policies and plans
in many parts of the world, such as in South Africa, in
Europe with the EU Water Framework Directive and in
Chile with water privatization. Some of the reforms in
developing countries have been assisted by the
international community and have frequently been
motivated, at least in part, by the active international
debate on these issues. These achievements also need
to be balanced, however, by a recognition that policy
changes at the national level have often only been
imperfectly followed through to effective implementation.
A recent example is Zimbabwe, where the actual content
of water reform is considered progressive, but where
reform has stalled due to recent political instability and
weak implementation capacity.
There is a tendency to separate policy-making processes
from implementation. The notion is that policy-making is
ascribed to decision-makers, while implementation is
linked to administrative capacity. This kind of thinking is
too rigid and fails to acknowledge that policies are often
modified as they move through public administrations and

get past the
drawing board

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

5 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 2.6: THE POLICY PROCESS: DECISION-MAKING VERSUS IMPLEMENTATION
The making of water policy involves a multitude

levels are critical, since implementation must

conditionality can be found in big national water

of decisions, actors and processes. Two different

ultimately take place in local urban and rural

resource projects that include large components

models of the policy-making process are

settings. How these organizations function and

of institutional or pricing reforms, as was the case

delineated: the first model shows the linear and

their relationship dynamics both have an impact

in Pakistan and Mexico. Although not yet common

idealized input-output version of policy-making.

on water governance and the possibilities of

or widely used in the water sector, several trade

Typical stages for policy are inputs that

more effective governance.

agreements that affect the agriculture sector may
impose the restructuring of a price system in one

constitute the basis for formulation of policy, the
content of the policy, implementation and a

At the local level, many local entities are involved

country as part of a condition for that country to

feedback loop to input. While these stages can

in water decision-making: irrigation, environmental

join the regional agreement. An example of such

be identified in the policy process, the second

and health departments and agencies, urban

regional cooperation is the recent European Water

model displays a more realistic version of how

development agencies, rural and urban planning

Framework Directive (see Chapter 14). This is a

policy-making is done. Policy-making is not a

agencies, regulatory agencies, public water

legislative piece that will guide European water

straightforward linear process, but rather a

utilities, water-user associations, consumer groups

policies in the coming decades. In the specific

‘messy’ business, in which various actors with

and other types of NGOs, religious groups, farmer

case of the European Union, water-related

different interests, stakes and powers are trying

organizations and unions, municipalities,

economic dependencies (agriculture) and likely

to influence the policy outcome while different

community leaders and local entrepreneurs, etc.

water-related environmental externalities are a
driving force behind regional agreements (DFID,

policy stages are interlinked and sometimes done
in a simultaneous fashion. What the policy

At the national level, parliaments, governments

2002). Another set of organizations that can

process looks like, what actors are involved and

and their ministries, consumer groups, research

affect domestic policies is regional river basin

other concerns differ among various development

institutes, NGOs and other interest groups, trade

commissions (The Mekong River Commission and

contexts and depend on what water challenges

unions, private businesses, etc., play critical roles.

The Nile Basin Initiative are two examples).
Various kinds of international NGOs are also

the policy is intended to address. The non-linear
model shows some of the critical factors that are

The international level and external pressures can

important actors for advocacy and promoting

shaping policy formulation and implementation.

many times have a critical influence on water

cooperation and research. Also multinational

reform in developing countries. Such influence

water companies are now playing an important

In practice, decision-making for water is done by

may take the form of pressure to comply with a

role in developing countries’ policy development

and through various kinds of organizations and

structure imposed by an international

and implementation. There is a plethora of water

formal and informal regulations, such as water

development agency as part of a large investment

organizations from the very local setting up to the

licensing or customary allocation decisions. Many

project. It can also take the form of loan

global scale. The effectiveness of these

organizations are formally constituted and have

conditionality. These are common features in

organizations and how they relate to each other

legal rights and responsibilities, while many are

structural adjustment projects that enhance price

and other organizational entities determine

informal and less visible to the observer. Local

reforms in various sectors. Other types of

governance outcomes.

The linear policy model

The non-linear policy model

The Policy Process according to the Stages Model
Input

Policy

Output

Information

Regulation

Application

Perception/
Identification

Distribution

Enforcement

Redistribution

Interpretation

Capitalization

Evaluation

Ethical ruling

Legitimation

Constitutional

Modification/
adjustment

Factors shaping policy outcomes
Institutional
arrangements

Political
parties

Political
leadership

Civil society

Organisation
Institutions
Demand
Support
Apathy

Symbolic

Retreat/ disavowal

Present policies
Technology

Past
policies

Bureaucrats
Social
demography

Cultural
attitudes

Distribution
of power

International
economic
forces

Economic
conditions

Shape of policy outcomes

Source: Gooch and Huitema, 2004.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 5 9

national bureaucracies to local levels for ultimate
enforcement. Policy implementers can respond to policy
change in different ways: they can implement reforms
fully or partly, or if internal reform resistance is high in
combination with lax monitoring from policy-making
levels, they can ignore new policies altogether. It is clear,
then, that policy-makers should not escape the
responsibility of implementation and making sure that
adequate capacities and financing is available for
effective implementation.
Because reforms change the status quo, one can expect
both support for and opposition to reform agendas by
affected groups. Institutional reforms generate the active
involvement of interest groups that may be affected
directly or indirectly. In some cases, the implementing
agency may not have a reform agenda that coincides
with that of the government initiating the reform. For
example, a stakeholder analysis of the parties involved
in a proposed pricing reform for the capital of Honduras,
Tegucigalpa, shows that the public agency in charge of
supplying water to the city was a major opponent to the
reform. A main aim of the agency was to seek continued
power over water allocation and administration.
Interestingly, the case of Tegucigalpa also showed that
the main support for reform was provided and driven by
external international development agencies, but in this
case, this was not sufficient for reform to take effect. It
was noted that for the reform to go forward, it would
require the support from critical national power centres,
such as the president and key government ministries.
(Strand, 2000; DFID, 2002). A similar situation of
opposing reform is described by Wambia (2000) in the
case of Pakistan, where certain government agencies
along with ministries opposed reform because it was felt
that it would affect them negatively. Part of the reform
was to transfer power and financial resources from the
irrigation ministry and its regional offices to what were
called Area Boards.
In governance systems that foster a non-implementation
policy climate, decision-making tends to be discretionary,
unpredictable and largely non-conducive to influence by
citizens. The implementation and allocation of resources
tend to benefit the ruling elite or certain groups or
individuals tightly connected to the ruling elite. Many civil
society actors in developing countries are well aware of
limited government commitment and capacities to follow
through on policy development and external pressures.
As a result, many NGOs and other civil society actors,

particularly those lacking political and financial clout, do
not find it very worthwhile to engage in policy processes.
Many NGOs tend to argue that the value of influencing a
policy that will not be implemented is not worth the
effort. Since limited implementation also opens up for
discretionary decision-making, many NGOs instead
attempt to manoeuvre in a highly informal local and
national political setting, often through face-to-face
relationships, through which they can influence decisionmaking in favour of their cause. Consequently, due to
more discretionary and ad hoc decision-making, many
NGOs in developing countries feel that it is better to
influence the implementation of a policy through informal
means rather than through policy content. There can be
many other barriers, both overt and hidden, to the
effective implementation of policy: the lack of capabilities
in or resources available to government departments;
resistance by sceptical officials; pressure by interest
groups, such as industrialists or farmers; problems with
other aspects of law and policy that can block effective
implementation, such as changes of land management
practices that also affect water resources. In the various
international attempts to promote policy development,
such developing country policy realities have yet to be
fully acknowledged.

Water policy reform ahead: Where to begin?
So while there has been progress in water policy
development during the past decade, this progress is
uneven and considerable challenges remain. Many
government reforms fail because once implemented, they
yield unsatisfactory outcomes because they never get
past implementation. How can the prospects for success
be improved? It has been noted that ‘a reform
programme will be successful if there is economic
rationality in its design, political sensitivity in its
implementation and close and constant attention to
political-economic interactions and socio-institutional
factors, so as to determine in each case the dynamics to
follow’ (Cordova, 1994). In particular, there needs to be a
more complete understanding of the forces that lead to
policy development in the first place and, critically, a
concerted drive to make sure that policies are followed
through to implementation. There also needs to be
effective feedback and assessment mechanisms, so that
the consequences of policy implementation can inform
future policy development. There are many components
that are critical for successful policy reform. For example,
some studies in policy implementation suggest that in
order to maximize the likelihood of success, or minimize

...policy-makers
should not
escape the
responsibility of
implementation
and making sure
that adequate
capacities and
financing is
available for
effective
implementation

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The limited
funding
opportunities
in low-income

failure, it is critical to address three key strategic issues:
keeping the scope of change narrow, limiting the role of
aid donors and giving reform firm leadership while
simultaneously allowing for line management discretion
(Polidano, 2001).

countries

Some critical issues for overcoming policy obstacles are
outlined below:

expose domestic

■

decision-makers
and policy
development to
pressure from
international
lending
institutes and

Acknowledge the role of politics and develop
strategies accordingly: Even though most reforms
require technical input the process itself is essentially
political and thus involves political compromises,
bargaining and negotiated outcomes. In most cases,
the proper packaging, sequencing, alliance building
and communication of reform can lead to more
tolerable reform content that can be more easily
implemented. The power balance between critical
political, social and economic actors will have a
significant impact on reform outcomes.

■

Secure high-level political support and commitment:
Without high-level political commitment to undertake
reform, it will be very difficult to go from policy
formulation to implementation. The whole government
needs to be involved to ensure that sufficient
resources and capacities are provided to achieve the
reform objectives.

■

Focus on process and seize the moment:
Management of the policy process, which has so far
received very little attention, is just as important. Some
policy studies suggest that the process is even more
important than the actual policy content. The timing of
a reform is important. According to the ‘crisis
hypothesis’, a perceived or real crisis due to floods and
droughts is needed to create conditions under which it
is politically possible to undertake the reform. The
‘honeymoon hypothesis’ suggests that it is easier to
implement a reform immediately after a government
takes office (Williamson, 1994).

donors

■

Participation and inclusiveness: Effective policy
formulation and implementation requires transparency
and inclusiveness. For example, does media and civil
society advocacy representing the needs and interests
of vulnerable groups, such as indigenous people,
women and children and threatened ecosystems,
influence the timing and content of decisions on policy
changes? Inclusiveness and active engagement do not

only refer to civil society but also to different
government agencies at various levels.
■

National ownership of policy process and content:
The limited funding opportunities in low-income
countries expose domestic decision-makers and
policy development to pressure from international
lending institutes and donors. If a country does not
develop a certain ‘internationally’ required policy, it
may face difficulties attracting international loans
and development project funds. It is not uncommon
in many low-income countries that due to external
pressure they are required to put into place policies,
plans and development programmes that lack
‘national ownership’ and have little chance of
actually being implemented.

■

Allow for incremental change and proper time for
successful reform: Reforms should be well prepared,
because once they are in place, they are often difficult
to modify. If possible, keep the reform as simple as
possible and avoid addressing many reform objectives
at the same time. Reform is an incremental process,
which sometimes can be painstakingly slow, and
managing policy processes is laborious and timeconsuming and should not be underestimated.
Although policy reform is an ongoing process and
modification occurs over time, it is important that the
main thrust of the policy can be sustained over time.

■

Compensate policy reform losers: Adequate
compensation mechanisms, negotiated with
stakeholders, are an important part of a reform.
Those who are losing out considerably in a reform
should be adequately compensated: paying a fair
amount of compensation is important for building
support and avoiding social and political clashes that
can jeopardize or slow down the reform. In the case
of water pricing reforms, several groups or issues,
such as the poor, or the environment, may need to
be specifically addressed. For example, addressing
the needs of poor people may mean including a
differentiated tariff structure.

■

Improve coordination: Uncoordinated donor
activities increase the risk of overloading the
capacity of governments and slow down reform work.
Donors should also allow greater flexibility in the
design and implementation of reforms and allow for
more experimentation by governments. Different

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 6 1

forms of tension and competition among various
government agencies are common. It is thus critical
that the political leadership of reform is intact to
allow for an effective coordination and a broad buyin from central government agencies down to local
regional and local administrations.
■

Monitor implementation and impacts: The
monitoring of policy reform and implementation is an
area often neglected by governments. Some attempts
have been made towards more systematic monitoring
of the progress and impact of water reform, but there
still remains much work to be done in this area in order
to actually examine if claimed progress in water reform
also impacts positively on sustainable water resource
use and improved water services. Effective monitoring
will also imply that policies can be fine-tuned, allowing
for financial reallocation between reform priorities.

2b. Water rights
Ownership or the right to use a resource means power
and control. While it may seem simple, water rights and
ownership often have a complex relationship with water
governance. How property rights are defined, who
benefits from these rights and how they are enforced are
all central issues that need further clarification in current
water policies and legislation. Insecurity of water rights,
mismatches between formal legislation and informal
customary water rights, and an unequal distribution of
water rights are frequent sources of conflict that can lead
to poor decisions on efficient water resource use and
equitable allocation. Also, the problem of managing
dwindling groundwater supplies or fish stocks – which
many times lack clear user rights – is a problematic water
governance challenge.

that is attached to many different and sometimes
competing, economic, social and environmental values.
While water users compete for the same resource and
struggle for increasing control, they also need to
cooperate if they want to make effective use of water
and sustain the water’s quantity and quality in the long
run. This often occurs in ‘pluralistic’ legal contexts, where
formal and informal normative systems sometimes clash.
For example, in South Africa, water management moved
from a pre-colonial collective activity to a publicly
regulated resource under Roman-Dutch law. It was then
transformed under Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence when it
was captured as a private resource to the benefit of a
small minority. A main objective of the current 1998
Water Act in South Africa is to redistribute water rights by
granting water permits to sections of society that were
previously discriminated against.3 The minimization and
resolution of water conflicts and disputes require clear
and coherent water rights that contain management
principles and strategies that can cooperate with
fluctuations of water supply and demand.

Water rights can be defined as ‘authorized demands to
use (part of) a flow of surface water and groundwater.
Including certain privileges, restrictions, obligations and
sanctions accompanying this authorization, among which
a key element is the power to take part in collective
decision-making about system management and direction’
(Beccar et al., 2002). Water rights are inextricably linked
to property.

It has been noted, for example, that water rights
provide the backbone of water management strategies
in small-scale agriculture and in many local contexts
basing their water use on customary traditions.
Water rights define who has access to water and in
what ways the user can take part in local water
decision-making. They also specify roles and
responsibilities regarding operation, maintenance,
monitoring and policing. In this sense, water rights
manifest social relationships and local power structures
of who is included or excluded from the benefits of
water and what the various rights and responsibilities
include. Water management practices in the Andes, for
example, have shown that social and political
inequalities can prevent successful collective action.
However, this also showed that collective management
of water can lead to more equitable water distribution,
in addition to strengthening the bargaining position of
weaker stakeholders (Boelens and Hoogendam, 2002).
The critical importance of water rights is not unique to
small-scale agriculture or indigenous systems but is
equally relevant to society at large.

Well-defined and coherent water rights are fundamental
to dealing with situations of increased competition
between water users, an important issue, which is
addressed in more detail in Chapter 11. Water
management is a complex activity; it is a mobile resource

From a formal legal point of view, water is considered a
property that belongs to the state in many countries.
Many governments have largely ignored informal
customary or traditional water rights. This oversight was
initiated during colonialism and continued under state-led

While it may seem
simple, water
rights and
ownership often
have a complex
relationship with
water governance

3. See www.thewaterpage.com/
leestemaker.htm

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...there is a
consensus
that the
establishment
of well-defined
and coherent
water rights
can lead to
a number of
social, economic
and environmental
benefits...

development and the ‘green revolution’. For example, in
many developing countries, the state is in charge of
large-scale irrigation networks and the distribution of
water permits. But in a parallel track, water rights are still
considered by many local framers and other water users a
common property where communities manage water
based on traditional rights. In some places, water rights
are also being privatized, and water markets that include
tradable rights are being set up. This multiplicity of water
rights can lead to confusing and conflicting situations of
entitlement roles and responsibilities among government
agencies as well as unclear guidelines on operation and
maintenance. There are far too many cases where water
resources and related networks and infrastructure are, in
practical terms, roughly equal to open access property
(no one’s property), which can result in a ‘tragedy of the
commons’. This can ultimately result in a management
breakdown where no user or government feels
responsible for sustaining surface- and groundwater
resources (quantity and quality) and related
infrastructure. Thus, within a single country, water rights
can take multiple shapes and range from customary laws
and local practices, government regulations and
bureaucratic procedures to privatization and tradable
water rights. Water reform should increasingly
acknowledge this multiplicity of water rights, which
would offer better and more realistic ways of improving
current water distribution.
Despite the various views on the water rights continuum,
there is a consensus that the establishment of welldefined and coherent water rights can lead to a number
of social, economic and environmental benefits:
■

It can promote equitable water use between existing
user groups and facilitate improved access to water by
groups that have been previously denied formal or
informal water rights.

■

It can improve the efficiency of existing water
supply allocations. For example, those requiring
additional water resources, such as growing cities,
can increasingly meet their needs by acquiring the
water rights of those who are using water for low
value purposes.

■

It can provide a basis for improving hydrological
data and information to manage the resource
more effectively.

■

It increases the willingness to take economic risks to
invest in improved water management and practices in
both rural and urban contexts, thus impacting
positively on productive livelihood opportunities. It can
also reduce the pressure on water resources, as it is
likely that those with water rights have incentives for
sustaining water.

Custom and tradition in water rights
Local customs and traditions are important factors in
defining community water management, allocation and
conflict mediation. Customary rights are often based on
community traditions and norms. In many cases,
customary rights represent functioning water resources
management decision-making systems that determine
local water use and attached rights and obligations. For
example, in the Andes in Latin America there is a
multiplicity of local customary decision-making systems
for community irrigation regarding who gets what water,
when and how (Beccar, 2002). Customary rights can
govern a number of water-related local social and
economic activities, such as irrigation, household water,
fisheries, livestock, plants and animals, funeral practices
and the environmental services provided by watersheds.
Generally, customary rights are not static but can evolve
over time as a response to formal legislation and
changing local hydrological and socio-economic
conditions. Beccar (2002) has noted that often enough,
customary rights are not taken into account in formal
water rights legislation and development projects. A study
conducted in the Pangani River Basin in Tanzania revealed
that out of 2,265 water abstractions, only 171 were
based on formal water rights (Hodgson, 2004). This can
lead to clashes between formal and informal rights and
rules and render legislation and development projects less
effective. Enhancing local decision-making capacities and
reflecting customary water management and rights in
formal legislation in relation to irrigation practices and
other water-related activities can create a more genuine
way of recognizing local customary water rights and
management systems (Beccar, 2002).
For example, customary water user rights are
acknowledged in Japanese river law (see Chapter 14).
The user rights in Japan are of two types, ‘Permitted
Water Rights’ and ‘Customary Water Rights’. Permitted
Water Rights are granted by the River Administrator to
the water user in pursuance of the River Law, while
Customary Water Rights are awarded to river water users
whose usage goes back to a time before the River Law

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 6 3

was established (in 1896). Users with Customary Water
Rights are obliged to notify to the River Administrator
details of their water usage such as the purpose for
which river water is used, the quantity used, the
conditions of usage and the intake position on the river.
The majority of Customary Water Rights are for
agricultural irrigation water. At present, Customary Water
Rights account for roughly 70 percent of the water rights
for irrigated agriculture. Since 1960, there has been an
increasing demand for domestic and industrial water and
the conciliation of water rights in times of drought has
become an important issue. Consequently, rules were
established to try to protect the established Customary
Water Rights and adjust water use under the New Water
Law that came into effect in 1964. The Amended River
Law of 1997 incorporated further measures to reconcile
different water uses in order to avoid conflict in extreme
droughts (Kataoka, 2005).
Importantly, there is a danger of romanticizing customary
rights and rules by expecting them to automatically take
into account the needs of the whole community. It has
frequently been noted that customary ways of allocating
and managing water resources can mirror unequal local
power relations (Hodgson, 2004). In such cases, it should
be an imperative of formal judiciary systems to make sure
that powerless and economically weak groups are
protected against local inequities in water distribution and
management. More than anything, though, the lesson to
be learned is that it is impossible to fully tap the
potential benefits from water projects and management
without taking into account customary water rights and
local ways of managing water resources. Taking into
account local water practices should form a part of any
water reform to minimize the social and economic costs
that can be associated with local opposition to water
reforms and development projects.

2c. Water as a human right
It has been estimated that in order to ensure our basic
needs, every individual needs 20 to 50 litres of water
free from harmful contaminants each and every day
(UN, 2003).
Over the last three decades, water has been addressed in
a number of international conferences, which have
recognized that water is a basic human need and some
have gone as far as explicitly affirming the right to water.
The right to water was only implicitly endorsed in the
1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UNDHR).
In 1977, the Mar del Plata Action Plan stated: ‘all
peoples, whatever their stage of development and their
social and economic conditions, have the right to have
access to drinking water in quantities and of a quality
equal to their basic needs’.4 The recognition of water as
a right continued with the 1989 Convention of the Rights
of the Child (CRC).5 Article 24 of the CRC, paralleling
Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
provides that a child has the right to enjoy the highest
attainable standard of health. Measures taken to secure
this right, include ‘combat[ting] disease and malnutrition
… through, inter alia, … the provision of adequate
nutritious foods and clean drinking water’.
In 2002 the United Nations Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) adopted the General
Comment on the right to water (see Box 2.7).
The Committee emphasized the government’s legal
responsibility to fulfil the right and defined water as a
social, cultural and economic good in addition to being
an economic commodity. The right to water applies
primarily to water of acceptable quality and quantity ‘for
personal and domestic uses’ – in effect an emphasis on
‘affordable’ water supply and sanitation. The need for
access to water for farming and other productive uses is

4. United Nations Water
Conference held at Mar del
Plata, Argentina, 7–18 March
1977.
5. www.unhchr.ch/html/menu2/
6/crc/treaties/crc.htm

BOX 2.7: THE RIGHT TO WATER: GENERAL COMMENT 15
The United Nations affirmed the right to water

right to water entitles everyone to sufficient,

of the Child, General Comment 15 is the first to

on 26 November 2002, noting that such a right

safe, acceptable, physically accessible and

focus explicitly on the right to water and the

is ‘indispensable for leading a life in human

affordable water for personal and domestic

responsibilities that governments have in

dignity’ and ‘a prerequisite for the realization of

uses.’ While the right to water has been implicit

delivering clean water and adequate sanitation

other human rights’. Through its General

in the rights to health, housing, food, life, and

services to all.

Comment 15, the Committee on Economic, Social

dignity already enshrined in other international

and Cultural Rights of the United Nations

conventions, such as the International Bill of

Economic and Social Council stated: ‘the human

Human Rights and the Convention on the Rights

Source: The full text of this General Comment is available
at: www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf/0/a5458d1d1bbd713
fc1256cc400389 e94?Opendocument

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...a human right
to water might
have the
unintentional
effect of causing
disputes
between
neighbouring
countries that
share water

acknowledged, but while ‘water is required for a range of
different purposes’ (e.g., to secure economic production
and livelihoods), ‘priority in the allocation of water must
be given to the right to water for personal and domestic
uses’.
The General Comment provides for a ‘progressive
realization’ of the right and acknowledges that there can
be constraints due to water scarcities. It also refers to the
role of donors and their responsibility to assist by
providing financial and technical assistance. It is
important not to confuse the right to water with water
rights. Moreover, it would be wrong to interpret the
General Comment as a right to free water. The Comment
is clear on this and includes provisions regarding the
‘economic accessibility’ of water and water services
defined as ‘affordable’.
Only a few countries have made formal legal
commitments to acknowledge a right to water, but even
fewer have matched an explicit right to water in their
constitutions with actual implementation (Centre on
Housing Rights and Evictions, 2004). One such example is
South Africa. Section 27 (1b) of the Bill of Rights of the
Constitution of South Africa states: ‘Everyone has the
right to have access to sufficient food and water.’6
Water policies and measures to implement this right in
South Africa are now being developed (see Chapter 14).
There are current signs that the human right to water
is gaining more national and international recognition.
According to the Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions
(2004), some of the more recent progress includes
the following:

6. www.info.gov.za/documents/
constitution/1996/96cons2.htm

■

In 2004, a Uruguayan referendum enacted the human
right to water into the Constitution when more than
64 percent of the population voted in favour of the
amendment. Kenya, in its 2004 draft constitution, is
now considering the explicit inclusion of the right to
water and sanitation in its legislation.

■

Courts in India, Argentina, Brazil and South Africa have,
in some cases, reversed decisions to disconnect water
supply to poor people who cannot afford to pay.

■

The Millennium Project Task Force on Water and
Sanitation recommended that the international
community explore ways to the right to water to
influence national policy on water and sanitation.

Does it make a difference to recognize water
as a human right?
The international community has for a long time explicitly
acknowledged a human right to food. However, people
continue to die of starvation and nearly a billion people
remain undernourished. Does explicitly acknowledging a
human right to water make a practical difference in
people’s lives?
Recognizing water as a human right can have a significant
impact on national water law, policy, advocacy and
development programmes. It can also be a way of
promoting an enhanced effort by the international
community and local governments to improve water
resources management and to meet the MDGs on water
supply and sanitation. It could further serve as a means to
increase the pressure to translate the right to water into
specific national and international legal obligations and
responsibilities: ‘To emphasize the human right of access to
drinking water does more than emphasize its importance. It
grounds the priority on the bedrock of social and economic
rights, it emphasizes the obligations of states parties to
ensure access, and it identifies the obligations of states
parties to provide support internationally as well as
nationally’ (Jolly, 1998). Potentially, it can also support
national and international legal frameworks that regulate
access to water and contribute to water conflict resolution.
Finally, explicitly acknowledging a human right to water can
help to place water issues higher up on political agendas
around the world.
But going beyond the legal sense of water as a human
right, many critical practical questions remain for
meaningful implementation: what aspects should such a
right entail? What are the concrete economic and social
benefits? What practical mechanisms would be required
for its effective implementation? How can such a right be
implemented if particular localities lack the hydrological
necessities? Who should pay for it? Should the
responsibility be placed on governments alone, or should
it also be held by individuals, communities and private
actors (Scanlon et al., 2004)? Some of the concerns that
have been expressed include the fact that issues of
water obligation and responsibility (e.g., the obligation
not to pollute) are not sufficiently emphasized and
minimum rights to water (for example 40 L/capita/day)
can provide excuses for governments to ‘lock’ water
provision at that level. As was previously noted, daily per
capita water consumption in Europe and North America
averages some 250 L to 600 L. It is thus clear that from

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 6 5

a development perspective more water or increased water
use efficiency is required, apart from meeting basic
needs. So far, the debate on water as a human right has
revolved around safe drinking water, but very little on
sanitation. Furthermore, basic water needs for direct
economic activities, such as agricultural and industrial
production, have not been a part of the water as a
human right agenda.
Concern has also been raised that a human right to water
might have the unintentional effect of causing disputes
between neighbouring countries that share water.
According to the 1997 UN Convention on the Law of
the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses,
a country is not permitted to exploit a shared water
resource in a manner that deprives individuals in a
neighbouring country of access to their basic human
needs (see Chapter 11). In practice, this kind of conflict
seems unlikely to arise.
At the national level, governments are responsible for
providing for adequate water supply and sanitation to
their citizens and ensuring that citizens comply with
existing water legislation. In practical terms, this means
that relevant stakeholders participate in decision-making
and that decisions are made transparent and information
available, so that citizens can act on the information that
is being provided to them. But to what extent do
governments have an obligation to provide the right to
water to their citizens? While the many international
declarations and formal conference statements supporting
a right to water do not directly require states to meet
individual water requirements, Article 2(1) of the ICESCR
binds governments to provide the institutional, economic
and social environment necessary to help individuals to
progressively realize those rights. It has been argued that

under certain circumstances, such as when individuals are
unable to meet basic needs for reasons beyond their
control, including natural disasters, discrimination,
economic impoverishment or disability, governments
should provide for basic water needs. Under such
circumstances, the meeting of basic water needs may
take precedence over other spending for economic
development. It may also require new financial resources
to be made available (Gleick, 1996).
According to a recent study, several cases (Centre on
Housing Rights and Evictions, 2004) from both developed
and developing countries demonstrate that there is a
legally enforceable right to water. The Menores
Comunidad Paynemil and Valentina Norte Colony cases
from Argentina have required states to address the
pollution of drinking water sources, as illustrated in
Boxes 2.8 and 2.9. Cases from other parts of the world
also suggest that taking the issue to court can be a
successful way of addressing local water concerns. For
example, court cases in India led the authorities to
reconsider plans for digging wells on a set of islands.
Local concerns raised the possibility that it might affect
the water quality. In another case, local Indian authorities
were ordered by the court to take immediate action to
address the problem of inadequate sanitation. These
cases show, among other things, that the effective
implementation of water as a human right requires that
the judiciary system function and that relevant water
information be made accessible to the public.

2d. Is corruption draining the water sector?
Within public service institutions for water, corruption
remains one of the least addressed challenges.
Historically, bilateral and multilateral organizations and
their clients have more or less tacitly accepted corruption

BOX 2.8: SAFEGUARDING WATER SUPPLY TO LOW-INCOME GROUPS
In the City of Cordoba, the water supply of

not payment was made, They also claimed that

obligation to provide a minimum of 50 L of

nineteen low-income families was disconnected

even the minimum supply of 50 L was

water in all circumstances was clearly

by a water service company on the grounds of

inadequate. The families requested the court to

insufficient for a standard family and therefore

non-payment. As a response, the families sued

obligate the company to provide at least 200 L

required the company to provide a minimum of

the water service company. They argued that

of water daily per family. The Judge rejected the

200 L per household.

the disconnection was illegal and that the

argument that the decision by the company to

company had failed to comply with its

cut or restrict the supply of water on the

regulatory obligation to provide 50 L of water

grounds of non-payment was illegal. However,

per day, which was to be supplied whether or

the Judge recognized that the contractual

Source: Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, 2004.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 2.9: SAFEGUARDING THE RIGHT TO SAFE WATER SUPPLY
The Paynemil Mapuche Community in
Neuquen, Argentina, 1995

Minister intervene in order to provide water for

In May 1997, the Provincial Court of Appeals

the Community. In March 1997, the issue

confirmed in all its terms the above-mentioned

People in the community discovered that the

became a court case:

decision. Both courts based their decisions on
the fact that the Government had not taken any

company’s plant was polluting the local water
source. The community, together with a

[T]he Children’s Public Defender, filed an accion

reasonable measures to tackle the pollution

university institute, filed complaints to six

de amparo (a special expedited procedure)

problem that seriously affected the health of the

different local authorities about the potential

against the Government, arguing that the

Paynemil, even though it was well informed

heavy-metal pollution of the aquifers from which

Province had neglected to fulfil its obligation to

about the situation. The Court of Appeals stated:

the community extracted its drinking water. As a

protect and guarantee the good state of health

‘even though the Government has performed

part of the complaint, case studies were

of the population. The court of first instance

some activities as to the pollution situation, in

presented that showed that the water was non-

accepted the Public Defender’s arguments and

fact there has been a failure in adopting timely

potable. Studies ordered by local authorities

ordered the Provincial Executive Power to: (1)

measures in accordance with the gravity of the

showed that many children also had high levels

provide – within two days notice of the decision

problem’. The Court of Appeals noted that, due

of heavy metals (lead and mercury) in their

– 250 litres of drinking water per inhabitant per

to the serious consequences brought about by

bloodstream and urine. The public agents in the

day; (2) ensure – within 45 days – the provision

the pollution of water, any delay in providing

Provincial Ministry of Health brought the issue to

of drinking water to the affected people by any

resources and in adopting those steps necessary

a higher political level when they communicated

appropriate means; (3) set up – within 7 days –

to reverse the present situation constituted an

their concern to the Health Minister. It was

a procedure to determine whether the health of

illegal omission violating the Paynemil

recognized that the water was unfit for human

the population had been damaged by the

community’s constitutional rights to health and

consumption and that traditional disinfection

existence of heavy metals, and in such a case, to

to a safe environment.

methods, such as boiling and filtering, were

provide the necessary treatment; and (4) take

inappropriate. It was recommended that the

steps to protect the environment from pollution.

7. The United Nations
Development Programme
(UNDP) defines corruption as
‘The misuse of public power,
office or authority for private
benefit – through bribery,
extortion, influence peddling,
nepotism, fraud, speed money
or embezzlement. Although
corruption is often considered
a sin of government and
public servants, it also prevails
in the private sector’.
Corruption is not only about
exchange of money and
services, it also takes the form
of cronyism, nepotism and
various kinds of kickbacks.
(TI, 2004, UNDP, 2004a.)

in public service delivery. Corruption has been seen as a
‘necessary evil’ and sometimes something that could
‘grease the wheels’ of development efforts. In recent
years, there has been an important shift in thinking, and
anti-corruption measures are now viewed as central to
equitable and sustainable development. There is now also
a growing body of research showing that corrupt practices
are detrimental to economic efficiency and social equity
and thus limit the scope for development opportunities.
Corruption is a symptom of poor governance in both
private and public spheres.7 In many countries, the
legislative framework and judiciary systems are often
inadequate and too weak. When this is combined with, for
example, low wages, huge income disparities (both within
and between countries) and accountability and
transparency shortcomings, personal economic gains can
be stronger than concern for the well-being of citizens, in
terms of providing water-related services and the
sustainable development of water resources. From an
institutional perspective, corruption arises when public
officials have wide authority, little accountability and

Source: Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, 2004.

perverse incentives and when their accountability responds
to informal patron–client linkages rather than adhering to
existing rules, regulations and contracts. In countries where
corruption is common and visible, there is often a high
social acceptance of and tolerance towards corrupt
practices that can lead to a deep-rooted ‘culture of
corruption’. It may even go as far as those engaging in it
believing they have a right and entitlement to the benefits
they reap and that working within the public sector is
perceived as a fairly legitimate opportunity to enrich
oneself and further one’s personal or family interests.
Corruption undermines development efforts and makes
it harder and much more costly to reach various national
and international development targets, such as the MDGs.
Fighting corruption is therefore not only a national
priority but also a global challenge.

Corruption and its consequences for
development and water service provision
More than US $1 trillion is paid in bribes each year
worldwide in both rich and developing countries, according

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 6 7

to estimates by the World Bank Institute (WBI, 2004). This
is almost equal to the combined GDP of low-income
countries. The $1 trillion figure, calculated using 2001–02
economic data, compares with an estimated size of the
world economy at that time of just over US $30 trillion
and does not include embezzlement of public funds or
theft of public assets. It is very difficult to assess the
extent of worldwide embezzlement of public funds, which
is a very serious issue in many settings. For example,
Transparency International (TI) estimates that former
Indonesian leader Suharto embezzled anywhere between
US $15 and 35 billion from his country, while Marcos in
the Philippines, Mobutu in Zaire and Abacha in Nigeria
may have embezzled up to US $5 billion each (TI, 2004).8
The estimation of global corruption costs does not take
into account indirect costs in the form of alternative uses
of funds for reducing poverty and economic inequalities
and providing water, health care, education, etc.
WBI research suggests that countries that tackle
corruption and improve their rule of law can increase
their national incomes by as much as four times in the
long term, in addition to drastically improving service
provision, such as water supply, sanitation and health.
Corruption costs the water sector millions of dollars every
year. It siphons off scarce monetary resources and
diminishes a country’s prospects for providing water and
sanitation for all. Corruption has several negative water
development consequences (UNDP, 2004a):

performance and effectiveness of both public and
private sectors. The undermining of public and private
institutions leads to inefficient and unequal allocation
and distribution of water resources and related services.
■

It decreases and diverts government revenues that
could be used to strengthen budgets and improve
water and other services, especially for poor people.

■

It renders rules and regulations ineffective, thereby
contributing to increased water pollution and overabstraction of ground and surface water. It also breeds
impunity and dilutes public integrity. Discretionary
powers and uncertainties in policy and law enforcement
create unpredictability and inequalities and can also
lead to bypassing the rule of law and justice system.

Corruption is thus a serious problem within the water
sector, but empirical evidence is still insufficient to make
generalizations of the magnitude of the problem and by
how much exactly it contributes to unsustainable uses of
water resources, water pollution and how much it drains
water development efforts. Corruption takes place in all
countries, but in some countries, it occurs on a more
systematic basis and is often seen as a part of how
business is done between public agencies and citizens, and
between public agencies and the private sector, as well as
within the public sector itself. Typical features of systems
prone to corruption include the following (UNDP, 2004a):
■

■

It reduces economic growth and discourages
investments within the water sector. It undermines

concentration of political powers in the executive
branch and private and public monopolies, in
combination with weak or non-existing checks and

8. The global NGO, Transparency
International (TI), was formed
in 1993. TI has played an
important role in putting the
corruption issue on
international as well as
national agendas. It publicizes
annual reports and a
corruption index on the status
of corruption in the world. The
World Bank Institute (WBI) has
also developed corruption
indices. Another anticorruption instrument in place
is the OECD Convention on
Combating Bribery of Foreign
Public Officials in International
Business Transactions.

BOX 2.10: CORRUPTION IN THE IRRIGATION SECTOR IN PAKISTAN
Agriculture is the largest sector in Pakistan’s

enders and small farmers in general. It has been

officials of the irrigation department to divert

economy. It contributes one quarter of the

observed that land inequality in rural Pakistan

water to the highest bidder allows those with

country’s gross domestic product (GDP) and

also reinforces inequities in access to critical

larger land holdings to skew water distribution in

employs almost half of the labour force.

resources like canal irrigation. Although canal

their favour. As a result, this can impose a

Agricultural production is highly dependent on

irrigation substantially increases productivity, the

threefold cost on the poor: they must pay water

irrigation, and the Indus Basin Irrigation System

pricing regime and delivery mechanism for canal

charges whether or not they get water, pay

and groundwater resources irrigate 80 percent

water clearly benefits those who have large

bribes to get the water which is their right, and

of Pakistan’s cropland.

holdings. In addition, the flat-rate pricing

suffer lower productivity due to uncertain and

mechanism for water often leads to wasteful and

erratic water supplies.

One important factor that hampers productivity

inefficient water use in a situation where water

in the rural sector is the difficulty of acquiring

for irrigation is a highly valuable and scarce

access to irrigation water, especially for tail-

resource. Moreover, the ability to influence

Sources: World Bank, 2004 and Daily Times, Pakistan,
12 July 2004.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 2.11: CORRUPTION IN THE WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION SECTORS IN INDIA
A more systematic effort to map petty

The revenues lost due to falsifying water metres

■ 17 percent said that it takes place every time

corruption and its modus operandi in India’s

accumulates to large sums over time. This is

■ 33 percent claimed it was quite common

water sector has recently been made.

money that alternatively could be spent on

■ 8 percent said that it takes place about half

Results show the following:

improved operation and maintenance, new

■ 41 percent of the customer respondents had

investments to improve water and sanitation

■ 17 percent said that it occurs occasionally

made more than one small payment (median

systems for economically weak groups, etc. Such

■ 25 percent said that it occurs

payment US $0.45) in the past six months to

alternative costs are rarely taken into account in

falsify metre reading to lower bills.

corruption equations.

the time

■ 30 percent of the customer respondents had

infrequently/never.
The value of the kickbacks to public officials

made more than one small payment (median

The study also indicates the frequency of side

normally ranged from 6 percent to 11 percent of

payment US $1.90) in the past six months to

payments from contractors to public officials

the contract value. The study also suggests that

expedite repair work.

within the water and sanitation sector. According

side payments for transfers of staff occur on a

to public official respondents, side payments

frequent basis. Interestingly, side payments for

occur on a frequent basis:

promotions were less common.

■ 12 percent of the customer respondents
had made payment (median payment
US $22) to expedite new water and
sanitation connections.

Source: Davis, 2004.

balances, poor transparency of decision-making and
restricted access to information
■

discretionary decision-making within both public and
private sectors

■

lack of accountability and weak systems of oversight
and enforcement

■

soft social control systems that provide a breeding
ground for acceptance and tolerance for corrupt
activities.

Two examples of corruption in the water and sanitation
and irrigation sectors are provided in Boxes 2.10 and
2.11. While these examples are not intended to suggest
that any one country or water sub-sector is worse than
the rest, it is important to note that many countries
that face severe water challenges are also ranked as
corrupt countries.9

9. For the most current
corruption index, see:
www.transparency.org/

In places where corruption is endemic, the consequences
are disproportionately borne by the poor, who have no
resources to compete with those able and willing to pay
bribes. In the end, corruption ‘tightens the shackles of
poverty’ on countries or groups that can least afford it
(UNDP, 2004a). Although in theory citizens have an
option to stay out of corruption, it is often difficult to do
so, since the choice can be between having access to

drinking water and going thirsty or having sufficient
irrigation water for agricultural crop production or losing
crops and farming income. Buying water from private
water vendors is in general more costly than the
municipal water supply. Water is something everybody
needs, and there is no substitute for it. Thus, in reality,
citizens often have few alternatives to bribing officials for
receiving water and sanitation services.

Abating corruption
The global response to abate corruption has recently picked
up speed. Many bilateral and multilateral organizations,
governments, civil-society organizations and private
businesses are currently developing internal and external
governance guidelines, codes of conduct and sponsor anticorruption/improved governance research and development
programmes. In 2003, the United Nations Convention
against Corruption was adopted by the General Assembly by
resolution 58/4 of 31 October 2003. A major breakthrough
of the Convention is that countries agreed on assetrecovery, which is stated explicitly as ‘a fundamental
principle of the Convention’. This is a particularly important
issue for many developing countries where high-level
corruption has plundered national wealth, and where
resources are badly needed for reconstruction and the
rehabilitation of societies under new governments. As of 11
October 2004, the Convention has 140 signatories and has
entered into force. As a spin-off of the Convention work,
the Global Compact adopted in 2004 a tenth principle on

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 6 9

corruption: ‘Business should work against corruption in all
its forms, including extortion and bribery.’
The battle against corruption is multi-faceted and
requires actions at many levels in the form of public
sector reform, increased salaries among public officials,
strict enforcement of existing rules and regulations,
improved accountability and transparency, multilateral
cooperation and coordination to track financial flows
and monitor international contracts, etc.10
Progress has been made in fighting corruption in some
areas, but much still needs to be done. The main
challenges lie ahead, and will require committed
leadership from governments, the private sector and civil
society backed by citizens’ support to push ahead for
effective anti-corruption measures and reform. Even
though corruption in the water sector is facilitated by
general inadequacies or a break-down of governance
systems, private, public, local, national and international
water decision-makers should all take responsibility for
initiating and implementing adequate anti-corruption
measures in the water sector. It is believed that changes
within one sector can ‘spill-over’ and make a contribution
to wider reforms of governance systems.

2e. Privatization of water services
The opening up of the water services sector to private
competition is a part of water sector reform of many
developing countries. This had not been possible without
overall economic reforms of liberalizing and decentralizing
economies that was initiated in the late 1980s and early
1990s. The ongoing water reforms in Ghana, India, Kenya,
Niger, South Africa, Tanzania and Uganda, for example, are
part and parcel of current economic and decentralization
reforms where management and financial responsibilities
are transferred to local governments, states or provinces.
The mobilization and effective use of existing financial
resources necessary to manage water resources and
water supply and sanitation services are major challenges
facing public and private water decision-makers and
managers around the world. Ultimately, the responsibility
for financing the water resource infrastructure and water
management needs rests with local or national
governments. However, this does not automatically imply
that funds necessarily have to come from governments.
Investment from private and other external sources, such
as donors and international lending institutions, is, and
will continue to be, frequently required.

The current situation in many developing countries is
problematic where even basic water functions, such as
operation and maintenance of drinking water supply and
sanitation utilities, are not adequately funded. Adequate
investments for improved water resources management or
ecosystem maintenance is typically even harder to obtain.
In many developing countries, investment in water
management and services is funded through insufficient
and insecure sources by central governments with very
limited funds. Water charges collected on the basis of
resource use are often paid into a ‘general exchequer’,
which can lead to lost opportunities to redefine financial
roles and responsibilities between different water users
and government agencies (Rogers and Hall, 2003).

The opening up
of the water
services sector
to private
competition is a
part of water
sector reform of
many developing
countries

Considerable discussion remains over public and private
water services, institutional arrangements and the
application of economic instruments to make water
services delivery more efficient and equitable. Increased
privatization, which in many cases has implied rising
water prices, is in many social settings a heavily
politicized issue that is creating social and political
discontent, and sometimes outright violence, the most
cited case being that in Cochabamba, Bolivia. There are
also other cases where private operators have faced
social protests against increasing user fees or private
firms’ performance. This has led to a situation where
operations are handed back to public authorities. For
example, Trinidad and Tobago is reforming its water
sector, now with a strong reluctance to re-introduce
private operators. There are, however, also examples, as
in Port Vila, Vanuatu, where privatization can improve
low-income households’ access to water services.
Experience demonstrates, among other things, the
need for a well-planned concession contract,
enforcement of regulatory powers and strong
commitment by political leaders and participation by
communities (see Box 2.12).
Private enterprises within the water supply sector
skyrocketed during the 1990s. It went from almost none
in the early 1990s to the current more than 2,350 private
enterprises (UNDP, 2003). Until recently there have been
expectations that the private sector will continue to
expand its investments in developing countries. Estimation
suggests that the private sector spent US $25 billion on
water supply and sanitation in developing countries
between 1990 and 1997, compared with US $297 million
in 1984–90. Most of this investment was in Latin America
and Asia, whereas Africa received less than one percent

10. See WBI recommendations
at www.worldbank.org/wbi/
governance

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

7 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

of the total investments made (UNEP, 2004). It now
seems like this trend of increased privatization is
reversing. Interestingly, many of the big multinational
water companies are questioning their own role in
increasing their investments in developing countries and
playing an active role in resolving the water supply and
sanitation crisis of many developing countries. Due to
the political and economic high-risk operations, shrinking
profit margins (in part due to currency instability), and
increasing criticism affecting firms’ business image, many
of the multinational private water companies have
started to retreat from water services contracts and

investments in developing countries. Saur, for example,
has pulled out from some African countries like
Mozambique and Zimbabwe. Another example is in
2003 when Suez started to downsize its water
investments in developing countries with one-third of
current investment levels. Likewise, other companies like
Veolia and Thames Water are reconsidering their
commitment in developing countries. In 2004, Thames
Water pulled out from its water operations in Shanghai
and is also facing difficulties in Jakarta, where it was
involved in Jakarta’s water privatization, which began in
1997, but where the company has not been able to

BOX 2.12: EXPERIENCES IN PRIVATE SECTOR INVOLVEMENT IN WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION
Experiences in Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and

housing on the city periphery. In many cases,

contract, intermittent water supply was often

Senegal

conflicts over land tenure beyond the municipal

common, but in most cases, water is now

In 2001 there was an assessment made of the

boundary put a strain on the extension of

available 24 hours per day, and unaccounted-for

results of water privatization in three African

services. Water supplies in many areas are

water has decreased dramatically from 50 to 23

countries: Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and Senegal.

comprised of hand-dug wells and shallow bores.

percent. The water tariff for the first 50 m3 per

The contractual arrangements that were applied

In 1994, Union Electrique du Vanuatu (UNELCO, a

month was reduced to US $0.58 per m3 from US

varied from medium-term leases to long-term

subsidiary of Ondeo Services) signed a forty-

$0.75 per m3. It has been reported that annual

concession contracts. All three countries

year concession contract to supply water and

economic losses of up to US $440,000 in 1991

displayed similar results from the privatization

electricity to Port Vila. A total investment of US

have been turned into a surplus of US $12,000

process: the connection rates had increased, and

$11.6 million was anticipated during the contract

in 2000. Private sector involvement seems to

there were also tangible improvements for billing

period, with US $580,000 per year for the first

work well in this small urban center.

and collection of revenue. However, increased

five years.

Groundwater not requiring treatment is

tariffs had made water supplies unaffordable for

inexpensive; tariffs are relatively higher than in

many of the poorest sections of society, which

The concession aims at providing a ‘self-

other Asian cities; and the relatively high cost-

led to people getting disconnected from water

regulatory system’, where the government

recovery facilitates free connections for the

supply due to inability to pay. It was also

monitors the concession and facilitates the

poor. Some of the components that have made

unclear to what extent poor people had

extension of services to new consumers. A

this enterprise work for poor people include a

benefited from water network connection

structured fixed-tariff system was established to

pro-poor concessional approach, with a clear

expansions. Experiences confirmed that very

ensure affordable water rates for poorer sections

investment plan and targets of network

poor sections normally tend to be excluded from

of society as well. For low-income households,

expansion; multiple service levels; and cross-

being a part of privatized service extension. To

the US $0.20 per cubic metre (m3) paid goes

subsidized connection fees. The government has

provide the poorest section of society with

into a special fund to finance free connections.

shown a strong commitment and enforced its

adequate water services is typically viewed as a

But households will still have to pay the

regulatory powers. In addition, the study also

high-risk enterprise that largely lacks

quarterly consumption bill.

indicates the importance of strong community

opportunities for economic return. Similar

leadership, active participation by recipient

experiences have also been found in other

The company is regularly monitored by the

communities and a high degree of awareness

places, such as in greater Buenos Aires,

government and provides regular financial

among water services consumers in general.

Argentina and in Bolivia.

reports and investment plans for five-year
periods to the government for approval. In this

Port Vila, Vanuatu: Water concession

particular case, UNELCO and the government has

with pro-poor elements

improved the water supply network and

In Port Vila, the poorest of the urban poor

extended uninterrupted, affordable water

reside in overcrowded, informal, impermanent

services to many new households. Prior to the

Sources: ADB, 2002; Mehta and Mirosa-Canal, 2004.
For more accounts of water services privatization in urban
areas, see also UN-HABITAT, 2004.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 7 1

make profit. Resistance from consumers and political
unease have delayed planned rises of water rates, and
the company also brought on bad publicity due to
allegations of inadequate service performance. Many of
the multinational water companies are consequently
focusing even more on the less risky markets of Europe
and North America.11
The private sector has been more effective at handling
issues of efficiency in water distribution systems, like
decreasing unaccounted-for water, improved billing and
increased revenue collection than at meeting issues of
equity of water distribution through the extension of
water networks. Rapidly increased water charges have in
some cases implied that poor people are being
disconnected from services. Those who have benefited
from private water services in developing countries are
predominantly those living in relatively affluent urban
pockets. Cost recovery for water services related to
irrigation and water supply and sanitation in rural, periurban and slum areas has proven to be a much more
complicated task and is often considered to be less
economically viable. Often, the extension of services to
poorer sections of society is not a part of public–private
contracts. It is evident that the private sector is facing
similar difficulties as many developing country
governments are unable to reach poor people with
improved water services. The record of private sector
involvement has been mixed, and there are often wide
gaps between the effectiveness of regulatory powers and
private sector operations.

Weak regulatory powers and poor governance
The increasing privatization has implied a new division of
roles: governments are increasingly becoming the service
regulator, while the private sector becomes the service
provider. Many governments in developing countries
operate with a low regulatory capacity for enforcement
of contracts and the distribution and monitoring of water
licensing and permits. With regulatory functions often
vested with government agencies, also responsible for
water services provision, conflicts arise regarding service
quality and a government agency’s independence may be
called into question. Successful water services
privatization will require a clear set of rules that promotes
both equity and efficiency in water distribution,
effectively enforced by an independent government
regulator adequately equipped with authority, finances
and human capacities.

This development has taken place in both middle-income
countries, like South Africa, and in some of the world’s
poorest countries, such as Niger. Obviously, these
countries have different regulatory capacities. The
regulatory authority is absent in Niger, while it is
relatively effective in South Africa (Mehta and MirosaCanal, 2004). Adequate and enforced regulatory
frameworks are critical for successfully increasing private
sector involvement in water service delivery. But despite
this insight, in many countries, privatization is taking
place without a balance between financially strong
private companies and financially strained government
agencies with low institutional capacities. Some of the
multinational companies that government authorities are
going in to contract with and are supposed to regulate
can sometimes have bigger annual turnover than the
GDP of the country. For example, in 2002 the waterrelated revenue of Vivendi Environment exceeded the
GDP of countries like Côte d’Ivoire and Kenya (Mehta
and Mirosa-Canal, 2004). Such economic asymmetry
can have an effect on the negotiation powers of
going in to contracts and how contracts are interpreted
once they are implemented. Governments, including
donors, should increasingly support the establishment of
independent and strong regulatory authorities in order to
facilitate the enforcement of concessions or other types
of arrangements between the public and private sectors.
Sound governance practices create enabling
environments, which encourage equitable and efficient
public and private sector investment. Beyond providing
general support to achieve good governance conditions,
specific attention should be directed to efforts that
reduce risk and facilitate healthy capital markets,
especially domestically. Some additional points on using
improved governance to mobilize financial resources
(Rogers and Hall, 2003):
■

Water should be recognized as an economic, social,
and environmental good; the full costs of water
management and water services must be
acknowledged, and the costs should be transparent
and affordable (through tariffs, cross-subsidies, taxes,
etc., see Chapter 12). All costs and benefits of
improved water management and services should be
taken into account.

■

Capital should be made available at all levels, such as
micro-credit, revolving loan programmes and the
issuing of local bonds.

Sound
governance
practices create
enabling
environments,
which
encourage
equitable and
efficient public
and private
sector
investment

11. The Economist, The flood
dries up: International water
companies, August 28 2004;
Mehta and Canal, 2004.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Recent trends
indicate that
water
multinationals
are scaling
down their
investment
plans in
developing
countries

■

It is essential to have institutional clarity regarding
water access and allocation: water rights and permits,
regulatory frameworks and management
responsibilities.

■

Decision-making systems that are transparent, inclusive
and that can be held accountable are necessary.

The importance of improved governance can be
illustrated with Porto Alegre, Brazil, where the opening
up of decision-making processes, such as participatory
budgeting, led to improved governance systems (see Box
2.13). Controversies that have surrounded some of the
public–private water service contracts could have been
reduced if the contracting process had been open to
public scrutiny.

Untapped potentials – local small-scale water
companies
The bulk of discussions on the need for improved
financing and increased privatization of water services has
focused on the role of multinational companies. However,
privately operated water utilities (excluding small-scale
local operators) only supply approximately 5 to 10 percent
of the world’s population with drinking water and even
less with sanitation (McGranahan, 2004a). Very little
attention has been paid to increasing capacities and
incentives of domestic water operators and local
entrepreneurs or to exploring the role of local
communities and various kinds of water user associations
and community-based organizations. Multinational
companies’ comparative advantage is to construct, operate
and manage large-scale infrastructure for drinking water
and sanitation, hydropower and irrigation. In many
instances, such large-scale infrastructure development

remains economically unviable. It is becoming increasingly
acknowledged that many water multinationals, as well as
governments, so far have not been able to provide the
type of technology that developing countries need to
meet the MDGs on water and sanitation or other
international and national water targets. Considering the
billions of people who are underserved with sufficient
water supply and sanitation one can conclude that there
exists huge demand for small-scale improvements as well
as application of large-scale solutions where appropriate.
Local entrepreneurs, communities and local organizations
should increasingly be viewed as important stakeholders
who can contribute to meeting the MDGs and other
international water targets.
There is currently an increasing number of examples of
private companies in developing countries that are
involved in the water sector to provide more appropriate
small-scale technology and where consumers may have
greater opportunities to decide on technologies applied.
It has been noted that small-scale independent water
networks are best documented and perhaps also most
common in Latin America. For example, in Paraguay it has
been estimated that small-scale operators serve about 9
percent of the population. In other countries the coverage
tends to be considerably lower but significant enough to
compete with larger water providers (Solo, 2003). The
small-scale water networks have mainly emerged due to
failing public utilities. A study on the role of small-scale
enterprises and water user associations in providing water
supply to rural areas in Morocco showed that there are big
potentials for both local entrepreneurs and stakeholders to
be involved in a meaningful way. The potential of local
entrepreneurs has also been noted in other contexts, such
as in Uganda. In 1991, water services management

BOX 2.13: IMPROVED GOVERNANCE FOR BETTER WATER SERVICES IN BRAZIL
In Porto Alegre, Brazil, in the past decade, US

reported that 99.5 percent of the city is

investments to improve water supply and

$140 million was invested in water and

supplied with water of a good quality, and 84

sanitation. Hence, it seems to be less of a

sanitation systems, 80 percent of which was

percent of the city’s sewage is being treated.

question of whether or not a service should be

generated through tariffs. The tariff system

Interestingly, this part of Brazil is known for

public or private, and more a question of the

includes cross-subsidies and a minimum water

being wealthier and having less social inequality

strength of existing institutions and how well

supply requirement of 10 m3 per month for low

than many other parts of Brazil; furthermore,

they can carry out public service tasks that

income households, but they only have to pay

there is a vibrant associational life. Hence, it

benefit the whole society.

the cost of 4 m3. There are different tariff levels

seems like the governance system coupled with

depending on income. Large consumers, like

existing levels of wealth and civil society

factories and shops, pay higher rates. It is

vibrancy has made it possible to raise required

Source: Mehta and Mirosa-Canal, 2004.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 7 3

BOX 2.14: THE ACTIVE ROLE OF WATER USER ASSOCIATIONS IN MOROCCO
Involving private companies in the management

rural water supply. A pilot study reveals that

contracts. The service contract has the

of urban water supply is considered one of the

small-scale entrepreneurs (one to five

advantage of offering the operator a relatively

options for improving services in developing

employees) and water user organizations have a

‘safe’ income, as it does not rely on the amount

countries. But what about the management of

big potential role in improving rural water supply.

of water sold and its price. Management

rural water supply? How can small-scale

Small-scale entrepreneurs have a significant role

contracts normally insist that incomes are based

entrepreneurs and other local actors be involved

to play in pumping station operations,

on tariff and quantity of water sold and thus

in a meaningful way? An example is provided

maintenance and caretaking, leakage control,

provide a more uncertain situation of future

from Morocco.

repairs and maintenance of major pipes,

incomes. It was also clear from the study that

maintenance of local piped network, standpipes

water user associations have an important role

Water supply in rural areas of Morocco has

and household connections, water metre

to play in maintaining local water networks as

developed much more slowly than in urban

reading, and water quality surveillance. Through

well as mobilizing communities. Interestingly,

areas. Coverage in rural areas has been

the survey it became apparent that small-scale

water user associations were, along with local

estimated at 40 percent. The central water

entrepreneurs have some technical experience

authorities, considered to play a significant role

authority Office National de l’Eau Potable

but lack experience with commercial

in commercial management of water, such as

(ONEP) faces challenges of increasing water

management. Communities preferred local

consumer administration, metre reading, and

supply coverage and sustaining such efforts.

entrepreneurs that they know. Interestingly, the

control of free-riders.

ONEP is now exploring measures of

entrepreneurs had a strong preference for

decentralizing, delegating and sub-contracting

service contracts rather than management

contracts were awarded to local companies in Uganda for
the management of water supplies in nine small towns.
Prior to this, the World Bank had invested in infrastructure
improvements. By 2003, the contracting out of water
supplies management had extended to twenty-four towns.
The basis for these management contracts can be traced
back to the legal and institutional reforms undertaken in
Uganda during the 1990s. There are indications that these
management contracts have reached some of their
objectives. Since a large share of the urban poor live in
small cities and towns this example can illustrate that
there is a potential for local small-scale companies to
reach underserved, low-income households in urban areas
(McGranahan, 2004b).
Local private enterprises often have several advantages:
(1) knowledge of local conditions; (2) local procurement,
production and employment; (3) medium and small-scale
operation that can have a positive impact on services in
secondary cities and towns as well as rural villages; (4)

Source: Brikké, 2004.

niche markets and a multiplicity of appropriate
technologies that can be explored in a more effective
way. However, a greater involvement of local enterprises
in operating water and sanitation utilities does not
automatically mean that services to poor people will
improve. There is not yet any conclusive evidence that
local small-scale water network operators would be more
effective than other types of set-ups to reach poor
people and informal settlements (McGranahan, 2004b).
The effectiveness of reaching poor people will continue to
depend on the nature of contracts, sound governance
systems, increased investments and enhanced local water
management capacities. A disadvantage is that local
entrepreneurs in many developing countries are
inexperienced in managing and operating utilities
(McGranahan, 2004b). As seen in the case of rural water
supply in Morocco (see Box 2.14), there may also in
other contexts be preferences and capacities that favour
service contracts with the public sector rather than
managing and operating utilities.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 3. Decentralization of Water Control and
Decision-making
Principle 10 of Agenda 21 (UN, 1992) states:
Environmental issues are best handled with the participation of all concerned citizens, at the
relevant level. At the national level, each individual shall have appropriate access to
information concerning the environment that is held by public authorities, including
information on hazardous materials and activities in their communities, and the opportunity to
participate in decision-making processes. States shall facilitate and encourage public awareness
and participation by making information widely available. Effective access to judicial and
administrative proceedings, including redress and remedy, shall be provided.
Yet the implementation of these rights has not kept pace
with the expectations generated by this international
declaration. The absence of information or mechanisms
for participation and redress result in decisions that
adversely impact, exclude, and are consequently opposed
by, affected communities. Such decisions are rarely
effective, frequently illegitimate and unjust, and
undermine the ability to integrate environmental concerns
into development processes. As the UN Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE) Convention on Access to
Information, Public Participation in Decision-making, and
Access to Justice in Environmental Matters in Member
States (the Aarhus Convention) indicates, no country has
fully developed policies or the organizational capacity to
implement all pillars of Principle 10. This is even more
true in many developing countries where transparency
and inclusiveness in decision-making have a shorter
history and often face stronger resistance by special
interests inside and outside governments.
In the last decade or so, there has been a recognition
that if efforts to improve the quantity or quality of water
supply are to be successful, not only must they be
technically sound and economically feasible, but they
must also deal directly with poverty alleviation, local
empowerment and environmental sustainability. In this
regard, it has been recognized that local organizations
and communities that are direct water users have strong
local hydrological and socio-economic knowledge and also
have the most at stake in water decisions.
The importance of participation and bottom-up
approaches and the critical role of local community
initiatives for resolving water challenges have been
demonstrated by the Arwari River Parliament in

Rajasthan, India. The river parliament, formed in 1998, is
based on a community-centred river basin approach and
consists of some seventy villages and forty-six micro
watersheds. The parliament meets twice a year and aims
at a wide range of objectives, such as sustainable
management of water resources, managing soil fertility
and land erosion, stopping illegal mining activities,
generating self-employment and alternative livelihood
options, promoting women’s groups and increasing
agricultural productivity through application of local
seeds and manure. It is reported that there have been
positive social, economic and environmental impacts.
Among other things, patterns of resource use are
regulated, and there is also a platform to resolve
disputes related to the allocation and management of
water, forest and land (Moench et al., 2003).
Several alternative methods of widening and deepening
people’s participation are emerging in different countries
to address water-related and other development
challenges. Reforms regarding increasing inclusiveness in
water decision-making are applied to the water sector in
various degrees and forms.

3a. Benefits of decentralization
The concept of decentralization has evolved over time
and acquired different interpretations. In a simplistic way,
decentralization can be said to be a means of dispersing
decision-making closer to the point of where the practical
work is done. It has, among other things, been defined
as the primary strategy for transferring responsibility from
the central government to sub-national levels of
government and representing a fundamental change in
the institutional framework in which political, social and
economic decisions are made (Rondinelli et al., 1984).

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 7 5

The term has now come to be used in senses that deviate
in many ways from this characterization, since
decentralization currently also refers to the transfer of
responsibilities to civil society and the private sector.
Decentralization should thus generally be perceived as a
process in which the government relinquishes some of its
decision-making powers and management responsibilities
to lower levels of government, private sector or
community and civil society organizations.
When it works well, decentralization has many benefits:
it can allow for a democratization of decision-making
through improved stakeholder inclusiveness, transparency
and accountability. Appropriately implemented, it can
empower people, particularly those lacking the social and
political clout and financial means to have a voice and
take part in decisions that define their livelihood
opportunities. It can also encourage the integration of
traditional knowledge and practices with innovative
technologies and science to promote fair and efficient
management of water resources and services.
Decentralized systems can make governments more
responsive. It is more likely that local public sector
officials will be held accountable by the local consumers
of services than by central government officials. It can
thus promote government agency responsiveness to
address water services and administrative shortcomings.
The existence of autonomous and flexible local
governments can promote the production of appropriate
and innovative practices. Similarly, local governments can
be better positioned to work with local NGOs and other
volunteer, community-based organizations in identifying
problems and defining solutions. Decentralizing decisions
can also lead to easier public access to water
information, which also entails lower costs to citizens for
obtaining information about government performance for
local government services than for central government.
As pointed out, decentralization done appropriately can
lead to increased democratization and bring decisions
closer to water users. But there is also an economic
efficiency rationale behind decentralization that often
goes hand-in-hand with aims of democratizing decisionmaking. It is assumed that bringing decisions closer to
water users can lead to better water resources allocation
as well as services provision. In a highly centralized
system of public goods and services, there is often a lack
of reliable information about the actual costs of those
services and to what extent services are being subsidized.

Moreover, there is limited information on performance
and quality of services of public sector agencies. In
contrast, the allocation of resources to public sector
services is likely to be more efficient under a
decentralized regime, with the assumption that local
public institutions are more likely to have better
information on citizens’ preferences and needs, such as
water demands among various user groups and the
willingness and capability to pay for improved services.
Another way of decentralizing is to make the direct water
users more responsible for water management. For
example, benefits of local community participation and
the use of traditional water managers to mediate water
conflicts, allocate water in efficient and equitable ways
and maintain irrigation infrastructure have been
demonstrated in the case of irrigation management in
India. Such experiences can also serve as an entry point
for decentralizing of irrigation-management
responsibilities. The local modalities and premises for
water allocation, management practices and mechanisms
for dispute resolution can differ.

Decentralization

3b. Decentralization in practice

opportunities

Despite ongoing reform work, many countries still lack legal
provisions for local government water responsibility in
water resources management/development. A survey of
forty-two countries in Africa, Asia, Europe and Latin
America indicates that twenty-four countries are lacking
legal provisions for local government responsibility.
However, in some countries, the legal provisions for local
water resources management are fairly strong. For
example, in Mongolia, regional and local governors have
responsibilities for water management and plans for water
collection, restoration and use. The water laws in Viet Nam
call for more integrated approaches and have decentralized
irrigation management to local water committees.12

can empower
people,
particularly
those lacking
the social and
political clout
and financial
means to have a
voice and take
part in decisions
that define their
livelihood

What does the practice of decentralization tell us?
Decentralization of the power to manage water (not just
read metres and fix leaks) does not come easily. There are
at times very strong social and political forces, both inside
and outside government, which benefit from preserving
status quo. A number of studies confirm the general
hypothesis emerging from research that the theory and
rhetoric of decentralization frequently fails to match the
willingness of central governments and their attached
agencies to relinquish power (Olowu and Wunsch, 2003).
Years of centralized authority may have undermined old
traditional resource management systems, as in the case

12. These figures are based on
Water Law and Standards. See:
www.waterlawandstandards.org

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 2.15: TRADITIONAL SYSTEMS UNDER THREAT IN INDIA
In the Indian States of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh

Similar systems with traditional water managers

The role of traditional water managers has been

and Tamil Nadu, traditional water managers are

are also found in other parts of India, such as in

greatly reduced over the past fifty years, mainly

called Neerkatti. They manage water tanks for

Ladakh, Uttaranchal and Maharashtra. For

due to water becoming a state property.

irrigation. Their knowledge of the terrain,

example, in Maharashtra’s cooperative irrigation

Irrigation management is consequently run by

drainage and irrigation needs is much beyond that

system, the Cultivator Committees appoint water

government departments and has shifted to a

of present-day water engineers. Their role begins

managers. The post is often hereditary to

government induced trend from surface-water to

before the monsoon. The tank, which is common

ensure loyalty to local practice. To ensure

groundwater irrigation. Consequently, traditional

property, requires collective action to be

neutrality in irrigation decision-making, landless

tank irrigation infrastructure has degraded, and

maintained. The Neerkattis decide upon the date

village residents are usually chosen. Their task

canals have clogged up. Traditional water

on which the community assists to desilt the tank

is to look after, regulate and maintain water

management often clashes with formal water

and clean the catchment. They size up the work

flows in the main, distributary and field canals.

licensing practices and regulations, hence

required and divide the labour among tank

The water managers play a critical role in

creating uncertainties in management

beneficiaries. With the first monsoon shower,

resolving water disputes thanks to their

responsibilities. The governments of Andhra

they take stock of water availability and decide

knowledge of water flows in different canal

Pradesh and Tamil Nadu have recently enacted

upon per capita allocation and what type of crops

systems. In some villages in Ladakh, a contract

legislation to enhance participatory irrigation

to grow. The Neerkattis ensure supply to every

is written between the traditional water

management, stemming from growing water

field on a rotational basis. How this is done can

managers and villages. The contract stipulates

disputes and the need to revive water tanks.

vary. In one village the tail-end users receive

obligations and responsibilities and the

However, the legislation has largely implied the

water first. The lands located closer to the tank

impartiality of the water managers. Water

creation of thousands of water user associations

will benefit from seepage water. The duration of

managers also supervise maintenance and

(70,000 in Andhra Pradesh alone) without

irrigation depends on the crop being grown. If a

mediate conflicts. If there are any serious

reviving the role of traditional water managers.

crop begins to dry, Neerkattis have the authority

disputes, the matter can be referred to other

These water user associations have had very

to divert water to drying fields, even by closing

village institutions. How water is allocated

mixed results. Traditional water management

the diversion to all other fields. They can also

differs. In some places, there has been a kind of

knowledge is increasingly being lost.

have other functions related to crop management.

lottery system developed to ensure impartial

To minimize the risk of partisanship, the

allocation. In other places, irrigation water is

Neerkattis do not enjoy any formal political power

prioritized to the farmer who tills the land first,

or own land linked to the water-tank system.

irrespective of location.

of years of colonial rule followed by centralized authority
(Box 2.15). Past centralization of water decision-making
in India has led to local ways of managing water
resources being increasingly lost. In such cases, civil
society of local water management institutions must be
reinvented and reformulated.
Observed trends show many governments to be
unwilling to decentralize adequate powers and
resources to local bodies, which can severely stifle local
bodies’ options to manage water resources and deliver
services. It has also been observed that governments
may take back powers and financial resources from
local bodies, often in response to pressure from
bureaucrats and legislators unhappy with the loss of
power (Manor, 2003). For example, in the Middle East

Source: Centre for Science and Environment, 2003.

and North Africa, many cases of participatory irrigation
management (PIM) indicate that governments give PIM
rhetorical support, but in practice, they do not provide
appropriate incentive structures, institutional
mechanisms or regulations to allow for effective local
irrigation management. Despite the evidence that PIM
works, some governments are less enthusiastic about
local water management than they claim to be. Several
case studies demonstrate that with the application of
PIM, water-use efficiency can increase by up to 30 to
50 percent and that the energy use for pumping was
cut in half (Attia, 2004). Other, less well-documented
benefits can include a reduction in local water conflict
and a sense of community and individual empowerment
that is said to improve family health and well-being
(Brooks, 2002).

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 7 7

rights and preferences. This point has been underlined
in a comparison between successful and unsuccessful
cases of community-based resource management in
Mexico. Two different features of successful
management were identified: the first emphasized the
important role of vigorous, regular and well-attended
community assemblies and the second stressed the
importance of accounting and reporting practices that
provide community members with a sufficient flow of
information (Klooster, 2000). The difference in water
services that such vigorous and transparent local
community assemblies can make has also been reported
from other parts of Latin America. A case study
(Rosensweig, 2001) of the small town of Itagua,
Paraguay showed that community-based water boards
were successful in improving water services.

Other studies have looked at the potential of
decentralization to enhance democratic participation and
the empowerment of marginalized groups, including
women. They demonstrate that democratic decentralization
has a very mixed record as a means of reducing poverty. It
has been noted that it may help to reduce poverty that
arises from inequalities between regions but often does less
to reduce poverty that arises from inequalities within
regions. Recent evidence suggests that the impact of
decentralization may be more positive than previously
thought, particularly for women. There is clear evidence
that the presence of significant numbers of women in local
decision-making bodies sometimes increases the quantity
and quality of crucial services, such as ante- and postnatal
care (Manor, 2003).

3c. Information, development and access
3d. Degree of public participation in water
decision-making

People’s participation in and access to relevant water
information are essential preconditions for successful
decentralization. One of the reasons why
decentralization is claimed to be conducive to efficiency
and equity in water allocation and distribution is
because it enables local-level services to be tailored
according to local needs and demands. What are the
mechanisms through which local needs, demands and
knowledge can be made known to decision-makers?
The only feasible way is to have an inclusive and
transparent process of local and central decision-making
through which various stakeholders can voice their

The weak levels of participation and access to information
have also been confirmed in a number of country surveys
carried out by The Access Initiative (TAI) in 2001–03. Table
2.2 shows that legal provisions for participation are weak.

UNICEF school project in a
camp for internally
displaced persons in
Sudan

In this first round of national assessments undertaken
by TAI, access to information on water quality monitoring
and the degree of public participation in water decisionmaking processes emerged as key areas for improvement
in most countries.13

Table 2.2: Public participation rights in constitutional and legal frameworks
Indicators
Constitutional guarantees
to public participation

Comprehensiveness of
notice and comment in
different types of
decision-making processes

Public notice and
comment requirements for
environmental impact
assessments

Weak
Constitution does not
explicitly guarantee right
to public participation in
decision-making:
Chile, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Mexico, South
Africa, United States
Types of policy- and projectlevel decisions requiring
public notice and comment
are not specified:
Indonesia, Thailand

No requirement for public
notice and comment for
Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs):
Thailand

Intermediate
No value offered: only two
indicator choices were
‘strong’ and ‘weak’

Strong
Constitution guarantees the
right to public participation in
decision-making: Thailand,
Uganda

Types of project-level
decisions requiring public
notice and comment are
specified, but types of
policy-level decisions are
not: Chile, Hungary,
India, Uganda
EIAs require public notice
and comment at final stage:
Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Mexico, Uganda

Types of both policy- and
project-level decisions
requiring public notice and
comment are specified:
Mexico, South Africa,
United States

Source: The Access Initiative, National Team Reports, see WRI, 2002.

EIAs require public notice and
comment at various stages:
Chile, South Africa,
United States

13. In 2001–03, TAI conducted
pilot assessments in nine
countries to test its
methodology and identify
needs for improved access to
information and participation.
For example, a number of
sub-indicators were used to
evaluate a number of
characteristics of public
participation in specific
decision-making cases. Some
of these indicators examine
the law and regulations
governing public
participation. Others focus on
practice illustrated by
selected decision-making
processes. The results
described here are based on
the assessments found at
www.accessinitiative.org

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The TAI pilot assessments indicated the following:
■

...the public

■

National-level environmental policy-making cases
recorded the strongest rankings for quality and
accessibility.

■

Regional or local planning processes demonstrated
intermediate or strong levels of accessibility but
considerable variability in the quality of effort made by
public authorities.

■

In productive, extractive, infrastructure and other sectors
at the national level in the pilot countries, decisionmaking is generally less accessible to the public.

■

Project-level decisions recorded highly variable public
participation, in terms of both quality and accessibility.

■

Participation tends to be weak at the earliest stages of
decision-making and in the monitoring of
implementation or review of performance.

■

Decision-making processes usually place the onus of
initiating participation on the public or affected
communities.

■

Meaningful public participation improves decisions. In
the cases where the pilot-country government invested
in supporting meaningful participation and actively
solicited input – or where civil society organized,
initiated a dialogue or provided input to which the
government responded – the decisions adopted
incorporated environmental and social aspects.

rarely has easy
access to useful

Public participation rights are insufficiently articulated in
most pilot country legal and constitutional frameworks.

information

developing water governance indicators to be pilot
tested in 2005–06.

3e. Access to water quality information
Information about water may also mobilize public opinion
to urge polluters and governments to reduce pollution
and improve water quality. It was found in the TAI pilot
assessments that the public rarely has easy access to
useful information about the quality of drinking and
surface water. Table 2.3 indicates that even if the quality
of information is good, the access to it is often very
limited. As a result, individuals and communities cannot
protect themselves from contaminated water or monitor
the improvement of its quality. The TAI pilot assessments
on access to water quality information also indicated the
following results:
■

The water quality monitoring systems assessed had
operated for more than three years. All monitoring
systems, except those in India, have provided regular
reports at least over this period. Some of the
monitoring systems have operated for decades.
For example, RandWater in South Africa began
operations in 1927.

■

In terms of the breadth of parameters monitored,
monitoring systems are categorized as either
comprehensive or basic. In Hungary, India, Mexico,
South Africa and the United States, it was found
that the chosen systems monitor a comprehensive
set of physical, bacterial, chemical and viral parameters
in water. Systems in Thailand and Uganda monitor
a more basic set.

■

The quality of the system for providing water quality
information also depends on how the monitoring
networks are coordinated. Monitoring systems can
cover a single urban area (as in Mexico or Indonesia),
entire countries (as in Hungary, India, Chile and
Thailand), or selected regions within a country (such as
the State of California in the United States).

■

In Thailand, the monitoring of drinking water from the
tap, by contrast, is divided among several bodies – the
Metropolitan Waterworks, Provincial Waterworks
Authorities, and the private Universal Utilities
Company. The monitoring of bottled water comes
under another body – the Food and Drug
Administration. In Thailand it was also found that,
while some analytical data on the quality of tap water

about the
quality of
drinking and
surface water

In 2004–05, over twenty countries carried out TAI
assessments, and thus more information will be
available on information disclosure and participation.
Some initial results from this next round of assessments
have shown specific gaps, particularly in information
dissemination among minority groups as well as
public involvement in planning processes. As countries
develop IWRM plans, it is important to examine the
degree to which the public is not simply consulted but
rather directly involved in the formulation of the plans.
Box 2.16 highlights two cases regarding access to
water information and participation in Ukraine and
Estonia. In addition, TAI is beginning the process of

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 7 9

BOX 2.16: ACCESS TO INFORMATION AND PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN THE WATER SECTOR
Water-related emergencies in Ukraine

making related to the implementation of policy,

problem with making this data public. However,

The case of an emergency in 2000 involving the

strategy, plans, programmes and legislation was

the Ministry of Social Affairs has initiated a

pollution of groundwater in five settlements of

made using different indicators. It was found

project for disseminating drinking water

the Pervomaysk district of the Mykolayiv oblast,

that there was no public participation in

monitoring data to the public via the Internet.

caused by a number of extremely toxic chemical

developing the above documents for the

There are eight sub-basins in Estonia for which

agents (the so called ‘Accident in Boleslavchik’),

chemical sector. However, all of the documents

the government has started drafting water

was assessed. Different indicators were used to

were available and accessible to the public.

management plans. The Pandivere basin is
located in the central Estonia and is a nitrate-

estimate access to information for environmental
emergencies. Among the indicators, the highest

Drinking water monitoring and regional

sensitive region. Overall, the public was invited

score was given to the presence of information

water plans in Estonia

to participate in drafting the water management

about environmental emergencies on the

The access to drinking water monitoring data in

plan and was given reasonable time for

Internet. This type of information is freely

a small town in southeast Estonia was assessed,

commenting. Public input was incorporated into

located on the website of the Ministry on

where drinking water problems are known to

the final decision. However, from the perspective

Emergencies of Ukraine. However, the public had

exist, and these problems are representative of

of the engagement of minorities, the

no access to online information about the

the whole region. The town is also

opportunity for public participation was negative.

impact of this environmental emergency on

representative in terms of administrative

No special efforts were made to invite Russian-

people’s health and environment, especially

capacity. When compared to air monitoring data,

speaking people (approximately 5 percent or less

about its effect on the quality of drinking water.

data for drinking water dissemination is not very

of the population in the basin) to participate in

It was rather difficult to find empirical material

developed. One of the reasons is perhaps that

the plan’s development. Although the law

related to public participation for the chemical

air monitoring belongs to the jurisdiction of the

prescribes conditions for participation (e.g., time

sector. The research team of Ecopravo-Kyiv

Ministry of the Environment (where several

for commenting, number of meetings, etc.), the

focused on the role of the public in the

trainings and projects have been carried out to

law does not say anything about taking special

development of the National Environment Health

implement the Aarhus convention), but drinking

efforts to involve minorities.

Action Plan (NEHAP) and the 2002 Ukrainian law,

water falls under the control of the Ministry of

‘On drinking water and water supply system’.

Social Affairs. There is a strong legal mandate

Assessment of public participation in decision-

for drinking water monitoring, but there is a

could be obtained from water authorities, the
country’s Food and Drug Administration (FDA) provides
no analytical monitoring on contaminants in bottled
water. The FDA only notes the conclusion of its
analysis: whether the quality of the drinking water of
the selected brand is ‘safe’. This policy means that
consumers cannot check for the presence of specific
contaminants. This lack of detail can be particularly
relevant to vulnerable populations such as children,
pregnant women, and older people.
■

In Hungary, different aspects of drinking and surface
water monitoring, however, are managed by different
agencies, and neither the system nor the data are
coordinated or integrated. The lesson to be drawn from
both the Thai and the Hungarian examples is
straightforward: unified and integrated systems provide
a more coherent picture of water quality and present
less of a challenge in obtaining information.

Source: The Access Initiative, National Team Reports,
EcoPravo, Kiev, Ukraine and Stockholm Environment
Institute, Tallinn, Estonia, 2004.

■

Information technologies facilitate public access
to information. Websites increasingly provide an
opportunity for the public to learn more about
water quality monitoring issues. In Hungary, the National
Health Action Program website provides widespread
coverage of environmental and health issues. In California,
a website for the Environmental Justice Coalition for Water
encourages citizens to become involved in monitoring the
water quality in their communities.

■

Two countries provide examples of how water data can
be disseminated. In South Africa, RandWater has
created a website to provide users with updates on
water issues. For example, a map highlights areas
where water should not be used for drinking without
treatment and where contact should be avoided
because of microbiological health effects. In the United
States, water suppliers disseminate annual reports to
customers about their drinking water.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 2.3: Quality and accessibility of water data, selected countries
Country
Hungary2
India
Indonesia3
Mexico4
South Africa
Thailand
Uganda
United States: California

Quality of information1
Intermediate
Intermediate
Weak
Strong
Intermediate
Weak
Weak
Intermediate

Accessibility
Weak
Weak
Weak
Weak
Intermediate
Weak
Weak
Strong

1. Systems score weak when only a few parameters on quality of water are collected.
2. Data from almost all 12 inspectorates and from 7 of 19 public health offices in four weeks; 7 of the 19 offices responded on
drinking water.
3. Indonesia submitted a single value for both air and water quality information.
4. Mexico disseminates drinking water information at the state level but not by individual water supply.
Source: The Access Initiative, National Team Reports, 2004.

■

Men fishing at sunset
with square nets in
Dhaka, Bangladesh

Detailed information on drinking and surface water
quality, on the other hand, is difficult to obtain in all
but two of the pilot countries: the United States and
South Africa. Under the 1996 amendments to the Safe
Drinking Water Act, the United States requires water
suppliers to provide customers with annual reports.
These reports are usually mailed with bills; many are
also posted on the Internet. Teams in five countries
(Hungary, India, Mexico, Thailand and Uganda) found
no active dissemination of data on drinking water
quality for the public on the Internet or in the press.
In Mexico and Uganda, teams could not obtain the

data at all; in India, data could be obtained only
through a personal contact.
In short, there are considerable differences in the
performance of government agencies in providing
information to the public about drinking or surface water
quality. Collectively, performance scores in providing
water quality information are weak. This should be
contrasted to the assessment of information disclosure
and public participation with regard to air quality that the
assessment found to be strong.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 8 1

Part 4. Water Governance Ahead
In the past decade, water and its governance have featured prominently on the international political
agenda and will continue to be an international priority through 2015 within the Decade on Water for
Life. International efforts to foster water institutional reform have included recommendations on good
water management practice, and the setting of goals and targets for improved water service provision to
the poor and for greater environmental sustainability via the MDG structure. High hopes and expectations
are now vested in recent international water targets from the Millennium Summit and the WSSD to
improve the water situation for billions of people. It is a paradox that while various international fora
have intensified their work towards improving the world’s water situation and implementing time-bound
water targets, the actual funding to the water sector in developing countries is diminishing, or stagnating
at best. Funding from donors remains stagnant, and additional investments from multinational water
companies to improve water governance and access to water are currently decreasing. There is very little
evidence that governments in developing countries are strengthening their water budgets.

In developing
countries there
are often
significant and
serious gaps

It has been demonstrated that water governance is
nested in the setting of overall national governance and
is correspondingly influenced, for better or for worse, by
that, by the national culture, and by events local to the
country and its surrounds (e.g., conflict) and
developments in the global economy. Some of the trends
of water governance include the following:
■

As a response to internal pressures and to pressures
from the international community and regional
organizations such as the EU, a widespread process of
reform of water governance is now underway. Progress
is patchy but generally slow, as evidenced by the
limited achievements in the production of national
IWRM plans and the weak coverage of water in PRSPs.
In developing countries there are often significant and
serious gaps between policy-making and its
implementation, not least because of institutional
resistance by public sector water organizations.

■

Progress is being made in water rights – in recognizing
their importance in dealing with social and economic
problems, in recognizing the importance of local
traditions and customs, in facilitating the management
of local competition for water and in recognition of
human rights to safe water.

■

Corruption is a major issue in the water sector, as in
many other sectors, but the impact of it is not well
quantified because of a lack of detailed information. It
is one of the least addressed challenges in the sector
and much remains to be done.

■

■

Privatization of water services in developing countries
has not been able to meet the high expectations on
improved and extended water supply and sanitation
services. Much of the privatization debate has had a
biased focus on multinational water companies. Local
and small-scale water companies are mushrooming in
both urban and rural settings and their potential to
improve water supply and sanitation largely remains
unexplored. There is thus a need to refocus
privatization to more systematically explore how local
water enterprises, including both water companies and
civil society organizations, can contribute to improved
water services. It is also high time to bring the
government back in and re-emphasize its importance in
raising and stimulating adequate investment funds, as
well as its critical role in regulatory and other
governance functions.
Recent moves by governments in lower-income
countries to delegate responsibility for water
management to lower levels of administration have had
limited success. Progress is slow, governments are not
delegating the needed powers and resources and have
in some cases taken back the delegated responsibility.
Often local governments do not have the capacity to
do what is required. Local groups and individuals are
hampered by lack of access to key information and
frequently by exclusion from participating in water
decision-making. There should also be a more sober
view on decentralization itself and what types of
decentralization are useful for improved water
resources management and services provision.

between policymaking and its
implementation,
not least
because of
institutional
resistance by
public sector
water
organizations

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Decentralization without the right checks and balances
may lead to local elites strengthening their positions at
the expense of politically and economically
marginalized groups.
At present, more effective water institutions are yet to
evolve in many countries. Much of the conceptual
development and division of roles and responsibilities
among government agencies, private businesses and civil
society tend to become mired in politics and do not reflect
true on-the-ground needs. Governments and donors
should increasingly support the establishment of
independent and strong regulatory authorities to facilitate
enforcement of concessions or other types of
arrangements between the public and private sectors.
There should be increased efforts to strengthen regulatory
capacities as well as to make them independent.

There is very little
evidence that
governments in
developing
countries are
strengthening their
water budgets

Experience has shown that development can be more
deeply rooted in systems where governments, private
firms and civil society can work together in various
constellations. There needs to be an improved water
trialogue between governments, civil society and the
private sector. The enhancement of governance, coupled
with an integrated management approach, can be a
vehicle for increased transparency, participation and a
climate of trialogue and trust-building, aimed at
increasing negotiation and minimizing differences within
the water sector. It is perhaps naive to think that all
disputes and differences can be bridged, but a society
that claims to attack water problems must make serious
efforts to address differences and be able to come up
with legitimate institutions and processes that can
mediate disputes (by the judiciary system, informal
conflict resolution mechanisms and elections), or at
least minimize their impacts (compensation to
disfavoured groups, etc.).
It has been demonstrated that governance matters for
the equitable, efficient and sustainable management of
water resources and related services and contributes to
achieving international water development targets.
Governance systems are intrinsically linked to political
processes and power. Therefore, the road to improved
governance cannot avoid politics and manoeuvring in
highly politicized contexts. Addressing improved water
governance is challenging, since it needs to take place
within a larger context of reform. Still, stakeholders
within the water sector can do their part by striving
towards integrated policies that also allow for multi-

stakeholder participation and subsidiarity. Water
stakeholders at all levels should not refrain from
attempting to play a role in shaping policy outcomes and
influencing political will. They must be increasingly
prepared to manoeuvre in different social and political
contexts. This is not to suggest that water managers
should choose political sides, but rather that they should
be aware that policy-making and implementation involve
politics. By knowing the political game and rules, they
can make more strategic inputs into policy-making
processes and other decision-making processes.
In continuing the work to improve water governance
it is critical to have the following items in mind:
■

Water sector reform goes hand-in-hand with overall
governance reform. It is highly unlikely that more
effective participation, transparency, etc. will take a
firm root in the water sector, unless the country’s
overall governance system allows it to do so. As a part
of broadening the water agenda, there is an increasing
need to harmonize and coordinate international water
targets and principles with other international regimes,
such as with global or regional trading regimes. Unless
water concerns are made part of broader national and
international trade processes, stability and
democratization, the chances of achieving the
international water targets remain difficult. There is
thus a need to collaborate with new actors outside
the water realm and to form more inclusive water
development networks.

■

Water reform and implementation is progressing,
although sometimes at a painstakingly slow pace. In
many developing country settings, the water sector and
its institutions are plagued by fragmentation,
marginalization and low capacities. Further, the
marginalization of water departments and ministries in
a country’s overall political affairs is the rule rather
than the exception. International water targets and
national IWRM plans and policies mean little unless
they are translated into legislation, institutional reform,
participation implementation, sufficient funding, etc.
Actions must be intensified towards the
implementation of water policies and plans. Increased
political commitment to implement existing water
policies and legislation would go a long way towards
achieving the international water targets.

■

The representation and participation of various
interests in water decision-making is an important

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 8 3

component in addressing urban and rural water and
food security and governance dynamics. Issues of
power and representation should be made explicit, for
example, while negotiating fair compensation to
farmers for water transfers to cities.

4a. No blueprint for progress
There is no blueprint for improved governance. With
social, political and economic preconditions as a base any
society must find its own way of improving governance.
Despite the variety in design and implementation of
improved governance across the world, there are also
certain characteristics of the water sector that must be
taken into account:
■

Water is a renewable resource, as it reproduces itself
through the hydrological cycle. While there is plenty of
freshwater at the global scale, there is a challenge of
having sufficient water, of the right quality, at the
right place and at the right time.

■

The nature of water resources is multi-purpose and
hydrologically interconnected.

■

Water is mainly considered a public good, but due to its
multi-purpose nature, it is also at times an economic
good. Importantly, water has economic, social and
environmental value, which, among other things, calls
for dialogue between water users and enhancement of
participation and multi-stakeholder processes.

■

The provision of water-related services is often
characterized as being close to monopoly situations,
particularly for water supply and sanitation. This can
limit the effectiveness of water markets and can also
require regulated price ceilings to protect consumers
from monopolistic power abuses.

■

The capital-intensive nature of water-related
infrastructure is often combined with low-cost recovery
and heavy subsidization. Water infrastructure
investment is also considered a ‘sunk cost’, meaning
that investments made to provide water services
cannot be transferred or redeployed for other
purposes, hence increasing capital investment risks.

It is important to develop institutions and governance
systems that can effectively respond to situations
characterized by variability, risk, uncertainties and change.
Conventional water planning remains rigid, and the

challenge remains to develop governance frameworks and
institutions that are flexible and adaptive. More attention
needs to be given to resilient institutions and approaches
that can govern or guide the complex, often surpriseladen, process of water governance central to long-term
management at a regional, basin, aquifer or even local
level (Moench et al., 2003). This suggests that specific
solutions – the ideal solution – may be less relevant and
emphasizes the importance of enabling processes and
frameworks that can be applied to resolve certain issues in
situations of economic or other constraints and in contexts
of change, that is, ‘second or third best’ solutions.

...there is a
challenge of
having sufficient
water, of the
right quality, at
the right place
and at the right
time

Many countries are currently at a crossroads about whether
to provide the required political and financial capital to
enhance efforts to improve water governance. ‘Business
as usual’ is no longer a viable option. If investment levels
and reform speed are not stepped up, countries’ abilities
to provide water and sanitation for all, increase food
production, while maintaining the environment will
be seriously compromised. This will, in the long- and
short-run, curtail societies’ prospects for development.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

References and Websites
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2002. Beyond Boundaries
Extending Services to the Urban Poor. Manila, ADB.
Arab Water Council, United Nations Development Programme
and Centre for Environment and Development for the
Arab Region and Europe. 2005. Status of Integrated
Water Resources Management (IWRM) Plans in the Arab
Region. Cairo, Egypt.
Attia, B. 2004. Comparative Analysis: Case Studies of Tunisia,
Turkey, Yemen and Egypt. IDRC. Water Demand

agriculture in Morocco. A. Dinar (ed.), The Political
Economy of Water Pricing Reforms. New York, Oxford
University Press.
Dinar, A. (ed.). 2000. The Political Economy of Water Pricing
Reforms. New York, Oxford University Press.
Frans and Soussan. 2003. Water in Asian PRSPs. Asian
Development Bank Water and Poverty Initiative. Manila,
ADB.
Gleick, P. H. 2003. Global freshwater resources: Soft-path

Management Forum – Middle East and North Africa:

solutions for the 21st century. Science. Vol. 302, pp.

Advocating Alternatives to Supply Management of Water

1524–28.

Resources. CD-ROM.
Beccar, L. et al. 2002. Water rights and collective action in
community irrigation, R. Boelens and P. Hoogendam

———. 2000. The human right to water. P. Gleick (ed.), The
World’s Water: 2000–2001, Washington, DC, Island Press.
———. 1996. Basic water requirements for human activities:

(eds), Water Rights and Empowerment. Assen, The

Meeting basic needs. Water International, Vol. 21, No. 2,

Netherlands, Gorcum Publishers.

pp. 83–92.

Boelens, R. and Hoogendam, P. (eds.). 2002. Water Rights

Global Water Partnership (GWP). 2003. Effective water

Japan-U.S. Water Partnerships in China, Institute of
Developing Economies, IDE, Chiba, Japan.
Kaufmann, D. and Kraay, A. 2003. Causality which Way?
Evidence for the World in Brief. Washington, DC, World
Bank Institute.
Kaufman, D., Kraay A. and Zoido-Lobaton. 1999. Governance
Matters. Washington, DC, World Bank Institute.
Keohane, R. and Ostrom, E. (eds). 1995. Local Commons and
Global Interdependence: Heterogeneity and Cooperation
in Two Domains. Berkeley, California, Sage Press.
Klooster, D. 2000. Institutional choice, community, and
struggle: A case study of forest co-management in
Mexico. World Development, Vol. 28, No.1, pp. 1–20.
Manor, J. 2003. Local governance. Paper prepared for Sida,
Stockholm.
McGranahan, G. 2004a. Getting the private sector to work for
the urban poor: Revisiting the privatization debate. Issue

and Empowerment. Gorcum Publishers, Assen, The

governance: Learning from the dialogues.

Paper in United Nations Human Settlements Programme

Netherlands.

www.gwpforum.org/gwp/library/

(UN-HABITAT). 2004. Urban Service Dialogue: Getting the

Effective%20Water%20Governance.pdf

private sector to work for the poor. Second World Urban

Bojö and Reddy. 2002. Poverty reduction strategies and the
environment, World Bank, Environmental Economics
Series Paper, No. 86.
Brikké, F. 2004. Act Locally! How to involve small-scale
enterprises in providing water supply to rural areas.
Industry and Environment, Vol. 27, No.1, UNEP.
Briscoe, J. 1997. Managing water as an economic good: Rules
for reformers. Water Supply, Vol. 15, No. 4.
Brooks, David B. 2002. Local Water Management. Ottawa,
Canada, IDRC Books.
Bruns B. R. and Meinzen-Dick, R. S. (eds). 2000. Negotiating
Water Rights. New Delhi, IFPRI, Vistaar Publications.
Centre for Science and Environment. 2003. Apt arrangers,
Down To Earth. 31 October. www.downtoearth.org.in/
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions. 2004. Legal resources
for the right to water: International and national

———. 2000. Towards Water Security: A Framework for Action.
Stockholm, GWP.
———. 2000. Integrated Water Resources Management. TEC
Background Paper, No. 4, Stockholm.
Gooch, G. D. and Huitema, D. 2004. Improving governance
through deliberative democracy: Initiating informed public
participation in water governance policy processes. Paper
presented at the Stockholm Water Symposium, 18 August
2004.
Hodgson, S. 2004. Land and Water – The Rights Interface,
FAO Legal Papers No. 36. FAO, Rome.
Holmes, Paul R. 2003. On risky ground: The water professional
in politics. Paper presented at Stockholm Water
Symposium, 2003.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2004.

Forum, September 2004, Barcelona.
———. 2004b. Getting Local Water and Sanitation Companies to
Improve Water and Sanitation Provision for the Urban
Poor. Issue Paper in United Nations Human Settlements
Programme (UN-HABITAT). 2004. Urban Service Dialogue:
Getting the Private Sector to Work for the Poor. Second
World Urban Forum, September 2004, Barcelona.
Mehta, L. and Mirosa-Canal, O. 2004. Financing water for all:
Behind the border policy convergence in water
management. IDS Working paper, No. 233.
Meinzen-Dick R. S. and Bakker M. 2001. Water rights and
multiple water uses: Issues and examples from Kirindi Oya
irrigation system, Sri Lanka. Irrigation & Drainage
Systems, Vol. 15, pp. 129–48.
Moench, M., Dixit, A., Janakarajan, S., Rathore, M. S. and

standards. Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Linking land and water governance – IFAD experience.

Mudrakartha, S. 2003. The Fluid Mosaic: Water Governance

www.cohre.org/water/

Proceedings of workshop, Farmers’ views first: Land and

in the Context of Variability, Uncertainty and Change,

Cordova, J. 1994. Mexico. J. Williamson (ed.), The Political
Economy of Policy Reform. Institute for International
Economics, Washington DC.
Crook R. C. and Manor, J. 1999. Democracy and

water governance. World Water Week, Stockholm 2004.
www.ifad.org/events/water
Johnson, R. W. and Rondinelli, D. 1995. Decentralization
Strategy Design: Complementary Perspectives on a

Ottawa International Development Research Centre (IDRC).
Natural Resources Systems Programme (NRSP). 2004. Research
Highlights 2002–03. Hemel Hempstead, UK: NRSP.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and

Decentralization in South Asia and West Africa

Common Theme. North Carolina, US, Research Triangle

Development). 2002. Supporting the development of

Participation, Accountability and Performance.

Institute.

water and sanitation services in developing countries,

Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Davis, J. 2004. Corruption in public service delivery: Experience
from South Asia’s water and sanitation sector. World
Development Report, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 53–71.
Delli Priscoli, J. 2004. What is public participation in water
management and why is it important? Water
International, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 221–27.

Johnson, R. W. and Minis, H. P. Jr. 1996. Towards Democratic
Decentralization: Approaches to Promoting Good
Governance. North Carolina, US, Research Triangle Institute.
Jolly, R. 1998. Water and human rights: challenges for the
twenty-first century. Address at the Conference of the
Belgian Royal Academy of Overseas Sciences, 23 March,
Brussels.

Department for International Development (DFID). 2002. The

Kataoka N. 2005. Conservation of the waterfront environment

political economy of water reform. Unpublished working

along Japan’s rivers: Institutions and their reforms of river

paper.

basin management. J. L. Turner and K. Otsuka (eds)

Diao, X. and Roe, T. 2000. The win-win effect of joint water
market and trade reform on interest groups in irrigated

Promoting Sustainable River Basin Governance – Crafting

Development Co-operation Report, Paris.
Olowu, D. and Wunsch, J. S., 2003. African Decentralization
and Local Governance. Boulder, Colorado.
Pierre, J. (ed.) 2000. Debating Governance. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
Polidano, C. 2001. Why civil service reforms fail: Public policy
and management, Working Paper No. 16, Institute for
Development Policy and Management, Manchester.
Postel, S. 1999. Pillar of Sand: Can the Irrigation Miracle
Last? New York, Norton.
Rogers P. 2002. Water Governance. Paper prepared for IADB
annual meeting, March 2002.

WAT E R G O V E R N A N C E . 8 5

Africa, organized by CSIR (Council for Scientific and

Rogers, P. and Hall, A. 2003. Effective water governance. TEC

Industrial Research).

Report No. 7, Global Water Partnership, Stockholm.
Rondinelli, D., Nethis, J. and Chemma, S. 1984.

UN (United Nations). 1992. Agenda 21. Official outcome of

Decentralization in Developing Countries: A Review of

the United Nations Conference on Environment and

Current Experience. Washington, DC, World Bank.

Development (UNCED), 3–14 June 1992, Rio de Janeiro.

Rosensweig, F. 2001. Case Studies on Decentralization of

UN-WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. World

Water Supply and Sanitation Services in Latin America.

Water Development Report: Water for People Water for

Strategic Paper No. 1, Environmental Health Project,

Life. Paris, UNESCO and New York, Berghahn Books.

USAID, Washington.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004a.
Anti-corruption. New York, Practice Note.

Scanlon, J., Cassar, A. and Nemes, N. 2004. Water as a
Human Right? IUCN Environmental Policy and Law Paper

———. 2004b. Decentralised Governance for Development: A
Combined Practice Note on Decentralization, Local

No. 51, Gland, Switzerland.

Governance and Urban/Rural Development. New York,

Shivakoti, G. P. and Ostrom, E. (eds). 2001. Improving

Practice Note.

Irrigation Governance and Management in Nepal. ICS
Press.

———. 2004c. Governance Indicators: A User’s Guide. Oslo
Governance Centre.

Slaymaker and Newborne. 2004. Implementation of water
supply and sanitation programmes under PRSPs. London,

———. 2003a. Human Development Report: Millennium

Overseas Development Institute.
Solo, T. M. 2003. Independent Water Entrepreneurs in Latin
World Bank, Washington D.C.

Strand, J. 2000. A political economy analysis of water pricing
Political Economy of Water Pricing Reforms. New York,

———. 2002. Public Administration Reform. New York, Practice
Note.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2004. Water
and development: Industry’s contribution. Industry and

Oxford University Press.

Environment, Vol. 26, No. 1.

Transparency International (TI). 2004. Global Corruption
Report 2004. London, Sterling, VA, Transparency

United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT).

International and Pluto Press.
Tropp, H. 2005. Building New Capacities for Improved Water
Governance. Paper presented at the International

resources: Institutional reform in Pakistan. A. Dinar (ed.),
The Political Economy of Water Pricing Reforms. New
York, Oxford University Press.
Ward, C. 2000. The political economy of irrigation water
pricing in Yemen. A. Dinar (ed.), The Political Economy of
Water Pricing Reforms. New York, Oxford University
Press.
Waterbury, J. 2002. The Nile Basin: National Determinants of
Collective Action. New Haven and London, Yale University
Press.
WBI (World Bank Institute). 2004. The costs of corruption.
News & Broadcast.
0,,contentMDK:20190187%7EmenuPK:34457%7EpagePK:

Factor. Almaty, Kazakhstan.

in Honduras’s capital, Tegucigalpa. A. Dinar (ed.), The

fullreport.htm
Wambia, J.M.. 2000. The political economy of water

web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/

Report 2003: Water as a Key Human Development

through Water Management. Manila, ADB.

Goals. New York. www.unmillenniumproject.org/reports/

Human Poverty. Oxford and New York, Oxford University
———. 2003b. Kazakhstan National Human Development

Soussan, J. 2003. Water and Poverty: Fighting Poverty

Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development

Development Goals – A Compact Among Nations to End
Press.

America: The Other Private Sector in Water Services.

UN Millennium Project. 2005. Investing in Development: A

34370%7EpiPK:34424%7EtheSitePK:4607,00.html
Williamson, J. (ed.). 1994. The Political Economy of Policy
Reform. Washington, DC, Institute for International
Economics.
World Bank Report. 2004. Pakistan Poverty Assessment.
Washington DC, World Bank.
WRI (World Resources Institute). 2003. World Resources
2002–2004: Decisions for the Earth – Balance, Voice
and Power. Washington, DC, World Resources Institute.
———. 2002. Closing the Gap: Information, Participation and

2004. Urban service dialogue: getting the private sector

Justice in Decision-making for Environment, Washington

to work for the poor. Paper presented at the Second

DC, World Resources Institute.

World Urban Forum, September 2004, Barcelona.

Symposium on Ecosystem Governance, 2005, South

The Access Initiative: www.accessinitiative.org
The African Water Page: www.thewaterpage.com
Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions (COHRE): www.cohre.org/water/
Freedom House: www.freedomhouse.org
Global Water Partnership: www.gwpforum.org
Transparency International: www.transparency.org/
Utstein Anti-Corruption Resource Centre: www.u4.no/
UNDP Governance Centre, Sources for Democratic Governance Indicators, 2003. www.undp.org/oslocentre
UNDP Water Governance Facility at Siwi: www.watergovernance.org
UNDP: www.undp.org/water
Water Law Standards, see: www.waterandstandards.org
The World Bank Institute: www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/
World Resources Institute: www.wri.org

The sewer is the conscience of the city
Victor Hugo, Les Misérables

Part 1. The Changing Face of Human
Settlements..............................................................89

Part 4. Addressing Water and Management
Needs in Different Size Settlements..........103

1a. Trends in an urbanizing world ..................................89
Fig. 3.1: Comparative distribution of the world’s
urban population, 1950–2000
Table 3.1: The distribution of the world’s
urban population by region, 1950–2010
Table 3.2: The distribution of the world’s
largest cities by region, 1800–2000
1b. Challenges of an urbanizing world: Inadequate
provision, increased inequalities ..............................90
Box 3.1: Water supply inadequacies weigh heaviest
on women

4a. Large villages versus small urban centres ..............103
Box 3.2: Lack of provision in secondary urban centres
around Lake Victoria in (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda)
4b. Land and water resources management in
cities and city regions ............................................104
Box 3.3: Demand-side water management:
Beijing’s water scarcity
4c. Access to clean water in settlements for refugees and
internally displaced persons ...................................107
Box 3.4: Providing fundamental rights to refugees

Part 5. Local Information for Global Goals.....108
Part 2. Developing Pro-poor Urban Water and
Sanitation Governance........................................94
2a. Facing the challenges of the urban poor
in terms of water and sanitation delivery ................94
Increasing the power and voice of the
urban poor ................................................................94
Increasing the responsiveness of the state .................95
Increasing the responsiveness of providers .................95
2b. Getting the best out of public utilities.....................96
Expansion plans and support for
non-networked systems .............................................96
Connection and disconnection procedures...................96
Price controls and subsidies .......................................96
Standards and their enforcement................................97

Part 3. Expanding Provision in Slums and
Squatter Settlements in Low- and
Middle-income Nations.......................................97

3a.
3b.
3c.
3d.

Map 3.1: Urban slum incidence in developing
countries, 2001
Map 3.2: Change in slum population in developing
countries, 1990–2001
Lowering the cost of conventional household
systems.......................................................................99
Community provision..............................................100
The role of slum and squatter upgrading ................101
Providing alternatives to slums for low-income
households .............................................................102

Low-income neighbourhood built on a hill
in Mexico City

5a. The importance of community-driven assessments...108
5b. The information base that drives good governance...110
5c. The focus of indicator development .......................110

Part 6. Local Actions for Local Goals.................111
References and Websites........................................112

3
CHAPTER 3

Water and
Human
Settlements
in an
Urbanizing
World
By

UN-HABITAT
(United Nations
Human Settlements
Programme)

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

8 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Urban populations have exploded worldwide in the last fifty years creating unprecedented challenges, among which
provision for water and sanitation have been the most pressing and painfully felt when lacking. Those who suffer the
most are the poor, often living in slum areas that are left out of water development schemes, due often to failures in
governance at many levels. Yet new partnerships emerge, where local communities are empowered to build innovative
and efficient models that integrate socio-economic realities and improve water and sanitation provision.
■

Above: Downtown
skyscrapers in Los
Angeles, United States
Below: A mother washing
her child in a slum, India

■

Bottom: Cairo, Egypt

■

It is within human settlements that virtually all nonagricultural water use is concentrated, and also where
most water-related diseases are contracted. The role
of planning for the water needs of human settlements
becomes increasingly pressing in an increasingly
urbanized world where water provision for urban centres
(both for production and for human use) represents an
increasing proportion of total freshwater use.
Human settlements provide a concrete context for
action. The struggle to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) for water and sanitation
will have to be achieved in human settlements – in
our cities, towns and villages. Here is where the actions
have to be coordinated and managed. It is at this level
that policy initiatives become an operational reality and
need both political and administrative support: conflicts
have to be resolved and consensus found among
competing interests and parties.
The water and sanitation MDG targets will not be
met without better urban governance but this has
to be embedded within regional water governance
arrangements that can manage water stress.
Human settlements are the loci of water service
provision; many are also the major polluters of

water resources. Metropolitan, city and municipal
governments have critical roles in water governance
to ensure adequate provision for water and sanitation
within their boundaries.
■

International agencies need to recognize the key
role of local processes and local institutions in meeting
the water- and sanitation-related MDGs and in better
water management – and the involvement within this
of local governments and civil society. The institutional
framework through which national governments and
international agencies support these local processes
has to change in most low- and middle-income nations.

■

More attention is needed to generate the information
base to support the improvement and extension of
provision for water and sanitation to those who are
unserved or inadequately served. This information
base is often weakest in the areas where provision is
worst – in large rural settlements and in the informal
settlements where much of the unserved urban
population live. Details are needed for each household
and housing unit of the quality and extent of provision
(if any) combined with maps of each settlement which
show each housing unit, existing water pipes, sewers
and drains, and paths and roads.

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 8 9

Part 1. The Changing Face of Human
Settlements
During the twentieth century, the world’s urban population increased more than tenfold, while rural
population increased but twofold.1 Today, half the world’s population lives in urban centres, compared
to less than 15 percent in 1900.2 In 1900, ‘million cities’ (cities with more than one million inhabitants)
were unusual and cities with over 10 million unknown; by 2000, there were 387 million cities and
18 with more than 10 million inhabitants. This trend of urbanization, in addition to the increasing
importance of large cities, was underpinned by the transformations of national political structures
(especially the virtual disappearance of colonial empires) and of national economies and employment
patterns (most economic growth was in urban-based industry and services). Virtually all nations
experienced an employment shift away from agriculture, and most of the growth in those working
in industry and services were in urban areas.
In the second half of the twentieth century, most of the
growth in the world’s urban population was in low- and
middle-income nations. By 2000, Asia alone had nearly
half the world’s urban population and more than half its
million cities. Tables 3.1 and 3.2 show the growth in
urban populations and urbanization levels between 1950
and 2000. Figure 3.1 highlights the regions where most
of this growth in urban population took place. On a
global scale, this increasing concentration of population
and economic activities in urban areas is likely to
continue, with most of the increase over the next twenty
to thirty years likely to be in urban areas in Africa, Asia

and Latin America (UN, 2004). This chapter thus focuses
on improving water and sanitation provision in urban areas.

By 2000, Asia
alone had nearly
half the world’s
urban
population and
more than half
its million cities

1a. Trends in an urbanizing world
The trend towards more urbanized societies and the
growing number of people living in large cities have very
large implications for freshwater use and wastewater
management. Although within virtually all national
economies, agriculture remains the largest user of
freshwater resources, the water demands from city
enterprises and consumers have become increasingly
important, and many major cities have had to draw

Figure 3.1: Comparative distribution of the world’s urban population, 1950–2000
60

% of the world's urban population

50

40
1950
30

2000

20

10

0
Africa

Asia

Source: Derived from statistics in UN, 2004.

Europe

Latin America
and the
Caribbean

Northern
America

Oceania

1. Unless otherwise stated, this
chapter draws its population
statistics from United Nations,
2004.
2. United Nations estimates
suggest that 48.3 percent of
the world’s population lived in
urban areas in 2003 and that
this figure will reach 50
percent around 2007. Figures
for rural and urban
populations for 1900 are
drawn from Graumann, 1977.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

9 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 3.1: The distribution of the world’s urban population by region, 1950–2010
Region
Urban population (millions of inhabitants)
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Northern America
Oceania
Population living in urban areas (%)
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Northern America
Oceania
World’s urban population (%)
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Northern America
Oceania

1950

1970

Year
1990

20001

Projection
for 2010

733
33
232
280
70
110
8

1,330
83
486
413
163
171
14

2,273
199
1,012
516
314
214
19

2,857
295
1,367
529
393
250
23

3,505
417
1,770
534
472
286
26

29.1
14.9
16.6
51.2
41.9
63.9
60.6

36.0
23.2
22.7
62.9
57.4
73.8
70.6

43.2
31.9
31.9
71.5
71.1
75.4
70.1

47.1
37.1
37.1
72.7
75.5
79.1
72.7

51.3
42.4
42.7
74.2
79.4
82.3
73.7

4.5
31.7
38.3
9.50
15.0
1.1

6.2
36.5
31.0
12.3
12.9
1.0

8.7
44.5
22.7
13.8
9.4
0.8

10.3
47.8
18.5
13.8
8.8
0.8

11.9
50.5
15.2
13.5
8.2
0.7

1. The statistics for 2000 in this table are an aggregation of national statistics, many of which draw on national censuses held in 1999,
2000 or 2001 – but some are based on estimates or projections from statistics drawn from censuses held around 1990. There is also
a group of countries (mostly in Africa) for which there are no census data since the 1970s or early 1980s so all figures for their
urban (and rural) populations are based on estimates and projections.
Source: Derived from UN, 2004.

freshwater from increasingly distant watersheds, as
local surface and groundwater sources no longer meet
the demand for water, or as they become depleted or
polluted. There has also been a rapid growth in the
contribution of city-based enterprises and consumers
to water pollution – although in many high-income and
some middle-income nations, this has been moderated
and on occasion reduced by more effective wastewater
treatment, pollution control and economic shifts away
from industry. As this chapter will describe in more detail,
provision for water and sanitation in urban areas has
expanded much more slowly than population growth in
most low-income and many middle-income nations.
Another important human settlement trend is change in the
employment structure of many rural settlements and small
urban centres. Although in most nations, available data do
not allow any precise documentation of this phenomenon,
a large part of the rural population lives in what could be
called ‘large villages’ or ‘small towns’, with populations

ranging from a few hundred to several thousand
inhabitants. For water and sanitation and wastewater
management, these ‘large villages’ or ‘small towns’ have
great importance, given the fact that in virtually all nations,
a large proportion of the national population live in them,
and that they have key ‘urban’ characteristics that have
relevance for how best to improve provision for water and
sanitation, even if they are classified as ‘rural’.

1b. Challenges of an urbanizing world:
Inadequate provision, increased inequalities
The main water-related urban challenge in low- and
middle-income nations remains ensuring adequate
provision for water and sanitation and sustainable
wastewater management. As data about deficiencies in
provision in urban areas have improved, so has the extent
of these deficiencies become more evident. According to
the (WHO/UNICEF) Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP), if
the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the
proportion of people without sustainable access to safe

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 9 1

Table 3.2: The distribution of the world’s largest cities by region, 1800–2000
Region
Number of million cities
World
Africa
Asia
Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Northern America
Oceania

1800

1900

2
0
1
1
0
0
0

17
0
4
9
0
4
0

86
2
31
30
7
14
2

387
35
194
62
49
41
6

3
37
34
8
16
2

8
44
15
16
15
2

2 200

6 300

Regional distribution of the world’s largest 100 cities (%)
Africa
4
2
Asia
65
22
Europe
28
53
Latin America and the Caribbean
3
5
Northern America
0
16
Oceania
0
2
Average size of the world’s 100 largest cities (thousands of inhabitants)
World

The main water-

Year
1950

187

725

20001

1. Some figures for city populations for 2000 are based on estimates or projections from statistics drawn from censuses held around
1990. There is also a group of countries (mostly in Africa) for which there is no census data since the 1970s or early 1980s so all
figures for their city populations are based on estimates and projections. The regional distribution of cities in 1950 and 2000 is in
part influenced by the way that cities/urban agglomerations are defined within nations.
Source: Satterthwaite, 2005.

drinking water supply and basic sanitation is to be met
by 2015, 961 million urban dwellers must gain access to
improved water supply and over 1 billion must gain access
to improved sanitation (WHO and UNICEF JMP, 2004).
In 2000, more than 900 million urban dwellers lived in
slums, most under life- and health-threatening
circumstances in low- and middle-income nations (UNHABITAT, 2003a).3 This represents nearly a third of all urban
dwellers worldwide. In most urban areas in low- and middleincome countries, between one-quarter and one-half of the
population lacks provision for water and sanitation of a
quality that greatly reduces the risk of human contamination
with faecal-oral pathogens (UN-HABITAT 2003b). In most
smaller urban centres, the proportion of people lacking
good provision for sanitation is even higher. Most urban
centres in these nations have no sewers at all and little
or no other public infrastructure for good quality sanitation
(Hardoy et al., 2001., UN-HABITAT, 2003b). Not surprisingly,
at any given time, close to half the population in low- and
middle-income nations is suffering from one or more of
the main diseases associated with inadequate water and
sanitation and, as Chapter 6, describes, virtually all these
diseases and health burdens could easily be prevented
(WHO, 1999; Millennium Project, 2005a).

The impact of these inadequacies in provision are difficult
to convey using conventional indicators and quantitative
data. The indicators of inadequate provision rarely
identify on whom the impacts fall most heavily in terms
of health and the burden of managing provision for water
and sanitation within the home. Box 3.1 provides some
insights into these impacts and shows how they tend to
fall most heavily on women and girls.
All too often, the advantages of urban areas (e.g.
economies of scale and agglomeration, particularly for
piped systems, greater potential for wastewater reuse)
are not fully exploited, while their potential
disadvantages (e.g. the greater risk of infectious disease
outbreaks when the water and sanitation systems fail)
pose great risks. In effect, urban populations have grown
more rapidly than the capacity of governments to
manage them, including putting into place institutional
structures to ensure good provision for water, sanitation
and wastewater management within each locality. This is
part of a larger failure to support the development of
competent, accountable city and municipal governments.
Thus, the key need is for what might be termed ‘good
local governance’, part of which is ‘good water
governance’ (see Chapter 2).

related urban
challenge in lowand middleincome nations
remains ensuring
adequate
provision for
water and
sanitation and
sustainable
wastewater
management

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

9 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

In principle,

Particularly challenging issues include:

sound water

■

governance
should be open

■

changing water management systems to cope with the
more decentralized patterns of urban development evident
in most high-income nations and many middle-income
nations and low-density sprawl around urban centres

■

improving provision in large villages and small towns,
especially to the high proportion of the population
with very limited capacity to pay

■

recognizing the importance of regular and convenient
water supplies for the livelihoods of low-income
households, as well as for health, including urban
agriculture, for instance, which makes up an important part
of the livelihoods of tens of millions of urban households
(Smit et al., 1996) and for household enterprises.

and transparent,
inclusive and
communicative,
coherent and
integrative, and

meeting water, sanitation and wastewater management
needs in the largest and fastest growing cities,
especially on their peripheries

equitable and
ethical

Few valid generalizations can be made as to what
approach should be taken, because the most effective
means of addressing these provision deficiencies varies
so much from urban centre to urban centre. However,
in most instances, the following is true:

Opposite: A favela (slum
housing) in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil

■

Provision deficiencies are not a problem that either
the private sector or the public sector can solve alone.

■

In many nations, at least in the next five to ten years, it
will not be possible for the provision deficiencies in most

urban areas to be addressed by the conventional model
of a (public or private) water utility extending piped
water supplies and sewers to individual households.
■

It will be impossible to meet the MDG targets in urban
areas, unless there are policies for improving water
and sanitation provision for low-income households
and community organizations, including brokering
agreements for those living in illegal settlements.

■

What is normally considered part of water and
sanitation provision must be expanded to include
slum and squatter upgrading programmes and
provisions for housing finance, as these play
important complementary roles.

■

Whether formal provision for water and sanitation is
undertaken by public or private utilities, city and
municipal governments have a critical role to play in water
governance, both in terms of ensuring provision for water,
sanitation and wastewater removal and in improving
sustainable water management within their boundaries.

■

The MDG targets for water and sanitation will not be met
without better urban governance. These also need to be
embedded within regional water governance arrangements
that often require agreements developed with freshwater
users upstream of the city and more attention to reducing
the impact of water pollution and urban runoff on water
quality for users downstream of the city (see, for instance,
Guadalajara in von Bertraub, 2003).

BOX 3.1: WATER SUPPLY INADEQUACIES WEIGH HEAVIEST ON WOMEN

There is no water to wash our hands when we use the
nearby bushes, plastic bags or the only public toilet
available some distance from our homes. There is always
fighting on who will be next, although there is a queue.
Everyone watches. There are no doors for privacy. How
long are we going to live this way? It is affecting our
pride and dignity. … Sometimes we have to go to the
back of our house to defecate in a plastic bag and
throw it in nearby bushes or in the gully – this is called
‘kitting’. The problem gets worse during menstruation
both for us and our daughters – they too can’t attend
school as there is nowhere at school for them to clean
themselves, and we the mothers don’t have enough
water to wash our bodies and to feel clean.
– Charlene, living in a slum in the Caribbean

We have been in this settlement (in Kothrud, in the
western part of Pune) for more than twelve years,
since we worked as labourers on the construction of
these apartment blocks that you see all around here.
Nearly 700 families live here now. When the
construction work was in progress, we got water at our
work sites. But now we face acute shortage of water.
We have public standposts in the settlement, but the
water is available for only two to three hours a day.
In such a short period of time, it is not possible for
all of us to fill water. There is always a long queue and
frequent fights. Women come to blows because some
try to fill many handaas (small water containers) or
jump the queue. Those who do not get their turn
before the water is turned off have to walk 20 to 30

minutes to fetch water. Some pay up to five rupees for
one handaa of water. Some collect the water that keeps
percolating in a small ditch by the side of the path near
the water taps. As you can see the water is turbid.
We cannot drink it, but we can use it for washing. For
a few weeks before the municipal elections, one of the
candidates who lives just on the other side of this hill
used to supply water to us in long hosepipes from
taps in his house. After the elections, the hosepipes
disappeared and our water supply stopped. Now if we
go to him to ask for water he drives us away as if we
are beggars. It is so humiliating!
– from interviews with women in Laxminagar, Pune, India.
Sources: UN-HABITAT, 2004, as quoted in Millennium Project
2005a (for the Caribbean); Bapat and Agarwal, 2003 (for India).

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

9 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Developing Pro-poor Urban Water and
Sanitation Governance
The groups most
affected by the
adverse
consequences of
expanding urban
water systems
are usually
those lacking
economic and/
or political
influence...

Although there has been much debate about the relative merits of public versus private provision
for water and sanitation in urban areas, this is actually of secondary importance to improving local
governance – which would then allow more locally appropriate choices to be made about the roles and
responsibilities of various agencies. Government agencies are always going to have responsibility for
ensuring and overseeing provision, whoever the actual service providers are. And even in public water
and sanitation agencies, it is common for much of the actual work to be contracted out to private
enterprises. In addition, it is clear that the potential for international companies and corporations
to contribute to improving and extending provision was greatly overstated during the 1990s – which in
part explains these companies’ declining interest in this sector. It is also clear that too little attention
has been given by international aid agencies and development banks to improving the capacity and
competence of national and local public utilities and private companies and to potential partnerships
between them (Budds and McGranahan, 2003; UN-HABITAT, 2003b).
Thus, the focus of this section is on the changes that support what might be termed ‘pro-poor
governance’ for water and sanitation. These fall into four main categories: those that increase
the power and voice of the urban poor to make demands; those that make the government more
responsive to their demands; those that make the (public, private, non-governmental organization
or community) providers more responsive to their demands; and those that prevent corrupt and
clientelistic practices from undermining the relationships between poor communities and their
governments and water and sanitation providers. The latter issue of corruption is considered in Chapter 2.
This section also discusses the role of public utilities in
smaller urban centres, and as these are not attractive
to private investments, how public utilities can be made
more responsive to providing water and sanitation to the
urban poor. The issue of privatization is covered in detail
in Chapter 2 and 12.

2a. Facing the challenges of the urban poor
in terms of water and sanitation delivery
Better water and sanitation could improve the lives of
hundreds of millions of urban dwellers who are currently
unserved or inadequately served by formal utilities and
lack the financial and organizational resources to develop
adequate, safe alternatives. Most of these urban dwellers
also suffer from other poverty-related deprivations. The
key issue is what needs to change. There is a growing
consensus that a central element to improving their
water and sanitary conditions is to ensure that water and
sanitation providers and those who work with them (and
that oversee them) are made more accountable to urban
poor groups (World Bank, 2003). In other words, by
changing the governance framework in this way, it
redresses current inequalities both in provision and
in influence over policies and priorities.

Increasing the power and voice of the urban poor
The urban poor usually lack influence within government
agencies or water providers. Influencing the state typically
involves different actions from influencing water providers
– voting or lobbying rather than paying, for example.
Nevertheless, many of the changes that help people rise
out of poverty, from receiving a good education to gaining
income-earning opportunities, can simultaneously help
them to influence governments and strengthen demands
on water providers, be they private or public.
Four particularly relevant changes are as follows:
■

higher incomes, which allow people to pay more for
water services, and to live in better-served locations,
as well as often contributing to their political influence

■

greater housing legality and security, which can confer
political legitimacy (and a legal address may be needed
to be able to vote) and increase resident capacity
to negotiate with water providers and influence their
willingness to invest their own time and resources in
water-related infrastructure (this applies to renters
as well as actual or aspiring owner-occupiers)

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 9 5

■

better information, which can provide residents with an
improved basis for setting their own water and sanitation
objectives and for negotiating with others in pursuing these

sanitary improvements, but they supported it once these
priorities had been made clear.

urban poor
Increasing the responsiveness of providers

■

better-organized communities, who are in a stronger
position to negotiate with both government and water
providers (and, in some cases, are in a better position
to make local investments in water infrastructure).

Increasing the responsiveness of the state
The capacity of urban poor groups to influence water
policies and water providers also depends on the
responsiveness of the government and water providers.
Politicians often promise better water services. Democracy
should help to increase the accountability of politicians
and make governments more responsive to the water
demands of their underprivileged citizens.
Democratization and decentralization should make
governments more responsive to water demands: in
Latin America, for example, this combination helps to
explain why public water and sanitation services improved
in many urban centres even while their economies were
not growing during the 1980s and 1990s. But
democratization and decentralization are no guarantee
that the government will respond to the demands of
urban poor groups. Also, even with non-democratic
regimes, states can be more or less responsive to the
demands of urban poor groups (see Chapter 2).
Many city governments have recognized a need to give
lower-income groups and other groups with ill-served
needs a greater say in ‘governance’ by the means of
conventional representative democratic structures.
Participatory budgeting is one of the most significant
innovations in this respect, and it is being applied in
about 250 cities (Cabannes, 2004; Menegat, 2002),
many in Brazil, as well as in other Latin American nations
and some European nations. Participatory budgeting
means more scope for citizen groups and communitybased representatives in setting priorities for local
government expenditures; it also implies a local
government budgeting system that is more transparent
and available to public scrutiny. While this process does
not lie outside representative democratic systems since
the municipal council is still responsible for approving
the budget, at least more scope is given to civil society
groups to influence it (Cabannes, 2004; Menegat, 2002;
Souza, 2001). In Porto Alegre, the politicians who
introduced participatory budgeting were surprised when
participants from low-income communities prioritized

The capacity of

Similarly, the capacity of urban poor groups to influence
water providers directly depends on how responsive
these providers are and to what they are responsive.
This applies to both privately- and publicly-operated
utilities, and in many circumstances the distinction
between negotiating with large utilities as opposed to
small enterprises is more significant, especially since large
private utility operators are almost always working under
contract. If the company’s contract gives them a strong
incentive to do so, they will be responsive to the demands
of the urban poor. If the contract does not give such
incentives, they will be less responsive. Market conditions
matter, but are mediated by the state. Good regulation is
important whether for public or private utilities, but this
needs sufficiently qualified and motivated staff and
resources as well as protection from political interference.
A small-scale water vendor who earns all revenue from
sales has different motivations for responding to demands.
Here, much will depend on the level of competition in
the market (rather than for the market, as is the case
with competition for large concessions), and on other
factors that determine whether the water vendor needs
to be concerned about losing sales.
One particular difficulty is making water and sanitation
providers responsive to the needs of those with very
low incomes and very limited capacities to pay, especially
if this is also accompanied by a commitment to charge
customers prices that reflect their costs. One way to
ensure provision for all within an overall system that
seeks to recover costs wherever possible is through
systems that provide a minimum amount of water at
very low cost or no cost, with rising unit costs as more
is used. This can be done through differential services
(for instance public standpipes where water is free and
household connections where water has to be paid for)
or differential prices (for instance, ‘lifeline’ tariffs for a
given minimum quantity of water with very low or no unit
costs and higher unit costs for consumption above this).
Both present problems in actual implementation. Water
utilities that seek to maximize their revenues dislike both
of these, unless compensated by the government – and
governments are often reluctant to pay for this (see
Connors, 2005). Lifeline tariffs can only work where lowincome households have a water connection and the
terms set can be so restrictive or inappropriate that they

groups to
influence water
policies and
water providers
also depends on
the responsiveness of the
government and
water providers

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

9 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

bring little benefit to poorer households (Sohail and
Cotton, 2003; see also Chapter 12).

2b. Getting the best out of public utilities
Much of the urban population in low- and middle-income
nations live in settlements that are of little interest to
the private sector. Urban water and sanitation utilities
were developed in response to public health threats,
and in the belief that, if left to the market, piped
water networks and sanitation systems would remain
underdeveloped. The need for water supplies to fight
fires also helped encourage public provision.
Unfortunately, while markets do not give private water
and sanitation enterprises sufficient incentives to provide
adequate services, public water and sanitation utilities
are also difficult to manage effectively. The notion that
utilities can be effectively centrally organized is probably
just as misleading as the notion that they can be left to
the market. To be effective, both publicly- and privatelyoperated utilities need to be regulated and to engage in
effective negotiations with government agencies, private
enterprises and civil society groups, as well as with their
actual and potential customers.
A number of the problems commonly associated with
under-performing public utilities are largely beyond the
utility’s control: government agencies failing to pay their
water bills; price controls imposed on the utilities that are
not matched by the requisite financial subsidies; and the
lack of a mandate to serve most informal settlements (or
even regulations preventing them from doing so), even
when 10 to 50 percent of a city’s population live in such
settlements. Other difficulties are not specific to water
governance and include corruption, aid-dependence and
development agendas, clientelism, political instability and
authoritarianism. Given the range of political, economic
and regulatory environments within which public utilities
operate, it is impossible to generalize about what
governance changes are likely to yield the greatest benefits
in the form of improved services. There are, however, a
number of areas where the quality of governance is likely
to be particularly critical to the urban poor, and where
increasing the transparency, accountability and equity of
utility operations is likely to be especially beneficial.

Expansion plans and support for nonnetworked systems
For those currently without access to the utility’s water
and sanitation services, the expansion plans can be of
critical importance, along with the mechanisms through

which these plans are to be realized. Particularly where
a large share of the population remains unconnected to
networked water and sanitation systems, the extent to
which the government supports alternative, nonnetworked, water and sanitation systems is also likely
to be a critical concern for the urban or peri-urban
poor. Often, the plans are not open to public scrutiny or
influence, and people are often not even aware of the
legal status of non-official water and sanitation providers.
These issues only enter public debate when things
go seriously wrong. In many circumstances, better
governance requires more transparent planning
procedures, and more accountability to low-income
groups as well as to the plans themselves.

Connection and disconnection procedures
People living in conditions of poverty constitute a
large share of the unconnected, and often face special
difficulties making the ‘lump’ payments typically required
to connect to the piped water network or sewer, or to
pay for an alternative in-house sanitation facility. Some
utilities provide more options, including for example the
use of pre-payment meters, as used in parts of South
Africa. Again, better governance is likely to require
more open negotiation with urban poor groups and their
representatives, both in the design and in the procedures
themselves. In some urban areas, this may require special
measures to enable renters to connect, as in Bangalore,
India, where the utility recently made special provisions
for renters, enabling them to negotiate directly with
the utility (Connors, 2005). Also, the urban poor are
particularly vulnerable to being disconnected (although
in many countries it is public organizations rather than
low-income residents that are most delinquent in paying
their water bills). Those disconnected may be unaware of
their rights, including their rights of appeal. Again, better
governance is likely to require more effective negotiation,
transparency and accountability (see Chapter 2).

Price controls and subsidies
The effects of price regulations and subsidies also
depend heavily on the quality of local governance.
Proponents will argue that price controls and subsidies
are necessary to ensure that the poor can afford the
services. Opponents will point out that price controls
and subsidies favour the affluent, since they are the ones
who already have access to water and sanitation services
(a typical recommendation being that connection costs be
cross-subsidized through the water tariff). Unfortunately,
when governance problems prevail, both positions may be

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 9 7

correct. If, for example, the subsidy provided is sufficient
to provide existing customers with water at the controlled
rates, but not sufficient to finance expansion, the urban
poor may actually lose out from price controls. In this
example, however, the problem does not lie with the
subsidies but with governance processes that do not
allow for transparent and effective negotiation over
the tariffs, subsidies and taxes (see Chapter 12).

Standards and their enforcement
As with price controls and subsidies, governance problems
can undermine the operation of standards. Standards that
are too low may leave the urban poor at risk, while

standards that are too high may exclude them,
particularly if they are not backed up by appropriate
financial mechanisms. High sanitary standards that lowincome households cannot meet do not stimulate sanitary
improvements, and often contribute to housing insecurity
both for renters and owner-occupiers. When standards
are imposed on water and sanitation utilities, even if the
water users do not pay directly, they often pay indirectly,
for instance through higher rates or the utility being
unable to expand according to plan. Again, good
governance is likely to require negotiation and greater
accountability, so that standards are not agreed upon if
the basis for achieving them is not going to be put in place.

Part 3. Expanding Provision in Slums
and Squatter Settlements in Low- and
Middle-income Nations
Improving and extending provision for water and sanitation in slums and squatter settlements presents
any formal service provider with difficulties. These include the uncertainty as to who within each house,
apartment or shack has responsibility for ensuring the payments (there are often multiple families and
many are tenants or sub-tenants). For most informal settlements, there are the uncertainties regarding
who owns the land and a lack of an official map showing plot boundaries, roads and paths (without
which it is impossible to design and lay piped systems). There is usually no register of households and
no official addresses assigned to dwellings. Furthermore, many informal settlements have sites and site
lay-outs for which it is difficult to provide piped services – difficult terrain (steep slopes, waterlogged
sites) and lack of public roads and footpaths alongside or under which a piped system could be installed.

In addition, many of the ways in which provision for water
and sanitation can be improved and extended depend on
the actions and investments of groups other than official
water and sanitation service providers. These include
individuals and households as they entail the following:
■

■

Investing in provision in their existing homes: this may
involve official service providers – for instance as the
household pays to connect to official systems and takes
responsibility for internal plumbing to support these
connections – or may be independent of such service
providers – for instance tapping groundwater, building
or improving personal on-site sanitation provision.

Investing in improved provision in their neighbourhood –
for instance as they join together with other households
in their street or neighbourhood to build sewers. This
too may or may not involve official service providers.
The model developed by the Orangi Pilot Project in
Pakistan is particularly significant in this respect, not
only in terms of the very large number of households
reached with good sanitation (in Orangi, in other parts
of Karachi, and in many other urban centres in Pakistan)
but also in its demonstration of the potential
effectiveness of government–community partnerships
in helping to develop the wider piped system. (This is
described in more detail further on in the chapter.)

A girl balances on a
flimsy bridge over a
polluted and flooded alley
in a Phnom Penh slum,
Cambodia

For most
informal
settlements,
there are the
uncertainties
regarding who
owns the land
and a lack of an
official map
showing plot
boundaries

■

Developing new homes on land they purchase or
occupy and through which they get better quality
provision for water and sanitation.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

WWDR Chapter (F) 03e

15/2/06

15:15

Page 98

9 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Most inter-

Map 3.1: Urban slum incidence in developing countries, 2001

national aid
agencies and
development
banks see
‘housing’ as
somehow
distinct from
improving
provision for
water and
sanitation...
Source: UN-HABITAT forthcoming publication, Urban Indicators Programme III, 2006.

As the discussion below describes, there has been
considerable innovation in many nations in helping lowincome individuals and households to get better water
and sanitation provision either through upgrading or
through support for incremental home development –
and these have great importance for achieving the water
and sanitation MDGs, even if none are officially classified
as ‘water and sanitation’ interventions, because they are
considered as housing interventions.
The conventional model of urban provision remains
piped water to each dwelling (house or apartment) and
a sewer connection for wastewater and toilets provided
by a public or a private company. Virtually all urban
households are served by this in high-income nations;
much of the urban population in many middle-income
nations also enjoy this level of provision. Where the
water supply is regular and of good quality, this model
has proved popular because of its convenience for
households and generally the low proportion of
household income that it costs; it has also proved
very effective in terms of improving public health.
Issues have been raised regarding the ecological
sustainability of this model, both at the input end
(because of the large volumes of freshwater needed,
especially for larger cities) and at the output end

(through the high cost of treating the
sewage/wastewater or the ecological damage to water
bodies from inadequately treated wastewater flows).
The success of this conventional model for about half the
world’s urban population has provided the assumption
that this is the model that should be extended to all
urban dwellers, even though it has not covered hundreds
of millions of urban households, despite its thirty years
of advocacy and promotion by international agencies.
Over the last two decades, major changes in how water
and sanitation provision is to be financed have also been
promoted by many international agencies, but not in the
form of provision. Conventional water and sanitation
systems were to be funded through the shift from
public-sector provision to privatization and private-public
sector partnerships – but as described in Chapter 2, this
did not provide the additional capital investment flows
that had been anticipated and did not provide the hopedfor expansion in provision. The inadequacies in provision
could not be solved by the efficiency gains that privatesector provision could bring. Many other factors
contributed to this failure, such as the weakness and
ineffectiveness of local governments, but at the problem’s
root is the fact that there is not enough capital to
finance the high costs of expanding and extending

WWDR Chapter (F) 03e

15/2/06

15:15

Page 99

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 9 9

Map 3.2: Change in slum population in developing countries, 1990–2001

Open sewers in slum area
of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Source: Forthcoming UN-HABITAT Publication,
Urban indicator Programme III, 2006.

provision of household water and sewer connections
and of building the institutional capacity to undertake
this – and manage the systems once they are constructed
– whether publicly or privately. In most cities, in addition
to the difficulties of extending provision to the large
sections of the population who live in illegal settlements,
this lack of finance (and often professional capacity) is
due, as noted earlier, to the lack of maps and addresses
for each household, the opposition from landowners
and government agencies to providing services to illegal
settlers and the difficulties of actually installing the pipes
in irregular layouts and on difficult sites.

3a. Lowering the cost of conventional
household systems
Many innovations in urban areas of low- and middleincome nations show how it is possible to overcome
these difficulties. The fact that these examples are drawn
from a wide range of cities, including some in very poor
nations, and that many are funded by local resources,
suggests that it is possible to improve and extend
provision to meet the MDGs in urban areas.
Perhaps the best known example of dramatically lowering
the cost of conventional household systems is the work
of the Pakistani NGO, the Orangi Pilot Project (OPP). This
project supports community-managed sewer construction

in Orangi, the largest informal settlement in Karachi
(Hasan, 1997; Zaidi, 2000), and was able to reduce the
cost of sewer provision per household to a fifth of what
municipal authorities charged, thereby making it
affordable to low-income households. In so doing, sewer
provision has reached hundreds of thousands of people,
and most of the costs are covered by what low-income
households can pay. This also developed the concept of
what OPP termed ‘component sharing’, where the
inhabitants of streets and neighbourhoods take
responsibility for the pipes, sewers and drains in their
neighbourhood and official service providers install the
water mains and sewer and drainage trunks to which
neighbourhood systems can connect.

...there is not

There are three other important aspects to OPP’s work
that are perhaps less well known. The first is the extent
to which their model has been used in many other areas
of Karachi and in many other urban centres in Pakistan,
including its widespread adoption by official (national and
local) government agencies (Rahman, 2004a). The second
is OPP’s demonstration of how to develop detailed maps
of informal settlements to provide the information base
that allows official agencies to install water and sanitation
– which will be described in more detail later. The third is
to demonstrate a much cheaper and more effective means
of improving the city-wide system of sewers and drains –

connections

enough capital
to finance the
high costs of
expanding and
extending
provision of
household water
and sewer

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

into which the community systems can integrate (Orangi
Pilot Project Research and Training Institute, 1998).
OPP-supported local and city-wide sanitation schemes
have achieved what is often said to be impossible by
private or public water and sanitation utilities: provision
of good quality sewers to each household with cost
recovery and a city-wide system into which these can
feed that does not require large external funding. Official
water and sanitation agencies usually refuse to consider
extending sewers to low-income settlements, because it
is thought to be too expensive or because they do not
believe that residents will pay for services. Were the OPP
‘component sharing’ model to be adopted in other cities
in Asia and Africa, it would be possible to develop sewers
(and the larger sewer system into which these integrate)
capable of reaching hundreds of millions of low-income
groups with good quality sanitation for a reasonable
total cost, much of which could be covered by household
payments. This model illustrates how the achievement
of ambitious targets for improved water and sanitation is
as much about the development of competent, capable,
accountable, local agencies or utilities that can work with
community organizations as it is about external finance.
In Brazil, PROSANEAR (Water and Sanitation Program for
the Low-income Urban Population) combined community
participation with more cost-effective technologies, which
reduced unit costs and made the investments work better,
consequently providing close to a million low-income
people with water piped to their homes and connection
to sewers (see Chapter 14).

3b. Community provision
Although most governments and international agencies
have supported public or communal facilities for water,
they generally avoid provision of communal facilities for
sanitation. Three recent large-scale programmes show
the possibilities for community provision. The first is in
the community-designed, built and managed toilets in
Indian cities. In the early 1990s, the National Slum
Dwellers Federation and Mahila Milan (savings
cooperatives formed by women slum and pavement
dwellers) began to experiment with designing, building
and managing community-toilet blocks in slums where
there was insufficient room or funding for household
provision. Large-scale community toilet block construction
programmes then developed in Pune and Mumbai,
when local government staff saw how much better the
community-designed, built and managed toilets worked

than the contractor-built public toilets they had
previously had made. Over 500 community designed
and managed toilet blocks were built, serving hundreds
of thousands of households, and comparable toilet
programmes are also developing in other cities. There
are plans to promote this approach in smaller towns
(Burra et al., 2003: see also Chapter 6).
The second example is from Dhaka and Chittagong,
Bangladesh’s two largest cities. Here, the UK charity,
WaterAid, supported community provision through seven
local NGOs. This provided for water points supplied through
legal connections to the metropolitan water authority lines
or tube wells (where such connections were not possible),
sanitation blocks (with water points, bathing stalls and
hygienic latrines), community/cluster toilets with septic
tanks, household water-seal pit latrines, the construction of
footpaths, drainage improvements, solid waste management
and hygiene education. Most facilities are provided on a full
cost-recovery basis with recovered funding supporting
additional slum projects (Hanchett et al., 2003).
The third example is from Luanda, Angola, where a local
NGO (Development Workshop Angola) has supported the
construction and management of 200 standpipes, each
serving about 100 families. This programme has supported
the development of locally elected water committees to
manage these standpipes, working in collaboration with the
water utility and the local authorities. This is another example
of community organizations and local NGOs doing the ‘retail’
part of water provision. Where local water agencies are too
weak to be able to extend provision to unserved low-income
communities, this kind of NGO–Community partnership can
have particular importance (Cain et al., 2002).
One possible reaction to these examples from India,
Bangladesh and Angola is that the inhabitants of slums
and squatter settlements deserve better facilities – for
instance good provision for water and sanitation within
their homes, not in public facilities. And why should there
be such a focus on keeping down costs and generating
revenues when serving among the poorest groups?
However, there are two good reasons why these
approaches were adopted: the cheaper the solution (and
the more it can generate cost recovery), the greater the
potential scale; and if a relatively low-cost solution can
be developed locally by local institutions with little or no
reliance on external funding, the scaling up may require
no external funding (see also Chapter 12).

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 0 1

3c. The role of slum and squatter upgrading
Slum and squatter upgrading programmes are the
principal means by which water and sanitation provision
is improved for lower-income groups in most cities in lowand middle-income nations. They became common in the
early 1970s, in part because governments recognized
that these were among the cheapest ways of improving
conditions for poorer groups, and because international
funding was available to support them. However, many
were not effective because the quality and extent of the
upgrading was so limited (for instance, for water and
sanitation, standpipes were shared by dozens or
hundreds of households without any sanitation provision)
and provision for maintenance was inadequate (for
instance, nothing was set up to ensure that the utility
responsible for water and sanitation would maintain the
newly installed infrastructure). Most also failed to solve
more fundamental problems, especially providing the
inhabitants of illegal settlements with secure tenure,
so the inhabitants still felt too insecure to invest in
improving their homes. Most upgrading programmes
also had little scope for participation.
However, there are upgrading schemes that have learnt
from these limitations and are improving and extending
provision for water and sanitation in ways that are more
sustainable and on a larger scale. One of the largest is
the national Baan Mankong (secure housing) Programme
in Thailand that seeks to reach 300,000 households in
2,000 poor communities in 200 Thai cities between
2003 and 2007 (Boonyabancha, 2003 and 2005). The
programme channels infrastructure subsidies and housing
loans through the national government agency, the
Community Organizations Development Institute, directly
to low-income communities, that plan and manage the
implementation of improvements of their housing and
basic services. This not only improves provision for basic
infrastructure (including water and sanitation provision)
but also ensures a stable, legal relationship between
households and water utilities by providing secure tenure
for residents. As housing tenure becomes secure and as
housing improves, so too does the management of water
and wastewater within homes. This programme also has
loan programmes to support low-income households to
improve and extend their homes (including improving
provision for water and sanitation within the home). It
also encourages organizations of the urban poor within
each urban centre to join together with the local
government, other government bodies and other
stakeholders in order to develop city-wide plans.

This combination of grant-funded upgrading and micro-finance
loans for individual households is also a characteristic of
several housing and local development programmes in Central
America to which the Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency (Sida) contributed funding. From 1998 to
2003, these programmes improved conditions for around
80,000 low-income households in five nations. Although their
form differed from nation to nation, each programme was
based on lending to low-income families to improve or expand
their existing housing or to build new houses. Household
savings and self-help efforts contributed around 20 percent of
all funding provided by external agencies. In some
programmes, family efforts were also supported by subsidies.
Some programmes also provided municipal governments with
credit or matching funds in order to provide basic services in
new and existing low-income settlements. These programmes
are unusual on at least two counts: first, from the outset, the
international donor sought to build institutions within each
nation for implementation; and second, it built the capacity to
provide loans to low-income households and ensure good cost
recovery performance with the funds recovered from loan
repayments going to support other loans (Stein and Castillo,
2005).

Slum and

Many other innovative upgrading programmes have
demonstrated how water and sanitation provision can
be greatly improved through a combination of cheaper
technologies, strong community participation and loan
financing, as is the case in the slum networking approach
developed in Ahmedabad, India. The municipal authorities
in Sao Paulo, Brazil implemented a major upgrading
programme between 2000 and 2004, and, perhaps
more importantly, recognized that working on a large
scale necessitates a strong legislative, administrative and
financial base, as well as land tenure legalization and the
legislative changes that this requires (Budds et al., 2005).

income nations

Micro-finance systems that support households to
improve and extend their housing can also play an
important role in improving water and sanitation
provision, as shown by the above examples. Loan
financing for housing can also support land tenure
regularization, which then allows or encourages better
provision from official water and sanitation utilities. For
instance, in Bolivia, many of the housing loans provided
by the NGO, PROA (Centro de Servicios Integrados para
el Desarrollo Urbano), are for housing improvements
(including improved water and sanitation provision),
regularization and new construction (Ferguson, 1999).

squatter
upgrading
programmes are
the principal
means by which
water and
sanitation
provision is
improved for
lower-income
groups in most
cities in lowand middle-

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...the South
African
Government has
provided
hundreds of
thousands of
low-income
households with
one-off grants

A shanty township near
Johannesburg, South
Africa

3d. Providing alternatives to slums for
low-income households
One important way to extend provision for water and
sanitation to low-income households is to increase their
capacity to buy, rent or build new accommodations with
better provision. The Millennium Project Task Force on
improving the lives of slum dwellers emphasized the
importance of providing low-income households with
alternatives to slums, i.e. more possibilities of acquiring
new housing with infrastructure that includes water and
sanitation provision (Millennium Project, 2005b). Given the
speed with which urban populations are growing in most
low- and middle-income nations, meeting the water and
sanitation MDGs will mean not only improving provision in
existing slums and squatter settlements, but also ensuring
that expanding urban populations do not create new
slums and squatter settlements with inadequate water
and sanitation provision. Since purchasing new complete
accommodation is beyond the means of most urban
households, this will largely be through the capacity to
legally purchase land for housing and the establishment
of finance systems that help residents to purchase the
land and build incrementally. Although pro-poor land
management and housing finance systems are not
normally considered key mechanisms for improving
water and sanitation provision, they are often the means
by which poorer families can acquire better provision.
Governments have moved away from direct provision of
‘alternatives to slums’. Twenty to thirty years ago, large
public housing programmes were common – and seen as
the means by which low-income households could get
better quality accommodation, including access to piped
water and sanitation. Large site and service and core
housing programmes were also based on the same
principle, although residents were responsible for
developing the house, as this kept down unit costs.

Most governments have stopped or greatly scaled down
these programmes, in part because they often proved
ineffective (many serviced site schemes were in locations
too far from income-earning opportunities) but also
because the units were assigned to (or soon purchased
by) non-poor households. However, some governments
have sought to work with the market in new housing
provision rather than provide an alternative to the
market through providing one-off grants to low-income
households in order to help them buy a house or land
with infrastructure on which they can build. For instance,
the South African Government has provided hundreds of
thousands of low-income households with one-off grants
to support them in obtaining housing, which usually
also means improved provision for water and sanitation
(see Chapter 14). The government of Ecuador set up a
housing incentive system that combines a grant from
the government, savings from recipient households and
loans from private institutions – all of which can support
housing improvements or new housing. Although the
experiences with these one-off housing subsidies are
mixed – for instance, where these are channelled through
housing contractors, the units constructed are often poor
quality and in inappropriate locations – they have worked
well in some instances and illustrate new ways by which
governments and international agencies can support
improved provision for water and sanitation.
In a similar approach, the Salvadoran Integral Assistance
Foundation (FUSAI) in El Salvador supports new housing
schemes for low-income households as well as upgrading.
For the new housing schemes, FUSAI develops new land
sites with infrastructure and services and aids low-income
households in developing their homes on these sites.
Households receive loans to support this development
and then receive a land title when they have repaid the
loan; the amount financed by the loan equals the price of
the house, including road and infrastructure development,
minus the subsidy received from the state and the value
of the family’s contribution (Stein and Castillo, 2005).
Thus, there is a multiplicity of means and methods by
which provision for water and sanitation can be improved
and extended and this usually requires a mix of household
and community action and investment in addition to
support from formal (private and public) agencies.
Examples given in this section suggest that the potential
role of community-based organizations and their
federations working in partnership with city governments
and other formal agencies has been underestimated.

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 0 3

Part 4. Addressing Water and Management
Needs in Different Size Settlements
The size of a settlement and the nature of its economic base obviously influence the most appropriate
means by which to provide or improve provision for water and sanitation and manage wastewater.
Rural and small urban settlements in low- and middle-income countries need particular attention in
this respect, for this is where much of the population with the worst water and sanitation conditions
live. Another important theme is the water resource problems that often afflict large cities or urban
regions, including those in high-income countries.

4a. Large villages versus small urban centres
The population living in large villages (from a few hundred
to several thousand inhabitants) and small urban centres
have not been given sufficient attention: the proportion
of the inadequately and unserved population remains
high, and the interventions most appropriate for improving
provision have yet to be applied, despite the fact that the
concentrations of people and enterprises lower the unit
cost of providing treated piped water supplies and most
forms of sanitation and drainage.
Virtually all governments accept that settlements with
more than 20,000 inhabitants are urban centres but
disagree about where to draw the line between urban and
rural for settlements with fewer than 20,000 inhabitants.
Some classify all settlements with only a few hundred
inhabitants as ‘urban’ while others consider most or all
settlements with up to 20,000 inhabitants as ‘rural’. This
has significance for two reasons: a very high proportion of
people live in settlements with between 500 and 20,000
inhabitants; and their designation as urban populations
generally means more government structures of capacities
gives a larger scope for supporting gives improved
provision for water and sanitation.
The key characteristics relevant to improving water and
sanitation in these urban centres include the following:
■

spatial concentrations of households that reduce the
unit costs of piped water, sanitation and drainage systems

■

significant proportions of the economically active population
working (part time or full time) in non-agricultural activities

■

many households having members who have migrated
temporarily to earn income and who send back remittances
(although this is most apparent in low- and middleincome nations)

■

a range of non-agricultural economic activities that
require regular water supplies and wastewater disposal.

The issue of which settlements are to be defined as
urban centres is politically charged in so far as both
governments and international agencies make decisions
about resource allocations between rural and urban
areas depending on the proportion of the population
that lives in them. The contestation between rural and
urban proponents on what should receive priority in
development investment and poverty reduction
programmes has been one of the dominant development
debates of the last thirty years. If India, Pakistan or
Egypt were reclassified as predominantly urban nations –
if their large villages were redefined as small urban
centres, a conclusion that is possible to substantiate
from a demographic and an economic perspective – it
would change the perceptions and programmes of most
international agencies working there.
Initiatives to improve urban water and sanitation provision
tend to forget smaller urban centres. For more urbanized
nations, 20 to 40 percent of their total population lives
in urban centres with fewer than 200,000 inhabitants;
for less urbanized nations, the majority of the population
often lives in urban centres with fewer than 200,000
inhabitants. An analysis of provision for water and
sanitation in urban areas of different sizes in forty-three
low- and middle-income nations showed that in almost
every case, the smaller the size-class for urban centres,
the worse the provision. It was found that the percentage
of households with piped or well water on the premises
or with flush toilets generally declined with city size, and
that generally the worst served urban populations were
those in urban centres with fewer than 100,000
inhabitants (Montgomery et al., 2003).

The percentage
of households
with piped or
well water on
the premises or
with flush toilets
generally decline
with city size

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...an important
part of
the demand
for water comes
from enterprises,
and there may
be important
synergies
between this
demand and the
possibilities for
investing in
improved
provision...

As mentioned earlier, these interventions operate through
economies of proximity (relating mostly to population
density, which means less pipe and drain and ditch
digging per household reached) and economies of scale
(relating mostly to population size thresholds, which
means lower unit costs per household served for watertreatment plants and maintenance and billing
departments). With respect to the first, for most forms
of infrastructure (including piped water, sewers and
drains), the costs per person served in a settlement of
500 people per hectare are usually half of those for a
settlement with 150 people per hectare (Banes et al.,
1996); obviously more scattered lower density populations
are much more expensive to reach. With respect to
economies of scale for water and sanitation, what little
work has been done suggests that most come into play
at a relatively low population threshold, i.e. they work for
most small urban centres, and some also work for large
villages. For some infrastructure and services, the opposite
may be true as cities get larger; although this may be
related more to poor governance or outweighed by higher
productivity (Linn, 1982; Hardoy et al., 2001). Many small
urban centres and large villages also have higher average
cash incomes per person than more dispersed rural
populations, which means a higher capacity to pay for
water piped to the home and good sanitation.
The potential economies of scale and proximity for large
villages and small urban centres often go unrecognized
by governments and international agencies. There are at
least three reasons why this is so:
■

the failure to recognize the proportion of national
(and urban and rural) populations living in them

■

the tendency for urban provision to concentrate in
larger urban centres

■

the failure of agencies responsible for water and
sanitation provision in rural areas to exploit the
economies of scale and proximity in large villages.

It has to be stressed that a significant proportion of the
population and of economic activities in all nations are in
small towns and large villages, which have unmet water,
sanitation and water waste management needs. This is
completely independent of whether the settlement is
classified as a village, town or urban centre, even if
this classification does influence the scope of its local
government and often the potential for funding. There

are economies of scale and proximity in most of these
settlements, which can lower unit costs for better water
and sanitation provision.
In many such settlements, an important part of the
demand for water comes from enterprises, and there
may be important synergies between this demand and the
possibilities for investing in improved provision, which also
benefits households. This link between economic activities
and domestic needs may also span rural-urban definitions,
as demand for water for livestock and crops can help
fund improved provision for water that also serves
domestic needs. In many such settlements, there may
also be sufficient demand for electricity and economies
of scale and proximity, which make water and sanitation
provision economically feasible and thus brings obvious
advantages with regard to power for water pumping.
Improving provision for water and sanitation and
integrating water use and wastewater management
within broader regional water management systems are
particularly challenging for these settlements, as they
generally have the weakest local government systems.
The institutions charged with water governance in these
settlements often face specific challenges. For example,
small urban centres may be large enough to justify a
water and/or sewerage network but too small to support
a locally managed utility. The challenges evident in these
kinds of settlements are highlighted in a study of small
urban centres in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania that are
clustered around Lake Victoria (see Box 3.2; Chapters 5
and 14). Rehabilitating existing infrastructure in these
urban centres and building capacity to ensure the
efficient operation of the utilities and provide the revenue
base to operate and maintain the systems do not require
very large investments. They do, however, require longterm support for building this capacity and some
immediate investments to address the most serious
problems. These systems would also help to address the
need to reduce the severe impact that rapid urbanization
is having on the environment (see also Chapter 5).

4b. Land and water resources management
in cities and city regions
Urbanization and growing urban water consumption and
wastewater generation in particular pose a number of
challenges for watershed and river basin management.
The conventional approach to meeting growing urban
water demands has been to intensify withdrawals from
local water aquifers or to divert more distant surface

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 0 5

BOX 3.2: LACK OF PROVISION IN SECONDARY URBAN CENTRES AROUND LAKE VICTORIA (KENYA, TANZANIA AND UGANDA)

Bukoba is a regional and district headquarters in
Tanzania with 81,221 inhabitants in 2002, of
which about 63 percent receive water services
from the Bukoba Water and Sewerage Authority.
There are no sewers in the town; residents rely on
pit latrines or septic tanks. As a result, sullage
and septic tank effluent is discharged into storm
water drains, contaminating Lake Victoria, which is
also the town’s main source of water. The water
distribution system was constructed in the 1940s,
and small sections of the distribution system were
last rehabilitated in 1986, but 60 percent of the
water remains unaccounted for: two-thirds of
which is a result of leaky pipes is and a third
attributable to administrative losses, including
illegal connections. The town has only one (very
old and run-down) vehicle for collecting solid
wastes; collection is irregular and services only
the central business district. In the lower-income
areas, it is common to find overflowing waste
piles spilling onto streets and into adjacent storm
water drains. The storm drainage system is very
limited, and many of the drains are blocked.
Homa Bay is a trading town, fishing centre and
district headquarters in southwest Kenya of about
32,600 inhabitants. The water supply system there
was constructed in 1958 and last rehabilitated in
2001. There is a full treatment plant but water
quality is often poor and water volume is far below

no exhauster tanker to empty pit latrines and
septic tanks. Storm drains are not available for
most of the town, and provision for the collection
of solid wastes is highly inadequate, so it is
common for drainage networks to be blocked.

demand, as there are regular electro-mechanical
breakdowns, and the filtration system is wearing
down. The plant currently serves about 15,000
residents through 1,672 legal connections. Water
supply is not continuous, and the system suffers
from low pressure, vandalism, illegal connections,
leakages, old age and blockages (40 percent of its
water goes unaccounted for). The town has several
unplanned informal settlements, and most of their
inhabitants get their water directly from the lake.
Preliminary investigations indicated that only 22
percent of the population is connected to sewers;
most people use pit latrines or toilets connected to
septic tanks or the bush. Overflowing toilets and
sewers are common during rainy seasons. There is

water flows. While municipal water demands are still
several times smaller than the demands of irrigated
agriculture, urban demands are spatially concentrated,
and when conflicts are not well managed, the results
can be inequitable and politically contentious.3 More
generally, as water infrastructure expands, local supplydemand imbalances are transferred to the regional scale,
increasing the need for integrated management and
adding to the pressure on ecological water requirements
(the water needed to maintain ecosystem function and
local hydrological cycles), even in areas distant from the
main demand centres. While this process is more evident
in affluent countries and regions, it is also occurring to
some degree in most parts of the world. Research on
the changing urban water systems in Africa, where
insufficient infrastructure is a major problem, indicates
that while in the early 1970s many major cities still used
groundwater supplies as their primary water source, by

Kyotera Town is the busiest centre in its district in
Uganda, because it is on one of the main roads
leading to Tanzania. About 10,000 inhabitants live
there, but the daily influx of people increases the
population to 25,000; overall the population is
growing rapidly. There is no public water supply and
the town relies mainly on piped water supplied by
a local church project, although the water is of poor
quality and not adequately treated and supply is
frequently interrupted due to power failures. Other
water sources are boreholes, wells and rainwater,
even though most households cannot afford to
collect and store rainwater. A groundwater supply
system is being developed, but there are no sewers.
About two-thirds of the population have pit
latrines, and about 20 percent use four public
toilets. There is no domestic solid waste collection
service, and the storm drain system is very
inadequate. The few drains that do exist are
clogged with solid waste.

Source: UN-HABITAT, 2004b.

the 1990s primary sources were more likely to be rivers,
and increasingly these river sources were more than 25
kilometres away (Showers, 2002).
The conventional approach to urban water supply
planning started with projecting populations and per
capita water consumption levels and multiplying them
together to estimate future water requirements. The
demand projections identified the quantities of water
that had to be made available by increasing the
exploitation of existing supplies or identifying and
securing new sources. But securing new sources often
became increasingly expensive, both in financial and in
ecological terms. In the United States, for example,
during the last decades of the twentieth century, many
water utilities encountered problems in applying this
demand-driven approach. Already in the 1970s, the US
National Water Commission began to examine the

Favelas in Curitiba, Brazil

3. See, for instance, the Owens
Valley-Los Angeles water
controversy in Kahrl, 1982.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 3.3: DEMAND-SIDE WATER MANAGEMENT: BEIJING’S WATER SCARCITY

Beijing has been facing growing water scarcity,
with falling groundwater tables and problems
securing sufficient surface water of adequate
quality. There are plans to divert large quantities
of water from the south to the north, a practice
very much in the tradition of demand-driven water
planning. The financial, environmental and social
costs of the project are very high, and some have
argued that it would be more beneficial to invest
in demand-side management and improvements to
upstream water systems rather than investing tens
of billions of dollars to divert billions of cubic
metres of water annually over distances of more
than 1,000 km. Partly because of the focus on

...water
resources
management

potential for urban water conservation, and by the end of
the century, urban water demand management was being
advocated for the following reasons:
■

untapped sources of water were becoming rarer, and
the depletion and contamination of groundwater
sources had further limited supplies (see Chapter 4)

■

the increased frequency of droughts had increased
competition for water between urban and agricultural
interests (see Chapters 8 and 10)

■

environmental concerns about increased water use had
intensified to the point where the development of new
supplies was politically unfeasible, and the prospects
for financing major construction programme were
discouraging for many water agencies (Baumann
and Boland, 1998) (see Chapter 5).

requires
land-use
management
into which water
resources
management
goals are
integrated...

infrastructure, however, the options and costs of
upstream investments are not well understood or
documented. While the scale of the water
infrastructure projects planned and being
implemented for Beijing is exceptional, the
tendency to ignore the possibility of investing in
improving water and land use upstream is not. Few
cities consider negotiating for upstream land and
water use practices that could help them secure
better water supplies within their own watershed,
partly because the institutional basis is lacking.
New York was exceptional when it invested heavily
in more ecologically suitable upstream land use
practices to secure better quality water supplies.

Urban development in California, and in particular in the
Los Angeles region, already has a long history of water
conflict (Kahrl, 1982; Reisner, 2001). More recently, there
have also been a number of concerted efforts to improve
the efficiency of water use and promote reuse (Gleick,
2000). Moreover, industrial water demands have been
declining as a result of the changing economic structure.
Water resources management remains a major challenge.
At least for the foreseeable future, however, water scarcity
is unlikely to become a major public health issue.
Many large metropolitan areas in low- and middle-income
countries also face serious water problems that

Source: Platt, 2004.

infrastructure solutions cannot easily address, and often
low-income groups within these areas also face problems
getting adequate water and sanitation. Many large cities,
one example of which can be seen in Box 3.3, are relying
on increasingly long and costly water diversions
(Lundqvist et al., 2004; Tortajada and Castelan, 2003).
Urban development also affects water users downstream,
and the development of large metropolitan areas and
urban regions typically has profound impacts on the
water and land-use of the surrounding region. It is
almost axiomatic that being upstream of a major city is
preferable to living downstream. Around Hanoi, Viet Nam,
for example, water-related problems downstream are felt
by farmers and developers alike, and upstream locations
are environmentally and economically more attractive
(van den Berg et al., 2003, Showers, 2002).
Finally, it is obvious that sound water resources management
goes hand-in-hand with holistic and integrated land-use
management (as highlighted in Chapter 2), which in turn
requires urban planning measures that define, restrict or
control land-use changes. In most urban centres in low- and
middle-income nations, either there is no coherent land-use
management plan or it is not adhered to, whether by new
enterprises, developers or squatters, and urban centre
expansion is largely defined by where new investments are
made. It is also common for polluting industries to locate or
relocate on urban peripheries to escape pollution controls. So
urban regions expand with a patchwork of developments to
which it is expensive to extend infrastructure, including that
related to water and wastewater. Many squatter settlements

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 0 7

develop on land ill-suited to development, including steep
slopes and flood plains. Protected watersheds may be
particularly attractive to illegal land developers and
squatters. And even in high-income nations, the power of
land developers and their customers can subvert land-use
management plans. There is intense competition for the best
sites within and around urban centres, and the profits that
can be made from land development (land value multiplies
many times as it changes from agricultural to industrial,
commercial or residential use) make it difficult to develop an
effective governance framework, whether for ensuring land
use management that contributes to water management or
for other key tasks, such as ensuring sufficient, appropriately
located land for housing for low-income groups. There have
been important advances in this, as described in Chapter 2.
Some cities also have programmes to restrict future
developments in watersheds and address the water and
sanitation needs of those who live there, while reducing
their wastewater impacts on the watershed (van Horen, 2001;
Jacobi, 2004).

4c. Access to clean water in settlements for
refugees and internally displaced persons
There are currently about 10 million refugees and 25 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs) throughout the world, and
clean water takes on particular importance for these people
(UNHCR, 2004). Forced to flee their homes and seek refuge
either in a foreign land, usually in a neighbouring country, or
in a different region of their own country, refugees and IDPs
are cut off from their normal livelihoods, deprived of access
to basic services, relegated to inhospitable environments
and often live in crowded camps ranging from scattered
spontaneous settlements to more organized camps.
Populations in refugee settlements vary from a few thousand
to over 100,000 in some instances. In a camp-like situation,
however, manageable size cannot exceed 20,000 people.
Providing clean water to refugees poses a range of challenges
and deserves special considerations, as they have traditionally
faced difficulties in fully exercising their rights and are very
prone to exploitation (Shrestha and Cronin, 2006).
In a refugee emergency, especially when there is a large influx
in a short period, water is often not available in adequate
quantity and quality, creating major public health hazards
in refugee settlements, with young children being primary
victims. In 1994, when one million Rwandans fled the country
after the genocide to neighbouring Democratic Republic of
Congo, as many as 60,000 children died from a vicious cycle
of water shortage and water-borne diseases, including cholera
(see Chapter 6). In such a situation, the challenge is to

maintain a strong resource preparedness (equipment and
personnel) while having a fail-safe mechanism to deliver
water service provision within a matter of days.
Beyond the emergency phase, the careful design and
management of water supply and distribution is essential
to prevent the protection concerns of refugees from being
aggravated and to improve their health and well-being. Even
those individuals who may have traditionally lived on less than
the recommended amount of water will require more water
when living in a refugee or IDP camp, because of crowding
and environmental factors. If the available water is limited or
too far away (the UNHCR standard in a camp-like situation is
to have a water point within 200 metres from the farthest
dwelling), refugees and IDPs, in particular women and
children, may be exposed to exploitation or attacks (as is
currently happening in Darfur, Sudan), besides spending an
inordinate amount of time and energy collecting water
(UNHCR, 2000).
Another dimension of the challenge is the environmental
impact. The presence of a large number of refugees or IDPs
in an area that was previously sparsely populated, exerts
pressure on the often marginal and fragile ecosystems. If
sustainable systems are not put in place, water sources may
be depleted and/or contaminated, which eventually could be
a source of serious friction with local host communities.
The principles of water supply in refugee and IDP situations
are based on core values that help protect their safety, rights
and dignity (see Box. 3.4). These include the following:

Providing clean
water to
refugees poses
a range of
challenges and
deserves special
considerations,
as they have

■

an equitable distribution of at least 20 L per person
per day of safe water, so that it does not become a
source of power that can be abused for various forms
of exploitation

traditionally
faced difficulties
in fully

■

secure access to water points so that the potential for
sexual and gender-based violence is mitigated

■

an adequate number of water distribution points in
close proximity to the dwellings, so that physical burden
(time and energy) on women and children is lessened

exercising their
rights and are
very prone to
exploitation

■

participatory planning in place with the refugee
community, so that development and operation
management of the water supply system and
sanitation and hygiene promotion activities are in
accordance with their particular needs and
cultural practices.

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 0 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Although the number of refugees decreased by approximately
24 percent between 2000 and 2004, the number of IDPs
increased by 43 percent in a single year (2003–04), many of
whom are in Sudan and Colombia. This can be catastrophic,

both in terms of human suffering and geopolitical conflict,
thus it is important that the safety, rights and dignity of
refugees and IDPs be safeguarded while it is still unsafe
for them to return home (UNHCR, 2005).

BOX 3.4: PROVIDING FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS TO REFUGEES: EXCERPTS FROM AN ALL-STAFF MESSAGE BY UNHCR’S ACTING HIGH
COMMISSIONER ON WORLD WATER DAY 2005

‘Our protection goals are to ensure that refugees'
fundamental rights are respected, including their
access to water. Fulfilling that basic right is essential
for the life, health and dignity of the people of
concern to UNHCR, as well as a benchmark for every
relief operation. A clean water supply is just as
indispensable to a refugee's survival in stable camp
situations as it is in emergencies; studies show that
between one-third and half of all illnesses in refugee
camps are caused by poor water supply, inadequate
sanitation services and deficient hygiene practices.
A refugee's access to water depends not just on

what we can provide but how we provide it. In one
country, because of an inadequate water supply,
over 40 percent of refugee school children regularly
skip classes to help their mothers collect water.
Refugees in another wait six hours on average every
day to collect water. As a result, they collect unsafe
water at unguarded locations in an effort to save
time, exposing women to sexual assaults and
multiplying the prevalence of diarrhoeal diseases.
These terrible social costs can in no way be
accounted for in a simple cost-benefit analysis.
UNHCR must provide refugees with adequate safe

water – and we must do so without putting
women and children at risk. Protection concerns
must be fully incorporated in the planning and
operation of water-related facilities.’

Source: www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/statements.html

Part 5. Local Information for Global Goals
It is important that efforts to develop internationally comparable indicators do not detract from also
developing indicators needed to ensure progress at the local level.

5a. The importance of community-driven
assessments
The MDGs have encouraged greater attention to monitoring
progress towards the stated targets and have stimulated
efforts to identify indicators that can provide the basis for
this monitoring. Although it might be assumed that these
indicators will provide a stronger information base for
action, this is not necessarily the case. This section
suggests an approach that relies, to a limited extent, on
standardized and representative surveys, and emphasizes
indicators designed primarily to inform and support local
action and only secondarily to corroborate or contribute
to national and international indicators.

for development. National censuses are too infrequent
(usually held once every ten years) and there are often
long delays between when the census takes place and
when the data generated by the census become available.
There is also a problem due to a lack of censuses; many
of the nations with the largest deficiencies in water and
sanitation provision have not had a census recently. In
nations where much of the population has provision
from official service providers, the most detailed data on
provision can come from these providers. This is not much
use, however, in low-income nations and in most middleincome nations, because a high proportion of the
population is not served by such providers.

Data from household surveys based on a representative
sample of national populations have become increasingly
important information sources for showing the quality and
extent of provision for water and sanitation. This is largely
because international donors wanted more regular
information regarding outcomes they considered important

While household surveys can show the extent of
deficiencies in provision for water and sanitation for
nations and the sample size can be made sufficient to
provide accurate statistics for the largest city and for rural
and urban areas, they often do not provide the data
most needed for addressing the provision deficiencies:

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 0 9

the identification of the actual households, neighbourhoods
and districts where provision is inadequate or non-existent.
It does not help a water utility much to know the
percentage of the population in the capital city that lacks
water piped to their home if it does not know which
households lack provision and which neighbourhoods have
the largest deficiencies. In theory, censuses should provide
this, but it is rare for the data collected on water and
sanitation provision to be made available to urban
governments and water and sanitation agencies that can
help improve and extend provision. Or, if this data is
provided, it is available in a form that is too aggregated to
allow the identification of where provision is inadequate
(Navarro, 2001). Household surveys and censuses also
include only a limited range of questions about the quality
and extent of water and sanitation provision. This may be
enough to provide national governments and international
agencies with a broad picture, but it does not show who
has adequate provision for water and sanitation, let alone
why (UN-HABITAT 2003b).
To improve or extend provision for water and sanitation to
those who are unserved or inadequately served, details are
needed for each household and housing unit on the quality
and extent of provision (if any) combined with maps of
each settlement that show each housing unit, existing
water pipes, sewers and drains, and paths and roads. This
information base is often weakest in the areas where
provision is worst: small urban centres in informal
settlements where much of the unserved urban population
live. There are usually no official maps of these areas, or if
they exist, they are inaccurate or lacking in detail. Officials
– whether from water and sanitation agencies or municipal
officials or those charged with undertaking surveys – may
be afraid to enter squatter settlements.
Through detailed enumerations of all households in
informal settlements and detailed maps showing each
housing unit and plot boundaries and existing infrastructure, these problems may be solved. One example of
this is the neighbourhood mapping programme supported
by the Orangi Pilot Project’s Research and Training
Institute (OPP-RTI) which covers most of Karachi, which is
an extension of the Institute’s support for householdand neighbourhood-managed sewers and drains
described earlier. The OPP-RTI noted the large
investments being made in water and sanitation on a
self-help basis by communities outside Orangi and
recognized the need to document this work for the
following reasons:

■

to understand the extent of community initiatives
being undertaken

■

to avoid duplication of work being done by the
government

■

to enable people to realize the extent of their work
and strengthen their capacity

...it is rare for
the data

■

to inform the government of the scale and nature of
this informal investment in water and sanitation so their
policies could support existing work.

collected on
water and
sanitation
provision to be
made available
to urban

Surveys of 334 informal settlements have been prepared,
encompassing 224,299 houses in 19,463 lanes. These
were done by youths who received training from OPP-RTI.
The neighbourhood surveys serve two functions: first, to
demonstrate to the government the scale and breadth of
household and community investment; and second, to
provide detailed maps of each neighbourhood that allow
government investments to complement household and
community investments in the component sharing model
described earlier (Rahman, 2004b; Orangi Pilot Project
Research and Training Institute, 2002).

governments and
water and
sanitation
agencies that
can help improve
and extend
provision

The urban poor federations whose work was mentioned
earlier have also shown how it is possible to organize
very detailed slum enumerations and surveys that draw
information from each household, while developing the
kinds of detailed maps that improved provision for water
and sanitation. Those who undertake these surveys visit
each household, so everyone is informed about why the
enumeration is being done. The information collected is
then returned to community organizations for verification.
It then provides the base for detailed improvement plans.
These enumerations cost much less than professionally
managed surveys, yet are more detailed, more relevant
to local action and less prone to serious errors and
misrepresentation. These slum surveys also provide the
organizational base from which to plan upgrading and
new-house development, as illustrated by the findings
from the Huruma enumeration in Nairobi, Kenya, which
provided the basis for a settlement-wide upgrading
programme (Weru, 2004).
These self-surveys and enumerations also provide
urban poor organizations with a powerful tool with
which to negotiate with local governments and water and
sanitation providers. They no longer make arguments for
improved provision for water and sanitation based on

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

4. In many countries, the
collection of information about
individuals and businesses is
governed by an official
statistics acts. These acts are
intended to ensure the
confidentiality of information
that has been collected about
a person or a business. Some
of the information collected is
of a sensitive nature, such as
income, health issues or
political activism. The
individual or business needs
to understand that
information collected about
them remains confidential.
5. UN-HABITAT recently
completed a Cities Without
Slums (CWS) initiative in
Kisumu, Kenya, whose
objective was to improve the
livelihoods of people living
and working in informal
settlements in Kisumu. The
programme was led by the
Municipal Council of Kisumu
(MCK), which is the key
planning institution for urban
development within the
Municipality. MCK is to
establish a City Development
Strategy/CWS/GIS secretariat
within their planning
department. The secretariat
will be in charge of the
creation and maintenance of a
digital map of Kisumu using a
high-resolution satellite image
as its basis. Other
responsibilities will be to
collect, edit, analyse and
manage information on
informal settlements,
population, housing, land-use
and urban transport mobility.
The secretariat will become a
centre of excellence for the
use of GIS in local planning
issues.

their poverty, but rather on detailed facts and maps.
This community-driven production of detailed data also
contributes to a more equal relationship with external
agencies as it is produced and owned by the
communities, not by external agencies. The surveys also
give each person and household an official identity, as
their occupation of land and housing is recorded – often
for the first time. Some of the urban poor federations
and their support NGOs have also undertaken city-wide
slum surveys that provide documentation of all slums,
informal settlements or pavement dwellings (Patel, 2004;
ACHR, 2004; Boonyabancha, 2005).
These slum surveys also provide the organizational base
from which to plan upgrading and new-house
development (Patel, 2004).

5b. The information base that drives good
governance
Community-based data collection of detailed information
on households in poor settlements is built on the
assumption that local government authorities are either
incapable or unwilling to collect similar data. However,
where there are legitimately elected local authorities
and professional local government staff, an effort must
be made to build their capacity to address the problems
of water and sanitation in the poor communities. This
includes the ability to collect and compile detailed
information on poor communities.4 This is a critical
aspect of good governance. Fortunately, advances in
technology make this easier to do than before.
Whereas it was once difficult to map a community, it is
now relatively easy with the use of satellite imagery and
geographic information systems (GIS; see Chapters 4 and
13). In today’s market, satellite images are no longer
expensive. This development, coupled with a UN-HABITAT
programme to provide GIS capability in up to 1,000 cities
globally, makes it feasible to bring this technology to local
authorities. In high-income countries, the use of GIS by
local authorities is well advanced. According to a survey
conducted by the Public Technology Institute in the US, in
2003, 97 percent of US cities with 100,000 or more
inhabitants used GIS; 88 percent of those between
50,000 and 100,000 used it; and 56 percent of those
below 50,000. Hence, with the objective of bringing these
advances to local authorities in low- and middle-income
countries, UN-HABITAT is supporting local government
authorities in their ability to develop sound pro-poor policy
analysis as part of the Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation

Initiative. This initiative is to provide satellite images
for seventeen towns in the Lake Victoria region. These
images form the basis for a GIS database that is to be
supplemented with field observations, household survey
data, existing land-use and infrastructure information.5
The effort is intended to bring the MDG indicators down
to the local level, so that water and sanitation
interventions can benefit the poorest communities.

5c. The focus of indicator development
This chapter has made clear the difference between the
data commonly collected to monitor the quality and extent
of water and sanitation provision on a national level and
the data needed to drive improvements in the quality
and extent of provision in each locality. Of course, national
governments and international agencies need to monitor
conditions and trends through household surveys based
on representative samples, and these should influence
priorities and resource allocations within central and
state/provincial governments. International agencies also
rely on these surveys for providing the information base
for establishing priorities as well as for monitoring
progress. But these surveys rarely provide the information
base on the quality and extent of provision for water and
sanitation with sufficient detail to assess the adequacy of
provision (UN-HABITAT, 2003b). They have not yet been
able to provide the information base needed by local water
and sanitation service providers and local governments
to indicate where the deficiencies in provision exist (both
spatially and in terms of which households have deficient
provision). It is important to balance the attention given
to improving national monitoring of provision to serve the
requirements of national governments and international
agencies with that given to developing the local data
needed to support improved provision.
As we have seen, the use of GIS by local authorities,
commonplace in high-income countries, provides a basis
for collecting the kinds of spatial information needed for
pro-poor governance. Improved indicators are most needed
to serve and inform the institutions with the capacity or
potential to contribute to improving and extending
provision and inform them as to where and with whom
their action should concentrate. For water and sanitation,
these are overwhelmingly local groups – water companies
and utilities, local governments, NGOs and community
organizations. In regard to indicators, the priority should
be developing the capacity of these local bodies to identify
relevant indicators and collect relevant data to monitor the
state of water and sanitation in their communities.

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 1 1

As emphasized throughout, much of the innovation in
local governance for improved water and sanitation is
rooted in partnerships between local governments and
community-based organizations formed by households
who generally have the worst provision for water and
sanitation (and often local support NGOs). Discussions of
indicators that are to have policy relevance and scientific
rigour need to reflect this. At this stage, perhaps the

most important issue is to support the development
of methodologies that can be applied by local bodies
that serve to provide the local information base needed
to improve and extend water and sanitation provision.
The continued development and reduced pricing of
satellite imagery and GIS are important factors in
enhancing the ability of local government to provide
pro-poor solutions.

Part 6. Local Actions for Local Goals
Governments in low- and middle-income nations and international agencies need to recognize the longterm trend towards increasingly urbanized societies and economies and to support capacities within
each urban centre for improving water and sanitation provision and wastewater management. Most
governments and international agencies underestimate the scale of the deficiencies in provision in
urban areas. Good local governance within each of the tens of thousands of urban centres in low- and
middle-income nations is important for addressing these deficiencies, both in terms of governments
that are more efficient and competent and of governments that work with and are accountable to their
populations, especially those with the lowest incomes.
A significant proportion of the rural population lacking
adequate provision for water and sanitation live in large
villages with urban characteristics in their population size,
density and concentration of non-agricultural enterprises.
Many such villages should be reclassified as urban centres
with attention given to supporting more competent,
accountable local governments based there.
New approaches are needed, if the MDGs for water and
sanitation are to be met, especially in smaller urban centres,
large villages and poorer municipalities within metropolitan
areas. In most such settlements, the deficiencies in provision
cannot be addressed by the conventional model of a (public
or private) water utility extending piped water supplies and
sewers to individual households. What is needed is locally
developed responses that make best use of local knowledge,
resources and capacities. Some of the most cost-effective
solutions have been developed by community organizations
and federations formed by slum and shack dwellers and
the local NGOs that work with them – and as this chapter
describes, these have great potential to increase their
scale and scope, where local governments and private water
utilities work with them.
Many non-water-related policies and programmes are
important for improving water and sanitation provision –
for instance, housing finance systems, land-use management
policies and household and community investments in

better housing and neighbourhood infrastructure. Official
support for upgrading slums and squatter settlements and for
land subdivision for new houses can also contribute much to
improved provision for water and sanitation. Housing finance
programmes can also make an important contribution, as
they support more households to buy, build or improve their
homes, including improved provision for water and sanitation.
In addition, better water governance usually depends on
better local governments – strengthened and supported
by appropriate decentralization and democratization.
Whether formal provision for water and sanitation is
undertaken by public utilities or international, national or
local private utilities, city and municipal governments have
a critical role in providing the planning and governance
framework. They also have the central role in embedding
this within regional water governance arrangements that
often require agreements developed with freshwater users
upstream of the city and more attention to reducing the
impact of water pollution and urban runoff on water
quality for users downstream of the city.
It is difficult for very centralized international development
agencies to provide the kinds of decentralized support that
improving provision for water and sanitation requires. How
can they know which factors are most important in each
particular locality and how to support them? How can they
help ensure the development of more competent, effective

Top to bottom:
Shibuya station, Japan
A class of children from
Singapore drew their
vision of their
environment for the
‘Scroll around the world’
project
Cans for water provision
in Santiago, Cape Verde

Section 1: CHANGING CONTEXTS

1 1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

local water-and sanitation-providing organizations in which
the unserved and ill-served have influence? This is an issue
especially where smaller urban centres have governments
that lack resources and the right to raise resources and
suffer from very weak technical capacity. Furthermore,
local social and political structures in these settlements
often marginalize or exclude most of the unserved and
ill-served. It is correct to say that good local governance is
the solution, but saying this does not mean that these
agencies know how to achieve it.

The information base needed to support good local
governance for water and sanitation differs from the
information base being developed by higher levels of
government and international agencies to monitor trends
in provision for water and sanitation to evaluate progress
towards meeting the MDGs. More attention should be
given to supporting local data collection and local
monitoring to serve local action and evaluation.

References and Websites
Bairoch, P. 1988. Cities and Economic Development: From the
Dawn of History to the Present. London, Mansell.
Banes, C., Kalbermatten, J. and Nankman, P. 1996.
Infrastructure provision for the urban poor. Unpublished
World Bank study, Washington DC.
Bapat, M. and Agarwal, I. 2003. Our needs, our priorities;

Workshop in Angola, IIED Working Paper 8 on Poverty
Reduction in Urban Areas.
Connors, G. 2005. Pro-poor water governance in Bangalore: A
city in transition. Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 17,
No. 1.
Ferguson, B. 1999. Micro-finance of housing: a key to

women and men from the ‘slums’ in Mumbai and Pune

building emerging country cities? Environment and

talk about their needs for water and sanitation.

Urbanization, Vol. 11, No.1, pp. 185–99.

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 71–86.
Baumann, D. D., Boland, J. J. and Hanemann, W. M. 1998.
Urban Water Demand Management and Planning. New
York, McGraw-Hill.
Bond, P. 2000. Cities of Gold, Townships of Coal. Trenton, NJ,
Africa World Press.
Boonyabancha, S. 2005. Baan Mankong; going to scale with

Gleick, P. H.. 2000. The changing water paradigm – A look at

Water Management in Megacities, Stockholm, World
Water Week.
Menegat, R. 2002. Participatory democracy and sustainable
development: integrated urban environmental
management in Porto Alegre, Brazil. Environment and
Urbanization, Vol. 14, No. 2, pp. 181–206.
www.ingentaselect.com/09562478/v14n2/.
Mitlin, D. and Mueller, A. 2004. Windhoek, Namibia: towards

twenty-first century water resources development. Water

progressive urban land policies in Southern Africa.

International, Vol. 25, No. 1, pp. 127–38.

International Development Planning Review, Vol. 26, No.

———. 2003. Water use. Annual Review of Environment and
Resources, Vol. 28, pp. 275–314.
Graumann, J. V. 1977. Orders of magnitude of the world’s
urban and rural population in history. United Nations

slum upgrading in Thailand. Environment and

Population Bulletin 8, New York, United Nations, pp.

Urbanization, Vol. 17, No. 1.

16–33.

———. 2003. A decade of change: From the Urban Community

Lundqvist, J., Biswas, A., Tortajada, C. and Varis, O. 2004.

Hanchett, S., Akhter, S. and Khan, M. H. Summarized by

2.
Montgomery, M.R., Stren, R., Cohen, B. and Reed, H.E. (eds.)
2003. Cities Transformed; Demographic Change and its
Implications in the Developing World. Washington DC,
The National Academy Press, London, Earthscan.
Navarro, L. 2001. Exploring the environmental and political
dimensions of poverty: the cases of the cities of Mar del

Development Office (UCDO) to the Community

Mezulianik, S. and Blagbrough, V. 2003. Water, sanitation

Organizations Development Institute (CODI) in Thailand.

and hygiene in Bangladesh slums; a summary of

Poverty Reduction in Urban Areas Working Paper 12,

WaterAid’s Bangladesh Urban Programme Evaluation.

London, IIED.

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp.

Katchi Abadis of Karachi: Documentation of Sewerage,

43–56.

Water Supply Lines, Clinics, Schools and Thallas –

Budds, J. and McGranaham, G. (2003) Are the debates on
water privatization missing the point? Experiences from
Africa, Asia & Latin America, Environment & Urbanization.
Budds, J., Teixeira, P. and SEHAB. 2005. Building houses,
building citizenship: integrated housing, urban

Hardoy, J. E., Mitlin, D. and Satterthwaite, D. 2001.
Environmental Problems in an Urbanizing World. London,
Earthscan Publications.
Hasan, A. 1997. Working with Government: The Story of the

development and land tenure legalization for low-income

Orangi Pilot Project’s Collaboration with State Agencies

groups in São Paulo, Brazil. Environment and

for Replicating its Low Cost Sanitation Programme.

Urbanization, Vol. 17, No. 1.

Karachi, City Press.

Burra, Sundar. 2005. Towards a pro-poor slum-upgrading

Jacobi, P. 2004. The challenges of multi-stakeholder

framework for Mumbai, India. Environment and

management in the watersheds of São Paulo.

Urbanization, Vol. 17, No. 1.

Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp.

Burra, S., Patel, S. and Kerr, T. 2003. Community-designed,
built and managed toilet blocks in Indian cities.
Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 11–32.
Cabannes, Yves. 2004. Participatory budgeting: a significant
contribution to participatory democracy. Environment and
Urbanization. Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 27–46.
Cain, A., Daly, M. and Robson, P. 2002. Basic Service Provision
for the Urban Poor; The Experience of Development

199–212.
Kahrl, W. L. 1982. Water and Power: The Conflict over Los
Angeles’ Water Supply in the Owens Valley. Berkeley,
University of California Press.
Linn, J. F. 1982. The costs of urbanization in developing
countries. Economic Development and Cultural Change,
Vol. 30, No. 3.

Plata and Necochea-Quequén. Environment and
Urbanization, Vol. 13, No.1, pp. 185–99.
Orangi Pilot Project – Research and Training Institute. 2002.,

Volume One: The First Hundred Katchi Abadis Surveyed.
Karachi, Orangi Pilot Project.
———. 1998. Proposal for a Sewage Disposal System for
Karachi. Karachi, City Press.
Patel, S. 2004. Tools and methods for empowerment
developed by slum dwellers federations in India.
Participatory Learning and Action 50, London, IIED.
Platt, R. H. 2004. Land Use and Society: Geography, Law, and
Public Policy. Washington DC, Island Press.
Rahman, P. 2004a. Update on OPP-RTI’s Work. Karachi, Orangi
Pilot Project – Research and Training Institute.
———. 2004b. Katchi Abadis of Karachi; a Survey of 334 Katchi
Abadis. Karachi, Orangi Pilot Project – Research and
Training Institute.
Reisner, M. 2001. Cadillac Desert: The American West and its
Disappearing Water. London, Pimlico.
Satterthwaite, D. 2005. The scale of urban change worldwide
1950–2000 and its underpinnings. IIED Working Paper.
www.iied.org/urban/index.html.

W AT E R A N D H U M A N S ETT L EM E N T S . 1 1 3

———. 2002. Coping with rapid urban growth. RICS

———. 2004 Global Refugee Trends: Overview of Refugee

International Paper Series, London, Royal Institution of

Populations, New Arrivals Durable Solutions, Asylum-

Chartered Surveyors.

seekers, Stateless and Other Persons of Concern to

Showers, K. B. 2002. Water scarcity and urban Africa: an
overview of urban-rural water linkages. World
Development, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 621–48.
Shrestha, D. and Cronin, A. A. 2006. The right to water and
protecting refugees. Waterlines, Vol. 24, pp. 12-140.
World Development, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 621–48.
Smit, J., Ratta, A. and Nasr, J. 1996. Urban Agriculture: Food,
Jobs and Sustainable Cities. Publication Series for Habitat
II, Vol. 1, New York, UNDP.
Sohail Khan, M. and Cotton, A. 2003. Public private
partnerships and the poor in water supply projects. WELL
Factsheet, Loughborough, WEDC, Loughborough

UNHCR. Geneva.
UN (United Nations) Millennium Project. 2005a. Health,
Dignity and Development; What Will it Take? Task Force
on Water and Sanitation, London and Sterling VA,
Earthscan.
UN-HABITAT/(United Nations Human Settlement Programme).
2005b. A Home in the City. TaskForce on Improving the
Lives of Slum Dwellers, draft.
———. 2004a. Unheard Voices of Women in Water and
Sanitation. Manila and Nairobi, Water for Asian Cities
Programme.
———. Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative;

University. www.lboro.ac.uk/well/resources/fact-

Supporting Secondary Urban Centres in the Lake Victoria

sheets/fact-sheets-htm/PPP.htm.

Region to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals.

Souza, C. 2001. Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities:
Limits and possibilities in building democratic institutions.
Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 13, No 1, pp. 159–84.
www.ingentaselect.com/09562478/v13n1/.
Stein, A. and Castillo, L. 2005. Innovative financing for lowincome housing improvement: Lessons from programmes
in Central America. Environment and Urbanization, Vol.
17, No. 1.
Tortajada, C. and Castelan. E. 2003. Water management for a
megacity: Mexico City Metropolitan Area. Ambio, Vol. 32,
No. 2, pp. 124–29.
UN (United Nations). 2004. World Urbanization Prospects:
The 2003 Revision. New York, United Nations Population
Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
ST/ESA/SER.A/237.

www.unhabitat.org
www.unwac.org
www.un-urbanwater.net
www.iied.org
www.measuredhs.com
www.unhabitat.org
www.adb.org/water/default.asp
www.un.org/waterforlifrdecade/statements.html
www.unher.org

Nairobi, Water for African Cities Programme, UN-HABITAT.
———. The Challenge of Slums: Global Report on Human
Settlements 2003. London, Earthscan.
———. Water and Sanitation in the World’s Cities: Local Action
for Global Goals. London, Earthscan.
———. Handbook for Emergencies. United Nations High
Commissioners for Refugees. Geneva.
UNHCR. 2004. The World’s Stateless People. United Nations
Questions and Answers. Geneva.
van den Berg, L. M., van Wijk, M.S. and Van Hoi. P. 2003. The
transformation of agriculture and rural life downstream of
Hanoi. Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp.
35–52.
van Horen, B. 2001. Developing community-based watershed
management in Greater São Paulo: The case of Santo

André. Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 13, No. 1,
pp. 209–22.
von Bertrab, E. 2003. Guadalajara’s water crisis and the fate
of Lake Chapala: A reflection of poor water management
in Mexico. Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 15, No. 2,
pp. 127–40.
Weru, J. 2004. Community federations and city upgrading: The
work of Pamoja Trust and Muungano in Kenya.
Environment and Urbanization, Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 47–62.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1999. Creating healthy
cities in the 21st Century. D. Satterthwaite, (ed.), The
Earthscan Reader on Sustainable Cities. London,
Earthscan Publications, pp. 137–72.
WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2000. Global Water Supply and
Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report. New York/Geneva,
WHO/ UNICEF.
WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United Nations
Children’s Fund) JMP (Joint Monitoring Programme). 2004.
Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and Sanitation Target;
A Mid-term Assessment. Joint Monitoring Programme for
Water Supply and Sanitation, Geneva.
World Bank. 2003. World Development Report 2004: Making
Services Work for Poor People. Washington DC, The World
Bank and Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Zaidi, S.A. 2000. Transforming Urban Settlements: The Orangi
Pilot Project’s low-cost sanitation model. Karachi, City
Press.

SECTION 2

Changing Natural
Systems
Both naturally occurring conditions and human impacts are
asserting strong pressure on our water resources today, in the
form of warming temperatures, rising sea levels, ecosystems
damage and increased climatic variability, among others. Human
influence is arguably becoming more important than natural
factors. The construction of dams and diversions continue to affect
river regimes, fragmenting and modifying aquatic habitats, altering
the flow of matter and energy, and establishing barriers to the
movement of migratory species. Deforestation, increasing areas of
farmland, urbanization, pollutants in both surface and sub-surface
water bodies and so on, all influence the timing and quantities of
flows and are having a huge impact on the quality and quantity
of freshwater.
It is against this background that we must assess the state of the
water resources. Assessment is a critical and necessary first step to
ensuring that the dual goals of water for environmental and
human needs are met. This section presents an overview of the
state of water resources and ecosystems and explores current
assessment techniques and approaches to Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM).
Global Map 3: Relative Water Stress Index
Global Map 4: Sources of Contemporary Nitrogen Loading

Chapter 4 – The State of the
Resource (UNESCO & WMO, with IAEA)

This chapter reviews the main
components of the water cycle and
provides an overview of the
geographical distribution of the world’s total water
resources, their variability, the impacts of climate change
and the challenges associated with assessing the
resource.
Chapter 5 – Coastal and
Freshwater Ecosystems (UNEP)

Natural ecosystems, rich in
biodiversity, play a critical role in the
water cycle and must be preserved. In
many areas, a variety of pressures on freshwater
ecosystems are leading to their rapid deterioration,
affecting livelihoods, human well-being and development.
To reverse this trend, protecting ecosystems and
biodiversity must become a fundamental component of
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM).

1 1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Water stress is commonly evaluated by comparing the
volume of renewable water resources per capita at a
national level. New mapping capabilities allow the
geography of water stress to be better defined. High
resolution water stress indices can be computed based on
the ratio of total water use (sum of domestic, industrial
and agricultural demand or DIA) to renewable water
supply (Q), which is the available local runoff
(precipitation less evaporation) as delivered through
streams, rivers and shallow groundwater. Developed from
actual statistics, the Relative Water Stress Index (RWSI),

also known as Relative Water Demand, is useful because it
is a dimensionless quantity, which can be applied at
different scales. The map below shows populations living
in water stressed (RWSI ≥ 0.4) and relatively unstressed
(RWSI < 0.4) conditions highlighting substantial withincountry differences that national estimates often obscure.
The map shown below (at approximately 50 km resolution
globally) nearly tripled earlier nation-wide estimates of
those people living under severe water stress, with
obvious impacts on the degree to which water problems
can be appropriately identified and managed.

Population (in thousands) above (reds) and below (blues) water stress threshold (RWSI=0.4)

Unstressed
>100

10–100

0–10

Little or no population

Stressed
0–10

10–100

>100

Population exposed to water stress in Africa
40
10 km grid
Population under
water stress (%)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Relative Water Stress Index

20
50 km grid
Country
0

10

6

10

4

10

2

10

0

The scale of the analysis is critically important when assessing the
level of water stress. For instance, the graph on the left shows
that when water stress was computed at the country scale, about
4% of the population in Africa was identified as suffering under
severe water stress. However, when evaluated using geospatial
data at a 10-km resolution, the percentage of the population
experiencing stress increased to 26% (Douglas et al., 2006;
Vörösmarty et al., 2005a).

Average Element Area (km2)
Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

S E C T I O N 2 . C H A N G I N G N AT U RA L SYST EM S . 1 1 7

Sources of Contemporary Nitrogen Loading
Nitrogen actively cycles through the atmosphere, the
continental land mass and the world's oceans, and
represents a critical nutrient upon which plant, microbial,
and animal life depend. Nitrogen, the most abundant gas
in the atmosphere, is delivered to watersheds through
natural processes including chemical transformation and
washout from precipitation as well as biological fixation.
The pathways that nitrogen follows as it travels through
the environment are complex. Contemporary human
activities have greatly accelerated the transport of reactive
nitrogen through river basins that ultimately deliver this
nutrient into coastal receiving waters (Galloway et al.,
2004). Globally there has been a two-fold increase in the
delivery of this nutrient to the oceans, with more than
ten-fold increases in some rivers draining industrialized
regions (Green et al., 2004). These increases arise from
the widespread application of fertilizer, animal husbandry
and point source sewage inputs.

These human induced changes to the nitrogen cycle have
far reaching impacts on water quality and public health,
protein supply for humans, and even the planetary heat
balance through the emission on nitrogen-based
greenhouse gases. The map below shows the predominant
source of nitrogen within each grid cell. Fixation is the
primary source throughout South America, Africa,
Australia, and the northernmost reaches of Asia and North
America. Atmospheric pollution and subsequent nitrogen
deposition plays a dominant role throughout the
industrialized northern temperate zones of Europe, Asia
and North America. Fertilizers are the predominant source
across major food producing regions. Livestock constitutes
the most important source in Eastern Europe and India.
Urban sewage loads create localized ‘hotspots’ for
pollution. Understanding the patterns of such loadings is
critical to the design of management interventions to
protect society and well-functioning ecosystems.

Predominant Sources of Contemporary Nitrogen Loading

Sewage

Fixation

Livestock

Deposition

Fertilizer

Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

I would feel more optimistic about a bright future for man if
he spent less time proving he can outwit Nature and more
time tasting her sweetness and respecting her seniority.
E. B. White

Part 1. Global Hydrology and Water
Resources ...........................................................121
1a. The driving forces and pressures on our water
resources ...........................................................121
Fig. 4.1: Global distribution of the world’s water
1b. Water’s global occurrence and distribution.........122
Fig. 4.2: Schematic of the hydrologic cycle
components in present-day setting

Part 2. Nature, Variability and
Availability .........................................................123
2a. Precipitation ......................................................123
Table 4.1: Precipitation distribution into surface
water and groundwater components (by climate
region)
Fig. 4.3: Oxygen-18 content of stream water
along the main stem of large rivers
2b. Evapotranspiration and soil moisture ................124
2c. Snow and ice......................................................125
2d. Surface waters...................................................125
Lakes..................................................................125
Rivers and streams ..............................................126
Fig. 4.4: Variations in continental river runoff
through most of the twentieth century
Fig. 4.5: Typical hydrographs in accordance
with climatic settings
Map 4.1: Distribution of GRDC water
measurement stations, March 2005
2e. Wetlands ...........................................................127
2f. Groundwater ......................................................128
Occurrence and renewability................................128
Map 4.2: Global groundwater regions:
predominant mode of groundwater occurrence
and mean rate of renewal
Transboundary groundwater ................................129
Table 4.2: Selected large aquifer systems with
non-renewable groundwater resources
Natural groundwater quality ................................130
Groundwater monitoring networks .......................130
2g. Water availability ..............................................130
Box 4.1: Index of water resources availability –
Total Actual Renewable Water Resources (TARWR)
Table 4.3: Water availability information
by country

Part 3. Human Impacts .........................................136
3a. Sedimentation ...................................................136
Table 4.4: Major principal sources and impacts of
sedimentation
3b. Pollution............................................................137
Table 4.5: Freshwater pollution sources, effects and
constituents of concern
Table 4.6: Spatial and time scales within which
pollution occurs and can be remediated

Box 4.2: Acid rain impacts on water resources
Fig. 4.6: Acid rain and its deposition processes
Fig. 4.7: Five-year mean of the pH level in
rainfall in the eastern regions of Canada and
the US
Box 4.3: Impacts to surface water quality from
human activity
Box 4.4: Impacts to groundwater quality from
human activity
Fig. 4.8: Primary sources of groundwater
pollution
Global water quality and pollution information .....139
3c. Over-abstraction ................................................143
Map 4.3: Groundwater abstraction rate as a
percentage of mean recharge
3d. Global warming and climate change ..................144
Box 4.5: Accelerating glacial decline
Map. 4.4: Principal regions of land-based and
mountain glaciers

Part 4. Matching Demands to Supply ..........146
4a. Environmental flows for preserving ecosystems and
increasing water resources ................................146
4b. Combating natural variability.............................147
Rainwater harvesting ...........................................147
Water diversions..................................................147
Box 4.6: Management of aquifer recharge
(MAR) – An example from Viet Nam
Storing water in reservoirs ...................................148
Transferring water among basins .........................148
4c. Water reuse .......................................................148
Table 4.7: Potential applications for reclaimed
water
4d. Demand management ........................................149
4e. Desalination ......................................................150
4f. Water Resources Assessment (WRA)..................151

Part 5. The Challenge of Sustainable
Development .....................................................151
5a.
5b.
5c.
5d.
5e.

Driving forces and pressures .............................151
State of our natural water resources ................152
Impacts ..............................................................152
Responses .........................................................152
The benefits.......................................................153

References and Websites ..................................154

4
CHAPTER 4

The State of
the Resource

By

UNESCO

(United Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and Cultural
Organization)

WMO
(World
Meteorological
Organization)

IAEA
(International
Atomic Energy
Agency)

1 2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Key messages:

Top to bottom:
Perito Moreno Glacier,
Argentina
Man collecting stagnant

Our water resources, irregularly distributed in space and time, are under pressure due to major population change and
increased demand. Access to reliable data on the availability, quality and quantity of water, and its variability, form
the necessary foundation for sound management of water resources. The different options for augmentation expand
the boundaries of the water resource in a conventional sense, helping to match demand and supply. All components
of the hydrological cycle, and the influence of human activities on it, need to be understood and quantified to
efficiently and sustainably develop and protect our water resources.
I

Climate change is having a significant impact on
weather patterns, precipitation and the hydrological
cycle, affecting surface water availability, as well as
soil moisture and groundwater recharge.

I

The growing uncertainty of surface water availability and
increasing levels of water pollution and water diversions
threaten to disrupt social and economic development in
many areas as well as the health of ecosystems.

water for drinking,
Uganda
Bus driving across flooded
plateau in the Andes,
Bolivia

I

Groundwater resources can, in many instances,
supplement surface water, particularly as a source of
drinking water. However, in many cases, these aquifers
are being tapped at an unsustainable rate or affected by
pollution. More attention should be paid to sustainable
management of non-renewable groundwater.

I

Many traditional practices are being refined (e.g.
rainwater harvesting), while more recent advances
(e.g. artificial recharge, desalination and water reuse)
are being developed further. More support needs to be
given to policy options, such as demand management,
which stress more efficient use of water resources,
as well as to technical solutions on the supply side.

I

The projected increased variability in the availability
and distribution of freshwater resources demands
political commitment to supporting and advancing
technology for the collection and analysis of
hydrological data. More up-to-date information
will enable policy-makers to make better informed
decisions regarding water resources management.

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 121

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 2 1

Part 1. Global Hydrology and Water Resources
The need to develop more sustainable practices for the management and efficient use of water
resources, as well as the need to protect the environmental ecosystems where these resources are
located, has led to fundamental shifts in awareness and public concern over the past decade. However,
despite increased awareness of the issues at stake, economic criteria and politically charged reasoning
are still driving water resource development decisions at most local, regional, national and international
levels. Though the long-term benefits of an integrated approach to achieving sustainable water
resources development have been cited in many of the global water conferences over the past decade,
considerable time and change in policy will be required to implement such an approach. At present, best
available practice and scientific knowledge are rarely adequately factored into decision-making or well
represented when establishing water resource policy or implementing management practices. In the
meantime, the pressures on our water resources are increasing.

1a. The driving forces and pressures on our
water resources
The combination of both naturally occurring conditions
and humanity’s actions creates pressure on our water
resources. Climate change and natural variability in the
distribution and occurrence of water are the natural
driving forces that complicate the sustainable
development of our water resources. Some of the
main driving forces affecting water resources include:
I

population growth, particularly in water-short regions

I

major demographic changes as people move from rural
to urban environments

I

higher demands for food security and socio-economic
well-being

I

increased competition between users and usages

I

pollution from industrial, municipal and agricultural
sources.

While many issues remain on how to deal with and
alleviate the pressures on our water resources, the
progress being made in some sectors is worth noting.
Natural units, such as river basins and aquifer systems,
are becoming institutionally recognized: one example is
the EU Water Framework Directive. Basin-oriented water
resources assessment is increasingly being adopted by
national and regional programmes and due consideration
is given to the need to identify the critical volume and
quality of water needed to maintain ecosystem resilience
(environmental flows; see Chapter 5).

We are also seeing the emergence of highly detailed
analyses of the processes involved as well as resultsbased diagnoses from catchment agencies, basin
commissions and watershed and aquifer management
authorities. These activities are being carried out globally
in a variety of different economic and cultural settings
and at different sizes and scales. Most of these
organizations were created relatively recently for

Figure 4.1: Global distribution of the world’s water

Source: Data from Shiklomanov and Rodda, 2003. Freshwater has a
global volume of 35.2 million cubic kilometres (km3).

At present,
best available
practice and
scientific
knowledge are
rarely
adequately
factored into
decision-making

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 122

1 2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

jurisdictions that correspond to physical hydrological
limits rather than historically defined administrative
boundaries (Blomquist et al., 2005; WWF, 2003). Moving
away from historically administrative boundaries to a
consideration of water resources management practice
based on physical hydrological limits allows us to better
respond to nature’s variability.

Ecohydrology
stresses the
important
relationships
and pathways
shared among

To better combat flooding, the Associated Programme
of Flood Management (APFM), a WMO and GWP joint
effort as well as UNESCO’s International Flood Initiative
(IFI) outline new approaches that are being developed
for a better understanding of the links between natural
settings and the legal, environmental and social
conditions inherent to flooding and the mitigation of its
impacts. In this way, communities commonly faced with
flooding can now develop more sustainable methods to
reduce the socio-economic effects of such high-impact
events (see Chapter 10).
Further illustrations of emerging progress on countering
the pressures on water resources are highlighted in
Chapters 6 through 13 and in some of the case study
examples cited in Chapter 14.

1b. Water’s global occurrence and
distribution
The world’s water exists naturally in different forms and
locations: in the air, on the surface, below the ground and
in the oceans (Figure 4.1).
Although a large volume of freshwater exists ‘in storage’,
it is more important to evaluate the renewable annual
water flows, taking into account where and how they
move through/ the hydrological cycle (Figure 4.2).
This schematic of the hydrological cycle illustrates
how elements can be grouped as part of a conceptual
model that has emerged from the new discipline of
ecohydrology, which stresses the important relationships
and pathways shared among hydrological and ecological
systems (Zalewski et al., 1997). This conceptual model
takes into consideration the detail of the fluxes of all
waters and their pathways while differentiating between
two components: ‘blue water’ and ‘green water’. Blue
waters are directly associated with aquatic ecosystems
and flow in surface water bodies and aquifers. Green
water is what supplies terrestrial ecosystems and rain-fed
crops from the soil moisture zone, and it is green water
that evaporates from plants and water surfaces into the

hydrological and
ecological
systems

Figure 4.2: Schematic of the hydrologic cycle components in present-day setting

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 2 3

atmosphere as water vapour. This concept was developed
by Falkenmark and Rockström (2004) who contend that
the introduction of the concepts of ‘green water’and
‘blue water’, to the extent that they simplify the
discussion for non-technical policy-makers and planners,

may help to focus attention and resources on the
often neglected areas of rain-fed agriculture, grazing,
grassland, forest and wetland areas of terrestrial
ecosystems and landscape management.

Part 2. Nature, Variability and Availability
The Earth’s hydrological cycle is the global mechanism that transfers water from the oceans to the
surface and from the surface, or subsurface environments, and plants to the atmosphere that surrounds
our planet. The principal natural component processes of the hydrological cycle are: precipitation,
infiltration, runoff, evaporation and transpiration. Human activities (settlements, industry, and
agricultural developments) can disturb the components of the natural cycle through land use diversions
and the use, reuse and discharge of wastes into the natural surface water and groundwater pathways.

2a. Precipitation
The Earth’s atmosphere contains approximately 13,000
km3 of water. This represents 10 percent of the world’s
freshwater resources not found in groundwater, icecaps
or permafrost (Figure 4.1). This is similar to the volumes
found in soil moisture and wetlands. However, of more
importance is the fact that this vapour cycles in the
atmosphere in a ‘global dynamic envelope’, which has
a substantive annually recurring volume, estimated to be
from 113,500 to 120,000 km3 (Shiklomanov and Rodda,
2003; FAO-AQUASTAT, 2003). Precipitation occurs as rain,
snow, sleet, hail, frost or dew. These large volumes
illustrate precipitation’s key role in renewing our natural
water resources, particularly those used to supply natural
ecosystems and rainfed crops. About 40 percent of the
precipitation that falls on land comes from ocean-derived
vapour. The remaining 60 percent comes from land-based
sources. It is particularly pertinent to recognize that
snowfall can contribute a large percentage of a region’s
total precipitation in temperate and cold climate regions.
For example, in the western US, Canada and Europe, 40
to 75 percent of regional precipitation can occur as snow.
The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has
published the international reference for each country’s
average annual precipitation, based on the period of
record from 1961 to 1990 (New et al., 1999; Mitchell
et al., 2002). Countries’ precipitation ranges from 100
mm/yr in arid, desert-like climates to over 3,400 mm/yr
in tropical and highly mountainous terrains. Together
with temperature, they define the significant variables
in global climatic and ecosystem biodiversity settings. This

long-term record base determines averages and defines
predictable variability both in time (monthly, annually,
seasonally) and place (nations, monitoring locations). This
record is significant as its 30-year standard is commonly
compared with actual annual amounts to define the
relative current variability, frequently tied to regional
and global evaluations of drought and climate change.

A young child plays in the
monsoon rain in Thailand

It is essential to
understand the
pathways of
water as it
arrives in the

It is essential to water resources development to
understand the pathways of water as it arrives in the
form of precipitation and migrates through the cycle
components. Table 4.1 illustrates how precipitation, in
three relatively diverse climatic zones, generally either
returns by evaporation or evapotranspiration back into
the atmosphere, becomes surface water through runoff,
or recharges groundwater.
Mapping precipitation’s isotopic composition (3H, 18O
and 2H) can help trace water movement through the
water cycle components. This is routinely done as part of
the Global Network of Isotopes in Precipitation (GNIP),1
operated jointly by IAEA and WMO at 153 stations in 53
nations. IAEA has initiated several projects to study and
distinguish among moisture sources and to better
understand the cycle transport patterns using applied
isotope techniques. Particular case studies have been
carried out in India (Bhattacharya et al., 2003), Southeast
Asia (Aggarwal et al., 2004) and with twenty-one
research groups participating globally to monitor many
other major rivers (Figure 4.3). This approach is of
further significance as it assists in the evaluation of the
hydrological cycle’s response to climatic fluctuations and

form of
precipitation
and migrates
through the
cycle
components

1. See isohis.iaea.org for more
information.

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 124

1 2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 4.1: Precipitation distribution into surface water and groundwater components (by
climate region)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Total precipitation
Evaporation/
Evapotranspiration
Groundwater recharge
Surface runoff

Temperate climate
%
mm
100
500–1,500

Semi-arid climate
%
mm
100
200–500

Arid climate
%
mm
100
0–200

~ 33
~ 33
~ 33

~ 50
~ 20
~ 30

~ 70
~1
~ 29

160–500
160–500
160–500

100–250
40–100
60–150

0–140
0–2
0–60

Source: Hydrogeology Center, University Neuchâtel, 2003.

can be used to calibrate and validate atmospheric
circulation models used in climate change studies.

2b. Evapotranspiration and soil moisture
The processes of evaporation and transpiration
(evapotranspiration) are closely linked to the water found
in soil moisture; these processes act as driving forces on
water transferred in the hydrological cycle. Movement
through soil and vegetation is large and accounts for
62 percent of annual globally renewable freshwater.
Evapotranspiration rates depend on many locally specific
parameters and variables that are difficult to measure
Figure 4.3: Oxygen-18 content of stream water along the main stem of
large rivers

and require demanding analyses in order to calculate an
acceptable level of accuracy. Other hydrological, cyclerelated and meteorological data are also considered in
the estimation of the rates. Today, however, local water
management in basins or sub-basins can better calculate
transpiration rates.
Evaporation from surface water bodies such as lakes, rivers,
wetlands and reservoirs is also an important component of
the hydrological cycle and integral to basin development
and regional water management. In the case of artificiallycreated reservoirs, it has been estimated by Rekacewicz
(2002) that the global volumes evaporating since the
end of the 1960s have exceeded the volume consumed
to meet both domestic and industrial needs.
From the standpoint of food production and ecosystem
maintenance, soil moisture is the most important
parameter to net primary productivity (NPP) and to the
structure, composition and density of vegetation patterns
(WMO, 2004). Near-surface soil moisture content strongly
influences whether precipitation and irrigation waters
either run off to surface water bodies or infiltrate into
the soil column. Regionally, mapping soil moisture deficit
is becoming a widely used technique to link climatological
and hydrological information in agriculture (e.g. Illinois,
US) and to reflect drought conditions (US Drought
Mitigation Center, 2004). Soil moisture distribution is
now identified as a prerequisite for effective river-flow
forecasting, irrigation system maintenance, and soil
conservation (Haider et al., 2004). Its distribution in time
and place are now viewed as essential to hydrological,
ecological and climatic models – both at the regional
and global level (US NRC, 2000).

Note: Surveys of oxygen-18 along the main stem of large rivers, such as Darling, Amazon, Danube, Rio
Grande and Mackenzie show the contribution and mixing of runoff sources to rivers, such as tributaries,
irrigation water and wastewater. Isotopes also reflect impacts of climate and land use pattern changes
on the water balance such as an evaporative enrichment of river water in arid regions.
Source: IAEA, 2002.

The Global Soil Moisture Data Bank (Robock and Vinnikov,
2005; Robock et al, 2000) archives contain data sets of
national soil moisture records but the data sets are
incomplete in terms of global coverage.

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 2 5

Satellite data can provide broader coverage with current
results that can be more closely representative when
combined with ground validation. From 2002, NASA’s
climate-monitoring ‘Aqua’ satellite has daily records of
50 to 60 km resolution data, readily obtained from
NOAA (Njoku, 2004; Njoku et al., 2004). From 2010,
the ‘Hydros’ satellite will exclusively monitor daily soil
moisture changes around the globe with an improved
spatial resolution of 3 to 10 km (Entekhabi et al., 2004;
Jackson, 2004). This will be an important upgrade for
remotely-sensed soil moisture data, which are becoming
increasingly relied upon by agricultural marketing and
administrative boards, commodity brokers, large-scale
farms, flood- and drought-monitoring and forecasting
agencies, water resources planning and soil conservation
authorities and hydroelectric utility companies.

2c. Snow and ice
About three-quarters of the world’s entire natural
freshwater is contained within ice sheets and glaciers.
However, most (97 percent) is not considered as a water
resource as it is inaccessible, located in the Antarctic,
Arctic and Greenland ice sheets. However, land-based
glaciers and permanent snow and ice – found on all
continents except Australia – cover approximately
680,000 km2 and are critical to many nations’ water
resources. Even in situations where ice covers only a
small percent of a basin’s upland mountainous terrain
(e.g. in the Himalayas, Rockies, Urals, Alps, Andes),
glaciers can supply water resources to distant lowland
regions. Thus, glacial ice and snow represents a highly
valuable natural water reservoir. Typically it affects
stream-flow quantity in terms of time and volume since
glaciers temporarily store water as snow and ice and
release runoff on many different time scales (Jansson et
al., 2003; Hock et al., 2005). Glacial runoff
characteristically varies with daily flow cycles that are
melt-induced and seasonal since concentrated annual
runoff occurs in summer when the water stored as snow
in winter is released as stream flow. The seasonal runoff
benefits occur principally in nations in the mid- and high
latitudes where there are otherwise only periods of low
flow, but benefits also occur in many semi-arid regions.
Glaciers can also affect long-term annual water
availability since runoff either increases or decreases as
their mass balance decreases or increases, respectively.
Finally, glaciers tend to act as stream-flow regulators that
can minimize year-to-year variability when catchment
areas are moderately (10 to 40 percent) glaciated. Runoff
variability rises as glaciated percentage both increases

and decreases. Glacier conditions are now monitored
globally since climate change is affecting their size and
mass balance.

2d. Surface waters
Surface waters include the lakes (as well as ponds),
reservoirs, rivers and streams and wetlands our societies
have depended upon and benefited from throughout
history. The flow into and through these surface water
bodies comes from rainfall, runoff from melting snow and
ice and as base-flow from groundwater systems. While
surface waters volumetrically hold only a small volume
(0.3 percent) of the Earth’s total freshwater resources,
they represent about 80 percent of the annually
renewable surface and groundwater. Ecosystem services
from surface waters are widespread and diverse as well as
being of critical importance. Reservoirs and large lakes
effectively counteract high seasonal variability in runoff
by providing longer-term storage. Other services
supported by surface waters include shipping and
transport, irrigation, recreation, fishing, drinking water
and hydropower.

Glacier
conditions are
now monitored
globally since
climate change
is affecting their
size and mass
balance

Lakes
Meybeck (1995), Shiklomanov and Rodda (2003) and
most recently Lehner and Döll (2004) have provided
extensive data characterizing the world’s lakes on a
global scale. Lakes store the largest volume of fresh
surface waters (90,000 km3) – over forty times more
than is found in rivers or streams and about seven times
more than is found in wetland areas. Together with
reservoirs, they are estimated to cover a total area of
about 2.7 million km2, which represents 2 percent of the
land’s surface (excluding polar regions) (Lehner and Döll,
2004). Most lakes are small. The world’s 145 largest lakes
are estimated to contain over 95 percent of all lake
freshwater. Lake Baikal (Russia) is the world’s largest,
deepest and oldest lake and it alone contains 27 percent
of the freshwater contained in all the world’s lakes. Lake
waters serve commerce, fishing, recreation, and transport
and supply water for much of the world’s population.
However, detailed hydrological studies have been
conducted on only 60 percent of the world’s largest
lakes (Shiklomanov and Rodda, 2003). LakeNet2 is
one example of an organization working with local
and regional governments, NGOs and IGOs in over 100
countries in order to address this knowledge deficit,
to tackle degrading conditions, and to develop lake
basin management programmes that include important
protection strategies. Recently, a global database of

Torre del Paine, Chile.
Glacial ice and snow
represent a highly
valuable natural water
reservoir

2. See www.worldlakes.org for
more information.

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 126

1 2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...the world’s
total runoff is
unevenly
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

distributed
throughout the
year for most
regions of the
globe...

3. Statistics related to the world’s
river systems (length, basin
area, discharge, principal
tributaries and cities served)
are currently updated online at
www.rev.net/~aloe/river/, as
part of an open source physical
sciences information gateway
(PSIGate).

lakes, reservoirs and wetlands (GLWD) has been created
and validated at the Center for Environmental Systems
Research, University of Kassel (CESR, Germany) in
cooperation with the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) (
Lehner and Döll, 2004). The primarily digital mapbased approach, complete with fully downloadable data,
facilitates the linking of existing local and regional
registers and remotely sensed data with the new
inventory. As such, it is an important achievement
related to global hydrological and climatological models.

Figure 4.4: Variations in continental river runoff
through most of the twentieth century
(deviations from average values)

Rivers and streams
An estimated 263 international river basins have drainage
areas that cover about 45 percent (231 million km2) of the
Earth’s land surface (excluding polar regions) (Wolf et al.,
1999, 2002). The world’s twenty largest river basins have
catchment areas ranging from 1 to 6 million km2 and are
found on all continents. The total volume of water stored
in rivers and streams is estimated at about 2,120 km3. The
Amazon carries 15 percent of all the water returning to the
world’s oceans, while the Congo-Zaire basin carries 33 percent
of the river flow in Africa (Shiklomanov and Rodda, 2003).3
Variability in runoff is depicted by river/stream flow visà-vis time graphs (hydrographs). In terms of variability,
Figure 4.4 (Digout, 2002) illustrates the three low
and three high runoff periods that were experienced
in the twentieth century by documenting the natural
fluctuations in river runoff in terms of both time
and place. These types of periodic variations are not
particularly predictable as they occur with irregular
frequency and duration. In contrast, we are commonly
able to predict runoff variability on an annual and
seasonal basis from long-term measurement records in
many river locations. River-flow graphs representative of
the principal climatic regions are illustrated in Figure 4.5
(Stahl and Hisdal, 2004). Shown together with monthly
precipitation and evaporation, they portray the annual
variability that is relatively predictable and similar
according to principal climatic regions of the world.
From this climatic zone perspective, tropical regions
typically exhibit greater river runoff volumes while arid
and semi-arid regions, which make up an estimated 40
percent of the world’s land area, have only 2 percent
of the total runoff volume (Gleick, 1993).
Monitoring networks for river flow and water levels in
rivers, reservoirs and lakes, supplemented by estimates
for regions where there is no extensive monitoring, help
understand runoff and evaluate how to predict its

Source: Digout, 2002; UNEP/GRID Arendal; Shiklomanov, 1999.

variability. Measurement networks are relatively common
in many developed populated areas. Most of the world’s
major contributing drainage areas have relatively adequate
monitoring networks in place. The Global Runoff Data
Center (GRDC, Koblenz, Germany), under WMO’s auspices,
routinely acquires, stores, freely distributes and reports on
river discharge data from a network of 7,222 stations,
about 4,750 of which have daily and 5,580 of which have
monthly data (GRDC, 2005; Map 4.1). Other international
programmes such as the European Water Archive (Rees
and Demuth, 2000) and national data centres supplement
this (data from private institutions are not included). The
longer the flow record, the better we can predict
variability in runoff – input that is especially important in
the context of flood forecasting, hydropower generation
and climate change studies. The quality and adequacy of
data records for runoff vary tremendously. While some

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 127

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 2 7

Figure 4.5: Typical hydrographs in accordance with climatic settings

Note: For tropical climates close to the equator (Af), perennial rivers flow all year. Towards the north and south the tropical climates have a
distinct rainy season and a dry season (Am and Aw). In dry climates (B) rivers are often ephemeral and only flow periodically after a storm.
In the temperate Cf climate, there is no distinct dry or wet season, whereas the ‘Mediterranean climate’ (Cs) has a pronounced seasonal
water deficit in the summer and a rainy winter reflected in the hydrograph. The cold climates (D) have a distinct snowmelt runoff peak and
the Df climate has an additional peak in the autumn caused by rain.
Source: Stahl and Hisdal 2004.

records extend back 200 years in Europe and 100 to 150
years on other continents, in many developing nations the
data record is generally of insufficient length and quality
to carry out either reliable water resources assessments
or cost-effective project designs. As a result, for these
regions, data is rarely compiled or distributed effectively
on a global scale (WMO, 2005).

2e. Wetlands
Wetlands are water-saturated environments and are
commonly characterized as swamps, bogs, marshes, mires
and lagoons. Wetlands cover an area about four times
greater than the world’s lakes. However, they contain
only 10 percent of the water found in lakes and other
surface waters. During the last century, an extensive
number of wetlands were destroyed or converted to
other forms of land-use. The role they play in terms of
ecosystems and water services are more fully described in

Chapter 5. However, because they total about 6 percent
of the Earth’s land surface (OECD, 1996), they are critical
areas to consider and protect in terms of surface water
and, in some regions, groundwater resources. Currently,
extensive work is being done through the ‘Wise Use’
campaigns sponsored principally by Ramsar, WWF and
UNEP. These campaigns seek to maintain critical services
in water and related livelihood and food production areas.
An important new study on variability in the role of
wetlands was carried out by Bullock and Acreman (2003),
wherein they assess the differences in wetland water
quantity functions based on 169 worldwide studies
conducted from 1930 to 2002. They believe this new
review ‘provides the first step towards a more
scientifically defensible functional assessment system
(of wetlands)’ and establishes ‘a benchmark for the
aggregated knowledge of wetland influences upon
downstream river flows and aquifers’. They conclude that

Everglades National Park,
United States, is 1 of the
1,558 wetland sites
currently protected under
the Ramsar Convention

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 128

1 2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Map 4.1: Distribution of GRDC water measurement stations, March 2005

‘there is only limited support to the generalized model of
flood control, recharge promotion and flow maintenance
portrayed throughout the 1990s as one component of
the basis of wetland policy formulation’, noting that
support is confined largely to floodplain wetlands. They
also note that: ‘Less recognized are the many examples
where wetlands increase floods, act as a barrier to
recharge or reduce low flows’ and that ‘generalized and
simplified statements of wetland function are discouraged
because they demonstrably have little practical value’.
Overall they conclude that wetlands cannot be considered
to have the same role in every hydrological setting.
They recommend that future water management actions
for both basins and aquifers carefully evaluate each
wetland’s characteristics as they will exhibit different
performance and functional roles according to their
location in the watershed, their climate, and the
extent of other development features.

2f. Groundwater
Global groundwater volume stored beneath the Earth’s
surface represents 96 percent of the Earth’s unfrozen
freshwater (Shiklomanov and Rodda, 2003). Groundwater
provides useful functions and services to humans and the
environment. It feeds springs and streams, supports
wetlands, maintains land surface stability in areas of
unstable ground, and acts as an overall critical water
resource serving our water needs.

UNESCO and WMO support the International Groundwater
Resources Assessment Centre (IGRAC, hosted in Utrecht,
The Netherlands). IGRAC estimates that about 60 percent
of withdrawn groundwater is used to support agriculture
in arid and semi-arid climates. Morris et al. (2003) report
that groundwater systems globally provide 25 to 40
percent of the world’s drinking water. Today, half the
world’s megacities and hundreds of other major cities
on all continents rely upon or make significant use of
groundwater. Small towns and rural communities
particularly rely on it for domestic supplies. Even where
groundwater provides lower percentages of total water
used, it still can serve local areas with relatively low-cost
good-quality water where no other accessible supply
exists. Finally, groundwater can bridge water supply
gaps during long dry seasons and during droughts.

Occurrence and renewability
Recent, globally focused groundwater publications (Zekster
and Everett, UNESCO Groundwater Series, 2004; UNEP,
2003), point out that large variations in groundwater exist
in terms of occurrence, rate of renewal and volumes stored
in different types of aquifers. Geological characteristics are
also an important factor. While shallow basement aquifers
contain limited storage, large volumes of groundwater are
stored in thick sedimentary basins. Aquifers in folded
mountain zones tend to be fragmented, while volcanic
rock environments have unique hydraulic conditions.
Shallow aquifer systems have near-surface water tables
that are strongly linked to and interchange with surface

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 2 9

water bodies. Map 4.2 illustrates the thirty-six Global
Groundwater Regions identified by IGRAC (2004), which
compares predominant hydrogeological environments
found around the world. The UNESCO-led World-wide
Hydrogeological Mapping and Assessment Programme
(WHYMAP) also contributes to mapping aquifer systems,
collecting and disseminating information related to
groundwater at a global scale (see Chapter 13).
Groundwater, as a potential resource, can be
characterized by two main variables: its rate of renewal
and its volume in storage. Much of groundwater is
derived from recharge events that occurred during past
climatic conditions and is referred to as ‘non-renewable
groundwater’ (IAEA). The actual recharge of these aquifer
systems is negligible. The world’s largest non-renewable
groundwater systems (Table 4.2) are located in arid
locations of Northern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula and
Australia, as well as under permafrost in Western Siberia.
Their exploitation will result in a reduction in stored

volumes. A debate has arisen about how and when
to use these groundwater resources as sustainable
groundwater development is understood as ‘exploitation
under conditions of dynamic equilibrium leaving reserves
undiminished’. However, nations may decide that the
exploitation of such reserves is justified where undesired
side-effects would not be produced (Abderrahman,
2003). UNESCO and the World Bank have jointly prepared
the publication Non-renewable groundwater resources,
a guidebook on socially-sustainable management for
policy makers (forthcoming, 2006).

Groundwater, as

Transboundary groundwater

and its volume

In terms of shared water resources, groundwater does not
respect administrative boundaries. Most of the large nonrenewable reserves in Table 4.2 are shared. However, in
addition to these aquifer systems, there are numerous
smaller renewable transboundary aquifers located
worldwide. Attention to shared groundwater resources
management is increasing with strong support from

a potential
resource, can be
characterized by
two main
variables: its
rate of renewal
in storage

Map 4.2: Global groundwater regions: predominant mode of groundwater occurrence and mean rate of renewal

Mean rate of
recharge
Type of region
(mm/year)
0
20 200
Basement regions
Sedimentary-basin regions
High-relief folded mountain regions
Volcanic regions

Large groundwater reserves in arid zones

1 Western mountain belt of North & Central
America
2 Central plains of North & Central
America
3 Canadian shield
4 Appalachian highlands
5 Caribbean islands and costal plains of
North & Central America
6 Andean belt
7 Lowlands of South America

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17

Guyana shield
Brazillian shield and associated basins
Baltic and Celtic shields
Lowlands of Europe
Mountains of Central & Southern Europe
Atlas Mountains
Saharan basins
West African basement
Subsaharan basins
East African basement & Madagascar

18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27

Volcanics of East Africa
Horn of Africa basins
West Siberian platform
Central Siberian plateau
East Siberian highlands
Northwestern Pacific margin
Mountain belt of Central & Eastern Asia
Basins of West & Central Asia
Mountain belt of West Asia
Himalayas & associated highlands

28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

Plains of Eastern China
Indo-Gangelic-Brahmaputra Plain
Nubian & Arabian shields
Levant & Arabian platform
Peninsular India & Sri Lanka
Peninsulars & islands of South-East Asia
Western Australia
Eastern Australia
Islands of the Pacific

Note: Small-scale world map showing 36 Global Groundwater Regions depicting predominant hydrogeological setting (Basement (red), Sedimentary Basin (yellow), High-Relief Folded Mountain
(green) and Volcanic (blue). Higher groundwater renewal rates, as averaged over each of the mentioned Global Groundwater Regions, are reflected in the figure by higher colour intensities. The
hatched zones depict areas of limited groundwater renewal that contain extensive (non-renewable) groundwater reserves which were created in the past.
Source: IGRAC, 2004.

1 3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Most renewable

Table 4.2: Selected large aquifer systems with non-renewable groundwater resources

groundwater is

Countries

Aquifer
system

Area (km2)

of a high
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

quality, is
adequate for
domestic use,
irrigation and
other uses, and
does not require
treatment

Egypt, Libya,
Nubian Sandstone
Sudan, Chad
Aquifer System
Algeria, Libya,
NW Sahara
Tunisia
Aquifer System
Algeria, Libya,
Murzuk Basin
Niger
Mali, Niger,
Iullemeden Aquifer
Nigeria
System
Niger, Nigeria,
Chad Basin
Chad, Cameroon
Aquifer
S.Arabia, UAR,
Multilayer Aquifer
Bahrain, Qatar
Arabian Platform
Australia
Great Artesian Basin
Russia
West Siberian
Artesian Basin

2,200,000

Estimated
total
volume
(km3)

Estimated
exploitable
volume
(km3)

Estimated
annual
recharge
(km3)

Estimated
annual
abstraction
(km3)

> 6,500

13

1.6

1,000,000

150,000
to 457,000
60,000

1,280

14

2.5

450,000

> 4,800

> 60 to 80

n.a.

1.75

500,000

250 to 550

50 to 80

n.a.

600,000

10,000
to 15,000
n.a.

>170 to 350

n.a.

n.a.

250,000

n.a.

500?

30

13.9

1,700,000
3,200,000

20,000
1,000,000

170
n.a.

50
55

0.6
n.a.

Source: Jean Margat, personal communication, 2004.
(Adapted from the UNESCO Working Group on Non-Renewable Groundwater Resources, 2004).

several international organizations that are addressing
sustainable management strategies which would enable
shared socio-economic development of such aquifers.
At present, the UNESCO Internationally Shared Aquifer
Resources Management (ISARM) project is compiling an
inventory of transboundary aquifers.

Natural groundwater quality
Most renewable groundwater is of a high quality, is
adequate for domestic use, irrigation and other uses, and
does not require treatment. However, it should be noted
that uncontrolled development of groundwater resources,
without analysis of the chemical and biological content,
is an unacceptable practice that can (as in the example
of fluoride and arsenic problems in Southeast Asia) lead
to serious health problems. Some waters have beneficial
uses owing to naturally high temperatures and levels of
minerals and gas. This is the case for thermal waters
where these properties have been created by high
geothermal gradients, volcanic settings or natural
radioactive decay. In most cases, these groundwaters
are highly developed and used for health and recreation
(spa) and geothermal energy services.

observed parameter, whereas widespread and
continuous water quality and natural groundwater
discharge and abstraction networks are operational in
only a few countries (Jousma and Roelofson, 2003).
Several large-scale efforts are underway to upgrade
monitoring and networks, for example, in Europe
(Proposal for new Directive on Groundwater Protection
[EC 2003] and in India [World Bank, 2005]). However,
groundwater assessment, monitoring and data
management activities are for the most part minimal or
ineffective in many developing countries and are being
downsized and reduced in many developed counties
(see Chapter 13). Lack of data and institutional
capacity is endemic, making adequate groundwater
development and management difficult. GEMS/Water
(a UNEP programme) is currently adding national
groundwater data to its international water quality
database (described in Part 3). This will supplement the
current global knowledge of groundwater quality
information collected and displayed by IGRAC on its
website, which includes special reports on both arsenic
and fluorides in groundwater (IGRAC, 2005a, 2005b).

2g. Water availability
Groundwater monitoring networks
Groundwater monitoring networks, as with surface
water systems, operate differently at national, regional
and local levels. Groundwater levels constitute the most

Efforts to characterize the volume of water available to a
given nation have been ongoing for several decades. The
primary input for many of these estimates is an
information database (AQUASTAT) that has historically

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 3 1

been developed and maintained by FAO. It is based on
data related to the quantity of water resources and uses
a water-balance approach for each nation (FAO, 2003a).
This database has become a common reference tool used
to estimate each nation’s renewable water resources. FAO
has compiled an Index of Total Actual Renewable Water
Resources (TARWR). The details of how the TARWR Index

and its national Per Capita Equivalent of ‘Availability’
(PCA) are determined and some of the considerations
that should be taken into account when using the
database index are explained in Box 4.1. The TARWR and
PCA results for most nations from the latest 2005 update
of the FAO AQUASTAT database are found in Table 4.3.

BOX 4.1: INDEX OF WATER RESOURCES AVAILABILITY – TOTAL ACTUAL RENEWABLE WATER RESOURCES (TARWR)
Total Actual Renewable Water Resources

capita basis. Beginning in about 1989, TARWR

Four additional limitations are inherent in the

(TARWR) is an index that reflects the water

has been used to make evaluations of water

TARWR information. First, seasonal variability

resources theoretically available for development

scarcity and water stress.

in precipitation, runoff and recharge, which is
important to regional and basin-level decision

from all sources within a country. It is a
km3/year.

Considerations related to availability in

making and water storage strategies, is not well

Divided by the nation’s population and adjusted

the TARWR index

reflected in annualized quantities. Second, many

to m3/yr, it is expressed as a per capita volume

It is important to note that the FAO estimates are

large countries have several climatic settings as

more readily allowing a relative evaluation of the

maximum theoretical volumes of water renewed

well as highly disparate population concentrations

resource available to its inhabitants. It estimates

annually as surface water runoff and groundwater

and the TARWR does not reflect the ranges that

the total available water resources per person in

recharge, taking into consideration what is shared

can occur within nations. The recently developed

each nation taking into account a number of

in both the surface and groundwater settings.

small-scale Relative Stress Index Map

individual component indicators by:

These volumes, however, do not factor in the

(Vörösmarty) could assist in overcoming this

socio-economic criteria that are potentially and

oversight. Third, there is no data in TARWR

differentially applied by societies, nations or

that identifies the volumes of ‘green’ water that

regions to develop those resources. Costs can vary

sustain ecosystems – the volumes that provide

considerably when developing different water

water resources for direct rain-fed agriculture,

sources. Therefore, whatever the reported ‘actual’

grazing, grasslands and forests – nor does it

adding external flow entering from other

renewable volume of water, it is a theoretical

account for the volumes of water that are

nations which contributes to both surface

maximum, and the extent to which it can be

potentially available from non-conventional

water and groundwater,

developed will be less for a variety of economic

sources (reuse, desalination, non-renewable

and technical reasons. For example, Falkenmark

groundwater). Finally, while the accounting-based

and Rockstrom (2004) point out that, globally,

method for a nation’s TARWR adds all water that

approximately 27 percent of the world’s surface

enters from upstream countries, it does not

water runoff occurs as floods. That is not

subtract any part of the water that leaves the

calculated volume expressed in

I

adding all internally generated surface water
annual runoff and groundwater recharge
derived from precipitation falling within the
nation’s boundaries,

I

I

subtracting any potential resource volumes
shared by the same water which comes
from surface and groundwater system
interactions, and

I

considered a usable water resource even

nation in the TARWR number although estimates

subtracting, where one or more treaty exists,

though it would be counted as part of the annual

of those volumes are available for each country

any flow volume required by that treaty to

renewable surface water runoff component of

from the database.

leave the country.

TARWR. Therefore, the usable volumes available as
resources to meet societal demands will be

It gives the maximum theoretical amount of

considerably less than the maximum number given

water actually available for the country on a per

as a nation’s TARWR.

Source: FAO, 2003a; FAO-AQUASTAT, 2005.

1 3 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 4.3: Water availability information by country (AQUASTAT, FAO 2005)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Country

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Precip
Population
Rate1
(1,000,000s) (mm/yr)

Afghanistan
24,926
Albania
3,194
Algeria
32,339
Angola
14,078
Antigua and
Barbuda
73
Argentina
38,871
Armenia
3,052
Aruba
101
Australia
19,913
Austria
8,120
Azerbaijan
8,447
Bahamas
317
Bahrain
739
Bangladesh
149,664
Barbados
271
Belarus
9,852
Belgium
10,340
Belize
261
Benin
6,918
Bermuda
82
Bhutan
2,325
Bolivia
8,973
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
4,186
Botswana
1,795
Brazil
180,654
Brunei Darussalam
366
Bulgaria
7,829
Burkina Faso
13,393
Burundi
7,068
Cambodia
14,482
Cameroon
16,296
Canada
31,744
Cape Verde
473
Central African
Rep.
3,912
Chad
8,854
Chile
15,996
China
1,320,892
China, Taiwan
Prov.
22,894
Colombia
44,914
Comoros
790
Congo, Dem
Rep.
54,417
Congo
3,818
Costa Rica
4,250
Côte d'Ivoire
16,897
Croatia
4,416
Cuba
11,328
Cyprus
808
Czech Rep
10,226

TARWR
Volume
2005
(km2/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2000
(m3/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2005
(m3/yr)

Surface Groundwater
water Overlap2
%
%
%
TARWR TARWR TARWR

Incoming Outgoing3 Total
Waters
Waters
Use
%
%
%
TARWR
TARWR
TARWR

300
1,000
100
1,000

65
42
14
148

2,986
13,306
478
14,009

2,610
13,060
440
10,510

55%
12%
98%

15%
92%
39%

6%
6%
21%

15%
35%
3%
0%

77%
0%
3%
80%

36%
4%
42%
0.2%

2,400
600
600

0.1
814
10

800
21,981
2780

710
20,940
3,450

34%
60%

16%
40%

16%
13%

0%
66%
14%

0%
14%
31%

4%
28%

500
1,100
400
1,300
100
2,700
2,100
600
800
2,200
1,000
1,500
1,700
1,100

492
78
30
0.02
0.1
1,211
0.1
58
18
19
26

25,708
9,616
3,765
66
181
8,809
307
5,694
1,786
82,102
3,954

24,710
9,570
3,580
63
157
8,090
296
5,890
1,770
71,090
3,820

89%
71%
20%
nd
3%
7%
10%
64%
66%

15%
8%
22%
nd
0%
2%
92%
31%
5%

4%
8%
14%
nd
0%
0%
2%
31%
5%

0%
100%

38%

7%

6%

0%
29%
73%
0%
97%
91%
0%
36%
34%
14%
61%

95
623

45,564
74,743

40,860
69,380

100%
45%

0%
21%

95%
17%

0.4%
51%

93%

1,000
400
1,800
2,700
600
700
1,200
1,900
1,600
500
400

38
12
8,233
9
21
13
15
476
286
2,902
0.3

9,429
9,345
48,314
25,915
2,680
1,084
566
36,333
19,192
94,353
703

8,960
6,820
45,570
23,220
2,720
930
2,190
32,880
17,520
91,420
630

7%
66%
100%
94%
64%
65%
24%
94%
98%
60%

14%
23%
1%
30%
76%
48%
4%
35%
13%
40%

1%
23%
1%
26%
40%
48%
3%
33%
12%
0%

80%
34%
0%
1%
0%
35%
75%
4%
2%
0%

100%
5%
6%
0%
92%
100%
14%
99%
14%
5%
0%

1,300
300
700
600

144
43
922
2,830

38,849
5,453
60,614
2,259

36,910
4,860
57,640
2,140

98%
31%
96%
96%

39%
27%
15%
29%

39%
23%
15%
26%

2%
65%
4%
1%

98%
9%
0%
25%

0.02%
0.5%
1.4%

2,400
2,600
1,800

67
2,132
1.2

50,635
1,700

2,930
47,470
1,520

94%
99%
17%

6%
24%
83%

0%
24%
0%

0%
1%
0%

50%
0%

1%

1,500
1,600
2,900
1,300
1,100
1,300
500
700

1,283
832
112
81
106
38
0.8
13

25,183
275,679
27,932
5,058
22,669
3,404
995
1,280

23,580
217,920
26,450
4,790
23,890
3,370
970
1,290

70%
27%
67%
91%
26%
83%
72%
100%

33%
24%
33%
47%
10%
17%
53%
11%

33%
24%
0%
43%
0%
0%
24%
11%

30%
73%
0%
5%
64%
0%
0%
0%

0%
23%
7%
15%
38%
0%
0%
100%

0.03%
0.005%
2%
1%

0%
0%
0%
0%
96%
60%
0%
22%

5%
3%
57%
258%
7%
105%
5%
1%
1%

0.2%

1%
1%
49%
6%
2%
1%
0.3%
2%
9%

22%
31%
20%

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 3 3

Table 4.3: continued

Country

49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96

Precip
Population
Rate1
(1,000,000s) (mm/yr)

Denmark
5,375
Djibouti
712
Dominica
79
Dominican
Republic
8,872
Ecuador
13,192
Egypt
73,390
El Salvador
6,614
Equatorial Guinea
507
Eritrea
4,297
Estonia
1,308
Ethiopia
72,420
Fiji
847
Finland
5,215
France
60,434
French Guiana
182
French Polynesia
248
Gabon
1,351
Gambia
1,462
Gaza Strip,
Palestinian Territories 1,376
Georgia
5,074
Germany
82,526
Ghana
21,377
Greece
10,977
Greenland
57
Grenada
80
Guadeloupe
443
Guatemala
12,661
Guinea
8,620
Guinea-Bissau
1,538
Guyana
767
Haiti
8,437
Honduras
7,099
Hungary
9,831
Iceland
292
India
1,081,229
Indonesia
222,611
Iran, Islamic
Rep.
69,788
Iraq
25,856
Ireland
3,999
Israel
6,560
Italy
57,346
Jamaica
2,676
Japan
127,800
Jordan
5,614
Kazakhstan
15,403
Kenya
32,420
Korea, Dem.
People's Rep.
22,776
Korea, Rep.
47,951

TARWR
Volume
2005
(km2/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2000
(m3/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2005
(m3/yr)

Surface Groundwater
water Overlap2
%
%
%
TARWR TARWR TARWR

Incoming Outgoing3 Total
Waters
Waters
Use
%
%
%
TARWR
TARWR
TARWR

700
200
3,400

6
0.3

1,128
475

1120
420

62%
100%

72%
5%

33%
5%

0%
0%

0%
0%

21%
3%

1,400
2,100
100
1,700
2,200
400
600
800
2,600
500
900
2,900

21
424
58
25
26
6
13
122
29
110
204
134

2,507
34,161
859
4,024
56,893
1,722
9,195
1,749
35,074
21,268
3439
812,121

2,370
32,170
790
3,810
51,280
1,470
9,790
1,680
33,710
21,090
3,370
736,260

100%
102%
1%
70%
96%

56%
32%
2%
24%
38%

56%
32%
0%
24%
35%

91%
16%

31%
100%

23%
16%

97%
87%

2%
49%

2%
48%

0%
0%
97%
30%
0%
56%
1%
0%
0%
3%
12%
0%

5%
36%
0%
0%
0%
35%
3%
80%
0%
25%
7%
0%

16%
4%
118%
5%
0.4%
5%
1%
2%
0.2%
2%
20%

1,800
800

164
10

133,333
6,140

121,390
5,470

99%
38%

38%
6%

37%
6%

0%
63%

0%
0%

0.1%
0.4%

300
1,000
700
1,200
700
600
1,500
200
2,700
1,700
1,600
2,400
1,400
2,000
600
1,000
1,100
2,700

0
63
154
50
74
603

52
41
12,035
12,480
1,878
1,870
2,756
2,490
6,998
6,760
10,767,857 10,578,950

0%
90%
69%
55%
75%

82%
27%
30%
49%
14%

0%
25%
29%
47%
11%

18%
8%
31%
43%
22%
0%

0%
19%
59%
0%
2%
0%

6%
31%
1%
10%

111
226
31
241
14
96
104
170
1,897
2,838

9,773
27,716
25,855
316,689
1,723
14,949
10,433
609,319
1,880
13,381

8,790
26,220
20,160
314,210
1,660
13,510
10,580
582,190
1,750
12,750

91%
100%
39%
100%
77%
91%
6%
98%
64%
98%

30%
17%
45%
43%
15%
41%
6%
14%
22%
16%

23%
17%
32%
43%
0%
31%
6%
12%
20%
14%

2%
0%
48%
0%
7%
0%
94%
0%
34%
0%

47%
45%
0%
0%
0%
0%
100%
0%
68%
0%

2%
1%
0.4%
1%
7%
1%
7%
0.1%
34%
3%

200
200
1,100
400
800
2,100
1,700
100
200
700

138
75
52
2
191
10
430
1
110
30

1,955
3,287
13,673
276
3,325
3,651
3,383
179
6,778
985

1,970
2,920
13,000
250
3,340
3,510
3,360
160
7,120
930

71%
45%
93%
15%
89%
59%
98%
45%
63%
57%

36%
2%
21%
30%
22%
41%
6%
57%
6%
10%

13%
0%
19%
0%
16%
0%
4%
25%
0%
0%

7%
53%
6%
55%
5%
0%
0%
23%
31%
33%

7%

53%
57%
2%
122%
23%
4%
21%
115%
32%
5%

1,400
1,100

77
70

3,464
1,491

3,390
1,450

86%
89%

17%
19%

16%
15%

13%
7%

0%
0%
0%
0%

30%
6%

12%
27%

1 3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 4.3: continued

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Country

97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144

Precip
Population
Rate1
(1,000,000s) (mm/yr)

Kuwait
2,595
Kyrgyzstan
5,208
Lao Peoples Dem. Rep. 5,787
Latvia
2,286
Lebanon
3,708
Lesotho
1,800
Liberia
3,487
Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
5,659
Lithuania
3,422
Luxemburg
459
Macedonia, Fr
Yugoslav Rep.
2,066
Madagascar
17,901
Malawi
12,337
Malaysia
24,876
Maldives
328
Mali
13,409
Malta
396
Martinique
395
Mauritania
2,980
Mauritius
1,233
Mexico
104,931
Moldova,
Rep.
4,263
Mongolia
2,630
Morocco
31,064
Mozambique
19,182
Myanmar
50,101
Namibia
2,011
Nepal
25,725
Netherlands
16,227
New Caledonia
233
New Zealand
3,904
Nicaragua
5,597
Niger
12,415
Nigeria
127,117
Norway
4,552
Oman
2,935
Pakistan
157,315
Panama
3,177
Papua New
Guinea
5,836
Paraguay
6,018
Peru
27,567
Philippines
81,408
Poland
38,551
Portugal
10,072
Puerto Rico
3,898
Qatar
619
Reunion
767
Romania
22,280

TARWR
Volume
2005
(km2/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2000
(m3/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2005
(m3/yr)

Surface Groundwater
water Overlap2
%
%
%
TARWR TARWR TARWR

Incoming Outgoing3 Total
Waters
Waters
Use
%
%
%
TARWR
TARWR
TARWR

100
400
1,800
600
700
800
2,400

0.02
21
334
35
4
3
232

10
4,182
63,184
14,642
1,261
1,485
79,643

8
3,950
57,640
15,510
1,190
1,680
66,530

0%
214%
57%
47%
93%
173%
86%

0%
66%
11%
6%
73%
17%
26%

0%
54%
11%
6%
57%
17%
26%

100%
0%
43%
53%
1%
0%
14%

0%
36%
100%
2%
11%
57%
0%

2,227%
49%
1%
1%
31%
2%
0.05%

100
700
900

1
25
3

113
6,737
7,094

106
7,280
6,750

33%
62%
32%

83%
5%
3%

17%
4%
3%

0%
38%
68%

117%
20%
100%

802%
1%

600
1,500
1,200
2,900
2,000
300
400
2,600
100
2,000
800

6
337
17
580
0.03
100
0.1
nd
11
3
457

3,147
21,102
1,528
26,105
103
8,810
129

3,100
18,830
1,400
23,320
91
7,460
130

84%
99%
93%
98%
0%
50%
1%

0%
16%
8%
11%
100%
20%
99%

0
15%
8%
9%
0%
10%
0%

16%
0%
7%
0%
0%
40%
0%

100%
0%
93%
0%
0%
52%
0%

7%
110%

4,278
1,904
4,624

3,830
2,230
4,360

1%
86%
79%

3%
32%
30%

0%
18%
20%

96%
0%
11%

0%
0%
0%

15%
22%
17%

600
200
300
1,000
2,100
300
1,300
800
1,500
1,700
2,400
200
1,200
1,100
100
300
2,700

12
35
29
217
1,046
18
210
91

2,712
13,739
971
11,814
21,898
10,211
9,122
5,736

2,730
13,230
930
11,320
20,870
8,810
8,170
5,610

9%
94%
76%
45%
84%
23%
94%
12%

3%
18%
34%
8%
15%
12%
10%
5%

3%
11%
10%
6%
14%
0%
10%
5%

91%
0%
0%
54%
16%
66%
6%
88%

85%
76%
1%
0%
5%
72%
100%
0%

20%
1%
44%
0.3%
3%
2%
5%
9%

327
197
34
286
382
1
223
148

86,554
38,787
3,107
2,514
85,478
388
2961
51,814

83,760
35,140
2,710
2,250
83,920
340
1,420
46,580

0%
94%
3%
75%
98%
94%
21%
97%

0%
30%
7%
30%
25%
97%
25%
14%

1%
28%
0%
28%
24%
91%
22%
12%

4%
90%
23%
0%
0%
76%
0%

0%
96%
0%
3%
0%
3%
0%

1%
6%
3%
1%
137%
76%
1%

3,100
1,100
1,500
2,300
600
900
2,100
100
2,100
600

801
336
1,913
479
62
69
7
0.1
5
212

166,563
61,135
74,546
6,332
1,596
6,859
1,814
94
6,935
9,445

137,250
55,830
69,390
5,880
1,600
6,820
1,820
86
6,520
9,510

100%
28%
84%
93%
86%
55%

12%
16%
38%
20%
6%

12%
16%
30%
19%
6%

94%
56%
4%

0%
46%
4%

0%
99%
94%
0%
3%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%

0.01%
0.1%
1%
6%
26%
16%

2%
90%
20%

0%
72%
16%
0%
13%
45%
0%
4%
0%
80%

4%
6%
2%

554%
11%

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 3 5

Table 4.3: continued

Country

Precip
Population
Rate1
(1,000,000s) (mm/yr)

145 Russian
Federation
142,397
146 Rwanda
8,481
147 Saint Helena
5
148 Saint Kitts and Nevis
42
149 Saint Lucia
150
150 Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines
121
151 Samoa
180
152 Sao Tome and
Principe
165
153 Saudi Arabia
24,919
154 Senegal
10,339
155 Serbia and
Montenegro
10,519
156 Seychelles
82
157 Sierra Leone
5,168
158 Singapore
4,315
159 Slovakia
5,407
160 Slovenia
1,982
161 Solomon Islands
491
162 Somalia
10,312
163 South Africa
45,214
164 Spain
41,128
165 Sri Lanka
19,218
166 Sudan
34,333
167 Suriname
439
168 Swaziland
1,083
169 Sweden
8,886
170 Switzerland
7,164
171 Syrian Arab
Rep.
18,223
172 Tajikistan
6,298
173 Tanzania
37,671
174 Thailand
63,465
175 Togo
5,017
176 Tonga
105
177 Trinidad and
Tobago
1,307
178 Tunisia
9,937
179 Turkey
72,320
180 Turkmenistan
4,940
181 Uganda
26,699
182 Ukraine
48,151
183 United Arab
Emirates
3,051
184 United Kingdom
59,648
185 United States
of America
297,043
186 Uruguay
3,439
187 Uzbekistan
26,479
188 Venezuela,
26,170
Bolivarian Rep.

500
1,200
800
2,100
2,300

TARWR
Volume
2005
(km2/yr)

Surface Groundwater
water Overlap2
%
%
%
TARWR TARWR TARWR

Incoming Outgoing3 Total
Waters
Waters
Use
%
%
%
TARWR
TARWR
TARWR

TARWR
Per Capita
2000
(m3/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2005
(m3/yr)

4,507
5

30,980
683

3,1650
610

90%
100%

17%
69%

11%
69%

4%
0%

0%
81%

0.0

621

560

15%

85%

0%

0%

0%

2.2
2.4
39

15,797
118
4,182

13,210
96
3,810

92%
60%

92%
19%

83%
13%

0%
0%
33%

0%
6%
14%

19,820

20%

1%

1%

79%

94%

31%

25%

3%
42%

3%
42%

40%
86%
98%
98%
43%
72%

23%
10%
27%
16%
11%
66%

21%
6%
25%
14%
8%
66%

98%
76%

11%
5%

11%
5%

0%
0%
27%
60%
0%
0%
19%
31%
0%
30%
0%
100%
2%
76%

0.2%

25%
58%

0%
0%
75%
41%
0%
56%
10%
0%
0%
77%
28%
41%
2%
24%

76%
75%
2%
21%
1%

2%
1%

1,600
3,000
2,200
100
700

2,000
2,500
2,500
800
1,200
3,000
300
500
600
1,700
400
2,300
800
600
1,500

722%
4%

160
0.6
50
32
45
14
50
112
50
65
122
4.5
174
54

36,322
149
9,279
16,031
100,000
1,538
1,154
2,794
2,642
2,074
292,566
4,876
19,679
7,462

30,960
139
9,270
16,080
91,040
1,380
1,110
2,710
2,600
1,880
277,900
4,160
19,580
7,470

300
500
1,100
1,600
1,200
2,000

26
16
91
410
15

1,622
2,625
2,591
6,527
3,247

1,440
2,540
2,420
6,460
2,930

18%
396%
88%
48%
73%

16%
38%
33%
10%
39%

8%
19%
31%
7%
34%

80%
17%
10%
49%
22%

119%

1,800
300
600
200
1,200
600

3.8
4.6
214
25
66
140

2,968
482
3,439
5,218
2,833
2,815

2,940
460
2,950
5,000
2,470
2,900

68%
87%
4%
59%
36%

32%
32%
1%
44%
14%

9%
13%
0%
44%
12%

0%
9%
1%
97%
41%
62%

0%
4%
29%
56%
22%

8%
60%
18%
100%
0%
27%

100
1,200

0.2
147

58
2,465

49
2,460

100%
98%

80%
7%

80%
6%

0%
1%

0%
0%

1,538%
6%

700
1,300
200
1,900

3,051
139
50
1,233

10,837
41,654
2,026
51,021

10,270
40,420
1,900
47,120

42%
19%
57%

17%
17%
18%

17%
4%
17%

8%
58%
77%
41%

14%
79%
54%
0%

0%
6%

23%
31%
32%
25%
58%
1%
18%
2%
5%

16%
2%
116%
1%

1 3 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 4.3: continued

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Country

Precip
Population
Rate1
(1,000,000s) (mm/yr)

189 Viet Nam
190 West Bank,
Palestinian Territories
191 Yemen
192 Zambia
193 Zimbabwe

TARWR
Volume
2005
(km2/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2000
(m3/yr)

TARWR
Per Capita
2005
(m3/yr)

Surface Groundwater
water Overlap2
%
%
%
TARWR TARWR TARWR

Incoming Outgoing3 Total
Waters
Waters
Use
%
%
%
TARWR
TARWR
TARWR

82,481

1,800

891

11,406

10,810

40%

5%

4%

59%

4%

8%

2,386
20,733
10,924
12,932

200
1,000
700

0.8
4
105
20

223
10,095
1,584

320
198
9,630
1,550

10%
98%
76%
66%

90%
37%
45%
25%

0%
34%
45%
20%

0%
0%
24%
39%

28%
0%
100%
71%

162%
2%
13%

Source: FAO-AQUASTAT, 2005.
Notes:
1. Average precipitation (1961–90 from IPCC (mm/year). As in the FAO-AQUASTAT Database, for some countries large discrepancies exist between national and IPCC data on
rainfall average. In these cases, IPCC data were modified to ensure consistency with water resources data.
2. Overlap is the water that is shared by both the surface water and groundwater systems.
3. Outflow – Sep. 2004 for surface water and Aug. 2005 for groundwater.

Part 3. Human Impacts
A number of forces continue to seriously affect our natural water resources. Many of these are primarily
the result of human actions and include ecosystem and landscape changes, sedimentation, pollution,
over-abstraction and climate change.

...each type of
landscape
change will have
its own specific
impact, usually
directly on
ecosystems and
directly or
indirectly on
water
resources...

The removal, destruction or impairment of natural
ecosystems are among the greatest causes of critical
impacts on the sustainability of our natural water
resources. This issue is dealt with more broadly in Chapter
5. However, it should be emphasized that the ecosystems
with which we interact are directly linked to the well-being
of our natural water resources. Although it is difficult to
integrate the intricacies of ecosystems into traditional
and more hydrologically-based water assessment and
management processes, this approach is being strongly
advocated in some sectors and scientific domains (e.g.
Falkenmark and Rockström, 2004; Figueras et al., 2003;
Bergkamp et al., 2003). The basis of this approach is the
recognition that each type of landscape change will have
its own specific impact, usually directly on ecosystems and
directly or indirectly on water resources. The magnitude of
the impacts will vary according to the setting’s conditions
with a wide range of possible landscape changes. Changes
that can occur to landscapes include: forest clearance,
crop- or grazing lands replacing grasslands or other
natural terrestrial ecosystems, urbanization (leading to
changes in infiltration and runoff patterns as well to
pollution), wetlands removal or reduction, new roadwork
for transportation, and mining in quarries or largescale open pits.

3a. Sedimentation
Sediments occur in water bodies both naturally and as
a result of various human actions. When they occur
excessively, they can dramatically change our water
resources. Sediments occur in water mainly as a direct
response to land-use changes and agricultural practices,
although sediment loads can occur naturally in poorly
vegetated terrains and most commonly in arid and semiarid climates following high intensity rainfall. Table 4.4
summarizes the principal sources of excessive sediment
loads and identifies the major impacts that this degree
of sediment loading can have on aquatic systems and
the services that water resources can provide. A recently
documented and increasing source of high sediment loads
is the construction of new roads in developing countries
where little consideration is given to the impacts of such
actions on aquatic systems and downstream water
supplies. Globally, the effects of excessive sedimentation
commonly extend beyond our freshwater systems and
threaten coastal habitats, wetlands, fish and coral reefs in
marine environments (see Chapter 5). The importance of
sediment control should be an integral consideration in
any water resources development and protection strategy.
UNESCO’s International Sediment Initiative (ISI) project
will attempt to improve the understanding of sediment

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 3 7

phenomena, and provide better protection of the aquatic
and terrestrial environments.

3b. Pollution
Humans have long used air, land and water resources as
‘sinks’ into which we dispose of the wastes we generate.
These disposal practices leave most wastes inadequately
treated, thereby causing pollution. This in turn affects

precipitation (Box 4.2), surface waters (Box 4.3), and
groundwater (Box 4.4), as well as degrading ecosystems
(see Chapter 5). The sources of pollution that impact our
water resources can develop at different scales (local,
regional and global) but can generally be categorized
(Table 4.5) according to nine types. Identification of
source types and level of pollution is a prerequisite to
assessing the risk of the pollution being created to both

Table 4.4: Major principal sources and impacts of sedimentation
Pertinence
SOURCES
Agriculture areas,
downstream catchments

Sector

Action or mechanism

Agriculture

I

poor farming with excessive soil loss

Impacts
I
I
I
I

Forest and development Forestry, Road
access areas,downstream Building, Construction,
catchments
Construction, Mining
MAJOR IMPACTS
Major rivers and
navigable waterways

Aquatic ecosystems

Navigation

I
I
I

I
I

Fisheries / Aquatic
habitat

I
I
I
I
I

extensive tree cutting
lack of terrain reforestation
lack of runoff control in steep terrain

I

deposition in rivers or lakes
dredging (streams, reservoirs, lakes or
harbors)

I

decreased light penetration
higher suspended solids concentrations
absorbed solar energy increases
water temperature
carrying toxic agricultural and
industrial compounds
settling and settled sediment

I

I

I

I
I

I
I
I
I

Lakes, rivers, reservoirs
as water supplies

Water supply

I
I
I

Hydroelectric facilities

Hydropower

I
I

increased pump/turbine wear
reduced water supply usability for
certain purposes
additional treatment for usability
required
dams trap sediment carried downstream
increased pump/turbine wear

I
I
I

I
I
I

All waterways and their
ecosystems

Toxic chemicals

I

become attached or adsorbed to
sediment particles

I
I

increase soil erosion
add toxic chemicals to the environment
sediment and pollutants are added to streams
irrigation systems maintenance cost increased
increase natural water runoff
accelerated soil erosion creating more sediment

decreases water depth making navigation difficult
or impossible.
releases toxic chemicals into the aquatic or land
environment.
affects fish feeding and schooling practices; can
reduce fish survival
irritate gills of fish, can cause death, destroy
protective mucous covering on fish eyes and scales
dislodge plants, invertebrates, and insects in stream
beds affecting fish food sources resulting in smaller
and fewer fish, increased infection and disease
susceptibility
stress to some fish species
release to habitat causes fish abnormalities or death
buries and suffocates eggs
reduces reproduction
affects water delivery, increases maintenance costs
reduces water resource value and volume
increased costs

diminished reservoir capacity
shortened power generation lifecycle
higher maintenance, capital costs.
transported to and deposited in, other areas
later release into the environment.

Source: Adapted from Environment Canada (2005a), www.atl.ec.gc.ca/udo/mem.html
Note: Water transforms landscapes and moves large amounts of soil and fine-grained materials in the form of sediment.
Sediment is: 1) eroded from the landscape, 2) transported by river systems and eventually 3) deposited in a riverbed, wetland, lake, reservoir or the ocean. Particles or
fragments are eroded naturally by water, wind, glaciers, or plant and animal activities with geological (natural) erosion taking place slowly over centuries or millennia. Human
activity may accelerate the erosion. Material dislodged is transported when exposed to fluvial erosion in streams and rivers. Deposition occurs as on flood plains, bars and
islands in channels and deltas while considerable amounts end up in lakes, reservoirs and deep river beds.

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 138

1 3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

BOX 4.2: ACID RAIN IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES
Atmospheric contamination from industrial

important issue in several developing countries

As reported by Driscoll et al. (2001), there are

plants and vehicle emissions leads to dry and

(for example in China, India, Korea, Mexico,

still impacts to water quality in northeastern US

wet deposition. This causes acidic conditions

South Africa and Viet Nam) where there are

and eastern Canada, even though improved

to develop in surface water and groundwater

typically lower emission controls and inadequate

conditions developed after the introduction of

sources and at the same time leads to the

monitoring and evaluation (Bashkin and

the Clean Air Act and its amendments (1992).

destruction of ecosystems. Acid deposition

Radojevic, 2001). In recognition of this, UNEP

impairs the water quality of lakes and streams

and the Stockholm Environmental Institute are

41 percent of lakes in the Adirondacks of

by lowering pH levels (i.e. increasing acidity),

sponsoring programmes such as RAPIDC (Rapid

New York and 15 percent of all lakes in New

decreasing acid-neutralizing capacity, and

Air Pollution in Developing Countries) with the

England exhibit signs of chronic and/or

increasing aluminum concentrations. High

aim of identifying sources and sensitive areas

episodic acidification. Only modest

concentrations of aluminium and increased

and measuring levels of acid rain. Extensive

improvements in acid-neutralizing capacity

acidity reduce species diversity and the

funding from ADB is now being used to source

have occurred in New England with none in

abundance of aquatic life in many lakes and

reductions in several Asian nations. The problem

the Adirondacks or Catskills of New York.

streams. While fish have received most attention

has broad transboundary implications as acid rain

Elevated concentrations of aluminum have

to date, entire food webs are often negatively

can get carried over long distances from polluting

been measured in acid-impacted surface

affected. Despite improvements, it still remains a

areas to other countries. For example, Japan is

waters throughout the Northeast.

critical situation that impacts water resources and

impacted by Korean and Chinese emissions, while

ecosystems in some developed regions of Europe

Canada, in addition to its own sources, receives

and in North America. The situation remains an

substantive emissions from the US.

Figure 4.6: Acid rain and its deposition processes

Figure 4.7: Five-year mean of the pH level in rainfall in the eastern
regions of Canada and the US

pH
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.0
5.2
5.4

Source: Environment Canada, 2005c.

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 3 9

BOX 4.3: IMPACTS TO SURFACE WATER QUALITY FROM HUMAN ACTIVITY
The challenge of how to improve water quality

impacts are becoming evident over large areas in

antibiotics, birth control pills, estrogen

by rehabilitation and protection of lakes, streams,

lakes, streams and groundwater and can also be

replacement therapies, chemotherapy agents,

reservoirs, wetlands and related surface water

linked to the degradation of aquatic freshwater

anti-seizure medications, etc., are finding

bodies is a growing global concern, typified

and marine ecosystems.

their way into the environment via human
and animal excreta from disposal into the

by the recent European Commission Water
Framework Directive (EC, 2000). However, surface

Further detail on pollution impacts are found in

sewage system and from landfill leachate that

water pollution risks, particularly in developing

the chapters on human settlements (Chapter 3),

may impact groundwater supplies. Agricultural

nations, remain relatively widespread. A valuable

agriculture (Chapter 7) and industry (Chapter 8).

practices are a major source and 40 percent
of antibiotics manufactured are fed to

initial step in identifying the nature and extent
of water quality impacts linked to pollution is

Emerging Issues

livestock as growth enhancers. Manure,

to distinguish their point (PS) and non-point

Only a small percentage of chemicals are

containing traces of pharmaceuticals, is

sources (NPS). PS pollution is commonly linked

regulated locally, nationally or internationally

often spread on land as fertilizer from which

directly to end-of-pipe releases from industry and

(Daughton 2004). An emerging concern is

it can leach into local streams and rivers.

municipal wastes. Its control is more direct and

contaminants in high population settings that

quantifiable and in many developed countries its

are neither traditionally measured nor regulated,

Reynolds further notes that conventional

mitigation has been linked to treatment achieving

for example pharmaceuticals (Wiegel et al.

wastewater treatment is not effective in

lower contaminant concentrations before

2004). Reynolds (2003) reports:

eliminating the majority of pharmaceutical
compounds. Since various contaminants do not

discharge. NPS pollution occurs when
contaminants from diverse and widely spread

Scientists are becoming increasingly

always have coincident pollution patterns, single

sources are transported by runoff into rivers,

concerned about the potential public health

indicators for all contaminants are not effective.

lakes, wetlands, groundwater and coastal areas.

impact of environmental contaminants

Reynolds (2003) suggests that ‘pharmaceutical

This type of pollution is more difficult to address

originating from industrial, agricultural,

contamination in the environment will involve

as there are a large number of sources, for

medical and common household practices,

both advanced waste and water treatment

example, varied agricultural areas all of which are

i.e., cosmetics, detergents and toiletries. A

technologies and source control at the point

using pesticides and nutrients. Today, however,

variety of pharmaceuticals including

of entry into the environment … all of which

NPS pollution is receiving more attention as its

painkillers, tranquilizers, anti-depressants,

are issues of ongoing scientific research’.

the aquatic systems and, through that system, to
humans and the environment. With the knowledge of
the principal sources of the pollution, the appropriate
mitigation strategy can be identified to reduce the
impact on the water resources.
The potential impacts from the different pollution types
based on the area (scale) affected, the time it takes to
contaminate, the time needed to clean up (remediate) a
contaminated area, and the links to the major controlling
factors are illustrated in Table 4.6 (Peters and Meybeck,
2000). With the exception of pathogenic contaminants,
all other forms of pollution can extend to a regional
scale. The fact that it takes considerably longer to
remediate a contaminated area than to pollute it
clearly highlights the need for adopting the precautionary
principle and prioritizing protection strategies rather than
costly ad-hoc restoration measures.

Developed countries have historically experienced a
succession of water quality problems relating to
pathogens, eutrophication, heavy metals, acidification,
organic compounds and micro-pollutants and sediments
from municipal, industrial and agricultural waste sources
(Webb, 1999; Meybeck et al., 1989; Revenga and Mock,
2000). In rapidly developing countries – such as Brazil,
China and India – similar sequences of water problems
have emerged over the last few decades. In other
developing countries, water pollution still remains
problematic and is one of the single leading causes of
poor livelihood and bad health (Lenton, 2004; and see
Chapter 6).

Global water quality and pollution information
Assessing water quality enables the natural characteristics
of the water to be documented and the extent of the
pollution to be determined; however, today monitoring is

1 4 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 4.4: IMPACTS TO GROUNDWATER QUALITY FROM HUMAN ACTIVITY
Protection of groundwater sources is becoming

in groundwater management practice (FAO

demanding, and can be much more costly.

a more widespread global concern as typified by

2003b) to arrive at more sustainable water

While this has been recognized for several

the recent European Commission directive which

development and use.

decades (Vrba 1985), this important message
has not been adequately or consistently

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

focuses on preventing rather than cleaning up
pollution (EC 2003). Incidents of groundwater

Groundwater pollution contrasts markedly in

conveyed to the policy-makers or the public.

pollution arising from human actions, particularly

terms of the activities and compounds that

To address this gap, groundwater vulnerability

in developing nations, remain relatively

most commonly cause surface water pollution.

assessment methods are being developed. These

widespread and its impacts in terms of degraded

In addition, there are completely different

emerging ‘vulnerability maps’ have historically

water quality are summarized in Zektser and

controls that govern the contaminant mobility

been applied to other risks such as flooding and

Everett (2004). Throughout the world, most

and persistence in the two water systems’

landslides and they can now be used as direct

countries’ practices of urbanization, industrial

settings. Foster and Kemper (2004), UNEP

input to water resources and land planning (Vrba

development, agricultural activities and mining

(2003), FAO (2003b) and Burke and Moench

and Zaporozek 1994). Results of such studies

enterprises have caused groundwater

(2000) point out that groundwater management

are absolutely critical where aquifers are used

contamination and its most typical sources are

commonly involves a wide range of instruments

for water supplies and have sensitive ecosystem

illustrated in Figure 4.8. A 2002 joint World

and measures (technical, process, incentive,

dependencies. In conjunction with other

Bank, GWP, WHO and UNESCO online guidance

legal and enforcement actions/sanctions and

environmental input, they have become effective

document (Foster et al. 2002) states ‘There is

awareness raising) to deal with resources that

instruments used to regulate, manage and take

growing evidence of increasing pollution threats

are less visible than those in our surface

decisions related to impacts from existing and

to groundwater and some well documented

water bodies.

proposed changes in land use, ecosystems and
sources of water supplies. Large-scale

cases of irreversible damage to important
aquifers, following many years of widespread

Mapping groundwater vulnerability

groundwater vulnerability maps (e.g. France,

public policy neglect’. This guide is

Groundwater is less vulnerable to human impacts

Germany, Spain, Italy, The Czech Republic,

supplemented by recommendations in a 2003

than surface water. However, once polluted,

Poland, Russia and Australia) serve as guidelines

joint FAO, UNDESA, IAEA and UNESCO report

cleaning it up (remediation) takes a relatively

for land use zoning at national or regional levels.

directly addressing the universal changes needed

long time (years), is more technically

Figure 4.8: Primary sources of groundwater pollution

solid waste tip
or landfill

industrially
polluted river

industrial site
drain

leaking
storage tanks

in-situ
sanitation

farmyard
drainage

leaking
sewers

wastewater
lagoons

Note: This figure illustrates the type of sources that should be inventoried for cataloging potential sources of groundwater contamination.
Source: Foster et al., 2002.

agricultural
intensification

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 4 1

Table 4.5: Freshwater pollution sources, effects and constituents of concern
Pollution type
1 Organic matter

Primary sources
Industrial wastewater and
domestic sewage.

2 Pathogens and
microbial
contaminants

Domestic sewage, cattle and other
livestock, natural sources.

3 Nutrients

Principally runoff from agricultural
lands and urban areas but also
from some industrial discharge.

4 Salinization

Leached from alkaline soils by over
irrigation or by over-pumping
coastal aquifers resulting in
saltwater intrusion.
Sulphur, Nitrogen oxides and
particulates from electric power
generation, industrial stack and
auto/truck emissions (wet and dry
deposition). Acid mine drainage
from tailings as well as mines.
Industries and mining sites.

5 Acidification
(precipitation
or runoff)

6 Heavy metals

7 Toxic organic
compounds and
micro-organic
pollutants.3
8 Thermal

Wide variety of sources from
industrial sites, automobiles,
farmers, home gardeners, municipal
wastewaters.
Fragmentation of rivers by dams
and reservoirs slowing water and
allowing it to warm. Industry
from cooling towers and other
end-of-pipe above-ambient
temperature discharges
9 Silt and
Natural soil erosion, agriculture,
suspended
road building, deforestation,
particles
construction and other land use
changes.
Other pollutants include Radioactivity, Fluoride, Selenium.

Effects1
Depletion of oxygen from the water column
as it decomposes, stress or suffocating
aquatic life.
Spreads infectious diseases through
contaminated drinking water supplies
leading to diarrhoeal disease and intestinal
parasites, increased childhood mortality
in developing countries.
Over-stimulates growth of algae
(eutrophication) which then decomposes,
robbing water of oxygen and harming
aquatic life. High levels of nitrate in
drinking water lead to illness in humans.
Salt build-up in soils which kills crops or
reduces yields. Renders freshwater supplies
undrinkable.

Constituents of concern2
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), Dissolved
Organic Carbon (DOC), Dissolved Oxygen (DO)
Shigella, Salmonella, Cryptosporidium,
Fecal coliform (Coliform), Escherichia coli
(mammal faeces – E. Coli)

Total N (organic + inorganic), total P (organic
+ inorganic)
For eutrophication: (Dissolved Oxygen,
Individual N species (NH4, NO2, NO3,
Organic N), Orthophosphate)
Electrical conductivity, Chloride (followed,
post characterization by full suite of major
cations (Ca, Mg), anions

Acidifies lakes and streams which
negatively impacts aquatic organisms and
leaches heavy metals such as aluminium
from soils into water bodies.

pH

Persists in freshwater environments such as
river sediments and wetlands for long
periods. Accumulates in the tissues of fish
and shellfish. Can be toxic to both aquatic
organisms and humans who consume them.
A range of toxic effects in aquatic fauna and
humans from mild immune suppression to
acute poisoning or reproductive failure.

Pb, Cd, Zn, Cu, Ni, Cr, Hg, As (particularly
groundwater)

Changes in oxygen levels and
decomposition rate of organic matter in
the water column. May shift the species
composition of the receiving water body.

Temperature

Reduces water quality for drinking and
recreation and degrades aquatic habitats
by smothering them with silt, disrupting
spawning and interfering with feeding.

Total suspended solids, turbidity

PAHs, PCBs, pesticides (lindane, DDT, PCP,
Aldrin, Dieldrin, Endrin, Isodrin,
hexachlorobenzene)

Sources and notes:
1 Principally from Revenga and Mock, 2000. Their compilation from Taylor and Smith, 1997; Shiklomanov, 1997; UNEP/GEMS, 1995.
2 From R. Peters, W. Beck, personal communication, 2004.
3 Micro-organic pollutant list now includes a suite of endocrin disrupters, antioxidants, plasticizers, fire retardants, insect repellents, solvents, insecticides, herbicides,
fragrances, food additives, prescription drugs and pharmaceuticals (e.g., birth control, antibiotics, etc.), non-prescription drugs (e.g., caffeine, nicotine and derivatives,
stimulants).

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 142

1 4 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Table 4.6: Spatial and time scales within which pollution occurs and can be remediated

Notes:
The nutritional status of most regions of the world has improved in all developing regions. Sub-Saharan Africa and
South Asia have also improved their nutritional level, but they lag behind and are host to the majority of the
undernourished people in the world.
1 Relevant primarily to * surface water, ** groundwater,
2 Local < 10000 km2, region->104 to 106 km2, global->106 to 108 km2.
3 Lag between cause and effect.
4 Longest time scale is for groundwater, followed by lakes, and shortest for rivers and streams.
Category Shading:
Scale – the colour intensity increases as impact dimension becomes greater.
Time to pollute and Time to remediate are highlighted in red for most critical, orange for moderately critical, and
yellow for the least critical situations. Green is shown for the situation where remedial actions could be less than
one year (pathogens).
Source: Modified from Peters and Meybeck, 2000.

Food remains in the
Mekong River after the
daily market activities,
Viet Nam

4. See www.gemstat.org for
more information

a more holistic process relating to health and other socioeconomic issues. The international compilation of surface
water and groundwater quality data sets at a global scale
is still in its relative infancy as compared to precipitation
or surface water runoff data. Although some facilities
have existed for several decades to collect and
disseminate this type of data, it has been historically
difficult to collect. This is attributable to several
reasons. National centres have not always been linked
to institutional networks. Most nations are simply not
used to providing this information to anyone other than
their immediate institutions and users for either national
or specific project purposes. In addition, data in many
developing countries is not extensive and even where it
has been collected, making it publicly available as a data
set is frequently not a priority for the already overloaded
and meagrely resourced national and subnational water
resource institutions. However, progress has been made
in the past three years in this area. The GEMS/Water
international water quality database4 went online in
March 2005 and now has begun to work with a broad
range of agencies, NGOs and data quality groups to
harmonize the reporting of water data and information.
They have established a QA/QC (quality assurance/quality
control) programme that includes laboratory evaluations

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 4 3

based on a freely available published set of methods
that are used by most of the laboratories that report
their data to GEMS/Water. GEMS/Water (2005) reports
that data is now received from about 1,500 stations
globally, including about 100 for lakes and groundwater.
Increased awareness of the need for water quality data
to evaluate impacts and design improved water use and
reuse strategies in order to meet quality and quantity
demands is emerging at national and river-basin levels.
Moreover, there is increasing use and future development
of shared aquifers and river basins – many of which are
being supported extensively by programmes of the GEF
(Global Environment Facility) and UNESCO.

3c. Over-abstraction
The problems of over-abstraction in surface water bodies
and groundwater, sometimes tied directly to upstream
diversions, reservoirs and deforestation, are well
documented. The problems commonly become exacerbated
when combined with extended natural dry periods.
Notable examples of substantive reductions in large major
river flows can be found around the world. Some of the
basins suffering from this reduction are: Niger, Nile, Rwizi,
Zayandeh-Rud (Africa); Amu Darya, Ganges, Jordan, Lijiang,
Syr Darya, Tigris and Euphrates, Yangtze and Yellow (Asia);
Murray-Darling (Australia); and Columbia, Colorado, Rio
Grande and San Pedro (North America). Examples of lakes
and inland sea areas decreasing dramatically in size and
volume include: Lakes Balkhash, Drigh, Hamoun, Manchar,
and the Aral and Dead Seas (Asia); Lakes Chad, Nakivale
and in the Eastern Rift Valley Area, e.g. Nakuru (Africa);
Lake Chapala (North America); and Mono Lake and the
Salton Sea (North America). Dramatically lowered water
levels in aquifers are increasingly reported, for example in
the Mexico City and the Floridian and Ogallala aquifers
(North America), as well as in China, India, Iran, Pakistan
and Yemen (Asia).
Despite years of clear over-use with evident changes in
both water and related ecosystem conditions, many of
the same causes persist. Among the most prominent are
the highly inefficient water supply provisioning practices
for agriculture and municipal use, deforestation, and
the basic lack of control over exploitation of the
actual surface and groundwater sources. Inappropriate
development of reservoirs and diversions combined with
inadequate considerations of alternatives in conservation
and use minimization (demand management) have further
complicated and increased the impacts on existing water

resources. While there are some hopeful signs of change
emerging in selected local actions (see Chapters 5 and
7), these are few in comparison to the broad-based and
fundamental modifications needed in national, regional
and subnational practices to reverse and counteract these
ongoing substantive impacts.
Groundwater over-abstraction represents a special
situation as the visual evidence is typically less obvious
and the effects are more difficult to recognize and
react to. Increased pumping from aquifers has increased
globally, particularly during the second half of the
twentieth century. While this has produced a number
of important benefits, some have been sustainable
over only relatively short periods and have had significant
negative side-effects (UNEP, 2003; FAO, 2003b; Burke
and Moench, 2000). We see, for example, that an initially
impressive benefit was experienced in India where shallow
groundwater development allowed irrigated land area to
be essentially doubled, thereby dramatically increasing
food production. However, it also caused momentous
changes to local water regimes that resulted in a variety
of impacts, including lowered water tables and entirely
depleted groundwater resources in some areas. Similar
cases from all climatic regions of the world illustrate that
over-abstracting groundwater is relatively common. The
results of groundwater over-abstraction can be seen in:
reduced spring yields; rivers drying up and having poorer
water quality because of lowered base-flow contributions;
intrusion of saline waters or other poor quality water into
the freshwater zones of aquifers; lowered or abandoned
productivity as water levels decline in wells; higher
production costs from wells or the need to extend
underground aqueducts (qanats) as inflow rates decrease;
and diminished groundwater-dependent ecosystems,
including wetlands, as they become stressed or lose
resilience from inadequate water sources. Subsidence is
another particularly widespread impact that occurs from
excessive over-pumping, with some notable examples in
a number of major cities in China, Japan, Mexico and the
US. However, this type of impact can be stopped when
the over-pumping of the aquifer is discontinued,
although the effects are not usually reversible. Llamas
and Custodio (2003) provide a recently updated
compilation of papers that illustrate the wide-ranging
impacts of intensive groundwater exploitation by
identifying examples of criteria that have led to overabstraction actions and by explaining how these criteria
can be part of sustainable development strategies.

Tigris River, Iraq

Groundwater
over-abstraction
represents a
special situation
as the visual
evidence is
typically less
obvious and the
effects are more
difficult to
recognize and
react to

WWDR Chapter 4e (F)

10/3/06

15:32

Page 144

1 4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Map 4.3: Groundwater abstraction rate as a percentage of mean recharge

Note: Low percentages indicate
underdeveloped groundwater
resources, high percentages point
to development stress or
eventually overexploitation.

High levels of
exploitation are
currently taking
place in many
countries in the
Middle East,
Southern and
Northern Africa,
Asia, selected
countries in
Europe, and in
Cuba

Source: IGRAC, 2004.

Map 4.3 introduces a groundwater development indicator
that compares the degree of groundwater use in each
nation to the volume of estimated recharge. Exploitation,
for example of more than 50 percent of recharge, will
likely result in particular stress on the aquifer
sustainability of groundwater systems. High levels of
exploitation are currently taking place in many countries
in the Middle East, Southern and Northern Africa, Asia,
selected countries in Europe, and in Cuba. In addition,
as noted above, parts of China, India, Mexico, Pakistan
and the US are also being overexploited in selected
regions where there is high aridity and population
density. Tracking groundwater use as compared to
recharge volumes at national and subnational levels –
and particularly for individual aquifers – should be
practised and implemented to identify and take
corrective action as needed to maintain groundwater
development sustainability.

3d. Global warming and climate change
As noted above, there is empirical evidence of impacts
on water resources from global warming. The IPCC, in
cooperation with new partners, has begun to address
this issue in addition to their more traditional focus on
greenhouse gases and temperature changes. A recent
IPCC expert meeting (IPCC, 2004, p. 27) identified two
issues related to water and the impacts from global
warming: one related to impacts and the other to
knowledge gaps. These two issues, as taken from
the IPCC report, are as follows:

I

‘The extreme event frequency and magnitude will
increase even with a small increase in temperature
and will become greater at higher temperatures. The
impacts of such events are often large locally and
could strongly affect specific sectors and regions.
Increased extreme events can cause critical design
values or natural thresholds to be exceeded, beyond
which the impacts’ magnitudes increase rapidly.’

I

Knowledge gaps related to the water sector were
identified as:
(1) Insufficient knowledge of impacts in different parts
of the world (especially in developing countries),
(2) Almost complete lack of information on impacts
under different development pathways and under
different amounts of mitigation,
(3) No clear relationship between climate change and
impacts on water resources,
(4) Little analysis of the capacity and cost of
adaptation, and
(5) Lack of understanding of how changes in
variability affect the water environment.

Arnell (2004) also assessed predicted impacts of both
population and climate on water-stressed regions, based
on population growth scenarios and climate change
models. He concludes:
Climate change increases water resources stresses …
where runoff decreases, including around the

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 4 5

Mediterranean, in parts of Europe, central and southern
America, and southern Africa. In other water-stressed
parts of the world – particularly in southern and eastern
Asia – climate change increases runoff, but this may
not be very beneficial in practice because increases
tend to come during the wet season and extra water
may not be available during the dry season.
However, he further points out that model results
differ by up to four times in terms of persons impacted
according to different population and climate scenarios.

Shiklamanov and Rodda (2003) conclude that only
general predictions and observations have been
developed based on the assessments of global warming
impacts on water resources to date. They agree with
Arnell (2004) that assessments of future water resources
can only be obtained by using estimates of possible
regional (rather than global) changes in climate (primarily
precipitation and temperature by seasons and months).
They specify that the existing climate change estimates
are extremely unreliable even for the largest regions and
river basins. Furthermore, they suggest that the gap in
knowledge related to the specific impacts of global
warming on water resources is one of the largest
scientific challenges in hydrology today.

BOX 4.5: ACCELERATING GLACIAL DECLINE
Land-based and mountain glaciers have

separated ice islands that used to be connected

However, this hope has not been realized as

generally experienced a worldwide retreat and

with the glaciers at levels above 7,500 m. While

much of the glacier runoff evaporates long

thinning during the last century. Notably,

Tibet’s glaciers have been receding for the past

before it reaches the country’s drought-stricken

glacier decline has considerably accelerated

four decades due to global warming, the rate of

farmers. ‘The human cost could be immense’

on a global basis during recent years (Arendt

decline has increased dramatically since the

states AFP (2004), as 300 million Chinese

et al. 2002; Dyurgerov 2003). The mean mass

early 1990s. It was initially thought that the

live in the country’s arid west and depend

balance decrease that took place during the

water from the melting glaciers could provide

on the water flowing from the glaciers for

period 1990–99 was three times greater than

additional water for China’s arid north and west.

their livelihoods.

that of the previous decade (Frauenfelder et
al. 2005). Data for this figure are based on

Map 4.4: Principal regions of land-based and mountain glaciers

measured changes in glacier mass balance
made at thirty glaciers located in nine high
mountain regions of Asia, Europe and North
and South America.
As a specific country example we can look to
China. In 2004, AFP (L’Agence France-Presse)
cites renewed concerns of disappearing glaciers
being broadcast in Asia, notably in China and
Nepal. Yao Tangdong, China’s foremost
glaciologist, was quoted in state media as
saying, ‘An ecological catastrophe is developing
in Tibet because of global warming and that
most glaciers in the region could melt away by
2100’. His conclusion was based on the results
of a forty-month study by a group of twenty
Sino-American scientists which showed

Source: GLIMS, 2005 (Global Land Ice Measurements from Space nsidc.org/data/glims/ lvOct05).

1 4 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. Matching Demands to Supply

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Numerous responses have been put forward to meet the ever-increasing demand for water. In some
cases, the response focuses on how to compensate for the natural variability in the hydrological cycle
in order to provide a continuously available resource. In other circumstances, the response focuses on
overcoming the reduced availability in water quantity or quality that results from human and
development impacts, from a demand management perspective.
Most water-short regions of the world with dry climates
have long-standing water conservation traditions. These
are being maintained or supplemented with demandmanagement practices. To meet increased demands, water
resource management practitioners are augmenting the
limited natural water supply with desalination, water reuse,
enhanced groundwater recharge and inter-basin transfers.
However, regions with abundant water (tropical and cold
climates) are accustomed to water supply schemes and
tend to adopt management practices that are particularly
adapted to those specific settings. It is often taken for
granted that resources will remain relatively abundant and
could be readily treated or replaced if polluted; that any
disruption in ecosystem balance could be remedied; and
that adequate water could be diverted and stored to
overcome the inconvenience of seasonal flow variations.
However, in these regions, impacts from human
development have been more severe than anticipated.
Water resources have been diminished in quantity and
quality, and ecosystem habitats have become endangered

to a point below their resilience levels. As a result,
responses are emerging that include some of the same
practices in demand management used in dry climates.
In both water settings, it is increasingly recognized that
maintaining and, where possible, restoring the state of the
environment by keeping both aquatic and terrestrial aquatic
ecosystems above resilience levels can provide substantial
long-term benefits to a region’s water resources.

4a. Environmental flows for preserving
ecosystems and increasing water resources
The heightened awareness of the important role
played by ecosystems in terms of water resources
and sustainability is a result of the recent focus on
‘environmental’ or ‘in-stream’ flows. Dyson et al.
(2003) define environmental flows as follows:
the water regime provided within a river, wetland
or coastal zone to maintain ecosystems and their
benefits. They provide critical contributions to river
health, economic development and poverty alleviation.

BOX 4.6: MANAGEMENT OF AQUIFER RECHARGE (MAR) – AN EXAMPLE FROM VIET NAM
The Binh Thuan province is located along the

In order to combat desertification, improved

redirecting rainfall during the rainy season

coastal plain in the lower part of central eastern

practices in ecosystem rehabilitation as well as

and making use of the resource during the dry

Viet Nam; its principal city is Phan Tiet, 200

remediation techniques to restore aquifer systems

period (December–March).

km East of Ho Chi Minh City. The area of the

and groundwater storage capacity are being

province is approximately 8,000 km2, with a

developed. In particular, these techniques are

The project’s implementation by UNESCO is

total population of 1 million.

being used in the Hong Phong sub-district (Bac

ongoing and the results achieved thus far have

Binh district), located about 25 km northeast of

allowed for the selection of the site for the

Before 1975, the area was covered by a dense

Phan Tiet, with an area of approximately 300

Aquifer Recharge Project in the morphological

tropical forest, which was cleared to make room

km2 encompassing three villages.

depression of Nuoc Noi, where the aquifer water
table is very close to the ground level. The use

for rice fields and resulted in massive
desertification. Due to an uneven rainfall

The geo-hydrological assessment of the area,

of the bank filtration technique is already

distribution and a four-month period (from

consisting of a semi-permeable bedrock and

producing satisfactory results as water quality

December to March) of very little precipitation,

porous material (sand dunes) with a thickness

increases. Groundwater can be abstracted and

the area suffers from considerable water

of up to 150 m, allows for the use of SAR

used, after natural filtration, for different

shortage during the dry season.

(storage and aquifer recovery) techniques by

purposes (human and agricultural).

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 4 7

The means for maintaining and restoring these flows
under multi-use and competing demand situations are
increasingly being considered in detail in many nations and
basins. In some regions, environmental flow considerations
are being integrated into water policy, legislation and
regulations, and water management practices. South
Africa (1997), Australia (CSIRO, 2004) and several USA
states (e.g. Connecticut, Texas), among others, already
have broadly encompassing legislation and in-field
practices that take into account environmental flows.
More research is needed to understand the water volumes,
levels and quality needed to keep ecosystems resilient
during seasonal variations and periods of climatic stress.
Furthermore, a recognized additional challenge is how
to introduce and embed this concept in the predominantly
engineering-driven water management agencies of many
developing countries so that the resilience of their basinand watershed ecosystem is less at risk (see Chapter 5).

4b. Combating natural variability
Dealing with variability in water runoff in particular has
led to centuries-old practices of intercepting, diverting
and storing water so that adequate volumes would be
available to match the needs and demands of the users.

Rainwater harvesting
Rainwater management, also known as harvesting, is
receiving renewed attention as an alternative to or a
means of augmenting water sources. Intercepting and
collecting rainwater where it falls is a practice that
extends back to pre-biblical times (Pereira et al., 2002).
It was used 4,000 years ago in Palestine and Greece;
in South Asia over the last 8,000 years (Pandey et al.,
2003); in ancient Roman residences where cisterns and
paved courtyards captured rain that supplemented the
city’s supply from aqueducts; and as early as 3000 BC
in Baluchistan where farming communities impounded
rainwater for irrigation. Recently in India, it has been
used extensively to directly recharge groundwater at
rates exceeding natural recharge conditions (UNESCO,
2000; Mahnot et al., 2003). Reports from other
international organizations focusing on this area5
indicate that eleven recent projects across Delhi
resulted in groundwater level increases of from 5 to
10 metres in just two years. In fact, the application
of rainwater management in India is likely to be one of
the most updated and modern in the world. The site
www.rainwaterharvesting.org provides links to cases
where rainwater management has been successfully
applied in different nations in both urban and rural

settings. An advantage of the technique is that its costs
are relatively modest and that individual or community
programmes can locally develop and manage the required
infrastructures (collection devices, basins, storage tanks,
surface or below-ground recharge structures or wells).
Larger rain harvesting schemes, which intercept runoff
using low-height berms or spreading dikes to increase
infiltration, have also been introduced in upstream
catchments where deforestation has decreased water
availability. The various methods of rainwater harvesting
that have the potential to satisfy local community and
crop demands are described in UNEP (2005).

Water diversions
Diverting surface waters into nearby spreading
basins/infiltration lagoons, ditches, recharge pits or
injection wells to recharge alluvial or other types of aquifers
are techniques used to deal with natural variability in flow,
reduce evaporative losses, and obtain better quality water.
Water diversion programmes being established around the
globe are referred to as ASR (artificial storage and recovery)
or MAR (managed aquifer recharge) (see Box 4.6). This
practice is being applied in arid and semi-arid locations
throughout the Middle East and Mediterranean regions.
Runoff in ‘wadis’ (dry riverbeds that only contain water
during times of heavy rain) that otherwise would
discharge into the sea or evaporate, is collected behind
earthen berms following infrequent but heavy rainfall. The
water infiltrates into the underlying alluvial gravel thereby
remaining available for substantively longer periods without
the excessively evaporative losses that would typically
occur from surface storage. In wetter areas, diversions
into alluvium are used as a means not only to store and
maintain groundwater-dependent ecosystems, but also
to reduce the treatment needed for the water supplies
systems taken from the alluvium further downstream.
Professional associations such as the US National Ground
Water Association (US NGWA) and the IAH (International
Association of Hydrogeologists) Commission on Managing
Aquifer Recharge (MAR)6 in cooperation with UNESCO and
other international donors, are actively supporting MAR
with applied research, capacity-building and pilot projects.
MAR programmes, some including injection of treated
wastewaters, are being carried out in both developed
and developing countries (e.g. in Australia, China,
Germany, Hungary, India, Kenya, Mexico, Oman, Pakistan,
the southern Africa region, Switzerland and the US).

Kakadu National Park,
Australia. Most
predictions indicate that
precipitations will
increase in Australia due
to climate change

Intercepting and
collecting
rainwater where
it falls is a
practice that
extends back to
pre-biblical
times...

5. See www.irha-h2o.org for
more information.
6. www.iah.org/recharge/
MAR.html

1 4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...the major
hydrological
challenge will be
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

to achieve more
equilibrium
between the
stored volumes
needed to meet
users’ demands
and the
incoming and
outgoing flow...

Storing water in reservoirs
The construction of dams to create reservoirs has
frequently been our response to growing demands for
water to provide hydropower, irrigation, potable supplies,
fishing and recreation, as well as to lower the impacts and
risks to our well-being from high-intensity events such as
floods and droughts. These facilities collect natural runoff,
frequently quite variable in its location, duration and
magnitude, and store it so that its availability is more
constant and reliable. Good information on the number
and capacity of dams is essential to assess impacts and
responses at the local, national and regional levels in
order to optimize water resources management, but it
is also needed to address issues related to global climate
and water availability scenarios (see Chapter 5).
Though the creation of reservoirs enables higher water
availability when and where it is needed, the construction
of these facilities has had a considerable impact, both
positive and negative, on the Earth’s ecosystems and
landscapes and has resulted in modifications to the
interactions among the components of the hydrological
cycle. Despite increased benefits derived from the
services reservoirs provide, there is ongoing debate about
how to prevent and reduce the social and environmental
consequences that come from building dams and creating
reservoirs. Following considerable media attention and
local actions some practices are changing. Large dam
construction rates have slowed, at least temporarily, and
there have been advances in the reconsideration of
alternatives and design criteria. Some existing dams that
no longer provide extensive services have been
decommissioned. Lastly, existing reservoir operations and
structures have been modified to allow releases. A
balance between what enters and what is released is
required to have a site’s upstream and downstream
hydrological settings and supporting ecosystems
sustained. When such a balance is achieved, the results
are substantial. There are both added benefits and
potential further value to the role of reservoirs in
development scenarios.

Transferring water among basins
The transfer of water from one river or aquifer basin
to another basin has long been used as a way to
meet water demands, particularly in arid and semi-arid
regions. It occurs often when large populations or, more
commonly, agricultural demands have outstripped existing
water resources. Even in advanced national development
stages, some basins can have surplus water resources while

others face shortages. Major long-distance schemes exist
in many nations and new ones are in development. Linking
the Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna system with other rivers in
India is part of the solution being offered to counteract
extensive recurring droughts and floods. For example, Shao
et al. (2003) present the situation in China where there are
seven existing major transfers and seven more planned or
under consideration. They describe a large-scale south-tonorth basin transfer involving the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers’
basins which, when completed, would divert 450 km3/yr.
They also point out some of the impacts of such a large
scheme. Multi-disciplinary approaches allow evaluation of
the feasibility and sustainability of transfer schemes. Global
experience has shown that although the transfer of water
among basins has been identified as a hydraulically and
technically feasible response, before proceeding with such
potential changes, broad social and environmental
considerations must be taken into account.

4c. Water reuse
Asano and Levine (2004) recently summarized the more
important challenges associated with water reclamation
and reuse. They noted that the technique of water
reuse is being applied in many countries including the
United States, Mexico, Germany, Mediterranean and
Middle Eastern countries, South Africa, Australia, Japan,
China and Singapore. Its increased application is being
facilitated by modern wastewater treatment processes,
which advanced substantially during the twentieth
century. These processes can now effectively remove
biodegradable material, nutrients and pathogens so
the treated waters have a wide range of potential
applications (Table 4.7). On a global scale, non-potable
water reuse is currently the dominant means of
supplementing supplies for irrigation, industrial cooling,
river flows and other applications (Asano, 1998). The
reuse of potable waters has been an accepted global
practice for centuries. Settlements downstream produced
their potable water from rivers and groundwater that
had circulated upstream through multiple cycles of
withdrawal, treatment and discharge (Steenvorden and
Endreny, 2004; Asano and Cotruvo, 2004; GW MATE,
2003). San Diego gets 90 percent of its current municipal
water supply from a wholesale water provider but in
future that amount will decrease to 60 percent with
the supplementary supply coming from reclaimed water
and desalination (USGS, 2005). Similar programmes are
emerging in many other large urban centres worldwide
where there are limited or less readily available
freshwater supplies. Similarly, riverbeds or percolation

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 4 9

ponds have been used to artificially recharge underlying
groundwater aquifers mainly with wastewater.
Recent documents from WHO (Aertgeerts and Angelakis,
2003) and the US EPA (2004) address the state-of-theart aspects and future trends in water use, both of
which predict increased development and use of the
above-mentioned practice to augment water supply
sources in order to meet demands. The WHO guidelines
for wastewater reuse first published in 1995 are being
updated with a planned release date of 2006 (WHO,
2005). According to water reuse surveys (Lazarova, 2001;
Mantovani et al., 2001), the best water reuse projects in
terms of economic viability and public acceptance are
those that substitute reclaimed water in lieu of potable
water for use in irrigation, environmental restoration,
cleaning, toilet flushing and industrial uses.
The annual reclaimed water volumes total about 2.2 billion
m3, based on 2000 and 2001 figures from the World Bank.
Recent projections indicate that Israel, Australia and
Tunisia will use reclaimed water to satisfy 25 percent, 11
percent and 10 percent, respectively, of their total water
demand within the next few years (Lazarova et al., 2001).
In Jordan, reclaimed water volumes are predicted to
increase more than four times by 2010 if demands are to
be met. By 2012, Spain will need to increase its reclaimed
water use by 150 percent and, by 2025, Egypt will need
to increase its usage by more than ten times. A number of
Middle Eastern countries are planning significant increases

in water reuse to meet an ultimate objective of 50 to 70
percent reuse of total wastewater volume. The growing
trend of water reuse is not only occurring in waterdeficient areas (Mediterranean region, Middle East and
Latin America), but also in highly populated countries
in temperate regions (Japan, Australia, Canada, north
China, Belgium, England and Germany). This method of
augmenting natural water sources is becoming an integral
component to many water resources management plans
and future use policies.

4d. Demand management
Conserving available water and reducing demand is a
necessary measure in water-short regions, especially those
in arid climates. Programmes of conservation and demand
reduction are referred to as water demand management
(WDM). This approach differs from the traditional supplydriven method, which makes all existing water available.
WDM applies selective economic incentives to promote
efficient and equitable water use. It also identifies water
conservation measures that are aimed at raising society’s
awareness of the scarcity and finite nature of the resource.
Conservation measures have not been readily implemented,
particularly where water was perceived as abundant.
However, the benefits in the extended useful life of
water supply and treatment plants and in the operating
efficiency and duration of sewage disposal systems can
be considerable in terms of higher economic return on
investment. On the environmental front, conservation

At inland
locations
or where
desalination is
too costly,
reclaimed water
can now
significantly
contribute to
the overall
water supply
used for
irrigation or
industry...

Table 4.7: Potential applications for reclaimed water
Application settings
Urban use
Unrestricted
Restricted-access irrigation
Agricultural irrigation
Food crops
Non-food crops, food crops
consumed after processing

Examples
Landscape irrigation (parks, playgrounds, school yards), fire protection, construction, ornamental fountains,
recreational impoundments, in-building uses (toilets, air conditioning)
Irrigation of areas where public access is infrequent and controlled (golf courses, cemeteries, residential, greenbelts)

Crops grown for human consumption and consumed uncooked
Fodder, fibre, seed crops, pastures, commercial nurseries, sod farms, commercial aquaculture

Recreational use
Unrestricted
Restricted

No limitations on body contact (lakes and ponds used for swimming, snowmaking)
Fishing, boating, and other non-contact recreational activities

Environmental use
Groundwater recharge
Industrial reuse
Potable reuse

Artificial wetlands, enhanced natural wetlands, and sustained stream flows
Groundwater replenishment, saltwater intrusion control, and subsidence control
Cooling system makeup water, process waters, boiler feed water, construction activities, and washdown waters
Blending with municipal water supply (surface water or groundwater)

Source: Asano and Leavine, 2004.

1 5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

One interesting
emerging
concept
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

proposes
combining
desalinated
water with
aquifer storage
and recovery...

allows for the diversion of the unused volumes to sustain
ecosystems and also lowers the pollution loadings to
lakes, rivers and groundwater. Such steps lead to improved
protection of drinking water sources and overall ecological
balance (Environment Canada, 2005b).
WDM advocates a wide range of measures that go
beyond conservation to broader sustainable resource
management. It applies to the protection of water
quality sources; reduction of wastage both in
infrastructure leakage and by users; improvement of
water allocation among competing uses, and creation
of appropriate pricing mechanisms. One example of a
situation where conservation measures are needed is
the case of ‘undelivered water’ – a commonly accepted
result of utilities supplying water through piped
distribution systems. The leakage from degraded pipes
provides ‘unaccounted for’ water that results in both a
physical shortage and reduced revenue. In terms of
inefficiency of resources and operations, losses are
routinely reported as 40 percent and as high as 60 to 70
percent in some major cities. Though it is an endemic
problem for most water utilities, its impact on society in
terms of wasted water resources is even more substantial.
Further water conservation can be achieved after delivery
by improving use practices in households. Reductions in
community water use after conservation measures have
been applied are reported to be as high as 40 percent.
These two situations illustrate to what extent the water
that is currently supplied may not actually be needed.
By reducing leakage and demand, substantial reductions
in the source volumes could be achieved. This should
be a clear message in development settings. WDM may
obviate the need for some of the proposed large-scale
physical or infrastructure investments and thereby
provide real efficiency gains to society (GWP, 2005a).

4e. Desalination

7. See www.idadesal.org for
more information.

Desalination is used mainly in water-scarce coastal arid
and semi-arid areas that are located inland where the only
available water source is saline or brackish groundwater.
The technology has been well established since the midtwentieth century and has evolved substantially to meet
the increased demands of water-short areas. Awerbuch
(2004) and Schiffler (2004) report on the global
application of desalination capacity and the most recent
advances and challenges. According to the latest statistics
in 2002 from IDA (International Desalination Association),7
about 50 percent of global desalination takes place in the

Middle East, followed by North America (16 percent),
Europe (13 percent), Asia (11 percent) Africa (5 percent)
and the Caribbean (3 percent). South America and
Australia each account for about 1 percent of the global
desalination volume. Globally, the contracted capacity of
desalination plants is 34.2 million m3/day converting
principally seawater (59 percent) and brackish water
(23 percent). In terms of the uses of desalinated water,
municipalities are the largest users (63 percent), followed
by substantial industry use (25 percent). The cost of
producing desalinated water has fallen dramatically in the
past two decades. Recently built large-scale plants produce
fresh water for US$ 0.45/m3 to US$ 0.50/m3 using reverse
osmosis (RO) systems and US$ 0.70/m3 to US$ 1.0/m3
using distillation systems. The energy consumed to drive
the conversion is a significant part of the cost and ranges
from 4 to 15kWh/m3 depending on factors such as the
technique used, the production rate of the facility, and
the quality of the equipment (US NRC, 2004).
Much of the conversion is likely to continue to be heavily
reliant on fossil fuels with its associated air pollution.
The challenge of what to do with the brine waste byproduct remains. Today it is disposed of by discharge
into the ocean or surface waters, sewage treatment
plants, deep-well injection, land application or further
evaporation in ponds. Each of these methods has
potentially adverse environmental impacts. The cost of
concentrate disposal for inland locations often limits
its applicability in these locations. Schiffer (2004)
recommends the establishment of an internationally
agreed-upon environmental assessment methodology
for desalination plants to enable the impacts from
different facilities to be consistently compared.
Future uses for desalination are emerging and IDA
expects that, with increasing demand and the upscaling of processes, it will continue to be applied for
the development of economies in coastal areas to
partially meet the demands of recreation and tourism,
environmental protection, the military, and irrigated
agriculture. One interesting emerging concept proposes
combining desalinated water with aquifer storage and
recovery (DASR) (Awerbuch, 2004; Pyne and Howard,
2004). This approach has the advantages of allowing
storage and recovery of large volumes of water while
minimizing facility throughput with lowered operating
costs. Stored volumes could be used to meet daily or
seasonal peaks in water demands while maintaining a
steady desalination rate.

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 5 1

4f. Water Resources Assessment (WRA)
Water resources assessments (WRAs) are designed to be
analyses of available water sources from the perspective
of potential water use. Since Rio ‘92, and in particular the
Dublin 2000 considerations, water resources have come
to be more broadly considered within the dimensions of
social equity, economics and ecosystem/ecohydrology.
The modern WRA process can be adapted and updated
to include these relationships (GWP, 2005b).
Hydrological data and information systems and networks
provide the basic and critical input to WRA, whether the
assessment is done within an IWRM perspective at the
national or basin/sub-basin/aquifer level or otherwise.
Factors that affect the accuracy of hydrological input to
WRAs include: the number of gauging stations, station
distribution within physiographic regions, duration and
continuity of observations, quality of measurements,
and data processing. The commonly measured parameters
include precipitation, evaporation, soil moisture, river
level and discharge, groundwater (well) depths, sediment
and water quality data on a continuous, hourly, daily
or monthly basis.
However, reliability and availability of data have declined
sharply since the mid-1980s, particularly in Africa and in
Eastern Europe (Rodda, 1998), and that situation has not
changed substantively since the turn of the century.
Investment in national networks has fallen drastically and

is still decreasing. Hydrometric networks, while they are
costly to maintain, provide basic WRA input that cannot be
collected dependably by any other means (see Chapter 13).
The development of more decentralized and basin-type
approaches for WRA is inherent in the internationally
agreed upon IWRM principles. It is widely recognized
that it will take several decades of institutional
adjustment (Blomquist et al., 2005) to reorient water
management practices on basins. However, such changes
are beginning at the basin level and there are examples
of decentralized approaches on most continents in terms
of water management processes. An important element
of the World Water Assessment Programme’s mission is
to assist partner case study countries in developing their
own assessment capacity (see Chapter 14). Sovereignity
issues and competition will always remain factors in
managing the resource. However, the basic WRA scope
which broadly defines the extent of available water
quantity and quality, including aspects related to
environment, pollution and water use, is the basis for
effective management. This information can be collected
and jointly developed by the nations sharing the
resource (see Chapter 11). These will give forwardlooking direction not only in water technology areas
but also on how improving data, information and
assessment practices for water resources will provide
critical knowledge that will greatly benefit society,
human livelihoods and the environment.

Part 5. The Challenge of Sustainable
Development
Climate change and the hydrological variability of water’s distribution and occurrence are natural driving
forces that, when combined with the pressures from economic growth and major population change,
make the sustainable development of our water resources a challenge.

5a. Driving forces and pressures
The combination of these factors commonly results in
increased water use, competition and pollution in addition
to highly inefficient water supply practices. These results
can be traced back to the fact that most decisions in
water resources management, at almost all levels, remain
principally driven by short-term economic and political
considerations that lack the long-term vision needed
to implement sustainable development practices. Water
management plans should consider the best existing
practices and the most advanced scientific breakthroughs.

The scientific community has to convey more effectively
its recommendations to decision-makers to enable the
latter to develop and maintain multidisciplinary
integrated approaches and solutions. Societies should
realize that today’s water-related challenges are no
longer readily solved just by using last century’s
hydraulic schemes. Increased funding and resources
need to be provided for the collection of detailed
water data and information.

Many
developing
nations, where
the demand for
water is growing
the fastest,
have the worst
capability for
acquiring and
managing water
data

1 5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Overall, there
are reasons to
be hopeful as
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

new water
programmes are
emerging that
finally
emphasize the
application of
more
sustainable
practices to
reduce impacts

5b.State of our natural water resources
The roles and interdependencies of the different
hydrological cycle components are often not fully
appreciated. As a result, it is difficult to set up
adequate protection and prevention strategies.
All components of the hydrological cycle should be taken
into account when developing water management plans.
Each component has a specific role that must be better
understood. For example, rain and snow directly supply
terrestrial ecosystems and soil moisture is a unique water
source for both agricultural development and terrestrial
ecosystems. Furthermore, glacial melting has a strong
influence on water availability in many nations and as a
result more comprehensive global assessments are needed.
We can substantively predict annual variability in
surface runoff and have created solutions to deal with it.
However, overcoming the less predictable five- to tenyear global cycles of distinctly lower and higher runoff
remains a challenge. Groundwater resources could provide
a valuable contribution to overcoming climate variability
and meeting demands during extended dry periods.
A surplus of surface water runoff during wet periods
can be used to replenish aquifer systems.
However, we do not have enough data on groundwater
and aquifer systems, especially in developing countries
where the lack of adequate surface water resources is
most extreme. This is particularly true in both Asia and
Africa where there has been a dramatic reduction in
water monitoring programmes.

hydrological and ecosystem functioning. This
becomes more important when we seek to advance
our understanding of the future impacts of climate
change at local and regional scales. We know that
detailed estimates of climate change impacts on water
resources at regional or global scales are currently
very problematic due to inadequate water data.
We have reached a reasonable level of knowledge
towards recognizing impacts on water quality and
quantity from pollution and excessive groundwater and
surface water withdrawals. The focus must now be on
reducing these impacts. In most developing countries,
specific and well-targeted programmes should be funded
to reduce impacts on water quality and quantity.
Overall, there are reasons to be hopeful as new water
programmes are emerging that finally emphasize the
application of more sustainable practices to reduce impacts.

5d. Responses
Prevention strategies and new technologies that
augment existing natural water resources, reduce
demand, and achieve higher efficiency are part of
the response to meet today’s increasing demands
on our available water resources.

Poor quality water and unsustainable supplies
limit national economic development and can
lead to adverse health and livelihood conditions.

To meet current and future water demands, increased
attention should be given to precautionary approaches
such as innovative uses of natural supplies and new
technologies. In the past we have responded by storing
runoff in reservoirs, diverting flows from water-abundant
to water-scarce regions, and extracting aquifer resources
– methods that provided ample water where and when it
was needed. These methods are likely to remain part
of most water resources development strategies. Nonconventional water resources, such as water reuse and
desalination, are being increasingly used and new
technologies such as artificial recharge are also becoming
more and more common. Capturing rain at the source
through rainwater harvesting is yet another method used
to increase the availability of natural water sources. In
certain regions, an extreme response has been adopted.
In some arid countries, where sufficient renewable water
resources are not available, non-renewable groundwater
reserves are being exploited to support development.

Landscape modifications further complicate our
understanding of and ability to predict the impacts
on water resources since these changes disrupt natural

Demand management and conservation are methods that
target efficiency. Conservation begins by reducing high
losses from water supply distribution systems. Demand

Water quality monitoring programmes are inadequate
or lacking in most developing nations; thus safeguarding
human health is difficult. Despite two decades of
increased international scientific attention and concern,
attempts to collect, compile and gain knowledge from
consumption, pollution and abstraction data and
information at a global scale are still piecemeal and
in relatively early stages of applicability.

5c. Impacts

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 5 3

management has gone largely unaddressed since most
water utilities still focus on infrastructure development
rather than on conservation.
It is worth noting that industry’s approach in recent years
has been to reduce wastewater and minimize the quantity
of processed water needed as this method has proven to
be technically feasible and economically advantageous.
The demand reduction and efficiency approach should be
an integral part of modern water resources management.
Its applicability should be promoted while recognizing
that it requires a distinct change in the behavioural
patterns of institutions, utilities and individuals – a
change that will require education, awareness-raising and
political commitment to achieve effective implementation.
Institutional responses at different levels are also needed.
Some nations have implemented new laws and regulations
that point the way forward toward protecting and
restoring our water sources. Many nations are adapting
emerging technical practices to secure and protect their
existing natural water resources and use local knowledge
as part of sustainable resource development.

5e. The benefits
There will be economic, social and environmental benefits
from carrying out regular Water Resources Assessments
(WRAs) in all basins and aquifers in individual nations
as well as regionally, where transboundary shared water
resources are present.
Modern approaches to WRA are rapidly emerging and now
go well beyond the traditional hydraulic and supply-biased
studies carried out during the last century. WRAs have

been extended to take advantage of the recently
recognized benefits that come from using an integrated
approach (IWRM) and including ecosystems’ services
(ecosystem approach). WRAs continue to fundamentally
require well-documented hydrological cycle component
data – without this data the evaluation results are
unreliable. To be comprehensive and assist in sustainable
practices, WRAs should include well-documented user
consumption and water quality requirements, accurate use
data, estimates of the environmental flow volumes needed
to maintain ecosystem resilience, characterization of both
point and non-point sources of pollution and the quality
of the receiving waters, and the extensive engagement
of all water users and other pertinent stakeholders.

Many nations

Providing incentives to improve demand management
efficiencies has proven highly effective in augmenting natural
water supplies. WRAs should consider new capacities to use
non-conventional water supplies and new technologies to
augment existing supplies. A comprehensive WRA must
also include social and economic considerations as well
as ecosystem needs and contributions.

and use local

If climate change follows the projected scenarios, we
can expect more erratic weather in the future, including
increased variability in precipitation, which will threaten
crop yields in both developed and developing countries,
while placing more than 2.8 billion people at risk of water
shortage. Understanding all aspects of the hydrological
cycle is critical if our society is to be able to cope with
the many changes we observe.

are adapting
emerging
technical
practices to
secure and
protect their
existing natural
water resources
knowledge as
part of
sustainable
resource
development

1 5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

References and Websites
Eight Basins. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper

van Zyl, J. 2004. The Hydrosphere State (Hydros) Satellite

renewable groundwater resources always be rejected? R.

3636, June 2005. (wdsbeta.worldbank.org/external/

Mission: An Earth System Pathfinder for Global Mapping

Llamas and E. Custodio (eds) Intensive Use of

default/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2005/06/14/

of Soil Moisture and Land Freeze/Thaw. IEEE Trans.

Groundwater: Challenges and Opportunities. Lisse, The

000016406_20050614124517/Rendered/PDF/

Geoscience And Remote Sensing, Vol. 42, No. 10, pp.

Netherlands, Balkema.

wps3636.pdf lvOct05).

2184–95. (hydros.gsfc.nasa.gov/pdf/TGARSHydros.pdf

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Abderrahman, W. A. 2003. Should intensive use of non-

Aertgeerts, R. and Angelakis, A. 2003. Health Risks in Aquifer
Recharge using Reclaimed Wastewater: State of the Art
Report, SDE/WSH/03.08.
(www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wastewater/wsh03
08/en/index.html lvOct05)
Aggarwal, P. K. and Kulkarni, K. M. 2003. Isotope Techniques
in Hydrology: Role of International Atomic Energy
Agency, Advances in Hydrology (Proc. Int. Conf. Water

Bullock, A. and Acreman, M. 2003. The role of wetlands in the
hydrologic cycle. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences,
Vol. 7, No. 3, pp. 358–89.
Burke, J. and Moench, M. 2000. Groundwater and Society:
Resources, Tensions and Opportunities. New York,
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs) E.99.II.A.1.
CSIRO. 2004. Returning the lifeblood to rivers. A drought

and Environment 2003, Bhopal, India), New Delhi, Allied

experiment - environmental flows resurrect irrigation

Publishers Pvt. Ltd. pp. 361–69.

country. How healthy river habitats suffer from altered

Aggarwal, P. K., Froehlich, K., Kulkarni, K. M. and Gourcy, L. L.

flows. Clever planning and management approaches.

lvOct05).
Environment Canada. 2005a. Water – The Transporter
(www.atl.ec.gc.ca/udo/mem.html lvOct05)
———. 2005b. The Bottom Line – Water Conservation.
(www.ec.gc.ca/water/en/manage/effic/e_bottom.htm
lvOct05)
———. 2005c. Acid Rain (www.ec.gc.ca/
acidrain/ lvOct05)
Falkenmark, M. and Rockstrom, J. 2004. Balancing Water for
Humans and Nature: The New Approach in Ecohydrology,
Earthscan, UK.

2004. Stable Isotope Evidence for Moisture Sources in

Where wild things are dammed, ECOS magazine, Issue

Asian Summer Monsoon under Present and Past Climate

122, pp. 11–19, CSIRO Publishing. (www.publish.csiro.au/

Report, FAO, Rome. (available at: www.fao.org/

Regimes. Geo. Res. Letters, Vol. 31.

ecos/index.cfm?sid=10&issue_id=4847 lvOct05)

documents/show_cdr.asp?url_file=/docrep/004/y3557e/y3

AFP (L’Agence France-Presse). 2004. China warns of
‘ecological catastrophe’ from Tibet’s melting glaciers,
News article. Terradaily.
Arendt, A. A., Echelmeyer, K. A., Harrison, W. D., Lingle, C. S.
and Valentine, V. B. 2002. Rapid wastage of Alaska

Daughton, C. G. 2004. Non-regulated water contaminants:
emerging research, Environmental Impact Assessment
Review, Vol. 24, pp. 711–32.
Digout, D. 2002. Variations in River Runoff by Continent
through Most of the 20th Century – Deviations from

FAO. 2002. World Agriculture: Towards 2015/2030. Summary

557e11.htm lvOct05)
———. 2005. Geo-referenced database on African dams.
(www.fao.org/ag/agl/aglw/aquastat/damsafrica/index.stm
lvOct05).
———. 2004. Personal communication from FAO containing

glaciers and their contribution to rising sea level, Science,

Average Values. (UNEP based on source material in

National Downstream Volumes datafile, 6 Sept 2004, FAO

Vol. 297, No. 5580, pp. 382–86.

Shiklomanov (1999) and UNESCO 1999 at

AQUASTAT staff, Rome. (Supplemented 18 Aug 2005 with

Arnell, N. W. 2004. Climate change and global water
resources: SRES emissions and socio-economic scenarios,
Global Environmental Change, Vol. 14, No. 1, pp. 31–52.
Asano, T. (ed.). 1998. Wastewater Reclamation and Reuse,

www.unep.org/vitalwater/07.htm lvOct05).
Driscoll, C. T., Lawrence, G. B., Bulger, A. J., Butler, T. J.,
Cronan, C. S., Eagar, C., Lambert, K. F., Likens, G. E.,
Stoddard, J. L. and Weathers, K. C. 2001. Acid Rain

Water Quality Management Library Volume 10. Boca

Revisited: Advances in scientific understanding since the

Raton, Florida, CRC Press.

passage of the 1970 and 1990 Clean Air Act

Asano, T. and Cotruvo, J. A. 2004. A Review: Groundwater
Recharge with Reclaimed Municipal Wastewater: Health
and Regulatory Considerations, Water Research, Vol. 38,
pp. 1941–51.
(www.med-reunet.com/docs/asano.pdf lvOct05)
Asano, T. and Leavine, A. D. 2004. Recovering sustainable
water from wastewater. Environmental Science and
Technology, June, pp. 201–08.
Awerbuch, L. 2004. Status of desalination in today’s world. S.
Nicklin (ed.) Desalination and Water

Amendments, Hubbard Brook Research Foundation.
Science Links Publication, Vol. 1, No. 1.
(www.hbrook.sr.unh.edu./hbfound/report.pdf lvOct05)
Dyson, M., Bergkamp, G. and Scanlon, J. (eds) 2003. Flow.
The Essentials of Environmental Flows. Gland,
Switzerland and Cambridge, UK, IUCN.
Dyurgerov, M. 2003. Mountain and subpolar glaciers show an
increase in sensitivity to climate warming and
intensification of the water cycle, Journal of Hydrology,
Vol. 282, pp. 164–76.

limited groundwater data available).
———. 2003a. Review of World Water Resources by Country.
Water Report 23. (ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/aglw/docs/
wr23e.pdf lvOct05).
———. 2003b. Groundwater Management: The Search for
Practical Approaches, FAO Water report 25
(ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/aglw/docs/wr25e.pdf lvOct05)
FAO-Aquastat. 2005. (www.fao.org/ag/agl/aglw/aquastat/
main/ lvOct05). Groundwater to surface water renewal
ratio calculated from total annual internally generated
groundwater and surface water volumes in the Aquastat
database.
Figueras, C., Tortajada, C. and Rockstrom, J. 2003. Rethinking
Water Management. UK, Earthscan.
Foster, S., Hirata, R., Gomes, D., D’Elia, M. and Paris, M. 2002.
Groundwater Quality Protection – a guide for water
utilities, municipal authorities, and environment

Re-use. Leicester, UK, Wyndeham Press, pp. 9–12.

EC (European Commission). 2003. Proposal for a Directive of

Bashkin, V and Radojevic, M. 2001. A Rain Check on Asia.

the European Parliament and of the Council on the

agencies. GWMATE in association with GWP, 112 p. (DOI:

Chemistry in Britain, No. 6. (Online at:

‘Protection of Groundwater against Pollution’.

10.1596/0-8213-4951-1) (www-wds.worldbank.org/

www.chemsoc.org/chembytes/ezine/2001/

(europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/

servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2002/12/14/

bashkin_jun01.htm lvOct05)

com/pdf/2003/com2003_0550en01.pdf lvOct05).

000094946_02112704014826/Rendered/PDF/

Bergkamp, G., Orlando, B. and Burton, I. 2003. Change:

———. 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament

multi0page.pdf lvOct05).
Foster, S. and Kemper, K. 2004. Sustainable Groundwater

Adaptation of water resources management to climate

and of the Council Establishing a Framework for the

change. Gland, Switzerland, IUCN.

Community Action in the Field of Water Policy, Brussels.

Management: Concepts and Tools, World Bank GW MATE

(europa.eu.int/comm/environment/

Briefing Note Series Profile (list of all fifteen briefing

water/water-framework/index_en.html lvOct05).

notes). (siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWRD/903930-

Bhattacharya, S. K., Froehlich, K., Aggarwal, P. K. and Kulkarni,
K. M. 2003. Isotopic Variation in Indian Monsoon
Precipitation. Records from Bombay and New Delhi,

Entekhabi, D., Njoku, E. G., Houser, P., Spencer, M., Doiron, T.,

Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 30, No. 24, p. 2285.

Kim, Y., Smith, J., Girard, R., Belair, S., Crow, W., Jackson,

Blomquist, W., Dinar, A. and Kemper, K. 2005. Comparison of

T. J., Kerr, Y.H., Kimball, J. S., Koster, R., McDonald, K. C.,

Institutional Arrangements for River Basin Management in

O’Neill, P. E., Pultz, T., Running, S. W., Shi, J., Wood, E.,

1112347717990/20424234/BN_series_profileMay04.pdf
lvOct05).

T H E STAT E O F T H E R ES O U R C E . 1 5 5

Fountain, A. and Walder, J. 1998. Water Flow through
Temperate Glaciers, Review of Geophysics, Vol. 36, No. 3,
pp. 299–328.
Frauenfelder, R., Zemp, M., Haeberli,W. and Hoelzle, M. 2005.
World-Wide Glacier Mass Balance Measurements: Trends
and First Results of an Extraordinary Year in Central
Europe, Ice and Climate News, No. 6. pp. 9–10.
(clic.npolar.no/newsletters/archive/ice_climate_2005_08
_no_06.pdf lvOct05)
GEMS/WATER. 2005. 2004 State of the UNEP GEMS/Water
Global Network and Annual Report.
(www.gemswater.org/
common/pdfs/gems_ar_2004.pdf lvOct05)
Gleick, P. H. (ed.). 1993. Water in Crisis: A Guide to the

An Overview of Current Knowledge. Series: Advances in
Global Change Research. Vol. 23, Springer.
IAEA. 2002. Isotope studies in large river basins: A new global
research focus. EDS 83, pp. 613-17.
IGRAC. 2005. Global Groundwater Information System
Database. (igrac.nitg.tno.nl/ggis_map/start.html lvOct05).

Mantovani, P., Asano, T., Chang, A. and Okun, D. A. 2001.
Management Practices for Non-potable Water Reuse.
Water Environment Research Foundation Report 97-IRM-6.
Meybeck, M. 1995. Global distribution of lakes. A. Lerman, D.
M. Imboden and J. R. Gat (eds), Physics and Chemistry of
Lakes, Springer, Berlin, pp. 1–36.

———. 2005a. Arsenic in Groundwater Worldwide

Meybeck, M., Chapman, D. and Helmer, R. (eds). 1989. Global

(igrac.nitg.tno.nl/arsmain.html lvOct05).

Freshwater Quality: A First Assessment. Blackwell Ref.

———. 2005b. Fluoride in Groundwater Worldwide
(igrac.nitg.tno.nl/flumain.html lvOct05).
———. 2004. Global Groundwater Regions.
(igrac.nitg.tno.nl/pics/region.pdf lvOct05).
IPCC. 2004. Expert Meeting on the Science to Address
UNFCCC Article 2 including Key Vulnerabilities, Buenos

Oxford, UK.
Mitchell, T. D., Hulme, M. and New, M. 2002. Climate Data
for Political Areas. Area, Vol. 34, pp. 109–12.
(www.cru.uea.ac.uk/cru/data/papers/mitchell2002a.pdf
lvOct05).
Morris, B. L., Lawrence, A. R. L., Chilton, P. J. C., Adams, B.,

World’s Freshwater Resources. New York, Oxford

Aires, Argentina 18-20 May 2004, Short Report.

Calow, R. C. and Klinck, B. A. 2003. Groundwater and its

University Press.

(www.ipcc.ch/wg2sr.pdf lvOct05).

Susceptibility to Degradation. A Global Assessment of the

GLIMS (Global Land Ice Measurements from Space). 2005.

———. (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2001.

Project Description: Global Land Ice Measurements from

Third Assessment Report: Climate Change 2001.

Space (nsidc.org/data/glims/ lvOct05).

(www.ipcc.ch/pub/reports.htm lvOct05).

Govt. South Africa. 1997. White Paper on Water Policy

IRHA (International Rainwater Harvesting Association). 2004.

Problem and Options for Management. Early Warning and
Assessment Report Series, RS. 03-3. United Nations
Environment Programme/DEWA, Nairobi, Kenya.
NSIDC (National Snow and Ice Data Center). 1999. update

(Section B: New National Water Policy) CH 5. Water

How RHW benefits water resources management

2005. World glacier inventory. World Glacier Monitoring

Resource Policy, Subchapter 5.2 Priorities – The Basic

(unpublished) (www.irha-h2o.org – lvOct05).

Service and National Snow and Ice Data Center/World

Jackson, T. 2004. How Wet’s Our Planet? Scientists want to be

Data Center for Glaciology. Boulder, CO. Digital media.

Obligations. (www.polity.org.za/html/govdocs/

able to measure soil moisture everywhere, every day!

(nsidc.org/data/docs/noaa/g01130_glacier_inventory/

white_papers/water.html#Contents lvOct05).

Agric. Res. Vol. 52, No. 3, pp. 20–22.

Needs and Environmental Reserve and International

Govt. Western Australia. 2005. (portal.environment.wa.gov.au/
portal/page?_pageid=55,34436&_dad=portal&_schema=
PORTAL lvOct05).
GRDC (Global Runoff Data Center). 2005. (grdc.bafg.de/
servlet/is/1660/, grdc.bafg.de/servlet/is/943/ lvOct05).
Greenhalgh, S. and Sauer, A.. 2003. Awakening the Dead

(www.ars.usda.gov/is/
AR/archive/mar04/planet0304.htm?pf=1 lvOct05).
Jansson, P., Hock, R. and Schneider, T. 2003. The Concept of

Climatology. Journal of Climate, Vol. 12, pp. 829–56.
(ams.allenpress.com/amsonline/?request=get-abstract

Jousma, G. and Roelofsen, F. J. 2003. Inventory of existing

Climate Change, WRI Issue Brief. (pdf.wri.org/hypoxia.pdf

and monitoring, IGRAC. (igrac.nitg.tno.nl/pics/

and Supply. (gwpforum.netmasters05.netmasters.nl/en/

Development of a 1961–1990 Mean Monthly Terrestrial

282, Nos. 1–4, pp. 116–29.
guidelines and protocols for groundwater assessment

lvOct05).

Twentieth Century Space-Time Climate Variability. Part 1:

Glacier Storage – A Review. Journal of Hydrology, Vol.

Zone: An Investment for Agriculture, Water Quality, and

GWP. 2005a. Efficiency in Water Use – Managing Demand

lvOct05).
New, M., Hulme, M. and Jones, P. D. 1999. Representing

inv_report1.pdf lvOct05).
Lakenet. 2005. (www.worldlakes.org lvOct05).
Lazarova, L. 2001. Recycled Water: Technical-Economic

&issn=1520-0442&volume=012&issue=03&page=0829
lvOct05).
Njoku, E. 2004. AMSR-E/Aqua Daily L3 Surface Soil Moisture,
Interpretive Parms, and QC EASE-Grids V001, March to
June 2004. Boulder, CO, US: National Snow and Ice Data
Center. Digital media – updated daily.
Njoku, E., Chan, T., Crosson, W. and Limaye, A. 2004.

content/toolcategory_453AAC8B-A128-11D5-8F08-

Challenges for its Integration as a Sustainable

0002A508D0B7.html lvOct05)

Alternative Resource. Proc. UNESCO Int’l. Symp. Les

Evaluation of the AMSR-E data calibration over land.

frontiéres de la gestion de l’eau urbaine: impasse ou

Italian Journal of Remote Sensing, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 19–37.

espoir? Marseilles, 18–20 June 2001.

(nsidc.org/data/docs/daac/ae_land3_l3_soil_moisture.gd.html

———. 2005b. Water Resources Assessment – Understanding
Water Resources and Needs. (gwpforum.netmasters05.
netmasters.nl/en/content/toolcategory_5E1CD3DC-3B4A4D82-B476-82DEF0EE0186.html lvOct05).

Lazarova, V., Levine, B., Sack, J., Cirelli, C., Jeffrey, P., Muntau,
H., Salgot, M. and Brissaud, F. 2001. Role of water reuse

lvOct05).
OECD.1996. Guidelines for aid agencies for improved

for enhancing integrated water management in Europe

conservation and sustainable use of tropical and sub-

evaluating and managing the risks and benefits,

and Mediterranean countries. Water Science and

tropical wetland. OECD Development Assistance

Sustainable Groundwater Management: Concepts and

Technology, Vol. 43, No. 10, pp, 23–33.

GW MATE. 2003. Urban Wastewater as Groundwater Recharge:

Tools, World Bank GW Mate Briefing Series Note 12.

Lehner, B. and P. Döll. 2004. Development and validation of a

Committee: Guidelines on Aid and Environment. No. 9.
Pandey, D. N., Gupta, A. K. and Anderson, D. M. 2003.

(siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWRD/903930-

global database of lakes, reservoirs and wetlands. Journal

Rainwater harvesting as an adaptation to climate change,

1112347717990/20424258/BriefingNote_12.pdf lvOct05)

of Hydrology, Vol. 296, Nos. 1–4, pp. 1–22.

Current Science, Vol. 85, No. 1, pp. 46–59. (www.irha-

Haider, S. S., Said, S., Kothyari, U. C. and Arora, M. K. 2004.

Lenton, R. 2004. Water and climate variability: development

Soil Moisture Estimation Using Ers 2 Sar Data: A Case

impacts and coping strategies, Water Science and

Study in the Solani River Catchment. Journal of
Hydrological Science, pp. 323–34. (www.extenzaeps.com/extenza/
loadPDF?objectIDValue=34832 lvOct05).
Hock, R., Jansson, P. and Braun, L. 2005. Modelling the

Technology, Vol. 49, No. 7, pp. 17–24.
Llamas, R. and Custodio, E. (eds). 2003. Intensive use of
groundwater, Challenges and Opportunities. Balkema.
Mahnot, S. C., Sharma, D. C., Mishra, A., Singh, P. K. and Roy,
K. K. 2003. Water Harvesting Management, Practical

Response of Mountain Glacier Discharge to Climate

Guide Series 6, V. Kaul (ed.). SDC/Intercooperation

Warming. U. M. Huber, H. K. M. Bugmann and M. A.

Coordination Unit. Jaipur, India.

Reasoner (eds), Global Change and Mountain Regions –

h2o.org/doc/text/pandey00.pdf lvOct05).
Pereira, L., Cordery, I. and Lacovides, L. 2002. Coping with
water scarcity, IHP-VI Tech. Documents in Hydrology No.
58, UNESCO.
Peters, N. E. and Meybeck, M. 2000. Water quality
degradation effects on freshwater availability: Impacts of
human activities, Int’l Water Res. Assoc., Water
International, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 185–93.
Peters, N. E. and Webb, B. 2004. Personal communication –
Water quality parameters to measure related to pollution.

1 5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Pyne, R. D. G. and Howard, J. B. 2004. Desalination/Aquifer

Water Science, 48, Elsevier, The Netherlands.

Corpus Christi, Texas, Desalination, Vol. 165, pp. 363–67.

Taylor, R. and Smith, I. 1997. State of New Zealand’s

(www.desline.com/articoli/5744.pdf lvOct05).
Rees, G. and Demuth, S. 2000. The application of modern
information system technology in the European FRIEND

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Tallaksen, L. M. and Van Lanen H. A. J. (eds), Developments in

Storage Recovery (DASR): a cost-effective combination for

Environment 1997. Wellington, New Zealand: The Ministry

152–71. London and New York, Routledge.
Wiegel, S., Aulinger, A., Brockmeyer, R., Harms, H., Loeffler, J.,

for the Environment. Revenga and Mock 2000.

Reincke, H., Schmidt, R., Stachel, B., von Tuempling, W.
and Wanke, A. 2004. Pharmaceuticals in the River Elbe

Freshwater Augmentation in Africa. ITEC.

Wasser und Boden, Vol. 52, No. 13, pp. 9–13.

(www.unep.or.jp/ietc/Publications/TechPublications/

Compared with Evaporation from Reservoirs. (UNEP

(ed.) Applied Geography: Principles and Practice, pp.

UNEP. 2005. Sourcebook of Alternative Technologies for

project. Moderne Hydrologische Informations Systeme.
Rekacewicz, P. 2002. Industrial and Domestic Consumption

Webb, B.W. 1999. Water quality and pollution. Pacione, M.

TechPub-8a/index.asp lvOct05).
———. 2003. Groundwater and its Susceptibility to

and its Tributaries, Chemosphere, Vol. 57, pp. 107–26.
WHO. 2005. Wastewater use. (www.who.int/water_sanitation_
health/wastewater/en/ lvOct05).
Wolf, A. T., Natharius, J. A., Danielson, J. J., Ward, B. S. and

based on Shiklomanov (1999) and UNESCO 1999 at

Degradation. A global assessment of the problems and

Pender, J. K. 2002. International river basins of the

www.unep.org/vitalwater/15.htm lvOct05).

options for management, UNEP/DEWA, Nairobi.

world. International Journal of Water Resources

(www.unep.org/DEWA/water/groundwater/

Development, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 387-427.

groundwater_report.asp lvOct05).

www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu/publications/register/t

Revenga, C. and Mock, G. 2000. Dirty Water: Pollution
Problems Persist. World Resources Institute Program, Pilot
Analysis of Global Ecosystems: Freshwater Systems.

UNEP/GEMS (United Nations Environment Program Global

ables/IRB_table_4.html

(earthtrends.wri.org/pdf_library/features/wat_fea_dirty.pdf

Environment Monitoring System/Water). 1995. Water

lvOct05).

Quality of World River Basins. Nairobi, Kenya: UNEP.

(web.worldbank.org/external/projects/main?pagePK=1042

Revenga and Mock 2000.

31&piPK=73230&theSitePK=40941&menuPK=228424&Pr

Reynolds, K. 2003. Pharmaceuticals in Drinking Water
Supplies, Water Conditioning and Purification Magazine,
Vol. 45(6). (www.wcp.net/column.cfm?T=T&ID=2199
lvOct05).
Robock, A. and Vinnikov, K. Y. 2005. Global Soil Moisture Data

UNESCO. 2004. WHYMAP. Groundwater Resources of the
World. Map 1:50 m. Special edn, August, BGR
Hanover/UNESCO, Paris.
———. 2000. Catch the water – where it drops. Rain water

Bank (climate.envsci.rutgers.edu/soil_moisture/

harvesting and artificial recharge to ground water. A

lv Jul2004).

guide to follow. IHP program document.

Robock, A., Vinnikov, K. Y., Srinivasan, G., Entin, J. K.,

UNESCO and World Bank. Forthcoming 2006. Non-renewable

Hollinger, S. E., Speranskaya, M. A., Liu, S. and Namkhai,

groundwater resources, a guidebook on socially

A. 2000. The Global Soil Moisture Data Bank. Bull. Amer.

sustainable management for policy matters.

Meteorol. Soc., Vol. 81, pp. 1281–99.
Rodda, J.C. 1998. Hydrological Networks Need Improving! In:
H. Zebedi (ed.), Water: A Looming Crisis? Proc. Int. Conf.
on World Water Resources at the Beginning of the 21st
century. Paris, UNESCO/IHP.
Schiffler, M. 2004. Perspectives and challenges for
desalination in the 21st century. Desalination, Vol. 165,
pp. 1–9.

US Drought Mitigation Center. 2005. Drought Map – April
2004. (www.drought.unl.edu/pubs/abtdrmon.pdf
lvOct05).
US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency).

World Bank. 2005. India’s Hydrology Project Phase II.

ojectid=P084632 lvOct05).
WMO. 2005. Analysis of data exchange problems in global
atmospheric and hydrological networks, WMO/TD No.
1255, GCOS No. 96. (www.wmo.ch/web/gcos/
Publications/gcos-96.pdf lvOct05).
———. 2004. Soil Moisture – Details of Recommended
Variables. (www.wmo.ch/web/gcos/terre/variable/
slmois.html lv-Oct05).
WWF. 2003. Managing Rivers Wisely – Lessons Learned from
WWF’s Work for Integrated River Basin Management.
(www.panda.org/about_wwf/what_we_do/freshwater/our_s
olutions/rivers/irbm/cases.cfm lvOct05).
Zalewski, M., Janauer, G.A. and Jolankai, G. 1997.

2004. Guidelines for Water Reuse, EPA 625/R-04/108.

Ecohydrology. A New Paradigm for the Sustainable Use of

(www.epa.gov/ORD/NRMRL/pubs/625r04108/

Aquatic Resources. IHP-V. Technical Documents in

625r04108.htm lvOct05).
US GS (United States Geological Survey). 2005. Reclaimed

Hydrology. No. 7. UNESCO, Paris.
Zektser, I.S. and Everett, L.G. 2004. Groundwater Resources

wastewater: Using treated wastewater for other

of the World and their Use, IHP-VI, Series on

projects and their implications: A China case study,

purposes. (ga.water.usgs.gov/edu/wwreclaimed.html

Groundwater No. 6, UNESCO. (Section 6.4 – Human

International Journal of River Basin Management, Vol. 1,

lvOct05).

Activities impact on groundwater resources and their

Shao, X., Wang, H. and Wang, Z. 2003. Interbasin transfer

No. 1, pp. 5–14. (www.jrbm.net/pages/archives/JRBMn1/
Shao.PDF lv Oct05)
Shiklomanov, I. A. 1999. World Freshwater Resources: World
Water Resources and their Use.
webworld.unesco.org/water/ihp/db/shiklomanov/index.shtml>
———. 1997. Assessment of Water Resources and Availability

US NRC (United States National Research Council) 2004,
Review of the desalination and water purification
technology roadmap. (www.nap.edu/books/0309091578/
html/R1.html lvOct05).
———. 2000. Issues in the Integration of Research and
Operational Satellite Systems for Climate Research: Part

in the World. In Comprehensive Assessment of the

I. Science and Design, Part 6, Soil Moisture. pp. 68–81.

Freshwater Resources of the World. Stockholm

Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and

Environment Institute.

Applications; Space Studies Board. National Academy

Shiklomanov, I. A. and Rodda, J. C. 2003. World Water
Resources at the Beginning of the 21st Century.
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Stahl, K and Hisdal, H. 2004. Hydroclimatology. Tallaksen, L.
and van Lanen, H. (eds). Hydrological Drought Processes and Estimation Methods for Streamflow and

Press, Washington DC. (print.nap.edu/pdf/0309069858/
pdf_image/68.pdf lvOct05).
———. 1998. Issues in Potable Reuse: The Viability of
Augmenting Drinking Water Supplies with Reclaimed
Water. Washington DC, National Academy Press.
Vrba, J., 1985. Impact of domestic and industrial wastes and

Groundwater. (Developments in Water Science, 48). p.

agricultural activities on groundwater quality. Hydrogeology

22. New York, Elsevier. Reprinted with permission from

in the service of man, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 91–117, IAH

Elsevier.
Steenvorden, J. and Endreny, T. 2004. Wastewater Re-use and
Groundwater Quality, IAHS Pub. 285.

Memoirs of the 18th Congress, Cambridge, UK.
Vrba, J. and Zaporozec, A. (eds). 1994. Guidebook on
mapping groundwater vulnerability. Vol. 16, 131. IHP-IAH
International Contribution to Hydrogeology, Verlag H.
Heise, Germany.

use).

We must treat each and every swamp, river basin, river and
tributary, forest and field with the greatest care, for all these
things are the elements of a very complex system that serves to
preserve water reservoirs – and that represents the river of life.
Mikhail Gorbachev

Part 1. Ecosystems and Their Capacity to
Provide Goods and Services ..........................161
Box 5.1: Lake Victoria: An ecosystem in decline

Part 2. The Environmental and Social
Importance of Ecosystems .............................164
2a. Goods and services.................................................164
Fig. 5.1: Estimated mean value of marine biomes
Table 5.1: Estimated value of selected wetlands
in Africa and Asia
2b. Fisheries.................................................................165

Box 5.3: Dams and their alternatives
4c. Pollution.................................................................179
Fig. 5.5: Declines in the concentrations of organic
contaminants in Russian and Chinese rivers
4d. Invasive species .....................................................180
Table 5.3: Introductions of invasive species
by region
4e. Climate change .......................................................181
Box 5.4: Biodiversity in Lake Chad
Map 5.4: Levels of Lake Chad from 1963 to 2001
Box 5.5: Dramatic decline of the Aral Sea
Map 5.5: Major irrigation areas in the
Aral Sea Basin

Part 3. Status of and Trends in Ecosystems
and Biodiversity ...................................................168

Part 5. Policy and Management Responses:
Implementing the Ecosystem Approach ...184

3a. Status of coastal and freshwater ecosystems........168
Box 5.2: Threatened South and Southeast Asian wetlands
3b. Global trends in key species ...................................168
Fig. 5.2: Living Planet Index, 1970–2000
Fig. 5.3: Trends in waterbird populations in the
African-Eurasian (AEWA) regions

5a. IWRM and its implementation challenges ..............185
Box 5.6: The ecosystem approach in action
5b. Protecting and restoring habitats...........................187
Fig. 5.6: Surface area and degree of protection of
major terrestrial habitats
Fig. 5.7: Distribution and degree of protection of
wetland habitats by region
Ramsar sites ............................................................188
Fig. 5.8: Total area designated as Ramsar sites
(1974–2004)
African Eurasian Migratory Waterbird
Agreement (AEWA) ..................................................189
5c. Ecosystem restoration............................................189
Box 5.7: Restored ecosystems and livelihoods

Part 4. Pressures and Impacts ..............................171
4a. Habitat alteration...................................................171
Increased suspended loads.......................................171
Drainage and conversion of wetlands .......................171
Table 5.2: Major threats to coastal and
freshwater ecosystems and services
Deforestation...........................................................173
Agricultural land-use changes...................................173
Map 5.1: Biological oxygen demand (BOD) for
major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and 1991–2003
Map 5.2: Inorganic nitrogen concentrations for
major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and
1991–2003
4b. Fragmentation and flow regulation (dams and
reservoirs) .............................................................176
Map 5.3: Fragmentation and flow regulation by
Large River System (LRS)
Fig. 5.4: Fragmentation and flow regulation by
biome type

Betsiboka River, Madagascar

Part 6. Facing Challenges and Managing
Trade-offs .................................................................191
References and Websites

......................................193

5
CHAPTER 5

Coastal and
Freshwater
Ecosystems

By

UNEP

(United Nations
Environment
Programme)

1 6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Coastal and freshwater ecosystems are deteriorating in many areas and at a faster rate than any other ecosystem.
Such changes are caused by intertwined factors, making it difficult to identify the problems early on. While progress in
integrating these various factors in managing water and ecosystems has been made in some places, the majority of
the world and its inhabitants increasingly suffers from a lack of priority given to environmental protection.
■

Humans depend upon healthy aquatic ecosystems for
drinking water, food security and a wide range of
environmental goods and services. Aquatic biodiversity
is also extremely rich, with high levels of endemic
species, and is very sensitive to environmental
degradation and overexploitation.

■

Aquatic ecosystems and species are deteriorating
rapidly in many areas. This is having an immediate
impact on the livelihoods of some of the world’s most
vulnerable human communities by reducing protein
sources for food, availability of clean water, and
potential for income generation.

■

People in regions with highly variable climatic
conditions are particularly vulnerable to droughts and
floods and the resulting deteriorating condition of
freshwater ecosystems. Coastal lowland areas, where
population densities are usually very high and coastal
habitats are fragile, are most likely to be affected by
sea level rise in future.

Top to bottom:
Ticti reservoir, Mexico
Franz Joseph Glacier,
New Zealand
Heavy rains in the
province of Misiones,
Argentina, carry off
significant quantities of
ferruginous earth into the
River Uruguay

■

The conservation of biodiversity (species, habitats and
ecosystem functions) must become an integral part of all
water resource management programmes. This will assist
poverty reduction strategies by ensuring the sustainability
of aquatic ecosystems for future generations.

■

Ecosystem approaches constitute a fundamental
element of Integrated Water Resource Management
(IWRM) and are essential for safeguarding and
balancing the needs and requirements of water
resources among different stakeholder groups and
ecosystems. Ecosystem approaches are the subject of
global and regional targets and policy initiatives, but
they have yet to be implemented in practice. This
requires awareness raising, tools and methodologies to
monitor and negotiate the trade-offs involved in such
broad-scale approaches.

■

Our understanding of the properties and functions of
many aquatic ecosystems is seriously hampered by
inadequate data. Enhanced monitoring efforts are
required to provide a better assessment of the status,
conditions and trends of global water ecosystems,
habitats and species.

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 6 1

Part 1. Ecosystems and their Capacity to
Provide Goods and Services
Human
population
growth and the
expansion of
economic
activities are
collectively
placing huge
demands on
coastal and
freshwater
ecosystems

The majority of us live in temperate and subtropical regions centred around the coast or inland water
systems. Coastal waters, rivers, lakes, wetlands, aquifers and other inland water systems such as
swamps and fens have in consequnce been subjected to disproportionate human-induced pressures.
These include construction along coastlines for harbours and urban expansion, alteration of river
systems for navigation and water storage, drainage of wetlands to increase farmland, overexploitation
of fisheries, and multiple sources of pollution. Human population growth and the expansion of economic
activities are collectively placing huge demands on coastal and freshwater ecosystems. Water
withdrawals, for instance, have increased sixfold since the 1900s, which is twice the rate of population
growth (WMO, 1997). In addition, the quality of many water bodies is declining due to increased
pollution from agriculture, industry, tourism, urban runoff and domestic sewage.
Desertification is also spreading as a consequence of the
misuse of water resources, not only in Africa and Central
Asia, but increasingly in other regions, such as in California
and southern Europe. The dramatic shrinking of the Aral
Sea in Central Asia and its consequences for biodiversity
and human well-being have been well documented (UNEP,
2004b; Kreutzberg-Mukhina, 2004). There are many other
water crises that have received less attention, such as the
serious soil erosion and groundwater depletion occurring
in parts of Spain and the eutrophication of many coastal
waters as a result of intensive farming. In other regions,
the problem may soon be one of too much water,
threatening many low-lying coastal and floodplain areas.
Predictions of the impacts of melting ice caps and increased
discharge from Arctic rivers due to global warming remain
uncertain, although it is clear that they will change the
fragile Arctic Ocean ecosystem, with potentially devastating
consequences further afield, especially along often highly
populated coastlines (ACIA, 2004).
While many of the world’s coastal and freshwater
ecosystems are continuing to deteriorate at alarming rates,
the reversal of these trends and the improvement of
water quality in other areas indicate that this decline is
neither inevitable nor always irreversible. The
management of water and land resources requires a
comprehensive understanding and careful consideration of
ecosystem functions and interactions. The application of
such knowledge in an integrated approach to land use and
water management is often referred to as an ‘ecosystem
approach’, and such a holistic response to the challenges
facing the world’s water resources is at the heart of
international agreements and programmes like the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the Global
Programme of Action (GPA) for the Protection of the

Marine Environment from Land-based Activities and the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD).
The ecosystem approach, a key element of integrated
water resources management (IWRM) (GWP, 2003), is a
strategy for the integrated management of land, water
and living resources which promotes conservation and
sustainable use in an equitable way (CBD, 2000). There is
no single way to implement the ecosystem approach, as
it depends upon local, provincial, national, regional and
global conditions. Box 5.1 discusses one of the many
systems in which an ecosystem approach should be
implemented to solve a current ecosystem crisis.
IWRM is a systematic participatory planning and
implementation process for the sustainable management
of water, land and coastal resources, which promotes
coordinated development and is based on credible science.
It involves the participation of stakeholders who determine
equitable resource allocation and the sharing of economic
benefits and monitoring within set objectives in order to
ensure the sustainability of vital ecosystems. It is also a
process that promotes the coordinated development and
management of water, land and related resources in order
to maximize the resultant economic and social welfare in
an equitable manner without compromising the
sustainability of vital ecosystems (GWP, 2000).
Integrated water resources management considers
the following:
■

The hydrological cycle in its entirety: downstream and
upstream interests are taken into account (basin-wide,
also across national borders), as well as surface and
groundwater sources and, most importantly, rainfall.

1 6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

There is a

■

The full range of sectoral interests: integrated
development and management implies close
coordination between institutions that are often
sectorally focused, the involvement of stakeholders in
decision-making, and taking into account those
stakeholders without a voice (such as the environment).

■

Future needs: as legitimate claims to the water
resource, such as future generations – sustainability
(Institute of Water and Sanitation Development of
Zimbabwe, 1997).

■

The management of water as a resource: as well as
the governance framework for provision of water
services to stakeholders.

growing
recognition of
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

the need for a
sustained global
effort to meet
the immense
challenges of
managing the
Earth’s water
resources

There is a growing recognition of the need for a
sustained global effort to meet the immense challenges
of managing the Earth’s water resources. At the 2002
WSSD, participating countries committed themselves to
halving the proportion of people who lack access to safe
drinking water and sanitation by 2015 (Millennium
Development Goal Target 10) and significantly reducing
the rate of biodiversity loss in aquatic ecosystems by
2010. Reconciling these two goals constitutes a major
challenge. The implementation of IWRM schemes on
regional and local scales; the increasing use of ecosystem
approaches focusing on river basins and their interaction
with coastal zones; the decommissioning of dams in
North America and Europe; and the many different river
and wetland restoration projects taking place throughout
the world all suggest that these commitments are starting
to be taken seriously, although change is slow and not
happening in every part of the world.
Indicators of ecosystems processes and functions are
essential to the proper assessment of watershed
resources by evaluating the pressures, state, driving
forces and responses to change. Unfortunately, the
necessary knowledge and data needed to develop and
interpret indicators are often lacking. Data remain
seriously incomplete and unharmonized at a global level,
making detection and resolution of problems extremely
difficult (see Chapter 13). Even more worrying is the fact
that hydrographic and water quality monitoring networks
have deteriorated in several parts of the world, further
hampering the accurate assessment of global water
resources. The Global Environment Monitoring System for
freshwater (GEMS/Water), led by the United Nations

Environmental Programme (UNEP), maintains a water
quality database with information from over 1,500
monitoring stations covering 112 watercourses from more
than eighty countries. However, most stations contain
only patchy and sporadic information, making the
detection of long-term trends in water quality difficult.
Information on groundwater resources is even less
complete because of the difficulty and the costs of
obtaining accurate measurements. Furthermore, there are
few systematic epidemiological studies that allow us to
understand the impacts of low quality or contaminated
water supplies on human health and well-being (see
Chapter 6). Existing data and information on aquatic
species and the extent and condition of their habitats are
also limited and fragmented. Although there are some
groups (e.g. water-birds and amphibians) for which trend
data do exist, they remain the exception. Given the need
for information to manage resources in an integrated
fashion, and the reality of the dearth of data and
monitoring, we have to depend on indicators that
measure drivers of change, which are currently quite
clear and, for the most part, easier to assess and
monitor. This is especially true in those countries where
resources for extensive fieldwork and capacity are limited.
For example, using data on the extent of agriculture in a
watershed, or the size and location of dams, we can draw
some conclusions about the relative degree of alteration
or stress affecting a system. These geospatial indicators
are often called proxies or surrogates, because they are
indicators of current threat and give only indirect
information about actual ecological integrity.
It is clear that if we continue to ignore ecosystem
processes and functions, human activities will lead to
the continuing degradation of coastal and freshwater
ecosystems, as well as the loss of biodiversity and a
consequential decline in human well-being.
This chapter addresses the current condition of
coastal and freshwater ecosystems and their capacity
to deliver an array of life-supporting ecosystem goods
and services. It looks critically at several different
management approaches and policies, and concludes
by identifying some of the challenges that human
society must face in attempting to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) related to
water resources and other international targets,
such as those for biodiversity and climate change.

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 6 3

BOX 5.1: LAKE VICTORIA: AN ECOSYSTEM IN DECLINE

Lake Victoria is the second largest lake in the
world. It supports a very productive
freshwater fishery with annual fish yields
exceeding 500,000 tonnes, with a value of US
$400 million. In addition, the lake provides
freshwater for irrigation, hydroelectric power,
recreation and transport (see Chapter 14).
In some parts of the basin, its population
density is well over 100 people per square
kilometre (km2) (Cohen et al., 1996) and has
been increasing at the rate of 3 to 4 percent
per year. The lake faces considerable pressure
from a variety of natural or anthropogenic
causes. It has undergone enormous
environmental changes within the last forty
years, caused by human activities such as
overfishing, siltation from deforested
watersheds, erosion from poor agricultural
practices, introduction of alien species and
industrial pollution. Seasonal variability
attributed to climate change has also been
noted. These combinations of natural and
anthropogenic causes have led to rapidly
evolving changes in the lake that seriously
threaten its ecosystem function and

dependent livelihoods. Three immediate
causes of eutrophication so far identified
include enhanced effluent discharge, from
untreated municipal sewage, runoff and storm
water, chemical pollutions from industries
(such as small-scale mining in some parts of
Tanzania, Panpaper Limited in Kenya, etc.)
and agrochemicals from farms, including the
expanding flower farms currently threatening
internationally important wetland sites, such
as Uganda’s Lutembe Bay, which hosts large
numbers of wintering waterbirds of global
significance, including almost the entire
population of the White-winged Tern
(Chlidonias leucopterus).
Today, nearly half of the lake experiences
prolonged anoxia (lack of oxygen) spells for
several months of the year, whereas four
decades ago anoxia was sporadic and
localized. As a result, algal biomass
concentration is almost five times greater in
the surface waters today than reported in the
1960s, which indicates higher rates of
photosynthesis. Also, water transparency
values have decreased to one-third and the

silica concentration to one-tenth of what they
were about forty years ago.
The lake was until recently home to over 600
endemic haplochromine cichlid fish (not all yet
formally catalogued), as well as a number of
other non-cichlid species. The extinction of
species of haplochromine cichlid fish in the
lake, primarily as a result of the introduction
of the Nile perch (Lates niloticus), remains
the single most dramatic event of vertebrate
extinction attributable to specific human
activities. More than 100 fish species have
been driven into extinction since 1960. The
lake’s fisheries are currently dominated by
three commercial species: the Nile perch, a
non-native species introduced in the 1950s
which now makes up 80 percent of the lake’s
fish population; the other 20 percent is
formed by the indigenous tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus from the Cichlidae
family) and dagaa (Rastrineobola argentea).
Sources: World Lakes Network (www.worldlakes.org/);
Cohen et al., 1996; Kiremire, 1997; Verschuren et al.,
2002; Dodman and Diagana, 2003; Hecky, 1993; Mugidde,
1993; Lehman, 1996; Johnson et al., 1996.

Algonquin National Park,
Canada

1 6 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Part 2. The Environmental and Social
Importance of Ecosystems
Water hyacinth
accidentally introduced in
Lake Victoria from Latin
America is having a huge
impact on the lake’s
natural ecosystem

The first United Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR1) noted that a healthy and
unpolluted natural environment is essential to human well-being and sustainable development,
stressing that aquatic ecosystems and their dependent species are an integral part of our lives and
provide a resource base that helps us to meet a multitude of human and ecosystem needs (UN-WWAP,
2003). These goods and services include water for human consumption, food production, irrigation,
energy generation, regulating services (e.g. flood mitigation, water filtration, aquifer recharge and
nutrient cycling), and transport and recreational services. Their value is irreplaceable, and they are an
important part of the water, energy, health, agriculture and biodiversity (WEHAB) sectors, which are
essential for poverty alleviation and socio-economic development. The ecosystem approach further
focuses on coastal and freshwater ecosystems, which are stepping stones for migratory birds and fish
species and provide global environmental services that underpin the natural functions of the Earth. But,
as WWDR1 shows, these ecosystems are under severe pressures that threaten their ability to meet the
multiple and growing demands placed upon them.

2a. Goods and services
All ecosystems, aquatic and terrestrial, play a role in
regulating the way water flows through the landscape,
highlighting the need to better understand the relations
between them and manage them in an integrated way.
Forests absorb precipitation and regulate streamflow, while
wetlands act as sponges, absorbing excess water in times
of heavy rain and high tides and releasing water slowly
during dry periods. Aquatic ecosystems play a number of
vital roles in human society: regulating climatic extremes,
providing food resources and, in the case of freshwater,
sustaining agricultural production. Many other human lifesupporting goods and services (see Table 5.2) are derived
from aquatic ecosystems, including:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

hydrological regulation of floods, availability and
supply of water during dry periods
sediment retention, water purification, and waste disposal
recharge of groundwater supplies
drinking water and sanitation for large populations
irrigation water for crops and drinking water for
livestock
coastline protection
climate change mitigation through greenhouse gas
absorption and impact buffering
recreation and tourism
cultural and spiritual values
a range of goods such as fibres, timber, animal fodder
and other food products
transport routes – sometimes the only accessible routes
hydroelectric and mechanical power.

The ability of any particular aquatic ecosystem to supply
the range of services listed above depends upon a variety
of factors, such as the type of ecosystem, the presence of
key species, management interventions, the location of
human communities and the surrounding climate and
topography. Few sites have the capacity to provide all of
the above services. Whereas recreation opportunities may
depend only on the presence of clean water, for example,
the provision of fish for food usually depends upon the
presence of a fully functioning food chain to sustain the
fish populations. Generally speaking, the more biologically
diverse an ecosystem is, the greater the range of services
that can be derived from it. There is some evidence from
aquatic systems that a rich regional species pool is
probably needed to maintain ecosystem stability in the
face of a changing environment (UNEP Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, 2006).
Aquatic ecosystems refer not only to coastal waters, rivers
and lakes, but also to a complex and interconnected
system of permanent and temporary habitats, with a high
degree of seasonal variation. Temporary habitats play a
key role in the overall value of water ecosystems. For
example, coastal estuaries and river floodplains are among
the most productive ecosystems on Earth (Junk et al.,
1989). Some, such as the Amazon floodplain, stretch over
thousands of kilometres, while others may be only a few
metres wide. Seasonal variation is vital for the integrity of
such ecosystems, as many fish depend on the seasonal
inundation of river floodplains for breeding or feeding.
The extent of flooding is in these cases positively

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 6 5

Figure 5.1: Estimated mean value of marine biomes
25,000
US dollars per hectare per year

correlated with fish catches (Welcomme, 1979). Many
tropical freshwater wetlands have a low nutrient status, as
in the black and clear floodplains in Amazonia (Furch,
2000). In these systems, high biodiversity is not an
indicator of high productivity, but rather of quick and
efficient nutrient recycling. These habitats are particularly
vulnerable to overexploitation. Estuaries and river
floodplains also have an important role in dissipating high
tides and river flows and preventing flood damage and
coastline erosion. In many countries, river floodplains also
serve as nutrient-rich sites for agriculture.

20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0

The precise value of many of these services (particularly
their monetary value) remain poorly understood. However,
direct use values of water buffering (e.g. flood prevention)
alone have been estimated at US $350 billion at 1994
prices, and recreational values at US $304 billion (Constanza
et al., 1997). It was estimated that reef habitats provide
human beings with living resources, such as fish, and
services, such as tourism returns and coastal protection,
worth about US $375 billion each year (Constanza et al.,
1997). Economic losses from degradation can also be
serious. One example is coastal erosion, which results from
altered currents and sediment loads caused by changes in
coastal and upstream land use. The beaches of Tangiers in
Morocco, for instance, largely disappeared in the 1990s
after new ports were built. The destination lost 53 percent
of its international tourist night-stays and substantial
tourism income, estimated at about US $20 million per year
(Blue Plan, 2005). Figure 5.1 roughly summarizes some of
the estimates for marine ecosystems.
Studies of particular wetlands (coastal or inland) provide
a fragmented picture of their physical and economic
benefits in different regions of the world (see Table 5.1).
For example, the value of using wetlands for waste
treatment in Kampala, Uganda was estimated at US
$2,000 to 4,000 per hectare (ha) (Emerton et al., 1999)
(see Chapter 14). Zambia’s wetlands were estimated to
be around US $16.7 million per year, of which US $4.2
million was generated by the Barotse floodplain alone
(Turpie et al., 1999).

2b. Fisheries
Fish are among the greatest and most obvious benefits
that human societies derive from aquatic ecosystems. In
2001, the reported global marine capture amounted to
85 million tonnes of fish, crustaceans and molluscs
(Fishstat, 2002). Unlike high-seas fisheries, however,
coastal and inland fisheries are often dominated by small-

s
n
s
s
s
ie s
he
ed
cea
eef
lve
uar
ars
he
al b
al r
no
s
m
Est
r
g
e
l
l
l
o
p
a
a
C
O
ida
ss/
ent
e/t
tin
gra
rov
on
g
Sea
C
n
Ma
Source: Constanza et al., 1998.

scale and subsistence operations from the poorest sectors
of society, for whom a catch provides a vital source of
livelihood and affordable protein. Inland capture fishery
production reported to the UN Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) by 150 countries in 2001 indicated a
total global production of 8.7 million tonnes, with the
greatest continental catches reported in Asia (5.8 million
tonnes) and Africa (2.1 million tonnes), mostly in
developing or transition economies where fish production
has rapidly increased over the past ten to fifteen years
(FAO, 2002). Seven countries reported inland fisheries as
their only source of fish, with twenty more considering
inland fisheries extremely important, accounting for
between 81 and 99 percent of their total fish production
(Kura et al., 2004).
FAO (2002) recently estimated that marine and inland
fisheries and aquaculture provide 16 percent of the
global animal protein intake (see Chapter 7). This
number exceeds 25 percent in the poorest countries,
reaching up to 90 percent in some isolated rural areas. In
the Upper Amazon Basin, for example, fish are reported
to provide the majority of animal protein consumed by
local households, with more than 200 kilograms (kg) of
fish consumption per year per person (Batista et al.,
1998). Fish are particularly important in communities
relying primarily on a few staple foods such as rice,
wheat, maize and cassava, which are deficient in
essential nutrients and can be supplemented by fish
(Thilsted et al., 1997). In areas where other economic
opportunities may be declining, small-scale fisheries and
related processing and trading offer an economic
alternative for an increasing number of unskilled

Aquatic
ecosystems refer
not only to
coastal waters,
rivers and lakes,
but also to a
complex and
interconnected
system of
permanent and
temporary
habitats, with a
high degree of
seasonal
variation

1 6 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 5.1: Estimated value of selected wetlands in Africa and Asia
Location
Bangladesh: Hail Haor

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Cambodia: Koh Kong
Province mangroves
Cambodia: Ream
National Park
Cameroon: Waza Logone
floodplain
Fiji: mangroves
India: Bhoj urban wetland

Indonesia: mangroves

Below: Las Huertas,
Mexico
Bottom: Anawilundawa,
Sri Lanka

Japan: Kushiro National
Park
Kenya: Lake Nakuru
National Park
Republic of Korea: coastal
wetlands
Malawi: Lower Shire
wetlands
Malaysia: mangroves
Mozambique: Zambezi
Delta coastal wetlands
Namibia: Chobe-Caprivi
wetlands
Nigeria: Hadejia-Nguru
floodplain
Nigeria: Hadejia-Nguru
floodplain
Philippines: Pagbilao
mangroves
Sri Lanka: Muthurajawela
urban marsh
Thailand mangroves
Thailand: Surat Thani
mangroves
Uganda: Nakivubo urban
wetland
Uganda: Pallisa District
wetlands
Zambia: Barotse floodplain

Value in million
US $/ha/year
649

2
32
59
3,000

Services

Source

Crops, fisheries, plants, flood control,
recreation, transportation, water quality
and supplies, existence values
Carbon sequestration
Storm protection
Crops, fishing, plant use, hunting

Colavito, 2002

86

Plant resources, grazing, crops,
water supplies, fisheries
Forestry, fisheries, crops
Water purification
Water quality and supplies, resource use,
amenity and recreational values, crop
cultivation
Forest products and fisheries

1,400
400–800

Recreational and amenity values
Recreational value of wildlife viewing

158
5,820
1,206

22,000

Bann, 1997
Emerton et al., 2002
IUCN, 2001
Lal, 1990
Verma, 2001

Burbridge and Maragos,
1985
Kuriyama, 1998
Navrud and
Mungatana, 1994
Lee, 1998

123

Fishery production and habitat, waste
treatment, aesthetic functions
Plant resources, hunting, crops, grazing

35
9

Forest products
Plant resources, hunting, crops, grazing

Hamilton et al., 1989
Turpie et al., 1999

22

Plant resources, hunting, crops, grazing

Turpie et al., 1999

Doum palm utilization, firewood, potash,
agriculture
Groundwater recharge for domestic
consumption
Forestry and fisheries

Eaton and Sarch, 1997

2
20
211
2,600
165
77
2,155
485

16

Turpie et al., 1999

Acharya, 1998

Water supplies, wastewater treatment, flood
attenuation, support to downstream fisheries
Coastline protection
Coastline protection

Janssen and Padilla,
1996
Emerton and
Kekulandala, 2002
Christensen, 1982
Sathirathai, 1998

Wastewater treatment

Emerton et al., 1999

Crops, grazing, fisheries, plant use, sand
and clay, maintenance of soil fertility, water
supplies and quality
Plant resources, hunting, crops, grazing

Karanja et al., 2001

Turpie et al., 1999

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 6 7

labourers. In the Lake Chad Basin, for example, fish
provide a source of income that is reinvested in farming
(Béné et al., 2003).
Much of the increase in fisheries production is the result
of enhancement efforts such as fish stocking and the
introduction of non-native fish species in lakes and rivers
(Kura et al., 2004), although the latter can in turn create
environmental problems as discussed below. In 2001,
aquaculture produced 37.9 million tonnes of fishery
products, or nearly 40 percent of the world’s total fish
consumption, valued at US $55.7 billion (FAO, 2002).
Aquaculture is the fastest-growing food production sector
in the world, with freshwater finfish alone accounting for
over 50 percent of global production. Asia, especially
China, dominates inland fishery production. China
produced close to 15 million tonnes of fish (about onequarter of the world’s total catch) in 2001, mostly carp
for domestic consumption. Other leading inland
aquaculture-producing countries include Bangladesh,
Cambodia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Tanzania,
Thailand and Uganda (Kura et al., 2004).
Inland fishing is almost entirely dominated by small-scale
and subsistence operations. In China alone, more than 80
percent of the 12 million reported fishermen are engaged
in inland capture fishing and aquaculture (Miao and Yuan,
2001). In the Lower Mekong River Basin, which covers
part of Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Viet Nam, a recent
study estimated that 40 million rural farmers are also
engaged in fishing, at least seasonally (Kura et al.,
2004). This is also true in Africa. In the major river basins
and lakes in West and Central Africa, FAO (2003)
estimated that fisheries employ 227,000 fishermen,
producing 569,100 tonnes of fish products per year, with

a value of US $295.17 million and a potential value of
nearly US $750 million (Neiland et al., 2004).

...most coastal
and freshwater

All of these benefits depend on the continuation of
healthy, functioning aquatic ecosystems. Unfortunately,
many hydrological systems are currently being modified
and damaged, resulting in a decline in biodiversity and a
consequent loss of many of the services mentioned.
It should be noted, furthermore, that information on
inland fishery production is notoriously poor, particularly
for subsistence fisheries, since catches are often grossly
underestimated by national governments (Kura et al.,
2004). FAO estimates under-reporting by a factor of
three or four (FAO, 1999 and 2001). Despite their key
role in providing nutrition to the poorest and most
vulnerable members of society, coastal and inland
fisheries frequently suffer from poor management,
competition from industrial fishing and degradation from
land-based activities, such as deforestation, pollution and
upstream development (Kura et al., 2004).
Even though inland and coastal harvests continue to
increase, maintained mainly by aquaculture expansion,
most coastal and freshwater systems are stressed by
overfishing, habitat loss and degradation, the
introduction and presence of invasive species, pollution,
and the disruption of river flows by dams and other
diversions (FAO, 1999 and Revenga et al., 2000).
This degradation threatens not only the biodiversity of
riverine and lacustrine ecosystems, but also the food
security and livelihood of millions of people – particularly
those of poor rural and coastal communities in the
developing world. The following section provides a brief
overview of the status of freshwater and coastal
ecosystems around the world.

systems are
stressed by
overfishing,
habitat loss and
degradation, the
introduction and
presence of
invasive species,
pollution and
the disruption
of river flows by
dams and other
diversions...

School of freshwater fish
in the State of Mexico,
Mexico

1 6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 3. Status of and Trends in
Ecosystems and Biodiversity
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Freshwater and coastal ecosystems comprise a range of highly productive habitats, such as lagoons,
estuaries, lakes, rivers, floodplains, small streams, ponds, springs, aquifers and wetlands. The term
‘wetland’ describes a particular group of aquatic habitats representing a variety of shallow, vegetated
systems, such as bogs, marshes, swamps, floodplains, coastal lagoons, estuaries, coral reefs and
seagrass beds, where the shallowest sites are often transitional areas and can be seasonally or
intermittently flooded (Groombridge and Jenkins, 1998).1

3a. Status of coastal and freshwater
ecosystems
Proximity to water bodies has been an incentive for the
location of human settlements for millennia, and the
human alteration of coastlines, rivers, lakes and wetlands
has gone hand in hand with social and economic
development. Coastal and freshwater ecosystems have
suffered multiple pressures, often undergoing degradation
in small, incremental steps that are difficult to recognize.
General analyses and reviews over the past two decades
have identified a range of pressures that cause adverse
change in these ecosystems (Allison, 2004; Revenga and
Kura, 2003; Revenga et al., 2000; Groombridge and
Jenkins, 1998; McAllister et al., 1997; Abramovitz, 1996;
Bryant et al., 1998; Burke et al., 2001). These show
physical alteration, habitat degradation and destruction,
water withdrawal, overexploitation, pollution and the
introduction of non-native species to be the leading
causes of aquatic species decline and ecosystem
degradation (see also Table 5.2). Rarely is a given species
or habitat imperilled as a result of a single threat, and it is
often impossible to decipher the intertwined effects of the
many disturbances occurring within a given river basin
(Malmqvist and Rundle, 2002). This ‘creeping’ nature of
degradation not only makes it difficult to identify serious
problems early on, but also allows people to get used to
degradation as it is occurring, so that over time degraded
ecosystems become accepted as the norm (Glantz, 1999).

1. The Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands defines wetlands as
‘areas of marsh, fen, peatland
or water, whether natural or
artificial, permanent or
temporary, with water that is
static or flowing, fresh,
brackish or salt, including
areas of marine water the
depth of which at low tide
does not exceed six metres’.

A variety of attempts have been made to assess the global
extent and distribution of aquatic habitats. However,
estimates vary considerably, depending on the type of
source material used. And while inventories of coastal
zones, river basins and lakes do exist, there are no good
data sets or indicators at the global level which track
changes in conditions over time. Unfortunately, there are
no unequivocally accepted global measures or indicators
that demonstrate the changes in the overall extent of

wetlands. Finlayson and Davidson (1999) concluded that
the information available is too patchy and inconsistent to
provide a precise picture of global change. An often quoted
estimate is that about 50 percent of the wetlands that
existed in 1900 had been lost by the late 1990s as a result
of the conversion of land to agriculture (Myers, 1997).
However, this figure remains largely speculative.
Accurate information does exist, however, for some
continents and regions. Junk (2002) recognized twentyfour major aquatic ecosystems in Africa, eight of
which are strongly subjected to large-scale irrigation,
with devastating environmental effects and losses of
ecosystem services and biodiversity. If human population
density is brought into the equation, south and
Southeast Asian wetlands can be considered among the
most severely degraded (see Box 5.2).
A global survey is beyond the scope of a chapter of
this length. In the following section we first summarize
some key global trends in wetland species and related
ecosystem goods and services and then examine the
range of pressures currently affecting aquatic ecosystems.
Lastly, we discuss some specific examples of changes to
the status of particular wetland habitats. Again,
freshwater systems are covered in more detail than
coastal systems, even though all these systems are
interlinked and provide many specific goods and services.

3b. Global trends in key species
Species richness in relation to the extent of habitat is
extremely high for many coastal and freshwater groups.
It has been estimated, for example, that 12 percent
of all animal species live in freshwater ecosystems
(Abramovitz, 1996), while virtually all terrestrial
species depend upon such ecosystems for their survival.
In Europe, for example, 25 percent of birds and 11
percent of mammals use freshwater wetlands as their

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 6 9

BOX 5.2: THREATENED SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIAN WETLANDS

Given high population densities, increased
rates of deforestation (particularly in
Indonesia) and the large degree of ecosystem
fragmentation in India, which has more than
4,000 dams, Southeast Asia’s wetlands are
probably the most degraded in the world. This
is reflected in the rapid decrease or local
extinction of large grazing wetland species,
such as the Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros
unicornis) and swamp deer (Cervus duvauceli,

C. eldi, C. schomburgki), and the high number
of globally threatened fish, amphibians, water
turtles and bird species in the region. In
addition, more than half of the region’s coral
reefs, the most species-rich on Earth, are at
high risk, primarily from coastal development
and fishing-related pressures. Southeast Asia’s
mangroves, also the most biodiverse in the
world, are under increasing pressure from
timber industries, aquaculture and conversion

main breeding and feeding areas (EEA, 1995). Of the
approximately 25,000 ray-finned (Actinopterygii) fish
species described to date, 41 percent are considered
primarily freshwater species. Individual freshwater systems
can be extremely important in supporting high numbers of
endemic species. According to the Ramsar Convention on
Wetlands, Lake Tanganyika in Central Africa, for example,
supports 632 endemic animal species. It is also important
to note that the resilience of ecosystems increases with
biodiversity, thus providing a relevant linkage between
management and biodiversity conservation.
As for coastal waters, Conservation International (CI) has
identified twenty-five biodiversity ‘hotspots’ around the
world, twenty-three of which are at least partially located
within coastal zones, mainly in Asia, the Caribbean, Africa
and South America (UNEP, 2005). Coral reefs alone,
representing only 0.2 percent of the total area of oceans
(Bryant et al., 1998), harbour more than 25 percent of all
known marine fish, with some reefs reaching densities of
around 1,000 species per square metre, especially in parts
of the Pacific and Indian Oceans (Tibbets, 2004). Semienclosed seas can also have a wealth of endemic flora
and fauna. The Mediterranean, for example, contains 7
percent of the world’s known marine species, although it
covers only 0.8 percent of the ocean surface: 694 species
of marine vertebrates have been recorded (580 fish, 21
mammals, 48 sharks, 36 rays and 5 turtles) and 1,289
marine plant taxons (Blue Plan, 2005).
Serious concern for the global status of aquatic biodiversity
was raised in the early 1990s (e.g. Moyle and Leidy, 1992),
focusing mainly on data relating to the conservation status
of fish. Most of the relatively few global reviews have

to agriculture despite their widely documented
importance for coastal protection, water
purification, carbon dioxide absorption, and as
breeding and nursing grounds for many
valuable subsistence and commercial fish
species (see also Chapter 14).

Sources: IUCN, 2003a; IUCN et al., 2004; Bryant et al.,
1998; Burke et al., 2001.

appeared only during the past decade (Abramowitz, 1996;
McAllister et al., 1997; Groombridge and Jenkins, 1998;
Revenga et al., 1998; Revenga et al., 2000). These still rely
heavily on information relating to fish, but draw from
available case studies of other groups (e.g. molluscs in US
waters), and also deal in increasing detail with threat
factors and their sources. For instance, FAO’s 2004
assessment of marine fish stocks for which information is
available, concludes that about half of the stocks (52
percent) were fully exploited, 16 percent were
overexploited, and 7 percent were depleted. Only about
one-quarter were either underexploited (3 percent),
moderately exploited (21 percent) or recovering from
previous exploitation (1 percent).

Pressures on

Pressures on aquatic ecosystems have caused a severe
decline in the condition of species, with more freshwater
species threatened with extinction than in either terrestrial
or marine environments (WRI et al., 2000; Revenga et al.,
2000; Loh et al., 2004). Available indices tend to support
the hypothesis that freshwater species are more threatened
by human activities than species in other realms. The Living
Planet Index (LPI) developed by UNEP’s World Conservation
Monitoring Centre (WCMC) and the World Wide Fund for
Nature (WWF) is based on trends in populations of
vertebrate species. The LPI found that on average freshwater
species populations fell by about 50 percent between 1970
and 2000, representing a sharper decline than measured in
either terrestrial or marine biomes. Furthermore, freshwater
species declined most sharply in the Neotropical and
Australasian realms (see Figure 5.2). However, this does not
mean that marine species are in good condition. The Marine
Species Population Index recorded a decline of about 35
percent over the same period.

more threatened

aquatic
ecosystems have
caused a severe
decline in the
condition of
species.
Freshwater
species are
with extinction
than in
terrestrial or
marine
environments

1 7 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 5.2: Living Planet Index, 1970–2000
Freshwater Species
2

250

1.8
1.6

Index

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

1.2

Australasia
Afrotropical
Indo-Malayan
Nearctic
Neotropical
Palearctic
Freshwater Index
N

150

1
0.8

100

No. species in index

200

1.4

0.6
50

0.4
0.2

0

0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: Loh et al., 2004.

Other similar measures that reflect the level of threat to
freshwater species include conservation status assessments,
such as those compiled by the Species Survival Commission
of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) and BirdLife
International through the Red List of Threatened Animals
and its derived red list indices. According to the 2003 IUCN
Red List, 3,011 freshwater species are listed as threatened
or extinct. Of these, 1,039 are fish and 1,856 are
amphibian. Among other freshwater groups, four of the five

Figure 5.3: Trends in waterbird populations in the
African-Eurasian (AEWA) regions

Note: The Agreement on the
Conservation of African-Eurasian
Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA)
covers 117 countries from
Europe, parts of Asia and Canada,
the Middle East and Africa. In
fact, the geographical area
covered by the AEWA stretches
from the northern reaches of
Canada and the Russian
Federation to the southernmost
tip of Africa. The available
evidence suggests that aquatic
habitats and species are suffering
a disproportionate decline in
comparison to other habitats.

Unknown

Fluctuating

Decreasing

Stable/increasing

Decreasing/stable

Increasing

Stable

Source: Wetlands International, 2002.

river dolphins and two of the three manatees are
threatened, as are several smaller aquatic mammals. About
40 freshwater turtles, more than 400 inland water
crustaceans and hundreds of bivalve and gastropod
molluscs are also listed as being threatened with extinction.
However, the accuracy of available information tends to
decline with lower taxa. Figures for crustaceans and
molluscs, for example, may not reflect a true picture of the
current global situation.
All of the world’s amphibian species were recently
assessed for the first time (IUCN et al., 2004), providing
important new insights into the condition of this large
faunistic group. The survey shows that amphibians are
experiencing declines unprecedented in modern times, with
nearly one-third (32 percent) of the world’s 5,743
amphibian species threatened and 168 species already
thought to have become extinct. Most amphibians are
dependent on freshwater habitats during their larval stages
(with the exception of arboreal species), and almost all
species are highly sensitive to changes in habitat and
water quality. The decrease in amphibian abundance and
their threat status around the world are of major concern
from a global biodiversity perspective. At least 43 percent
of all amphibian species are declining in population,
indicating that the number of threatened species can be
expected to rise in the near future. The largest numbers of
threatened species occur in Latin America. Although
habitat loss and fragmentation clearly pose the greatest
threat to amphibians, a newly recognized fungal disease is
seriously affecting an increasing number of species, which
might have developed in response to the increasing global

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 7 1

eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems. Perhaps most
disturbing is the fact that many species are declining for
unknown reasons – complicating efforts to design and
implement effective conservation strategies.
Birds have generally been recorded in more detail and
over longer periods than any other group of species.
Although there are limitations in using them as general
indicators, the relative richness of data means they are

often the best available proxy to suggest overall trends in
biodiversity. The latest trend estimates from BirdLife
International (Butchart et al., 2004) confirm that
waterbird species are facing disproportionately serious
problems. Some 22 percent of the world’s seabirds alone
are threatened species (WWF/IUCN, 2001). Additionally,
global population estimates for waterbirds compiled by
Wetlands International (2002) show a declining trend in
the African-Eurasian flyway region (see Figure 5.3).

Part 4. Pressures and Impacts
Most aquatic ecosystems are vulnerable to a range of human activities. The likely impact of these
activities varies from place to place and according to the type of habitat involved. Table 5.2 summarizes
some of the key pressures with respect to different coastal and freshwater ecosystem types, as well as
some of the goods and services that these ecosystems supply. Some specific pressures are discussed in
greater detail below.

4a. Habitat alteration
Many aquatic ecosystems have undergone major
alterations as a result of deliberate habitat change, either
directly or through changes to nearby habitats. Various
forms of land use changes have a major influence on
water resources and ecosystems around the world (UNEP,
2004b). Several such changes are briefly described below.

Increased suspended loads
Increased concentrations of suspended solids in coastal
waters, rivers and lakes resulting from human activity can
cause significant changes in habitats. Examples include
intensive agriculture, deforestation, road construction,
urbanization, tourism, mining, dredging for harbours and
shipping lanes, and gravel pit operations. Increased
particulate matter in water leads to higher levels of
turbidity, and thus reduces photosynthesis. In inland
waters, it can fill downstream reservoirs faster than
anticipated (UNEP, 2002b). As the suspended
(occasionally polluted or even toxic) material settles out
of the water column, the habitat for benthic organisms
can change in ways that reduce biodiversity (Cobb et al.,
1996). Some freshwater mammals are threatened with
extinction because of increased silt loads in rivers,
including the Spot-necked Otter (Lutra maculicollis) in
South Africa, the Malagasy Web-footed Tenrec
(Limnogale mergulus) in Madagascar, and the Giant Otter
Shrew (Potamogale velox) in Cameroon (Revenga and
Kura, 2003). Near shore coastal habitats are particularly
impacted by suspended solids. Deltas, mangrove forests,

beaches and other coastal habitats are affected by
altered currents and sediment delivery – to the benefit of
some locations and the detriment of others (UNEP,
2002b). Coral reefs, mangrove forests and sea-grass beds
may be smothered and deprived of light due to increases
in sediment loads, thereby degrading important breeding
and nursing grounds for many commercially valuable and
subsistence fish species (Spalding et al., 2002). Fish
populations are affected, both through reduced sources
of food and by direct physical effects – such as clogging
and abrasion of gills, behavioural changes (e.g.
movement and migration), reduced resistance to disease,
blanketing of spawning grounds and other habitat
changes – and physical constraints that prevent
functional egg and fry development (Singleton, 1985).
Similarly, invertebrate communities are impacted if
photosynthetic communities (e.g. periphyton) are
affected. The direct invertebrate effects of suspended
solids include smothering, clogging of interstices in gravel
and cobble beds affecting microhabitats, abrasion of
respiratory surfaces, and interference of food intake for
filter-feeding species (Singleton, 1985).

Drainage and conversion of wetlands
Uncontrolled or poorly regulated wetland drainage has
created severe threats to aquatic ecosystems and species
in some parts of the world, with impacts sometimes
affecting entire river basins or coastal habitats. While
some drainage is often an essential step in agriculture and
coastal development, done in the name of ensuring local

Increased
concentrations
of suspended
solids in coastal
waters, rivers
and lakes
resulting from
human activity
can cause
significant
changes in
habitats

1 7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 5.2: Major threats to coastal and freshwater ecosystems and services
Ecosystem
Rivers

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Estuaries

Goods and services
Many environmental, economic (e.g. fish, water
supplies, transport, disposal, biological cleaning,
climate regulation, etc.), religious and spiritual values
High biodiversity, fish, waterfowl, sedimentation,
buffer zones, biological cleaning, recreation

Coral reefs

High species diversity, coastal protection,
biological cleaning, tourism

Mangroves

High species diversity, coastal protection, water
purification, CO2 absorption, breeding and nursing
grounds for commercial fish species, source of
firewood and timber, coastal protection, tourism
High species diversity, nursing grounds for commercial
fish species, coastal protection, water purification,
CO2 absorption, sediment stabilization
Water supplies, sediment and nutrient retention,
recreation

Sea-grass
beds
Inland deltas

Threats
Reclamation, drainage, regulation of flow including dam construction,
hydroelectric power, pollution, deforestation, soil erosion and degradation,
climate change and alien invasive species
Reclamation, drainage, irrigation, hydroelectric power, regulation of water
flow, dams and dykes, pollution, agricultural intensification, deforestation, soil
erosion/degradation, overexploitation of fish and other food species, climate change,
waterborne disease control, and alien invasive species
Climate change, suspended solids from coastal construction, upstream
agriculture and logging, tourism; nutrients from untreated sewage and
agricultural runoff; pollution from industrial discharges, urban, agricultural and
landfills runoff, mining
Cutting for firewood and building materials, timber industry, road
construction, reclamation for aquaculture, agricultural, urban and industrial
areas, tourism developments, and sea-level rise
Dredging for harbours, ports and shipping lanes, fishing by benthic trawling,
aquaculture, coastal pollution, and clearance for beaches and other tourism
developments and facilities
Drainage, irrigation, regulation of water flow, pollution, agricultural
intensification, deforestation, soil erosion/degradation, overexploitation of fish and other
food species, climate change
Reclamation, drainage, irrigation, hydroelectric power, regulation of water
flow, dams and dykes, pollution, agricultural intensification, deforestation, soil
erosion/degradation, overexploitation of fish and other food species, climate
change, waterborne disease control, and alien invasive species
Pollution, agricultural intensification, eutrophication, deforestation, soil
erosion/degradation, overexploitation of fish and other food species, climate change,
waterborne disease control, and alien invasive species
Drainage, regulation of water flow, dams and dykes, pollution, agricultural
intensification, soil erosion/degradation, overexploitation of fish and other
food species, and waterborne disease control
Reclamation, drainage, regulation of water flow, pollution, agricultural intensification,
eutrophication and climate change
Reclamation, drainage, regulation of water flow, pollution, agricultural
intensification, and climate change
Drainage, agriculture and climate change

Floodplains

High productivity, high fish and fibre productivity,
flood buffers, fire protection, carbon storage,
recreation, groundwater recharge

Lakes

Water supplies, fibre, fish, waterfowl, recreation,
groundwater recharge, religious and spiritual values

Freshwater
marshes

Flood buffers, carbon storage, reed, willow, food
and fibre, purification

Raised bogs

Carbon storage, fossil fuels, purification

Fen mires

Carbon storage, pastoralism, willow, reed, groundwater
recharge
Species diversity, husbandry, pastoralism, recreation,
groundwater recharge
Carbon storage, climate regulation, water flow,
Pollution, climate change, overexploitation of fish and other food species
subsistence hunting and herding, groundwater recharge
Timber and fibre, biological cleaning, sanitation,
Deforestation, soil erosion, degradation and pollution
flood buffers, groundwater recharge,
purification
Water reservoirs, water storage, storage of nutrients
Irrigation, pollution, agricultural intensification, eutrophication, deforestation,
soil erosion/degradation, overexploitation of food species and waterborne
disease control
Water and food supplies, stop-over sites for migratory
Irrigation, agricultural intensification, pollution, overexploitation of fish
species, recreation, religious and spiritual values
and other food species, and alien invasive species

Alpine
meadows
Tundra
wetlands
Forest
swamps/
shrubs
Groundwater
aquifers
Freshwater
springs and
oases
Wet
grasslands
Ponds,
gravel pits,
drainage
channels

Carbon storage, food supply, flood buffers (mostly on
floodplains), groundwater recharge
Water supplies, recreation

Source: UNEP and UNEP-WCMC, 2004.

Regulation of water flow, drainage, agricultural intensification, eutrophication,
overexploitation of food species, and climate change
Pollution, eutrophication and overexploitation of fish and other food species

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 7 3

livelihoods, many such efforts usually bring short-term
economic gains while neglecting the long-term impact on
local communities. Draining wetlands can have serious
effects on their natural regulatory functions, causing not
only species and habitat loss but also significant
detrimental impacts on human populations through
increased and unpredictable droughts and flooding, and
erosion and saline intrusions along coastlines.
The Pripyat River, for example, between Ukraine and Belarus
previously had about 25 percent of its basin covered by
peatlands, the subsequent clearance of which resulted in a
long-term decline in river water quality (Bragg and Lindsay,
2003). Temperate wetlands, including peatlands, have been
heavily modified by conversion to agriculture and other land
uses in Western Europe, where many countries have lost
more than 90 percent of their wetlands. Much of the wet
grassland in Europe has also diminished due to drainage
and land conversion. In England and Wales, for instance,
less than 20 percent of traditional wet grasslands remained
by the late 1990s. Similarly, wet grassland decreased in
northern Germany on average by more than 50 percent
between 1945 and the early 1990s, with devastating
effects on biodiversity, as well as on water holding and
carbon storage capacity. In Eastern Europe, socio-economic
changes after 1990 led to the abandonment of agriculture
on many wet grasslands in northern Russia, Poland and the
Baltic States, thereby allowing them to develop into bushy
wetlands with little or no drainage. If this trend continues,
degraded fen mires and other habitats sensitive to intensive
land use could regenerate and once again provide reservoirs
of clean water, carbon storage and other services. When
wetlands are drained, the natural flow of sediments also
changes, with various impacts in habitats. It is sometimes
possible, however, to reverse such changes.

Deforestation
Forests are often highly diverse systems, and water flowing
through forested catchments is generally of high quality.
However, these areas are also very sensitive to changes in
land use, and any conversion of forest, including the loss
of biomass and biodiversity (Krebs, 1978; Tischler, 1979),
can disrupt the dynamics of water flow and recharge
functions. Apart from the potential changes in water
quality, quantity and flow continuity, deforestation also
often results in increased sediment loads, with various
impacts on downstream and coastline habitats.
Deforestation in the 1990s was estimated at a net loss
of 14.6 million ha per year (taking into account

reforestation), or 4.2 percent of the world’s natural
forests (FAO, 2001). According to a recent report by the
World Bank (Dudley and Stolton, 2003), much of the
world’s drinking water comes from catchments that are,
or would naturally be, forested. This report also found
that a third of the world’s largest 100 cities rely on
forests in protected areas for a substantial proportion of
their drinking water, demonstrating that metropolitan
authorities are increasingly recognizing the importance
of the link between forests and water supplies
(see Chapter 12). It is clear that forests often provide
the basis for the integrated management of water
resources, although precise effects vary from place to
place; a topic that has been controversial among
hydrologists. Knowledge of the type and age of trees,
soil conditions and user needs can help determine what
kind of forest management policies will be most
beneficial in a given situation.

Agricultural land-use changes
Agriculture is the largest user of freshwater. Irrigation is
responsible for almost 70 percent of all water withdrawals,
involving around 250 million ha of land (Millennium
Project, 2004), particularly in arid lands and in the larger
rice-growing areas of the world. As a result, some rivers
(e.g. the Colorado in the US, and the Nile in Africa) have
no discharge to the sea during certain periods of the year
(Postel, 1995). This, in and of itself, causes a range of
downstream and coastal problems and in some cases
accelerates the salinization of soils in irrigated regions and
aquifers near coastlines. No global figures for salinization
exist, but in the early 1990s a World Bank study estimated
that up to 2 million ha of land were being withdrawn from
agriculture each year due to water logging and
salinization (Umali, 1993). While the majority of the
world’s crops are still grown in rainfed farmlands, 17
percent of the world’s cultivated land currently produces
40 percent of its food (Wood et al., 2000), with an
increasing trend towards irrigation.
Intensified agricultural practices that rely on the
application of soluble fertilizers and pesticides can result
in increased nutrient runoff – one of the major causes of
deterioration in water quality. In extreme cases severe
eutrophication and harmful algal blooms can result in
both inland and coastal waters, leading to hypoxia, a
condition where rapid algal growth depletes oxygen as it
decomposes. Besides severely impacting human uses of
water, eutrophication can cause major changes in aquatic
food webs and ecosystem productivity.

Toxic algae warning sign
on boating lake in
Portishead, UK

Intensified
agricultural
practices that
rely on the
application of
soluble
fertilizers and
pesticides can
result in
increased
nutrient runoff
– one of the
major causes of
deterioration in
water quality

WWDR Chapter (F) 05h

15/2/06

15:24

Page 174

1 7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

In addition, silt being washed into water from ploughed
land and changes in the way stream and river banks are
managed can damage fish spawning grounds and coastal
habitats. For instance, the drainage of Dartmoor and
Bodmin Moor in the UK has damaged salmon spawning in
the Tamar, Fowey and Camel rivers, which together are
worth a total of about US $27.3 million in rod fisheries.
Nutrients from agricultural runoff, aquaculture operations,
and human and industrial wastes – including atmospheric
depositions – can cause severe eutrophication and
changes in the trophic conditions of coastal waters, rivers,
lakes, reservoirs and wetlands. Nitrogen and phosphorus
compounds are usually the major nutrients responsible
for increases in unnaturally rapid growths of algae and
other plants, which are symptomatic of eutrophic water
bodies. Besides severely impacting human uses of water,
eutrophication can cause major changes in aquatic food
webs and ecosystem productivity. The die-off of excessive
plant matter can lead to the deoxygenation of the water,
killing many aquatic species and affecting chemical cycles
that fuel biological productivity. Bacteria and other micro-

organisms require oxygen to decompose pollutants that
enter aquatic systems.
Biological oxygen demand (BOD) is a measure of the
quantity of oxygen necessary for biological oxidation of
waterborne substances and therefore an indicator of
organic pollution. Some aquatic species are particularly
susceptible to declines in oxygen concentrations and thus
to pollution from sewage or fertilizers. For example, salmon
(Salmonidae) species require dissolved oxygen
concentrations greater than 5 milligrams per litre (mg/L)
and cyprinids and members of the Carp (Cyprinus carpio)
family, more than 2 mg/L (Gleick et al., 2001). When
nutrient levels increase, the delicate balance between
corals and algae is also destroyed. The algae may overgrow
and smother the corals, thereby affecting the marine
organisms that depend on them. This may in turn affect
humans who depend on these marine resources for their
livelihoods. Map 5.1 shows the distribution and changes in
BOD for the regions of the world and major river basins.
Oxygen-depleted coastal waters are also widespread along
the eastern and southern coasts of North America, the

Map 5.1: Biological oxygen demand (BOD) for major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and 1991–2003

Note: Coloured areas on the map
indicate percentage change and
histograms the mean
concentration changes by region.
BOD is a measure of the amount
of dissolved oxygen consumed as
a result of decay of organic
matter in the water column or at
the sediment–water interface.
Pollution in the form of municipal
and industrial effluents is often
high in organic matter and, thus,
BOD is an indicator of ecosystem
stress from municipal and
industrial pollution. Watersheds in
white indicate insufficient data in
one of the time periods to
calculate % change.

Source: Based on global water monitoring data maintained by the UNEP GEMS/Water programme, www.gemswater.org

WWDR Chapter (F) 05h

15/2/06

15:24

Page 175

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 7 5

southern coasts of Japan and China, and large parts of the
many, often semi-enclosed, seas surrounding Europe
(various sources compiled in UNEP, 2004b).
High concentrations of nitrate in water make it unusable
for drinking purposes. A comparison of dissolved nitrogen
concentrations in eighty-two major watersheds from the
late 1970s (see Map 5.2) indicates that twenty-five
watersheds had increased nitrate concentrations, thirteen
had lower concentrations, probably due to improved
nutrient control programmes for wastes, and the
remainder showed no significant change or had
insufficient data for accurate assessments to be made.
The results suggest that, while conditions appear to be
deteriorating in more areas than improving, significant
improvements can be achieved if there is sufficient
political will to improve wastewater treatment and
modify agricultural policy.
In a global assessment of the human impacts on
phosphorus leaching and its relation to eutrophication, it
was found that even though households and industry tend

to be the most significant sources, the mining of
phosphorus, and its subsequent use in fertilizers, animal
feeds and other products is altering the global phosphorus
cycle, causing it to accumulate in soils in some locations
(Bennett et al., 2001). This can increase phosphorus
runoff and subsequent loads to aquatic ecosystems, inland
and coastal alike. The authors estimated that phosphorus
storage in soils and aquatic systems was 75 percent
greater than pre-industrial levels. In agricultural areas, the
rate of phosphorus accumulation appears to be decreasing
in developed nations and increasing in developing nations.
As phosphorus is the key to biological production in most
aquatic systems, in the future eutrophication problems are
likely to increase in developing countries. Stored soil
phosphorus can be transported to aquatic systems during
storms and other events, which means there will be an
inevitable lag before management actions taken to control
eutrophication have a significant effect. Furthermore,
phosphorus can build up in lake and coastal sediments.
As this phosphorus can be remobilized under certain
circumstances, it may threaten severe eutrophication in
the future.

A waterfall in Sri Lanka

Map 5.2: Inorganic nitrogen concentrations for major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and 1991–2003

Source: Figure generated based global water monitoring data maintained by the UNEP GEMS/Water programme, at www.gemswater.org

Note: Inorganic nitrogen,
measured as nitrate +
nitrite, is an indicator of
trophic stress on
ecosystems as a result of
human activities. Inorganic
nitrogen can enter aquatic
ecosystems through
agricultural activities, in the
form of runoff from
fertilizer applications, as
well as from industrial and
municipal processes.
Nitrogen, in conjunction
with phosphorus, controls
the growth of plants and
algae in aquatic systems
and elevated levels of
these nutrients can lead to
overly productive or
eutrophic conditions that
can impair ecosystem
health. Watersheds in white
indicate insufficient data in
one of the time periods to
calculate % change.

WWDR Chapter (F) 05h

15/2/06

15:24

Page 176

1 7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

4b. Fragmentation and flow regulation (dams
and reservoirs)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Once species
become extinct,
they can never
be recovered,
with severe
potential effects
on entire food
webs and
ecological
processes

While it is difficult to obtain a single and absolute measure
of the condition of freshwater ecosystems, some indicators
are available that can help to illustrate their overall status.
The fragmentation and flow regulation indicator is a case in
point. This indicator provides a measure of the degree to
which freshwater systems have been altered by the
construction of dams and reservoirs. According to the World
Commission on Dams (WCD, 2000), most of the world’s
large dams were built during the second half of the
twentieth century and, as of 2000, between 160 and 320
new large dams are still being built every year. Today, there
are more than 45,000 dams of over 15 metres (m) high,
with about 15 percent of the total annual river runoff being
sequestered behind dams (Gornitz, 2000). Almost half of
the existing large dams (22,000) are in China, followed by
the United States with 6,390 (WCD, 2000).
Dams play a major role in fragmenting and modifying
aquatic habitats, transforming lotic (flowing) ecosystems
into lentic (still) and semi-lentic ecosystems, altering the
flow of matter and energy and establishing barriers to
the movement of migratory species. Waterfalls, rapids,
riparian vegetation and wetlands can all disappear when
rivers are regulated or impounded (Dynesius and Nilsson,
1994). These habitats are essential feeding and breeding
grounds for many aquatic and terrestrial species and also
contribute significantly to maintaining other vital
ecosystem services, including water purification. The

fragmentation indicator presented here suggests that
many unique riverine habitats have been fragmented or
even eliminated. Given that habitat loss is the leading
cause of species extinction in freshwater ecosystems,
this indicator gives a measure of the risk that many
freshwater species face. Once species go extinct, they
can never be recovered, with severe potential effects on
entire food webs and ecological processes.
This fragmentation and flow regulation indicator was
developed by Umeå University in Sweden, in collaboration
with the World Resources Institute (Nilsson et al., 2005).
It assesses 292 of the world’s largest river systems,
which comprise approximately 60 percent of the world’s
river runoff, and occupy more than half (54 percent) of
the world’s land area. A large river system (LRS) is
defined as a river system that has a river channel section
with a virgin mean annual discharge (VMAD, the river
discharge before any significant direct human
manipulations) of at least 350 cubic metres per second
(m3/s) anywhere in its catchment (Dynesius and Nilsson,
1994). Results of the analysis (see Map 5.3) show that
there are 105 strongly affected, 68 moderately affected,
and 119 unaffected LRSs. Unaffected river systems are
those without dams in their catchments, although dams
in tributaries may not disqualify a river from being
classified as ‘unaffected’ if flow regulation is less than
2 percent of the VMAD. A river system is never
considered unaffected if there are dams in the main
channel, and is never classified as strongly affected if

Map. 5.3: Fragmentation and flow regulation by Large River System (LRS)

Note: This map presents the
results of the river fragmentation
and flow regulation indicator. Of
the 292 of the world’s LRSs, 173
are either strongly or moderately
affected by dams; while 119 are
considered unaffected. In terms
of areas, strongly affected
systems constitute the majority
(52 percent or about 4,367 km2)
of total LRS catchment area.
Grey colour represents potential
LRSs in Indonesia and Malaysia
that were not assessed due to
lack of data.

Source: Nilsson et al., 2005.

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 7 7

there are no dams in the main channel. All river systems
with no more than one-quarter of their main channel
length left without dams are considered strongly affected.
The world’s two river systems with the largest discharges,
the Amazonas-Orinoco and the Congo rivers, are
moderately affected, while the third largest, the Yangtze
River in China, is strongly affected by fragmentation and
altered flows. The largest river remaining unaffected by
fragmentation and altered flows is the Yukon River system
in Alaska. The other unaffected river systems are mainly
smaller catchments in areas with low population densities,
such as catchments surrounding the Hudson Bay in Canada
and others in southern Chile and Argentina as well as in
northern Siberia. Although fewer in number, river systems
classified as moderately affected represent, on average,
both the largest basins and those with higher discharges.
On the other hand, strongly affected systems constitute
the majority (52 percent) of total LRS catchment areas,
despite contributing less VMAD per system.
At the continental level, Europe has the smallest number
(four) and smallest proportion (10 percent) of freeflowing or unaffected large river systems. The highest
number (forty) of unaffected LRSs is found in North and
Central America, whereas Australasia contains the highest
proportion (74 percent) of unaffected systems. In South
America, the unaffected systems are on average smaller
than affected systems both in discharge and catchment
area. The situation is similar in Africa. For example, the
moderately affected Congo River (Central Africa) system
contributes 51 percent of total African LRS runoff.
This indicator does not address the within-basin
distribution of impacts, which can be significant in large
basins. For example, the Mackenzie (Northwest Territories,
Canada) and the Amazonas-Orinoco systems, which are
moderately affected, include extensive, virtually pristine
areas as well as strongly affected areas. This within-basin
variation is likely to have significant ecological implications.
Furthermore, the data used are conservative and represent
minimum values, implying that the LRS at a global scale
may be more affected than depicted. An example can be
seen with the Brahmaputra, a river thought to have more
dams in Tibet than official sources report. If true, this
would increase the Ganges-Brahmaputra system (Tibet,
China, Bangladesh and India) classification to a higher
fragmentation level. If irrigation pressure, planned dams
and dams under construction are taken into account, the
current fragmentation classifications will also change.

Despite gains in information, there are still data gaps that
limit our understanding of the relationships between
impacts on LRSs and ecosystem conditions. Most river
systems in Indonesia, for example, are omitted, along with
several in Malaysia, because reliable data are not available.
This is particularly unfortunate because the region harbours
some of the most unique and rich species assemblages on
the planet, representing great conservation potential.
When the fragmentation and flow regulation indicator is
correlated with terrestrial biome distribution, as classified
by Olson et al. (2001), the analysis shows that unaffected
LRS catchments are most represented in large biomes:
tundra; boreal forests; tropical and subtropical moist
broadleaf forests; and tropical and subtropical grasslands,
savannahs and shrublands (see Figure 5.4). In fact,
tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests and boreal
forests contain low proportions of strongly affected river
systems in terms of area. Smaller biomes retain little or no
unaffected large river systems. Strongly affected systems
are dominant in three biomes – temperate broadleaf and
mixed forests; temperate grasslands, savannahs and
shrublands; and flooded grasslands and savannahs – each
of which retain less than 1 percent of their total surface
area as unaffected LRSs. An important result is that
strongly affected catchments alone constitute 80 percent
of LRS area in deserts and xeric shrublands, and 99
percent for Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrubs
– highlighting the pressure on these ecosystems from
altered river catchments and water abstraction.
Furthermore, the eight most biogeographically diverse
LRSs2, spanning seven or more biomes each, are all
moderately or strongly impacted.
Dams are often promoted as a means of meeting water
and energy needs and supporting economic growth. We
can therefore anticipate that the demand for large dams
will continue to increase, particularly in regions with high
water demand driven by growing populations and
agricultural needs. The latest accounts of current dam
development support this hypothesis. There are currently
270 dams over 60 m high planned or under construction
around the world. Of the LRSs assessed, 46 presently
have large dams planned or under construction, with
anywhere between 1 and 49 new dams per basin (WWF
and WRI, 2004). In addition, interbasin exchange of dam
benefits may play a strong role in future decisions about
dam construction. For example, over thirteen dams are
planned or proposed for the currently unaffected Salween
River (Tibet, China and Myanmar), the most imminent of

Approximately
nine rivers are
at risk of
entering a
higher impact
class: from
unaffected to
affected, or
from moderately
to strongly
affected

2. The eight most
biogeographically diverse LRSs
are the Amazonas-Orinoco
Basins in South America; the
Zambezi in Africa; the Amur,
Ob and Yenisey in northern
Asia (Russia, Mongolia); and
the Irrawaddi, GangesBrahmaputra and Indus in Asia.

1 7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 5.4: Fragmentation and flow regulation by biome type
10

km2 (x 105)

M

160

120

80

40

T

M

TSMBF

BT

RI

TSCF

TSDBF

TCF

TSGSS

MGS

FGS

TGSS

TBMF

L

DXS

0
MFWS

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

L

MFWS

0
200

RI

5

TSCF

240

km2 (x 105)

Non-LRS area
Unaffected
Moderately affected
Strongly affected

FGS

280

Note: The figure represents the distribution of surface area within each of the world’s sixteen terrestrial biomes as belonging to unaffected,
moderately affected or strongly affected LRSs. Biomes are listed in descending order from left to right by proportion of strongly affected area
within LRS-covered area; the inset presents increased resolution of impact class distribution for six biomes with little LRS-covered area.
MFWS = Mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub; DXS = desert xeric shrubs; L = lakes; TBMF = temperate broadleaf mixed forests;
TGSS = temperate grasslands, savannahs and shrublands; FGS = flooded grasslands and savannahs; MGS = montane grasslands and shrublands; TSGSS = tropical
and subtropical grasslands, savannahs and shrublands; TCF = temperate conifer forests; TSDBF = tropical and subtropical dry broadleaf forests; TSCF = tropical
and subtropical coniferous forests; RI = rock and ice; BT = boreal forests/taiga; TSMBF = tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests; M = mangroves; T =
tundra. Grey colour represents non-LRS area, including potential LRSs in Indonesia and Malaysia that were not assessed because of lack of data.
Source: Nilsson et al., 2005.

which (the Tasang Dam on the main stem) is based on
international and interbasin benefits and would alone
make the Salween moderately affected.
Almost half of the new dams are located on just four
rivers: forty-nine on the Yangtze (China), twenty-six on
the Rio de la Plata (Argentina and Uruguay), twenty-six
on the Tigris-Euphrates (Iraq, Syrian Arab Republic and
Turkey), and twenty-five on the Ganges-Brahmaputra
(WWF and WRI, 2004). In addition to the Salween, new
dams are planned for several other unaffected LRSs,
including the Cá and the Agusan rivers in Southeast Asia,
and the Jequitinhonha in South America (see Chapter 14).
Approximately nine rivers are at risk of entering a higher
impact class: from unaffected to affected, or from
moderately to strongly affected. Some of the impacts of
these new dams may be limited by adopting
recommendations from the WCD. Understanding and
maintaining ecosystem functions in river systems where
new dams are planned can be partly achieved by
considering and balancing all the social, environmental
and economic forces surrounding each dam proposal.

Fragmentation poses serious problems that can, in some
cases, more than counteract any of the advantages of
dams (see Box 5.3). The foregoing analysis identifies three
biomes dominated by strongly affected LRSs (temperate
broadleaf and mixed forests; temperate grasslands,
savannahs and shrublands; and flooded grasslands and
savannahs) that deserve immediate action to mitigate the
impacts of existing alterations to flow regimes.
A reasonable goal might be to protect remaining
unaffected basins from dam construction, as most of
the unaffected basins are relatively small and freeflowing because their location and form have not
made damming feasible, thereby making them easier
to protect. For example, rivers with long, gently-sloping
runs instead of large falls do not meet most hydroelectric
requirements (see Chapter 9). Rivers on large plains,
rather than distinct valleys, are also poor sites for
constructing impoundments.
The possibility of decommissioning more dams might be
considered, especially those that are old and no longer

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 7 9

BOX 5.3: DAMS AND THEIR ALTERNATIVES

The World Commission on Dams report
proposed a new decision-making framework to
improve the planning and management of
dams and their alternatives. One of its
strategic priorities, ‘sustaining rivers and
livelihoods’, addresses the need for a basinwide understanding of ecosystem functions
and the livelihoods that depend on them, as
well as adopting options and decision-making
to avoid impacts, followed by minimization and

mitigation of harm to the health and integrity
of the river systems. Environmental flows are
water flow allocations that are reserved for
the river to sustain their ecological functions
and species. While the core values and
strategic priorities put forward in the report
are widely accepted by all major stakeholders,
the full set of recommendations, including
policy principles and guidelines, has been the
subject of dispute among some stakeholder

fulfil their original purpose, those that have created
serious environmental impacts, and those where
endangered species and ecosystems face a high risk of
extinction. These issues are now beginning to be
addressed in some locations. In the US, for example,
more dams are being removed each year than are being
built. By 2000, 465 dams had been decommissioned in
the US, the majority of which were followed by successful
ecological and fisheries restoration (Postel and Richter,
2003). In some cases, improved dam operations, such as
the implementation of fish ladders, the occasional
flooding of downstream areas and the maintaining of
minimum river flows, may be more feasible than removal
and can also help to restore key habitats.

4c. Pollution
In addition to the pollution that generally accompanies
agricultural intensification, aquatic ecosystems are affected
by a wide range of pollutants that are leached from the
soil, released directly into waterways or deposited from
the atmosphere. Domestic and industrial effluents can
seriously impact aquatic ecosystems, particularly in
developing countries where wastewater treatment is
minimal or non-existent and untreated effluents are often
discharged directly into waterways. An estimated 80
percent of the pollutants entering coastal waters, mostly
from land-based sources, are transported via rivers, and
there are clear links between upstream river basins and
associated coastal zones (UNEP, 2004b). Furthermore, at
least eight of the ten regions defined by UNEP’s Regional
Seas Programmes3 with sufficient data report that over 50
percent of their wastewater is still discharged into coastal
and freshwaters untreated; and for five of these, it is over
80 percent (UNEP/GPA, 2004). Untreated sewage from
municipal sources and animal wastes from agricultural

groups and governments, which has limited
the extent to which the recommendations
have been applied on a global scale. The UNEP
Dams and Development Project aims to
promote dialogue on improving decisionmaking, planning and management of dams
and their alternatives on the basis of WCD core
values and strategic priorities.
Source: WCD, 2000.

activities also add high concentrations of carbon-rich
organic material to these pollutant loads.
Even in the developed world, industrial effluents can have
significant negative impacts on aquatic ecosystems (see
Chapter 8). In the US alone, it is estimated that industry
generates about 36.3 billion kg of hazardous organopollutants each year, with only about 10 percent disposed
of in an environmentally responsible manner (Reddy and
Mathew, 2001). Concentrations of organochlorine
pesticides, such as DDT and BHC4, have been declining over
the past decade in some countries’ surface waters, as
regulations to curtail their use have been put in place. Such
compounds are the focus of major global studies (e.g. Li
and Macdonald, 2005; Ueno et al., 2003), because they are
harmful to aquatic biota, persistent in ecosystems, and their
derivatives can bio-accumulate in food chains, having
potentially significant impacts on animals at the top of
these chains. Studies undertaken in the northern rivers of
Russia clearly show the degree of decline in both river
water quality and Burbot fish (Lota lota) (see Figure 5.5)
(Zhulidov et al., 2002). Similarly, BHC concentrations in
China have exhibited a significant decline over time.
However, because of their persistence, the impacts of DDT
and other organochlorines continue to be seen for many
years after their use has been discontinued.
In recent years, there has been a growing concern about
the impacts that personal care products5 and
pharmaceuticals are having on water quality and the
productivity of aquatic systems and ecological functioning
– through the disruption of endocrine systems in fish, for
example (UN-WWAP, 2003). Between the 1940s and
1984, it is estimated that over 1 million tonnes of
antibiotics were released into the biosphere (Mazel and

3. See www.unep.org/
regionalseas/About/
default.asp for more
information about this
programme.
4. Dichloro diphenyl
trichloroethane and
hexachlorocyclohexane,
respectively.
5. This refers to a wide range of
products used to, e.g., soften
your water, boost the cleaning
power of laundry detergents
and other household products,
skin protecting lotions,
deodorants, compounds used
to prevent things like
shampoos and conditioners
from spoiling after purchase,
and increasing the protective
power of sunscreens.

6. Invasive alien species (IAS) are
defined as ‘an alien species
(species, subspecies or lower
taxon, introduced outside its
natural past or present
distribution; and includes any
part, gametes, seeds, eggs or
propagules of such species
that might survive and
subsequently reproduce),
whose introduction and/or
spread threaten biological
diversity’ (CBD Decision VI/23).

Davis, 2003). As few studies have been undertaken to
quantify the effects of personal care products and
pharmaceuticals on components of aquatic ecosystems
(e.g. effects on algal assemblages in freshwater, Wilson et
al., 2003), very little is known generally about their
distribution, fate and effects on aquatic systems and
potable water supplies (Jones et al., 2005; Sharpe, 2003).

4d. Invasive species
Invasive alien species (IAS) are thought to be the second
most important cause of biodiversity loss in freshwater
systems after habitat loss and degradation. However in some
lake ecosystems, they are now considered by some to be
the primary cause of biodiversity loss (Ciruna et al., 2004).6
There are many ways in which invasive species can
become established in an ecosystem, as a result of
political, demographic, cultural, socio-economic or
ecological factors. Introductions can either be intentional
– through introduction of ‘exotic’ plants and organisms
into gardens or waterways, or government-sanctioned
releases of organisms for propagation or harvest – or

unintentional, as a result of the escape of aquaculture
operations or the accidental transport of organisms
attached to boats, structures, garbage or in ballast water.
There appears to be some correlation between levels of
human activity, trade, ecological integrity and the
resistance of ecosystems to invasion from introduced
species (Ciruna et al., 2004). Where ecosystem functions
have been degraded, there is generally a greater
susceptibility to invasions. Once an IAS has established in
a new region, it can cause severe damage to local species
and habitats. Table 5.3 indicates the scale of
introductions in different regions.
In Mexico (see Chapter 14), for example, of the 500 or so
known fish species, 167 are considered to be at risk and,
of this total, 76 are thought to be threatened by invasive
alien species (Ciruna et al., 2004). Changes in biodiversity
through predation and competition for resources can lead
to decreased local biodiversity. The Nile Perch (Lates
niloticus) was originally introduced into Lake Victoria in
1954 to counteract the impacts of overfishing of native

Figure 5.5: Declines in the concentrations of organic contaminants in Russian and Chinese rivers
Total DDT (DDT, DDE1, DDD2), in Burbot fish liver lipid
content (means ± S.E.)

DDT in 8 Arctic Russian river waters
Russian rivers

14

400

12

300

North Dvina
Orb
Yenisey
Pyasina

DDT (ng L-1)

Mezen

DDT (ng L-1 lipid)

Pechora

10
8

Lena

200

100

6

Kolyma

1.0

90
Medium
10

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

Sources: Russian data: Zhulidov et al., 2002; Chinese data: GEMS/Water www.gemswater.org

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

0.0
1980

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

Notes: 1. Diphenyl dichloro
ethylene
2. Dichloro diphenyl
dichloroethane

BHC concentrations for selected rivers in China
China rivers

1989

1988

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

0

BHC (ug/L)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

1 8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 8 1

fish stocks (as seen in Box 5.1). However, aggressive
competition and predation by this species on the native
fish has since resulted in the apparent disappearance of
up to 132 endemic fish (Stiassny, 2005). The introduction
of the Atlantic comb jellyfish that caused the collapse of
fisheries in the enclosed Black Sea is another well
documented example of the detrimental effects of IAS
(e.g. in UNEP, 2002b). And in the semi-enclosed
Mediterranean, the accidentally introduced algae
(Caulerpa taxifolia) now affects six western Mediterranean
and Adriatic countries, covering 13,000 ha of the sea
floor over 180 km of shoreline, where it has colonized
precious sea-grass beds. IUCN classifies it as one of the
100 most dangerous invading species (Blue Plan, 2005).
Dominant invasive species can cause a rapid decrease in
the productivity of the ecosystem. The water hyacinth
(Eichhornia crassipes) is one of the most aggressive and
fastest growing aquatic weeds in the world. Originating in
South America, it is now present in more than fifty
countries, primarily as a result of its introduction as an
attractive ornamental plant. Within a matter of days, water
hyacinth infestations can block waterways, preventing the
passage of boats and interrupting economic activities, as
well as dramatically reducing the availability of light and
oxygen in the water – usually killing off endemic species
in the process (Lowe et al., 2004).

Table 5.3: Introductions of invasive species by
region
Region

Europe
Asia
Africa
Oceania
South and Central America
Middle East
North America

Percentage of total
recorded invasive
species introductions

25.1
16.4
14.7
14.7
14.1
8.4
6.3

Source: Ciruna et al., 2004.

likely future
impacts of
climate change
on coastal and
freshwater are
not yet fully
understood

approximately 38 percent of the global population and nine
of the ten most densely populated cities in the world. The
most vulnerable coastal nations, as recently assessed by
UNEP through a vulnerability index, are Bangladesh, China,
India, the Netherlands, Pakistan, the Philippines, the United
States and the small island developing states, especially
Barbados, Fiji, Haiti, the Maldives and the Seychelles
(UNEP, 2005; see also Chapter 10).
More detailed scenarios for such areas as North America
(Schindler, 1997) and southern Africa (Hulme, 1996)
predict major changes, particularly for dynamic shallowsurface water systems, which will in turn affect their
biodiversity and the livelihood of the populations that
depend on them.

4e. Climate change
The current and likely future impacts of climate change
on coastal and freshwater ecosystems, as outlined by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), are not
yet fully understood. Sea-level rise, higher temperatures,
greater carbon dioxide concentrations in seawater,
increased droughts and floods, and increasingly frequent
extreme weather events are all anticipated, with major
implications for aquatic ecosystems. Warmer water,
combined with anticipated changes in ocean currents,
could have a devastating impact on water ecosystems
and species diversity. One potential result is a reduction
in the upwelling of nutrients, which would in turn reduce
productivity in key fishing areas. Decreased growth may
also be seen in coral reefs, with high concentrations of
carbon dioxide in the water, impairing the deposition of
limestone required for coral skeletons. A significant sealevel rise will cause some low-lying coastal areas to
become completely submerged, while others will
increasingly face high but short-lived water levels.
These anticipated changes will have major impacts on
coastal habitats and populations. Coastal zones harbour

The current and

On a global level, polar and arid systems appear to
be the most vulnerable to climate change (see also
Chapter 4). Polar systems store the vast majority of
freshwater, and most scenarios suggest they are likely
to develop a considerably increased discharge of water,
driven by higher temperatures in both the polar regions
and particularly in the Arctic (ACIA, 2004). Arid regions
are also expected to experience drastic changes.
While global warming may increase productivity in some
regions and habitats, the overall predictions are that the
impacts of climate change on aquatic ecosystems will be
detrimental. Coastal wetlands such as mangroves and coral
reefs (Southeast Asia), coastal lagoons (Africa and Europe)
and river deltas (the Nile, Niger and Congo in Africa; the
Ganges and Mekong in Asia) will be seriously affected by
rising water levels, as well as other coastal lowland areas
with an elevation of less than 0.5 m (UNEP, 2002c).
The crash of the European eel population (Anguilla
rostrata) is an example of the detrimental effects of

1 8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

BOX 5.4: BIODIVERSITY IN LAKE CHAD

Lake Chad is 250 metres above sea level and
its drainage basin is shared by Cameroon,
Chad, Niger and Nigeria. As one of the largest
wetlands in Africa, it hosts a biodiversity of
global significance. These wetlands were once
home to many large mammals, including
elephants, hippopotami, gazelle, hyenas,
cheetahs and wild dogs and also provided a
habitat for millions of migratory birds. The lake
supports fish populations that feed local
communities and provide an important export
trade, with 95 percent of the catch going to
Nigeria in a trade worth an estimated US $25
million a year. During the severe drought
periods of the 1970s, 1980s and early 1990s,
Lake Chad shrunk significantly, from
approximately 23,000 km2 in 1963 to less
than 2,000 km2 in the mid-1980s. The key
reasons for this phenomenon have been

identified as overgrazing, deforestation
contributing to a drier climate and large,
unsustainable irrigation projects in Cameroon,
Chad, Niger and Nigeria which have diverted
water from the lake and the Chari and Logone
rivers. Since the 1990s, the lake levels have
started to rise as rainfall has increased.
However, the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) predicts reduced rainfall
and increased desertification in the Sahel near
Lake Chad, and drought frequencies are likely
to increase again. The size of the affected
region and the duration of the phenomenon
are unprecedented. The changes have
contributed to a widespread lack of water,
major crop failures, livestock deaths, a collapse
of local fisheries, rising soil salinity, and
increasing poverty throughout the region.
Alestes naremoze, a fish species that once

made up approximately 80 percent of the
catch, is now rare due to the disappearance of
its natural spawning beds. Sarch and Birkett
report an annual fish catch in the Lake Chad
Basin between 1986 and 1989 of 56,000
tonnes, compared to an annual catch of
243,000 tonnes between 1970 and 1977. The
implications do not stop in the Sahel.
The decline in migratory bird species, such as
the Central European wet grassland waders,
including Ruff (Philomachus pugnax) and
Black-tailed Godwit (Limosa limosa), is also
related to the changes in conditions in Lake
Chad and other wetland areas in the Sahel
zone (see Map 5.4).
Sources: UNEP, 2004a, 2004c; Nami, 2002; Coe and
Foley, 2001; FEWS, 2003; IPCC, 2001; Sarch and
Birkett, 2000; Zöckler, 2002.

Map. 5.4: Levels of Lake Chad 1963–2001

A Chronology of Change

Natural and Anthropogenic Factors Affecting Lake Chad

Niger

Chad

Niger

Chad

Cameroon

Chad

Niger

Nigeria

Nigeria

1987

1973

1963

Nigeria
Cameroon

Cameroon

1997

2001

Water
Former shoreline

Niger

Chad

Niger

Chad

Vegetation

This collection of maps has been sourced from a series
of satellite images provided by NASA Goddard Space
Flight Center:

Nigeria

UNEP

Source: UNEP, 2002c, 2004c.

Nigeria
Cameroon

http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/gsfc/earth/environ/lakechad/chad.htm

Cameroon

PHILIPPE REKACEWICZ
MAY 2002

WWDR Chapter (F) 05h

15/2/06

15:24

Page 183

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 8 3

BOX 5.5: DRAMATIC DECLINE OF THE ARAL SEA

In Central Asia, the Aral Sea has also declined

of biodiversity and wildlife habitat in the area’s

dramatically in recent decades, with devastating

rich wetlands and deltas, and an increase in

consequences for both biodiversity and human

human pulmonary diseases and infant mortality

well-being. Map 5.5 shows the impact of highly

resulting from the high toxicity of the salt

intensive agriculture on the Aral Sea Basin,

concentrations in the exposed seabed. Whereas

including the construction of ninety-four water

in 1959 the Aral Sea’s fisheries produced almost

reservoirs and 24,000 km of channels on the

50,000 tonnes of fish, by 1994 the annual catch

Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers to support the

was only 5,000 tonnes. Biodiversity has also

irrigation of 7 million ha of agricultural land. As

declined, with many local species extinctions in

a direct result of these developments, the

the region. The sensitive Turgay riverine forests,

volume of water in the Aral Basin has been

once a hotbed of biodiversity, have been

reduced by 75 percent since 1960. This loss of

reduced to marginal fragments in four nature

water, combined with the impact of excessive

reserves in Uzbekistan.

chemicals from agricultural runoff, has caused a
collapse in the Aral Sea fishing industry, a loss

Sources: UNESCO, 2000; Postel, 1999; KreutzbergMukhina, 2004.

Map. 5.5: Major irrigation areas in the Aral Sea Basin

Source: Kreutzberg-Mukhina, 2004.

Stranded boats on the exposed, former
seabed of the Aral Sea

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

1 8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

climate change at the species level. The European eel
fishery, which once sustained 25,000 fishermen, has
systematically declined over the past thirty years, due in
part to climate change and the weakening of the Gulf
Stream. By the mid-1980s, the number of new glass eels
(eel juveniles) entering European rivers had declined by
90 percent. Recent figures indicate that this level has
now dropped to 1 percent of former levels (Dekker,
2003). While the major causes for this drastic decline are
believed to be overfishing of eel juveniles for aquaculture
operations (particularly in Japan), freshwater habitat loss
and degradation, pollution, disease, and changes in
climate and ocean currents are also contributing to
reducing the number of juveniles (Dekker, 2003).

Scientists now believe that the glass eels may be unable
to reach Europe because the Gulf Stream has slowed so
much that they cannot survive for a sufficiently long
period to make the 5,000-mile journey (Brown, 2004).
Dryland areas are naturally vulnerable to water stress.
Changes have been well documented for sites such as
Lake Chad and the Aral Sea (UNEP, 2002b), which are
examined in Boxes 5.4 and 5.5, because they illustrate
the extreme effects of current ecological changes. For
many dryland waters, however, there is
little information, including for much of Central Asia,
the Middle East, and most parts of Africa.

Part 5. Policy and Management
Responses: Implementing the
Ecosystem Approach
This chapter has thus far discussed some of the most serious problems facing the world’s coastal and
freshwater ecosystems, from both a social and an environmental perspective. While recent
improvements in some areas suggest that the situation is far from hopeless, failure to address these
problems will have immediate social and economic costs and long-term – in some cases irreversible –
impacts on biodiversity. It is perhaps not too alarmist to talk about a crisis currently facing water
resources management. The following section considers some of the current and potential responses to
this crisis.
According to the Global Water Partnership (GWP), current
problems of water management often stem from the lack
of integrating ecosystem functions and processes into
natural resource management efforts. The ecosystem
approach is not sufficiently implemented. The GWP also
stresses that current management efforts suffer from a
widespread lack of governance structures and legal
frameworks for integrating the policies that can have a
positive impact on the management of water resources.
Good water governance exists where the responsible
government bodies establish effective policies and legal
frameworks to allocate and manage water in ways that
are responsive to national and relevant international,
social and economic needs, and to the long-term
sustainability of the resource base. Such policies need to
recognize the finite and sensitive nature of water
resources, incorporate notions of the sustainable use of
aquatic systems, and negotiate and develop partnerships
with relevant stakeholder groups. In this way, government
policies can be supported by the population, rather than

being opposed and resisted. This suggests that current
water management frequently fails to meet these ideals
(Rast and Holland, 2003), thus jeopardizing many of the
goods and services provided to humanity by healthy
aquatic ecosystems.
This is perhaps not surprising; negotiations over freshwater
are among the oldest and most intractable problems
relating to the use of the Earth’s natural resources (see
Chapter 11). Choices and trade-offs must often be made
between a range of potential benefits that could be
derived from an aquatic ecosystem. If a particular aquatic
system is managed to maximize fisheries production, for
example, then benefits that could be derived from the
diversion of water for irrigation are likely to be reduced.
Different needs have to be balanced within the natural
limitations and functions of the ecosystem and between
local communities (see Chapter 12), and local needs have
to be balanced with those of more distant users, who may
be far downstream or in recipient coastal areas (see

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 8 5

Chapter 11). Achieving the sustainable use of our readily
available water resources in order to equitably share and
value them is the reason for developing approaches
associated with Integrated Water Resources Management.

5a. IWRM and its implementation challenges
It is becoming increasingly accepted that the most
effective approach to the sustainable use of aquatic
ecosystems is embodied in the concept of IWRM. A
primary difference between the traditional sectoral approach
to water management and IWRM is that the latter makes
the link between water resources and human activities
throughout the hydrological cycle and allows ecological
and socio-economic issues to be considered within an
ecosystem approach.

within which freshwater resources can be managed to
meet different stakeholder interests (see Chapter 14).

over freshwater
Although IWRM is simple to envision, experience over the
past decade suggests that it is difficult to implement
effectively because of the need to integrate a complex,
and often competing, combination of elements. These
elements can include the following (GWP, 2000):
■
■
■

■
■

IWRM specifically considers the relationships between
freshwater and coastal zones, along with other interactions
between freshwater, land use and development. It seeks to
reduce the negative impacts of development in a river basin
through, for example, the use of alternative land-use
practices that mitigate damage while maintaining economic
and social benefits (Falkenmark et al., 1999; GWP, 2000).
At the same time, integrated coastal zone management
(ICZM) is widely accepted as the most appropriate policy
framework for the coastal–marine interface, while the
integrated coastal area and river basin management
(ICARM) merges the two. The close link between freshwater
and coastal ecosystems is further recognized by the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes, the Global
Programme of Action (GPA) for the Protection of the Marine
Environment from Land-based Activities, and the European
Union (EU) Water Framework Directive (UNEP, 2004b).
Some governments and international development and
conservation organizations use the integrated river basin
management (IRBM) approach, a similar concept to IWRM,
which considers the river or lake basin/aquifer as the
ecologically defined management unit. The application of
IRBM can therefore take place at a variety of scales,
depending upon the size of the river basin, ranging from
small catchments of a few square kilometres to major
national basins (e.g. the Loire and Vistula in Europe), as
well as transboundary basins where allocation and
pollution issues cross international borders (e.g. Lake
Chad and the Danube, Oder and Rhine river basins).
Special institutional and governance structures, such as
river basin organizations or authorities, have sometimes
been established to set operational and legal frameworks

...negotiations

■

land and water issues
freshwater bodies and downstream coastal zones
water consumed in the direct production of biomass as
opposed to that flowing in rivers and aquifers (green
versus blue water)
surface-water and groundwater resources
water quantity and quality
differing water interests upstream and downstream.

IWRM becomes even more complex when transboundary
water systems are involved, because this situation
frequently requires that one or more countries subordinate
some of their national interests in favour of their
neighbours’ needs (see Chapter 11). The World Lake
Vision Committee has identified the lack of proper
accountability on the part of citizens and governments as
one of the most significant root causes of unsustainable
water use, along with a general lack of accountable
environmental stewardship, inadequate stakeholder
participation, and inappropriate or ineffective
governmental institutions and regulatory mechanisms
(World Lake Vision Committee, 2003).
A series of regional workshops, convened by UNEP in
various developing countries to address and redress the fact
that IWRM schemes have frequently experienced serious
problems, concluded that some of the major barriers to
implementing IWRM (Rast, 1999) include the following:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

lack of proper coordination of management activities
lack of appropriate management tools
inability to integrate water resources policies
institutional fragmentation
insufficiently trained or qualified manpower
shortfalls in funding
inadequate public awareness
limited involvement by communities, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and the private sector.

Attempts to resolve some of these issues have included
the establishment of freshwater and regional seas

are among the
oldest and most
intractable
problems
relating to the
use of the
Earth’s natural
resources

1 8 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Looking beyond
freshwaters to
consider links
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

with coastal
waters has often
proved difficult,
partly because

agreements at local, basin or regional levels (e.g. in the
Mekong, the Black Sea and the Danube, the
Mediterranean, and Lake Chad). While such initiatives
have met with some success, they often still lack the
policy tools necessary to promote long-term integrated
water resources management.
UNEP has proposed four overall principles for the
development of such approaches (UNEP, 2004b):
■

river managers
are often water
engineers,
concerned with
issues of water
quantity and

■

quality, food
production and
flood
management

■

An adaptable management structure: effective
institutional management structures must incorporate
a certain degree of flexibility, allowing for public input,
changing basin priorities, and the incorporation of
new information and monitoring technologies.
The adaptability of management structures must
also extend to non-signatory riparian countries
(i.e. those within the same hydrological system)
by incorporating provisions that address their needs,
rights and potential accession.
Clear and flexible criteria for water allocations and
quality: water allocations, which are often at the heart
of most water disputes, are a function of water
quantity and quality, as well as political fiat. Effective
institutions must therefore identify clear allocation
schedules and water quality standards, which
simultaneously provide for extreme hydrological events,
new understandings of basin dynamics, and changing
societal values and aquatic ecosystem needs. Riparian
states may also consider prioritizing uses throughout
the basin. Establishing catchment-wide water
precedents may not only help to avert inter-riparian
conflicts over water uses, but also to protect the
environmental health of the basin as a whole.
Equitable distribution of benefits: this concept,
subtly yet powerfully different from equitable water
use or allocation, is at the root of some of the world’s
most successful water management institutions, a
noteworthy example being the US-Canada International
Joint Commission (IJC, 1998). The idea concerns the
distribution of the benefits derived from water use –
whether from hydropower, agriculture, economic
development, aesthetics, or the preservation of healthy
aquatic ecosystems – rather than equal distribution of
the water itself. Distributing water-use benefits allows
for positive-sum agreements, whereas dividing the
water itself among competing users may only allow for
winners and losers (see Chapter 12).

■

Detailed conflict resolution mechanisms: many
basins may continue to experience disputes even
after a treaty is negotiated and signed. Therefore,
incorporating clear mechanisms for resolving
conflicts is a prerequisite for effective long-term
basin management for sustainable water use
(UNEP, 2002a; see Chapter 11).

Other examples of integrated approaches are
recommended for applying water management efforts
in areas of water scarcity, as well as those with water
abundance. The recommendations of a World Bank
report (Abdel-Dayam et al., 2004) on agricultural
development include the following:
■

Evolving institutions for the governance, management
and financing of agricultural drainage, as well as
(re)designing physical interventions and technical
infrastructure from the perspective of multifunctionality and plurality of values.

■

Drafting policies that create environments conducive
to change and empower actors to make the necessary
changes.

Fortunately, IWRM is becoming increasingly accepted and
ingrained in the planning and decision-making processes
of water managers and policy-makers. It has become
clear that there are great similarities between
management issues in coastal and river areas, and the
concept of IWRM has been extended from its initial
freshwater focus to establish appropriate links to coastal
waters. One major impetus towards the adoption of IWRM
is the Plan for Implementation from the 2002 WSSD,
through which participating governments agreed to
develop IWRM and water-efficiency plans by 2005 (see
Chapter 2). To this end, the GWP is also promulgating
principles and approaches to assist governments to meet
this deadline (see Chapter 1).
Looking beyond freshwaters to consider links with coastal
waters has often proved difficult, partly because river
managers are often water engineers, concerned with
issues of water quantity and quality, food production and
flood management. In contrast, much of the concern
regarding coastal zones is focused on the impacts of
land-based activities on downstream coastal areas. UNEP
has promoted this management link since 1999 through
its ICARM programme. The FreshCo Partnership was
launched at the World Summit on Sustainable

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 8 7

BOX 5.6: THE ECOSYSTEM APPROACH IN ACTION

Quito Catchment Conservation Fund,
Ecuador

The Komadugu-Yobe Integrated
Management Project, Nigeria

European Union Water Framework
Directive

About 80 percent of Quito’s drinking water
comes from two protected areas, the Cayambe
Coca Ecological Reserve and the Antisana
Ecological Reserve. A nominal water use fee
on citizens of Quito together with 1 percent
of revenues of hydroelectric companies and
contributions expected from other sources in
the future is used to finance conservation of
the reserves.

To combat increasing tensions among local
stakeholders about scarce water resources in
the North Nigerian River Basin, the Nigerian
National Council on Water Resources
established the Hadejia-Jama’are-KomaduguYobe Coordination Committee in 1999, with
support from the Komadugu-Yobe Integrated
Management Project. The project will establish
a framework for broad-based and informed
decision-making, based upon agreed
principles for equitable use and sustainable
management of the Komadugu-Yobe Basin.

This Directive, adopted in 2000, stipulates that
EU governments should adopt IRBM to achieve
‘good’ or ‘high’ ecological status in all water
bodies (coastal and inland) by 2015 (see
Chapter 14). Status is assessed by indicators
measuring departure from natural or pristine
conditions for any given category of water
body. Data are evaluated against five
categories of ecological status, ranging from
‘high’, representing the absence of
anthropogenic disturbance in all variables, or
only very minor alteration, to ‘bad’, reflecting
an extensive departure from natural conditions.
Sources: Echavarria, 1997; IUCN, 2003b; EU, 2000.

Development (FreshCo Partnership, 2002)7 to provide
further impetus to this process.
IWRM is increasingly being recognized by the global
community, and has become the subject of international
commitments and targets that are starting to develop
necessary legal and policy frameworks. There is now an
urgent need to move beyond these preliminary steps to
widespread implementation, and doing this effectively will
require developing a series of tools and methodologies or
adapting those already used in different biomes and
situations. Of equal importance, the partnerships –
between governments, communities, NGOs, industry
interests and research groups – must move beyond
general commitments to specific actions and active,
flexible and durable working arrangements. In pursuing
these partnerships, it will be essential that the case for
conservation be rooted in the most reliable and accessible
information on aquatic ecosystems, particularly with
respect to their values, uses and flow requirements, and
how these properties may vary between basins and
ecosystems. Examples for implementing this ecosystem
approach are provided in Chapter 1.
As demand for water grows with the need for hard
decisions to meet this demand, so too will conservation
need to be rooted in the soundest possible science.

None of these goals will be easy to achieve, but the
fact that political commitment is growing along with
the recognition of the urgency of these needs provides
some cause for cautious optimism.

5b. Protecting and restoring habitats
One management response to pressures on wetlands is
to protect a certain proportion through protected areas,
such as national parks or wilderness areas. While most
such areas are primarily designated to protect their
biodiversity values, they can also serve other beneficial
functions, such as the protection of fish breeding stocks
or of coastlines, flood mitigation and the maintenance
of water purity. Protected areas can be an important
component within watersheds and coastal ecosystems
managed under IWRM approaches. According to the
latest report on the state of the world’s protected areas
(Chape et al., 2004), some 12.7 percent of wetlands are
contained within protected areas recognized by the IUCN.
Because these figures are based on remote sensing data,
smaller wetland protected areas and wetlands classified
as other kinds of habitat, such as forests or grassland,
may have been missed, and the real degree of protection
may be higher (see Figures 5.6 and 5.7). If tropical
moist forest is included, of which a large proportion is
regularly flooded, the value potentially increases to
almost 20 percent.

7. See www.ucc-water.org/
freshco/ for more information.

1 8 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 5.6: Surface area and degree of protection of major terrestrial habitats
50,000
10.1%
45,000

Surface area (1000 sq km)

35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
12.2%
15,000

13.3%

12.2%

10.3%

23.8%

10,000
12.3%
5,000

12.7%

14.7%

Temperate Temperate
and boreal broadleaf and
needleleaf mixed forest
forest

Tropical
moist
forest

Tropical dry
forest

Savannah

Shrubland

Grassland

Wetlands
(inland)

Desert

Source: Chape et al., 2004.

Figure 5.7: Distribution and degree of protection of wetland habitats by region
Wetland

1,400
1,200
Surface area (1000 sq km)

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

40,000

1,000
800
600
400
200
Brazil

East Asia

Eastern and
Southern
Africa

Europe

North
America

North
Eurasia

South
America

Western and
Central
Africa

Source: Chape et al., 2004.

In addition to fully protected area status, a number of other
important instruments exist to help safeguard freshwater
and coastal ecosystems, while integrating their protective
functions with other forms of sustainable development.

Ramsar sites
The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, signed in Ramsar,
Iran, in 1971, is one of the oldest intergovernmental
treaties explicitly dedicated to the conservation of
wetlands. It provides a framework for national action and
international cooperation for the preservation and wise use
of wetlands and their resources (see Chapter 12).
There are presently 144 Contracting Parties to the

Convention, with 1,420 wetland sites, totalling 123.9
million ha, designated for inclusion in the Ramsar List of
Wetlands of International Importance (See Figure 5.8).
While many Ramsar sites are also officially protected
areas, the Ramsar designation has been used as a ‘softer’
instrument to generate commitments to sustainable use
and guarantee some degree of protection without
necessarily ruling out all forms of sustainable development.
According to a recent study by the World Bank, the
designation of aquatic ecosystems as Ramsar sites is
likely to have improved the conservation prospects of
these sites for a variety of reasons, including increased
awareness of their ecological importance, increased

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 8 9

Figure 5.8: Total area designated as Ramsar sites (1974–2004)
Annual area designated
Cumulative area designated
20,000,000
120,000,000

100,000,000

15,000,000

80,000,000

12,500,000
10,000,000

60,000,000

7,500,000
40,000,000
5,000,000
20,000,000

2,500,000
0

0
1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004

Source: Wetlands International, 2005: www.wetlands.org/RDB/global/AreaTrend.html

conservation funding (both international and domestic),
increased participation by local stakeholders in conservation,
and reduction of threats (Castro et al., 2002).

African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbird
Agreement (AEWA)
Migratory bird species are particularly vulnerable to water
degradation and habitat fragmentation. They utilize
several different types of habitats, depending on the
stage they have reached in their lifecycle and the
possibility of unhindered movement between habitats.
The Convention on Migratory Species (CMS) is another
treaty with particular relevance to aquatic ecosystems,
through its role in sustaining migration routes for
waterbird species. The Convention helps to inform
national and international agreements on the protection
of migratory birds, fish and coastal species, such as
whales and marine turtles, often also including official or
voluntary protection of habitats. The AEWA is the largest
agreement developed so far under the CMS, which came
into force on 1 November 1999. The agreement covers
235 species of birds that are ecologically dependent
upon wetlands for at least part of their annual cycle. The
AEWA aims to enhance waterbird protection by
establishing a site network and promoting the sustainable
use of waterfowl and their habitats (Boere, 2003).

5c. Ecosystem restoration
Efforts to address the serious degradation problems
facing many freshwater and coastal ecosystems are
already demonstrating that ecosystem restoration is
indeed possible. To date, most restoration activities
have been initiated and carried out by NGOs, although
an increasing number of governments and local
communities are now undertaking such projects.
Restoration has become a central activity in modern
environmental management, as well as a growing stage
for long-term sustainable management systems. However,
it should be noted that restoration is not a panacea for
poor management. Such projects are generally very
costly, and some habitats are extremely difficult, if not
impossible, to restore. As an example, raised bogs and
fen mires are, at best, very difficult to restore, and in
some cases, restoration is not possible because
irreversible soil changes have occurred. The goal of
preventing damage must still be the most important
management objective, although restoration remains an
important option when damage has already occurred.
Box 5.7 briefly describes some current restoration
projects, both large and small, in the very different
conditions that characterize Africa, Asia and Europe.
Many more examples of successful freshwater and marine
restoration schemes could be cited, from large-scale
government initiatives such as the restoration of the

Cumulative area designated

Total area designated (per year)

17,500,000

1 9 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

BOX 5.7: RESTORED ECOSYSTEMS AND LIVELIHOODS

Mauritania
The Diawling Delta had been virtually
destroyed by a combination of years of low
rainfall and the construction of a dam in 1985,
leading to an ecological crisis, loss of wetlanddependent livelihoods and the mass migration
of its inhabitants. Restoration started in 1991,
when the government declared 16,000 ha as a
national park. Although the population was
initially hostile to the declaration, acceptance
of this designation grew as protected area
managers and the World Conservation Union
(IUCN) staff worked with communities to
restore the region’s biodiversity and local
livelihood options. There is now an agreed
management plan, increased management
capacity and procedures to resolve resource
conflicts. The restoration area covers 50,000
ha, larger than the national park area itself.
Artificial flooding began in 1994, with the aim
of reconstructing former flooding patterns and
saltwater inflow, which has restored a diverse
delta ecosystem, with fish catches rising from
less than 1,000 kg in 1992 to over 113,000
kg in 1998. Seeds of the restored acacia trees
are used in the tanning industry, and the
indigenous women once again produce famous
traditional mats from Sporobulus robustus, a
brackish floodplain grass that again grows
abundantly. Bird counts have risen from a
meagre 2,000 in 1992 to over 35,000
waterbirds in 1998. The total value added to
the region’s economy as a result of this effort
is approximately US $1 million per year.
Mozambique
The Kafue Flats, named after the Kafue River, a
tributary of the Zambezi, consist of extensive
savannah wetland of approximately 5,600 km2,
where the natural flooding regime was
dramatically altered by two dams built in the
1970s. The dams had reduced the flooded area,
changed the timing of the flooding, affected
wetland productivity and reduced water
resources, grazing areas and wildlife and fish
populations, as well as the potential for tourism.
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) has
been working with the Ministry of Energy and

Water Development, and the Zambia Electricity
Supply Cooperation, in a project that aims to
restore the natural flooding regime of the Kafue
and, in turn, restore wetland productivity and
biodiversity. This can only be achieved by
changing the operation rules of both dams. At
the end of Phase I in 2002, an integrated river
basin management (IRBM) strategy for the Flats
was accepted by the Zambian Government. The
first results of improvement are anticipated in
the next few years.
The Netherlands
In 1982 the Dutch Government funded the
creation of small ponds to replace the loss or
simplification of natural wetlands and
traditional canals. About 600 ponds were
created in the first year, immediately
colonized by the most common amphibian
species, with some also being colonized by
rarer species. Several thousand more ponds
have been created throughout the country in
subsequent years, and an International Pond
Project has been launched under the auspices
of the EU LIFE fund.

private reserves and restoration areas in many
countries. One British farmer has converted 65
ha of former sugar-beet and wheat crops near
the River Cam in East Anglia into a rich, diverse
wetland, with meres, reedbeds and wet
grassland areas to enrich local biodiversity.
Since restoration work began in 1995, the
project has resulted in the successful recovery
and re-establishment of seventy-nine species of
breeding waterbirds, including a rapid increase
in the numbers of Lapwings (Vanellus vanellus),
the establishment of Avocets (Recurvirostra
avocetta), a colony of Common Terns (Sterna
hirundo), and the successful breeding of
endangered Bitterns (Botaurus stellaris) and
Marsh Harriers (Circus aeruginosus).
Japan
Kushiro River, a Class A river originating in
Kussharo Lake in Akan National Park in eastern
Hokkaido, winds gently through the expansive
Kushiro Swamp before reaching the Pacific Ocean.
Its total length is 154 km with a basin dimension
of 2,510 km2, and 180,000 inhabitants in the
area, approximately 75,000 of whom live in a
flood area. Since salmon and trout run the river

Germany
In order to reverse serious losses in natural
habitats, the German Government
implemented a programme to conserve and
restore sites of national concern. By 2002, a
total of fifty-three projects had been initiated,
with forty-two of these relating to freshwater
and coastal wetland habitats, conserving and
restoring more than 180,000 ha. With NGOs
or local communities as partners, a large
proportion of the approximately US $400
million budget has been used over the past
ten years for land purchases, which are often
necessary before restoration can begin. In all
of these projects, restoration work has started
and mostly been completed, covering river
stretches, wetland areas and fen mires.

and artificial salmon hatching is operated, it is an
important river for conservation. Kushiro Swamp,
located downstream on the Kushiro River, is the
biggest swamp in Japan: 18,000 ha, 5,012 ha of
which are registered as a natural monument and
7,863 ha of which are designated under the
Ramsar Convention. Located near an urban area,
the swamp serves as an important flood barrier as
well as a scenic tourist attraction. In the past fifty
years, however, this area has decreased by 20
percent, as the swamp slowly gives way to alder
forests. The Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport has now joined forces with the Hokkaido
Prefectural Government to explore various
innovative options for restoring the river and
swamp to their former glory. Ongoing research
focuses on stream restoration, swamp vegetation
management and control of sediment flows.

United Kingdom
Restoration does not have to involve
governments or international grants, as
demonstrated by the increasing number of

Sources: Hamerlynck and Duvail, 2003; WWF Mozambique,
2003; Stumpel, 1998; Scherfose et al., 2001; Hokkaido
Regional Developement Bureau, 2003; Cadbury, 2003.

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 9 1

Everglades in the US and Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, to
local-level efforts in the coastal zones of the
Mediterranean and Caribbean seas and the Pacific, Indian
and Atlantic oceans. In all of these cases, the key aspects
that have contributed to their success are as follows:

Activities can vary widely and complement each other:
■
■
■
■

■

■

■
■
■

the involvement of all stakeholders (government,
community groups, environmental organizations, private
sector, scientists and others) at all decision levels
cross-sectoral planning and management (environment,
development, agriculture, forestry, urban planning,
tourism, public works, etc.)
an appropriate landscape scale
sufficient funding (e.g. using tourism returns)
long-term planning.

■
■
■
■
■

closing damaging industries
establishing ‘no-take’ sanctuaries
banning illegal fishing
promoting alternative livelihoods through microenterprise development
launching public awareness campaigns
supporting environmental clean-up
developing disaster response strategies for oil spills
and the like
regulating tourism
creating and maintaining mooring schemes.

Positive results do not come overnight, but experiences
obtained over the past decade are very promising (UNEP,
2002a, 2004b; WRI, 2000; Bryant et al., 1998; Blue Plan,
2005).

Part 6. Facing Challenges and Managing
Trade-offs
Accepted indicators, such as trends in the status of biodiversity, and pollution measurements, such as
BOD and nitrate concentrations in water, indicate the continuing deterioration of our coastal and
freshwater ecosystems. In addition, the global indicator of river fragmentation and flow regulation
presented in this chapter shows that most of the large river systems are strongly or moderately affected
by dams and altered flows. For the past decade, despite efforts to minimize or reverse these trends,
aquatic ecosystems have continued to deteriorate – with freshwater systems declining at an even faster
rate than marine or terrestrial ecosystems. Some specific habitats, such as freshwaters in arid areas and
semi-enclosed seas, have been particularly affected. Furthermore, due to a widespread lack of
comprehensive and coordinated monitoring programmes, our understanding of the status of many of
these ecosystems remains poor or incomplete. The best available information currently focuses on coral
reefs, waterbirds, amphibians and marine commercial fish, although even this information remains
largely incomplete.
As demonstrated in this chapter, ecosystem changes do
not only concern those interested in biodiversity, but also
have direct and immediate impacts on human societies in
terms of lost services such as drinking water, food
production, employment opportunities, and recreational
and aesthetic values. The poorest members of society
generally suffer the most when coastal and freshwater
are degraded, undermining national and international
efforts at poverty alleviation (see Chapter 1).
It is critical that we recognize the direct links between
the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem degradation and
the loss of ecosystem resilience. Biodiversity and the

conservation of coastal and freshwater ecosystems are
not separate issues from sustaining clean water and food
security, but rather an integral part of the same agenda.
As such, they must become an integral part of all future
plans for water management and restoration.
These problems are now generally recognized by most
governments, intergovernmental agencies, nongovernmental organizations, major industries and –
most crucially – by the communities directly involved.
More importantly, there is general agreement regarding
the appropriate way to move forward, based on the
ecosystem approach and the harmonization of

It is critical that
we recognize
the direct links
between the
loss of
biodiversity and
ecosystem
degradation and
the loss of
ecosystem
resilience

1 9 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

conservation and development through what has become
known as Integrated Water Resources Management.

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

However, despite all the fine words about this approach,
the reality is that it has at most been implemented only
locally, and even then often reluctantly. Many
stakeholders remain ill-informed and unconvinced about
the value of the ecosystem approach, and many
communities continue to shun long-term benefits and
values in favour of destructive short-term gains. Better
public information and incentives for stakeholders to act
in an ‘environmentally friendly’ manner are becoming vital
if we are to improve the current situation.

Global warming has
caused the Vatnajokull
glacier in Iceland to
retreat, revealing this
spectacular lagoon

The next challenge for national governments and the
international community is to start implementing these
approaches on a broader scale. Successful
implementation will depend on winning the acceptance of
the ecosystem approach by the majority of stakeholders
and developing and providing implementing tools and
applying methodologies to facilitate IWRM, many of
which are related to managing the inevitable trade-offs
involved. Rather than arguing about whether dams are
good or bad, for instance, we need more robust criteria
for deciding when they are, or are not, likely to produce
net benefits, and how to best build dams to achieve
societal needs while sustaining ecosystem functions.
Similar tools are needed for weighing the trade-offs of
different approaches to agricultural production and

tourism. Better monitoring and evaluation systems are
also needed to ensure that the impacts of management
actions can be tracked over time and adjustments made
as necessary. Those involved in managing water resources
and ecosystems also need participatory and conflict
resolution skills, in addition to greater technical expertise.
The relevant organizations, strategies and frameworks for
methodologies and partnerships are already being
developed in many cases, although the urgency of the
problems means that many of these efforts must be
further accelerated. A clear, unequivocal lead from
governments and the international community is needed
to ensure that the good work developing in this critically
important area is maintained and enhanced in the future.
Although data on biodiversity and water quality exist for
some species groups, habitats and regions, there are still
large gaps in the information available on many species,
and very little information is available on the extent and
quality of aquatic ecosystems. If the global community is
serious about monitoring indicators that accurately
describe the status of these ecosystems, habitats, species
and their protection, in order to evaluate progress towards
the WSSD’s and Convention of Biological Diversity’s 2010
target of reducing the rate of biodiversity loss,
considerable improvements in the data quality, formats
and geographical coverage are urgently required. Indeed,
the ecosystem indicators presented today are only ever as
good as the data that support them.

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 9 3

References and Websites
Abdel-Dayam, S., Hoevenaars, J., Mollinga, P. P.,

Bragg, O. and Lindsay, R. 2003. Strategy and Action

Scheumann, W., Slootweg, R. and van Steenbergen,

Plan for Mire and Peatland Conservation in Central

F. 2004. Reclaiming Drainage: Toward an Integrated

Europe. Wetlands International, Publication 18.

Approach. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Abramovitz, J. N. 1996. Imperilled Waters,
Impoverished Future: The Decline of Freshwater
Ecosystems. Worldwatch Paper No. 128, Washington
DC, Worldwatch Institute.
Acharya, G. 1998. Valuing the hidden hydrological
services of wetland ecosystems. Stockholm paper

Brown, P. 2004. Freshwater fish stocks revived, but

Coe, M. T. and Foley, J. A. 2001. Human and natural
impacts on the water resources of the Lake Chad
Basin. Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 106.
Cohen, A. S., Kaufman, L. and Ogutu-Ohwayo, R. 1996.

climate change blamed for eel’s decline. The

Anthropogenic threats, impacts and conservation

Guardian, 25 August 2004.

strategies in the African Great lakes: A review.The

Bryant, D. Burke, L., McManus, J. and Spalding, M. 1998.
Reefs at Risk: A Map-Based Indicator of Threats to
the World’s Coral Reefs. Washington DC, WRI.
Burbridge, P. R. and Maragos, J. E. 1985. Analysis of

Limnology, Climatology and Paleoclimatology of
the East African Lake. T. C. Johnson, and E. Odada
(eds). Toronto, Gordon and Breach, pp. 575–624.
Colavito, L. 2002. Wetland economic valuation using a

presented at 4th Workshop of the Global Economics

Environmental Assessment and Coastal Resources

bioeconomic model: The case of Hail haor,

Network, Wetlands: Landscape and Institutional

Management Needs (Indonesia). Washington DC,

Bangladesh, Paper presented at the Workshop on

Perspectives.

International Institute for Environment and

Conservation and Sustainable Use of Wetlands:

Development.

Learning from the World. Kathmandu, Nepal, IUCN-

ACIA (Arctic Climate Impact Assessment). 2004. An
Assessment of Consequences of Climate Variability

Burke, L., Kura, Y., Kassem, K., Revenga, C., Spalding,

and Change and the Effects of Increased UV in the

M., and McAllister, D. 2001. Pilot Analysis of Global

Arctic Region. Anchorage, ACIA, Cambridge

Ecosystems: Coastal Ecosystems. Washington, DC,

University Press.

World Resources Institute.

Allison, E. 2004. The fisheries sector, livelihoods and

Butchart, S. H. M., Stattersfield, A. J., Bennun, L. A.,

The World Conservation Union.
Constanza, R., d’Arge, R. and de Groot, R. 1997. The
value of the world’s ecosystems services and
natural capital. Nature, Vol. 387, pp. 253–60.
Constanza, R., d’Arge, R., de Groot, R., Farber, S.,

poverty reduction in Eastern and Southern Africa.

Shutes, S. M., Akçakaya, H. R., Baillie, J. E. M., Stuart,

Grasso, M., Hannon, B., Limburg, K., Naeem, S.,

F. Ellis and A. Freeman (eds), Rural Livelihoods and

S. N., Hilton-Taylor, C. and Mace, G. M. 2004.

O’Neill, R. V., Paruelo, J., Raskin, R. G., Sutton, P.

Poverty Reduction Policies. London, Routledge.

Measuring global trends in the status of biodiversity:

and Van der Belt, M. 1998. The value of the world’s

Red list indices for birds. PLoS Biology, Vol. 2, No. 12.

ecosystems services and natural capital. Ecological

Bann, C. 1997. An economic analysis of alternative
mangrove management strategies in Koh Kong
Province, Cambodia. EEPSEA (Economy and
Environment Programme for Southeast Asia)
Research Report Series, 1, Singapore, pp. 1–72.
Batista, V. S., Inhamuns, A. J., Freitas, C. E. C. and D.
Freire-Brasil. 1998. Characterisation of the fishery in

Cadbury, C. J. 2003. Arable to wetland: Restoring
habitat for birds in the Cambridgeshire fens.
Cambridgeshire Bird Report, Vol. 76, pp. 133–52.
Castro, G., Chomitz, K. and Thomas, T. S. 2002. The
Ramsar Convention: Measuring its Effectiveness for
Conserving Wetlands of International Importance.

Economics, Vol. 1, No. 25, pp. 3–15.
David, L. J., Golubev, G. N. and Nakayama, M. 1988. The
environmental management of large international
basins: The EMINWA Programme of UNEP. Water
Resources Development, Vol. 4, pp. 103–07.
Dekker, W. 2003. Eel stocks dangerously close to

river communities in the low-Solimões/high-Amazon

World Bank and World Wild Life Fund.

collapse. Copenhagen, Denmark, International

region. Fisheries Management and Ecology, Vol. 1,

www.ramsar.org/cop8_doc_37_e.htm

Council for the Exploration of the Sea.

No. 5, pp. 419–35.
Belfiore, S. 2003. The growth of integrated coastal

CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). 2002. COP
Decisions VI/23Alien species that threatens

management and the role of indicators in integrated

ecosystems, habitats or species.

coastal management. Ocean & Coastal

www.biodiv.org/decisions/?m=cop-06

Management, Vol. 46, pp. 225–34.
Béné, C., Neiland, A.E., Jolley, T., Ovie, S., Sule, O.,
Ladu, B., Mindjimba, K., Belal, E., Tiotsop, F., Baba,

———. 2000. COP Decision V/6: Ecosystem Approach.
www.biodiv.org/decisions/?m=cop-05
Chape, S. J., Harrison, M., Spalding, M. and Lysenko, I.

www.ices.dk/marineworld/eel.asp
Dodman, T. and Diagana, C. H. 2003. African Waterbird
Census. Wetlands International, Global Series, 16.
Dudley, N. and Stolton, S. 2003. Running Pure: The
Importance of Forest Protected Areas to Drinking
Water. World Bank/WWF Alliance for Forest
Conservation and Sustainable Use.

M., Dara, L., Zakara, A., and Quensiere, J. 2003.

2004. Measuring the extent and effectiveness of

Dynesius, M. and Nilsson, C. 1994. Fragmentation and

Inland fisheries, poverty, and rural livelihoods in the

protected areas as an indicator for meeting global

flow regulation of river systems in the northern

Lake Chad basin. Journal of Asian and African

biodiversity targets. Philosophical Transactions:

Studies, Vol. 38, pp. 17–51.

Biological Sciences, London, Royal Society.

Bennett, E. M., Carpenter, S. R. and Caraco, N. E. 2001.

Christensen, B. 1982. Management and Utilization of

third of the world. Science, Vol. 266, pp. 753–62.
Eaton, D. and Sarch, T. M. 1997. The economic
importance of wild resources in the Hadejia-Nguru

Human impact on erodable phosphorus and

Mangroves in Asia and the Pacific. FAO

Wetlands. Collaborative Research in the Economics

eutrophication: A global perspective. BioScience,

Environment Paper No. 3.

of Environment and Development (CREED) Working

Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 227–34.
Blue Plan. 2005 (in prep). Report on Environment and

Ciruna, K. A., Meyerson, L. A. and Gutierrez, A. 2004.
The ecological and socio-economic impacts of

Paper #13. London, International Institute for
Environment and Development (IIED).
Echavarria, M. 1997. Agua!: Juntos Podremos Cuidarla!

Development in the Mediterranean (working title).

invasive alien species in inland water ecosystems.

Sophia-Antipolis, France, Blue Plan Regional Activity

Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity on

Estudio de Caso Para un Fondo Para la Conservacion

Centre of the Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP).

behalf of the Global Invasive Species Programme,

de las Cuencas Hidrograficas Para Quito, Ecuador.

Boere, G. 2003. Global activities on the conservation,
management and sustainable use of

Washington DC.
Cobb, D. G., Galloway, T. D. and Flannagan, J. F. 1996.

Quito, Ecuador, The Nature Conservancy/USAID.
EEA (European Environment Agency). 1995. Europe’s
water: An indicator based assessment. European

migratowaterbirds: an integrated flyway/ecosystem

Effects of discharge and substrate stability on

approach. WSG Bulletin, Vol. 100, pp. 96–101.

density and species composition of stream insects.

Environment Agency Topic Report 1/2003.

Bootsma, H. A. and Hecky, R. E. 1993. Conservation of

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences,

Emerton, L., Iyango, L., Luwum, P. and Malinga, A.

the Great Lakes: A limnological perspective.
Conserv. Biol., Vol. 7, pp. 644–55.

Vol. 49, pp. 1788–95.

1999. The Economic Value of Nakivubo Urban
Wetland. Kampala, Uganda, Uganda National

1 9 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Wetlands Programme and Nairobi, IUCN-The World

International Union for Theoretical and Applied

Conservation Union, Eastern Africa Regional Office.

Limnology], Vol. 27, pp. 412–15.

Emerton, L. and Kekulandala, B. 2002. Assessment of

International Joint Commission and the Boundary
Waters Treaty of 1909. Washington. DC,

the Economic Value of Muthurajawela Wetland.

riverine frogs in south-eastern Australia.

IUCN-The World Conservation Union, Colombo, Sri

A. Campbell (ed.), Declines and Disappearances of

Lanka Country Office and Regional Environmental

Australian Frogs. Canberra, Environment Australia,

Zimbabwe. 1997. Assessment of Integrated Water

Economics Programme.

pp. 109–30.

Resources Management activities in the Southern

Emerton, L., Seilava, R. and Pearith, H. 2002. Bokor,
Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

Gillespie, G. and Hines, H. 1999. Status of temperate

IJC (International Joint Commission). 1998. The

Glantz, M. H. (ed.). 1999. Creeping Environmental

Kirirom, Kep and Ream National Parks, Cambodia:

Problems and Sustainable Development in the

Case Studies of Economic and Development

Aral Sea Basin. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge

Linkages, Field Study Report, Review of Protected
Areas and their Role in the Socio-Economic

University Press.
Gleick, P. H., Singh, A. and Shi, H. 2001. Threats to the

Development of the Four Countries of the Lower

World’s Freshwater Resources. Oakland, California,

Mekong Region. Brisbane, International Centre for

Pacific Institute for Studies in Development,

Environmental Management and Karachi, IUCN-The
World Conservation Union, Regional Environmental
Economics Programme.
EU (European Union). 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of

Environment and Security.
Gornitz, V. 2000. Impoundment, groundwater mining
and other hydrologic transformations: Impacts on
global sea level rise. B. C. Douglas, M. S. Kearney

the European Parliament and of the Council of 23

and S. P. Leatherman (eds), Sea Level Rise: History

October 2000, establishing a framework for

and Consequences. San Diego, Academic Press,

community action in the field of water policy,
Official Journal, L 327, 22/12/2000 P. 0001–0073.
Falkenmark, M., Andersson, L., Castensson, R. and
Sundblad, K. 1999. Water: A Reflection of Land
Use: Options for Counteracting Land and Water

pp. 97–119.
Groombridge, B. and Jenkins, M. 1998. Freshwater
biodiversity: A preliminary global assessment. WCMC
Biodiversity Series No. 8.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2003. Water

Mismanagement. Stockholm, Swedish Natural

Management and Eco Systems: Living with Change.

Science Research Council.

Global Water Partnership, Technical Advisory

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United
Nations). 2004. Review of the State of World
Marine Fishery Resources. (FAO Fisheries Technical
Paper 457). Rome, FAO.
———. 2002. The State of World Fisheries and
Aquaculture – Fisheries Resources: Trends in
Production, Utilization and Trade. Rome, FAO.

Committee Background Paper No. 9, Stockholm.
www.gwpforum.org/gwp/library/TEC%209.pdf
———. 2000. Integrated Water Resources Management.
Global Water Partnership, Technical Advisory
Committee Background Paper No. 4, Stockholm.
www.gwpforum.org/gwp/library/TACNO4.pdf
Hamerlynck, O. and Duvail, S. 2003. The Rehabilitation

International Joint Commission.
Institute of Water and Sanitation Development,

Africa Region. A preliminary inventory.
www.thewaterpage.com/IWRM_Zimbabwe.htm
IPCC (International Panel of Climate Change). 2001.
Climate Change 2001 – Impacts, Adaptation, and
Vulnerability. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University
Press.
IUCN (World Conservation Union) Water and Nature
Initiative. Conservation International and Nature
Serve. 2004. Global Amphibian Assessment.
www.globalamphibians.org
———. 2003a. Red List of Globally Threatened Species.
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
———. 2003b. Integrated management of the KomaduguYobe River Basin (Nigeria Water and Nature
Initiative). Online at:
www.waterandnature.org/d1.html
———. 2001. Economic Value of Reinundation of the
Waza Logone Floodplain, Cameroon. Projet de
conservation et de développement de la région de
Waza-Logone, Maroua.
Janssen, R. and Padilla, J. E. 1996. Valuation and
evaluation of management alternatives for the
Pagbilao mangrove forest. Collaborative Research in
the Economics of Environment and Development
Working Paper Series No. 9.
Johnson, T. C., Schol, C. A., Talbot M. R., Kelts, K.,
Ricketts, R. D., Ngobi, G., Beuning, K. R. M.,

of the Delta of the Senegal River in Mauritania.

Ssemanda, I., and McGill, J. W. 1996. Late Pleistocene

Aquaculture 2000. Rome, FAO, Fisheries

Nouakchott, Mauritania, IUCN.

desiccation of lake Victoria and rapid evolution of

Department.

www.iucn.org/themes/wetlands/pdf/diawling/

———. 2001. The State of World Fisheries and

———. 1999. Review of the State of World Fishery
Resources: Inland Fisheries. FAO Fisheries Circular

Diawling_GB.pdf
Hamilton, L. S., Dixon, J. A. and Miller, G. O. 1989.

No. 942, Rome, FAO Fisheries Department.

Mangrove forests: An undervalued resource of the

Finlayson, C. M. and Davidson, N. C. 1999. Global

land and of the sea. E. Mann Borgese, N. Ginsburg

cichlid fishes. Science, Vol. 273, pp. 1091–93.
Jones, O. A., Lester, J. N. and Voulvoulis, N. 2005.
Pharmaceuticals: a threat to drinking water? Trends
in Biotechnology, Vol. 23, pp. 163–67.
Junk, W., Bayley, P. B. and Sparks, R. E. 1989. The flood

review of wetland resources and priorities for

and J. R. Morgan (eds), Ocean Yearbook 8, Chicago,

pulse concept in river-floodplain systems. Canadian

wetland inventory: Summary report. C. M. Finlayson

USA, The University of Chicago Press, pp. 254–88.

Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, No. 106,

and A. G. Spiers (eds), Global Review of Wetland

Hecky, R. E., 1993. The eutropication of Lake Victoria.

Resources and Priorities for Wetland Inventory, CD-

Verhandlungen der Internationale Vereinigung für

ROM, Canberra, Australia, Supervising Scientist

Theoretische und Angewandte Limnologie

Report 144.

[Proceedings of the International Union for Theoretical

Fishstat. 2002. Fishstat Plus, Universal Software for
Fisheries Statistical Time Series. FAO Fisheries,

and Applied Limnology], Vol. 25, pp. 39–48.
Hokkaido Regional Development Bureau. 2003.

pp. 110–27.
Junk, W. 2002. Long-term environmental trends and the
future of tropical wetlands. Environmental
Conservation, Vol. 29. pp. 414–35.
Karanja, F., Emerton, L., Mafumbo, J. and Kakuru, W.
2001. Assessment of the Economic Value of Pallisa

Restoration of Kushiro River. River Restoration,

District Wetlands. Kampala, Uganda. Biodiversity

seminar textbook. Foundation for Riverfront

Economics Programme for Eastern Africa, IUCN-The

Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)

Improvement and Restoration.

World Conservation Union and Uganda National

and Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM).

www.rfc.or.jp/rivernetwork/pdf/en/07kushiro_en.pdf

Software version 2.3.
FreshCo Partnership. 2002. A partnership on linking

www.ucc-water.org/freshco/

Wetlands Programme.

Hulme, M. 1996. Climate Change and Southern Africa:

Kiremire, B. T. 1997. The status of chemicals in Uganda

An Exploration of Some Potential Impacts and

and a survey of disposal methods. Presentation

major source of solutes in an Amazon floodplain

Implications for the SADC Region. Gland,

given at the American Chemical Society US Africa

lake during the low water period. Verhandlungen

Switzerland. Climatic Research Unit, University of

Workshop on Environmental Chemistry and Water

der Internationale Vereinigung für Theoretische

East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom and WWF

Quality, Feb 1997, Mbarara, Uganda.

und Angewandte Limnologie [Proceedings of the

International, Gland, Switzerland.

Furch, K. 2000. Evaluation of groundwater input as

C O A STA L A N D F R ES H WAT E R E C O SYST EM S . 1 9 5

Krebs, C. J. 1978. Ecology: The Experimental Analysis of

Theory and Practice of Nature Conservation and

Distribution and Abundance, 2nd edn. New York,

Preservation and Management. New York and

Harper & Row Publishers.

London, Chapman and Hall.

Kreutzberg-Mukhina, E. 2004. Effect of drought on

Mugidde, R., 1993. The increase in phytoplankton

waterfowl in the Aral Sea region: Monitoring of

productivity and biomass in lake Victoria (Uganda).

anseriformes at the Sudochie Wetland. 202.

Verhandlungen der Internationale Vereinigung für

Resources, A Web of Connections. Washington DC,
Island Press, pp. 283–315.
Reddy, C. A. and Mathew, Z. 2001. Bioremediation
potential of white rot fungi. G. M. Gadd (ed.), Fungi
in bioremediation. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.

Kura, Y., Revenga, C., Hoshino, E. and Greg, M. 2004.

Theoretische und Angewandte Limnologie

Fishing for Answers: Making Sense of the Global

[Proceedings of the International Union for

A. 1998. Watersheds of the World: Ecological Value

Fish Crisis. Washington DC, World Resources

Theoretical and Applied Limnology], Vol. 25, pp.

and Vulnerability. Washington DC, World Resources

Institute.

846–49.

Kuriyama, K. 1998. Measuring the value of the

Myers, N. 1997. The rich diversity of biodiversity issues.

Revenga, C., Murray, S., Abramovitz, J. and Hammond,

Institute and Worldwatch Institute.
Revenga, C., Brunner, J., Hinninger, N., Kassem, K. and

ecosystem in the Kushiro Wetland: An empirical

M. L. Reaka-Kudla, D. E. Wilson, and E. O. Wilson

Payne, R. 2000. Pilot Analysis of Global

study of choice experiments. Forest Economics and

(eds), Biodiversity II: Understanding and Protecting

Ecosystems: Freshwater Systems. Washington DC,

Policy Working paper, No. 9802.

Our Biological Resources. Washington DC, Joseph

Lal, P. N. 1990. Ecological Economic Analysis of
Mangrove Conservation: A Case Study from Fiji.
UNESCO Mangrove Occasional Paper, No. 6.

Henry Press, pp. 125–38.
Nami, B. 2002. Environmental Degradation of the Lake
Chad Basin: Implications for Food Security.

Lee, H. D. 1998. Use and value of coastal wetlands in

Navrud, S. and Mungatana, E. D. 1994. Environmental

Korea. Intercoast Network Newsletter, No. 32, pp.

valuation in developing countries: The recreational

7–8.
Lehman, J. T. 1996. Pelagic food webs of the east
African great lakes. T. C. Johnson and E. Odada

value of wildlife viewing. Ecological Economics, Vol.
11, pp. 135–51.
Neiland, A. E., Béné, C., Bennett, E., Turpie, J., Chong,

World Resources Institute.
Revenga, C. and Kura, Y. 2003. Status and Trends of
Biodiversity of Inland Water Ecosystems. Technical
Series No. 11. Montreal, Secretariat of the
Convention on Biological Diversity.
Sarch, M. T. and Birkett, C. M. 2000. Fishing and
farming at Lake Chad: Responses of lake level
fluctuations. The Geographical Journal, Vol. 166,
No. 2, pp. 156–72.

(eds), The Limnology, Climatology and

C. K., Thorpe, A., Ahmed, M., Valmonte-Santos, R.

Paleoclimatology of the East African lakes. Toronto,

A. and Balasubramanian, H. 2004. River Fisheries

and the roles of local communities in the

Gordon and Breach, pp. 281–301.

Valuation: A Global Synthesis and Critical Review.

conservation of natural resources: Case study of

Penang, Malaysia, WorldFish Center and

Surat Thani, south of Thailand. EEPSEA Research

Li, Y. F. and Macdonald, R. W. 2005. Sources and
pathways of selected organochlorine pesticides to
the Arctic and the effect of pathway divergence on

Comprehensive Assessment of Water in Agriculture.
Nilsson, C., Reidy, C. A., Dynesius, M. and Revenga, C.

HCH trends in biota: a review. Science of the Total

2005. Fragmentation and Flow Regulation of the

Environment, Vol. 342, pp. 87–106.

world’s large river systems. Science, Vol. 308, No.

Loh, J., Randers, J. Jenkins, M., Kapos, V., Bernal, J.,
Smith, K., Lacambra, C. and Phipps, E. (eds). 2004.

5720, 405–08.
Ogutu-Ohwayo, R. 1990. The decline of the native

Sathirathai, S. 1998. Economic valuation of mangroves

Report.
Scheffer, M. 1998. Ecology of Shallow Lakes. Vol. 1,
London, Chapman and Hall, pp. 1–357.
Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S. R., Foley, J. A., Folke, C. and
Walker, B. 2001. Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems.
Nature, Vol. 413, pp. 591–96.
Scherfose, V., Boye, P., Forst, R., Hagius, A., Klär, C.,

Living Planet Report 2004. Gland, Switzerland,

species of Lake Victoria and Kyoga (East Africa) and

World Wide Fund International.

the impact of introduced species, especially the

Niclas, G. and Steer, U. 2001.

Nile perch, Lates niloticus, and the Nile tilapia,

Naturschutzgrossgebiete des Bundes. [Large-scale

the world’s worst invasive alien species: A selection

Oreochromis niloticus. Env. Biol. Fish, Vol. 27, pp.

conservation projects of national interest]. Natur

from the global invasive species database. IUCN,

81–96.

Lowe, S., Browne, M. and Boudjelas, S. 2004. 100 of

Auckland, New Zealand. www.issg.org/booklet.pdf
Malmqvist, B. and Rundle, S. 2002. Threats to the

Olson D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D.,
Burgess, N. D., Powell, G. V. N., Underwood, E. C.,

und Landschaft, Vol. 76, pp. 389–97. (in German).
Schindler, D. W. 1997. Widespread effects of climatic
warming on freshwater ecosystems in North

running water ecosystems of the world.

D’amico, J. A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E., Morrison,

America. Hydrological Processes, Vol. 11, pp.

Environmental Conservation, Vol. 29, pp. 134–53.

J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. F., Ricketts, T. H., Kura,

1043–67.

Mazel, D. and Davis, C. B. 2003. Antibiotic resistance in

Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Hedao, P. and

microbes. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, Vol.

Kassem, K. 2001. Terrestrial ecoregions of the

56, pp. 742–54.

world: A new map of life on Earth. BioScience, Vol.

McAllister, D. E., Hamilton, A. L. and Harvey, B. H. 1997.
Global freshwater biodiversity: Striving for the
integrity of freshwater ecosystems. Sea Wind, Vol.
11, No. 3. Special issue (July-September 1997).
Miao, W. and Yuan, X. 2001. Development and present
status of inland fisheries and aquaculture in China.

51, No. 11, pp. 933–38.
Postel, S. 1999. Pillar of Sand: Can the Irrigation
Miracle Last? World Watch Institute, Washington DC.
———. 1995. Where have all the rivers one? World
Watch, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 9–19.
Postel, S. and Richter, B. 2003. Rivers for Life:

Unpublished paper prepared for the World

Managing Water for People and Nature.

Resources Institute, Qitang, Wuxi, China, Chinese

Washington DC, Island Press.

Academy of Fishery Sciences.
Millennium Project, 2004. Interim Report, Task Force
Water and Sanitation.
www.unmillenniumproject.org/documents/
tf7interim.pdf

Rast, W. 1999. Overview of the status of
implementation of the freshwater objectives of
Agenda 21 on a regional basis. Sustainable
Development International, Vol. 1, pp. 53–57.
Rast, W. and Holland, M. M. 2003. Sustainable

Moyle, P. B. and Leidy, R. A. 1992. Loss of biodiversity

freshwater resources: Achieving secure water

in aquatic ecosystems: Evidence from fish fauna. P.

supplies. M. M. Holland, E. R. Blood and L. R.

L. Fielder et al. (eds), Conservation Biology: The

Shaffer (eds), Achieving Sustainable Freshwater

Sharpe, M. 2003. High on pollution: drugs as
environmental contaminants. Journal of
Environmental Monitoring, Vol. 5, pp. 42N-46N.
Singleton, H. J. 1985. Water quality criteria for
particulate matter: Technical appendix. Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada, British Columbia Ministry
of the Environment Lands and Parks.
Spalding, M. D., Taylor, M. L., Ravilius, C. and Green, E. P.
2002. The Global Distribution and Status of Seagreass
Ecosystems, 2002. London, UK, UNEP/WCMC.
Stiassny, M. 2005. Personal communication with Dr.
Melanie Stiassny, American Museum of Natural
History, New York.
Stumpel, A. H. P. 1998. The creation and restoration of
ponds as a habitat for threatened amphibians.
Delbaere (ed.), Facts and Figures on Europe’s
Biodiversity. ECNC, 1998–1999.
Sverdrup-Jensen. 2002. Fisheries in the Lower Mekong
Basin: Status and perspectives. MRC Technical Paper

1 9 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

No. 6, Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Mekong River
Commission.
Thilsted, S. H., Roos, N. and Hassan, N. 1997. The role
of small indigenous species in food nutrition
security in Bangladesh. Paper presented at the

Section 2: CHANGING NATURAL SYSTEMS

International Consultation on Fisheries Policy

———. 2004c. Fortnam, M. P. and Oguntula, J. A. (eds),

Analysis of Global Ecosystems: Agroecosystems

Kalmar, Sweden, University of Kalmar.

Technical Report. Washington DC: World Resources

———. 2002a. Atlas of International Freshwater
Agreements, Stevenage, England, Earthprint.
———. 2002b. Global Environment Outlook 3: Past,

Research in Developing Countries, Hirtshals,

present and future perspectives. London, Earthscan

Denmark, 2–5 June 1997.

Publications Ltd.

Tibbetts, J. 2004. The state of the oceans, Part 2:

Wood, S., Sebastian, K., and Scherr, S. 2000. Pilot

Lake Chad Basin, GIWA regional assessment 43.

———. 2002c. Vital Water Graphics: An Overview of the

Institute and International Food Policy Research
Institute.
World Commission on Dams (WCD). 2000 Dams and
development : A new framework for decisionmaking, Earthscan Publ., London, UK.
World Lake Vision Committee. 2003. World Lake Vision:

Delving deeper into the sea’s bounty.

State of the World’s Fresh and Marine Waters.

A Call to Action. World Lake Vision Committee

Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 112, No. 8,

Nairobi, Kenya, UNEP.

(International Lake Environment Committee,

June 2004.

UNEP/GPA (United Nations Environmental

Tischler, W. 1979. Einführung in die Ökologie, 2nd edn,

Programme/Global Programme for Action for the

Stuttgart and New York, Spektrum Akademischer

Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-

Verlag (in German).

based Activities). 2004. Water Supply and

International Environment Technology Centre, United
Nations Environment Programme and Shiga, Japan
Prefectural Government).
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 1997.

Sanitation Coverage in UNEP Regional Seas. Need

Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater

Economic Valuation of the Zambezi Basin Wetlands,

for Regional Wastewater Emission Targets (WET).

Resources of the World. UN, UNDP, UNEP, FAO,

Harare, Zimbabwe. IUCN-The World Conservation

Section III: An inventory of regional specific data

UNESCO, WMO, UNIDO, World Bank, SEI. WMO,

Union, Regional Office for Southern Africa.

and the feasibility of developing regional

Turpie, J., Smith, B., Emerton, L. and Barnes, J. 1999.

Ueno, D., Takahashi, S., Tanaka, H., Subramanian, A. N.,
Fillmann, G., Nakata, H., Lam, P. K. S., Zheng, J.,
Muctar, M., Prudente, M., Chung, K. H. and Tanabe,

wastewater emission targets (WET). The Hague, the
Netherlands, UNEP/GPA.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific, and

S. 2003. Global pollution monitoring of PCBs and

Cultural Organisation). 2000. Water Related Vision

organochlorine pesticides using skipjack tuna as a

for the Aral Sea Basin for the Year 2025. Paris,

bioindicator. Archives of Environmental
Contamination and Toxicology, Vol. 45, pp. 378–89.

France, UNESCO.
Verma, M. 2001. Economic valuation of Bhoj wetland

Geneva, Switzerland.
———. 1992. Dublin Statement and Report of the
Conference. International Conference on Water and
the Environment: Development Issues for the 21st
Century. Geneva, Switzerland, WMO.
WRI (World Resources Institute), UNDP (United Nations
Development Programme), UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme) and World Bank. 2000.

Umali, D. L. 1993. Irrigation-induced salinity: A growing

for sustainable use. Report prepared for India:

World Resources 2000–2001: People and

problem for development and the environment.

Environmental Management Capacity Building

ecosystems: The fraying web of life. Washington

World Bank Technical Paper 215, Washington D.C.

Technical Assistance Project, Bhopal, Indian Institute

www-wds.worldbank.org/servlet/

of Forest Management.

WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/1993/08/01/

Verschurem, D., Johnson, T. C., Kling, H. J., Edgington,

000009265_3970311124344/Rendered/PDF/

D. N., Leavitt, P. R., Brown, E. T., Talbot, M. R. and

multi_page.pdf

Hecky, R. E. 2002. History and timing of human

Umeå University and WRI (World Resource Institute).
2004. Fragmentation and Flow Regulation
Indicator. Umeå, Sweden, Umeå University and
Washington DC, World Resources Institute.

impact on Lake Victoria, East Africa. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London B. Vol. 269, pp. 289–94.
Watson, B., Walker, N., Hodges, L. and Worden, A.
1996. Effectiveness of peripheral level of detail

UN-WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment

degradation when used with head-mounted

Programme). 2003. Water for People, Water for

displays. Technical Report 96–04, Graphics,

Life. World Water Development Report. Paris,

Visualization & Usability (GVU) Center, Georgia

UNESCO and London, Berghahn Books.

Institute of Technology.

———. 2000. UN Millennium Development Goals, United
Nations, New York. www.un.org/millenniumgoals/

Welcomme, R. L. 1979. Fisheries Ecology of Floodplain
Rivers. London, Longman.

DC, WRI.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2003. Managing
Rivers Wisely: Kafue Flats Case study, Mozambique.
www.panda.org/downloads/freshwater/
mrwkafueflatscasestudy.pdf
WWF and WRI (World Resources Institute). 2004. Rivers
at Risk: Dams and the Future of Freshwater
Ecosystems. www.panda.org/downloads/
freshwater/riversatriskfullreport.pdf
WWF/IUCN (Global Conservation Organization/World
Conservation Union). 2001. The Status of Natural
Resources on the High Seas. Gland, Switzerland
Zhulidov, A. V., Robarts, R. D., Headley, J. V., Liber, K.,
Zhulidov, D. A., Zhulidova, O. V. and Pavlov, D. F.
2002. Levels of DDT and hexachlorocyclohexane in

———. 1992. Report of the United Nations Conference

———. 2005. Annual History of Ramsar Site Designations.

burbot (Lota lota) from Russian Arctic rivers. The

on Environment and Development. Resolutions

www.wetlands.org/RDB/global/Designations.html

Science of the Total Environment, Vol. 292, pp.

Adopted by the Conference. United Nations,

and www.wetlands.org/RDB/global/AreaTrend.html

A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 Vol. 1, pp. 275–314.

Wilson, B. A., Smith, V. H., Denoyelles, F. Jr., and Larive,

231–46.
Zöckler, C. 2002. A comparison between tundra and wet

C. K. 2003. Effects of three pharmaceutical and

grassland breeding waders with special reference to

Marine and Coastal Ecosystems and Human Wellbeing:

personal care products on natural freshwater algal

the ruff (Philomachus pugnax). Schriftenreihe

A Synthesis Report Based on the Findings of the

assemblages. Environmental Science & Technology,

Landschaftspflege und Naturschutz, Vol. 74.

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. UNEP.

Vol. 37, pp. 1713–9.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2006.

———. 2005. Assessing Coastal Vulnerability: Developing a
Global Index for Measuring Risk. Nairobi, Kenya.

FEWS (Famine Early Warning Systems Network). 2003. www.fews.net

DEWA. UNEP.

Ramsar 2005. www.ramsar.org

———. 2004a. Lake Chad: Sustainable Use of Land and

Regional Ecosystem Office. 2005. Definitions N-Z. www.reo.gov/general/definitions_n-z.htm#R

Water in the Sahel. Environmental Change Analysis

UNEP-GEMS Water (Global Environment Monitoring System). 2004. www.gemswater.org

Series. DEWA, UNEP. Nairobi, Kenya.

Wetlands International. 2005. Annual History of Ramsar Site Designations.

———. 2004b. GEO Yearbook 2003. London, Earthscan
Publications Ltd.

www.wetlands.org/RDB/global/Designations.html and www.wetlands.org/RDB/global/AreaTrend.html
World Lakes Organisation: www.worldlakes.org/

SECTION 3

Challenges for
Well-being and
Development
The provision of adequate drinking water is just one aspect of the
role played by water in meeting basic needs and contributing to
development. Having enough water to cover domestic hygiene
needs promotes better health and well-being. Sanitation facilities
help to ensure the safe disposal of human waste and reduce
disease and death. Adequate water supplies improve the prospects
of new livelihood activities, including agriculture, that are
otherwise denied and which are often a key step out of poverty.
Industry at all scales needs reliable water resources to prosper and
grow. Water also plays a key role in energy generation and
transportation.
We must examine the current conditions of and the different
demands being placed on water for food, human health, industry
and energy, as increased competition will demand integrated
responses in order to ensure that there is enough water of
adequate quality to meet each of these needs in a sustainable
manner.
Global Map 5: Domestic and Industrial Water Use
Global Map 6: Sediment Trapping by Large Dams and Reservoirs

Chapter 6 – Protecting and
Promoting Human Health
(WHO & UNICEF)

This chapter reviews the main
components of the water cycle and
provides an overview of the geographical distribution of
the world’s total water resources, their variability, the
impacts of climate change and the challenges associated
with assessing the resource.
Chapter 7 – Water for Food,
Agriculture and Rural Livelihoods
(FAO & IFAD)

The demand for food is not negotiable.
As the largest consumer of freshwater,
the agriculture sector faces a critical challenge: producing
more food of better quality while using less water per unit
of output, and reducing its negative impacts on the complex
aquatic ecosystems on which our survival depends. Better
water management leads to more stable production and
increased productivity, which in turn enhance the livelihoods
and reduce the vulnerability of rural populations. This
chapter examines the challenges of feeding a growing
population and balancing its water needs with other uses,
while contributing to sustainable development in rural areas.
Chapter 8 – Water and Industry
(UNIDO)

Despite industry’s need for clean
water, industrial pollution is damaging
and destroying freshwater ecosystems
in many areas, compromising water security for both
individual consumers and industries. This chapter focuses
on industry’s impact on the water environment in routine
water withdrawal and wastewater discharge, analysing a
broad range of regulatory instruments and voluntary
initiatives that could improve water productivity, industrial
profitability and environmental protection.
Chapter 9 – Water and Energy
(UNIDO)

To be sustainable, economic
development needs an adequate and
steady supply of energy. Today’s
changing contexts require the consideration of a range of
strategies to incorporate hydropower generation and other
renewable forms of energy production to improve energy
security while minimizing climate-changing emissions. This
chapter stresses the need for the cooperative management
of the energy and water sectors to ensure sustainable and
sufficient supply of both energy and water.

2 0 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Domestic and Industrial Water Use
Freshwater is critical to the ever-growing urban
populations around the world, as well as the industrial
base upon which these modern societies are based. With
rapid urban growth – often poorly managed – the delivery
of adequate, clean, and reliable supplies of freshwater
becomes an important development challenge. Calculating
contemporary domestic and industrial water use is today
based on educated guesswork, for many countries lack
comprehensive and standardized survey systems to

determine water use. Decaying, poorly managed, and
leaky delivery systems add to the difficulty. In the maps
below, reported water withdrawals by country (WRI, 1998)
were used to estimate domestic and industrial water use.
The reporting year of national water use statistics differed
from country to country. To make up for this inconsistency,
regional water use trends reported in Shiklomanov (1996)
were used to extrapolate national water use to a common
year, in this case, the year 2000.

Annual domestic water use
(2000) in millions of cubic
meters per grid cell
0

<1
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

1–10
10–100
>100

Annual industrial water use
(2000) in millions of cubic
meters per grid cell
0
<5
5–50
50–500
>500

As shown in the maps above, a broad spectrum of water use arises, with high levels associated with dense settlement
and advanced levels of economic development. Maps of water use such as these can be linked with those depicting
water supply to define patterns of water scarcity and stress.
Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

WWDR section intro 3

15/2/06

16:57

Page 201

S EC TI O N 3 . C H A L L E N G ES FO R W E L L - B E I N G A N D D E V E LO P M E N T . 2 0 1

Sediment Trapping by Large Dams and Reservoirs
Dams and reservoirs create what are essentially large
holding tanks that intercept and efficiently trap incoming
particulate matter. Despite widespread increases in soil
erosion from poor land management upstream, the
construction of dams and reservoirs has made a significant
impact on the transport of sediment destined for the
world's coastal zones (Walling and Fang, 2003). At least
30 percent of continental sediment now fails to reach the
oceans (Vörösmarty et al., 2003; Syvitski et al., 2005).
Today, several large river basins, such as the Colorado and

the Nile, show nearly complete trapping due to reservoir
construction and flow diversions. Given that most of the
major reservoirs of the world have been constructed only
over the last 50 years, by any measure of global change,
the impact of these structures has been substantial, rapid
and unprecedented. The map, based on information from
large, registered reservoirs only, illustrates the variable
efficiency of sediment trapping worldwide. The additional
impact of many smaller but unregistered impoundments
numbering around 800,000 is unknown (McCully, 1996).

Sediment trapping efficiency

0

0–0.2

0.2–0.4

0.4–0.6

0.6–0.8

0.8–1

The impact of interrupted sediment flows is of more than
academic interest. Siltation of reservoirs means a loss of
water storage capacity and a shorter lifespan or costly
maintenance for expensive infrastructure designed to
support hydropower generation, irrigation, or domestic
and industrial uses. The delivery of adequate supplies of
freshwater and nutrient-rich sediment is critical to
sustaining coastal ecosystems and preventing coastal
erosion, such as in the Nile Delta (right). A recent sample
of 40 deltas around the world shows that more than 75%
are threatened predominantly by the upstream loss of
sediment and only secondarily by global sea level rise. In
this sample alone some 10 million people in coastal
landscapes risk being flooded (Ericson et al., 2006).
Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

By means of water we give life to everything
The Koran, Book of The Prophets 21:30

Part 1. Human Health in Water
Development .....................................................205
Box 6.1: The emergence of malaria in India’s
Thar Desert
Table 6.1: The relationship between the MDGs and
water, sanitation and hygiene

Part 2. Update of the Burden of Waterrelated Diseases..............................................208
Table 6.2: Global burden of disease: Deaths by age,
gender, region and cause for the year 2002
Table 6.3: Global burden of disease: DALYs by age,
gender, region and cause for the year 2002
2a. Diseases related to lack of access to safe
drinking water, poor sanitation and
insufficient hygiene ...........................................210
Diarrhoeal diseases .............................................210
Box 6.2: Control of diarrhoeal diseases
Intestinal helminth infections ...............................212
Table 6.4: Estimated global burden of disease
associated with soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infections, 1990
Table 6.5: Global estimates of prevalence and the
number of cases of soil-transmitted helminth infections
by region and age group, 2003
Skin and eye infections........................................212
2b. Vector-borne diseases associated with water....213
Table 6.6: Global estimates of people at risk of
four vector-borne diseases
Malaria ...............................................................214
Water management for malaria control ................215
Box 6.3: Malaria control through stream water
management
Filarial infections .................................................216
Schistosomiasis ...................................................217
Arboviral infections..............................................217
Box 6.4: A new strategy against Aedes aegypti
in Viet Nam
2c. Non-communicable water-associated health
issues ................................................................218
Box 6.5: Recreational water use, pollution and health
Box 6.6: Availability and quality of drinking water in
the Ruhuna Basins, Sri Lanka

Part 3. Progress towards the MDG Targets on
Water, Sanitation and Health ...................221
3a. Status of MDG 7: Drinking water and sanitation
targets...............................................................221
Fig. 6.1: Projected population without access to
improved sanitation
Map 6.1: Coverage with improved drinking water
sources, 2002
Map 6.2: Coverage with improved sanitation, 2002
3b. Status of the other MDG targets with respect
to water-related health issues ..........................221

Part 4. Indicators ...................................................224
4a. Burden of water-related diseases......................224
4b. Access to improved drinking water and
sanitation: Standards and definitions ................224
Table 6.7: Classification of improved and unimproved
drinking water sources
Table 6.8: Classification of improved and unimproved
sanitation facilities
Box 6.7: User-based versus provider-based data
Table 6.9: Requirements for water service levels and
health implications
4c. Water quality.....................................................226
Drinking water quality .........................................227
Box 6.8: Water safety plans (WSPs)
Wastewater use in agriculture and aquaculture.....228
4d. Child mortality ...................................................229
4e. Nutritional status ..............................................229

Part 5. Comparative Risk Assessment ........229
Box 6.9: Benefits of improved sanitation

Part 6. Governance................................................231
6a. Economic evaluation of interventions................231
6b. Water scarcity: Bridging the gaps between the
different sectors ................................................232
6c. Multiple uses of water ......................................233
Box 6.10: Domestic use of irrigation water
6d. Falling groundwater levels .................................233
6e. Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers....................233
Box 6.11: Successful water supply in Phnom Penh,
Cambodia

Part 7. Water for Life: Making it Happen ..235
References and Websites ..................................237

6
CHAPTER 6

Protecting and
Promoting
Human Health

By

WHO

(World Health
Organization)

UNICEF
(United Nations
Children’s Fund)

2 0 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Water-related diseases, including diarrhoea, are a leading cause of death in children of developing countries. However,
they can be prevented and controlled by improving access to safe drinking water and sanitation, as well as domestic
and personal hygiene. Yet progress remains very slow, especially in the provision of adequate sanitation in subSaharan Africa and South-East Asia. An integrated approach to human health and water resources management is
urgently required. This should be characterized by flexible planning and implementation, analysis of the costeffectiveness of local options, a significant reallocation of resources to drinking water, sanitation and hygiene, and
attention to the most vulnerable groups in urban and rural settings. This is essential to save the lives of millions and
ensure considerable long-term economic benefits.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

■

Above: Exterior and
interior of a toilet block
in Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania

Infectious diseases, especially diarrhoea followed by
malaria, continue to dominate the global burden of
water-related disease. Substantial progress has been
made in reducing the mortality associated with
diarrhoeal disease but morbidity remains essentially
unchanged, while the burden of malaria is increasing.

■

Globally, the drinking water target set by MDG 7 is on
schedule, but the sanitation target will not be met by
2015 without extra inputs and efforts. In sub-Saharan
Africa, the trends observed since 1990 indicate that
neither of the targets will be met by 2015.

■

The water-related disease burden and the relative
efficiency of water interventions are key criteria in
water/health decision-making. Disability-Adjusted Life
Years (DALYs) and cost and effectiveness of
interventions should be put upfront as key decisionmaking criteria.

■

Understanding of drinking water quality as it relates to
health has evolved from rigid standards applied at the
treatment facility to a process of risk assessment and
management from catchment to consumer.

The importance of both accelerated access to safe
water and adequate sanitation, and better Integrated
Water Resources Management (IWRM) practices to
achieving most MDG targets, need a higher profile.
This can be achieved by refining and publicizing the
correlations between water indicators and the
indicators for childhood illness/mortality and nutritional
status.
Below: A teacher assists a young girl to wash her hands
with soap and clean water after using a sanitary latrine
in a school in North Khway Ye village in Myanmar. Some
3,800 children die every day from diseases associated
with lack of access to safe drinking water, inadequate
sanitation and poor hygiene
■

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 0 5

Part 1. Human Health in Water Development
A range of water conditions and parameters essentially determine the health status of communities. Human
health, therefore, cuts across all sectors responsible for water resources development, management and use.
In water for domestic uses, the focus is on the lack of
access to sufficient supplies of safe drinking water,
adequate sanitation, and the promotion of hygiene
practices, all in relation to diarrhoeal and other waterrelated diseases. While infectious diseases are of principal
concern, other health risks may be important under
specific circumstances.
In water for food and energy, the focus is on the
hydrological changes caused by dam construction (see
Chapter 5) and irrigation development (see Chapter 7) and
the ensuing transmission risks of vector-borne diseases,
such as malaria, schistosomiasis, filariasis and Japanese
encephalitis. The impact of irrigated crop production on the
nutritional status of communities varies. On the whole, it is
positive, but there may be vulnerable groups whose
nutritional status declines with the introduction of irrigation,
which shifts the economic balance from subsistence to cash
crops. Over time, irrigation development may result in
significant improvements in the economic status of
communities, allowing better access to health services and,
indirectly, an improved community health status. Increased
energy generation through hydropower development
benefits large segments of the population, the urban
populations often disproportionately so; communities
vulnerable to adverse health impacts live in the vicinity of
dams and reservoirs (see also Chapters 5 and 9).

In water for ecosystems, the evidence base for associations
between natural ecologies, biodiversity conservation and
human health still requires substantial development. It may
be safely assumed that many of the environmental services
provided by wetlands, for example, are important to
sustaining the health of communities that depend on these
ecosystems for their livelihood. Yet, in specific settings, such
as wetlands, there may also be health risks related to waterassociated vector-borne diseases, sanitation-related diseases
and impaired access to health services. However, health can
be a key motivator in mobilizing communities to participate
in nature conservation and environmental management.

...there may be
vulnerable
groups whose
nutritional
status declines
with the
introduction of

Improvements in access to safe drinking water, adequate
sanitation and hygiene have an impact on wider development
issues, a fact that has been summarized by the Water Supply
and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC, 2004) for the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (see Table 6.1).

irrigation...

Human health cuts across all water issues. Community
health status is, therefore, the ultimate indicator of the
success or failure of integrated water resources development
and management. During and after water resources
development, both negative and positive health effects can
occur. Documented cases of adverse health impacts in the
wake of water resources development abound; a recent
example comes from Rajasthan, India (see Box 6.1).

BOX 6.1: THE EMERGENCE OF MALARIA IN INDIA’S THAR DESERT
The massive Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana project
is changing the face of the Thar Desert in
Rajasthan, and will eventually irrigate 1.9 million
hectares (ha) of arable land. Halfway through the
project development, the number of locally
transmitted malaria cases has risen from a few
thousand to 300,000 a year. Key environmental
changes include a rise in groundwater levels, more
surface water bodies, changed water-retention
properties of the soils, and an elevated relative
humidity. The associated mosquito species
succession from Anopheles stephensi to
A. culicifacies has resulted in intensified
transmission, which has shifted from seasonal to
perennial. Between 1980 and 1995, the proportion

of Rajasthani malaria cases registered in the desert
districts grew from 14.1 percent to 53.3 percent,
and the share of Plasmodium falciparum cases (the
most virulent malaria parasite species) rose from
11.6 percent to 62.5 percent. On the other hand,
the extension of the canal system has made large
quantities of water available for domestic use.
Regrettably, the trend is that the ingenious
traditional water supply systems of desert villages,
consisting of small earthen underground reservoirs,
are abandoned as soon as irrigation water becomes
available. The increased quantities of water
available for domestic use are nonetheless likely to
provide important health benefits, despite the
increased number of cases of malaria.

The two major environmental risk factors (seepage
water collections from the canals, and pools of
uncontrolled surplus run-off water) can be reduced
by forestation and land reclamation, and by
meticulous application of wet and dry irrigation
management techniques meticulously. Such
measures must be backed up by raising awareness
among farmers and irrigation managers, and
establishing effective institutional arrangements
between health and irrigation authorities. Their
application will greatly reduce (but not eliminate)
the need for standard malaria control measures,
such as case detection and treatment, and the use
of insecticide-treated mosquito nets.
Source: Tyagi, 2004.

2 0 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 6.1: The relationship between the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and water,
sanitation and hygiene

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

MDGs and their targets
Goal 1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Target 1: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion
of people whose income is less than US $1 a day.
Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion
of people who suffer from hunger.

The water, sanitation and hygiene perspective
■ The security of household livelihoods rests on the health
of its members; adults who are ill themselves or must
care for sick children are less productive.
■ Illnesses caused by unsafe drinking water and inadequate
sanitation generate high health costs relative to income
for the poor.
■ Healthy people are better able to absorb nutrients in food
than those suffering from water-related diseases,
particularly helminth1 infections, which rob their hosts of
calories.
■ Access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation
helps reduce household expenditures on health care.
■ The time lost because of long-distance water collection
and poor health contributes to poverty and reduced food
security.
■ Promotion of a healthy school environment is an essential
Goal 2. Achieve universal primary education
Target 3: Ensure that, by 2015, children everywhere,
element of ensuring universal access to education. School
boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full
enrolment, attendance, retention and performance are
course of primary schooling.
improved; teacher placement is improved.
■ Improved health and reduced water-carrying burdens
improve school attendance, especially among girls.
■ Separate school sanitation facilities for girls and boys
increases girls’ attendance, especially after they enter
adolescence.
Goal 3. Promote gender equality and empower women ■ Sanitation improvement allows women and girls to enjoy
Target 4: Eliminate gender disparity in primary and
private, dignified sanitation, instead of embarrassment,
secondary education, preferably by 2005, and to all
humiliation and fear from open defecation.
levels of education no later than 2015.
■ Access to safe drinking water and sanitation reduces the
burden on women and girls from looking after sick
children or siblings and from water carrying, giving them
more time for productive endeavours, (adult) education
and leisure.
■ Water sources and sanitation facilities closer to home
reduce the risk of assault for women and girls when
collecting water or searching for privacy.
■ Improved access to sanitation, safe drinking water sources
Goal 4. Reduce child mortality
Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990 and
and improved hygiene behaviour lead to a sharp decline
2015, the under-5 mortality rate.
in infant and child morbidity and mortality from diarrhoeal
diseases.
■ Better nutrition and a reduced number of episodes of
illness lead to the physical and mental growth of children.
Goal 5. Improve maternal health
■ Good health and hygiene increase chances of a healthy
Target 6: Reduce by three-quarters, between 1990
pregnancy.
and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
■ Safe drinking water and basic sanitation are needed in
health-care facilities to ensure basic hygiene practices
following delivery.
■ Accessible sources of water reduce labour burdens and
health problems resulting from carrying water, thereby
reducing maternal mortality risks.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 0 7

Table 6.1: continued
MDGs and their targets
Goal 6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Target 7: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the
spread of HIV/AIDS.
Target 8: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse the
incidence of malaria and other major diseases.

Goal 7. Ensure environmental sustainability
Target 9: Integrate the principles of sustainable
development into country policies and programmes
and reverse the loss of environmental resources.
Target 10: Halve by 2015 the proportion of people
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation.
Target 11: Achieve significant improvement in lives of
at least 100 million slum dwellers by 2020.
Goal 8. Develop a global partnership for development
Target 12: Develop further an open, rule-based,
predictable, non-discriminatory trading and financial
system.
Targets 13 and 14: Address special needs of less
developed countries, landlocked and small island
developing countries.
Target 15: Deal comprehensively with the debt
problems of developing countries through national
and international measures in order to make debt
sustainable in the long term.
Target 16: In cooperation with developing countries,
develop and implement strategies for decent and
productive work for youth.
Target 17: In cooperation with pharmaceutical
companies, provide access to affordable essential
drugs in developing countries.
Target 18: In cooperation with the private sector, make
available the benefits of new technologies, especially
information and communications.

The water, sanitation and hygiene perspective
■ Reliability of drinking water supplies and improved water
management in human settlements contribute to reducing
malaria and dengue fever transmission risks.
■ A reduction in stagnant water around tap points
translates into less breeding places for mosquitoes.
■ Less pressure by other infections on the immune system
of HIV/AIDS sufferers allows for better health.
■ Better, more hygienic and dignified possibilities to take
care of ill people lift their burden.
■ Safe drinking water and basic sanitation help prevent
water-related diseases, including diarrhoeal diseases,
schistosomiasis, filariasis, trachoma and intestinal
helminth infections.2
■ Adequate treatment and disposal of wastewater result in
a sharp decrease in environmental contamination by
faeces, which contributes to better ecosystem conservation
and less pressure on scarce freshwater resources.
■ Careful use of water resources prevents contamination of
groundwater and helps minimize the cost of water
treatment.
■ Better health is linked to a reduction in poverty, which in
turn helps to put less strain on natural resources.
■ Development agendas and partnerships should recognize
the fundamental role that safe drinking water and basic
sanitation play in economic and social development.
■ Countries that illustrate improved access to and quality of
safe drinking water and sanitation are more attractive,
boosting tourism and national image.
■ These countries have more options for employment
creation, as water supply and sanitation provision is
labour intensive.
■ Safe drinking water and better sanitation provide a better
chance for completing schooling, which leads to higher
youth employment.
■ Including health impact assessment in water resources
development planning prevents the transfer of hidden
costs to the health sector.

1. Helminths are parasitic intestinal worms that include tapeworms, hookworms, whipworms and roundworms.
2. Human schistosomiasis is a chronic, usually tropical, disease caused by infection with parasitic blood flukes that have certain aquatic snail species as
their intermediate host. Depending on the Schistosoma species, the infection will lead to disorders of the liver or urinary system. Filariasis is a parasitic
disease caused by thread-like worms, which are transmitted by mosquitoes and invade the lymphatic vessels causing chronic swelling of the lower
extremities. Trachoma is a contagious infection of the eye caused by a bacteria-like organism and can cause damage to the cornea leading to visual
impairment and blindness.
Source: Adapted from WSSCC, 2004.

2 0 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Update of the Burden of Waterrelated Diseases
The DALY is a
powerful tool
for assisting
policy-makers in
sector-wide
decision-making

The basic measures of disease frequency are incidence (new cases that occur in a population over time)
and prevalence (existing cases in a population at a certain point in time). In principle, disease incidence
data could be obtained from routine government health information systems. However, such data
remain scant, inaccurate and often unreliable and fail to attribute diseases to specific social and
environmental determinants. Data collected directly at the user/household level are generally more
reliable. These data are mostly obtained through cross-sectional surveys that provide prevalence, not
incidence, figures. For example, the proportion of people surveyed with helminth eggs in their stools
provides an estimate of the prevalence of helminth infection. If there is prospective surveillance of
large populations, direct incidence figures can be available. For diarrhoea, there are now sufficient
results from longitudinal studies to make it possible to arrive at reliable global estimates of incidence
(Kosek et al., 2003). For some diseases, such as scabies, no studies have been done and reliable global
data, whether incidence or prevalence, are currently unavailable.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Mortality rates express the incidence of death in a particular
population during a defined period of time. Mortality data
are more widely available than comparable information on
disease incidence rates (morbidity) and functional
disabilities. Many of the water-related diseases affect
children in particular, and the database for estimating child
mortality is unquestionably much better developed than
that for adult mortality (Murray and Lopez, 1994a). This
provides a strong rationale for reporting mortality data for
the under-5 years age group separately.

1. In the DALY methodology a
disease is only included in
terms of the disability it
causes, whether temporary or
permanent. Every health
status gets a disability weight,
varying between 0 (perfect
health) and 1 (death).

The first UN World Water Development Report described
the methodology for assessing water-related health
impacts at the global level (UN-WWAP, 2003; Prüss, et al.,
2002). It referred to the Disability-Adjusted Life Year
(DALY), a summary measure of population health, as an
important indicator for assessing the disease burden
associated with, for example, environmental exposures,
and evaluating options for public health interventions. The
DALY was developed under the Global Burden of Disease
study (Murray and Lopez, 1996) and was a major step
towards rational information-based health policy. One DALY
represents the loss of one healthy life year. For each
disease, DALYs are calculated at the global and regional
levels as the discounted sum of years lost due to
premature mortality and the years lost due to disability for
incident cases of the ill-health condition.
The DALY is a powerful tool for assisting policy-makers in
sector-wide decision-making for prioritizing health activities
on the basis of cost-effectiveness analysis. It is therefore the

unit of choice for monitoring the burden of disease over
time and across populations in relation to improvements in
water supply and sanitation. Although not yet utilized for
this purpose, it would also be a good measure in health
impact assessment (HIA) of hydraulic infrastructure
development projects, such as dams and irrigation schemes.
DALY estimates depend on the availability of data of
sufficient quality as well as on assigning a certain class of
severity of disability to each disease (Murray and Lopez,
1994b, 1996). This is based mainly on expert opinion and
partly on empirical population valuations from surveys,
such as those documented in recent World Health Reports
(WHO 2003a, 2004a). In the case of certain water-related
infectious diseases, such as intestinal helminth infections
and schistosomiasis, DALYs are estimated on the basis of
the number of new individuals infected with an associated
low disability weight1 (i.e. less severe). Once better data
on clinical signs and symptoms associated with such
diseases become available from community-based
epidemiological studies, more appropriate disability
weights can be assigned, and the DALY estimates will
become more empirically based and less modelled.
Furthermore, global estimates have to be validated by
locally measured epidemiological data. For example, a study
by Würthwein et al. (2001) in an area of Burkina Faso
found much higher percentages of total burden of disease
(mortality and morbidity) caused by malaria, diarrhoea,
intestinal helminth infections and malnutrition than the
Global Burden of Disease study (Murray and Lopez, 1996).
Such differences are bound to have important implications

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 0 9

for local health planning and decision-making. It has been
stated that the normative value choices in the DALY on
disability weighting, age weighting and discounting2 tend to
underestimate the disease burden attributed to young
populations and communicable diseases. This goes against
efforts to target diseases that are prevalent in poor
populations (Arnesen and Kapiriri, 2004).

Clearly, water-related diseases continue to impose a large
burden on health, especially in Africa and Asia (see
Chapter 14). Globally, diarrhoeal diseases and malaria
accounted, respectively, for 4 percent and 3 percent of
DALYs lost and 1.8 and 1.3 million deaths in the year
2002. This burden is almost entirely concentrated in the
group under 5 years of age. While the burden of

2. Based on the reality that
individuals prefer benefits now
rather than in the future,
future life years are
discounted.

Table 6.2: Global burden of disease: Deaths by age, gender, region and cause for the year 2002
Cause

All causes
Diarrhoeal disease
Malaria
Schistosomiasis
Lymphatic filariasis2
Onchocerciasis
Dengue
Japanese encephalitis
Trachoma
Intestinal nematode infections
Protein-energy malnutrition4
Drowning5

Total number
of deaths
(thousands)
57,029
1,798
1,272
15
0
0
19
14
0
12
260
382

0–4 years
(%)
18
90
90
0
n/a3
n/a
22
36
n/a
23
57
15

Gender
Male
Female
(%)
(%)
52
48
52
48
48
52
65
35
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
45
55
49
51
n/a
n/a
50
50
50
50
69
31

AFR
(%)
19
39
89
8
n/a
n/a
1
0
n/a
32
40
17

SEAR
(%)
26
34
5
2
n/a
n/a
63
61
n/a
36
26
26

Region1
WPR
EMR
(%)
(%)
21
7
9
14
1
5
23
61
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
20
5
21
17
n/a
n/a
10
8
5
10
35
7

AMR
(%)
10
3
0
6
n/a
n/a
11
0
n/a
13
16
6

EUR
(%)
17
1
0
0
n/a
n/a
0
0
n/a
0
2
10

Region1
WPR
EMR
(%)
(%)
18
9
11
14
1
5
3
13
7
2
0
2
21
5
45
12
17
16
21
8
11
12
35
7

AMR
(%)
10
4
0
4
0
0
11
0
7
6
6
6

EUR
(%)
10
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
8

Table 6.3: Global burden of disease: DALYs6 by age, gender, region and cause for the year 2002
Cause

All causes
Diarrhoeal disease
Malaria
Schistosomiasis
Lymphatic filariasis2
Onchocerciasis
Dengue
Japanese encephalitis
Trachoma
Intestinal nematode infections
Protein-energy malnutrition4
Drowning5

Total
DALY
(thousands)
1,490,126
61,966
46,486
1,702
5,777
484
616
709
2,329
2,951
16,910
10,840

0–4 years
(%)
29
91
91
1
4
4
23
37
0
18
88
19

Gender
Male
Female
(%)
(%)
52
48
52
48
48
52
60
40
76
24
58
42
45
55
48
52
26
74
50
50
51
49
69
31

1. WHO defines the regions of the world as follows:
AFR – Africa south of the Sahara
SEAR – South-East Asia (includes India)
WPR – Western Pacific (includes China)
EMR – Eastern Mediterranean (includes Sudan, Afghanistan, Pakistan)
AMR – the Americas
EUR – Europe (includes Central Asian republics)
2. Lymphatic filariasis, onchocerciasis and trachoma are diseases that are not
fatal but that can lead to considerable disability (see Table 6.3).
3. For mortality rates that are zero, there can be no percentage.
4. Malnutrition is both a medical and a social disorder. It can occur as a primary
disorder (with consequences for the susceptibility to infectious diseases) or as

AFR
(%)
24
38
88
78
35
97
1
0
52
39
34
18

SEAR
(%)
29
33
6
0
56
0
62
43
7
27
36
25

a secondary disorder, prompted by infectious diseases, many of which are
water-related.
5. Drowning is a major, non-communicable water-associated health problem.
6. The Disability-Adjusted Life Year is a summary measure of population health.
One DALY represents a lost year of healthy life and is used to estimate the
gap between the current health of a population and an ideal situation where
everyone in that population would live into old age in full health.

Source: WHO, 2004a.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

2 1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

3. Onchocerciasis is a tropical
parasitic disease caused by
infection with filarial worms of
the genus Onchocerca that
after long and intense
exposure can cause skin
lesions and blindness. The
worms are transmitted by
Simulium blackflies that breed
in the rapids and highly
oxygenated parts of rivers,
hence the popular name ‘river
blindness’.
4. Rotavirus gets its name from
the Latin word for wheel,
because of the wheel-like
appearance of the virus under
the electron microscope.
Discovered in 1973, it is a
leading cause of
gastroenteritis and acute
diarrhoea in young children.

diarrhoea is distributed over both Africa and South Asia,
malaria is largely a burden on children under the age of
5 in Africa. Africa accounts for more than half of the
world’s burden of onchocerciasis3 (97 percent), malaria
(88 percent), schistosomiasis (78 percent), and trachoma
(52 percent). The World Health Organization (WHO) Region
of South-East Asia accounts for more than half of the
world’s burden of dengue (62 percent) and lymphatic
filariasis (56 percent). Tables 6.2 and 6.3 provide estimates
of the global burden of disease of the major water-related
diseases for the year 2002, expressed in number of deaths
and DALYs. These are based on data from the 2004 edition
of the World Health Report (WHO, 2004a).
Diarrhoea and many other water-related diseases could
eventually be controlled in a sustainable way by universal
access to safe water and adequate sanitation, improved
hygiene and optimal water management practices. In the
short term, the control of many water-related diseases
depends to a large extent (and puts a heavy burden) on
the health care delivery system, which is responsible for
oral rehydration therapy to prevent deaths from
diarrhoea, insecticide-treated mosquito nets and
chemotherapy to prevent and treat malaria and individual
or mass drug treatment for the various helminth
infections. There have been ongoing disease elimination
programmes against some important water-related

Hundreds of professional launderers do their wash every day in the creek located at
the entrance of the tropical forest of Le Banco (designated a national park in 1953) in
Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire

diseases, notably Guinea worm infection, onchocerciasis,
lymphatic filariasis and trachoma. These programmes,
and those aimed at controlling intestinal helminth
infections and schistosomiasis, are based on the mass
treatment of at-risk populations. Low-cost, safe and
effective drugs are available, but there are problems with
respect to the insufficient capacity of health care
delivery systems. This also applies to malaria control,
where prompt treatment of patients and promotion of
insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) is the backbone of the
current strategy.
The following sections focus on the most important
water-related diseases for which global data are
available. There are many more water-related infectious
as well as non-infectious diseases for which no data are
available, and these cannot therefore be used to monitor
progress in water-related development activities.

2a. Diseases related to lack of access to
safe drinking water, poor sanitation and
insufficient hygiene
Diarrhoeal diseases
It is estimated that, on average, each child under 5
years of age in a developing country suffers from three
episodes of diarrhoea per year, with little change over
the years (Kosek et al., 2003). While the number of
cases has remained very high, substantial progress has
been made in reducing the mortality associated with
diarrhoeal disease. According to the Global Burden of
Disease study by Murray and Lopez (1996), 2.9 million
people died of diarrhoea in 1990, compared to
1.8 million in 2002, a decline of 37 percent. DALYs lost
to diarrhoea went down with the same percentage from
99 million to 62 million. The reduction in mortality is
probably due to improved case management, particularly
oral rehydration therapy (ORT) (Victora et al., 2000).
Despite this reduction, diarrhoeal diseases remain the
leading cause of death from water-related diseases in
children, accounting for 21 percent of all deaths of
children under 5 in developing countries (Parashar
et al., 2003). The increasing use of ORT from the early
1980s onwards is likely to have had its greatest impact
on mortality due to dehydration from acute watery
diarrhoea, such as that caused by rotavirus infection.4
Persistent diarrhoea (episodes lasting fourteen days or
longer, often associated with under-nutrition) and
dysentery may now cause an increasing proportion of
the remaining diarrhoeal deaths. No recent numbers

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 1 1

are available but based on a large review of studies
between 1966 and 1997, the annual number of
dysentery episodes caused by Shigella5 throughout the
world was estimated to be 164.7 million, of which
163.2 million were in developing countries (causing
1.1 million deaths) and 1.5 million in industrialized
countries. A total of 69 percent of all episodes and
61 percent of all deaths attributable to shigellosis
involved children under 5 years of age (Kotloff et al.,
1999). Since the beginning of the 1990s large
outbreaks of dysentery caused by Shigella have been
reported with high case fatalities, first from Central
Africa and later from other parts of the continent.
While other pathogens, such as viruses, are more
common causes of diarrhoea, Shigella is responsible for
most deaths. This has important implications for control
measures, as simple hygiene measures, especially
handwashing after defecation, are very effective in its
prevention and control (see Box 6.2).
Amoebiasis6 is the second most important cause of
dysentery and results in an estimated 100,000 deaths
each year (WHO/PAHO/UNESCO, 1997). Two forms of
Entamoeba histolytica7 may be found in the stools of
those carrying the infection: cysts and trophozoites.
People with cysts can infect others, but they can be

perfectly healthy themselves. Only the trophozoite, which
is the motile form, is a sign of active infection. The cysts
can be very persistent in the environment. In recent
years, there has been an increased recognition of the
protozoan parasite Cryptosporidium parvum as the cause
of water-borne disease outbreaks, especially in the
industrialized countries. The cysts are resistant to chlorine
that is used for drinking water disinfection.
Cryptosporidium and other protozoal infections are an
important cause of chronic diarrhoea in patients infected
with HIV. In the developing world, where highly effective
antiretroviral treatment remains unaffordable, protozoarelated diarrhoea continues, by and large, to be a major
cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV-infected
individuals (Lean and Pollok, 2003).
In the early 1990s, cholera was concentrated in the
Americas with 400,000 cases and 4,000 deaths in 1991.
From the late 1990s onwards the problem shifted to
Africa, where between 100,000 and 200,000 cases are
officially reported each year: in 2002 a total of 123,986
cases with 3,763 deaths were reported. The actual
number of cases is considered to be much higher. Poor
surveillance systems and frequent under-reporting, often
motivated by fear of trade sanctions and lost tourism, are
the root causes.

5. Bacteria of the genus Shigella
often cause dysentery.
6. Amoebiasis is an infection
from a protozoan parasite
(Entamoeba histolytica),
which can lead to the
destruction of the intestinal
mucosa and, on penetrating
the intestinal wall, may affect
other organs, particularly the
liver.
7. Entamoeba is a genus of
dysentery-causing amoebae.

BOX 6.2: CONTROL OF DIARRHOEAL DISEASES
Outbreaks of diarrhoea, such as those caused by

leads to bloody diarrhoea (dysentery). Typical

Simple hygiene measures are very effective in

cholera, draw a lot of attention and often result

for Shigella is the very small infective dose;

control and prevention of shigellosis, especially

in the mobilization of resources and policy

therefore, it can spread easily from person to

handwashing after defecation. Measures to

changes. However, it is the day-to-day diarrhoea

person.

improve the quality of drinking water, for
example by boiling or adding chlorine to the

of small children that causes the great majority
The mainstay of diarrhoeal disease case

water, are important for the prevention of

management is oral rehydration therapy (ORT) to

rotavirus transmission, but are unlikely to have

Diarrhoea is caused by a wide variety of

prevent dehydration. The discovery of ORT was

an impact on the transmission of Shigella.

microorganisms, including viruses, bacteria and

an important public health advance of the

protozoa. Rotavirus is the most common cause

twentieth century and has saved many lives. ORT

Preventing the contamination of human fingers,

of watery diarrhoea in children in developed as

is, however, most effective against acute watery

legs of flies, water and food by the sanitary

well as developing countries. The primary

diarrhoea and has less effect in preventing death

disposal of faeces would have an impact on both

pathway of rotavirus transmission is faecal-oral

due to dysentery.

Shigella and rotavirus transmission. This provides

of deaths each year.

a strong rationale for placing sanitation top of

and infection can occur through ingestion of
faecally contaminated water or food and contact

Treatment of shigellosis usually involves

with contaminated surfaces. An important cause

antibiotics, in addition to ORT. Unfortunately,

of diarrhoea, especially in developing countries,

most Shigella bacteria have developed resistance

is Shigella; infection with this bacterium often

to common antibiotics.

the agenda to combat diarrhoea.

Sources: Kotloff et al., 1999; Victora et al., 2000;
Parashar et al., 2003.

2 1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Globally, irondeficiency
anaemia is the
most common
micronutrient
disorder, known
to be associated

A number of water-related pathogens have emerged as
new problems in developing as well as industrialized
countries. These include Hepatitis E, Escherichia coli
O157, and Legionella pneumophila, which can colonize
water systems in buildings.
Typhoid fever is not a diarrhoeal disease, but it is
associated with poor water supply, sanitation and
hygiene. The global burden for the year 2000 was
estimated at 21.6 million cases (with 216,510 deaths),
half of which were from the WHO South-East Asia region
(Crump et al., 2004).

with high
maternal
mortality and

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

morbidity

Intestinal helminth infections
The roundworm (Ascaris), the whipworm (Trichuris),
and hookworms (Ancylostoma and Necator) are mainly
transmitted through soil that is contaminated with
human faeces and are, therefore, directly related to the
level of sanitary facilities. These soil-transmitted
helminths flourish where poverty, inadequate sanitation
and minimal health care prevail. In 1947, it was
estimated that 1.5 billion people were infected with
these worms. Fifty years later, this figure had increased
to 3.5 billion. Taking account of the population
increase, the proportion of the world population
infected with these parasites remains virtually
unchanged despite all the advances in medicine and
technology (Chan, 1997). The clinical importance of a
worm infection very much depends on the wormburden. Above a certain number of worms, there are
detrimental effects on physical fitness, growth
development and school performance. In addition,
hookworm infections cause blood loss from the
intestine and are recognized as a major contributor to
iron deficiency anaemia in adolescent girls and women
of childbearing age. Globally, iron-deficiency anaemia is
the most common micronutrient disorder, known to be
associated with high maternal mortality and morbidity.
The reduction in DALYs lost from intestinal worm
infections between 2000 and 2002, as reported in the

This woman’s hands bear
the marks of arsenic
poisoning through
drinking water

subsequent World Health Reports, can be attributed to an
adjustment in the calculations and does not necessarily
reflect a real reduction in the number of cases. Had
symptoms and effects of disease been taken into account
consistently, the estimated burden of disease would be
much higher. It was estimated at 39 million DALYs for the
year 1990 (see Table 6.4).
A recent update of the infection prevalences (see
Table 6.5) shows that this has declined markedly in the
Americas and Asia, but prevalence rates in Africa remain
stagnant. This study (de Silva et al., 2003) also
demonstrates the strong and reciprocal links between
poverty and helminth infections, in particular hookworm
infection.
Periodic drug treatment of school-age children living in
areas of high endemicity is the control measure to obtain
immediate benefits (WHO, 2002a). Long-term sustainable
control will only be obtained by safe disposal of human
faeces. The provision of culturally acceptable sanitary
facilities for disposal of excreta and their proper use are
necessary components to be included in any programme
aimed at controlling intestinal parasites. In poor urban
areas, sewerage and rainwater drainage can have a
significant effect on the intensity of intestinal helminth
infections by reducing transmission in the public domain
(Moraes et al., 2004).

Skin and eye infections
Many infectious skin and eye diseases are related to poor
hygiene and inadequate water supplies. Once enough
water is available and used for personal and domestic
hygiene, the prevalence of these diseases diminishes and
they are therefore often classified as water-washed
diseases. Trachoma is the leading cause of preventable
blindness in the world, with an estimated 146 million
cases, 6 million of which have caused actual blindness.
The disease is related to poverty, illiteracy and
unhygienic, crowded living conditions, particularly in dry
dusty areas. Eye-seeking flies are important in the

Table 6.4: Estimated global burden of disease associated with soil-transmitted intestinal
helminth infections, 1990
Helminth
Ascaris
Trichuris
Hookworm

Number of infections
Morbidity
Mortality
(millions)
(cases, millions) (deaths per year, thousands)
1,450
350
60
1,050
220
10
1,300
150
65

Source: WHO, 2002a.

DALYs lost
(millions)
10.5
6.4
22.1

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 1 3

Table 6.5: Global estimates of prevalence and the number of cases of soil-transmitted
helminth infections by region and age group, 2003

Trachoma is the

Helminth

leading cause of

Population
(millions)
At risk
Total

Infection prevalence
(%)

Estimated number of infections (millions)
Age groups (years)
0–4
5–9
10–14
>15
Total

Ascaris
LAC
SSA
MENA
SAS
India
EAP
China
Total

514
571
158
338
808
560
1,262
4,211

530
683
313
363
1,027
564
1,295
4,775

16
25
7
27
14
36
39
26

8
28
3
13
15
20
35
122

10
28
3
15
18
25
44
143

10
25
3
13
17
25
51
144

56
92
14
56
89
134
371
812

84
173
23
97
140
204
501
1,221

Trichuris
LAC
SSA
MENA
SAS
India
EAP
China
Total

523
516
52
188
398
533
1,002
3,212

530
683
313
363
1,027
564
1,295
4,775

19
24
2
20
7
28
17
17

10
26
1
10
8
16
15
86

12
27
1
11
9
19
19
98

12
23
1
10
9
19
22
96

66
86
4
43
47
105
163
514

100
162
7
74
73
159
220
795

Hookworm
LAC
SSA
MENA
SAS
India
EAP
China
Total

346
646
73
188
534
512
897
3,195

530
683
313
363
1,027
564
1,295
4,775

10
29
3
16
7
26
16
15

1
9
0
2
2
4
3
21

3
18
1
5
5
9
9
50

5
29
1
8
8
16
18
85

41
142
8
44
56
120
173
584

50
198
10
59
71
149
203
740

Abbreviated regions are as follows:
LAC – Latin America and the Caribbean
SSA – sub-Saharan Africa
MENA – Middle East and North Africa

preventable
blindness in the
world, with an
estimated 146
million cases,
6 million of
which have
caused actual
blindness

SAS – South Asia
EAP – East Asia and the Pacific Islands
Source: de Silva et al., 2003.

transmission and are associated with poor environmental
sanitation. The provision of pit latrines in villages in
Gambia resulted in a significant reduction of fly-eye
contact and trachoma prevalence (Emerson et al., 2004).
The main burden is in sub-Saharan Africa, with focal
areas in the eastern Mediterranean and South and
Central Asia.

2b. Vector-borne diseases associated with
water

There is sufficient scientific evidence to support the
notion that with improved hygiene and access to water
and sanitation, trachoma will disappear from these areas
as it has from Europe and North America (Mecaskey
et al., 2003).

In 2003, WHO commissioned from the Swiss Tropical
Institute8 a number of systematic literature reviews
focusing on the association between water resources
development and four vector-borne diseases (malaria,
lymphatic filariasis, Japanese encephalitis and
schistosomiasis). The research led to global estimates of
people at risk of these diseases in irrigation schemes and

Water is the breeding site for many disease vectors that
play a key role in the spread of disease-causing
organisms. Malaria, Japanese encephalitis, filariasis and
schistosomiasis are major vector-borne diseases
associated with water resources development.

8. www.sti.ch

2 1 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

In many parts of
Africa the
population faces

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

intense yearround malaria
transmission,
resulting in a
high disease
burden,
especially
among
children...

near dam sites, and provided evidence of the impact of
water resources development on these diseases in
different WHO sub-regions (Erlanger et al, 2005; Keiser
et al., 2005a,b; Steinman et al., in press). The low level of
association between water resources development and
malaria and schistosomiasis in sub-Saharan Africa, where
the estimated burden of these two diseases is highest,
reflects the limited level of development of this
continent’s water resources potential rather than a lack of
association (see Chapter 14). The at-risk population for
Japanese encephalitis in rice irrigation schemes is highest
in South Asia. While only 5.9 percent of the global
population at risk of schistosomiasis lives in the western
Pacific region (mainly China and the Philippines), relatively
substantial parts of the population at risk living in irrigated
areas or near dams (14.4 percent and 23.8 percent,
respectively) are found in that region (see Table 6.6).

Malaria
Malaria remains one of the most important public health
problems at a global level, causing illness in more than
300 million people each year. Its share of the global
burden of disease has increased over the past few years
and now stands at 46.5 million DALYs, 3.1 percent of the
world’s total. This is an increase of 23 percent, compared
with the year 1990. Mortality increased by 27 percent
from 926,000 in 1990 to 1,272,000 in 2002. The
majority of the burden of malaria is concentrated in subSaharan Africa. In many parts of Africa the population

faces intense year-round malaria transmission, resulting
in a high disease burden, especially among children
below 5 years of age and pregnant women. In all malariaendemic countries in Africa, on average 30 percent of all
out-patient clinic visits are for malaria (WHO/UNICEF,
2003). In these same countries, between 20 percent and
50 percent of all hospital admissions are malaria-related.
International efforts to reduce the malaria burden are
coordinated by the WHO-led Roll Back Malaria (RBM)
initiative, which was launched in 1998. The main strategy
is to promote prompt diagnosis and treatment, and the
use of insecticide-treated nets (ITNs).
Malaria control is hampered by a number of constraints.
Vector mosquitoes are becoming increasingly resistant to
insecticides and malaria parasites to inexpensive drugs.
Climate and environmental change, population movements
and behavioural change have helped malaria gain new
grounds in many parts of the developing world. The
difficulties in achieving a high coverage of ITNs among
the vulnerable groups are a major issue, especially in
Africa. In addition, operational constraints limit effective
re-impregnation of ITNs. Most importantly, the countries
facing severe malaria problems have an underdeveloped
health care sector that is limited in its potential to
implement the established strategies, particularly those
related to ensuring early diagnosis and treatment, disease
monitoring and community involvement in control
activities.

Table 6.6: Global estimates of people at risk of four vector-borne diseases
Estimated numbers of

Malaria
(million)

People at risk globally
>2,000
People at risk near irrigation schemes,
851.3
globally
People at risk near dams, globally
18.3
People at risk in urban settings (no access
to improved sanitation
People at risk near dams and irrigation
9.4
schemes, sub-Saharan Africa
People at risk near dams and irrigation
860.3
schemes, excluding sub-Saharan Africa
People at risk near dams and irrigation
n.a.*
schemes, Western Pacific
People at risk near irrigation schemes,
n.a.*
South East Asia and Western Pacific

Lymphatic
filariasis
(million)
>2,000
213

Japanese
encephalitis
(million)
1,900
180–220

Schistosomiasis
(million)

n.a.
395

n.a.
n.a.

42

n.a.

n.a.

39

n.a.

n.a.

66

n.a.

n.a.

40

n.a.

*Not segregated to this level.
Sources: Erlanger et al., 2005; Keiser et al., 2005a,b; Steinman et al., in press;
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/resources/envmanagement/en/index.html

779
63

132 (in irrigated areas)
SE Asia
167 (in rice irrigated areas)
921 (in irrigated areas)
W. Pacific
36 (in rice irrigated areas)

}
}

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 1 5

Water management for malaria control
Water resources development projects, especially
irrigation systems, can provide the ecological conditions
suited to the propagation of malaria vectors. The
relationship between malaria and water resources
development is, however, highly situation-specific,
depending on the ecology, biology and efficiency of local
vectors, people’s behaviour and climate. The
opportunities for malaria vector breeding are often
associated with faulty irrigation design, maintenance or
water management practices. The case of irrigationrelated malaria in the Thar Desert is described in Box 6.1.
In Africa, but also in parts of Asia, several empirical
studies have shown the counter-intuitive result of no
intensification of malaria transmission in association with
irrigation development and increased mosquito vector
densities; socio-economic, behavioural and vector
ecological factors may all play a role in this phenomenon,
dubbed the ‘paddy paradox’ (Ijumba and Lindsay, 2001;
Klinkenberg et al., 2004). Studies in West Africa on rice
irrigation and farmers’ health showed that irrigation
altered the transmission pattern but did not increase the
burden of malaria (Sissoko et al., 2004). It was also
documented that irrigated rice cultivation attracted young
families, improved women’s income and positively
affected treatment-seeking behaviour by shortening the
delay between disease and initiation of treatment.9
Globally, it is estimated that only 18.9 million people
(most of whom are in India) live close enough to large
dams to be at risk of malaria transmitted by mosquitoes
associated with man-made reservoirs (Keiser et al.,
2005a). The population living close to irrigation sites in
malaria endemic areas is much larger and has been
estimated at 851.5 million (see Chapters 7 and 8).
However, in Africa, where the main burden of malaria
rests, only 9.4 million people live near large dams and
irrigation schemes. Hardly any information is available on
the impact of small dams, of which there are many
hundreds of thousands in malaria endemic areas in Africa
and elsewhere. Cumulatively, these could well be more
important for malaria transmission than large dams and
irrigation schemes. The potential for the further
expansion of small dams is considerable, particularly in
sub-Saharan Africa. There is therefore a pressing need for
strategic health impact assessment as part of the
planning of small dams that should encompass a broad
approach towards health, including issues of equity and
well-being (Keiser et al., 2005a).

The role of the aquatic environment as an essential
condition for malaria transmission was recognized long
ago. Environmental management methods were used for
malaria control, especially in Asia, Central America and the
Caribbean, Europe and the US (Konradsen et al., 2004;
Keiser and Utzinger, 2005). A lack of scientific evidence of
effectiveness, uncertainty about the present-day feasibility
of implementation and remaining vertical vector-control
structures prevent environmental management methods
from playing a more important role in present-day malaria
control. The joint World Health Organization (WHO), Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) Panel of Experts on
Environmental Management for Vector Control (PEEM) has
played a central role in research and capacity-building in
this field since the early 1980s. Recently, international
research initiatives have focused on possibilities for
reducing malaria as part of an ecosystem approach to
human health, by looking at the relationship between all
components of an ecosystem in order to define and assess
priority problems that affect the health and livelihood of
people and environmental sustainability.10
The Consultative Group on International Agricultural
Research’s (CGIAR) Systemwide Initiative on Malaria and
Agriculture (SIMA) looks at the interaction of people with
land, water and crops as they farm existing agricultural
areas or develop new areas for farming. This is expected
to lead to the identification of specific environmental
management measures for the reduction of the disease
transmission potential. In the absence of an effective
vaccine, treatment of patients and promotion of
insecticide-treated nets will remain the main evidencebased strategies for malaria control. But even in the
African context, vector control (largely by indoor housespraying with residual insecticides) and proper
management of the environment is increasingly
recognized as an indispensable part of malaria control
(see the recent work done in Sri Lanka discussed in
Box 6.3). In low transmission areas such as in many parts
of Asia and in the latitudinal and altitudinal fringes of
malaria distribution in Africa, environmental management
is re-emerging as an important component of an
integrated approach to malaria control. In such areas, it is
also important that health impact assessments be part of
the planning process of hydraulic infrastructure projects,
in order to identify, qualify and possibly quantify adverse
health effects at the earliest possible stage and suggest
preventive solutions (Lindsay et al., 2004). In rural areas
of Africa where mosquito breeding places are diffuse and

Mosquitoes are
becoming
increasingly
resistant to
insecticides and
malaria parasites
to inexpensive
drugs

9. See www.warda.cgiar.org/
research/health for more
information
10. For more information, go to
www.idrc.ca/ecohealth

2 1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

In rural areas of
Africa where
mosquito
breeding places
are diffuse and
varied, there
may be little
scope for
environmental
control

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

measures

varied, there may be little scope for environmental control
measures. The situation is different in African cities. In
urban and peri-urban areas, breeding sites can be detected
more easily than in rural areas, and environmental
management is proposed as a main feature for an
integrated control approach (Keiser et al., 2004). This can
have an important impact on the overall malaria burden.
According to different plausible scenarios, an estimated 25
to 100 million malaria cases occur in African cities.

Filarial infections
Mosquito-borne lymphatic filariasis is rarely lifethreatening but causes widespread and chronic suffering,
disability and social stigma. Globally, an estimated
119 million people are infected, with 40 million suffering
from severe chronic disease. More than 40 percent of
those infected live in India and 30 percent in Africa. In
India alone, the disease causes losses of US $1 billion
annually (Erlanger et al., 2005). The current Global
Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis (GPELF), led
by WHO, is based on mass drug administration of the
entire population at risk. It has been argued that vector
control is an essential supplement that will add to the
sustainability of these efforts. The programme provides
significant opportunities to deliver public health benefits
in the broader scope of intestinal helminth infections,
malaria and dengue (Molyneux, 2003).

Urban vectors of lymphatic filariasis (Culex species) breed
in organically polluted waters, such as blocked drains and
sewers. An estimated 394 million urban dwellers, mainly in
South Asia, are at risk of lymphatic filariasis if lack of
access to improved sanitation is considered a key
determinant (Erlanger et al., 2005). Urban improvement,
including proper sanitation, a robust drainage
infrastructure and environmental management to minimize
mosquito-breeding places, has been shown to contribute
significantly to the reduction of transmission risks. In the
rural areas of Africa, where anopheline mosquitoes are the
vectors, an estimated 213 million people are at risk
because of their proximity to irrigation schemes (Erlanger
et al., 2005). While densities of the mosquito vector are
often much higher in irrigated areas as compared to
irrigation-free sites, relatively few studies have been done
aimed at linking water resources development and filarial
disease. More research is needed to better define the
potential of water management approaches for vector
control in this connection. In rural areas of Africa, the
vector of lymphatic filariasis also transmits malaria.
Therefore, vector control activities such as implemented
under the Roll Back Malaria initiative can be expected to
reduce the transmission of malaria as well as lymphatic
filariasis (Manga, 2002). In India, the vectors of lymphatic
filariasis and malaria are different, but vector control,
including breeding-site reduction and environmental

BOX 6.3: MALARIA CONTROL THROUGH STREAM WATER MANAGEMENT
From a global perspective, the use of

reflecting the different patterns of transmission,

demonstrated a high potential for effective

environmental and engineering-based control

disease-vector ecology and the local capacities

vector control by feasible changes in irrigation

interventions that make the water environment

available for implementation. Extensive field

and stream water management, resulting from

less conducive for vector-breeding plays a limited

research and close collaboration between the

periodic fortnightly releases from upstream

role in current malaria control efforts. However,

water management and health sectors provide

reservoirs, to eliminate mosquito breeding sites

research from around the world has shown the

opportunities for a significant contribution to

and render the habitat less conducive to

potential for using environmentally based control

malaria control.

Anopheles culicifacies breeding for some time
after the water release (see Chapter 14). The

interventions as a component of an integrated
control programme. Some of the interventions

Recent work in Sri Lanka assessed options for

approach followed did not result in a loss of

being field-tested today are based on the

the control of malaria vectors through different

water, since the water was captured in reservoirs

approaches used during the first half of the

water management practices in irrigation

downstream. The designated water management

twentieth century, while others have come about

conveyance canals and streams. The approach

strategy was far cheaper than the use of

through the use of modern technologies in an

was based on the use of existing irrigation

chemical larvicides.

attempt to counter the new challenges resulting

structures regulating the water levels in the

from large-scale changes in the freshwater

waterways and was aimed at eliminating the

environment. The experiences clearly point to the

principal breeding sites of the most important

site-specific nature of the interventions,

malaria vector in the country. Overall, the result

Sources: Konradsen et al., 1998, 1999; Matsuno et al.,
1999; Keiser and Utzinger., 2005.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 1 7

management, can have an impact on different vector
species and both diseases (Prasittisuk, 2002).
Guinea worm infection is unique in that it is the only
communicable disease that is transmitted exclusively
through drinking water containing infected intermediate
hosts. These are small crustaceans infected with the
parasite Drancunculus medinensis, which causes the
disease in humans. Thus, it is the only disease that can
be prevented entirely by protecting supplies of drinking
water. Guinea worm infection is about to be eliminated by
improvements in water supply. In Africa, the number of
cases has declined from 3.5 million in 1986 to 35,000 in
2003 (WHO/UNICEF, 2004). The majority of remaining
cases are in Sudan, where many areas are inaccessible to
eradication efforts due to ongoing civil conflicts.

Schistosomiasis
Schistosomiasis (bilharzia) is contracted by humans
through contact with water infested with the freeswimming larval stages of parasitic worms (cercariae)
that penetrate the skin and develop in the human body
to maturity. Parasite eggs leave the human body with
excreta. They hatch in freshwater and infect aquatic snail
intermediate hosts. Within the snails they develop into
cercariae, which are, in turn, released into the water to
infect new human hosts. Transmission can take place in
almost any type of habitat from large lakes or rivers to
small seasonal ponds or streams. Man-made water
bodies, including irrigation schemes, are particularly
important, as the human population density is usually
high around these and water contact patterns are
intense. The disease occurs in seventy-four countries in
Africa, South America and Asia, with an estimated 200
million people infected, 85 percent of whom live in subSaharan Africa.
Schistosomiasis is a chronic, debilitating parasitic disease,
which may cause damage to the bladder, liver and intestines,
lowers the resistance of the infected person to other diseases
and often results in retarded growth and reduced physical
and cognitive functions in children. The current estimate of
the global burden of disease due to schistosomiasis as
presented in the World Health Report is based on the
number of people infected with an associated low disability
weight because many infections do not result in clinical
disease. With better data on morbidity and mortality now
becoming available, DALYs due to schistosomiasis should be
recalculated (Crompton et al., 2003). Recent estimates from
sub-Saharan Africa indicate that 280,000 deaths per year can

be attributed to schistosomiasis, much higher than the
15,000 listed by the Global Burden of Disease Initiative (van
der Werf et al., 2003).
The key element in the current control strategy is the
regular treatment of at-risk populations, especially school
children, with the drug praziquantel. This has to be
combined with improvements in sanitation, which will
prevent eggs from entering the environment. Contact
with infested water has successfully been reduced by
improving water supplies and providing laundry and
shower facilities and footbridges. It has been stated that
linking schistosomiasis control to improvements in water
supply and sanitation has the potential to ensure longterm control and, in many instances, elimination of the
disease (Utzinger et al., 2003). Results from national
control programmes in endemic countries such as Brazil,
China and Egypt are encouraging (see Chapter 14).
However, there is currently little or no schistosomiasis
control in sub-Saharan Africa (Engels and Chitsulo, 2003).
Of the estimated population at risk (779 million globally),
some 105 million live close to dams and irrigation
schemes (Steinmann, in press). Proportionally, a high
percentage of these live in the western Pacific region
(China and Philippines).
The introduction or spread of schistosomiasis has been
documented in relation to the construction of large dams
and irrigation systems. In these settings, it is important to
combine mass chemotherapy and improvements in water
supply and sanitation with snail control. Reductions in
snail populations can be achieved by various engineering
means, including proper drainage, canal lining, removal of
aquatic vegetation from canals, regular flushing of canals,
increasing the flow velocity, drying of irrigation systems
and changing water levels in reservoirs. Such often
capital-demanding interventions should be focused on
locations where water contact is intense. Of even greater
importance for increased schistosomiasis transmission in
the future could be the thousands of small dams that are
being built on the African continent for agriculture,
livestock, and drinking water supply.

Arboviral infections
Japanese encephalitis: Restricted to the Asian region,
Japanese encephalitis (JE) is closely associated with
irrigated rice ecosystems, where the Culex mosquito
vectors prefer to breed. Transmission risks are greatly
enhanced where pig rearing is practised as a source of
food and income generation: pigs are amplifying hosts of

Globally, an
estimated 119
million people
are infected
with lymphatic
filariasis, with
40 million
suffering from
severe chronic
disease

2 1 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 6.4: A NEW STRATEGY AGAINST AEDES AEGYPTI IN VIET NAM
The Australian Centre for International and

■

Tropical Health and Nutrition and the General
Department of Preventive Medicine and HIVAIDS control of the Vietnamese Ministry of

■

■

breeding mosquito, A. aegypti. It incorporates
four elements:

Between 1998 and 2004, the strategy achieved

that depends on community understanding

the elimination of vectors from thirty-two out of

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

the most
important
mosquito-borne
viral disease in
the world. In
the last fifty
years, its
incidence has
increased thirtyfold. An
estimated 2.5
billion people
are at risk in
over 100
endemic
countries

11. Based on www.who.int/csr/
disease/dengue/impact/en/

people. As a result, no dengue cases have been

■

detected in any of the communities since 2002,

use of predacious copepods of the genus

and the deployment of the strategy indicates so

Mesocyclops as a biological control agent

far its applicability and sustainability wherever

community activities of health volunteers,
schools and the public.

Dengue ranks as

thirty-seven communities, covering 309,730

prioritized control according to the larval
productivity of major habitat types

Health have progressively deployed a new
strategy for the control of the container

a combined vertical and horizontal approach

large water storage containers are major sources
of the vector.
Source: Kay and Nam, 2005.

the JE virus. It is the leading cause of viral encephalitis in
Asia with 30,000 to 50,000 clinical cases reported
annually and an estimated global burden of 709,000
DALYs lost in 2002; under-reporting is, however,
considerable. Vaccination initiatives are the mainstay of JE
outbreak control, but water management methods have
been used to control the mosquito vector, especially the
alternate wet and dry method of cultivating rice (van der
Hoek et al., 2001a; Keiser et al., 2005b).

householders to store water in containers close to
homes), promotion of inappropriate drinking water
storage containers and increase in volume of solid waste,
such as discarded plastic containers and other abandoned
items which, following rains, provide larval habitats in
urban areas.11 Box 6.4 shows a strategy developed in
Viet Nam to control dengue transmission.

Dengue: Dengue ranks as the most important mosquitoborne viral disease in the world. In the last fifty years, its
incidence has increased thirty-fold. An estimated 2.5
billion people are at risk in over 100 endemic countries.
Up to 50 million infections occur annually, with 500,000
cases of dengue haemorrhagic fever and 22,000 deaths,
mainly among children. Prior to 1970, only nine countries
had experienced cases of dengue haemorrhagic fever
(DHF); since then the number has increased more than
fourfold and continues to rise. In 2001, the Americas
alone reported over 652,212 cases of dengue (of which
15,500 were DHF), nearly double the number of cases
reported for the same region in 1995. Dengue is present
in urban and suburban areas in the Americas, South and
South-East Asia, the East coast of Africa, the Eastern
Mediterranean and the Western Pacific regions. In South
and South-East Asia, it has also spread to rural areas. In
areas of high endemicity, dengue hemorrhagic fever
considerably increases the disease burden caused by this
virus. Several factors have combined to produce
epidemiological conditions in developing countries in the
tropics and subtropics that favour viral transmission by
the Aedes mosquito vectors: rapid population growth,
rural–urban migration, inadequate basic urban
infrastructure (e.g. unreliable water supply leading

Among the ill-health conditions that are water-associated
but not caused by infectious agents, two stand out globally
based on the burden of disease: drowning and the effects
of long-term exposure to inorganic chemicals that occur
naturally in the groundwater sources of drinking water (see
Box 6.5). Anthropogenic chemical pollution of surface
waters, mainly by industry and agricultural runoff, is a
health hazard, but the impacts on health (for example,
malignant tumours) generally occur only after extended
periods of exposure and are difficult to attribute accurately
to specific environmental or lifestyle factors.

2c. Non-communicable water-associated
health issues

Drowning is a significant problem worldwide, particularly in
children under the age of fifteen, with 97 percent of all
drowning incidents occurring in low- and middle-income
countries (Peden and McGee, 2003). In 2002, an estimated
382,000 people drowned worldwide, which translates into
the loss of more than 10 million DALYs. The risk of drowning
is not just linked to recreational water use, but is also
important in the context of natural disasters (for example, in
low-lying areas when protective hydraulic works have not
been adequately maintained). It is an occupational health
hazard for sailors, fishermen and other professions.
Obviously, the death toll of the Indian Ocean tsunami of
26 December 2004 will contribute to a sharp increase in the

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 1 9

mortality caused by drowning as an exceptional peak
resulting from a phenomenon for which early warning is key
(see Chapters 1, 10 and 14).

combination of practical, affordable and sustainable water
supply programmes aimed at minimizing the combined
risk to health posed by diarrhoeal disease, fluoride,
arsenic and other chemical contaminants that may be
present in the environment. Installing filters or other
devices in millions of tubewells to remove arsenic and
fluoride is an almost impossible task. Yet, it is imperative
that water from each and every tubewell be tested for
arsenic and fluoride in affected areas, before it is made
available for consumption. Even in affected villages, one
or more pumps could provide water with permissible
arsenic and fluoride levels. In other cases, there might be
no choice but to use surface water sources that are also
used for agriculture and other uses with suitable
treatment. This calls for clear, integrated policies on the
joint use of surface and groundwater resources, as
illustrated in Box 6.6.

The strategy to improve rural drinking water supply by
installing low-cost hand pumps that draw groundwater
uncontaminated by disease-causing microbes, has been
applied on a large scale in several countries. In Bangladesh
alone, more than 4 million tubewells have been installed
over the past twenty years to provide drinking water to 95
percent of the population. It is believed to have contributed
significantly to the reduction of the burden of diarrhoea
over the same period. Arsenic occurs naturally in
groundwater, and excess exposure to arsenic in drinking
water may result in a significant risk of skin lesions and
cancer (WHO, 2004b). The high concentrations of arsenic in
many Bangladeshi tubewells occur in an erratic pattern, and
the scale of the problem has only become known in recent
years. The full effects of arsenic poisoning will only become
apparent at a later stage: deep wells have been in use since
the late 1970s, and cancer has a long latency period
(Yoshida et al., 2004). However, a return to surface water
would inevitably result in an increase in diarrhoeal disease
(Lokuge et al., 2004). In India, an estimated 66 million
people rely on groundwater with fluoride concentrations
exceeding WHO recommended norms for their drinking
water needs. While arsenic is toxic and carcinogenic, an
excess of fluoride leads to the mottling of teeth and, in
severe cases, crippling skeletal deformities, as well as other
health problems. In addition to the Indian subcontinent and
China, clinical forms of dental and skeletal fluorosis are
particularly common along the East African Rift Valley
(WHO/IWA, 2006; see also Chapter 14).

There are many other chemicals that can cause health
problems. However, at the global level these are not as
important as fluoride or arsenic. Nitrate pollution of
groundwater is a major environmental issue in developing
as well as industrialized countries (see Chapter 5).
Nevertheless, a recent review of the global burden of
disease related to nitrate in drinking water concluded that
nitrate is just one of the factors that play a role in the
sometimes complex causal web underlying
methaemoglobinemia (‘blue baby syndrome’).12 Given the
apparently low incidence of this condition and the
complex nature of the role of nitrates and individual
behaviour, it is currently inappropriate to attempt to link
disease incidence with drinking water nitrate levels
(Fewtrell, 2004).

The situation in Bangladesh and other areas, including
parts of India, China and East Africa, calls for a pragmatic

The Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality (WHO, 2004b)
establishes values for the concentrations of substances

12. This condition can occur
when large amounts of
nitrates in water are ingested
by an infant and converted to
nitrite by the digestive
system. The nitrite changes
the oxygen-carrying blood
protein. As a result, body
tissues may be deprived of
oxygen, causing the infant to
develop a blue colouration.

BOX 6.5: RECREATIONAL WATER USE, POLLUTION AND HEALTH
Drowning is not the only risk associated with

exposure to chemical contaminants, but

norms on recreational water use and health in

recreational water use. Swimming may be

exposure from recreational water is likely to be a

the form of guidelines. Volume 1 of the WHO

exposed to health hazards at many places where

very small fraction of total exposure.

Guidelines for Safe Recreational Water

raw or partially treated sewage is pumped into

Recreational waters in the tropics and subtropics

Environments addresses the health aspects of

seas every day. Chemical contamination of seas

pose special hazards, not just from some of the

coastal and fresh waters.

and rivers arises principally from direct waste

local aquatic or amphibious predators such as

discharge (e.g. industrial effluent) or chemical

crocodiles, but also from the causative agents of

spills and is typically local or regional in nature.

a number of tropical diseases, especially

Little is known about the adverse effects of

schistosomiasis. WHO produces international

Source: www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
bathing/en/

2 2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

BOX 6.6: AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY OF DRINKING WATER IN THE RUHUNA BASINS, SRI LANKA
The Ruhuna Basins in southern Sri Lanka were

areas in the Ruhuna Basins, many tubewells were

In basins such as these, providers of drinking water

described as a pilot case study in the first World

constructed in order to exploit deeper

are faced with a dilemma. Taking availability and

Water Development Report (UN-WWAP, 2003; see

groundwater resources. However, a large

biological and chemical water quality into account,

also Chapter 14). Recent studies in the area have

proportion of these wells are not used by the local

shallow wells seem to be the best water source for

confirmed the observation that seepage from

population, because the water is unpalatable, due

domestic purposes, especially those protected by a

irrigation canals and reservoirs is indispensable for

to salt or other chemicals. Water quality testing

wall from surface inflow. However, irrigation

maintaining water levels in shallow wells that

showed that surface water was polluted by faecal

rehabilitation programmes that include the lining of

people use for drinking. Canal seepage accounted

matter, therefore presenting a potential risk for

canals are threatening this source of drinking

for more than half of groundwater recharge, and

faecal-orally transmitted diseases, especially

water. Residents may then be forced to look for

canal closure resulted in groundwater levels

diarrhoea, if used for drinking. Shallow wells had

alternative water sources and may have to revert to

decreasing by 1 to 3 metres within a few days,

lower levels of pollution, and tubewells had the

untreated surface water from larger canals and

leading to the drying-up of many shallow wells and

lowest level of faecal indicator bacteria, often

reservoirs if shallow wells fail. This stresses the

problems of access to domestic water supplies for

meeting the zero pathogen criterion referred to

need for a governance structure with intersectoral

farmers. To make agricultural water use more

in the WHO guidelines for Drinking-water Quality.

and integrated planning, development and

efficient, several canals were lined with concrete

While the tubewell water from deeper aquifers

management of water resources to ensure that the

and this has reduced seepage and further

was of good bacteriological quality, the water

needs of at least the most important stakeholder

restricted the availability of water for domestic use.

generally had high contents of iron, salt and

group in the system – farmers – are met.

fluoride. Prevalence of dental fluorosis among
To improve the drinking water supply for the

14-year-old students in the area was

Sources: Boelee and van der Hoek, 2002; van der Hoek

people that settled in newly developed irrigated

43 percent.

et al., 2003; Rajasooriyar, 2003.

above which toxic effects may occur; most chemicals
included in the guidelines’ listing are of health concern
only after extended exposure of years rather than months.
In addition to fluoride and arsenic, the guidelines give
values for a number of other naturally occuring inorganic
substances, including barium, boron, chromium,
manganese, molybdenum, selenium and uranium. In
relation to industrial waste, the guidelines list three
inorganic chemicals (cadmium, cyanide and mercury) and

give values for some twenty organic substances of
importance. Most pollutants originating from agricultural
activities are pesticides and a large part of them (or their
residues) have never been detected in drinking water, while
another substantive part occurs at concentrations well
below those at which toxic effects may occur. Finally, the
guidelines single out the cyanobacterial toxins produced by
many species of Cyanobacteria occurring naturally in lakes,
reservoirs, ponds and slow-flowing rivers.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 2 1

Part 3. Progress towards the MDG Targets on
Water, Sanitation and Health
In 1990, 77 percent of the world’s population used improved drinking water sources. Considerable
progress was made between 1990 and 2002, with about 1.1 billion people gaining access to improved
sources. Global coverage in 2002 reached 83 percent, keeping the world on track to achieve the MDG
target; however, there are great regional disparities. Table 6.1 reviews the water and sanitation targets
in relation to the MDGs.

The region that made the greatest progress towards
sustained access to safe drinking water is South Asia,
where coverage increased from 71 percent to 84 percent
between 1990 and 2002. This jump was fuelled primarily
by increased access to improved water sources in India,
home to over 1 billion people. Coverage in sub-Saharan
Africa increased from 49 percent to 58 percent between
1990 and 2002. Yet this falls short of the progress
needed to achieve the MDG target of 75 percent
coverage by 2015 (see Map 6.1). Nevertheless, there are
a number of success stories in water supply, sanitation
and hygiene in sub-Saharan Africa, some of which are
reported in the Blue Gold Series of the World Bank Water
and Sanitation Programme (see also Chapter 14).13
Global sanitation coverage rose from 49 percent in 1990
to 58 percent in 2002. Still, some 2.6 billion people –
half of the developing world and 2 billion of whom live in
rural areas – live without improved sanitation. Sanitation
coverage in developing countries (49 percent) is only half
that of the developed world (98 percent). Major progress
was made in South Asia between 1990 and 2002. Yet,
more than 60 percent of the region’s population still did
not have access to sanitation in 2002. In sub-Saharan
Africa, sanitation coverage in 2002 was a mere 36
percent, up 4 percent from 1990. Over half of those
without improved sanitation – nearly 1.5 billion people –
live in China and India.
To halve the proportion of people without improved
sanitation, global coverage needs to grow to 75 percent
by 2015, from a starting point of 49 percent in 1990.
However, if the 1990–2002 trend continues, the world
will fall short of the sanitation target by more than half a
billion people. In other words, close to 2.4 billion people
will be without improved sanitation in 2015, almost as
many as there are today. The proportion of the world’s

population with improved sanitation has increased by just
9 percent since 1990, a rate far slower than that required
to meet the MDGs. The widening gap between progress
and target (see Figure 6.1) signals that the world will
meet its sanitation goal only if there is a dramatic
acceleration in the provision of services.

3b. Status of the other MDG targets with
respect to water-related health issues
Some of the indicators for monitoring progress towards
meeting the MDGs are especially relevant in connection with
water-related diseases. WHO and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) are responsible for providing the
UN Statistics Division with relevant international statistics and
analyses of quantitative and time-bound indicators directly
linked to water and sanitation. Data sets and information on
water supply and sanitation coverage are derived from their
Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP). In addition, progress
towards the MDGs is monitored by a number of indicators
that are health-related but that cut across different sectors.
While there is progress in many parts of the world with
respect to targets on child mortality, nutrition and waterrelated infectious diseases, the situation remains extremely
worrisome in sub-Saharan Africa.
Figure 6.1: Projected population without access to
improved sanitation
Current trend
if on track to reach the MDG target
3.0
Population (in billions)

3a. Status of MDG 7: Drinking water and
sanitation targets

New toilet installed
thanks to a water and
sanitation project in Bara
Bari village, Bangladesh

2.7 bn

2.5

2.4 bn

2.0

1.9 bn

1.5
1.0
0.5
0
1990

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2004.

2002

2015

13. For more information, go to
www.wsp.org/08_BlueGold.asp

WWDR Chapter 06c (F)

15/2/06

15:35

Page 222

2 2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Map 6.1: Coverage with improved drinking water sources, 2002

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2004. The boundaries shown on this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of
any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may
not yet be full agreement.

A significant
part of child
mortality rates
can be
attributed to
waterassociated
diseases

■

MDG Target 2: Halve, between 1990 and 2015, the
proportion of people who suffer from hunger

■

One of the two indicators for monitoring progress
towards achieving this target is the prevalence of
underweight children under 5 years of age.
It is unlikely that the MDG target of reducing 1990level prevalence of underweight children by 50 percent
in the year 2015 can be met, mainly due to the
deteriorating situation in Africa (de Onis et al., 2004).
Worldwide, the percentage of underweight children has
been projected to decline from 26.5 percent in 1990 to
17.6 percent in 2015, a decrease of 34 percent.
However, in Africa, the rate was expected to increase
from 24 percent to 26.8 percent. In developing
countries, stunting has fallen progressively from 47
percent in 1980 to 33 percent in 2000, but with very
little, if any, progress in large parts of Africa (de Onis
et al., 2000). Estimated trends indicate that overall
stunting rates in developing countries will continue to
decrease to 16.3 percent in 2020 (de Onis and
Blössner, 2003). The great majority of stunted children
live in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, where only
minor improvements are expected.

MDG Target 5: Reduce by two-thirds, between 1990
and 2015, the under-5 mortality rate
Progress in reducing child mortality is low. No country
in sub-Saharan Africa is making enough progress to
reach this target. The developing world only achieved a
2.5 percent average annual decrease during the 1990s,
well short of the target of 4.2 percent (UNDP, 2003).
A significant part of this mortality rate can be
attributed to water-associated diseases.

■

MDG Target 8: Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse
the incidence of malaria and other major diseases
Throughout sub-Saharan Africa, the decrease in
under-5 mortality from all combined causes, apparent
during the 1970s and 1980s, levelled off in the 1990s,
perhaps partially as a result of increased malaria
mortality (WHO/UNICEF, 2003).

WWDR Chapter 06c (F)

15/2/06

15:35

Page 223

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 2 3

Map 6.2: Coverage with improved sanitation, 2002

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2004. The boundaries shown on this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of
any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may
not yet be full agreement.

2 2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. Indicators
Good indicators must fulfil a number of criteria. They must have a scientific evidence base, be policyrelevant, make it possible to monitor progress towards internationally agreed targets (such as the targets
of the MDGs), and reliable data necessary to compute the indicator values should be available in the public
domain. Several indicators relevant to water and health are well-defined, well-established and backed by
databases with global coverage that are updated at least on an annual basis. Examples include access to
safe drinking water and adequate sanitation, under the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP);
global burden of specific diseases, expressed in deaths and DALYs (WHO’s World Health Reports); child
mortality (UNICEF); and nutritional status (WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition).

4a. Burden of water-related diseases

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Databases on the number of deaths and DALYs by cause
(disease), age, gender and region are maintained by
WHO.14 The major water-related diseases and hazards
whose mortality rate and burden can be monitored in this
way include diarrhoea, malaria, schistosomiasis, lymphatic
filariasis, onchocerciasis, dengue, Japanese encephalitis,
trachoma, intestinal helminth infections (separate for
Ascaris, Trichuris and hookworm), and drowning. Some
water-related diseases of interest are separately accounted
for or not included, notably cholera, typhoid fever and
Guinea worm disease. For these diseases, and for selected
other diseases like diarrhoea and malaria as well, it is still
useful to report the direct measures of disease frequency
(incidence or prevalence) when data are available.
Changing epidemiological patterns, with important
implications for planning appropriate cost-effective
interventions, make it preferable to segregate reported
diarrhoea figures for watery diarrhoea, persistent diarrhoea
and dysentery.
In the context of ongoing mass treatment campaigns,
increasing numbers of baseline prevalence data will be
generated for intestinal helminth infections. Such mass
treatment campaigns will result in immediate prevalence

reductions. Over longer periods of time, the prevalence of
intestinal helminth infections can be an important
indicator for monitoring the impact of improvements in
sanitation, so long as it is possible to control for other
confounding factors, especially treatment. Spatial
differences in prevalences following extended periods of
mass treatment will indicate particular environmental risk
factors linked to sanitation conditions and specific
behaviours.

4b. Access to improved drinking water and
sanitation: Standards and definitions
The question of what exactly constitutes access to safe
drinking water and basic sanitation has been a topic of
debate in recent years. Since the publication of the 2000
coverage estimates for access to improved facilities,
produced by WHO, UNICEF and their Joint Monitoring
Programme (WHO/UNICEF, 2000), in which definitions based
on an expert consensus are presented, several publications
have attempted to provide alternative definitions (see UN
Millennium Project, 2004b).
JMP, responsible for monitoring progress towards the
MDG targets, has used proxy indicators to estimate the
number of people with and without access to safe

Table 6.7: Classification of improved and unimproved drinking water sources
Improved sources of drinking water
Piped water (into dwelling, yard or plot)
Public tap/standpipe
Tubwell/borehole
Protected dug well
Protected spring

Unimproved sources of drinking water
Unprotected dug well
Unprotected spring
Vendor-provided water
Tanker truck water
Surface water (river, stream, dam, lake, pond, canal,
irrigation channel)

Rainwater collection
Bottled water*
*Bottled water is considered an ‘improved’ source of drinking water only where there is a secondary source that is ‘improved’.
14. See www.who.int/evidence/
bod for more information.

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2005; www.wssinfo.org

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 2 5

Table 6.8: Classification of improved and unimproved sanitation facilities
Improved sanitation facilities
Flush/pour flush to: piped sewer system
septic tank
pit (latrine)
Ventilated Improved pit latrine
Pit latrine with slab
Composting toilet

Unimproved sanitation facilities
Public or shared latrine

Specifically, the JMP definition for monitoring the
proportion of the population with access to an improved
drinking water source is as follows:
An improved drinking water source is more likely to
provide safe drinking water than a not-improved
drinking water source, by nature of its construction,
which protects the water source from external
contamination particularly with faecal matter.
The JMP definition for monitoring the proportion of the
population with access to basic sanitation is expressed in
terms of the proportion of a population that uses an
improved sanitation facility, defined as a facility that
hygienically separates excreta from human contact.
Rather than providing an all-inclusive definition of what
constitutes access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation, the categorization into improved and unimproved
facilities was a necessary step to make the available data
comparable between countries and within countries over
time. This allows JMP to monitor progress, using the best
available nationally representative population-based data
obtained from household surveys (see Box 6.7). Chapter 3
gives more details on the accuracy of local surveys
compared to national censuses in urban areas.
JMP estimates do not always reflect whether or not an
improved source provides drinking water of an acceptable

periods of time,
the prevalence

Pit latrine without slab or open pit
Hanging toilet/hanging latrine
Bucket latrine
No facilities (so people use any area, for example, a field)

of intestinal
helminth
infections can

Source: WHO/UNICEF, 2005; www.wssinfo.org

drinking water and basic sanitation. These are the official
indicators for monitoring the MDG targets; these proxy
indicators for access are defined as the type of facility
that people use to obtain their drinking water and meet
their sanitation needs. JMP categorized these facilities as
‘improved’ or ‘unimproved’ (Tables 6.7 and 6.8). People
relying on an improved source as their main source of
drinking water are counted as having access to safe
drinking water, while those using an improved sanitation
facility are counted as having access to sanitation.

Over longer

quality; nor do they take into account accessibility of the
drinking water source (in terms of the distance or time)
or the affordability of drinking water. Issues of
intermittence, reliability or seasonality are not reflected
either. For access to basic sanitation, JMP monitors the
number of people using different types of sanitation
facilities, not taking into account whether or not they
provide privacy and dignity or whether or not they are
used by all household members at all times. Nor does the
outcome of the monitoring process reflect the actual level
of hygiene or cleanliness of the facility. This type of
information is generally not collected at national level.

be an important
indicator for
monitoring the
impact of
improvements in
sanitation...

Nonetheless, using the categorization ‘improved/
unimproved’, JMP has a yardstick for measuring progress
and change over time. It allows a reasonably accurate
estimate of the number of people without access to any
type of improved facility: the have-nots on which the
MDGs focus.
However, access to safe drinking water and sanitation
needs to be better defined. Howard and Bartram (2003)
propose four access categories (see Table 6.9), based on
the relationship between accessibility expressed in time or
distance and the likely quantities of water collected or
used. The four categories are: no access, basic access,
intermediate access and optimal access. Global access, as
monitored by JMP, corresponds to the level of basic access.
The definitions applied by WHO and UNICEF constitute a
pragmatic approach to a complex global monitoring need
and ensure consistency, replicability and a focus on those
without access.
Over the years, a number of comprehensive definitions of
access have been formulated. Such definitions and the
accompanying standards may serve in the planning or
design of new drinking water and sanitation services. The
related indicators are specific, objective and measurable
on an individual, setting-specific basis. However, when

Women and children
collecting water for domestic
use from a public water
fountain, India

2 2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 6.7: USER-BASED VERSUS PROVIDER-BASED DATA
Why are data derived from household surveys

Informal settlements and slums, even those that

based on user data derived from nationally

better than those provided by governments or

are home to hundreds of thousands of people,

representative household surveys and national

water utilities? The latter suffer from variations in

frequently do not appear in official government

censuses. This marks an important shift away

the interpretation of what constitutes access. This

statistics because of questions of tenure or land

from the approach of using data originating

complicates comparability between countries and

ownership. In general, access to such areas

from governments in the 1990s, which became

even within a country over time. Often only those

tends to be poor and when not counted, a

possible after the introduction of the five-

facilities that are constructed under government

significant over-reporting of coverage will result.

yearly Multiple Cluster Indicator Surveys (MICS)

programmes or by water utility companies are

Household surveys usually do survey peri-urban

by UNICEF in sixty-four countries in 1995.

counted. Facilities constructed by households,

areas when they fall into one of the selected

Together with results of the Demographic and

NGOs or the private sector may be partially or

sampling clusters, thus providing a better picture

Health Surveys (DHS), or data from national

totally excluded. Water providers are inclined to

of the actual situation (see also Chapter 3).

censuses and other sources, including WHO’s

report progressively on the number of facilities

Household surveys including national censuses

Water, Sanitation and Health Programme, this

constructed and do not take into account facilities

together provide the most reliable, nationally

provides a large enough knowledge base to

that are not used or that have fallen into disrepair.

representative, comparable data, and they are

calculate coverage estimates supported by

Household surveys, on the contrary, record, at a

available for almost every country in the world.

evidence-based datasets.

given point in time, the facilities people actually

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Since 2000, JMP coverage estimates have been

use – broken facilities are not counted.

15. All of these guidelines are
available online at
www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health/norms/
16. In four volumes: (1) Policy
and regulatory aspects;
(2) Wastewater use in
agriculture; (3) Wastewater
and excreta use in
aquaculture; (4) Excreta
and greywater use in
agriculture. All of these are
available at www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/
norms/

Source: www.wssinfo.org

used as a benchmark to assess globally whether or not
existing services meet the required standards, the
feasibility of measuring such indicators declines sharply
and becomes a bottleneck for the frequent monitoring of
progress and trends.

4c. Water quality

■

Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality

An example is provided by the lack of agreement on what
exactly constitutes domestic and personal hygiene. The
debate is centred around activities like bathing and
clothes washing. Such activities usually require amounts
of water equal to or larger than the amount used for all
other basic personal and domestic water needs combined.
In rural areas, bathing and clothes washing often takes
place at the source or water point or in rivers or streams.
In urban slum areas or during emergency situations, this
might not be possible or desirable due to limited water
availability, privacy concerns or public health concerns of
contaminating the water source. Howard and Bartram
(2003) argue that an improved source should provide
adequate quantities for bathing and clothes washing as
well, but recognize that the quantity per person required
corresponds to the level of intermediate access and not
to the level of basic access. It should be recalled that
basic access is the current global standard for access.
Drinking water for domestic and personal hygiene
therefore does not necessarily include the use for
extensive bathing and clothes washing.

■

Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta
and Greywater16

■

Guidelines for Safe Recreational Water Environments.

The three principal international guidelines on water
quality of relevance to human health are as follows:15

These guidelines are addressed primarily to water and
health regulators, policy-makers and their advisors, to
assist in the development of national standards. For a
long time, in the absence of good epidemiological
studies, guidelines and standards for water-related
hazards were based on the technical feasibility of
providing treatment and took a ‘no or very low’ risk
approach. However, setting targets that are too high can
be counter-productive: they may be ignored if they are
not attainable. National standards should therefore reflect
national conditions, priorities and capacities to improve
water supplies. All the recently developed guidelines are
based on risk-assessment methods. This considers the
risk for disease, not just the presence or absence of
pathogens or chemicals in the water.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 2 7

Table 6.9: Requirements for water service levels and health implications
Service level
No access – quantity
collected often below
5 litres (L) per capita
per day
Basic access – average
quantity unlikely to
exceed 20 L per capita
per day

Access measure
(distance or time)
More than 1,000
metres (m) or 30 minutes
total collection time
Between 100 and 1,000 m
or 5 to 30 minutes total
collection time

Intermediate access –
average quantity about
50 L per capita per day

Water delivered through one
tap on plot or within 100 m or
5 minutes total collection time

Optimal access – average
quantity 100 L per capita
per day

Water supplied through multiple
taps continuously

Needs met
Consumption cannot be
assured
Hygiene not possible (unless
practised at the source)
Consumption should be
assured
Handwashing and basic food
hygiene possible; laundry and
bathing difficult to assure
unless carried out at source
Consumption assured
All basic personal and food
hygiene assured; laundry and
bathing should also be assured
Consumption: all needs met
Hygiene: all needs should
be met

...there is
Level of health
concern
Very high

An important recent event was the publication of the
third edition of the Guidelines for Drinking Water
Quality (WHO, 2004b). These guidelines are widely
accepted in industrialized and developing countries.
Recent developments in microbial risk assessment and
its linkages to risk management are taken into account.
Increased attention is paid to effective preventative
management through a ‘framework for drinking water
safety’, including ‘water safety plans’ (see Box 6.8).
The guidelines pay attention to the adequacy of supply,
which is not only determined by water quality but also
by water quantity, accessibility, affordability and
continuity. The importance of water quality at the point
of use (within the house) is emphasized, while
previously, quality guidelines tended to refer only to the
source of the drinking water.
There is agreement that the best available indicator of
faecal pollution of individual drinking water sources is
Escherichia coli (or thermo-tolerant coliform bacteria).
The presence of E. coli provides conclusive evidence of
recent faecal pollution, but its absence does not
automatically prove that the water is safe. There is
certainly a need for additional indicators, especially for
protozoa such as Cryptosporidium parvum. To date, no
water quality standards regarding Cryptosporidium
oocysts have been established, and the minimum
concentration of oocysts in drinking water leading to

recognition that
a few key

High

chemicals,
notably fluoride
and arsenic,

Low

cause largescale health

Very low

Source: Howard and Bartram, 2003.

Drinking water quality

increasing

clinical illness in healthy individuals has not been
conclusively defined.
Drinking water quality guidelines have always included
permissible levels of chemical substances. Chemicals in
drinking water can be naturally occurring or originate
from pollution by agricultural activities (fertilizer,
pesticides), human settlements and industrial activities.
While the revised WHO guidelines state that microbial
hazards continue to be a priority concern in both
developed and developing countries, there is increasing
recognition that a few key chemicals, notably fluoride
and arsenic, cause large-scale health effects. For a risk
analysis, information from the catchment on naturally
occurring chemicals is essential. If chemicals such as
fluoride or arsenic are present in unusually high
concentrations in rocks, soil or groundwater, there is an
elevated risk for public health. In many countries, the
development of appropriate risk management strategies is
hampered by a lack of information on the presence and
concentrations of chemicals in drinking water and the
lack of information on disease cases. In the case of
chemical hazards with high measurable disease burden,
the target would be to reduce the occurrence of disease
cases. If the disease burden is low, it cannot be directly
measured by public health surveillance systems, and
quantitative risk assessment methods can be applied (see
also Chapter 10).

effects

2 2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 6.8: WATER SAFETY PLANS (WSPs)
To ensure that drinking water is safe, a

drinking water management, which previously

processes and the prevention of contamination

comprehensive strategy that looks at risks and

tended to focus on the detection of

during storage, distribution and handling of

risk management at all stages in water supply

contamination that had already taken place. WSP

drinking water. This is achieved by an

(WHO, 2004b), from catchment to consumer, is

approaches exist for large (piped) supplies and

assessment of the entire drinking-water supply

needed. In the WHO Guidelines for Drinking-

smaller community or household supplies in

chain, effective operational monitoring, and

Water Quality, such approaches are called water

developed and developing countries. The

management plans.

safety plans (WSPs). WSPs have built-in quality

objectives of WSPs are the minimization of

control at each step of the process, from source

contamination of source waters, the reduction or

to tap, and represent a paradigm shift in

removal of contamination through treatment

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Wastewater use in agriculture and aquaculture
With the increasing scarcity of freshwater resources
available to agriculture, the use of urban wastewater in
agriculture will increase, especially in arid and semi-arid
regions. Wastewater is often the only reliable source of
water for farmers in peri-urban areas, and it is widely
used in urban and peri-urban areas, in both treated and
untreated forms. A nationwide survey in Pakistan showed
that an estimated 25 percent of all vegetables grown in
the country are irrigated with untreated urban
wastewater and that these vegetables, cultivated close
to the urban markets, were considerably cheaper than
the vegetables imported from different regions of
Pakistan (Ensink et al., 2004). Likewise, 60 percent of
the vegetables consumed in Dakar, Senegal are grown
with a mixture of groundwater and untreated wastewater
within the city limits (Faruqui et al., 2004). In this
context, the use of wastewater for peri-urban agriculture
provides an opportunity and a resource for livelihood
generation.
The major challenge is to optimize the benefits of
wastewater as a resource (both the water and the
nutrients it contains) and to minimize the negative
impacts on human health. There is sufficient
epidemiological evidence that infection with intestinal
helminths poses the major human health risk associated
with the agricultural use of untreated urban wastewater.
In those countries where sewage and excreta are used to
feed fish, there are important risks for infection with
flukes. Foodborne trematode (fluke) infections are a
serious and growing public health problem, with an
estimated 40 million people affected worldwide.
Transmission to humans occurs mostly via consumption
of raw freshwater fish and aquatic plants. A recent
analysis indicates that residents in endemic areas living

Source: WHO, 2005; Davison et al., 2005.

close to freshwater bodies more than double their risk of
infection, and it is speculated that the exponential
growth of aquaculture is the major contributing factor to
this emerging disease trend (Keiser and Utzinger, 2005).
Mitigating health risks while maximizing benefits requires
holistic approaches that involve all stakeholders in a process
to enhance knowledge sharing, promote realistic measures
for hygiene and sanitation improvement, generate income,
produce food for better livelihoods and sustain the
strengthening of water and sanitation services at household
and community levels.
For the protection of public health in this context, WHO has
developed updated Guidelines for the Safe Use of
Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater (WHO, 2006a–d). They
define an acceptable and realistic level of public health
protection, which can be achieved through a combination of
setting microbial water quality targets and implementing
health protection measures, such as crop restriction,
application techniques and irrigation timing. This approach
is flexible and is applicable to both industrialized and lessdeveloped countries. Countries can choose to meet the
health target level by wastewater treatment alone, or
through a combination of partial wastewater treatment and
additional health protection measures.
In adopting wastewater use guidelines for national
standards, policy-makers should consider what is feasible
and appropriate in the context of their national situation.
They should use a risk-benefit approach that carefully
weighs the benefits to household food security, nutrition
and local economic development against possible negative
health impacts. The revised guidelines call for a progressive
implementation of measures and incremental improvements
in the public health situation.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 2 9

4d. Child mortality
Children under the age of 5 are the most affected by
poor water supply and sanitation. Diarrhoea is one of the
directly preventable causes of under-5 mortality. Child
mortality is the result of a complex web of determinants
at many levels. The fundamental determinant is poverty,
and an underlying determinant is under-nutrition. The
under-5 mortality rate has become a key indicator of
health and social development. It can be seen as a crosscutting indicator for several of the challenge areas and
for achieving the MDG targets.
There is sufficient evidence that improvements in water
supply, sanitation and hygiene result in fewer cases of
diarrhoea and lower overall child mortality. To obtain the
maximum possible reduction in child mortality, these
improvements would have to be combined, however, with
other preventive interventions (breastfeeding, vitamin A
supplementation) and treatment interventions (oral
rehydration therapy and zinc) (Jones et al., 2003). This
combination of interventions could save more than 1.8
million children under the age of 5 each year, which is 88
percent of the annual under-5 mortality due to
diarrhoea.17
The infant mortality rate is a less suitable indicator than
the under-five mortality rate in the context of waterrelated diseases, since only a small proportion of deaths in
the neonatal period (first twenty-eight days of life) can be
attributed to water-related diseases (Black et al., 2003). In
the first six months of life, children are, to some extent,
protected against diarrhoea (if they are being breastfed)
and malaria. It is only towards the end of the first year of

life that infectious diseases due to poor water, sanitation
and hygiene take their huge toll on children’s health.

4e. Nutritional status
Nutritional status is probably the single most informative
indicator of the overall health of a population (see also
Chapter 7). For evaluating the impact of water supply and
sanitation interventions, nutritional status is as important
and appropriate a measure as the incidence of diarrhoeal
disease. Anthropometric measurements are well defined,
and are easily and inexpensively performed. Data on
childhood under-nutrition are available from the WHO
Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition,18
which is based on nationally representative anthropometric
surveys. It is a good example of international collaboration
in standardizing indicators and data collection systems (de
Onis and Blössner, 2003).
One of the indicators for monitoring progress towards the
MDG targets is the prevalence of underweight children
under 5 years of age. Underweight (low weight-for-age)
reflects the effects of acute as well as chronic undernutrition. Weight-for-age is a composite indicator of
height-for-age and weight-for-height, which makes its
interpretation difficult. Stunting (low height-for-age)
reflects chronic under-nutrition and is an indicator of the
cumulative effects of standard of living, women’s
educational level, access to food, access to water supply
and sanitation, and burden of infectious diseases.
Stunting is a good indicator to monitor the long-term
impact of improvements in water supply, sanitation and
hygine, provided it is possible to correct for confounding
variables.

Part 5. Comparative Risk Assessment
Most water-related diseases have multiple risk factors. This raises a number of questions: What part of
the burden of disease is attributable to inadequate water supply and sanitation? What would be the
health gains of improvements in water supply and sanitation? Similar questions may be posed for water
management in agriculture: What burden of disease can be attributed to poor water management, and
what are the health benefits of improved water management?
To answer these questions, epidemiological measurements
are needed that quantify the public health relevance of
important risk factors. The population-attributable risk
provides a measure of the amount of disease in the whole
population, which is attributable to a certain level of exposure
(risk to health), assuming that the association between

exposure and the disease is one of cause-and-effect. The
known attributable risks for a disease often add up to more
than 100 percent, because some risk factors act through
other more proximal factors, such as under-nutrition. The
potential impact fraction expresses the proportion of disease
that could be eliminated by reducing exposure. Risk

17. Child mortality data are
available online from UNICEF
at www.childinfo.org/cmr/
revis/db2.htm
18. Available online at
www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/

2 3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...washing
hands with soap
can reduce the
risk of
diarrhoeal
diseases by 42
to 47 percent,
and the
promotion of
handwashing

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

might save a
million lives per
year

assessment methods using these measures were the subject
of the World Health Report 2002 (WHO, 2002b), which
stated that approximately 3.1 percent of annual deaths (1.7
million) and 3.7 percent of DALYs (54.2 million) worldwide are
attributable to unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene. The
decrease in the burden of disease due to poor water,
sanitation and hygiene, from 6.8 percent in 1990 to 3.7
percent in 2000, is partly due to a decline in mortality
associated with global diarrhoeal disease.
The Comparative Risk Assessment (CRA) module of the
Global Burden of Disease study aims to assess risk
factors in a unified framework. It provides a vision of
potential gains in population health by reducing exposure
to a risk factor or a group of risk factors. This has
provided sufficient evidence that in the poorest regions
of the world, unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene are
major contributors to loss of healthy life, expressed in
DALYs (Ezzati et al., 2002). Globally, 88 percent of DALYs
lost due to diarrhoea can be attributed to unsafe water,
poor sanitation and lack of hygiene, while 92 to 94
percent of DALYs lost due to diarrhoea can be
attributable to the joint effects of unsafe water,
sanitation and hygiene; underweight; vitamin A
deficiency; and zinc deficiency (Ezzati et al., 2003).
Further analysis by the CRA Collaborating Group in multiple
age and exposure categories, or along a continuum of
exposures, showed that globally, a considerable proportion
of the disease burden attributable to major risk factors
occurred among those with only moderately raised risk
levels, not the extremes (Rodgers et al., 2004). This is
consistent with the fundamental axiom in disease prevention
across risk factors: ‘A large number of people exposed to a
small risk may generate many more cases than a small
number exposed to high risk’ (Rose, 1992). It follows that
population-based strategies that seek to shift the whole

distribution of risk factors have the potential to substantially
reduce total disease burden, possibly over long time periods
if the interventions alter the underlying risk behaviours or
their socio-economic causes (Rodgers et al., 2004).
The relative importance of the availability of drinking
water, quality of drinking water, sanitation and hygiene
behaviour for the occurrence of diarrhoeal diseases
continues to be a subject of discussion. Many of the viral,
bacterial and protozoan pathogens that cause diarrhoea
can be transmitted through the ingestion of contaminated
water. Accordingly, water supply utilities and programmes
aim to remove these pathogens before the drinking water
is provided to consumers. The importance of drinking
water quality for the transmission of diarrhoeal diseases
was challenged when several reviews in the 1980s and
1990s showed that increasing the quantity of water
available for personal and domestic hygiene and ensuring
the safe disposal of excreta led to greater reductions in
diarrhoeal morbidity than improving drinking water quality
(Esrey et al., 1991). Safe excreta disposal and
handwashing after defecation would stop the transmission
by preventing faecal pathogens from getting into the
environment. If these primary barriers were in place, then
secondary barriers such as removing faecal pathogens
from drinking water would be less important. As the
debate continues and setting-specific case studies tip the
balance in one direction or the other, one thing is clear
improvements in access to safe water will only provide real
health benefits if sanitation facilities are improved at the
same time. In this respect, it is alarming that global
sanitation coverage has only increased from 49 percent in
1990 to 58 percent in 2002, lagging behind the
successful increase in global coverage for access to safe
drinking water, which is now 83 percent and on track to
meet the 2015 MDG target (WHO/UNICEF, 2004).

BOX 6.9: BENEFITS OF IMPROVED SANITATION
The best way to prevent faecal-orally transmitted

Improved sanitation has important additional

the main factors preventing girls from attending

diseases such as diarrhoea is the sanitary

benefits, especially to women. In many cultures,

school, particularly when menstruating. In

disposal of human faeces in pit latrines or other

the only time when women or girls can defecate,

Bangladesh, a gender-sensitive school sanitation

improved sanitation facilities. Improved

if they have no latrine, is after dark. The walk to

programme increased girls’ enrolment by

sanitation is also the only long-term sustainable

the defecation field, often in the dark, is when

11 percent.

option for controlling intestinal worms and

women run the greatest risk of sexual

schistosomiasis.

harassment and assault. The lack of adequate,

Source: www.lboro.ac.uk/well/resources/

separate sanitary facilities in schools is one of

fact-sheets/fact-sheets-htm/wps.htm

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 3 1

Based on current evidence, washing hands with soap can
reduce the risk of diarrhoeal diseases by 42 to 47
percent, and the promotion of handwashing might save a
million lives per year (Curtis and Cairncross, 2003).
Handwashing promotion should become an intervention
of choice. Hygiene depends on the quantity of water that
people have available, and one has to realize that in
many areas, handwashing after defecation or before
preparing food seems like a luxury when the water has to
be fetched from a water point far away.
Recently, there has been increased attention to the fact
that drinking water, even if it is of good quality, can
become contaminated between the point of collection and
the home, and in the domestic environment, when children
dip their faecally polluted hands in a household water
container, for example. The water quality of drinking water
sources might not be associated with the occurrence of
diarrhoea (Jensen et al., 2004), because it does not reflect
the water quality at the point of use. There is increasing
evidence that simple, low-cost interventions at the
household and community level are capable of improving
the microbial quality of domestically stored water and of
reducing the associated risks of diarrhoeal disease and
death (Clasen and Cairncross, 2004; Sobsey, 2002). This has
led to the creation of the WHO-coordinated International

Network to Promote Household Water Treatment and Safe
Storage, providing a framework for global collaboration of
UN and bilateral agencies, governments, NGOs, research
institutions and the private sector committed to improve
household water management as a component in water,
sanitation and hygiene programmes.
Epidemiological studies have established a causal
relationship between malnutrition and diarrhoea.
Malnourished children experience higher risks of mortality
associated with diarrhoea (Rice et al., 2000). This is
especially true for persistent diarrhoea and dysentery
that now account for the majority of deaths related to
diarrhoea in the developing world. About 61 percent of
deaths due to diarrhoea in young children are attributable
to underweight (low weight-for-age) (Caulfield et al.,
2004). About 15 percent of the global disease burden
can be attributed to the joint effects of childhood and
maternal underweight or micronutrient deficiencies. In
terms of DALYs, in 1990, under-nutrition was the single
leading global cause of health loss, estimated at 140
million DALYs (9.5 percent of total) attributable to
underweight (Ezzati et al., 2002). Although the
prevalence of underweight has decreased in most regions
of the world, it has increased in sub-Saharan Africa.

Part 6. Governance
Challenges with respect to water availability, water quality and sanitation are intertwined with
challenges on food security, urbanization and environmental degradation. They stand in the way of
poverty reduction and sustainable development. Providing for effective and sustainable water supply
and sanitation services requires adequate governance structures and includes a commitment to good
governance. In certain countries, broad policy and institutional constraints are greater obstacles than
resource and technological constraints. Often, policy and institutional reforms are needed, and these
would have to: (1) balance the competition for water between different uses and users; (2) implement a
genuinely integrated approach to water resources management; and (3) establish effective governance
institutions and institutional arrangements conducive to such an integrated management approach.

6a. Economic evaluation of interventions
Global disease control priorities should be based on the
global burden of disease and the availability of costeffective interventions. In the long term, many
environmental health interventions have proved to be
cost-effective compared to medical interventions. Water
connections in rural areas have been estimated to cost US
$35 per DALY saved, hygiene behaviour change US $20

per DALY saved, and malaria control US $35–75 per DALY
saved (Listorti and Doumani, 2001).
Hutton (2002) was commissioned by WHO to test a number
of intervention scenarios and concluded that cost-benefit
ratio is high when all benefits are included, standing at an
economic benefit of around US $3 to 6 per US $1 invested
for most regions and for most interventions. Time saving

Washing hands
with soap can
reduce the risk
of diarrhoeal
diseases by 42
to 47 percent

2 3 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...estimated
benefits of
US $3 to 34 per
US $1 invested
if the water and
sanitation MDG
targets were

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

achieved...

was found to be an important component in the overall
benefits from water and sanitation improvements. When
valued in monetary terms, using the minimum wage as a
proxy for annual time savings, such savings outweigh the
annual costs of the interventions.
The scenario scoring highest in actually reducing the
burden of water-related disease to nearly zero is that
where universal access to piped water and sewerage
connections is provided, with an estimated cost of US $850
to 7,800 per DALY averted (Evans et al., 2004; Rijsberman,
2004). This is above income levels in developing countries.
In the scenario that provides for low-cost technologies
(standpipes and latrines, as opposed to piped water and
sewerage connections to individual homes), the cost would
improve to US $280 to 2,600 per DALY averted, if
disinfection at the point of use is added.
A further analysis considering disease burden averted,
costs to the health services and to individual households
reduced, and opportunity costs (attending ill family
members, fetching water) avoided arrived at estimated
benefits of US $3 to 34 per US $1 invested if the water
and sanitation MDG targets were achieved, with, on the
whole, benefits from sanitation investments being greater
than those from water interventions. In aggregate, the
total annual economic benefits of meeting the MDG
targets on water supply and sanitation accrue to US $84
billion (Hutton and Haller, 2004). While global estimates
for the additional annual investment to meet the MDG
water and sanitation targets all arrive at about US $11
billion, meeting the targets translates into 322 million

working days per year gained at a value of US $750
million (SIWI/WHO, 2005).
Based on a study in Burkina Faso, the cost of
implementing a large-scale hygiene promotion programme
was estimated at US $26.9 per case of diarrhoea averted
(Borghi et al., 2002). Cost-effectiveness of a latrine
revision programme in Kabul, Afghanistan ranged from US
$1,800 to 4,100 per death due to diarrhoea averted,
depending on age and payer perspective (Meddings
et al., 2004). Fattal et al. (2004) estimated the cost of
treating raw sewage used for direct irrigation to meet the
WHO 1989 norms for safe irrigation of vegetables eaten
raw with untreated wastewater at about US $125 per
case of disease prevented.

6b. Water scarcity: Bridging the gaps
between the different sectors
While the looming freshwater crisis is getting a lot of
attention from water resources policy- and decision-makers,
the provision of domestic water to rural populations is often
not perceived as a problem in this context. Policy
documents on integrated water resources management
(IWRM), whether from governments or donor organizations,
give first priority to water supply for agricultural production
purposes in water allocation decisions; the domestic uses
are only a small fraction of the total amount of freshwater
utilized in a country. For example, the agriculture sector of
the South Asian region receives about 96 percent of the
total diversions. Even in sub-Saharan Africa, with a much
less developed irrigation infrastructure than Asia, 84 percent
of total water diversions is used in agriculture.

BOX 6.10: DOMESTIC USE OF IRRIGATION WATER
Millions of people around the world rely on

requirements and not on domestic water needs.

nutritional status of children. It was concluded

surface irrigation water for most of their

Therefore, when decisions for water allocation

that irrigation water management has a clear

domestic needs. This is especially true of

are made, domestic uses are rarely taken into

impact on human health and that bridging the

irrigation communities living in areas with low

account. Also, with the looming freshwater

gap between the irrigation and domestic water

rainfall, under-developed drinking water supply

crises, there is increasing pressure on the

supply sectors could provide great health benefits

systems, and in regions with low groundwater

irrigation sector to make water use in agriculture

by taking into account the domestic water

tables or unusable groundwater, due to high

more efficient. In this process, the non-

availability when managing irrigation water. In

concentrations of salt or hazardous chemicals. In

agricultural uses of irrigation water need to be

the same study, it was found that using irrigation

such circumstances, the way in which irrigation

considered.

seepage water as a safe source for domestic
supplies was a possible option.

water is managed has a tremendous bearing on
the health of the populations living in these

Studies in Punjab, Pakistan have documented the

areas. Unfortunately, irrigation water

links between availability of irrigation water for

management is based entirely on crop

domestic use and its impact on diarrhoea and the

Source: Van der Hoek et al., 2001b; 2002a, b.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 3 3

The difference between credible high and low estimates
of the water globally required for agriculture in 2025 is in
the order of 600 cubic kilometres (km3) – more than is
estimated to be required for all domestic uses. This has
created a widely prevalent notion that a small diversion
from the irrigation sector could fulfil the demands of a
growing population for domestic water supply. In reality,
this reallocation of water between sectors can be very
difficult, and truly integrated water management is
constrained by the traditional sectoral thinking and
priorities set by professionals in the various disciplines
and the existing power structure. The main concern of
public health officials and researchers is the increasing
deterioration of water quality due to industrial and urban
waste, agricultural runoff and insufficient investments in
the domestic water supply infrastructure.
This global concern for water quality is, to a large extent,
a reflection of the very high quality standards
traditionally imposed on drinking water by institutions and
professionals in industrialized countries. On the other
hand, the managers of water for agricultural production
see their responsibilities largely confined to the provision
of water in time and space in accordance with the
cropping cycle requirements. Few irrigation managers
would see it as part of their mandate to supply water for
domestic use. To water planners, domestic uses in rural
areas concern only a small fraction of the total amount of
freshwater utilized and are therefore easily overlooked.
This may lead to the situation that high investments have
been made to mobilize freshwater into an area, without
considering other uses than irrigation.

6c. Multiple uses of water
In many areas, the most readily available surface water is
from irrigation canals and reservoirs. It has not been
sufficiently recognized that apart from irrigating crops,
irrigation water is used for many other purposes,
including drinking, cooking, livestock rearing, aquaculture
and wildlife. Washing clothes and bathing are probably
the most frequently observed domestic uses of irrigation
systems throughout the world. When there is a poor
supply of domestic water from underground sources, but
abundant supply for agricultural production, irrigation
water from canals and reservoirs can be the only source
of water for domestic use. In a few cases, such uses have
been considered in the design of irrigation systems, but
as a general rule, designers and engineers have tended
to focus exclusively on water use in crop production. On
the other hand, providers of domestic water rarely

consider the usage of irrigation water as an option,
because the conventional strategy has been to utilize
groundwater, not surface water for domestic purposes.
As a result, the non-agricultural household uses of
irrigation water have neither been systematically
documented, nor have the possibilities they offer been
seriously explored. A large gap therefore remains
between what happens in irrigation schemes (what
people do) and what is taken into account in water
resources planning and policies. With increasing focus on
improved water use efficiency within irrigation systems,
there is a risk that recognized uses of water (crop
irrigation) will be prioritized to the detriment of other
valuable but non-recognized uses, such as domestic
needs (see Box 6.6 for an example in Sri Lanka). There is
a critical need, therefore, to understand the health
dimensions of the multiple uses of irrigation water, the
determinants of its use, the realistic alternatives, and the
consequences of these uses in order to promote informed
water policy formulation (see Box 6.10).

6d. Falling groundwater levels
The over exploitation of groundwater for agricultural
and industrial purposes renders the availability of
shallow groundwater for drinking and domestic purposes
increasingly problematic. In some of the major
breadbaskets of Asia, such as the Punjab in India and
the North China Plain, water tables are falling 2 to 3
metres a year. The wealthier farmers can continue to
drill deeper tubewells with larger, more expensive
pumps, but poor farmers are unable to do so. The
problem of falling groundwater levels is now seen by all
stakeholders as a threat to food security. What has
received less attention is that it also causes the shallow
drinking water wells of poor communities to run dry.
Deepening these wells is very costly and beyond the
resources of the poor. In coastal areas such as the State
of Gujarat, India, over-pumping causes salt water to
invade freshwater aquifers, making them unsuitable for
drinking. Over-pumping has also been linked to the
contamination of drinking water with arsenic. Clearly,
pumping groundwater has become a key policy issue
that can only be dealt with in the context of IWRM.

6e. Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
One of the main instruments for national governments in
their attempts to reduce poverty are the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs), which give clarity and
direction to all the development work in a country. These

The main
concern of
public health
officials and
researchers is
the increasing
deterioration of
water quality
due to industrial
and urban
waste...

2 3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

BOX 6.11: SUCCESSFUL WATER SUPPLY IN PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA
Cambodia is one of the poorest countries in

war, poor management and lack of maintenance.

2004, it is predicted that the water supply

South-East Asia. It is still recovering from

This problem has been worsened by the rapid

capacity in the city will have increased to

decades of conflict, and all sectors, including the

growth of the urban population. However,

235,000 cubic metres per day. This is now

health sector, require reconstruction. The life of

successful rehabilitation projects have taken

considered a success story for which the PPWSA

most people in Cambodia is still defined by

place with foreign aid and technical assistance.

was awarded the Water Prize of the Asian

poverty and a very high burden of disease with

Since 1993, the Phnom Penh Water Supply

Development Bank.

a government health care system that is ill-

Authority (PPWSA) has increased its distribution

equipped to deal with a range of health

network from serving 40 percent of the Phnom

Charging for water and the relative roles of

problems. Access to improved drinking water

Penh population to over 80 percent. Non-

public versus private management are

sources (estimated at 34 percent in 2002) is

revenue water – the result of leaks,

controversial issues (see Chapters 2 and 12).

extremely low, even by developing country

mismeasurement, illegal connections and illegal

Phnom Penh provides a rare example of an

standards (WHO/UNICEF, 2004). In the capital,

sales – has been reduced to 22 percent (from

efficient water-delivery system in a large city run

Phnom Penh, the water supply and drainage

72 percent) and collections are at almost 99

by a public body.

systems have deteriorated over the years due to

percent with full cost recovery achieved. By mid-

Source: www.adb.org/Documents/News/2004/nr2004012.asp.

are country-owned development strategies demanded by
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund of
countries that want to be eligible for loans. Reducing an
excessively-high disease burden will have a positive
economic impact, and strategies on communicable disease
control and child health can be seen as evidence of a
pro-poor approach. A review of twenty-one PRSPs found
that all of them included strategies on communicable
disease control, child health and water and sanitation
improvement (WHO, 2004c). However, the emphasis was

overwhelmingly on government delivery of health services
to reach health goals without examination of the role of
non-government providers and other sectors.
Furthermore, quantifiable targets were mostly not
mentioned, making it difficult to link PRSP indicators with
the MDGs. One of the overarching criticisms of the PRSPs
from NGO sources has been that participation – the
widely proclaimed centrepiece of national ownership of
the PRSPs – is poorly implemented (UN Millennium
Project, 2004a).

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 3 5

Part 7. Water for Life: Making it Happen
With respect to human health, this second edition of the World Water Development Report consolidates
our new and updated insights into the diverse nature and broad scope of conditions where the
development, management and use of water resources are associated with community health status.
The concept of burden of disease, expressed in Disability-Adjusted Life Years lost, has strengthened its
position as a universal indicator of that status with valid applications in economic evaluation as well as
development planning. New tools have also become available to better estimate the costs and benefits
of different options, particularly for improving access to drinking water and sanitation.
The basic driving forces of the water–health nexus have
not changed in nature and include population expansion,
rapid urbanization, globalization and increasing scarcity of
good-quality freshwater resources. At the global policy
level, the MDGs are exerting an increasingly marked
pressure on both thinking about and acting on waterhealth issues; newly emerging economic realities
(particularly the rapid developments in China and India)
further modulate these pressures.
Positive and negative trends can be distinguished. The
positive trends include:
■

Global progress towards achieving the MDG target on
drinking water.

■

A significant reduction in mortality due to childhood
diarrhoea.

■

The availability of good indicators for monitoring
progress towards achieving health-related MDG targets
at the global and regional level.

■

A significant evolution in approaches to managing the
quality of drinking water, recreational waters and
wastewater, from a technical no-risk concept to a
comprehensive system of risk assessment and
management.

■

Greater recognition of health impact assessment as the
critical starting point for a functional incorporation of
human health considerations, especially into integrated
water resources development and management.

Together, these trends will influence and improve the
governance of water and health issues in the coming
years. Authorities now can apply adaptive management
and ensure optimal solutions in local settings. Decisionmaking will have a stronger evidence base, even though

the indicators used need further development and
refinement. An example of this is provided by the new
vision on the safe use of wastewater, excreta and
greywater in agriculture and aquaculture that assesses
and manages health risks and that balances health costs
and benefits rather than applying rigid water quality
standards. In many parts of the world rigid standard
setting has proved to be neither feasible nor enforceable,
whereas through water safety plans, through safe
household water management and storage or through
safe use of wastewater, governments can achieve solid
and sustainable progress.
On the downside, the following constraints and
bottlenecks can be observed:
■

Lack of progress towards achieving the MDG sanitation
target left 2.6 billion people without access to
improved sanitation at the end of 2002.

■

The significant increase in the absolute number of
people without access to an improved drinking water
source and improved sanitation, in both urban and
rural areas, since 1990 as exclusively experienced in
sub-Saharan Africa.

■

The problematic health situation (with no signs of
improvement) in sub-Saharan Africa, as reflected in
practically all indicators, and in particular by the
increasing malaria burden.

■

Lack of progress in the implementation of the IWRM
concept specifically, and in the realization of
intersectoral action for health in general.

■

An inadequate evidence base needed to advocate for
increased investment in urban sewage treatment,
resulting from a lack of indicators and mechanisms for
monitoring the sewerage discharge and the added
burden of disease for people downstream.

Water taps provided by
relief organizations at the
Virginia Newport high
school in Monrovia,
Liberia, where some of
the 25,000 internallydisplaced people had
taken refuge

2 3 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Despite the general acceptance of the Integrated Water
Resources Management concept, the different water use
sectors still by and large fail to coordinate their planning
and to collaborate at the implementation phase, with a
range of predictable, and therefore in many cases
preventable, adverse consequences for human health. Like
the more generic concept of intersectoral collaboration,
IWRM is embraced by all, but funded by few. The
innovative proposals of the World Commission on Dams for
improved planning procedures and best practice in
implementation, in the broader governance context (of
generic value to all water resources development and
transferable to water and health issues), have received
insufficient follow-up and seem all but forgotten.

meeting the MDG drinking water and sanitation targets
especially in rural areas that still lag far behind urban
areas, but also in peri-urban and slum areas that are
likely to absorb most of the urban population increase
in the coming decade.
■

Increase investments in sanitation coverage and
improvement worldwide, ensuring a progressively
expanding portion for sewerage and proper
maintenance.

■

Increase investments for meeting the MDG drinking
water and sanitation targets in sub-Saharan Africa.

■

Refine the correlations between water indicators and
the indicators for childhood illness/mortality and
nutritional status, the importance for accelerated
access to safe water and adequate sanitation, and
better Integrated Water Resources Management
(IWRM) practices.

■

Promote intervention studies that provide scientific
information and help strengthen the evidence base on
the effectiveness of environmental management
methods for control of water-associated vector-borne
diseases, and develop a toolkit for environmental
managers in this area.

■

Make the multiple uses and multiple users of water the
starting point of planning, developing and managing
water resources at the river basin level, and promote
the principle of subsidiarity in the governance of water
resources.

■

Introduce the use of available tools for estimating
costs and benefits of different drinking water and
sanitation options initially at the national and
subsequently at lower levels of governance.

Inadequate funding also continues to bog down efforts to
achieve the sanitation target. While there are several factors
to which this can be attributed, the continued lagging
behind of support for sanitation projects (as compared to
drinking water projects) deserves special mention.
Growing challenges in the health sector range from drug
resistance in important parasitic and bacterial pathogens
to newly emerging diseases (with SARS and the H1N5
avian influenza virus as recent examples) underscore the
need for water resources development, management and
use to take human health into consideration in a far more
comprehensive and integrated manner.
The following recommendations aim to strengthen the
positive trends and help counter the constraints:
■

Re-focus a much more broadly supported programme
of development aid and technical assistance on

Signs of the times: a
camel drinking bottled
water in Petra, Jordan

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 3 7

References and Websites
Arnesen, T. and Kapiriri, L. 2004. Can the value choices in

De Silva, N. R., Brooker, S., Hotez, P. J., Montresor, A., Engels,

DALYs influence global priority-setting? Health Policy, Vol.

D. and Savioli, L. 2003. Soil-transmitted helminth

70, pp. 137–49.

infections: updating the global picture. Trends in

Black, R. E., Morris, S. S. and Bryce, J. 2003. Where and why
are 10 million children dying each year? Lancet, Vol. 361,
pp. 2226–34.
Blumenthal, U. J., Mara, D. D., Peasey, A., Ruiz-Palacios, G.

Parasitology, Vol 19, pp 547–51.
Emerson, P. M., Lindsay, S. W., Alexander, N., Bah, M., Dibba,
S. M., Faal, H. B., Lowe, K. O., McAdam, K. P., Ratcliffe,
A. A., Walraven, G. E. and Bailey, R. L. 2004. Role of flies

and Stott, R. 2000. Guidelines for the microbiological

and provision of latrines in trachoma control: cluster-

quality of treated wastewater used in agriculture:

randomised controlled trial. Lancet, Vol. 363, pp. 1093–8.

recommendations for revising WHO guidelines. Bulletin of
the World Health Organization, Vol. 78, pp. 1104–16.
Boelee, E. and van der Hoek, W. 2002. Impact of irrigation on
drinking water availability in Sri Lanka / Impact de
l’irrigation sur la disponibilité de l’eau potable au Sri

Engels, D. and Chitsulo, L. 2003. Schistosomiasis. D. W. T.

Ensink, J. H. J., Mahmood, T., van der Hoek, W. and Raschid-

International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage.

one? Water Policy, Vol. 6, pp. 197–206.

Caulfield, L. E., de Onis, M., Blössner, M. and Black, R. E. 2004.
Undernutrition as an underlying cause of child deaths
associated with diarrhea, pneumonia, malaria, and measles.
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, Vol. 80, pp. 193–8.
Chan, M. S. 1997. The global burden of intestinal nematode
infections – Fifty years on. Parasitology Today, Vol. 13,
pp. 438–43.
Clasen, T. F. and Cairncross, S. 2004. Household water
management: refining the dominant paradigm. Tropical
Medicine and International Health, Vol. 9, pp. 187–91.
Crompton, D. W. T., Engels, D., Montresor, A., Neira M. P. and
Savioli, L. 2003. Action starts now to control disease due
to schistosomiasis and soil-transmitted helminthiasis. Acta
Tropica, Vol. 86, pp. 121–4.
Crump, J. A., Luby, S. P. and Mintz, E. D. 2004. The global
burden of typhoid fever. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, Vol. 82, pp. 346–53.
Curtis, V. and Cairncross, S. 2003. Effect of washing hands with
soap on diarrhoea risk in the community: a systematic
review. Lancet Infectious Diseases, Vol. 3, pp. 275–81.
Davison, A., Howard, G., Stevens, M., Callan, P., Fewtrell, L.,
Deere, D. and Bartram, J. 2005. Water Safety Plans:
Managing Drinking-water Quality from Catchment to
Consumer. Geneva, WHO.
De Onis, M. and Blössner, M. 2003. The World Health

WHO.
Hutton, G. 2002. Evaluation of the Global Non-Health Costs
and Benefits of Water and Sanitation Interventions.
Basel, Swiss Tropical Institute.
Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of costs and
global level. Document WHO/SDE/WSH/04.04. Geneva,

Infections. Geneva, WHO.

use in Pakistan: An obscure activity or a vitally important

pp. 960–9.

Service Level and Health. WHO/SDE/WSH/03.02. Geneva,

benefits of water and sanitation improvements at the

Sally, L. 2004. A nationwide assessment of wastewater

Faso. Tropical Medicine and International Health, Vol. 7,

Health Perspectives, Vol. 112, pp. 1371–4.
Howard, G. and Bartram, J. 2003. Domestic Water Quantity,

(eds) 2004. Controlling Disease due to Helminth

Drainage, 21–28 July, Montreal, Canada. Q. 51, R. 5.04.

hygiene promotion cost-effective? A case study in Burkina

and global burden of disease: a discussion. Environmental

Crompton, A. Montresor, M. C. Nesheim and L. Savioli

Lanka. ICID-CIID 18th Congress on Irrigation and

Borghi, J., Guinness, L., Ouedraogo, J. and Curtis, V. 2002. Is

Fewtrell, L. 2004. Drinking-water nitrate, methemoglobinemia,

Erlanger, T. E., Keiser, J., Caldas de Castro, M., Bos, R., Singer,

WHO.
Ijumba, J. N. and Lindsay S. W. 2001. Impact of irrigation on
malaria in Africa: Paddies paradox. Medical and Veterinary
Entomology, Vol. 15, pp. 1–11.
Jensen, P.K., Jayasinghe, G., van der Hoek, W., Cairncross, S.
and Dalsgaard, A. 2004. Is there an association between

B. H., Tanner, M. and Utzinger, J. 2005. Effect of water

bacteriological drinking water quality and childhood

resource development and management on lymphatic

diarrhoea in developing countries? Tropical Medicine and

filariasis, and estimates of populations at risk. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 73(3):
523–33.
Esrey, S. A., Potash, J. B., Roberts, L. and Shiff, C. 1991.
Effects of improved water supply and sanitation on
ascariasis, diarrhoea, dracunculiasis, hookworm infection,
schistosomiasis, and trachoma. Bulletin of the World
Health Organization, Vol. 69, pp. 609–21.
Evans, B., Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Closing the

International Health, Vol. 9, pp. 1210–15.
Jones, G., Steketee, R. W., Black, R. E., Bhutta, Z. A., Morris, S.
S., and Bellagio Child Survival Study Group. 2003. How
many child deaths can we prevent this year? Lancet, Vol.
362, pp. 65–71.
Kay, B.H. and Nam, Vu Sinh, 2005. New strategy against
Aedes aegypti in Viet Nam. Lancet, Vol. 365, pp. 613–17.
Keiser, J., Caldas de Castro, M., Maltese, M. F., Bos, R., Tanner,
M., Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005a. The effect of

sanitation gap – the case for better public funding of

irrigation and large dams on the burden of malaria on

sanitation and hygiene. Background paper for the

global and regional scale. American Journal of Tropical

Roundtable on Sustainable Development, 9–10 March,
2004, Paris, OECD.
Ezzati, M., Lopez, A. D., Rodgers, A., Vander Hoorn, S.,

Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 72, pp. 392–406.
Keiser, J., Maltese, M. F., Erlanger, T. E., Bos, R., Tanner, M.,
Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005b. Effect of irrigated

Murray, C. J. L. and Comparative Risk Assessment

rice agriculture on Japanese encephalitis and

Collaborating Group. 2002. Selected major risk factors

opportunities for integrated vector management. Acta

and global and regional burden of disease. Lancet, Vol.
360, pp. 1347–60.
Ezzati, M., Vander Hoorn, S., Rodgers, A., Lopez, A. D.,
Mathers, C. D., Murray, C. J. L. and Comparative Risk
Assessment Collaborating Group. 2003. Estimates of

Tropica, Vol. 95, pp. 40–57.
Keiser, J., Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005c. Reducing the
burden of malaria in different settings with environmental
management: a systematic review. Lancet Infectious
Diseases, Vol. 5, pp. 695–707.

global and regional potential health gains from reducing

Keiser, J. and Utzinger, J. 2005. Food-borne trematodiasis: An

multiple major risk factors. Lancet, Vol. 362, pp. 271–80.

emerging public health problem. Journal of Emerging

Faruqui, N., Niang, S. and Redwood, M. 2004. Untreated
wastewater reuse in market gardens: a case study of

Infectious Diseases, Vol. 11: 1507–14.
Keiser, J., Utzinger, J., Caldas de Castro, M., Smith, T. A.,

Organization Global Database on Child Growth and

Dakar, Senegal. C. A. Scott, N. I. Faruqui and L. Raschid-

Tanner, M. and Singer, B. H. 2004. Urbanization in sub-

Malnutrition: methodology and applications. International

Sally (eds), Wastewater Use in Irrigated Agriculture:

Saharan Africa and implications for malaria control.

Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 32, pp. 518–26.

Confronting the Livelihood and Environmental Realities,

American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol.

De Onis, M., Blössner, M., Borghi, E., Frongillo, E. A. and
Morris, R. 2004. Estimates of global prevalence of

pp. 113–25. Wallingford, CAB International.
Fattal, B., Lampert, Y. and Shuval, H. 2004. A fresh look at

childhood underweight in 1990 and 2015. Journal of the

microbial guidelines for wastewater irrigation in

American Medical Association, Vol. 291, pp. 2600–6.

agriculture: a risk-assessment and cost-effectiveness

De Onis, M., Frongillo, E. A. and Blössner, M. 2000. Is

approach. C. A. Scott, N. I. Faruqui, L. Raschid-Sally,

71 (Suppl. 2), pp. 118–27.
Klinkenberg, E., van der Hoek, W. and Amerasinghe, F. P.
2004. A malaria risk analysis in an irrigated area in Sri
Lanka. Acta Tropica, Vol. 89, pp. 215–25.
Konradsen, F., Matsuno, Y., Amerasinghe, F. P., Amerasinghe,

malnutrition declining? An analysis of changes in levels of

(eds). Wastewater Use in Irrigated Agriculture:

P. H. and van der Hoek, W. 1998. Anopheles culicifacies

child malnutrition since 1980. Bulletin of the World

Confronting the Livelihood and Environmental Realities.

breeding in Sri Lanka and options for control through

Health Organization, Vol. 78, pp. 1222–33.

Wallingford, CAB International Publishing.

water management. Acta Tropica, Vol. 71, pp. 131–8.

2 3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Konradsen, F., Steele, P., Perera, D., van der Hoek, W.,

Learning from the past 100 years. Acta Tropica, Vol. 89,
pp. 99–108.

Parashar, U. D., Bresee, J. S. and Glass, R. I. 2003. The global

malaria control in Sri Lanka. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, Vol. 77, pp. 301–9.
Konradsen, F., van der Hoek, W., Amerasinghe, F. P., Mutero,
C. and Boelee, E. 2004. Engineering and malaria control:

Kosek, M., Bern, C. and Guerrant, R. L. 2003. The global
burden of diarrhoeal disease, as estimated from studies
published between 1992 and 2000. Bulletin of the World
Health Organization, Vol. 81, pp. 197–204.
Kotloff, K. L., Winickoff, J. P., Ivanoff, B., Clemens, J. D.,
Swerdlow, D. L., Sansonetti, P. J., Adak, G. K. and Levine,

burden of diarrhoeal disease in children. Bulletin of the
World Health Organization, Vol. 81, p. 236.
Peden, M. M. and McGee, K. 2003. The epidemiology of
drowning worldwide. Injury Control and Safety
Promotion, Vol. 10, pp. 195–9.
Prasittisuk, C. 2002. Vector-control synergies, between ‘roll back

M. M. 1999. Global burden of Shigella infections:

malaria’ and the Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic

Implications for vaccine development and implementation

Filariasis, in South-east Asia. Annals of Tropical Medicine

of control strategies. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, Vol. 77, pp. 651–66.

and Parasitology, Vol. 96, Supplement 2, pp. 133–7.
Prüss, A., Kay, D., Fewtrell, L. and Bartram, J. 2002. Estimating

SIWI and WHO (Stockholm International Water Institute and
World Health Organization). 2005. Making water a part
of economic development. Report commissioned for the
13th session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development, Stockholm and Geneva, SIWI and WHO.
Sobsey, M.D. 2002. Managing Water in the Home:
Accelerated Health Gains from Improved Water Supply.
Geneva, WHO, report ref: WHO/SDE/WSH/02.07.
Steinmann, P., Keiser, J., Bos, R., Tanner, M. and Utzinger, J. In
press. Schistosomiasis and water resource development:
Systematic review, meta analysis and estimates of people
at risk. Lancet Infectious Diseases.
Tyagi, B.K. 2004. A review of the emergence of Plasmodium
falciparum-dominated malaria in the irrigated areas of
the Thar Desert, India. Acta Tropica, Vol. 89, pp. 227–39.
UN Millennium Project. 2004a. Interim Report of Task Force 4
on Child Health and Maternal Health.
UN Millennium Project. 2004b. Monitoring Target 10 and

the burden of disease from water, sanitation, and

Beyond: Keeping Track of Water Resources for the

related diarrhoea remains a major cause of morbidity and

hygiene at a global level. Environmental Health

Millennium Development Goals. Issues Paper prepared for

mortality in HIV-infected individuals. Review of Anti-

Perspectives, Vol. 110, pp. 537–42.

Lean, S. and Pollok, R. C. G. 2003. Management of protozoa-

infective Therapy, Vol. 1, pp. 455–69.

Rajasooriyar, L. 2003. A study of the hydrochemistry of the

CSD 12. Millennium Task Force on Water and Sanitation.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2003.

Uda Walawa Basin, Sri Lanka, and the factors that

Human Development Report, 2003. The Millennium

Environmental Management for Malaria Control in the

influence groundwater quality. Ph.D. thesis, University of

Development Goals: a Compact Among Nations to End

East Asia and Pacific (EAP) Region. HNP Discussion

East Anglia, UK.

Lindsay, S., Kirby, M., Baris, E. and Bos, R. 2004.
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Murray, C. J. L. and Lopez, A. D. (eds). 1996. The Global
Burden of Disease. Boston, Harvard University Press.
———. 1994a. Global and regional cause-of-death patterns in
1990. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Vol. 72,
pp. 47–480.
———. 1994b. Quantifying disability: data, methods and results.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Vol. 72, pp.
481–94.

Amerasinghe, P. H. and Amerasinghe, F. P. 1999. Cost of

Paper, Washington, DC, World Bank.

Rice, A. L., Sacco, L., Hyder, A. and Black, R. E. 2000.

Human Poverty. New York, Oxford University Press, 2003.
UN-WWAP (United Nations World Water Development

Malnutrition as an underlying cause of childhood deaths

Programme). 2003. The United Nations World Water

Bridging the Gaps. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 422.

associated with infectious diseases in developing

Development Report: Water for People, Water for Life.

Washington, DC, World Bank. www.worldbank.org/afr/

countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Vol.

environmentalhealth/

78, pp. 1207–21.

Listorti, J. A. and Doumani, F. M. 2001. Environmental Health:

Lokuge, K. M., Smith, W., Caldwell, B., Dear, K. and Milton, A. H.

Rijsberman, F. 2004. The Water Challenge. Copenhagen

2004. The effect of arsenic mitigation interventions on

Consensus Challenge Paper. Copenhagen, Environmental

disease burden in Bangladesh. Environmental Health

Assessment Institute.

Perspectives, Vol. 112, pp. 1172–7.

Rodgers, A., Ezzati, M., Vander Hoorn, S., Lopez, A. D., Ruey-

Paris and London, UNESCO and Berghahn Books.
Utzinger, J., Bergquist, R., Shu-Hua, X., Singer, B. H. and
Tanner, M. 2003. Sustainable schistosomiasis control: The
way forward. Lancet, Vol. 362, pp. 1932–4.
Van der Hoek, W., Sakthivadivel, R., Renshaw, M., Silver, J. B.,
Birley, M. H. and Konradsen, F. 2001a. Alternate Wet /

Bin Lin, Murray, C. J. L. and Comparative Risk Assessment

Dry Irrigation in Rice Cultivation: A Practical Way to Save

malaria’ and the Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic

Collaborating Group. 2004. Distribution of major health

Water and Control Malaria and Japanese Encephalitis?

Filariasis, in the African Region. Annals of Tropical Medicine

risks: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study.

and Parasitology, Vol. 96, Supplement 2, pp. 129–32.

PLOS Medicine, Vol. 1, Issue 1, e27.

Manga, L. 2002. Vector-control synergies, between ‘roll back

Matsuno, Y., Konradsen, F., Tasumi, M., van der Hoek, W.,
Amerasinghe, F. P. and Amerasinghe, P. H. 1999. Control
of malaria mosquito breeding through irrigation water

Rose, G. 1992. The Strategy of Preventive Medicine. Oxford,
Oxford University Press.
Saadé, C., Bateman, M. and Bendahmane, D. B. 2001. The

Research Report 47. Colombo, IWMI.
Van der Hoek, W., Konradsen, F., Ensink, J. H. J., Mudasser, M.
and Jensen, P. K. 2001b. Irrigation water as a source of
drinking water: is safe use possible? Tropical Medicine
and International Health, Vol. 6, pp. 46–54.

management. International Journal of Water Resources

Story of a Successful Public-Private Partnership in Central

Van der Hoek, W., Feenstra, S. G. and Konradsen, F. 2002a.

Development, Vol. 15, pp. 93–105.

America: Handwashing for Diarrheal Disease Prevention.

Availability of irrigation water for domestic use in

Arlington, VA, Basic Support for Child Survival Project,

Pakistan: its impact on prevalence of diarrhoea and

EHP, UNICEF, USAID, World Bank.

nutritional status of children. Journal of Health,

Mecaskey, J. W., Knirsch, C. A., Kumaresan, J. A. and Cook, J. A.
2003. The possibility of eliminating blinding trachoma.
Lancet Infectious Diseases, Vol. 3, pp. 728–34.
Meddings, D. R., Ronald, L. A., Marion, S., Pinera, J. F. and

Scott, C. A., Faruqui, N. I. and Raschid-Sally, L. (eds). 2004.
Wastewater Use in Irrigated Agriculture: Confronting the

Population and Nutrition, Vol. 20, pp. 77–84.
Van der Hoek, W., Boelee, E. and Konradsen, F. 2002b. Irrigation,

Oppliger, A. 2004. Cost effectiveness of a latrine revision

Livelihood and Environmental Realities. Wallingford: Cabi

domestic water supply and human health. Encyclopedia of

programme in Kabul, Afghanistan. Bulletin of the World

Publishing.

Life Support Systems: Knowledge for Sustainable

Health Organization, Vol. 82, pp. 281–9.
Molyneux, D. 2003. Lymphatic filariasis (elephantiasis)

Shordt, K., van Wijk, C., Brikké, F. and Hesselbarth, S. 2004.
Monitoring Millennium Development Goals for Water and

Development (EOLSS), Oxford, EOLSS Publishers.
Van der Hoek, W., Ekanayake, L., Rajasooriyar, L. and

elimination: a public health success and development

Sanitation. A Review of Experiences and Challenges.

Karunaratne, R. 2003. Source of drinking water and other

opportunity. Filaria Journal, Vol. 2, 13

Delft, IRC.

risk factors for dental fluorosis in Sri Lanka. International

(www.filariajournal.com/content/2/1/13)
Moraes, L. R. S., Cancio, J. A. and Cairncross, S. 2004. Impact of

Sissoko, M. S., Dicko, A., Briët, O. J. T., Sissoko, M., Sagara, I.,
Keita, H. D., Sogoba, M., Rogier, C., Touré, Y. T. and

Journal of Environmental Health Research, Vol. 13,
pp. 285–93.

drainage and sewerage on intestinal nematode infections in

Doumbo, O. K. 2004. Malaria incidence in relation to rice

poor urban areas in Salvador, Brazil. Transactions of the

cultivation in the irrigated Sahel of Mali. Acta Tropica,

N., Nagelkerke, N. J. D., Habbema, J. D. F. and Engels, D.

Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 98,

Vol. 89, pp. 161–70.

2003. Quantification of clinical morbidity associated with

pp. 197–204.

Van der Werf, M. J., de Vlas, S. J., Brooker, S., Looman, C. W.

schistosome infection in sub-Saharan Africa. Acta Tropica,
Vol. 86, pp. 125–39.

P R O T E C T I N G A N D P R O M O T I N G H U M A N H E A LT H . 2 3 9

Victora, C. G., Bryce, J., Fontaine, O. and Monasch, R. 2000.
Reducing deaths from diarrhoea through oral rehydration
therapy. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Vol. 78,
pp. 1246–55.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006a. Guidelines for the
Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Volume
1: Policy and Regulatory Aspects. Geneva, WHO. World
Health Organization,
———. 2006b. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater,
Excreta and Greywater. Volume 2: Wastewater Use in
Agriculture. Geneva, WHO.
———. 2006c. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater,
Excreta and Greywater. Volume 3: Wastewater and
Excreta Use in Aquaculture. Geneva, WHO.
———. 2006d. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater,
Excreta and Greywater. Volume 4: Excreta and Greywater
Use in Agriculture. Geneva, WHO.
———. 2005. Water safety plans: managing drinking-water
quality from catchment to consumer, prepared by Annette
Davison, Guy Howard, Melita Stevens, Phil Callan, Lorna
Fewtrell, Dan Deere and Jamie Bartram. WHO publication

———. 2004a. World Health Report 2004. Changing History.
Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/whr/2004
———. 2004b. Guidelines for Drinking-water Quality. Third
Edition. Volume 1. Recommendations. Geneva, WHO.
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/en
———. 2004c. PRSPs: Their Significance for Health: Second
Synthesis Report. WHO/HDP/PRSP/04.1, Geneva, WHO.
———. 2003a. World Health Report 2003. Shaping the Future.
Geneva, WHO. www.who.int/whr/2003
———. 2003b. Guidelines for Safe Recreational Water
Environments. Volume 1: Coastal and Fresh Waters.
Geneva, WHO.
———. 2002a. Prevention and Control of Schistosomiasis and
Soil-Transmitted Helminthiasis. WHO Technical Report
Series 912, Geneva.
———. 2002b. World Health Report 2002. Reducing Risk,
Promoting Healthy Life. www.who.int/whr/2002
WHO/IWA (World Health Organization/International Water
Association). 2006. Fluoride in drinking water. Geneva,
World Health Organization.
WHO/PAHO/UNESCO (World Health Organization/Pan-American

WHO/SDE/WSH/05.06, Geneva, WHO.

Health Organization/United Nations Educational, Scientific

www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/

and Cultural Organization). 1997. A consultation with

wsp0506/en/index.html

experts on amoebiasis. Mexico City, Mexico 28–29 January

World Health Organization: www.who.int
WHO Water, Sanitation and Health: www.who.int/water_sanitation_health
WHO Evidence and Information for Health Policy: www.who.int/evidence
WHO Regional Offices
Africa: www.afro.who.int/wsh/index.html
Americas: www.paho.org/Project.asp?SEL=TP&LNG=ENG&ID=86
Eastern Mediterranean/Centre for Environmental Health Activities: www.emro.who.int/ceha/community.asp
Europe: www.euro.who.int/healthtopics/HT2ndLvlPage?HTCode=drinking_water www.euro.who.int/ecehrome
South East Asia: www.searo.who.int
Western Pacific: www.wpro.who.int/health_topics/water_sanitation_and_hygiene
United Nations Children’s Fund: www.unicef.org
UNICEF Water, Environment and Sanitation: www.unicef.org/wes
Monitoring programmes
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation: www.wssinfo.org
UNICEF Monitoring the Situation of Women and Children: www.childinfo.org
Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council: www.wsscc.org
World Bank: www.worldbank.org
World Bank Water Supply and Sanitation Programme: www.worldbank.org/watsan
World Bank Water and Sanitation Blue Gold Series: www.wsp.org/08_BlueGold.asp
Asian Development Bank: www.adb.org
Water for All Programme: www.adb.org/Water
Health, Nutrition and Population Programme: www.adb.org/Health

1997. Epidemiological Bulletin – Pan American Health
Organization, Vol.18, pp. 13–4.
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2005. Water for Life: Making it Happen.
Geneva.
———. 2004. Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and Sanitation
Target. A Mid-term Assessment of Progress. New York,
Geneva.
———. 2003. Africa Malaria Report. WHO/CDS/MAL/2003.1093.
———. 2000. Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment
2000 Report. New York, Geneva.
WSSCC (Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council).
2004. Resource Pack on the Water and Sanitation
Millennium Development Goals. Geneva, WSSCC.
Würthwein, R., Gbangou, A., Sauerborn, R. and Schmidt, C. M.
2001. Measuring the local burden of disease. A study of
years of life lost in sub-Saharan Africa. International
Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 30, pp. 501–8.
Yoshida, T., Yamauchi, H. and Fan Sun, G. 2004. Chronic health
effects in people exposed to arsenic via the drinking
water: dose – response relationships in review. Toxicology
and Applied Pharmacology, Vol. 198, pp. 243–52.

2 4 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

International Development Research Centre (IDRC Canada) Ecohealth Programme: www.idrc.ca/ecohealth
International Water and Sanitation Centre, the Netherlands: www.irc.nl
International Water Association: www.iwahq.org.uk
International Commission for Irrigation and Drainage: www.icid.org
WHO Collaborating Centres in Water, Sanitation and Health:
Water Quality and Health Bureau, Health Canada: www.hc-sc.gc.ca/waterquality
Office national de l’Eau potable (ONEP), Morocco: www.onep.org.ma
Institute of Environmental Engineering and Research: www.uet.edu.pk/Departments/Environmental/environmental_main.htm
DBL Institute for Health Research and Development, Denmark: www.dblnet.dk
DHL Water and Environment Denmark: www.dhi.dk
Institute for Water, Soil and Air Hygiene, Federal Environment Agency, Germany: www.umweltbundesamt.de
Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, Bonn, Germany: www.meb.uni-bonn.de/hygiene
Institute for Water Pollution Control (VITUKI), Hungary: www.vituki.hu
University of Surrey, School of Engineering: www.surrey.ac.uk/eng

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

National Centre for Environmental Toxicology: www.wrcplc.co.uk/asp/business_areas.asp#ncet
British Geological Survey, Groundwater Systems and Water Quality Programme: www.bgs.ac.uk
International Water Management Institute, Sri Lanka: www.iwmi.cgiar.org
Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand: www.tm.mahidol.ac.th
Asian Institute of Technology, Urban Environmental Management Programme: www.ait.ac.th
Queensland Institute for Medical Research, Mosquito Control Laboratory, Australia:
www.qimr.edu.au/research/labs/briank/index.html
National Institute of Public Health, Department of Water Supply Engineering, Japan: www.niph.go.jp
Centre regional pour l’Eau potable et l’Assainissement à faible Coût, Burkina Faso: www.reseaucrepa.org
Future Harvest centres associated with the CGIAR doing research on water management/health
International Food Policy Research Centre: www.ifpri.org/events/seminars/2005/20050623AgHealth.htm
Africa Rice Centre (formerly: West African Rice Development Association): www.warda.cgiar.org/research/health
International Water Management Institute (IWMI): www.iwmi.org

Starvation is the characteristic of some people not having
enough food to eat. It is not the characteristic of there being
not enough food to eat.
Amartya Sen

Part 1. Water’s Role in Agriculture ...............245
Table 7.1: Governance issues at different levels
in agricultural water management
1a. The water variable in agriculture .......................245
Feeding the world’s population: from need to
surplus ...............................................................245
Box 7.1: Measuring hunger and undernutrition
Fig. 7.1: Per capita food consumption by
region, 1965–2030
Agriculture: Crops and livestock products .............247
Fig. 7.2: Main sources of global food supply, 2002
Fig. 7.3: Dietary changes in developing
countries, 1965–2030
Food commodities: Fish .......................................248
Box 7.2: Integrated resources management in
support of food production in rural areas
Sources of water in agriculture: Rainfed and
irrigated agriculture.............................................250
Fig. 7.4: Blue and green water in the
hydrological cycle
Fig. 7.5: Evolution of cropland, 1961–2000
Map 7.1: Distribution of areas under irrigation in the
world, 2000
Trends and projections ........................................251
1b. Drivers of change in agricultural production......252
Changing patterns of demography, food
production, food demand and diets .....................252
Urbanization .......................................................254
Impact of climate change ....................................254
Increased water scarcity and competition for
water..................................................................254

Part 2. How Agriculture Can Respond
to the Changing Nature of Demand for
Water ...................................................................255
2a. Raising water productivity in agriculture...........255
From water use efficiency to water productivity......255
Fig. 7.6: Water productivity of different crops, Cyprus
Boosting rainfed agriculture.................................256
Fig. 7.7: Grain yield under improved and traditional
technologies, 1977–2001, Andhra Pradesh, India
The potential of biotechnology ............................256
Virtual water and food trade................................257
Table 7.2 Virtual water content of selected products
2b. Improving irrigation ..........................................258
Achievements and failures of irrigation ................258
Box 7.3: The role of women in irrigated farming in
sub-Saharan Africa
Institutional reforms in irrigation management......258
Fig. 7.8. Examples of institutional reforms and
implications in terms of ownership and management

Rice terraces, China

Box 7.4: Mali, Office du Niger: The successful
reform of an irrigation monopoly
Modernization of large irrigation systems .............260
The roles of private and public sectors in
financing irrigation ..............................................261
Fig. 7.9: World Bank lending in irrigation,
1960–2005
Irrigation technology: Moving towards more
precision agriculture ............................................261

Part 3. Towards a More Sustainable
Agriculture .........................................................262
3a. Water storage and the evolution of
groundwater-based economies ..........................262
Managing groundwater .......................................263
3b. Environment and water quality ..........................263
Salinity, a hazard of irrigation in arid zones..........263
Recycling: Achieving an adequate urban-rural
balance of wastewater use ..................................264
Box 7.5: Revised World Health Organization (WHO)
guidelines for the safe use of wastewater in
agriculture
Wetlands: Fragile ecosystems, sources of
livelihood ............................................................265
Box 7.6: Tonle Sap: The benefits of seasonal
flooding for livelihoods, nutrition and biodiversity
3c. Water to combat hunger and poverty in rural
areas..................................................................265
Map 7.2: Proportion of undernourished people
in total population, 2000–02
Fig. 7.10: Proportion of undernourished people in
selected developing countries, 2000–02
Fig. 7.11: Estimated and projected number of
undernourished people by region, 1991–2030
Water in livelihood as a pathway out of poverty...268
Table 7.3: Shifting towards a livelihood-based
approach in rural areas
Box 7.7: Positive impacts of irrigation on rural
communities
Box 7.8: Local governance to secure access to land
and water in the Lower Gash watershed, Sudan

Part 4. Governance Matters at All Levels in
Agriculture ........................................................270
References and Websites .................................272

7
CHAPTER 7

Water
for Food,
Agriculture
and Rural
Livelihoods
By

FAO

(Food and
Agriculture
Organization of the
United Nations)

IFAD
(International Fund
for Agricultural
Development)

2 4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Above: Farmer ploughing a
rice field, Indonesia
Below: Wollo women
diverting a stream to
irrigate land, Ethiopia

In the context of demographic growth, increased competition for water and improved attention to
environmental issues too often left out by agricultural policies, water for food remains a core issue – that
can no longer be tackled through a narrow sectoral approach. New forms of water management in
agriculture, including irrigation, are to be explored and implemented, in order to focus on livelihoods
rather than just on productivity.
■

To satisfy the growing demand for food between 2000
and 2030, production of food crops in developing
countries is projected to increase by 67 percent.
At the same time, a continuing rise in productivity
should make it possible to restrain the increase in
water use for agriculture to about 14 percent.

■

As competition for water increases among different
sectors, irrigated agriculture needs to be carefully
examined to discern where society can benefit most
effectively from its application. Access to natural
resources needs to be negotiated with other users in
a transparent fashion in order to achieve optimal uses
under conditions of growing scarcity.

Bottom: Rendille livestock
enclosures, Kenya.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Bottom right: Fruit and
vegetable market, Jordan

■

Farmers are at the centre of any process of change
and need to be encouraged and guided, through
appropriate incentives and governance practices, to
conserve natural ecosystems and their biodiversity and
minimize their negative impact, a goal that will only be
achieved if the appropriate policies are in place.

■

Irrigation institutions must respond to the needs of
farmers, ensuring more reliable delivery of water,
increasing transparency in its management and
balancing efficiency and equity in access to water.
This will not only require changes in attitudes, but
also well targeted investments in infrastructure
modernization, institutional restructuring and
upgrading of the technical capacities of farmers
and water managers.

■

The agriculture sector faces a complex challenge:
producing more food of better quality while using less
water per unit of output; providing rural people with
resources and opportunities to live a healthy and
productive life; applying clean technologies that ensure
environmental sustainability; and contributing in a
productive way to the local and national economy.

■

Action is needed now to adapt agricultural and rural
development policies, accelerate changes in irrigation
governance and, through adequate water laws and
institutions, support the integration of the social,
economic and environmental needs of rural populations.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 4 5

Part 1. Water’s Role in Agriculture
During the second half of the twentieth century, the global food system responded to a twofold increase
in the world’s population by more than doubling food production, and this in an environment of
decreasing prices for agricultural products. During the same period, the group of developing countries
increased per capita food consumption by 30 percent and nutritional situations improved accordingly.
In addition, agriculture continued producing non-food crops, including cotton, rubber, beverage crops
and industrial oils. However, while feeding the world and producing a diverse range of commodities,
agriculture also confirmed its position as the biggest user of water on the globe. Irrigation now claims
close to 70 percent of all freshwater appropriated for human use.
In the absence of competition for raw water, and
with little initial concern for environmental implications,
agriculture has been able to capture large quantities of
freshwater and ensure its claim to freshwater use. In the
near future, the need to produce and process more food
for the world’s growing population will translate into an
increased demand for irrigation. However, agriculture is
now increasingly obliged to accommodate its claims on
water within a complex framework in which social,
economic and environmental objectives have to be
negotiated with other sectors. The basis for well-informed
negotiation hinges upon the degree of effective
governance that can be found within the respective
social, economic and environmental sectors.
Food production, whether on a large commercial farm, a
homestead garden plot or a fish pond, is a local activity.
However, the decisions underlying the way in which food
is produced are increasingly beyond the reach and
influence of local communities and of local agricultural
organizations. Prices and specifications for agricultural
export products are decided at far away market places.
National governments in many developing countries have
discriminated against the rural sector in order to favour
urban constituencies, and rich countries have subsidized
their agricultural exports, with dire consequences for
undercapitalized rural producers operating in an
environment of poor or non-existing physical, financial,
educational and health infrastructure. At present, about
13 percent of the world’s population does not have
access to enough food to live a healthy and productive
life, yet the ability, technology and resources needed to
produce enough food for every man, woman and child in
the world do currently exist. Lack of health, financial or
natural resources such as land and water, and lack of
skills to link productive activities with remote markets and
ensure employment, are all intimately related to poverty.

Table 7.1 presents the various levels of governance linked
to agricultural water management. Water governance
issues emerge around water allocation and distribution, but
governance aspects other than those concerning water are
equally important. Secure tenure of sufficient land is
fundamental to water governance, as is the availability of
supporting infrastructure related to distribution and
marketing. Market access is critical to income generation.
Clearly, the management of rural water, including irrigation
facilities, calls for some form of local governance. Recent
trends towards increased responsibility of water users
present new challenges for such arrangements. Again,
beyond water management, the whole system of food
governance arises when the implementation of national
food policies (through subsidies, taxes, tariffs and even
food aid in some instances) distorts markets and
marginalizes the rural poor.
With current trends towards international trade
liberalization, the complexity of these governance
problems and their interconnection is growing.
Water governance and related food system issues have to
be examined from local, national and global perspectives.
This chapter reviews the main links between water, food
production, markets and rural livelihoods, as well as their
implications in terms of governance at all levels.

1a. The water variable in agriculture
Feeding the world’s population: from need to
surplus
For adequate nutrition, a person’s daily diet should be
complete (in energy terms) and balanced (in nutritional
terms). The indicator used as a proxy to assess the
nutritional situation of a population is the average dietary
energy intake in the form of kilocalories per person per
day (kcal/person/d). The dietary energy supply (DES)
value of 2,800 kcal/person/d is taken as a threshold to

...agriculture is
now increasingly
obliged to
accommodate
its claims on
water within a
complex
framework in
which social,
economic and
environmental
objectives have
to be negotiated
with other
sectors

2 4 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 7.1: Governance issues at different levels in agricultural water management
Level
Farmer

Water
Access to water: water
rights; water markets

Farmer
groups

Water rights; equity;
water distribution;
accountability
Reliability, equity and
flexibility of irrigation
service delivery

Irrigation
service

In developed
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

countries, food
consumption has

Land
Access to land: land
tenure; size of farm
holdings
–

Infrastructure
Access to affordable
technology, including
irrigation
Management authority
(irrigation schemes)

Crop patterns and
licensing

System management
and maintenance; cost
recovery; transparency;
accountability
Decentralization;
development of new
infrastructure (including
markets)
Main hydraulic
infrastructure planning;
development and
management
(corruption)
Policies and legislation
on: decentralization;
infrastructure
development planning;
cost recovery; financing
mechanisms for
infrastructure; access to
finance for local
stakeholders
Transboundary water
shared infrastructure
–

Local
Water licensing
government (nepotism); conflict
resolution

Land-use planning

Basin
authority

Sectoral water
allocation; water
quality management;
water conservation
(financial incentives)
National
Water policy and
government legislation; institutional
arrangements

Soil conservation;
watershed protection

Regional
Transboundary water;
level
security of supply
Global level International security
and solidarity

–

Land-use policy and
legislation; cadastre;
land-use planning

kept increasing
strongly and
their population
is now
increasingly

–

Market-Services
Access to production
inputs and markets
Farmer cooperatives,
unions, meteorological
forecasting
Farm roads maintenance
and other scheme
infrastructures
Market infrastructure and
transport; access to
finance; market
information
–

Policies and legislation on:
food security; agriculture
(subsidies); rural
development; trade
(tariffs, subsidies); food
self-sufficiency; rural
finance

Regional trade agreements
Agricultural subsidies and
tariffs

stricken by
obesity
national food security: below this level, countries are
likely to suffer severe chronic undernutrition problems in
their population. However, even in conditions of sufficient
national food supply (above 2,800 kcal/person/d), a part
of the population may be suffering from undernutrition
because individuals and households lack the capacity to
access the food they need, either through self-production
or purchase. Box 7.1 briefly discusses this matter.
Based on DES/person/d as a food security indicator,
Figure 7.1 shows for the world and for each region
the levels of food consumption in 1965 and 1998,
with projections for 2030. The nutritional situation has
improved everywhere and, towards the turn of the
century, the world average has reached the
2,800 kcal/person/d ‘graduation’ level. This can be argued
to mean that universal food security – food for all – is
within grasp. The sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia

regions, where food consumption is the lowest, have
improved their situation but their level is still low. The
developing countries of East and Southeast Asia, as well
as Latin America and the Caribbean, are close below or
above the threshold level. In developed countries, food
consumption has kept increasing strongly and their
population is now increasingly stricken by obesity and
growing food wastage. In the details, it is interesting to
note that most of the progress in the food situation has
occurred in some of the most populous developing
countries, in particular Brazil, China and Indonesia.
Significant progress has also been made in India, Nigeria
and Pakistan. There remain, however, thirty nations with
a very low level of food intake (below 2,200
kcal/person/d), plagued by both the inability to produce
enough food and to earn foreign exchange to import the
food that their population needs. Of these thirty
countries, twenty are located in sub-Saharan Africa.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 4 7

BOX 7.1 MEASURING HUNGER AND UNDERNUTRITION
The method used by the Food and Agriculture

proportion of undernourished people in the total

nutritional status based on anthropometric

Organization (FAO) of the United Nations (UN)

population is defined as that part of the

surveys, and qualitative methods for measuring

to monitor the state of the world’s food

distribution lying below a minimum level of

people’s perception of food insecurity and

insecurity is based on information from national

energy requirement, which is derived taking into

hunger. None of these methods alone suffices to

food balance sheets, adjusted through

account sex, age and type of activity.

capture all the aspects and dimensions of food
insecurity.

household income and expenditure surveys.
These surveys allow the construction of a

Other methods for measuring hunger and

distribution function of dietary energy

undernutrition involve income and expenditure

consumption on a per-person basis. The

survey data, adequacy of dietary intake, child

Sources: FAO, 2003b; Mason, 2002.

Figure 7.1: Per capita food consumption by region, 1965–2030

4,000

1964-1966
1997-1999
2030

3,500
Threshold of 2,880 kcal/person/day

Dietary energy supply
(kcal/person per day)

3,000
2,500
2,000

Note: The nutritional status of
most regions of the world has
improved. Sub-Saharan Africa
and South Asia have also
improved their nutritional level,
but they lag behind and are
host to the majority of the
undernourished people in
the world.

1,500
1,000
500
0
World

Industrial
countries

Countries in
transition

Developing Near East and Sub-Saharan
countries North Africa
Africa

South Asia

East Asia

Latin
America and
the Caribbean

Source: FAO, 2003a.

Agriculture: Crops and livestock products
Drinking water intake typically varies between 2 and
3 litres per person per day (L/person/d). In addition, there
are domestic water requirements for personal and
household hygiene and related requirements, which are
quantified at 30 to 300 L/person/d, according to standard
of living and quality of water supply. Producing food
requires much more water: from 2,000 to 5,000
L/person/d, depending on diet and climate differences and
the efficiency of local food production systems.
Most of the water used to produce food or other crops
comes from rain that is stored in the soil (so-called green
water), where it is captured by crop roots. Irrigation is
practised in places and times where rainwater is insufficient

for adequately supplying water to crops.
It provides a guaranteed supply of water and protects
against droughts and dry spells. Globally, rainfall provides
about 90 percent of the water used by crops. Although it
covers only 10 percent of the water used in agriculture,
irrigation claims 70 percent of all the freshwater
(so-called blue water) used for human consumption
and so comes under heavy scrutiny when discussing
freshwater governance. The concept of green water and
blue water is further discussed below (see also Chapter 4).
The production of food commodities presents different
demands on producers and the environment, including
the quantity and quality of the water required.

Harvesting fish,
State of Mexico

2 4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Agriculture, including livestock production and
aquaculture, produces most of the food we eat.
Direct food harvest from inland and marine environments,
including capture fisheries1, plays a vital role in the
livelihood of many rural and indigenous people.
However, its total quantity is only a fraction of global
food supply (Figure 7.2). In addition to food and
beverage commodities, agriculture also produces
non-food commodities including fibre (such as cotton),
and industrial oil.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Young girl sorting freshly
harvested tomatoes for
packing, Honduras

1. Fisheries are usually divided
into capture fisheries and
aquaculture, where capture
fisheries refers to the direct
harvesting of fish and other
aquatic organisms from their
natural environment, while
aquaculture can be defined
as the farming of aquatic
organisms with some sort of
intervention in the rearing
process to enhance their
production.

Food consumption habits are strongly linked to local
environment and production capacities, but through the
years, there have been major changes in food
consumption patterns, which depend largely on factors
such as income. Figure 7.3 shows changes in diet
composition from the 1960s through the recent past and
projected to 2030. Rice, wheat and other cereals are a
major component of the human diet. They represent, in
terms of dietary energy supply, more than half of all food
consumed. However, the relative weight of cereals in the
human diet tends to decline as income increases,
signalling an increase in the consumption of vegetable
oils and meat. While the demand for cereals intended for
direct human consumption is decreasing, about one-third
of all cereals is now used for animal feed, and agriculture
keeps responding to this strong aggregate demand.
The oil crops sector is one of the most dynamic in the
world: since the 1970s, oil crops have provided 20 percent
of the increase in caloric intake in developing countries.
Livestock production accounts for some 40 percent of
the gross value of agricultural production, and its role is
continually growing as consumers adopt a diet richer in
meat and dairy products. Current trends (Figure 7.3)
show strong growth in the meat component of diets.
Livestock production is the world’s largest user of
agricultural land, through grazing and consumption of
fodder and feed grains. Although overgrazing and
ensuing land erosion has caused concern, it is worth
noting that grazing natural pasture is a very efficient way
of using rainwater to produce food that is rich in protein.
A fairly recent development within the livestock sector is
the shift of feed production from natural pasture and hay
to cereals. Contrary to grazing, when feed grains are
produced using irrigation, the shift in livestock production
methods has an impact on water demand. Looking at
another facet of this complex question, in traditional
livestock management, animal manure is an important
element in the process of returning nutrients to the soil, and

lack of manure is a cause of soil degradation. Conversely,
intensive methods of livestock production result in the
production of large amounts of manure that all too often are
discharged into surface waters or left on the land to seep
into the groundwater, threatening water supplies needed for
potable water and other high-value uses.

Food commodities: Fish
Capture fisheries and aquaculture are critical to food
security among poor communities in inland and coastal
areas. Fish, including shellfish and crustaceans, provides
about 16 percent of animal proteins consumed worldwide
and is a valuable source of minerals and essential fatty
acids in human nutrition. Fish consumption, however,
varies greatly among regions, and average values for fish
consumption have little meaning. As an environmental
product, capture fisheries, both marine and inland, are
the largest source of ‘wild’ food. Because of the open
access conditions that prevail in fisheries, overexploitation
has led to the depletion of many stocks. Conflicts are
frequent between native and community-based
small-scale subsistence fishers, recreational fishers
and large-scale or industrialized fishers who emphasize
commercial and income-producing purposes.
More significantly, fisherfolk also suffer from
encroachment by, and conflicts with, other resource users
and sectors, including urban and industrial development,
tourism, agriculture and energy sectors (see Chapter 11).
While fish production from marine capture fisheries has
not increased since the 1990s, production from inland
capture fisheries has shown modest but steady increases.
Inland fishery catches are believed to be greatly
under-reported and could be twice as high as records
show (FAO, 2003d). Freshwater fisheries, in particular
the unreported fraction of strategic relevance for poor
people, tend to be undervalued or completely neglected
in water development projects. This is especially the case
in the estimation of the adverse effects of aquatic
pollution and habitat degradation that result from the
unsustainable use of water resources in fishing
communities. There are nevertheless significant
opportunities for considering and implementing measures
(see Box 7.2) that integrate fisheries and agriculture
activities in order to enhance fish production and food
security (FAO, 1998).
Aquaculture in freshwater, brackish water and seawater
has increased its production from less than 5 million
metric tonnes (t) in the 1960s to close to 50 million t in

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 4 9

Figure 7.2: Main sources of global food supply, 2002
600
Values in kcal/person per day:
500

Food-total:

2,804 (100%)

- Vegetal:

2,336 (83%)

- Animal:

Dietary energy supply

400
(kcal/person per day)

468 (17%)

+ Meat:

217 (8%)

+ Other animal (milk, egg, fat): 223 (8%)
+ Fish:

28 (1%)

300

200

100

0

e
Ric

als
ers
eat
ere
tub
Wh
d
rc
e
n
a
Oth
ots
Ro

gar

Su

ils
ses
eo
Pul
abl
t
e
Veg

s
its
ble
Fru
eta
g
e
V

Me

at

k
Mil

h
Fis

r fo

od

e
Oth

Note: Cereals, in particular rice
and wheat, dominate food supply
and provide the largest share of
energy to the world’s population.
Although the livestock and
fisheries sectors remain marginal
in global terms, they play an
important role in the supply of
proteins. These global figures
hide a large geographical
variability in people’s dietary
energy supply.

Source: FAOSTAT, accessed in 2005.

Figure 7.3: Dietary changes in developing countries, 1965–2030
3,000
Other
2,500

Meat
Vegetable oils

Dietary energy supply
(kcal/person per day)

2,000

Pulses
Sugar
Roots and tubers

1,500

Other cereals
1,000

Wheat

500
Rice
0
1964-1966
Source: FAO, 2003a.

1997-1999

2030

Note: While rice, wheat and
other cereals remain the main
component of the human diet,
their relative weight tends to
decline as income increases,
compensated by an increase in
the consumption of vegetable oils
and meat. The oil crops sector is
one of the most dynamic in
the world: since the 1970s, oil
crops have provided 20 percent
of the increase in caloric intake in
developing countries.

2 5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Of particular
relevance is the
rapid growth of
aquaculture
production in
China – an
average of 11.5
percent per year
in the last thirty
years, compared

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

to 7 percent per
year for the rest
of the world

2000. This trend is bound to continue, driven both by
market demand for high-priced fish (including shellfish)
and by the ability of aquaculture to produce low-priced
but nutritious fish for local consumption. Of particular
relevance is the rapid growth of aquaculture production
in China – an average of 11.5 percent per year in the last
thirty years, compared to 7 percent per year for the rest
of the world. When properly managed and integrated into
other agricultural activities, aquaculture constitutes a
valuable way to increase the productivity of water. But as
it intensifies, new environmental challenges arise, and
aquaculture can be the cause of water pollution and
consequent damage to natural systems.

Sources of water in agriculture: Rainfed and
irrigated agriculture

The concept of ‘blue’ and ‘green’ water has been
used for quite some time to distinguish between two
fundamentally different elements of the water cycle
(see Chapter 4). When atmospheric precipitation reaches
the ground, it divides into several sections, which pursue
the terrestrial part of the hydrological cycle along
different paths. Out of a total annual amount of 110,000
cubic kilometres (km3) of precipitation on the land
surface, about 40,000 km3 is converted into surface
runoff and aquifer recharge (blue water) and an
estimated 70,000 km3 is stored in the soil and later
returns to the atmosphere through evaporation and plant
transpiration (green water, see Figure 7.4). Blue water is
the freshwater that sustains aquatic ecosystems in rivers
and lakes; it can also be applied to drinking or domestic
purposes, to industry or hydropower or to irrigated
agriculture. Rainfed agriculture uses only green water.
Irrigation uses blue water in addition to green water to
maintain adequate soil moisture levels, allowing the crop
plants to absorb the water and fulfil their crop yield
potential. The green water/blue water concept has proven
to be useful in supporting a more comprehensive vision
of the issues related to water management, particularly
in reference to agriculture (Ringersma et al., 2003). It is
estimated that crop production takes up 13 percent
(9,000 km3 per year) of the green water delivered to the
soil by precipitation, the remaining 87 percent being used
by the non-domesticated vegetal world, including forests
and rangeland. While irrigation currently withdraws about
2,300 km3 of freshwater per year from rivers and
aquifers, only about 900 km3 is effectively consumed by
crops (this issue is addressed in more detail later in the
section on water use efficiency).

The bulk of the world’s agricultural production is
rainfed, not irrigated. Claims that agricultural production is
threatened by global water shortages usually fail to note that
most of the world’s food production does not rely on
freshwater withdrawals at all and does not necessarily
accelerate the naturally occurring rates of evapotranspiration.
The largest share of the water uptake by plants is
transpired back into the atmosphere through plants’
leaves. In addition to its energy dissipating role, the

Out of the world’s total land area of 13 billion hectares
(ha), 12 percent is cultivated, and an estimated 27 percent
is used for pasture. The 1.5 billion ha of cropland include
277 million ha of irrigated land, representing 18 percent of
cropland. In population terms, cropland amounts to a
global average of 0.25 ha per person. Figure 7.5 shows
the evolution of cropland compared to population between
1960 and 2000, illustrating the huge productivity increase

Competition in the use of water for agriculture and for
fisheries is a key issue. Agricultural water use is strongly
consumptive and results in reduced river outflow that
adversely affects fish habitat. Intensive agriculture tends
to release agrochemicals applied in excess to
groundwater and rivers thus adding to the deleterious,
often lethal, effects of water pollution on fisheries.
At the core of the requirements of fisheries are:
maintaining aquatic habitats, sustaining river flow to
keep ecosystems healthy and abating pollution upstream;
for agriculture, it matters crucially to have water securely
available for use during the irrigation season. In an
integrated resources management (IRM) context, local
and basin-wide interest groups representing agriculture
and fisheries can negotiate and trade off their benefits
and duties to construct viable compromises. In practice,
however, settling complex contentious matters in an
integrated context meets difficulties because the
prospective negotiating partners are likely to be unequal
in knowledge, financial and political clout, and in
negotiating skills, and strong governance support is
therefore needed to foster the process and guarantee
fair and equitable outcomes.

Sprinkler irrigation on an
experimental field of
asparagus, Brazil

transpiration process is necessary for lifting nutrients from
-photosynthesis takes place. If soil moisture levels fall
below the wilting point, plant growth slows and eventually
stops, and the potential crop yield is not fulfilled. Irrigation
aims at ensuring that enough moisture is available at all
times during the plant’s life cycle to satisfy its water
demand, thus supporting maximum crop yields.

WWDR Chapter 07e (F)

15/2/06

15:47

Page 251

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 5 1

Figure 7.4: Blue and green water in the hydrological cycle

Precipitation
Green water
Blue water

km3/yr

%

119
75
44

100
63
37

Note: About two-thirds of the
water falling on land is
evaporated from the ground or
transpired by the vegetation
(forests, rangeland, cropland) and
rainfed agriculture uses about 8
percent of the green water.
Irrigation uses both green water
and blue water. Although the
share of water used in irrigation
is marginal in the global
hydrological cycle, irrigated
agriculture is the single most
important user of blue water,
leading in an increasing number
of places to severe shortage
and competition for water.

Source: adapted from Shiklomanov, 2000; FAO, 2002b; Ringersma et al., 2003; Rockström, 1999.

of agriculture during that period. The intensification of
agricultural production made it possible to limit the
expansion of agricultural land to a few percentage points
as the population was more than doubling.
The options for increasing the amount of land dedicated
to agriculture at the expense of natural forests and
savannahs are limited, because land has to be both
suitable and available for conversion to agriculture.
The food needs of a growing population are therefore
largely served through increased land productivity,
meaning harvesting a larger quantity of crops from the
existing agricultural land surface. Irrigation lifts the
constraint on crop productivity that stems from
insufficient and unreliable rainfall. During the second half

of the twentieth century, irrigation development became
a core part of the strategy to feed a doubling world
population, with a consequent increase in the quantity
of water utilized for this purpose. Map 7.1 shows the
location and extent of irrigation in the world in 2000
and the relative importance of irrigation in national
agriculture, a distribution that strongly correlates with
climatic conditions.

Trends and projections
According to FAO projections, food demand in 2030 is
expected to be 55 percent higher than in 1998, taking
into account increases in both population and per capita
food intake. To respond to this demand, global food
production should increase at an annual rate of

BOX 7.2: INTEGRATED RESOURCES MANAGEMENT IN SUPPORT OF FOOD PRODUCTION IN RURAL AREAS
Integrated approaches to resource management

resources. Basic features of good IRM include

guidance on IRM for sustainable production of

(IRM) are challenging but provide significant

the formation of extensive partnerships and the

fish and other food at the local level. Such IRM

avenues for enhancing fish production as well as

close involvement of local interests. It implies

efforts are also often required at regional and

the productivity of inland water bodies. In

improved cross-sectoral cooperation among the

international levels, and further assistance is

particular, opportunities exist for the enhanced

agriculture, forestry and fisheries sub-sectors.

necessary in regional decision-making for the
transboundary management of shared river and

integration of inland fisheries and aquaculture
into agricultural development planning,

Increased efforts are needed to provide better

especially irrigation, adding value to shared

targeted technical assistance and policy

lake basins (see Chapter 11).

2 5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 7.5: Evolution of cropland, 1961–2000

1, 400

Irrigated

0.50
0.45

Rainfed

1, 200
0.40

Cropland per person

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

0.35
0.30

800

0.25
600

0.20
0.15

400

0.10
200
0.05
0
1961

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: FAOSTAT, 2005.

1.4 percent. This growth would occur mostly in
developing countries, where about 80 percent of the
projected growth in crop production will come from
intensification in the form of yield increases (67 percent)
and increased cropping intensity (12 percent). The
remaining 20 percent will come from cropland expansion
in some countries of sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America
and East Asia that still have land potential (FAO, 2003a).

A farmer and his cattle
return home across rice
terraces, Indonesia

In 2030, irrigated agriculture in ninety-three developing
countries would account for over 70 percent of the
projected increase in cereal production. In these countries,
the area equipped for irrigation is expected to expand by
20 percent (40 million ha) between 1998 and 2030. This
projected increase in irrigated land is less than half of
the increase of the preceding period (100 million ha).
Thanks to increased cropping intensity, the area of
harvested crops in irrigation is expected to increase by
34 percent by 2030. In the same period, the amount of
freshwater that will be appropriated for irrigation is
expected to grow by about 14 percent to 2,420 km3 in
2030. Compared to the projected 34 percent increase in
harvested irrigated area and the 55 percent increase in
food production, the 14 percent increase in water
withdrawal for irrigation is modest. Irrigation in the
ninety-three developing countries, aggregated as a
group, still claims a relatively small part of their total
water resources. At the local level, however, where there

are already water shortages, such as in the Near East and
North Africa, growing competition between agriculture,
cities and industries will exacerbate water scarcity, and
it is likely that the share of freshwater available for
agriculture will decrease (Faurès et al., 2003).
In countries and regions facing serious water scarcity
problems, the gap between demand and production will
grow, forcing them to rely increasingly on importing food
to satisfy domestic needs. Already today, several
countries like Egypt or Jordan have a structural food
deficit and cannot produce the food they need to satisfy
domestic demand.

1b. Drivers of change in agricultural
production
Changing patterns of demography, food
production, food demand and diets
Global demographic projections point to declining rates in
population growth. Deceleration of demographic growth
and gradual saturation in per capita food consumption
will contribute to a slowing growth of food demand.
Nevertheless, the expected absolute annual increments in
population growth continue to be large, of the order of
76 million people per year at present and 53 million
people per year towards 2030. Almost all of this
population growth will take place in developing countries,
with large regional differences. These countries have to
find an adequate mix of policies stimulating local food

hectares per person

Note: In forty years, cropland has
increased only slightly while
population was more than
doubling, leading to a sharp
reduction in the amount of land
needed to produce food for one
person. These rapid increases in
productivity were obtained
through intensification of
agricultural production, in which
irrigation has played an important
role.

1, 000 hectares

1, 000

WWDR Chapter 07e (F)

15/2/06

15:47

Page 253

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 5 3

Map 7.1: Distribution of areas under irrigation in the world, 2000

Note: Irrigation is concentrated in
arid and semi-arid areas, where it
represents a significant share of
cropland, and in the humid
tropics of Southeast Asia, where
it made it possible to move from
one to two or even three
harvests of rice per year.
Source: Siebert et al., 2005; FAO/AQUASTAT, 2005.

production, income generation for the poorer, mostly
rural, segments of the population and generation of
foreign exchange to import the complement of food
needed to satisfy domestic food requirements.
Agricultural commodity supply and demand are also
changing (Schmidhuber, 2003). In addition to the
required quantity, many factors in changing food demand
and production patterns, sometimes cancelling out one
another, influence agricultural production and the way
inputs are managed. The distribution of bulk grain has
become more reliable and ‘just-in-time’, allowing world
reserves to be progressively reduced over the past
decades from about four months to less than three
months of global demand (FAO, 2005). Food commodities
are produced, conditioned, refrigerated and transported
over increasing distances at the cost of energy and
environmental degradation.
Meat demand has been shifting towards poultry, and the
world is now consuming more poultry meat than bovine
meat. Given that poultry has a much better conversion
rate of cereals into meat (two to one) than cattle

(between five and seven to one), this shift releases some
of the pressure projected on the cereal sector and water
demand for the irrigated cereal production.
As diets diversify and become healthier and better
balanced, the demand for fresh vegetables and fruits
increases. These goods are produced under intensive
farming methods, including the use of greenhouses
and irrigation for timely year-round production following
exacting specifications. The controlled agro-ecological
environment under which vegetables and fruits are
produced also allows for accurate water control with
minimum wastage. However, this form of agriculture is
only possible under full control of water, which should be
available on demand and in good quality. Many irrigation
systems are not equipped with the necessary storage,
conveyance and control systems and do not have the
capacity to deliver water under these stringent conditions.

In countries and
regions facing
serious water
scarcity
problems, the
gap between
demand and
production of
food will grow,
forcing them to
rely increasingly
on importing
food to satisfy
domestic needs

2 5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Urbanization

Fishermen, Turkey

Growing urban centres have a strong impact on nearby rural
economies. Newly urbanized people tend to change their food
consumption habits with a preference for foods that are easier
and less time-consuming to prepare (for example preferring
rice to millet). Urban markets are larger and more diverse than
rural markets and often lead rural-urban migrants to take
advantage of opportunities in informal activities such as
producing, processing and trading food products. In addition
to creating urban livelihoods, the rural-urban links established
through urbanization open markets for rural products and thus
also improve rural livelihoods. However, cities are rapidly
increasing their claim on water, which is often satisfied
at the expense of nearby rural areas. Furthermore, urban
centres represent a source of water pollution that has
profound impacts on downstream agriculture and aquatic
ecosystems.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Growing urbanization also has significant impacts on food
markets. In recent decades, a handful of transnational
corporations have gained increasing control over trade,
processing and sales of food, and the thirty largest
supermarket chains now account for one-third of food
sales worldwide (FAO, 2004a). This progression has been
particularly fast during the last decade in South America
and East Asia. Smallholders face difficulties in meeting
the requirements imposed by supermarkets that
increasingly prefer to contract limited numbers of
suppliers. They often need to invest substantially in
irrigation, greenhouses and storage to meet the
standards for supply quality and reliability.

Impact of climate change

In arid areas,
return flow from
agriculture itself
and multiple
reuses of water
lead to
progressive
degradation in
water quality

The average temperature of the earth’s surface has risen
by 0.6 °C since the late 1800s. It is expected to increase by
another 1.4 to 5.8 °C by the year 2100, and the sea level
may rise from 9 to 88 cm during the same period (IPCC,
2001). Climate change is expected to have significant
impact on agriculture and food production patterns through
three major factors: global warming, change in rainfall
patterns and the increase in carbon dioxide (CO2)
concentration in the atmosphere. A temperature increase
of more than 2.5 °C could affect global food supply and
contribute to higher food prices. The impact on crop yields
would vary considerably from one region to another. Heat
stress, shifting monsoons and drier conditions can reduce
yields by as much as one-third in the tropics and subtropics.
Dry continental areas, such as central Asia and the African
Sahel, would be expected to experience drier and hotter
climates, whereas longer growing seasons and increased

rains might boost productivity in temperate regions.
Higher temperatures would also influence production
patterns, shifting production ranges of specific crops
towards the poles. A similar expansion of the range of
pests increases the risk of crop losses.
In a scenario of moderate climate change (a temperature
increase of less than 2 °C), gradual adaptation of
cultivars and agricultural practices could occur with no
expected major impact on food production in tropical
areas. However, regional impact would vary widely,
affecting the production capacity of some countries.
Those most vulnerable to these changes are the poor
and landless in rural areas dependent on isolated rainfed
agricultural systems in semi-arid and arid regions.
The changes in the hydrological cycle and rainfall patterns
– more precipitation, more frequent intense rainfall
events and more evaporation – would affect soil moisture
and increase erosion (see also Chapter 4). In droughtprone areas, the number and duration of dry spells would
be expected to increase, affecting crop production. It is
generally admitted that higher levels of CO2 in the
atmosphere could stimulate photosynthesis and
contribute to an increase in crop productivity. This is
particularly true for C3 crops that include wheat, rice,
soybeans, barley, cassava and potato, for which a CO2
concentration increase of 50 percent leads to a
15 percent increase in potential production. At the same
time, as most weeds are also C3 plants, they will also
become more aggressive. C4 crops, which include several
tropical crops like maize, sugar cane, sorghum and millet,
as well as many pasture and forage grasses, are less
responsive to higher levels of CO2.

Increased water scarcity and competition for
water
Historically, irrigation represents between 70 and
80 percent of all water uses, with some countries using
90 percent or more for irrigation. This percentage is
changing as more and more countries face water shortages.
It is estimated that over 1 billion people now live in
countries and regions where there is insufficient water to
meet food and other material needs. By 2030, over 60
percent of the population will live in urban areas (UN,
2004), claiming an increasing share of water abstraction.
Much of this water will have to come from agriculture;
of all freshwater use sectors, agriculture in most cases
shows the lowest return on water in economic terms.
As the stress on water resources increases, competition

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 5 5

grows between irrigation agencies fighting to retain their
power and cities needing to satisfy the needs of their
rapidly growing populations (Johnson III et al., 2002).
Water stress and the pressing need to renegotiate
intersectoral allocations are usually factors that force
changes in the way water is managed in agriculture.
Declining water quality adds to the stress on supply.
In developing countries, water diverted to cities is often
released after use without adequate treatment. In arid
areas, return flow from agriculture itself and multiple
reuses of water lead to a rapid degradation in quality.
In particular, combined problems of water pollution and
water scarcity can have disastrous effects on fish
populations and habitats.

Above: Nomad women
drawing water from a
well during a sandstorm,
Mauritania

Part 2. How Agriculture Can Respond to the
Changing Nature of Demand for Water
In the global debate about increasing water scarcity, agriculture is often associated with the image of
inefficient, wasteful water use. This image is conveyed by poor performance in terms of ‘water use
efficiency’, a term that was defined as the ratio between the irrigation water absorbed by the plants
and the amount of water actually withdrawn from its source for the purpose of irrigation. FAO has
estimated that overall water use efficiency in irrigation ranges around 38 percent in developing
countries and has projected only a minor increase in overall water use efficiency in the forthcoming
decades (FAO, 2003a). The word ‘efficiency’, when its value is significantly below 100 percent, implies
that water is being wasted. However, from a water balance perspective, water not taken up and
transpired by the crop plants, even if unnecessarily withdrawn from its natural course, is not necessarily
wasted. Unused water may be used further downstream in the irrigation scheme, it can flow back to the
river or it can contribute to the recharge of aquifers. Renewable freshwater is only effectively ‘lost’
when it evaporates from the soil, is fatally polluted or when it joins a saltwater body.

2a. Raising water productivity in agriculture

From water use efficiency to water productivity

This fact does not, by itself, deny justification of
programmes aimed at increasing water use efficiency in
irrigation; in most cases it is better for water to be left
in its natural course rather than being extracted.
The adoption of water-saving technologies and improved
water management is justified in terms of better equity
within irrigation schemes, higher reliability of water
service, reduced waterlogging and reduced energy
cost in cases when pumping is required, when it can be
demonstrated that excess water is actually lost to the
sea or to salty depressions, and when water withdrawal
jeopardizes the sustainability of the ecosystems. In all
cases, the overall implications in terms of water balance
must be clearly understood (Seckler et al., 2003).

Rather than water use efficiency, the concept of water
productivity is now widely accepted as a measure of
performance in agricultural water use. By definition,
productivity represents the output of any production
process expressed per unit of a given input, in this
case water. In agriculture, several types of output can
be considered. In a strict commodity production vision,
the output is usually expressed in volumes or value of
a given agricultural production. Figure 7.6 shows water
requirements and economic return for a selection of crops in
Cyprus. However, productivity calculations are increasingly
being extended to assess the water value of other outputs,
including the social and environmental services provided by
irrigation (Molden et al., 2003).

A farmer watering crops
using watering-cans,
Thailand

2 5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 7.6: Water productivity of different crops, Cyprus
Economic return per m3
of water (Cy£)
Water requirements
(m3/ha)
OF=On field
GH=Greenhouse

100
80
60
40
20

Table grapes (OF)

Table olives (OF)

Citrus (OF)

Fodder (OF)

Watermelons (OF)

-80

French beans (GH)

-60

Tomatoes (GH)

-40
Note: The productivity of water
in agriculture can be expressed
in economic terms. This figure
shows how water productivity
changes from one crop to
another in a given environment.

Tomatoes (OF)

-20

Spring potatoes (OF)

0

Values are expressed in percentage of the highest value
-100

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Source: FAO and WDD, 2002.

In the last forty years, water productivity – expressed in
kilograms of crop produced per cubit metre of water –
has nearly doubled; that is, only half as much water is
needed today than was needed to produce the same
quantity of food in the 1960s (Renault, 2003).
This remarkable improvement in crop water productivity
is the result of increased yields for all major crops,
thanks to breeding programmes that developed crop
varieties with increasing harvest index, better
physiological adaptation, and deeper rooting systems
leading to better drought resistance. Water productivity
of modern rice varieties, for example, is three times
greater than the water productivity of traditional
varieties, and progress in extending these achievements
to other crops has been considerable (Bennett, 2003).

Boosting rainfed agriculture

Traditional irrigation
system, Oman

Rainfed farming represents 82 percent of cropland and
the bulk of the world’s agricultural production. It is
practised mostly in temperate climates and humid and
sub-humid tropics. In rainfed farming, the outcome of
farming operations depends on rainfall patterns and
associated climatic phenomena. Both droughts and
excess precipitation can lead to a partial or total loss of
agricultural production. In the future, rainfed agriculture
is projected to continue providing a large part of food
production. There is still a large ‘yield gap’ to be closed,
meaning that the production yields achieved under
experimental station conditions are at present
significantly larger than the average yields obtained in

practice. Figure 7.7 shows that in India, for instance,
long-term on-station experiments have indicated a steady
gap between improved and traditional technologies, with
a yield ratio of one to four in 2001 (Wani et al., 2003).
Such a gap demonstrates that in most cases, production
is more constrained by market opportunities and food
prices than by production capacity.
Various cropping systems (combining appropriate soil
fertility management and water conservation practices)
contribute to boosting rainfed agriculture by reducing soil
evaporation and increasing nutrient availability for plants
during the growing season. Crop residues, or even
specific crop cover management and mulching, also help
to conserve moisture by limiting evaporation and runoff
(Rockström et al., 2003). A long list of effective practices
could be written, as farmers and researchers have developed
and will continue to invent systems that help to mitigate the
effects of drought at all scales and contribute to increasing
water efficiency in rainfed conditions.

The potential of biotechnology
Biotechnology can be defined as any technological
application that uses biological systems and living
organisms to make or modify products or processes for a
specific use. This definition covers many of the tools and
techniques that are commonplace in agriculture and food
production. While there is little controversy about many
aspects of biotechnology, including traditional breeding,
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) have become

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 5 7

Figure 7.7: Grain yield under improved and traditional technologies, 1977–2001, Andhra Pradesh, India
7
Improved technologies

Observed potential yield

Traditional technologies
6

Grain yield (t/ha)

5

4

3

2

1

0
1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

Note: Long-term monitoring
experiments show that yields
increase steadily, but that a
significant gap remains between
yields obtained by farmers and
potential yields, even in rainfed
areas.

Source: Wani et al., 2003.

the target of a very intensive and emotionally charged
debate. The key difference between traditional breeding
and modern genetic modification is that in the latter,
genetically modified plants or animals are created using
genes isolated from other living organisms, or from across
the border between species and between animal and
vegetal organisms. Current research focuses on the
nutritional value, new products (including biodegradable
plastics) and agronomic characteristics like salt and
drought tolerance (FAO, 2002a; 2003c; 2004b).
The impact that biotechnology may have on water
resources management is hard to assess. It is certain
that yield increases of main crops will continue to enhance
crop water productivity. Development of drought- and
salinity-resistant crops could be relevant in the context of
water scarcity; however, experts disagree on the possibility
of achieving important progress with such crops in the
near future: some success is being reported in tackling
drought and salinity tolerance, but to date, there have
been no big breakthroughs in developing such crops (FAO,
2003c). The relevance of GMOs for the food security of
the rural poor is also a subject of controversy. Many of
the currently available technologies generated by
conventional research methods have yet to reach the
poorest farmers’ fields, and there is no guarantee that
new biotechnologies will fare better. Identifying small
farmers’ constraints to technology access and use
continues to be an issue that the development community
must address (FAO, 2003a; 2004a).

Virtual water and food trade
The concept of virtual water is attracting attention in
relation to the analysis of trade flows and increasing
water scarcity (Allan, 2003; see also Chapters 8, 11
and 12). Producing goods and services generally requires
water. The water used in the production process of an
agricultural or industrial product is called the virtual water
contained in the product. For producing 1 kg of wheat we
need for instance 1 to 2 m3 of water. Producing livestock
products requires even more water: producing 1 kg of
cheese requires about 5 m3 of water, and it takes about
16 m3 of water to produce 1 kg of beef (Hoekstra,
2003). The concept makes it clear that, in a reasonably
safe, interdependent and prosperous world, a country
with limited water resources could depend on the import
of agricultural products showing high levels of embedded
water (e.g. meat) and apply its own water resources to
produce other commodities of lower value in terms of
water content (see Table 7.2). Conversely, a country with
abundant water resources could benefit from its
comparative natural advantage by exporting products
that are high in embedded water.
Food trade analysis shows that most trade takes place
between countries that show substantial endowments in
water resources, indicating clearly that factors other than
water drive international food trade. Yet an increasing
number of arid countries that face water scarcity (Egypt,
Tunisia, etc.) are progressively embracing policies aimed
at increasing their dependency on the import of staple

Farmers working on the
construction of contour
bunds, Myanmar

2 5 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 7.2 Virtual water content of selected
products

Note: Virtual water is the total
amount of water used in the

Product
Wheat
Rice
Maize
Potatoes
Soybeans
Beef
Pork
Poultry
Eggs
Milk
Cheese

Litres of water per kilo of crop
1, 150
2, 656
450
160
2, 300
15, 977
5, 906
2, 828
4, 657
865
5, 288

production and processing of a
given product.

During the
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

twentieth
century, the
world population
increased
threefold, while
water used in
agriculture
through
irrigation
increased sixfold
and some
major rivers
approached an
advanced level
of water
depletion

Source: Adapted from Hoekstra, 2003.

crops and thus releasing water for more financially
productive uses. Such policies usually imply long-term
trade agreements between importing and exporting
countries and therefore tend to facilitate increased
stability in international relations.

2b. Improving irrigation
During the twentieth century, the world population
increased threefold, while water used in agriculture
through irrigation increased sixfold and some major
rivers approached an advanced level of water depletion.
The ‘green revolution’ was based on a technology
package comprising components of improved highyielding varieties of cereals, irrigation, improved soil
moisture utilization and the application of plant nutrients,
pest control, and associated management skills. The use
of these technology packages on good land in suitable
socio-economic environments resulted in increased crop
yields and increased incomes for millions of farmers,
particularly in Asia. Statistics indicate that yields of rice,
wheat and maize approximately doubled between the
1960s and the 1990s. The green revolution has been a
major achievement, and its effects are continuing, but
the need for systematic use of irrigation, mineral
fertilizers and agrochemical-based pest and weed
control created environmental and health problems.

and canals, financed mostly by national governments,
with support from international lending institutions.
However, irrigation project performance problems
started to emerge as early as the mid-1960s: not all the
irrigation areas created were actually irrigated; crop yields
were below projections; maintenance was substandard,
and rehabilitation too frequently required; in some areas,
soils started to become salinized; the return on
investments was lower than expected; and the benefits
to poor people were fewer than foreseen when calling
for public funding (Mollinga and Bolding, 2004).
Understanding of the causes of poor performances in
irrigation has improved. Design faults, including missing or
inadequate drainage infrastructure, were often observed
and sometimes traced to the application of inappropriate
design standards (i.e. calling on materials, equipment and
skills that were not locally available). Today’s economic
context calls for changes in agricultural policies and
practices that these schemes cannot easily accommodate.
In the Indus River Basin, for example, large irrigation
schemes were initially designed and built to spread and
share water thinly and equitably in order
to reach as many farmers as possible, with deliveries
covering only part of water needs when the entire area is
considered. These systems cannot accommodate current
demands for crop diversification and intensification.
Other dysfunctions can be traced to disregard for relevant
socio-economic conditions, lack of consultations with
stakeholders and target groups, and generally poor
governance both at the level of the countries implementing
the irrigating works and of the financing institutions and
donors. In many cases, women were excluded from the
benefits of irrigation, because, according to social
traditions, they could not have access to land rights and/or
would not be allocated water rights (see Box 7.3). Among
typical governance problems in the irrigation sector are the
capture of benefits, including the control of water by the
most influential farmers at the expense of poorer
smallholders, and control of irrigation systems by rentseekers, usually well-connected with local decision-makers.

Institutional reforms in irrigation management
Achievements and failures of irrigation
The aim of large-scale irrigation projects was to drive
regional and national development through the
participation of significant segments of populations in
direct and indirect project benefits. This socio-economic
objective justified the implementation, at substantial
public cost, of hydraulic infrastructure, including dams

By the 1990s, the major agencies funding development
were making their loans conditional on the adoption of
reform packages that required a balanced fiscal budget, a
reduced role for the state and a larger role for the private
sector. These packages emphasized economic water
pricing, financial autonomy for irrigation agencies and the
devolution of management responsibilities to lower levels.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 5 9

BOX 7.3: THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN IRRIGATED FARMING IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
In most countries, access to irrigation water is

In Burkina Faso, a case study showed that

livestock. The effects of having an individual

mediated by race, social status and gender. In

overall productivity increased when women and

plot also significantly improved the bargaining

sub-Saharan Africa, a complex set of rights and

men were allocated small separate plots rather

position of women within households.

obligations reflecting social and religious norms

than larger household plots. Women proved to

prevails within rural communities and dictates the

be good irrigation managers and preferred to

division of labour between men and women

work on their own plots. As they became

farmers. Irrigation projects have often been

economically less dependent upon their

implemented without considering existing social

husbands, they were able to help support their

and cultural practices like the gendered division

relatives and increase their own opportunities for

of labour and responsibilities.

individual accumulation of wealth in the form of

Among these reforms, irrigation management transfer
(IMT) appears to be the most systematic and far-reaching
effort so far. The philosophy behind IMT lies in the
perception that increased ownership, representation
and active participation of farmers in the operation
and maintenance of irrigation systems would be more
effective than publicly run systems and would create an
incentive for farmers to be more responsible towards
their common obligations. IMT is based on the principle
of subsidiarity, which holds that no responsibility should
be located at a higher level than necessary.

Sources: FAO, 2002a; Rathgeber, 2003.

Several approaches were developed to reform irrigation
institutions, often in combination with each other.
Decentralization, devolution, privatization and the
development of public–private partnerships for irrigation
management are all possible elements of institutional
reform packages being implemented at various levels
in over fifty countries, including Australia, India, Mexico,
the Philippines and Turkey. All of them imply substantial
changes in the way water governance is being practised.
Figure 7.8 schematically presents the implications of
these institutional packages in terms of ownership and
management of water for a range of typical situations.

Cattle drinking from the
riverbank, Ethiopia

Figure 7.8: Examples of institutional reforms and implications in terms of ownership and management

Before
Entity
Public sector

Authority

Private sector
or famers

After
Reform process
Public sector

Private sector
or famers

Irrigation Management
Transfer

Irrigation system
Management

Authority

Decentralization

River basin agency
Management

Small hydropower
system

Authority
Management

Source: Adapted from FAO, forthcoming.

Privatization

Note: Institutional reforms in
irrigation management can
take many forms. In most cases,
they imply changes in the
ownership, responsibility and
authority over different parts of
the irrigation system, land, water
and infrastructures. The figure
shows a sample of possible
changes, and the new roles of
governments, farmers and the
private sector (including farmers’
associations).

2 6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 7.4: MALI, OFFICE DU NIGER: THE SUCCESSFUL REFORM OF AN IRRIGATION MONOPOLY
In the 1960s, the Office du Niger, a state

the central control it exercised became a source

leased out, while the health clinics were

enterprise, managed 45,000 hectares (ha) of

of inefficiency and lack of accountability. As rice

transferred to the respective ministry and literacy

rice fields in the inland delta of the Niger River

yields declined to 2 metric tons per hectare

and extension services were delivered for a fee.

in Mali, producing over half of Mali’s rice. The

(t/ha) and cropping intensity sank to 60 percent,

By 1996 the Office had been turned into a

agency had a monopoly on rice marketing, and

national rice imports grew. Eventually, farmers

public enterprise with financial and

farmers were obliged to sell their paddy crops to

refused to grow rice, and the project survived on

administrative autonomy. Farmers were involved

the Office at a low price. The agency staff not

fund infusions by the government. In turn, the

through joint committees established in each

only operated the irrigation network but also

government solicited support from donors for

zone of the irrigation scheme. Paddy yields

supplied inputs, provided extension, stored the

financial and technical assistance.

climbed to 6.5 tons/ha in places and cropping
intensity climbed to 115 percent, contributing to

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

paddy, operated the rice mills, ran a seed farm,
produced farm equipment, managed guest

In 1993, a presidential delegate was appointed

improving the financial sustainability of the

houses and restaurants, staffed health clinics

to draw up and implement a reform plan. Rice

scheme (see also Chapter 14).

and ran literacy courses. The vertical integration

mills were sold and the seed farm, guest houses,

of the agency was useful initially, but gradually

equipment workshop and training centre were all

such as

Successful institutional reforms require strong political
backing and a willingness to shift responsibilities for
delivering efficient and equitable irrigation services
from government agencies to new, more representative
institutions (see Box 7.4). Progress is slow, and reforms
have often tended to disregard the need for funding the
provision of public goods such as education, health and
water services, which are all fundamental for
development, poverty reduction and nutritional
improvements in rural areas. Modalities for large-scale
irrigation governance continue to be a subject of debate,
and covering social, economic and environmental aspects
proves difficult to attain (Mollinga and Bolding, 2004).

education,

Modernization of large irrigation systems

health and

Modernization of an irrigation system can be defined as
the act of upgrading or improving the capacity of the
system to respond appropriately to current water service
demands, keeping in perspective future needs. The process
involves institutional, organizational and technological
changes. It implies changes at all operational levels of
irrigation schemes, from water supply and conveyance
to the farm level. Improvements in canal operation is
generally a critical step in the process (Facon, 2005).

...reforms have
often tended to
disregard the
need for
funding the
provision of
public goods

water services,
which are all
fundamental for
development...

Modernization implies that a large part of the authority on
irrigation management be transferred from government
institutions to farmers and that farmers be in a position to
decide on the level of service they want and are willing to
pay for. The term, ‘modernization’, refers, therefore, not only
to the rehabilitation, upgrading or transformation of physical

Source: Johnson III et al., 2002.

infrastructure in irrigation systems, but also to innovation or
transformation in how irrigation systems are operated and
managed. The concept is highly relevant to most of the
large irrigation schemes in Asia, where rapid economic
development poses new challenges to local agricultures.
Management reform of irrigation systems requires
adequate and sustainable financing for ongoing
operation and maintenance and, when needed, for
the rehabilitation and upgrading of the infrastructure,
including water gates and automated controls, which are
a precondition for accurate and flexible water distribution.
It also often includes demand management approaches
in order to encourage efficient water allocation.
Water pricing in irrigation serves several purposes.
Water charges refer to the collection of fees from water
users, with the prime purpose of covering the cost of
operation and maintenance, and, sometimes, to recover
part of the investment costs. Water pricing, instead, has
been advocated as an effective tool for reducing wastage
and achieving more productive water use. Experience
shows that such economic incentives alone have little
chance for success and need to come as part of a
comprehensive package of policies aimed at enhancing
the productivity of irrigation systems: water distribution
rules, effective local institutions and technological choices
are essential complements to any attempt at conserving
water in response to higher prices.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 6 1

effective contribution to poverty eradication and reduction
of malnutrition, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa.

The roles of private and public sectors in
financing irrigation
Figure 7.9 illustrates the decline in irrigation investment
since the 1970s. This decline has been attributed to a
conjunction of reasons, including poor technical,
economic and social performance of large-scale
irrigation systems and the increasing cost of irrigation
development, as the best sites are already taken, and
the price of food commodities is at an historic low.
Public sector investment in irrigation now needs to be
more strategic than in the past and explicitly geared
towards growth and poverty-reduction outcomes. In this
respect, the evaluation of the impact of irrigation cannot
be reduced to increases in yields, outputs or the
economic rate of return alone, but has to measure
the impact of each marginal dollar of investment on
poverty reduction (Lipton et al., 2003). Indeed, the most
recent figures tend to show a renewed interest of major
developing banks in agriculture and rural development as
a response to the need to reach the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) in view of the fact that the
majority of the poor and hungry people live in rural
areas. The recent report of the Commission for Africa
(2005), the Report of the UN Millennium Project Task
Force on Hunger (2004) and several recent commitments
taken in the framework of the African Union and the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) all call for
more investments in water control in rural areas as an

Government agencies tend to systematically underestimate
the role of the private sector in irrigation investment.
Even in public irrigation schemes, farmers usually provide
up to 50 percent of investment in irrigation development.
Private sector investment aims to produce maximum
revenue for the investor. As such, it is typically dynamic,
responds well to market opportunities, is economically
effective, and usually provides a substantial contribution to
rural economies. It does not, however, take into account
considerations of social equity and so does not directly
target poverty reduction. In the future, public investment
and policies must better recognize and support private
initiatives in agricultural water management by providing
appropriate incentives and an environment that favours
investments by the private sector, including small farmers.
In many places, land tenure reform and stable water rights
are paramount to the involvement of the private sector in
irrigation. The role of the public sector is also to ensure
that private sector development benefits the largest
possible number of rural people and is performed in a way
that guarantees long-term environmental sustainability.

Irrigation technology: Moving towards more
precision agriculture
Where agriculture moves away from subsistence farming

Computer-controlled
irrigation in a salad
factory, Germany

In many places,
land tenure
reform and
stable water
rights are
paramount to
the involvement
of the private
sector in
irrigation

Figure 7.9: World Bank lending in irrigation, 1960–2005
2500

Lending (current US$ million)

2000

1500

1000

500

Source: based on World Bank data.

2005

2002

1999

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

1975

1972

1969

1966

1963

1960

0

Note: World Bank lending in
irrigation and drainage in
constant dollars peaked between
the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s,
followed by a sharp decline, as a
result of falling prices of
main agricultural commodities,
increased cost of new irrigation
investments and progressive
reduction in water availability.
The most recent data, however,
suggest a renewed interest
in rural development, including
water management in agriculture.

2 6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

and farmers progressively shift self-sufficient activities into
more business-oriented activities, irrigation is increasingly
used for precision agriculture. Precision agriculture is an
agricultural concept relying on the existence of in-field
variability. It seeks to tailor agricultural practices to suit
local conditions. Precision agriculture is well adapted to
markets that demand delivery on a precise schedule of
products subject to stringent specifications. Precision
agriculture calls for optimal control of water deliveries and
is an ideal condition for the application of pressurized
irrigation technologies (sprinkler and localized irrigation).
Localized irrigation finds its most rewarding applications in

horticulture and fruit tree production. Combined with
automatic fertilizer application, or ‘fertigation’, it usually
guarantees high returns on investments, reliability in the
control of soil moisture, and reduced labour costs. When it
is well managed, it can ensure an irrigation efficiency of
close to 100 percent, thus contributing to minimizing
water loss. Precision agriculture has a bright future in
serving an increasing number of consumers in urban
areas, but its application to low-cost staple food and
commodities, representing the largest share of irrigation,
is unlikely to materialize.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Part 3. Towards More Sustainable Agriculture
Agriculture has significant impacts on environment and people's health and too often, pursuing a narrow
development goal of increased productivity has lead to the breakdown of the resilience of natural
ecosystems. The negative impacts of water management in agriculture are related to land and water
uses, in particular through encroachment on natural ecosystems, water extraction, erosion, or loss of soil
biodiversity. The drainage and return of flows from irrigation often result in unwanted impacts, including
loss of water quality. Inappropriate agricultural practices like excessive application of pesticides and
fertilizers have direct impacts on water quality and affect people's health; waterlogging and salinization
is also the result of inadequate planning and management of irrigation and drainage in agriculture.
Finding alternative ways to alleviate these impacts is therefore essential to maintain the integrity and
productivity of the ecosystems on which it depends and to create the conditions for agriculture to
contribute, in a sustainable way, to food security, poverty alleviation and economic growth.

3a. Water storage and the evolution of
groundwater-based economies
Irrigation backed by water storage has been conceived to
provide a high degree of water security to reduce
agricultural risk and encourage farmers to invest. Water
stored in reservoirs is a secure asset on which farmers
can rely. Surface water storage in reservoirs, however,
contends with several problems, including the cost and
liability of the impounding structure; the loss of water
through evaporation; reservoir and canal sedimentation;
river fragmentation and changes in river regimes; and the
destruction of local livelihoods and resources. In the past,
these costs (externalities) tended to be systematically
underestimated while the potential benefits of dams were
overestimated. The World Commission on Dams (WCD,
2000) represented significant progress in stating that all
costs (social, economic and environmental) must be
assessed against potential benefits derived from the
construction of reservoirs.

Groundwater, where it is available, is a highly reliable source
of water and provides an attractive alternative to surface
storage. In the last few decades, groundwater has played a
central role in enabling the transformation of rural
communities from low productivity subsistence agriculture
to more intensive forms of production. In contrast to surface
water systems based on reservoirs and canals, users pump
the aquifer as and when needed, and because groundwater
extraction occurs through a pressurized system instead of
open channels, precision application, which can greatly
increase yields, is also possible. Except in places where
energy is subsidized, groundwater productivity tends to be
good, as pumping costs provide an incentive to saving
water. For farming populations, groundwater access enables
increases in production while reducing agricultural risk,
enabling them to invest in more intensive forms of
production and improve their livelihoods. Consequently,
groundwater has played a particularly large role in yield and
production increase. Evidence also suggests that
groundwater access often plays a role in reducing rural
poverty (Moench, 2001). Groundwater-based rural
development has been central to major productivity gains in

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 6 3

agriculture and the improvement of rural livelihood. But
groundwater-based rural economies also show signs of
vulnerability as aquifers are depleted (see also Chapter 4).

oxide into the atmosphere. The improper use of
pesticides has detrimental impacts on the environment,
resources and human health. (see Chapters 5 and 6).

Managing groundwater

While there is no question that agriculture must reduce
the impact of its negative externalities, there is also wide
recognition that agriculture must not necessarily be
considered in opposition to natural ecosystems: positive
externalities generated by agriculture go beyond the strict
economic systems of crop production. In the same way
that humans have for millennia drawn their food from
the environment, agricultural systems that have proved
sustainable in the long term can go far in the
preservation of ecosystems and their biodiversity, while
enhancing rural livelihoods. The twentieth century has
been a time of productivity, based on the application of
agronomic practices that favour a limited number of
strategic crops. In this aspect, much indigenous
knowledge has been neglected and partly lost in the drive
to always apply agricultural systems that are high in
energy inputs and low in species and cultivar diversity.
As conditions now exist to release the pressure on natural
resources, the trend, in numerous developed countries, is
to transform agriculture into a landscape management
practice, offering new avenues for better integration of
agriculture with its environment (see also Chapter 13).

Private irrigation often uses groundwater, and its individualistic
nature makes groundwater extraction difficult to control, leading
to risks of anarchic exploitation and unequal water access. As
water levels drop, competition among users increases,
progressively excluding poorer farmers who cannot afford the
cost of competitive well deepening, whereas those farmers who
develop groundwater early, and those who already possess
diverse forms of social or other capital, often consolidate their
economic advantage. Managing a groundwater body consists
mainly in ensuring that the extraction of water by a large
number of individual users is performed in a controlled manner.
This is technically feasible, but in reality meets major legal,
institutional and social obstacles. Conventional bureaucratic
controls based on well-licensing procedures, water pumping
quotas and policing entail large transaction costs and have
generally proven ineffective. It is a cause for concern that many
aquifers continue to be drawn from until declining discharges,
growing salinity and increasing pumping costs announce
groundwater depletion (Burke and Moench, 2000).
Few examples exist of successful groundwater
management. In Guanajuato State, Mexico, an experiment
involving users at the local level has led to the creation of
Aquifer Management Councils that have resulted in
reduced transaction costs and progressive changes in
users’ behaviour. The sustainability and replicability of such
a model remains to be ascertained (see also Chapter 14).

3b. Environment and water quality
Water abstractions for agriculture and other purposes
modify the water balance and reduce the quantity of
water that flows its natural course. The impact on the
aquatic environment ranges from negligible to deleterious
and deadly in extreme cases. The return of contaminated
water into natural water bodies, when exceeding the
natural recovery capacity of these systems, further
reduces the amount of freshwater of adequate quality
available for various uses and for sustaining the aquatic
environment. Agriculture is a major cause of river
depletion in the regions of the world sustained by
irrigation and is the main source of nitrate pollution of
groundwater and surface water, as well as a principal
source of ammonia pollution. It is also a major
contributor to the phosphate pollution of lakes and
waterways and to the release of methane and nitrous

In addition to producing food and other goods for farm
families and markets, sustainable agriculture also
contributes to a range of public goods, such as clean
water, wildlife, management of living aquatic resources,
carbon sequestration in soils, flood protection and
landscape quality. Certain non-food functions of
sustainable agriculture cannot be produced by other
sectors, including on-farm biodiversity, groundwater
recharge, or social cohesion. Thus, what many see as an
almost unbearable challenge for the agriculture sector –
internalizing externalities – might in fact also be seen as
a major opportunity to promote sustainable development
in rural areas (FAO and MAFF, 2003).

Salinity, a hazard of irrigation in arid zones
Irrigation development has caused numerous cases of soil and
water salinization, which is mostly restricted to arid and semiarid areas, where about 40 percent of the world’s irrigated
land is located and where the rate of evapotranspiration is
high. By withdrawing water from rivers for application on land,
irrigation tends to accelerate the rate of accumulation of salts
on land through evaporation and increase its concentration in
rivers. Salinization is also likely to become a problem on poorly

Fields near Quito,
Ecuador. The plateaus of
Quito benefit from the
humid, gentle climate of
the Sierra, which favours
the cultivation of cereals
and potatoes

2 6 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

drained soil, when the groundwater level is close to the
surface. In such cases, water tends to rise from the water
table to the surface by capillary action and then evaporate
from the soil surface, leaving salts accumulating at the
surface. In more humid regions, rainfall usually provides
enough leaching to prevent harmful salt accumulation.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Heavy monsoon rains
submerge villages, roads
and fields in India

Salinization
seriously affects
20 to 30 percent
of the area
under irrigation
in arid and
semi-arid zones

No exact assessments are available on the extent and
severity of salinization, but Smedema and Shiati (2002)
suggest that it seriously affects 20 to 30 million ha
worldwide, that is, about 25 percent of the area under
irrigation in arid and semi-arid zones and about
10 percent of all areas under irrigation. Most of this is a
legacy of large-scale water works developed from the
1950s. The spread of salinization in these ‘old’ irrigation
areas is now drastically reduced. Current global estimates
of the rate of extension of salinization are in the order of
0.25 to 0.50 million ha per year.
To a large degree, irrigation-induced land and river
salinization is inherent to the practice of irrigation in arid
and semi-arid areas. The adverse impacts of salinization
can, to some extent, be prevented and mitigated, but largescale development in arid regions will always represent a
salinity hazard that goes beyond the single irrigation
scheme and amplifies as one travels downstream. Of
particular concern are the major rivers that have their
sources in the Himalayas and flow into desert areas in
Pakistan and Central Asia. Preventive action includes
planning irrigation development better, avoiding highly
saline areas and establishing drainage infrastructure. Among
the measures that can be applied are the application of
river basin-level salt balance models to predict and monitor
the incidence of salinization and the interception and
disposal of highly saline runoffs. Salt control programmes
have contributed to arresting river salinization. However,
significant lowering of salt concentrations in rivers would
generally require radical measures such as a substantial
reduction in land under irrigation.

Recycling: Achieving an adequate urban–rural
balance of wastewater use
Cities produce large quantities of solid and liquid waste that
are disposed of and more or less treated back into the
environment. If this process is not adequately considered in
all its steps and consequences – and in developing countries
it generally is not – the impact can be devastating to the
environment and to people living close to disposal sites,
causing the disruption of ecosystems and putting people at
risk of poisoning (see Chapter 3). Liquid waste (the
contents of sewers) is discharged into rivers and coastal
zones, where it may overtax the recovery capacity of natural
water bodies, leading to the establishment of new, less
desirable ecological systems (i.e. anaerobic systems).
Agriculture around cities is generally dynamic and well
connected to markets, making profitable use of water.
Wastewater provides users with a stable source of water
with a high nutrient content. However, the use of
untreated wastewater in agriculture poses risks to human
health. Governments have usually responded to such risks
by implementing strict regulations limiting or preventing
the use of wastewater and advocating treatment before
use. Full treatment, however, can be expensive, and
achieving an adequate urban–rural balance and
distribution of charges and benefits continues to elude
governance. While the uncontrolled use of wastewater
cannot be encouraged, unconditional restriction is not a
practical option, as wastewater is too valuable a resource
for farmers who have no other alternatives.
A more pragmatic approach to wastewater use in
agriculture is now emerging. It includes enhanced
monitoring, health protection and education, and
alternative agricultural practices. This approach is being
adopted in the revision of the WHO guidelines for
wastewater use in agriculture (see Box 7.5).

BOX 7.5: REVISED WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO) GUIDELINES FOR THE SAFE USE OF WASTEWATER IN AGRICULTURE
WHO first published its ‘Guidelines for the safe

health targets. This framework allows more

with expanded sections on risk analysis and

use of wastewater and excreta in agriculture and

flexibility to countries in adapting what would be

management, revised microbial guideline values

aquaculture’ in 1989. A revision of these

available and achievable in the context of local

and further elaboration of chemical

guidelines is currently under preparation. The

social, economic and environmental factors. In

contaminants, including pharmaceuticals and

revised WHO guidelines will incorporate a risk-

addition, the interaction between wastewater

endocrine disrupting substances, health-impact

benefit approach, in which the assessment of

use and poverty in the political context and

assessment, and wastewater use planning

tolerable risks takes place before the setting of

international development targets is mentioned

strategies at sub-national levels.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 6 5

BOX 7.6: TONLE SAP: THE BENEFITS OF SEASONAL FLOODING FOR LIVELIHOODS, NUTRITION AND BIODIVERSITY
Tonle Sap, in central Cambodia, is the largest

Licensed fishing lots occupy the most productive

all of them tradable on local markets. In the

freshwater lake in Southeast Asia. The annually

areas in terms of fish catch. There is a tendency

vegetal world, besides rice, thirteen plant

flooded area includes a ring of freshwater

to underestimate the importance of rice field

species were recorded, of which six were

mangrove forest, shrubs, grassland and rice

fisheries in the Tonle Sap, because they tend to

marketed.

fields. The Tonle Sap is also a rich fishing

yield only small amounts of fish at a time, but

ground, with an estimated catch of 250,000

this provision of fish is available for many people

In conclusion, the Tonle Sap ecosystem is of

metric tonnes (t) per year on average.

on a regular basis (it is estimated that fish

major importance to the local population, not

consumption around the lake averages about

only for the supply of rice, but also for animal

60 to 70 kg per person per year).

protein and vegetables. Development that

Traditionally, the people living around the lake in

focuses only on increasing yields of rice through

areas subject to flooding have cultivated rice
varieties that could cope with the high water

The Tonle Sap is also an important source of

intensification and the use of agrochemicals may

level by elongating their stems up to five metres,

biodiversity. A survey carried out in 2001

provide more rice to eat, but may also eliminate

with a maximum growth of 10 cm per day. Where

identified seventy different species of fish and

many aquatic animals and vegetables harvested

the flooding is not as deep, normal wet rice

other organisms captured in rice field

from and around the rice fields.

varieties are transplanted into the fields once the

ecosystems for consumption as food and for

flood has reached them. In some areas, rice is

other purposes. They include several species of

planted in the fields as floodwaters recede.

fish, snake, turtle, crab, shrimp and amphibians,

Source: Adapted from Balzer et al., 2002.

Wetlands: Fragile ecosystems, sources of
livelihood

3c. Water to combat hunger and poverty in
rural areas

Wetlands are fragile ecosystems and an important source
of biodiversity, with complex hydrological and livelihood
support functions, including regulation, silt retention,
grazing land, hunting, fishing and wood production. In the
past, the attractive characteristics of wetlands for
agricultural production (particularly their fertility and soil
moisture) have led planners to undervalue their
environmental and socio-economic functions and promote
their conversion into agricultural production. Conversion of
wetlands into farmland, largely a matter of the past in
developed countries, is still actively underway in regions
with high demographic growth that suffer from food
insecurity, as in sub-Saharan Africa. Not all wetlands can
be preserved, and research is needed to identify critical
wetlands of particular importance for biodiversity, so that
a critical core of wetlands can be preserved. The Ramsar
Convention, which initially focused on wetland
conservation to ensure the survival of migrating bird
species, now works with its partners to promote a wise
use of wetlands in general, emphasizing the needs of
local populations and the complex livelihood support
functions of the wetlands. Resolution VIII.34 of the 8th
Conference of the Contracting Parties (2002) focuses on
the necessary interactions between agriculture, wetlands
and water resources management (see Box 7.6).

The projections of total food demand suggest that per
capita food consumption will continue to grow
significantly, and the world average will approach
3,000 kcal in 2015, compared to 2,800 kcal around 2000.
The world will be producing enough food for everyone,
but its distribution will continue to be unequal. In
absolute figures, the number of undernourished people in
the world has been stagnating since the early 1990s, and
was estimated at 850 million in 2000–02, of which
815 million were in developing countries (see Map 7.2,
Figures 7.10 and 7.11). Projections show a decline to
610 million in 2015, which is progress, but still distant
from the 1996 World Food Summit target of 400 million
in 2015 (FAO, 1997). Although the Millennium
Development Goal of reducing by half the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty and hunger by the year
2015 is well within grasp, at present, 15,000 children
under the age of five die every day as a consequence of
chronic hunger and malnutrition (see Chapters 1 and 6).
Chronic hunger is a reflection of extreme poverty, as
those affected by hunger do not have the resources
needed to produce or buy food. Hunger is not only a
result of poverty but also contributes to poverty by
lowering labour productivity, reducing resistance to
disease and depressing educational achievements.

Irrigation in the Eastern
Cape, South Africa

WWDR Chapter 07e (F)

15/2/06

15:47

Page 266

2 6 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 7.10: Proportion of undernourished people in selected developing countries, 2000–02

1990-1992

2000-2002

80
70
60
50
%

40
30
20
10

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

0

Source: FAO, 2004a.

Map 7.2: Proportion of undernourished people in total population, 2000–02

Note: While the world is
progressively graduating
out of poverty, sub-Saharan
Africa remains plagued with
high levels of undernutrition.
Although less severe in
relative terms, the situation
in South Asia also deserves
attention, as it holds the
largest absolute number of
undernourished people in
the world.

Source: FAO, 2004a.

WWDR Chapter 07e (F)

15/2/06

15:47

Page 267

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 6 7

Note: This graph shows changes
in the percentage of
undernourished people over a
ten-year period in ninety
developing countries. It shows
that relatively rapid changes
can be obtained in food
security when the right
political decisions are taken. It
also shows the negative impacts
that civil unrest and wars can
have on people’s food security.
* Ethiopia and Eritrea: no
separate data available for
1990–92; Afghanistan, Iraq,
Papua New Guinea and Somalia:
no data available for 2000–02.

Figure 7.11: Estimated and projected number of undernourished people by region, 1991–2030
350

1990-92
1997-99

300

2015
2030

People undernourished
(millions)

250

200

150

100

50

0

Source: FAO, 2003a.

Near East

Sub-Saharan

and North Africa

Africa

South Asia

East Asia

Latin America
and the Caribbean

Note: Projections towards 2030
indicate a reduction in the total
number of undernourished people
in all developing regions, but
increases are still expected
between now and 2015 in the
Near East and sub-Saharan Africa.
Asia is expected to see the
highest drop in the number of
undernourished people as a result
of steady economic growth.

2 6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Access is a
pivotal concept
in the
development of
livelihoods, and
is allied with the
notion of
entitlement.
Poverty results
from the failure

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

to express such
entitlements...

Decades of international concern about an ethically
unacceptable global level of extreme poverty and hunger,
and national and international policies and governance
formulated in this spirit, have been insufficient to
transform the livelihoods of the poor for the better.
Forty years ago, there was hope that the green
revolution, with its new high-yielding varieties of rice,
wheat and maize, would bring world hunger to an end by
increasing food supply. The green revolution boosted
food production and, in relative terms, the global situation
has improved. Nevertheless, universal food security has not
been achieved, and the absolute number of chronically
hungry people remains high. So what options are now
available to eradicate hunger and poverty, and what role
does water play in this endeavour?

Water in livelihood as a pathway out of poverty
The livelihoods approach to understanding and tackling
poverty, its causes and consequences, is gaining momentum
across the developing world and among the development
partners. For water and food, it means a fundamental shift
beyond considering water as a resource for increasing food
production to focusing on people and the role that water
plays in their livelihood strategies. This puts people at the
centre of development and means that issues such as
drought and secured access to water become problem-led

rather than discipline-led, leading to a focus on institutional
and political barriers to water access and on physical
infrastructure needed for its management.
At the heart of the livelihoods approach are the ‘capital’
assets of households, a particularly relevant approach in
rural areas. These include not only natural assets, such
as land and water, but also social, human, physical and
financial assets, presenting a comprehensive view of the
basis of livelihood, as opposed to the more classical
approach that tends to address single issues separately
(see Table 7.3). Within a sustainable livelihoods approach,
water is treated as an economic good and as an asset
that can be invested to generate benefits and income.
To consider only the role of water in agricultural
production is not sufficient; in a livelihoods approach, it is
necessary to understand the impacts of improved water
supplies on the socio-economic livelihood circumstances of
households. The challenge for the future is to introduce
this systemic approach in places where the majority of
organizations and the professionals working in them are
still driven by a sectoral approach (see Chapter 12).
Irrigation is a direct source of livelihood for hundreds of
millions of the rural poor in developing countries because
of the food, income options and indirect benefits it

Table 7.3: Shifting towards a livelihood-based approach in rural areas
Capital
Physical
capital

Issue
Infrastructure for
rainfed and irrigation
systems

Livelihood-based approach
Improves decision-making ability through
better rainfed and irrigation farming
systems. Removes risk and uncertainty
including maintenance and management
of natural capital stocks.
Social
Community approach Communities mobilized to establish water Identifies poorest households and
capital
needed to raising or
user associations (WUA) to improve
strengthens participation in, and influence
managing other forms agricultural water management.
on, community management systems;
of capital, of crucial
creates safety-nets within communities to
importance in
ensure the poor have access to water;
irrigation management,
improves rights to land and water and
water user associations
establishes right to access by poor
(WUA), networks
households within communities.
Natural Land and water
Develops new and enhances existing
Enhanced through training in catchment
capital
availability
water resources using physical and
protection and maintaining natural
social assets.
environment.
Financial Cash, credit, savings, Develops individual or community-based Secured through access to small-scale
capital
animals
tariffs and charges mechanisms for
credit.
water use.
Human
Labour, knowledge
Trains people in agricultural water
Knowledge of demand, responsive
capital
(through education,
management and promotes gender
approaches, community self-assessment of
experience)
equity.
needs, participatory monitoring, gender
mainstreaming.
Source: Adapted from Nicol, 2000.

Production-based approach
Rainfed and irrigation farming systems
improved to increase agricultural
production.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 6 9

BOX 7.7: POSITIVE IMPACTS OF IRRIGATION ON RURAL COMMUNITIES
■

Employment and income for landowners and
the landless who benefit from new
employment opportunities.

■

Increased production options throughout
the year, used for both home consumption
and sale.

■

Health improvements through access to
safe domestic water supply and sanitation.

■

Widening of social networks through
participation in water committees.

■

Attraction of immigration and improved
provision of services, such as education.

■

Boost to local economy and family welfare.

Source: Adapted from Vincent, 2001; Meinzen-Dick and
Bakker, 1999; Zwarteveen 1996.

generates (Vincent, 2001). The anti-poverty effects of
irrigation can be assessed on two levels: (1) production,
related to the national or regional economy, and (2)
livelihoods, related to the household and its well-being. The
former has been the method traditionally used to assess
irrigation impacts; conversely, a livelihoods approach to
irrigation places adequate and secure livelihood aims before
increased production. Negative impacts of irrigation systems
and provision on livelihoods, such as water-borne infections,
waterlogging and salinity, increases in land prices and in
women’s unpaid workload, displacement and disparity of
benefits between inequity in irrigation water distribution,
are outweighed in most cases by benefits (see Box 7.7).
The balanced achievement of these livelihoods benefits,
without a disproportionate gap between those who lose
and those who gain in irrigation processes, can only be
reached if access to water or to the benefits it generates
to third parties is secured by the poor and landless. Access
is a pivotal concept in the development of livelihoods, and
is allied with the notion of entitlement. Poverty results
from the failure to express such entitlements, not from the
lack of individual rights to the commodities at stake.

Despite difficulties in participatory irrigation management
processes, a beneficial by-product has been the
strengthening of social capital, increasingly accounted for
in livelihood improvements (see Box 7.8). Increasing the
positive impacts of water in supporting and enhancing
the livelihood of the poor has three implications:
■

recognizing the role and importance of water in nonagricultural uses in single purpose management
systems and identifying complementarities among uses
(Meinzen-Dick, 1997)

■

supporting people’s capacity to manage their water in
a fair and sustainable manner (Vincent, 2001)

■

engaging a policy move from production and health to
sustainable livelihoods in water assessments (Nicol,
2000), that is, moving from supply-led to demandresponsive policies that take requirements and claims of
user groups into account and make more efficient and
equitable use of existing supplies (Winpenny, 1997).

BOX 7.8: LOCAL GOVERNANCE TO SECURE ACCESS TO LAND AND WATER IN THE LOWER GASH WATERSHED, SUDAN
In Sudan, the livelihood of more than 67,000

Traditional approaches to rehabilitating such

land and water by building on existing local

poor farming families is to be improved on a

projects usually focus on infrastructure repairs,

community organizations. Efforts are underway to

large irrigation scheme in the Gash watershed in

with little room for adaptation. In the Gash

counter the strong tradition of supply-driven

the arid eastern part of the country. Set up in

Sustainable Livelihood Regeneration Project

irrigation management, where farmers are

the 1920s in order to settle nomadic people, the

(GSLRP) (2004–12), the improvement of farmers’

tenants, and empower farmers to take on more

project fell into decline in the 1970s. The

livelihood was selected as the first objective.

management responsibility. This puts household

management was fragmented and nepotistic,

Capacity development and institutional reforms

livelihood, rather than infrastructure development,

and farmers complained about its ineffectiveness

have been designed to ensure that all

firmly at the core of future investments.

in meeting their needs for social and economic

stakeholders are involved in the decision-making

development. Soon, production shifted to low-

process. This is seen as critical to the success of

return subsistence crops, farmers stopped paying

the project. New organizations are being set up

irrigation fees and the system fell into disrepair.

to ensure that citizens gain more secure rights to

Source: IFAD, 2003.

2 7 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

In many parts of the world, poor farmers rank soil erosion and
lack of soil fertility among the main constraints to improving
crop yields – both of which are linked to water management.
Technical solutions have long been available, yet the problems
and the solutions do not appear to be connected and so the
rate of adoption of good practices remains poor. The links
between research, extension and poor farmers need to be
strengthened in new and innovative ways that encourage
two-way communication with farmers (IFAD, 2001).

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Water mobilization targeted towards benefiting the poor
can effectively contribute to reducing extreme poverty and
hunger. Safe water supply improves personal health, the
primary physical capital, thus facilitating the undertaking
of gainful activities. Water availability sustains the natural
ecosystems on which the livelihoods of the rural poor
largely depend. Irrigation can reduce the risk of droughts

and increase cropping intensities by ‘extending’ the wet
season in the humid and tropical zones. Introducing
irrigation technology can reduce household risks by raising
incomes. Groundwater access often plays a particularly
important role in reducing rural poverty. However, while
irrigation is one of the success stories of the twentieth
century, providing significant increases in food production,
its poverty-reduction impact is not a foregone conclusion.
Inequality in access to land and water resources, such as
in southern Africa and Latin America, tends to exacerbate
social inequities. If not properly managed, resources tend
to end up in the hands of large influential farmers,
thereby leaving almost none for small poor farmers to
control (Lipton et al., 2003). Access to financial capital is
also important; most often poor farmers have neither the
money to invest in irrigation nor the collateral, such as
land tenure rights, to obtain credit.

Part 4. Governance Matters at All Levels in
Agriculture
In the future, a
purely sectoral
approach to
water
management
will no longer
be possible...

Agriculture requires that large quantities of water be taken up by crops from the soil in the root zone.
The production of meat requires substantially more water, and fish production needs large quantities of
clean water in ponds, rivers and estuaries. Globally, irrigated agriculture claims close to 70 percent of all
freshwater withdrawn from its natural course, but this represents only about 10 percent of water used
by agriculture – rainfall that replenishes soil moisture provides the larger part. However, irrigation has a
strategic role in agriculture. Depending on various circumstances, irrigation helps to produce two to
three times as much per hectare than non-irrigated agriculture. It is of crucial importance in boosting
agricultural productivity and limiting horizontal expansion of cropland.
However, agriculture is now coming under much more
scrutiny as competition for water between sectors increases.
Degraded land and water systems, competition from other
economic sectors and the need to conserve the integrity of
aquatic ecosystems are progressively limiting water availability
to agriculture and imposing cleaner production methods. In
the future, a purely sectoral approach to water management
will no longer be possible, and substantial adaptations of
agricultural policies will be necessary to align production with
overall river basins and aquifer management objectives.
As competition increases, irrigated agriculture will need to
be systematically examined to discern where society can
most effectively benefit from its application. Access to
natural resources needs to be negotiated with other users in
a transparent fashion in order to achieve optimal allocation
and uses under conditions of growing demand for water.

The modernization of irrigated agriculture, through
technological upgrading and institutional reform, will be
essential in ensuring much-needed gains in water
productivity. Irrigation institutions will have to respond to
the needs of farmers, ensuring flexible and reliable delivery
of water, increasing transparency in its management and
balancing efficiency and equity in access to water. This will
not only require changes in attitudes, but also well-targeted
investments in infrastructure modernization, institutional
restructuring and upgrading of the technical capacities of
farmers and water managers.
Agriculture is under pressure to reduce its negative impact
on the environment and other sectors, particularly when
associated with the use of fertilizers and pesticides, as well
as wasteful water use. However, there is currently a much
wider recognition that better agricultural water management

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 7 1

can also have a profoundly positive impact, reaching far
beyond the strict economic system of crop production.
Farmers are at the centre of any ecological process of
change. They need to be encouraged and enabled,
through appropriate incentives and governance practices,
to conserve natural ecosystems and their biodiversity and
minimize the negative impacts of agricultural production,
a goal that will only be achieved if the appropriate
policies are in place.
Farmers around the world are deeply affected by
economic factors out of their control. Historically,
governments in developing countries have tended to
neglect agricultural development in favour of
industrialization and national and urban activities.
However, it is now more generally acknowledged that
agriculture is the main engine of growth in many
developing economies. Thirty countries, most of them in
Africa, are highly dependent on agriculture, and progress
in improving their food security situation depends on,
more than any other factor, the development of local
food production. In most cases, there is a need for
substantial increase in investment in rural areas, where
water management plays a central role in raising the
productivity of agriculture and related rural activities.
At the same time, targeted policies are needed to
address the causes of chronic hunger and poverty. To be
effective, such policies need to focus on people and
develop the assets they control. Titles to land and secure

and equitable access to water and basic rural services
(education, finance, etc.) are also needed if rural
populations are to emerge from marginalization and
integrate their farming activity in their region’s economy.
The agriculture sector faces complex challenges:
producing more food of better quality, while using less
water per unit of output; providing rural people with
resources and opportunities to live healthy and productive
lives; applying clean technologies that ensure
environmental sustainability; and contributing in a
productive way to the local and national economy.
Continuing ‘business as usual’ is unlikely to deliver the
Millennium Development Goals on the path towards
freeing humanity of extreme poverty and hunger and
ensuring environmental sustainability. Action is needed
now to adapt agricultural and rural development policies,
accelerate changes in irrigation governance and, through
adequate water laws and institutions, support the
integration of the social, economic and environmental
needs of rural populations.
Ultimately, the reduction of rural hunger and poverty
depends on the decisions and actions of the farming
community in developing countries – 500 million farm
households. Their potential contribution will not be fully
realized in the absence of a socio-economic environment
that encourages, supports and protects their aspirations,
ideas and initiatives.

A class of children from
Shanghai, China, drew
their vision of their
environment for the
‘Scroll around the world’
project

Workers harvest carp
raised in a stock pond,
India

2 7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

References and Websites
Allan, J. A. 2003. Virtual water – the water, food and trade
nexus: useful concept or misleading metaphor? Water
International, Vol. 28, pp. 4–11.
Balzer, T., Balzer, P. and Pon, S. 2002. Kampong Thom
Province, Kingdom of Cambodia. M. Halwart, D. Bartley,

Rome, FAO.
———. 2002b. Crops and Drops: Making the Best Use of
Water for Agriculture. FAO, Rome.
———. 1999. Global issues and directions in inland fisheries.

Mason, J. B. 2002. Measuring hunger and malnutrition.
Measurement and assessment of food deprivation and
undernutrition. Proceedings of an international scientific
symposium convened by FAO, 26–28 June, Rome.
Meinzen-Dick, R. 1997. Valuing the multiple uses of

and H. Guttman (eds), Traditional Use and Availability

Review of the State of World Fishery Resources: Inland

irrigation water. M. Kay, T. Frank and L. Smith (eds),

of Aquatic Biodiversity in Rice-based Ecosystems. CD-

Fisheries. FAO Fisheries Circular. No. 942, Rev. 1. Rome,

Water: Economics, Management and Demand. London,

ROM, Rome, FAO.

FAO.

Barker, R. and Molle, F. 2004. Evolution of Irrigation in South

———. 1998. Integrating fisheries and agriculture to enhance

E. & F. N. Spon.
Meinzen-Dick, R. and Bakker, M. 1999. Irrigation systems as

and Southeast Asia. Comprehensive Assessment

fish production and food security. The State of Food and

multiple-use commons: Water use in Kirindi Oya, Sri

Research Report 5. Colombo, Sri Lanka, International

Agriculture, 1998, No. 31, pp. 85–99. Rome, FAO

Lanka. Agriculture and Human Values, No. 16, pp.

Water Management Institute.

Agriculture Series.

Bennett, J. 2003. Opportunities for increasing water
productivity of CGIAR crops through plant breeding and
molecular biology. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker and D. Molden
(eds), Water Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and
Opportunities for Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI
Publishing and IWMI.
Burke, J. and Moench, M. H. 2000. Groundwater and
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

———. 2002a. The State of Food and Agriculture 2002.

———. 1997. Report of the World Food Summit, 13–17
November 1996, Part 1. Rome, FAO.
FAO and MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
of Japan). 2003. Issue paper for the Ministerial meeting
on Water for food and agriculture. Rome, FAO and MAFF.
FAO and WDD (World Development Department of Cyprus).
2002. Reassessment of the water resources and demand

281–93.
Moench, M. 2001. Groundwater: Potential and Constraints.
2020 Vision Focus (Overcoming Water Scarcity and
Quality Constraints), No. 9. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
Molden, D., Murray-Rust, H., Sakthivadivel R. and Makin, I.
2003. A water productivity framework for understanding
and action. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker, and D. Molden (eds),
Water Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and

Society: Resources, Tensions and Opportunities. New

of the island of Cyprus. Synthesis report. Rome/Nicosia,

Opportunities for Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI

York, UN DESA and ISET.

FAO/WDD.

Publishing and IWMI.

Commission for Africa. 2005. Our Common Interest. Report

FAO-IPTRID (International Programme for Technology and

Mollinga, P. P. and Bolding, A. 2004. The Politics of Irrigation

of the Commission for Africa.

research in Irrigation and Drainage). 2003. The irrigation

Reform: Contested Policy Formulation and

www.commissionforafrica.org

challenge: Increasing irrigation contribution to food

Implementation and Implementation in Asia, Africa and

Dixon, J., Gulliver, A. and Gibbon, D. 2001. Farming Systems
and Poverty: Improving Farmers’ Livelihoods in a
Changing World. Rome/Washington DC, FAO/World Bank.
Facon, T. 2005. Asian irrigation in transition – service
orientation, institutional aspects and
design/operation/infrastructure issues. G. Shivakoti,

security through higher water productivity from canal
irrigation systems. Issue Paper 4. Rome, FAO and IPTRID.
Faurès, J. M., Hoogeveen, J. and Bruinsma, J. 2003. The FAO
Irrigated Area Forecast for 2030. Rome, FAO
www.fao.org/ag/agl/aglw/aquastat/reports/index.htm
Hoekstra, A. Y. (ed). 2003. Virtual water trade, proceedings

D. Vermillion, W. F. Lam, E. Ostrom, U. Pradhan and R.

of the international expert meeting on virtual water

Yoder (eds), Asian Irrigation in Transition: Responding

trade, Value of Water Research Report No. 12. Delft,

to Challenges. London, Sage Publications Ltd.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United

the Netherlands, IHE.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development).

Nations). Forthcoming. Irrigation Management Transfer:

2003. Republic of the Sudan, Gash sustainable livelihoods

Worldwide Efforts and Results. Rome, FAO.

regeneration project, project document. Rome, IFAD.

———. 2005. FAO Food Outlook. Quarterly Report No. 1, April
2005, Global information and early warning system on
food and agriculture (GIEWS). Rome, FAO.
———. 2004a. The State of Food Insecurity in the World
2004. Rome, FAO.
———. 2004b. The State of Food and Agriculture 2003–2004:

———. 2001. Rural Poverty Report 2001: The Challenge of
Ending Rural Poverty. Oxford, IFAD.
IPCC (International Panel on Climate Change). 2001. Third
Assessment Report – Climate Change 2001: Synthesis
Report. Geneva, IPCC.
IWMI (International Water Management Institute). 2003.

Latin America. Aldershot, UK, Ashgate Publishing.
Nicol, A. 2000. Adopting a sustainable livelihoods approach
to water projects: Implications for policy and practice.
Working Paper 133, London, Overseas Development
Institute.
Rathgeber, E. 2003. Dry taps… Gender and Poverty in Water
Resources Management. Rome, FAO.
Renault, D. 2003. Value of virtual water in food: principles
and virtues. A.Y. Hoekstra (ed.), Virtual Water Trade,
Proceedings of the International Expert Meeting on
Virtual Water Trade. Delft, the Netherlands, UNESCOIHE.
Ringersma, J., Batjes, N. and Dent, D. 2003. Green Water:
Definitions and Data for Assessment. Wageningen, the
Netherlands, ISRIC.
Rockström, J. 1999. On-farm green water estimates as a tool
for increased food production in water scarce regions.
Phys. Chem. Earth B, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 375–83.
Rockström, J., Barron, J. and Fox, P. 2003. Water productivity

Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the

Confronting the Reality of Wastewater Use in

Poor? Rome, FAO.

Agriculture. Water Policy Briefing No. 9. Colombo, Sri

in rain-fed agriculture: Challenges and opportunities for

Lanka, IWMI.

smallholder farmers in drought-prone tropical agro-

———. 2003a. World Agriculture Towards 2015/2030: An FAO
perspective. Rome/London, FAO/Earthscan Publishers.
———. 2003b. International scientific symposium on

Johnson III, S., Svendsen, M. and Gonzalez, F. 2002. Options
for institutional reform in the irrigation sector.

ecosystems. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker and D. Molden (eds),
Water Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and

measurement and assessment of food deprivation and

International Seminar on Participatory Irrigation

Opportunities for Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI

undernutrition. Summary of Proceedings. 26–28 June

Management, Beijing.

Publishing.

2002. Rome, FAO.
———. 2003c. Report of the FAO Expert Consultation on
Environmental Effects of Genetically Modified Crops.
16–18 June 2003, Rome, FAO.———. 2003d. Review of

Kijne, J. W., Barker, R. and Molden, D. (eds). 2003. Water

Schmidhuber, J., 2003. The outlook for long-term changes in

Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and Opportunities for

food consumption patterns: Concerns and policy options.

Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI Publishing.

Paper prepared for the FAO Scientific Workshop on

Lipton, M., Litchfield, J. and Faurès, J. M. 2003. The effects

the State of World Fishery Resources: Inland Fisheries.

of irrigation on poverty: a framework for analysis. Water

FAO Fisheries Circular, No. 942, Rev. 1, Rome, FAO.

Policy, Vol. 5, No. 5/6, pp. 413–27.

Globalization of the Food System: Impacts on Food
Security and Nutrition, 8–10 October 2003, Rome, FAO.

W AT E R F O R F O O D , A G R I C U LT U R E A N D R U R A L L I V E L I H O O D S . 2 7 3

Seckler, D., Molden, D. and Sakthivadivel, R. 2003. The

UN (United Nations). 2004. World Population Monitoring

concept of efficiency in water-resources management

2003: Population, Education and Development.

and policy. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker and D. Molden (eds),

Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population

Water Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and
Opportunities for Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI
Publishing.
Shiklomanov, I. 2000. Appraisal and assessment of world
water resources. Water, International, Vol. 25, No. 1,
pp. 11–32, March 2000. IWRA.

Division. New York, United Nations.
UN (United Nations) Millennium Project Task Force on
Hunger. 2004. Halving hunger by 2015: A framework for
action. Interim report. Millennium project. New York,
United Nations.
Vincent, L. 2001. Water and rural livelihoods. R. Meinzen-

Productivity in Agriculture: Limits and Opportunities for
Improvement. Wallingford, UK, CABI Publishing.
Winpenny, J. T. 1997. Demand management for efficient and
equitable use. M. Kay, T. Frank and L. Smith (eds),
Water: Economics, Management and Demand. London,
E. & F.N. Spon.
WCD (World Commission on Dams). 2000. Dams and
Development, A New Framework for Decision-making:
The Report of the World Commission on Dams. London
and Sterling, VA, Earthscan Publications Ltd.

Siebert, S., Döll, P., Feick, S. and Hoogeveen, J. 2005. Global

Dick and M. W. Rosegrant (eds), 2020 Vision Focus 9

Map of Irrigated Areas. Version 3.0, interactive map.

(Overcoming Water Scarcity and Quality Constraints).

Frankfurt/Rome, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University and

Brief 5. Washington, DC, International Food Policy

Relations and Irrigated Land Allocation Policies in

FAO.

Research Institute.

Burkina Faso. Washington, DC, The Consultative Group

Smedema, L. K. and Shiati, K. 2002. Irrigation and salinity: A

Wani, S. P., Pathak, P., Sreedevi, T. K., Singh, H. P. and Singh,

perspective review of the salinity hazards of irrigation

P. 2003. Efficient management of rainwater for

development in the arid zone. Irrigation and Drainage

increased crop productivity and groundwater recharge in

Systems, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 161–74.

Asia. J. W. Kijne, R. Barker and D. Molden (eds), Water

Zwarteveen, M. Z. 1996. A Plot of One’s Own: Gender

on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR).

CGIAR (Consultative Group on International Agriculture Research) – Challenge Program on Water and Food:
www.waterforfood.org/
One of the greatest challenges of our time is to provide food and environmental security. The CGIAR Challenge Program on Water
and Food approaches this challenge from a research perspective.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture (CA): www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Assessment/Index.asp
A multi-partner assessment process hosted by International Water Management Institute (IWMI). The CA Synthesis Report will be
released in August 2006. It will examine trends, conditions, challenges and responses in water management for agriculture in order
to identify the most appropriate investments for enhancing food and environmental security over the next fifty years.
FAO-AQUASTAT: www.fao.org/ag/aquastat/
Global information system of water and agriculture. Provides users with comprehensive information on the state of agricultural water
management across the world, with emphasis on developing countries and countries in transition (statistics, country profiles, maps
and GIS).
FAO-FAOSTAT: faostat.external.fao.org/
Online multilingual database containing over 3 million time-series records covering international statistics in the areas of food
production, prices, trade, land use, irrigation, forests, fisheries, etc.
FAO – Global Perspective Studies: www.fao.org/es/ESD/gstudies.htm
Includes the report, World Agriculture: Towards 2015/2030, which is FAO’s latest assessment of the long-term outlook for the
world’s food supplies, nutrition and agriculture.
FAO – The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture (SOFIA): www.fao.org/sof/sofia/index_en.htm
Published every two years with the purpose of providing policy-makers, civil society and those who derive their livelihood from the
sector with a comprehensive, objective and global view of capture fisheries and aquaculture, including associated policy issues.
FAO – The State of Food Insecurity (SOFI): www.fao.org/sof/sofi/index_en.htm
Reports annually on global and national efforts to reduce by half the number of undernourished people in the world by the year
2015.
ICID (International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage): www.icid.org/
ICID is a non-profit organization dedicated to enhancing the worldwide supply of food and fibre by improving the productivity of
irrigated and drained lands through the appropriate management of water and environment and the application of irrigation,
drainage and flood management techniques.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development) – Rural Poverty: www.ifad.org/poverty/
In its Rural Poverty Report 2001, The Challenge of Ending Rural Poverty, the International Fund for Agricultural Development
argues that, to be successful, poverty-reduction policies must focus on rural areas.

We are no longer able to think of ourselves as a species tossed
about by larger forces – now we are those larger forces.
Bill McKibben, The End of Nature

Part 1. Industry in an Economic Context ........277
1a. Water use by industry ............................................277
Fig. 8.1: Trends in industrial water use by region,
1950–2000
Fig. 8.2: Total world industrial water use,
1950–2000
Fig. 8.3: Water use by industry vs. domestic use
and agriculture
1b. Negative industrial impacts on the water
environment ...........................................................277
Box 8.1: Identification, assessment and prioritization
of pollution ‘hot spots’
Fig. 8.4: Industry shares of biological oxygen demand
(BOD), by industrial sector and in selected countries
Table 8.1: Release of benzene, toluene,
ethylbenzene and xylenes directly or indirectly to
water in eight EU Member States, 2003
Fig. 8.5: Release of total organic carbon (TOC)
directly or indirectly to water in thirteen EU Member
States, 2003
1c. Natech disasters ....................................................281
Box 8.2: Industrial disasters around the world

Part 2. Governance Issues and Sustainable
Development in Industry Regulation ........284
Box 8.3: International agreements and Multilateral
Environmental Agreements (MEAs)
2a. Best environmental practices and international
standards for industry ............................................284
Table 8.2: Trends in ISO 14001 certification
regionally and globally, 1997–2002
Box 8.4: Best Environmental Practices (BEPs)
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) ....................285

Part 3. The Vision: Towards High Water
Productivity and Zero Effluent
Discharge .............................................................290
3a. Strategies for saving water and increasing
industrial water productivity ..................................290
Water auditing.........................................................290
Matching water quality to use requirements ............290
Water recycling and on-site reuse.............................290
Using reclaimed water..............................................291
Box 8.5: Definitions of water reclamation, reuse
and recycling
Table 8.3: Wastewater treatment requirements as a
function of end-use for industrial water supply
Minimizing virtual water in manufactured
products .................................................................293
Better policy instruments and economic
incentives ...............................................................293
3b. Strategies and methodologies for reducing
pollution: Paving the way to zero effluent
discharge................................................................294
Cleaner production...................................................294
Box 8.6: Cleaner cheese production in El Salvador
Box 8.7: Cleaner beer production in Cuba
Environmentally Sound Technologies (the TEST
strategy)..................................................................295
Box 8.8: The TEST strategy in the Danube Basin
Stream separation....................................................297
Raw material and energy recovery from waste...........297
Reuse of waste ........................................................297
Wastewater treatment technologies..........................297
Achieving zero effluent discharge .............................298

Part 4. The ‘Cradle-to-Cradle’ Concept .............299
Table 8.4: Industrial water productivity
by country, 2000/01

References and Websites........................................303

Aerial view of the disposal of mine wastes into a water
body, Ishpeming, Michigan, US

8
CHAPTER 8

Water and
Industry

By

UNIDO

(United Nations
Industrial
Development
Organization)

2 7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

For the majority of the world’s population, a thriving economy and improvement in the quality of life are closely linked
to better access to consumer goods. Growing local industries create much-needed jobs, so people have more
disposable income to spend on manufactured products. This often comes at the cost of increasing volumes of dumped
solid waste, deteriorating water quality, and increased air pollution, when industry discharges untreated wastes onto
land and into water and air. However, the linkage between industry and pollution is not inevitable. The purpose of this
chapter is to show that manufacturing activities can be both clean and profitable. Indeed, industry can lead the way in
pricing water at its true value and conserving high-quality water resources. Governance has an important role to play
in creating the conditions that promote healthy and sustainable industrial growth.

Top to bottom:
Industrial site in
Grangemouth, Scotland
Dockside construction site
in the US
Water treated on site at a
rubber factory, Malaysia

■

Industry is a significant engine of growth providing
48 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in East
Asia/Pacific, 26 percent of GDP in lower-income
countries and 29 percent of GDP in higher-income
countries, although this last figure is declining.

■

Much industrial activity in middle- and lower-income
countries is accompanied by unnecessarily high levels
of water consumption and water pollution.

■

Worldwide, the total rate of water withdrawals by
industry is slowing, whereas the rate of water
consumed is steadily increasing.

■

It is possible to decouple industrial development from
environmental degradation, to radically reduce natural
resource and energy consumption and, at the same
time, to have clean and profitable industries.

■

A very wide range of regulatory instruments, voluntary
initiatives, training and advice is available to help
industrial managers improve water-use productivity and
to reduce polluting emissions to very low levels. At the
same time, these tools can aid production efficiency,
reduce raw material consumption, facilitate recovery of
valuable materials and permit a big expansion of reuse/recycling.

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 7 7

Part 1. Industry in an Economic Context

The total water

Industry is the engine of growth and socio-economic development in many developing countries. In the fastgrowing East Asia and Pacific region, industry now provides 48 percent of the total gross domestic product
(GDP), and this proportion is still increasing. In heavily indebted poor countries, the proportion of GDP
provided by industry grew quickly from 22 percent to 26 percent between 1998 and 2002. In rich countries,
by contrast, the proportion of GDP coming from the production of manufactured goods is slowly declining,
currently providing some 29 percent of GDP, with services making up the bulk of the economy. Overall
however, industrial production continues to grow worldwide, as economies grow (World Bank, 2003).

withdrawal from
surface water
and groundwater
by industry is
usually much
greater than the
amount of water
that is actually
consumed

1a. Water use by industry
Water is used by industry in a myriad of ways: for cleaning,
heating and cooling; for generating steam; for transporting
dissolved substances or particulates; as a raw material; as a
solvent; and as a constituent part of the product itself
(e.g. in the beverage industry). The water that evaporates
in the process must also be considered in accurate
assessments as well as the water that remains in the
product, by-products, and the solid wastes generated along
the way. The balance is discharged after use as wastewater
or effluent. The total water withdrawal from surface water
and groundwater by industry is usually much greater than
the amount of water that is actually consumed, as
illustrated by the graphs in Figures 8.1 and 8.2. Industrial
water use tends to be measured in terms of water
withdrawal, not water consumption.
Following major growth between 1960 and 1980, water
withdrawal for use by industry worldwide has pretty much
stabilized. Industrial water withdrawal in Europe has
actually been dropping since 1980, although industrial
output continues to expand. In Asia, the growth in
industrial water withdrawal was rapid up to 1990, and has
since been growing much more slowly, despite the region’s
high growth in manufacturing output. As shown by these
figures, the intensity of water use in industry is increasing
in these regions, as is the value added by industry per unit
of water used (see Table 8.4 at end of chapter).
Once more information becomes available on
environmental water flow requirements in many rivers and
rainfed agriculture, a fuller picture may be presented of
the allocation of water among all its various uses. It will
also be necessary to analyse actual water use in terms of
consumption by the various sectors (see Figure 8.3). The
return flows from the different sectors to surface water
and groundwater must be accurately depicted, with the
inclusion of water reuse cycles (and water reclamation,
see discussion below). Only then can a realistic water
balance be prepared for a given river basin or country.

1b. Negative industrial impacts on the water
environment
Frequently of greater concern than the actual volume of
water used by industry is the negative impact of industry
on the water environment. Water quality is deteriorating
in many rivers worldwide, and the marine environment is
also being affected by industrial pollution. How does this
take place? Much of the water used by industry is usually
disposed of ‘to drain’. This can mean one of the following
things:
■

direct disposal into a stream, canal or river, or to sea

■

disposal to sewer (which may be discharged,
untreated, further downstream, or may be routed to
the nearest municipal sewage treatment plant)

■

treatment by an on-site wastewater treatment plant,
before being discharged to a watercourse or sewer
treatment in a series of open ponds.

There are many instances of water reclamation (treating
or processing wastewater to make it reusable), where
industrial effluent is not returned immediately to the
natural water cycle after use. It can be recycled or reused
directly on-site, either before or after treatment. The
water may also be treated and then reused by other
industries nearby or agricultural or municipal users, as
well as for cropland irrigation or local parks and gardens.
All these possibilities for water reclamation and reuse are
dependent on the quality of the discharge and are
discussed in more detail in Part 3. Reclaimed water that
has been treated can also help to conserve the water
environment by being injected to replenish underground
aquifers or prevent salt-water intrusion or by being
discharged into a drought-stricken wetland.
Of major concern are the situations in which the industrial
discharge is returned directly into the water cycle without
adequate treatment. If the water is contaminated with

2 7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 8.1: Trends in industrial water use by region, 1950–2000
Industrial water withdrawals and consumption in Asia over 50 years
250

8

200

Industrial water use
km3/year

Industrial water use
km3/year

Industrial water use in Australia and Oceania over 50 years
10

6
4
2
0

150
100
50
0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

1995

2000

1950

400
300
200
100
0

1990

1995

2000

40
30
20
10

1960

1970

1980

1990

1995

2000

1950

15
10
5
0

1960

1970

1980

1990

1995

2000

Industrial water withdrawals and consumption in Europe over 50 years

Industrial water use
km3/year

Industrial water withdrawals and consumption in Africa over 50 years

Industrial water use
km3/year

1980

0
1950

300
200
100
0

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

1995

2000

1950

1960

1970

Note: Vertical scale varies among the graphs. Industrial water withdrawals in Africa and South America are still
rising, albeit off a very low base. In Asia, North America and Europe, industrial water use accounts for the bulk of
the global figure for industrial water withdrawals. Note that industrial water consumption is everywhere much
lower than the volume of water withdrawn.
Source: Shiklomanov, 2000.

Figure 8.2: Total world industrial water use, 1950–2000
World industrial water withdrawals and consumption iover 50 years
1000
Industrial water use
km3/year

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

1970

Industrial water withdrawals and consumption in South America over 50 years

Industrial water use
km3/year

Industrial water use
km3/year

Industrial water withdrawals and consumption in North America over 50 years

1960

Withdrawals

800

Consumption

600
400
200
0
1950

1960

1970

Source: Shiklomanov, 2000.

1980

1990

1995

2000

1980

1990

1995

2000

Withdrawals
Consumption

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 7 9

Figure 8.3: Water use by industry vs. domestic use and agriculture
100%

80%

60%

40%

Above: An Ijaw child
shows off the oil that has
damaged the communal
20%

0%

World

Low
income
Domestic

Middle
income
Industry

Lower
middle
income

Upper
middle
income

Low &
middle
income

East
Asia &
Pacific

Europe
&
Central
Asia

Latin
Middle
America East &
& Carib. N. Africa

South
Asia

SubSaharan
Africa

Agriculture

Note: There is increasing competition for water among the various water use sectors in many river basins. If we compare water use (i.e. water withdrawal)
by industry to water use by other sectors, namely agriculture and domestic use, it is clear that globally, industry uses only a fraction of the amount of water
used by agriculture. However, in East Asia and the Pacific, industrial water use has grown to a significant proportion of total use, in line with its significance
to the economies of those countries. In sub-Saharan Africa, although overall water use is low, the water used by industry is a larger proportion of the total,
because more agriculture is rainfed, rather than irrigated. These data exclude rainfed agriculture from the calculations of water use, and do not include
environmental flow requirements as a water use category. In many catchment areas and river basins, environmental needs have not yet been calculated
(see Chapter 5).
Source: World Bank, 2002.

heavy metals, chemicals or particulates, or loaded with
organic matter, this obviously affects the quality of the
receiving water body or aquifer. The sediments
downstream from the industrial discharge can also be
contaminated. Water that has a high organic content
(called the biochemical oxygen demand, or BOD) often
appears cloudy or foamy, and is characterized by the rapid
growth of algae, bacteria and slime (see Figures 8.4 and
8.5 and Chapter 5). The growth of these organisms
depletes the level of oxygen in the water. It is more
difficult for fish, insects, amphibians and many species of
aquatic plants to live and breed in such oxygen-depleted
water. If the water discharged is still hot, this ‘thermal
pollution’ may also affect the aquatic ecosystems
downstream, which have to adjust to a temperature that is
higher than normal (see also Chapter 9).
A much larger volume of water may actually be affected
than the volume of the industrial discharge itself.
Industries and water quality regulators in some places still

rely on the so-called ‘dilution effect’ to disperse
contaminants within the water environment to the point
where they fall below harmful levels. In areas where
industries are growing fast and more industrial plants are
coming on-stream with many newly created discharge
points, this approach can quickly result in polluted rivers
and reservoirs. The toxicity levels and lack of oxygen in
the water can damage or completely destroy the aquatic
ecosystems downstream as well as lakes and dams,
ultimately affecting riverine estuaries and marine coastal
environments. In international river basins, routine
pollution and polluting incidents such as industrial
accidents and spillages may have transboundary effects.
Significant pollution sources in river basins, such as large
industrial plants, may be termed ‘hot spots’ and
prioritized for clean-up within a river basin management
plan (see Box 8.1).
It is important to consider not only the level or
concentration of individual substances, but also their

forest around her village
in the Delta region of
Nigeria. The fish catch
has dropped dramatically
as a result of oil spillage
from a nearby extraction
pipe
Below: Wastewater from
bleaching cotton in a mill,
Ndola, Zambia

2 8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

combined effect. It is very expensive to monitor water
quality for the presence of numerous chemicals, each of
which must be tested for separately. By monitoring the
populations of certain organisms, called indicator
organisms (such as frogs, molluscs or certain insect
species), it is possible to create a picture of how the
water body is being affected over time. These ecotoxicological methods provide a more cost-effective way
of assessing the impact of industrial discharges and are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 5 on ecosystems.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Direct human health impacts can result if the industrial
discharge is located upstream of:
■

a recreational bathing and swimming area or
commercial, recreational or subsistence fishing
grounds

■

a point where farmers withdraw water in order to
irrigate their crops

■

a point where a municipality withdraws water for
domestic use

■

a point where people without a formal water supply
withdraw water for drinking.

Many municipalities now find that the quality of the
drinking water which they supply is compromised by
industrial pollution. This raises water treatment costs for
the water supply utility. Where the problem is variable
freshwater quality, caused by irregular effluent
discharges, the water treatment plant may not be able to
cope adequately with the contaminants. In such cases
the health of local people may be affected in the longer
term, depending on the concentration and type of
substances involved.
Two additional ways in which industries may more
indirectly affect the water environment are through the
following:

BOX 8.1: IDENTIFICATION, ASSESSMENT AND PRIORITIZATION OF POLLUTION ‘HOT SPOTS’

The methodology for evaluating hot spots was

A multi-stage screening system, developed by the

developed within the framework of the Global

United Nations Industrial Development Organization

Environment Facility (GEF) regional project

(UNIDO), is used to identify priority hot spots. They

preparing a Strategic Action Plan for the

are evaluated according to pollution control issues,

transboundary Dnieper River Basin, including

water quality issues and biodiversity issues, as well

areas of the three countries involved, namely

as economic and employment criteria. Point sources

Russia, Ukraine and Belarus. The objectives of the

of pollution are scored on a number of criteria

Strategic Action Plan are to facilitate the reduction

under each of these general headings, which are

of pollution in the river basin, and ultimately to

then weighted according to their significance,

contribute to the protection of the Black Sea.

before a total score is assigned. Non-point sources
and areas that are difficult to characterize

As in many river basins in populated areas, there

quantitatively (e.g. abandoned military facilities, or

are thousands of pollution sources in the

large tailings ponds) may still rank as hot spots but

Dnieper River Basin. The Hot Spot methodology

are described qualitatively, based upon the

identifies, assesses and prioritizes the most

professional judgement of national experts. Finally,

significant sources of pollution, based on their

for a small group of priority hot spots, mitigation

impacts and characteristics. These include point

measures are proposed together with an estimation

sources, such as industrial and municipal

of implementation costs and a cost-benefit analysis.

agricultural and urban runoff. Each contributes to

An example of water quality issues scored

human health risk and environmental

includes the following criteria:

location of nearest municipal drinking water
withdrawal downstream

■

influence of river quality on the nearest
municipal drinking water withdrawal point

■

population being supplied by river water within
25 kilometres downstream of the hot spot

■

recreational bathing areas located near the
hot spot

■

other aquatic recreational activities near the
hot spot

■

any illnesses attributed to the recreational
areas

■

hot spot directly identified as the source of
illnesses

■

proximity of recreational fishing areas and
sustainability

■

proximity of commercial fishing areas and
sustainability

■

effluents, and non-point sources, such as

degradation, including significant impacts to

■

agricultural water utilization in proximity to
the hot spot

■

sediment quality

■

proximity to national boundaries.

environmentally sensitive areas where
biodiversity is threatened.

Source: UNIDO, 2003.

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 8 1

■

■

The leaching of chemicals from solid wastes: The solid
wastes generated by industrial activity may contain a
quantity of contaminated water or other liquids, which
gradually seep out once the waste is disposed of. In the
rain (or in groundwater, if the waste is buried in a
landfill), further chemicals may be leached or mobilized
from the solid waste over time. This leachate eventually
reaches a stream or an aquifer. Industrial dumpsites and
municipal landfill sites, if not adequately constructed,
are frequently found to generate such ‘leachate plumes’
that can be significant pollution hot spots.
The atmospheric deposition of chemicals distributed
through air and rain pollution: Some industries emit
significant quantities of sulphur and nitrogen
compounds (SOx and NOx) into the atmosphere. These
may dissolve into raindrops, and fall as acid rain. Many
streams, rivers and lakes in Europe are more acid than
they would naturally be, due to this process. Other
compounds such as dioxins and furans may also be
released into the atmosphere from furnaces, and
thereby enter the water cycle.

More detailed information on industrial pollution in Europe
is available since the introduction of the European
Pollutant Emissions Register. All factories in the European
Union over a certain size are required to report their
emissions. Figure 8.5 shows figures on total organic carbon
releases to water (a more accurate measure than the BOD
data available). Table 8.1 shows the amount of benzene,
toluene, ethylbenzenes and xylenes being released annually
to the water environment, both directly and indirectly.
These toxic hydrocarbons are emitted by a range of
industries, from oil refineries to pharmaceutical plants.

1c. Natech disasters
Natech disasters are a new disaster category, identified
by the UN International Strategy on Disaster Reduction
(UN-ISDR) as a technological disaster triggered by a
natural hazard (see Box 8.2). In Europe, for instance,
there are many vulnerable installations close to rivers or
in earthquake-prone regions, which are vulnerable to
flooding or strong tremors (see Chapter 10).
For example, the magnitude of an earthquake in Turkey
that measured 7.0 on the Richter Scale in August 1999
triggered unprecedented multiple and simultaneous
hazardous materials releases, wreaking havoc on relief
operations assisting earthquake victims. In one incident,
the leakage of 6.5 million kilograms (kg) of toxic
acrylonitrile (ACN) contaminated air, soil and water,

Figure 8.4: Industry shares of biological oxygen demand (BOD), by industrial sector
and in selected countries

Industry shares of BOD emissions - EL SALVADOR

Industry shares of BOD emissions - CHINA

Industry shares of BOD emissions - BELGIUM

Industry shares of BOD emissions - SOUTH AFRICA

Note: This figure shows the industry shares of organic pollution emissions
(using BOD as an indicator), by industrial sector in selected countries. The
data on BOD is the only pollution data available, and it is not very accurate
as it is calculated indirectly from employment data in the various industrial
sectors.

Primary metals
Paper and pulp
Chemicals
Food and beverages
Stone, ceramics and glass
Textiles
Wood
Other

In less developed economies, such as in El Salvador, the food and beverage
industry generates the majority of the organically loaded effluent. In
developed countries such as Belgium, where the economy is more
diversified, effluent from the food and beverage industry is still significant,
but there is a wider spread of other contributing sectors. In China, the
primary metals sector, chemicals and textiles contribute the lion’s share. In
all countries, the pulp and paper sector can be a significant polluter of the
aquatic environment, if untreated effluent is released.
Source: World Bank, 2002.

threatening residential areas. Automatic foam sprayers
were available at the industrial facility at the time of the
earthquake, which would normally have contained the
ACN release, but these were rendered useless due to a
lack of water and power. These technological disasters
posed additional health and psychological problems to an
already devastated population. Hence current industrial
risk management regulations should be carefully revised to
ensure that this kind of ‘natech’ risk is being addressed.

2 8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 8.5: Release of total organic carbon (TOC) directly or indirectly to water in
thirteen EU Member States, 2003
Industrial plants for pulp from timber or
other fibrous materials and paper or board
production (>20t/d) – 240,771,200.00kg
Installations for the disposal of nonhazard
waste (>50t/d) and landfills (>10t/d) –
123,851,400.00kg
Basic organic chemicals – 41,957,238.80k
Others – 30,943.80kg
Slaughterhouses (>50t/d), plants for the
producation of milk (>200t/d), other aanim
raw materials (>75t/d) or vegetable raw
materials (>300t/d) – 18,628,850.00kg

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Source: EC, 2004.

Table 8.1: Release of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes directly or indirectly to water in eight EU Member States, 2003
Activity releasing benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes

Directly to water
(kg/year)

Indirectly to water
(kg/year)

967
67,486

2,830
880

390
1,020

–
–

Metal industry and metal ore roasting or sintering installations
Basic organic chemicals

16,080
40,328

8,080
127,158

Basic inorganic chemicals or fertilisers
Biocides and explosives

57,996
6,170

–
365

1,282
2,300

7,550
2,136

–
–

707
3,773

194,019

153,479

Combustion installations (> 50 MW)
Mineral oil and gas refineries
Coke ovens
Coal gasification and liquefaction plants

Pharmaceutical products
Installations for the disposal or recovery of hazardous waste (>10 tons/day)
Plants for the pre-treatment of fibres or textiles (>10 tons/day)
Installations for surface treatment or products using organic solvents (>200 tons/year)
Total
Source: EC, 2004.

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 8 3

BOX 8.2: INDUSTRIAL DISASTERS AROUND THE WORLD

The Tisza tailings dam disaster

raw ingredients, and the water implications were

Martin County, Kentucky, United States

On 30 January 2000, a breach in a tailings dam

identified through the presence of red dye in

On 11 October 2000, a coal tailings dam failed

released some 100,000 cubic metres (m3) of

one of the substances, which turned the river

after the collapse of an underground mine

cyanide-rich tailings waste into the river system

red. The main wave of chemicals destroyed eels,

beneath the slurry impoundment, and 950,000

near Baia Mare in northwest Romania (see also

fish and insects, as well as habitats for small

m3 of coal waste slurry was released into local

Chapter 14). This spill released an estimated 50

animals on the riverbanks. The total eel

streams. About 120 km of rivers and streams

to 100 tonnes (t) of cyanide, as well as heavy

population was destroyed for 500 kilometres

turned an iridescent black, causing a fish kill

metals, into the Somes, Tisza and finally the

(km) downstream, from Basel in Switzerland

along the Tug Fork of the Big Sandy River and

Danube Rivers before reaching the Black Sea. Ice

down to Loreley in Germany. It took three

some of its tributaries. Towns along the Tug were

on the rivers and low water levels in Hungary

months after the incident for the contaminant

forced to turn off their drinking water intakes.

delayed the dilution of the cyanide, increasing

concentrations to drop to normal values. As a

the risk to municipal water supplies. High

result of new regulations and precautions put in

Nandan County, Guangxi Province, China

concentrations of copper, zinc and lead, leached

place following this incident, the permanent

Also in October 2000, after a tailings dam

by the cyanide, compounded the problem.

chemical load in the Rhine has been reduced,

failure, at least 15 people were reported killed

Impacts included:

and information systems on potential incidents

and 100 missing. More than 100 houses were

improved.

destroyed by the tailing wave downstream.

Arsenic contamination from mines in
Thailand

Sebastião das Águas Claras, Nova Lima
District, Minas Gerais, Brazil

Past mining activities caused heavy arsenic

On 22 June 2001, the failure of an iron mine

contamination of groundwater and topsoil over a

waste dam caused a tailings wave to travel at

40 km3 area in Nakhon Si Thammarat province,

least 6 km. Five mine workers died in the

Thailand (see Chapter 14). The contamination

incident.

■ contamination and interruption of the drinking

water in twenty-four locations, affecting 2.5
million people
■ massive fish kill and destruction of aquatic

species in the river systems
■ severe negative impact on socio-economic

conditions of the local population
■ long-term reduction of revenue from tourism

was revealed in a study commissioned by the
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) in

San Marcelino, Zambales, Philippines

2000. One conclusion of the study was that the

In August 2002, at the Dizon Copper Silver

contamination would last for the next thirty to

Mines, after heavy rain, the overflow and

The Red Rhine Incident

fifty years. Testing of 1,000 samples showed

spillway failure of two abandoned tailings dams

In 1986 a fire destroyed a chemical store in

arsenic contamination in some groundwater wells

caused some tailings to spill into Mapanuepe

Basel, Switzerland, near the borders of France

to be 50 to 100 times higher than the World

Lake and eventually into the St. Tomas River. By

and Germany. Chemicals reached the water in

Health Organization's guideline value for drinking

11 September, several low-lying villages had

the Rhine River through the plant’s sewage

water (0.01 milligrams per litre). Most people in

been flooded with mine waste: 250 families

system when huge amounts of water (10,000-

the affected district stopped drinking well water

were evacuated; no injuries were reported.

15,000 m3) were used to fight the fire. The

in 1993, after the local health effects were

store contained large quantities of thirty-two

found, and are now paying a very high cost for

different chemicals, including insecticides and

tap water.

and canoeing
■ drop in real estate prices.

Source: WHO, 2004.

2 8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Governance Issues and Sustainable
Development in Industry Regulation
Environmental governance is central to ensuring that growing industries undertake an acceptable and
affordable level of pollution control and environmental management. This section discusses a number of
international conventions and multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) that exist in order to
regulate industries, and in particular those dealing with hazardous and toxic chemicals (see Table 8.2).
It is also important to note that voluntary systems go a long way towards demonstrating that industries
can be both clean and profitable. Various voluntary approaches have been developed over time and are
discussed later in this chapter.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

The ‘polluter pays principle’, or the 3Ps, was first widely
discussed at the 1992 United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil (Rio Principle 16). The principle was endorsed by the
attending country representatives, and was also adopted
by the Conference of the Parties of the Basel Convention
among others (see section 2a below). Under the Basel
Convention, the 3Ps states that the potential polluter must
act to prevent pollution, and that those who cause
pollution must pay for remedying the consequences of
that pollution. With the development of the concept of
Cleaner Production (see section 3b below), the 3Ps now
stand for Pollution Prevention Pays: in other words, good
environmental management need not be simply an extra
cost for a company to bear, but can actually improve
production processes, save money and resources, and
make the company more efficient, more profitable and
more competitive in the global marketplace.

1. See www.un.org/esa/sustdev/
documents/WSSD_POI_PD/
English/POIToc.htm
2. Best Environmental Practices
(BEP) are guidelines that exist
for all sectors of human
society striving to co-exist
with the natural environment,
such as housing,
infrastructure, industry and
tourism. BEPs for industry
include carrying out
environmental impact
assessments for new projects,
environmental audits for
existing projects and using
best available technology.

The World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD),
held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in August 2002
proposed a Plan of Implementation, which makes a strong
link between the related goals of industrial development,
poverty eradication and sustainable natural resource
management1 (see Box 8.3). The Johannesburg targets
proposed for industry to build on what was defined in
Goal 7 of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in
2000 by doing the following:
■

ensuring environmental sustainability

■

integrating the principles of sustainable development
into country policies and programmes

■

reversing the loss of environmental resources.

For countries adopting poverty-reduction policies, industrial
growth is desirable in order to diversify their economy,
create jobs and add value to primary products and raw
materials being produced. However, it is very important
that the necessary legal and institutional arrangements be
in place to enable this growth to take place sustainably.
Since water pollution can have significant transboundary
effects, good environmental governance at the national
level includes committing to international agreements and
conventions on transboundary cooperation on shared
waters (see Chapter 11).

2a. Best environmental practices and
international standards for industry
Voluntary measures and self-regulation are the means
whereby industries can demonstrate their commitment to
improving the environment and monitoring their own
performance. The extent of self-regulation tends to vary
with the size of the enterprise, and the industrial sector
in question. Consumers and media pressure can often
influence the level of eco-awareness of companies in a
particular sector. Women working through consumer
organizations and environmental pressure groups have
been particularly successful in bringing about good
environmental practices in the companies making
household products such as detergents. Eco-labelling is a
growing practice whereby consumers can choose to buy
certain products labelled to indicate that they are
produced in a cleaner and more environmentally
responsible way.
The international competitiveness of a company and its
products in the global market is therefore often enhanced
by its commitment to best environmental practices (BEP).2
A company can show its high quality of self-regulation by
seeking certification through ISO 14001, which is the
current international environmental standard administered

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 8 5

by the International Organization for Standardization.
By the end of 2002, nearly 50,000 companies in 118
countries had received this certification (see Table 8.2).
Some of the approaches to BEP, discussed below, have
been made mandatory in national environmental law in
some countries, but not in others. BEP can begin at the
planning and design stage of a new industrial installation,
with an environmental impact assessment (EIA), and be
continued by putting in place an environmental
management system (EMS) for the plant. Periodic or
occasional environmental audits can be carried out during
the plant’s lifetime in order to assess the effectiveness of
the environmental management system, and the plant’s
compliance with environmental regulations. The use of
Best Available Technology (BAT) usually goes hand-inhand with BEP (see Box 8.4).

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
The EIA process is now required by law for new projects
and significant extensions of existing projects in many
countries. It covers a broad range of activities ranging
from industrial to infrastructure projects. The process
introduces procedural elements, such as the provision of
an environmental impact statement and consultation with
the public and environmental authorities, within the
framework of development consent procedures for the
activities covered.

...good
environmental
management
need not be
simply an extra
cost for a
company to
bear...

BOX 8.3: INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS AND MULTILATERAL ENVIRONMENTAL AGREEMENTS (MEAs)

The Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal

Entered into force in May 1992. As of 28 May 2004, 159 states and the European Union
were Parties to the Convention, which is an effective mechanism for addressing waste
generation, movement, management and disposal. It plays a significant role in the safe
management of chemicals. Recently, the Basel Convention joined with other existing
international organizations in the creation of the Africa Stockpile Project, aimed at
eliminating harmful stockpiles of pesticides on that continent. The Basel Convention is also
working to create useful partnerships in areas as diverse as e-waste1, biological and medical
waste, and a global partnership aimed at addressing the stockpile of used oils in Africa.

The Rotterdam Convention on the Prior
Informed Consent (PIC) Procedure for Certain
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in
International Trade

A voluntary procedure from 1980 onwards, and is now mandatory in the 73 countries
that are party to the Convention. This Convention entered into force in February 2004. A
total of 27 hazardous chemicals are currently subject to the PIC Procedure. To put this into
perspective, about 70,000 chemicals are currently on the market, with 1,500 new on es
being added each year. This poses a significant challenge to governments, which must
monitor and manage the use of these chemicals. The treaty helps countries to reduce the
risks associated with the manufacture, trade and use of hazardous chemicals.

The Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants (POPs)

A global treaty, which entered into force in May 2004 and is designed to protect human
health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants (POPs). POPs are chemicals
that remain intact in the environment for long periods, become widely distributed
geographically, accumulate in the fatty tissue of living organisms, and are toxic to humans
and wildlife. They have been shown to cause cancer and to damage the nervous,
reproductive and immune systems, as well as causing birth defects. At present, twelve
hazardous chemicals, including DDT, dioxins and furans, are listed as POPs. In implementing
the Convention, governments take measures to eliminate or reduce the release of POPs into
the environment.

2 8 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 8.3: CONTINUED

The European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD) on Integrated River Basin
Management for Europe

Adopted in October 2000, it coordinates the objectives of European water policy in order
to protect all waters, including surface water and groundwater, using a river basin
management approach. The WFD coordinates with all previous EU directives relating to
water, including the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive (IPPC) of
1996, which addresses industrial installations with a high pollution potential. Such
installations may only be operated if the operator holds a permit containing requirements
for the protection of air, water and soil, waste minimization, accident prevention and, if
necessary, site clean-up. These requirements must be based on the principle of Best
Available Techniques (BAT) (see following section). The European Pollutant and Emissions
Register, which has been compiled under the IPPC Directive, contains information on the
emissions to air and water of nearly 10,000 industrial installations across Europe.2

The UNECE Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary Waters and International
Lakes (UNECE Water Convention)

Intended to strengthen national measures for the protection and ecologically sound
management of transboundary surface water and groundwater. It obliges Parties to
prevent, control and reduce water pollution from point and non-point sources. More than

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

150 major rivers and 30 large lakes in the UNECE region run along or straddle the border
between two or more countries. The Convention entered into force in October 1996
and has been ratified by 34 countries and by the European Community. It is open for
accession by all UN Member States.

The 1992 UNECE Convention on the
Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents

Entered into force in April 2000, and 32 countries and the European Community are
currently Parties to the Convention. This Convention cooperates with the UNECE Water
Convention on issues related to the prevention of chemical accidents and the limitation of
their impact on transboundary waters. In 2003 this resulted in the signing of the joint
Protocol on Civil Liability and Compensation for Damage caused by Industrial Accidents on
Transboundary Waters. The following work is being undertaken under both Conventions:
■ An inventory of existing safety guidelines and best practices for the prevention of

accidental transboundary water pollution3
■ Safety guidelines and best practices for tailing dams, pipelines, and navigation of ships on rivers
■ Alarm and notification systems
■ International response exercises4
■ Transboundary contingency planning.

1. E-waste is electronic and electrical waste including domestic computers and appliances.
2. The upgraded register, the European Pollutant Release and Transfer Register, should go online in 2009 and will then replace the present one, the European Pollutant and Emissions
Register, EPER. Just like EPER, it will provide clear information about the level of specific pollutants, the quality of our local environment, emissions from specific industrial facilities and
activities, and by country. But while EPER reports on 50 substances emitted to air and water, the PRTR will report on more than 90 substances released to air, water and land. The
present register covers 56 industrial activities; the new one will cover 65. It will also have information on what the industrial installations do with their waste and waste water. The
reporting cycle will be annual instead of every three years. What is more, the PRTR will compile reporting of pollution from diffuse sources such as road traffic, aviation, shipping and
agriculture.
3. For more information see www.unece.org/env/teia/water/inventory.htm
4. For more information see www.unece.org/env/teia/response.htm

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 8 7

Table 8.2: Trends in ISO 14001 certification regionally and globally, 1997–2002
National standards institutes from individual

the ISO 14001 implement environmental

The number of companies with ISO 14001

countries have created the ISO 14000, which

management systems, conduct environmental audits,

certification globally increased more than tenfold

provides voluntary environmental management

and evaluate their environmental performance. Their

between 1997 (two years after the introduction of

systems standards. The table below shows the

products adhere to environmental labelling

the standard) and 2002. Europe and the Far East

number of companies in each region that have

standards, and waste streams are managed through

dominate the statistics, with 47 percent and 36

received the International Organization for

life cycle assessments. However, the ISO does not

percent respectively of all companies certified

Standardization (ISO) 14001 certification by

require companies to provide public reports on their

worldwide. (ISO 14001 replaced ISO 14000 in 1995).

December of any given year. Companies adhering to

environmental performance.

Regions

Number of companies with ISO 14001 certification

North America
Share in percent
No. of countries

1997
117
2.64
3

1998
434
5.50
3

1999
975
6.91
3

2000
1,676
7.32
3

2001
2,700
7.35
3

2002
4,053
8.20
3

Europe
Share in percent
No. of countries/economies

2,626
59.24
25

4,254
53.94
29

7,365
52.21
32

11,021
48.13
36

18,243
49.62
41

23,316
47.14
44

Central and South America
Share in percent
No. of countries/economies

98
2.21
5

144
1.83
12

309
2.19
14

556
2.43
18

681
1.86
22

1,418
2.87
21

Africa/West Asia
Share in percent
No. of countries/economies

73
1.65
10

138
1.75
15

337
2.39
21

651
2.84
25

923
2.51
29

1,355
2.74
31

Australia/New Zealand
Share in percent
No. of countries

163
3.68
2

385
4.88
2

770
5.46
2

1,112
4.86
2

1,422
3.87
2

1,563
3.16
2

Far East
Share in percent
No. of countries/economies

1,356
30.59
10

2,532
32.10
11

4,350
30.84
12

7,881
34.42
14

12,796
34.81
16

17,757
35.90
17

World total

4,433

7,887

14,106

22,897

36,765

49,462

Number of countries/economies

55

72

84

98

112

118

This rapid worldwide increase in the number of companies certified is accompanied by a dramatic rise in environmental awareness of managers and workers,
because there is a substantial element of training and capacity-building involved in the certification process. This capacity-building and development of the
environmental knowledge base necessarily goes hand-in-hand with the introduction of new management systems and performance yardsticks in these companies
(see Chapter 13).
Source: www.iso.org/iso/en/prods-services/otherpubs/iso14000/index.html

2 8 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The EU commissioned eighteen case studies of the EIA
process to be reviewed across Europe in order to
investigate its effectiveness. This review showed that the
EIA process improved the implementation of the project
itself and ensured the protection of the environment. In
the majority of the case studies, all participants
confirmed that the EIA process had assisted in decisionmaking in one or more of the following ways:

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

■

Above: Polluted water due
to discharge of refuse from
a sugar-mill in Nosy Bé
Dzamandzar, Madagascar

the quality of the project design was improved in 83
percent of the case studies

■

key environmental issues were identified in 94 percent
of the case studies

■

higher standards of mitigation were achieved than
would otherwise have been expected in 83 percent of
the case studies

■

environmentally sensitive areas were avoided through
relocation or redesign of the project in 56 percent the
of the case studies

■

a better framework for preparing conditions and legal
agreements to govern future operation of the project
was provided in 72 percent of the case studies

■

environmental concerns were incorporated from an
earlier stage in the design process in 61 percent of the
case studies

■

better decision-making was achieved in at least 61
percent of the case studies, due to the following:
– a more systematic and structured framework
for analysis
– more objective and credible information
– increased rigour in evaluating environmental
information.

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 8 9

BOX 8.4: BEST ENVIRONMENTAL PRACTICES (BEPs)

Environmental Management Systems
(EMS)

instruments, permits set the emission limit

‘Best’ is defined as that which is most effective

values for the company’s activities. The licence

in achieving a high general level of protection of

Aimed at achieving the organization’s

stipulates a maximum load on the environment

the environment as a whole. ‘Available’

environmental policy, as defined by the top

and what reduction of this load must be

techniques are defined as those which can be

management. The system needs to describe

achieved. The EMAS environmental management

implemented in the relevant industrial sector,

various aspects, including setting responsibilities,

system is an instrument that provides industries

under economically and technically viable

defining environmental objectives, the means of

with a set of appropriate means for achieving an

conditions, taking into consideration the costs

achieving these, and the operational procedures,

effective reduction in the load on the

and benefits and whether or not the techniques

training needs, monitoring and communication

environment.

are used or produced inside the country, as long
as they are reasonably accessible to the

systems that are to be used. The structure of an
EMS is essentially an ‘empty shell’, within which

Best Available Technology (BAT)

operator. This includes both the technology used

the company defines its own unique ways of

The BAT concept is a useful standard-setting tool

and the way in which the industrial installation is

operating and establishing accountability. The

for emissions reduction in many industrial

designed, built, maintained, operated and

most widely used EMS is that provided by the

sectors. In the European Union (EU), however,

decommissioned. The following considerations

International Organization for Standardization

the use of BAT is mandatory as part of the

should be taken into account when determining

within the ISO 14001 framework (see Table 8.2).

Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control

BAT:

(IPPC) Directive of 1996. Since 2000, all new

Environmental audits

industrial installations in the EU have been

■

the use of low-waste technology

These should be carried out periodically in order

subject to the IPPC Directive and the BAT

■

the use of less hazardous substances

to assess the effectiveness of the management

provisions. Imposing new and considerably

■

the furthering of recovery and recycling of

system in place and its conformity with the

tougher BAT rules on all existing industrial

substances generated and used in the process

organization’s environmental policy and

installations in the EU could jeopardize many

and of waste, where appropriate

programme. Quantitative technical audits can

European jobs, and therefore the IPPC Directive

form part of this process, such as water and

granted these installations an eleven-year

energy audits. An environmental audit must also

transition period (i.e. to 2007). In many cases,

assess the organization’s compliance with

BAT means quite radical environmental

relevant environmental regulatory requirements.

improvements, and sometimes it can be very
costly for companies to adapt their existing

The European Union’s Eco-Management
and Audit Scheme (EMAS)

■

operation which have been tried with success
on an industrial scale
■

technological advances and changes in

■

the nature, effects and volume of the

■

the commissioning dates for new or existing

■

the length of time needed to introduce the

■

the consumption and nature of raw materials

scientific knowledge and understanding

plants to BAT.

emissions concerned
installations

A voluntary scheme designed to promote
continuous improvements of the environmental

best available technique

performance and compliance with all relevant
regulatory requirements regarding the

(including water) used in the process and

environment. To achieve this aim, industrial sites

their energy efficiency

in Europe are required to use an environmental
management system to monitor efficiency and to

■

environment and the risks to it

environmental performance. They are also
■

describing the current environmental conditions
and the operational aspects required at the site
level to deliver continuous improvements in
environmental performance. In regulatory

the need to prevent accidents and to minimize
the consequences for the environment

EMAS statements are principally focused on
improvements of environmental performance by

the need to prevent or reduce to a minimum
the overall impact of the emissions on the

report on their achievements regarding
encouraged to seek ISO 14001 accreditation.

comparable processes, facilities or methods of

■

the use of information published by the EU or
by international organizations.

2 9 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 3. The Vision: Towards High Water
Productivity and Zero Effluent Discharge
Water can be
saved either by
cutting down
on water input…
or by water

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

recycling and
reuse...

Both water quantity and quality need to be considered in the challenge of improving industrial water
use. Where water quantity is concerned, it is useful to consider water productivity, in terms of the
industrial value added per unit of water used (see Table 8.5 at end of chapter). The higher the water
productivity, the greater the intrinsic value being placed on the water. In water-scarce regions, where
there is competition for water among various users, water is likely to be allocated to the more highly
productive uses. Industry achieves higher water productivity than agriculture, but as it is difficult to
compare the water productivity of domestic use or environmental flow requirements, because the
adequate data and economic instruments are not available to make such comparisons. Within industry,
as in other sectors, it is important to strive towards greater water productivity.
Where water quality is concerned, zero effluent discharge
is the ultimate goal, in order to avoid any releases of
contaminants to the water environment. Zero effluent
discharge entails water recycling, which also contributes
to raising water productivity. If zero effluent discharge is
not economically and technically feasible, there are some
valuable intermediate strategies, which can be pursued to
reduce pollution and to ensure that waste substances are
recovered and water reused.

3a. Strategies for saving water and
increasing industrial water productivity
Water auditing
Conducting a water audit of an industrial plant or
manufacturing facility clearly shows where the water
supplied to the plant is being used, how much is used in
each process, and where it ultimately ends up. Rainwater
that falls on the site, as well as the natural evaporation
that occurs, should also be included in the audit. Once a
water audit has been done, it is possible to draw a flow
chart and show the water balance across the plant, or
over individual units of the process. This is the first step in
finding innovative ways to save water on an industrial site.
Water can be saved either by cutting down on water input,
where it is being unnecessarily wasted, or by identifying
water recycling and reuse opportunities, discussed in more
detail below. On-site rainwater harvesting may also be
considered, since this is preferable to allowing rainwater
(which may have become contaminated) to simply run off
into the stormwater system. Case studies from the same
industrial sector can provide some ideas and general
lessons on saving water, but each site needs to be audited
and analysed individually.

Matching water quality to use requirements
In many instances, the water used in industry is of an
unnecessarily high quality for the use to which it is put.
The analogy in domestic water use is, for instance, using
water of drinking quality in order to flush toilets or water
the garden. Similarly, in industrial processes there are
many applications where lower water quality could be
used. This offers recycling opportunities. Often 50 percent
or more of an industrial plant’s water intake may be used
for the purpose of process cooling, a need that can often
be met with lower quality water. On the other hand,
some industries (such as the pharmaceutical industry)
require water of exceptionally high quality. In such
processes, additional water treatment is carried out on
the water received from the local water utility, or
withdrawn from groundwater or surface waters, in order
to further improve the water quality before it is used.
There are cases in industry where water is used
inappropriately, where a completely different approach
could be taken to save water in water-scarce areas. An
example of this would be switching to using pneumatic or
mechanical systems for transportation, instead of using
water to move the products, as is often done in the
poultry and other food industries.

Water recycling and on-site reuse
Water recycling is the primary means of saving water in
an industrial application: taking wastewater that would
otherwise be discharged and using it in a lower quality
application (often after treatment). Each cubic metre (m3)
of water that is recycled on-site represents one cubic
metre that will not have to be withdrawn from a surface
water source or from groundwater. Water can even be used
many times over. In such cases, where, for instance, a

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 9 1

The most
common uses
of reclaimed
water are

given cubic metre of water is used ten times in the process
(a ‘recycle ratio’ of ten to one), this represents 9 m3 that
are not withdrawn from a freshwater source. Increased
water savings can be made by raising the recycle ratio. The
industrial water productivity of the product is thereby also
greatly increased, as far less freshwater is used to produce
the same quantity of product.

industrial cooling
and power
generation,
followed by
boiler feed and
quenching

The way in which water recycling is done on-site must be
governed by the principle of matching water quality to
use requirements, as mentioned above. This is dependent
on the nature of the manufacturing process, as well as
on the degree of wastewater treatment carried out on
the site. Processes such as heating, cooling and
quenching are the most common applications for lower
quality water. It can also be used as washdown water,
and for site irrigation.
A second consideration in recycling industrial water is the
cost of treating the wastewater to the required level,
including the cost of new or additional pipes and pumps,
as compared to the cost of ‘raw’ water supplies
(freshwater). Where the quality of freshwater is declining
locally, or where freshwater supplies are becoming
unreliable due to water scarcity in the region (droughts or
falling groundwater levels), on-site industrial water
recycling becomes an increasingly attractive option. On-site

water recycling can be regarded as a component of
industrial risk management, since it contributes to reducing
the risk related to the unreliability of freshwater supplies.
For example, the micro-chip manufacturer, Intel,
established the Corporate Industrial Water Management
Group to improve water use efficiency at its major
manufacturing sites, which use large amounts of highly
treated water for chip cleaning. The group includes
representatives from fabrication sites, corporate
technology development experts, and regulatory
compliance staff. Intel’s initial goal was to offset by 2003
at least 25 percent of its total incoming freshwater
supply needs by using recycled water and installing more
efficient systems. In 2002, the company exceeded this
goal by achieving 35 percent water savings through
recycling water and efficiency gains.

Using reclaimed water
A more indirect means of recycling water occurs when an
industrial enterprise reuses the wastewater produced by
another industrial plant close by (with a treatment step in
between, if necessary). Again, the principle of matching
water quality to use requirements must be followed. The
availability of wastewater, when needed, and its variability
in terms of quality also need to be considered. For
instance, an industrial plant could use wastewater from a

BOX 8.5: DEFINITIONS OF WATER RECLAMATION, REUSE AND RECYCLING

‘Water reclamation’, ‘reuse’ and ‘recycling’

Water reuse is the use of treated wastewater

Water recycling and reuse has far-reaching

should not be used interchangeably. In the

for beneficial purposes such as agricultural

benefits in industries beyond the mere

wastewater treatment industry, the following

irrigation and industrial cooling. Water reuse can

requirement of complying with the effluent

definitions are used:

be done directly or indirectly.

discharge permits:

Water recycling normally involves only one use

Direct water reuse requires the existence of

1. Reduction in freshwater withdrawal and

or user, and the effluent from the user is

pipes or other conveyance facilities for delivering

captured and redirected back into that use

reclaimed water.

reclaiming wastewater, thereby reducing

scheme. Water recycling is predominantly
practised by industry.

consumption
2. Minimization of wastewater discharge by

Indirect water reuse is the discharge of an

clean-up costs and discharge liabilities

effluent to receiving waters (a river, lake or

3. Recovery of valuable by-products

Wastewater reclamation is the treatment or

wetland) for assimilation and further withdrawals

4. Improvement of the profit margin by cost

processing of wastewater (industrial or

downstream. This is recognized to be important

municipal) in order to make it reusable.

and can be planned for, but does not constitute
direct water reuse.

reduction
5. Enhancement of corporate image, public
acceptance and environmental responsibility.

Reclaimed water is treated effluent suitable for
an intended water reuse application.

Source: Asano and Visvanathan, 2001.

2 9 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

nearby municipal sewage treatment plant. The result is
usually called reclaimed water and is sold to industry by
municipalities in many countries, including Australia, South
Africa and the US. The most common uses of reclaimed
water are industrial cooling and power generation,
followed by boiler feed and quenching. In such
arrangements, the use of reclaimed water by industry
eases the pressure on scarce water resources in the
region.

Above: This golf course in

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Arizona, US, is watered
with recycled water from
the city of Page

In the metropolitan region of Durban, South Africa, an
innovative public-private partnership has been supplying
reclaimed water to industries since 1999 (see Chapter 14).
The Southern Sewage Works of the Durban Metro Water
Services treats over 100,000 m3/day of domestic and
industrial effluent (through primary treatment only), prior
to discharging it to sea through a long sea outfall.
Projections showed that the capacity of the sea outfall
would soon be reached, due to the growing population
and industrial water discharges in the area. A secondary
treatment plant with a capacity of 48,000 m3/day was
built, which was allowed to discharge water into a canal
that flows over the beach into the sea. A nearby paper
mill then contracted to take 9,000 m3/day of the treated
water. A local survey was undertaken, which found that
further (tertiary) treatment would be required to sell
reclaimed water to other industries in the area, which
needed higher quality water than the paper mill. Since it
was not economically feasible for the municipal water
utility to construct and operate such a high-tech plant,
the tertiary treatment works (which currently treats and
sells up to 30,000 m3/day of reclaimed water to local
industries) was built through a public-private partnership.

Agricultural irrigation and urban irrigation (of parks, sports
fields and golf courses) are also major applications for
reclaimed water, which is important since irrigation is usually
the largest water user in any region (see Chapter 7). Israel
currently reuses some 84 percent of its treated sewage
effluent in agricultural irrigation. The World Health
Organization has laid down guidelines for the use of
reclaimed water in irrigation, as there may be health
implications when reclaimed water is sprayed in the open
(WHO, 2005). Reclaimed water can also be used to
recharge aquifers, for instance to avoid saline water
intrusion into the aquifer, or simply to augment the
groundwater supply. In the Adelaide region of Australia,
half of the city’s water demand is met through reclaiming
water by aquifer storage and recovery.
In construction applications, reclaimed water can be used
for dust control, soil settling and compaction, aggregate
washing and concrete production. Domestic applications for
reclaimed water include fire fighting, car washing, toilet
flushing and garden watering. Supplying reclaimed water in
urban areas requires two sets of piping: one for potable
water (drinking water) and the other for reclaimed water –
termed ‘dual reticulation’. The installation of dual
reticulation is usually done in new housing developments,
as laying it retrospectively may be prohibitively expensive.
The Tokyo Metropolitan Government in Japan has long
encouraged the fitting of new office blocks and apartments
in Tokyo with dual reticulation (see also Chapter 14).
There are even a few cities in arid regions, such as in
Windhoek, Namibia, where reclaimed water is treated to a
very high standard and then reused directly to augment
the potable water supply.

Table 8.3: Wastewater treatment requirements as a function of end-use for industrial water supply
Industrial water use
Cooling tower makeup
Once through cooling
– Turbine exhaust condensing
– Direct contact cooling
– Equipment and bearing cooling
Process water
Boiler feed water

Washdown water
Site irrigation
Source: Asano and Visvanathan, 2001.

Nitrogen and
Phosphorus removal
Normally

Chemical
precipitation
Yes

Filtration
Yes

Sometimes
Seldom
Yes
Yes
Requires more extensive treatment;
use of reclaimed wastewater
generally not recommended
Sometimes
No

Seldom
No
Yes
Yes

Sometimes
Sometimes
Yes
Yes

Seldom
No

Yes
Normally

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 9 3

Both freshwater and reclaimed water can contain
constituents that can cause problems, but their
concentrations in reclaimed water are generally higher.
■

■

■

Scaling: This refers to the formation of hard deposits
on surfaces, which reduce the efficiency of heat
transfer processes. Due to repetitive recycling of feed
water in the cooling water, water lost by evaporation
leads to increases in the concentration of mineral
impurities such as calcium, magnesium, sodium,
chloride and silica, which eventually lead to scale
formation. Scale forming constituents can be
eliminated using appropriate chemical precipitation
techniques.
Corrosion: Ammonia, which may be present in
significant concentration in reclaimed municipal
wastewater, is one of the prime causes of corrosion in
many industrial water reuse installations. Dissolved
oxygen and certain metals (manganese, iron, and
aluminium) may also promote corrosion because of
their relatively high oxidation potential. The corrosion
can be controlled by adding chemical corrosion
inhibitors.
Biological growth: Slime and algal growth are
common problems in reclaimed water due to a high
nutrient content, which promotes biological growth.
This growth can be controlled or eliminated by addition
of biocides during the internal treatment process.

■

Foaming: Associated with the presence of
biodegradable detergents, foaming problems can be
avoided by using anti-foaming chemicals.

■

Pathogenic organisms: When reclaimed water is used
in industry, the assurance of adequate disinfection is a
primary concern for protecting the health of workers
and plant operators. The most stringent requirement,
similar to unrestricted reclaimed water use in food crop
irrigation, would be appropriate if there exists a
potential for human exposure to spray.

in two ways: either as m3/t of product, or as m3/dollar of
added value. By looking at the imports and exports of
each type of product, it is possible to calculate the virtual
water flows into and out of the region. One can also
calculate the industrial water productivity of various
products and sectors, in terms of the industrial value
added per unit of water used (see Table 8.4 at end of
chapter). In water-scarce regions, it makes sense to focus
on the manufacture of products that use little water, and
to therefore only export products with a high water
productivity. This minimizes the amount of virtual water
that is exported. Conversely, water-intensive products and
products with low water productivity, such as aluminium
and beer, should be imported into water-scarce regions, as
this represents a way of indirectly importing water.

Better policy instruments and economic
incentives
Industrial water management strategies that intend to
minimize water consumption and wastewater generation,
and thereby improve water productivity, can be either
internal or external to the enterprise itself. Internal
strategies are those measures that are required to be
taken at a factory level in order for water consumption
and wastewater generation to be controlled, such as
water recycling. These measures can be taken more or
less independently of external strategies.
External strategies, on the other hand, are measures that
are required at the industry level in the context of local,
regional or national industrial water management.
Generally, the factory management does not control
these strategies, although in certain cases some
measures are required at the factory level in response.
The nature and number of a particular type of industry
present in a locality or a region can significantly influence
these strategies. Some of these strategies are
summarized as follows:
■

national water recycling and reuse policies

■

grouping of industries in a particular site (industrial
parks) coupled with combined treatment methods and
reuse policies

■

rationing the water use within industry, so that each
process uses a defined quantity of water

■

applying economic instruments such as penalties, water
charges, subventions, credits and grants.

Minimizing virtual water in manufactured products
The concept of the virtual water trade has been
mentioned in Chapters 7, 11 and 12, in relation to trade
in crops and food products. The same concept applies in
relation to manufactured products, where the virtual water
of a particular finished product represents the volume of
water that was used to produce it. This can be calculated

...the virtual
water of a
particular
finished product
represents the
volume of water
that was used to
produce it

2 9 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

National water conservation policy, also called water
demand management, is the key factor in water recycling
and reuse in industries. It forms an important component
of national water efficiency plans. In some developing
countries, industry is not charged for water nor for
wastewater services; in other words, industrial water
withdrawals and wastewater discharges are still free and
unregulated. Both regulation and the imposition of
stepped water tariffs according to the volume of water
used are key instruments for governments to use in these
situations (see Chapter 12).

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Compliance with stringent effluent requirements can force
industries to implement new water-saving technologies to
reduce effluent discharges and prevent pollution
incidents. Fines for non-compliance and the threat of
closure for repetition of non-compliance can also
significantly achieve higher recycling and reuse. Higher
charges for raw water can be applied to industries using
large volumes of water. An example can be seen in
Singapore, which levies a 15 percent water conservation
tax on operations using more than a specified amount.
New factories using more than 500 m3 of water per
month must apply for approval from the City Council
during the planning phase. A fertilizer plant in Goa, India
cut water demand by 50 percent over a six-year period in
response to higher water prices. Dairy, pharmaceutical,
and food processing industries in São Paulo, Brazil (see
also Chapter 14), reduced water use per unit output by
62 percent, 49 percent and 42 percent, respectively
(Kuylenstierna and Najlis, 1998).
Given proper incentives, it is generally found that industry
can cut its water demand by 40 to 90 percent, even with
existing techniques and practices (Asano and Visvanathan,
2001). However, water conservation policies need to be
fair, feasible and enforceable. Economic incentives should
be given to industry to comply with standards and policy
and to reduce raw water intake and wastewater
discharge. Such incentives could include subsidies for
industries implementing innovative environmental
technologies and financial and advisory support for
industries that fund new research.

Pollution from a chemical
factory upstream
devastated fish farms
along the Tuo River, a
tributary of the Yangtze
River, China

3b. Strategies and methodologies for
reducing pollution: Paving the way to zero
effluent discharge
No industrial plant operator sets out in the morning to
pollute the environment. The objectives of a plant
operator are to minimize production costs and to
maximize the volume of production. Releases of
pollutants into rivers and streams are carried out because
this is typically a low-cost and low-tech option for waste
and wastewater disposal. Frequently, once plant operators
and managers become aware of the possibilities of
cleaner production, the water and energy savings as well
as the cost savings that can be made, their response is
enthusiastic. In addition, the company as a whole can
become more competitive in the global market by
advertising its environmental policy and its strategies to
reduce pollution. Some examples of how individual
companies have benefited from implementing cleaner
production methods are described in Boxes 8.6 and 8.7.
Strategies to reduce pollution include applying the principles
of cleaner production in general. This is illustrated by a
specific example of a UNIDO methodology for promoting
cleaner production, the TEST (transfer of environmentally
sound technology) strategy, which has been implemented in
several river basins. Some of the specific processing
techniques that can be applied to reducing water pollution
on industrial plants include stream separation, raw material
and energy recovery, and the reuse of waste and
wastewater. End-of-pipe treatment technologies are also
discussed briefly below, as these technologies are
applicable both to recycling water, and to treating it prior to
discharge back into the water environment. In the long run,
the most desirable approach is that of aiming for zero
effluent discharge, so that no industrial wastewater at all is
discharged back directly into the environment.

Cleaner production
The principles of cleaner production include optimizing
the use of resources used as inputs to the production
process, such as raw materials, water and energy, and
reducing to a minimum the generation of wastes. They
are also concerned with the method of disposal of wastes
and their impact on water, air and soil. A Cleaner
Production Assessment (CPA) is a specific methodology
for identifying areas of inefficient use of resources and
poor management of wastes by focusing on the
environmental aspects and impacts of industrial
processes. This methodology (developed by UNEP)
consists of the following five phases:

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 9 5

■

■

■

Phase I: Planning and organization: obtain
management commitment; establish a project team;
develop policy, objectives and targets; plan the CPA.
Phase II: Pre-assessment (qualitative review): prepare
company description and flow chart; undertake a walkthrough inspection; establish a focus.
Phase III: Assessment (quantitative review): collect
quantitative data; assess material balance; identify
Cleaner Production opportunities; record and prioritize
options.

Environmentally Sound Technologies (the TEST
strategy)
Whereas CPAs are focused at the enterprise level, TEST is
applied at a river basin level in order to scale up the
benefits of clean production. The TEST strategy is a
methodology that has been developed by UNIDO, which
involves individual enterprises, national and local
governments, and river basin organizations (see also
Chapter 14). To date, it has been applied in the Danube
and the Dnieper Basins with considerable success, helping
to protect the Black Sea marine ecosystem (see Box 8.8).
The methodology consists of the following aspects:

Given proper
incentives, it is
generally found
that industry
can cut its
water demand
by 40 to 90
percent...

■

■

Phase IV: Evaluation and feasibility study: prepare
preliminary evaluation; conduct technical evaluation;
conduct economic evaluation; conduct environmental
evaluation; select viable options.

■

identifying the pollution hot spots in the basin
(see Box 8.1)

■

introducing the principles of cleaner production and
reducing the industrial pollution associated with certain
enterprises, selected as demonstration sites, which are
located at these pollution hot spots

■

scaling up the TEST by training and equipping water
managers, plant operators and local trainers and
consultants with the principles and tools of the
Cleaner Production Assessment (CPA), the
Environmental Management System (EMS) and
Environmental Management Accounting (EMA)

■

supporting the relevant river basin organization in
building awareness of the benefits of Cleaner
Production and increasing industrial water productivity.

Phase V: Implementation and continuation: prepare an
implementation plan; implement selected options; monitor
performance; sustain Cleaner Production activities.

There is a network of National Cleaner Production Centres
in twenty-seven countries, established by UNIDO, which
assist in spreading the CPA methodology among
companies in various industrial sectors. Many successful
case studies of cleaner production are available,
demonstrating how CPA can help companies become
cleaner and more profitable.

BOX 8.6: CLEANER CHEESE PRODUCTION IN EL SALVADOR

A typical dairy company in El Salvador was using

The solution proposed by the National Cleaner

10 litres (L) of milk and about 80 L of water in

Production Centre in El Salvador was to process

order to produce one kilogram (kg) of cheese.

the whey in order to produce a marketable

Nearly 9 L of whey were produced as a by-

whey-fruit drink. Such drinks are available in the

product and discharged into the wastewater.

European market and are popular with

Whey is a highly concentrated organic liquid,

consumers. No additional investment was

containing proteins and lactose. Large dairy

required by the company in order to process the

companies use ultra-filtration plants to produce

whey. The estimated benefits were found to

pure lactose, additives for ice cream and other

include:

■

11.5 percent reduction in the volume of
wastewater

■

40,000 milligrams per litre (mg/L) reduction in
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) level in
wastewater

■

60,000 mg/L reduction in chemical oxygen
demand (COD) level in wastewater

■

US $60,000 annual savings in wastewater
treatment costs.

food products from this by-product. However,

Other dairy companies in El Salvador are starting

this technology is not affordable for small and

to produce this product, and similar programmes

medium-sized companies.

are being developed in Guatemala and Mexico.

2 9 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 8.7: CLEANER BEER PRODUCTION IN CUBA

Tinima Brewery is the second largest brewery in

means that the main volume of liquid does not

Cuba, producing 47,600 cubic metres (m3) of

pass through the hot section. The investment

beer per year. In 2002, the National Cleaner

required was low, as these changes needed only

Production Network responded to a request from

some new pipeline arrangements.

■

to be just as acceptable to consumers, and the

three main components: barley malt, sugar and

technology is now approved for all breweries in

water. This process produces a sugary liquid

Cuba. The following savings were achieved by

called wort, which is cooled, fermented and

Tinima Brewery as a result of the cleaner

filtered in order to obtain the final product. A

production technology:

■

■

■

stages
■

30 percent savings on thermal energy
consumption in the cooling stages
12 percent savings in total electricity
consumption

and water short-circuit the hot section and are
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

50 percent savings on thermal energy
consumption in the heating and evaporating

new technology was proposed to Tinima

added directly to the fermentation tank. This

3 percent savings on caustic cleaning solution
consumption

■

Beer is produced by mixing, milling and boiling

Brewery, in which the concentrated sugar syrup

4 percent savings on sugar consumption (used
as an additive to the beer)

This new technology was implemented at Tinima
Brewery in 2003. The beer produced was found

11 percent reduction in the volume of
wastewater

■

the brewery’s management for a cleaner
production assessment (CPA) of the brewery.

■

74 percent reduction in cooling water
consumption

■

7 percent reduction in total water consumption

21 percent reduction in greenhouse gas
emissions.

Source: UNIDO, 2004.

BOX 8.8: THE TEST STRATEGY IN THE DANUBE BASIN

The implementation of the TEST programme in the

■

improving scheduling management and

freshwater and energy), reduced wastewater

maintenance

discharges and pollution loads into the Danube

completed in December 2003, successfully

■

improving raw materials storage

River and its tributaries, as well as reduction of

introducing the TEST approach in seventeen

■

adjusting water consumption by reducing

waste generation and air emissions. The total

companies in five countries (Bulgaria, Croatia,

wastage and leaks, and improving process

reduction in wastewater discharge into the Danube

Hungary, Romania and Slovakia). The companies

control.

River Basin, achieved by the end of 2003 as a

Danube River Basin began in May 2001 and was

result of implementing Type A and B measures,

were identified as hot spots of industrial pollution,
from various industrial sectors, including chemicals,

There were 260 Type B (involving a relatively small

was 4,590,000 m3 per year. Pollution loads in the

food, machinery production, textiles, pulp and

investment with a short payback period) measures

wastewater were reduced in most of the

paper. Tangible results were achieved in terms of

identified, of which 109 were implemented by the

companies, including chemical oxygen demand

increased productivity and improved environmental

end of the project. The total investment

(COD), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), oily

performance. These results are used to show other

undertaken by the 17 enterprises to implement

products, total suspended solids, heavy metals and

enterprises in the basin that it is possible to

the Type B measures was US $1,686,704, while

toxic chemicals.

reduce environmental impacts to acceptable levels

the estimated financial savings as a result of

while becoming more competitive.

these measures are US $1,277,570 per year.

There were 224 Type A (no cost or low cost)

It is interesting to note that the Bulgarian,

which 38 were approved by top management of

measures identified, of which 128 were

Romanian and Slovak companies had the highest

the various enterprises for implementation. The

implemented by the 17 participating enterprises.

number of Type A and B measures identified.

total investment required for the approved Type C

These were mostly ‘good housekeeping’

This can be explained by the fact that these

measures is US $47,325,000 and they are

measures involving the following:

companies used relatively outdated technology,

scheduled for completion by 2007. The total

■

process improvement (with small technological

thus many more measures could be identified to

additional reduction in wastewater discharges will

changes using existing equipment)

optimize the existing process. The environmental

be 7,863,000 m3 per year, with estimated annual

■

raising the skills of operational staff

benefits were significant in terms of reduced

savings by the companies of US $5,362,000.

■

revising laboratory procedures

consumption of natural resources (including

Source: UNIDO, 2004.

Finally, 141 Type C (requiring a significant
financial investment) measures were identified, of

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 9 7

Stream separation
The principle of stream separation is a useful tool when
assessing wastewater flows for treating the final discharge
and when identifying flows of process water that may be
recycled and reused. Wastewater containing a variety of
contaminants is much more difficult and expensive to treat
effectively than wastewater containing only one
contaminant. Also, mixing a concentrated stream of effluent
with a more diluted stream may result in much larger
volumes of wastewater entering an expensive treatment
process. The diluted stream alone may be suitable for
discharge directly into a sewer, to be dealt with by a
municipal wastewater treatment plant or may be suitable
for on-site recycling for direct reuse in another part of the
process. Treating the concentrated stream alone may
become easier, because it may contain fewer contaminants
and is likely to be cheaper, because the volume is much
smaller. Now that a wide range of treatment technologies is
available, stream separation may provide better and more
cost-effective solutions in comparison to producing a single
mixed effluent. The larger the enterprise, the more costeffective this approach becomes. However, even small and
medium-sized enterprises may benefit from considering
stream separation.

recovered and reused in another part of the process, or
indeed in another enterprise nearby, which requires lower
grade heat. Indirect energy recovery can be done through a
biological form of wastewater treatment, in which anaerobic
bacteria break down organic matter in the wastewater and
produce methane (biogas). The methane may then be used
to fire a boiler or to generate electricity (see Chapter 9).

■
■
■
■

the cost of the separation process, which can recover
the raw materials from the remainder of the waste
the quantities of recoverable material
the cost of the raw material
the cost of waste disposal.

If the cost of the separation process is too high, or if the
quantities of recoverable material are too small, material
recovery becomes unprofitable. Similarly, very cheap raw
materials and a low cost of waste disposal mitigate
against the feasibility of the process.
Energy recovery may be possible in the same way from
wastewater carrying waste heat. Once discharged, the
waste heat becomes thermal pollution in the receiving
water body. However, the heat could potentially be

many cases
in industry
where used
solvents, oils,

Reuse of waste
The recycling of glass, paper and various types of plastics
are the best-known examples of waste reuse. However,
there are many cases in industry where used solvents,
oils, concentrated wastewater containing starch, or
various solid wastes can be traded for their residual value
and reused. One innovative industrial park in Cape Town,
South Africa, has set up a voluntary Waste Register for the
companies located within the park (see Chapter 14). Each
company is required to log its waste production, the
quantity and the type of waste, as well as the types of
raw materials used as inputs and whether these may be
reclaimed materials. The Waste Register may be searched
on the industrial park’s website, so that companies can
identify sources that fit their requirements. This approach
results in savings on raw materials and waste disposal
costs for the companies involved.

Raw material and energy recovery from waste
An important aspect of reducing pollution is to look
carefully at the solid and liquid waste generated by a
given production process in order to calculate the
quantities of unconverted raw material remaining in the
waste streams. This unconverted raw material can
potentially be reused. The feasibility of the recovery
process can be assessed by determining the following:

...there are

Wastewater treatment technologies
These technologies are applicable both to recycling water
and treating it prior to discharge back into the water
environment. End-of-pipe treatment is often applied prior
to discharging wastewater into the sewage system, as
municipalities can charge industries for accepting their
wastewater, with a rising tariff according to the
concentration of the discharge. Some of the technologies
mentioned below result in the recovery of energy or raw
materials from the wastewater, such as anaerobic
treatment, which produces biogas, and sulphate removal,
which produces gypsum.
Today, there is a very wide range of treatment
technologies available. Wastewater treatment
technologies typically fall into two broad categories:
■

physical/chemical treatment (e.g. settling, filtration,
reverse osmosis, adsorption, flocculation, chlorination)
and biological treatment (aerobic or anaerobic
treatment which remove organic matter)

■

other more specialized processes such as phosphate
reduction and sulphate removal.

concentrated
wastewater
containing
starch, or
various solid
wastes can be
traded for their
residual value
and reused

2 9 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

There are also land-based treatment methods, such as
treatment in flow through wetlands, and various types of
contained lagoons (most of which are both aerobic and
anaerobic). Matching the type of treatment to the
contaminants in the wastewater (coupled with stream
separation as mentioned above) results in the most costeffective solution. There is no technological constraint on
the quality of the water which can be achieved through
treatment, although there are inevitably cost constraints.

Achieving zero effluent discharge

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Zero Effluent Discharge is a key target for both reducing
water withdrawal by industry, and reducing pollution to
the water environment. All the effluent that would
normally be discharged is recycled or sold to another
user, using the principles of stream separation, raw
material and energy recovery from waste, and reuse of
waste, which have been discussed above.
Reducing the volume of effluent discharged back into the
water environment by industry is essential to closing the
gap between water withdrawal and actual water
consumption, which was noted in the first section of this
chapter. Once no more water is discharged from an

industrial installation, its overall water consumption will
equal its water withdrawal from source. In practice, this
means that water withdrawal by industry will gradually
decline, as levels of water recycling increase, down to the
point where withdrawal equals consumption. This process
has already begun, as has been shown by the declining
water withdrawal by industry in Europe over the past
twenty-five years (see Figure 8.1 above).
The city of St Petersburg, Florida, US, is the first
municipality in the world to have achieved zero effluent
discharge to its surrounding surface waters. Situated on a
bay that is a major tourist attraction, the city has laid an
extensive dual-reticulation system for reclaimed water. All
the generated domestic and industrial wastewater is treated
to a high standard. The reclaimed water is then reused for
irrigation and industrial cooling applications by thousands of
customers, accounting for nearly half of the city’s water
needs of 190,000 m3. By substituting reclaimed water for
potable water in many applications, the city has eliminated
the need for expansion of its potable water supply system
until the year 2030. Equally important for the area, one
sees no pollution of the beaches and marine ecosystems by
municipal wastewater, and no unsightly sea outfalls.

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 2 9 9

Part 4. The ‘Cradle-to-Cradle’ Concept
There is a growing worldwide understanding that we need to find ways to make our industrialized
society more conservative in its use of materials and resources. At present the uses of materials and
other inputs to industrial processes (such as energy and water) are primarily linear. Resources are
mined, products are manufactured, wastes are generated and then disposed of at the end of the
process. Sooner or later, the products themselves end up as waste to be thrown away. By contrast, the
‘cradle to cradle’ concept is a vision of cyclical flows of materials: the materials that make up products
are reused over and over again. This approach seeks to eliminate the whole concept of waste, bringing
industrial production closer to the natural ecological process.
In 2002, this concept was put forward by William
McDonough and Michael Braungart in their book, Cradle
to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things. They
argue that there need to be two major flows of
materials: one of biodegradable materials, termed
‘biological nutrients’, and one of non-biodegradable
materials (such as metals and plastics) termed
‘technological nutrients’. The earth’s natural chemical and
biological cycles will ensure the recycling of the
biodegradable materials, while society needs to put in
place the systems necessary for the complete recycling of
the ‘technological nutrients’. For the recycling of
materials, it is important that the two flows be kept
distinct, otherwise each cycle will progressively
contaminate the other. Hence the sourcing of materials
for use in industry and the design of products become
crucial: each product must be easily consigned to one or
the other of the nutrient flows at the end of its lifespan
so that cross-contamination does not occur between the
two cycles. The authors argue that manufacturers need
to change from becoming suppliers of a product, to
suppliers of a service. A customer would use a product
for a certain period, after which the manufacturer takes it
back and breaks it down, reusing all of its materials to
create new products.
What the cradle-to-cradle concept means for water is a
complex question, as water is an essential part of both
the biological and the technological cycles. However,
water recycling is clearly the key. The basic principle must
be refraining from contaminating the water that is
returned to the biological cycle with any ‘technological
nutrients’, or non-biodegradable materials, metals and
solvents. Ideally, water should recirculate either within
the biological cycle, or within the technological cycle.
Implementing zero effluent discharge to the water
environment would ensure that once used by industry,
water stay within the technological cycle, except for that

fraction that evaporates and is thereby returned to the
biological cycle, free of contaminants. Preventing the
atmospheric deposition of contaminants and the leaching
of solid wastes into the water environment would also be
essential to implementing the ‘cradle-to-cradle’ vision.
In the long term, the cradle-to-cradle vision could become
the basis of almost all product design in manufacturing.
This would result in a much cleaner and healthier world.
Applications of the concept need to be found that can be
implemented by industries without excessive cost in
developing countries. This implies building both the
necessary design capacity in those countries, and the
capability to tap into global technology and information
support networks. The experience of the companies that
have already adopted the ‘cradle-to-cradle’ strategy
shows that effective design not only generates positive
externalities but can also make good business sense.
This chapter has largely focused on industry’s impact on
the water environment through its routine water
withdrawal and wastewater discharge. However, solid
waste disposal and air pollution by industry, as well as
major industrial disasters, such as the Red Rhine incident,
can also affect freshwater quality and thereby pose a risk
to the water environment. Aquatic ecosystems in many
places worldwide are being damaged or destroyed by
industrial pollution, which in the case of fisheries has
direct economic consequences. Many municipalities now
find that the quality of the drinking water they supply is
compromised by industrial pollution. This raises water
treatment costs for the water supply utilities, which are
then passed on to consumers through increased water
rates. Where the problem is variable freshwater quality,
caused by irregular effluent discharges, the water
treatment plant may not treat the contaminants
adequately. Hence companies requiring clean freshwater,
as well as municipalities, are finding their water security

...a vision of
cyclical flows...
the materials
that make up
products are
reused over and
over again

3 0 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

increasingly affected by water shortages and deteriorating
water quality.

Washing sugarbeets as
they are unloaded at a
sugar factory, Antois–
Picardy River Basin, France

...industries

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

often lead the

Industries therefore have a dramatic effect on the state of
the world’s freshwater resources, both by the quantity of
water that they consume and their potential to pollute
the water environment by their waste discharge. Yet
industries often lead the way towards a more sustainable
society by implementing water recycling and putting
environmental management systems in place in their
factories and offices. As discussed, there has been an
exponential increase over the past decade in the numbers
of industrial companies worldwide seeking certification
with ISO 14001, the international environmental standard.
This demonstrates many companies’ commitment to being

environmentally responsible as well as profitable,
enhancing both their corporate image and their
competitiveness.
As stated by the WSSD Plan of Implementation, poverty
eradication and sustainable natural resource management
are strongly linked. For countries adopting povertyreduction policies, industrial growth is highly desirable in
order to diversify the economy, create jobs, and add
value to primary products and raw materials being
produced. However, it is important that the necessary
legal and institutional arrangements be in place to enable
this growth to take place sustainably, keeping in mind
that environmental commitment can be a highly efficient
tool for enhancing profitability and competitiveness.

way towards

Table 8.4: Industrial water productivity by country, 2000/01

a more

Country

sustainable
society by
implementing
water recycling
and putting
environmental
management
systems in
place...

Industrial value
added (IVA): 2001*
(billion constant
1995 US $)
(1)

Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Republic
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Czech Republic
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt

23.21
4.84
69.13
1.19
107.29
82.15
1.02
13.10
5.76
0.40
2.25
3.41
239.36
3.48
0.79
2.67
205.98
0.23
0.30
26.29
593.70
25.24
0.86
4.16
2.40
20.97
44.90
7.18
24.03

Industrial water
use: 2000
(Km3/year)

Population:
2000
(million)

IWP
per capita
(US $ IVA/m3/c)

(3)

Industrial water
productivity
(IWP)
(US $ IVA/m3)
(4) = (1)÷(2)

(2)

0.80
0.06
2.76
0.13
2.40
1.35
4.77
0.52
1.30
0.03
0.05
0.03
10.65
8.21
0.02
0.08
31.57
<0.01
<0.01
3.16
161.97
0.40
0.06
0.46
0.11
1.47
0.32
0.90
9.57

30.29
13.13
37.03
3.79
19.14
8.08
8.04
137.44
10.19
6.27
8.33
1.54
170.41
7.95
13.10
14.88
30.76
3.72
7.89
15.21
1,282.44
42.11
50.95
4.02
16.01
10.27
5.32
12.65
67.88

28.97
86.13
25.07
9.18
44.70
60.85
0.21
25.25
4.44
15.04
46.86
127.97
22.48
0.42
35.14
33.69
6.52
56.08
93.97
8.33
3.67
62.36
14.66
9.11
21.79
14.31
138.59
7.96
2.51

0.96
6.56
0.68
2.42
2.34
7.53
0.03
0.18
0.44
2.40
5.63
83.05
0.13
0.05
2.68
2.26
0.21
15.09
11.92
0.55
<0.01
1.48
0.29
2.26
1.36
1.39
26.05
0.63
0.04

(5) = (4)÷(3)

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 3 0 1

Table 8.4: continued
Country

El Salvador
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Republic
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao PDR
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Lithuania
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea

For countries

Industrial value
added (IVA): 2001*
(billion constant
1995 US $)
(1)

Industrial water
use: 2000
(Km3/year)
(2)

3.39
1.72
0.77
53.22
430.02
2.85
748.18
2.04
28.18
3.53
1.59
1.32
17.26
120.24
94.42
29.51
332.94
1.95
1,889.94
1.80
8.39
1.32
285.64
0.36
0.59
1.88
2.52
0.43
2.48
0.28
48.65
0.81
0.31
99.69
0.78
0.26
13.36
1.50
0.94
119.90
15.85
0.48
0.39
14.31
49.05
15.71
1.49
1.65

0.20
0.06
0.15
2.07
29.76
0.01
31.93
0.08
0.25
0.27
0.03
0.10
4.48
35.21
0.56
1.69
16.29
0.07
15.80
0.04
5.78
0.10
3.05
0.31
0.17
0.10
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.05
1.90
0.02
0.05
4.29
1.33
0.12
0.20
0.01
0.01
4.76
0.20
0.03
0.01
0.81
1.46
3.47
0.04
0.03

Population:
2000
(million)

IWP
per capita
(US $ IVA/m3/c)

(3)

Industrial water
productivity
(IWP)
(US $ IVA/m3)
(4) = (1)÷(2)

6.28
1.39
62.91
5.17
59.24
1.23
82.02
19.31
10.61
11.39
8.15
6.42
9.97
1,008.94
212.09
70.33
57.53
2.58
127.10
4.91
16.17
30.67
46.74
4.92
5.28
2.42
3.50
2.04
3.70
11.31
22.22
11.35
2.67
98.87
4.30
2.53
29.88
18.29
1.76
15.86
3.78
5.07
10.83
113.86
4.47
141.26
2.86
4.81

16.89
26.80
5.30
25.66
14.45
198.17
23.43
26.52
114.44
13.20
45.85
13.63
3.85
3.42
169.18
17.50
20.44
28.08
119.62
40.27
1.45
13.60
93.66
1.17
3.46
19.60
333.78
19.31
60.34
5.90
25.58
49.92
6.34
23.25
0.59
2.06
66.51
102.65
73.34
25.17
79.26
14.34
31.69
17.65
33.56
4.53
34.47
51.24

2.69
19.24
0.08
4.96
0.24
161.12
0.29
1.37
10.79
1.16
5.62
2.12
0.39
<0.01
0.80
0.25
0.36
10.90
0.94
8.20
0.09
0.44
2.00
0.24
0.66
8.10
95.47
9.49
16.33
0.52
1.15
4.40
2.38
0.24
0.14
0.81
2.23
5.61
41.74
1.59
20.98
2.83
2.93
0.16
7.51
0.03
12.07
10.66

(5) = (4)÷(3)

adopting
povertyreduction
policies,
industrial growth
is highly
desirable in
order to diversify
the economy

3 0 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 8.4: continued

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Country

Industrial value
added (IVA): 2001*
(billion constant
1995 US $)
(1)

Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, Bolivian Republic
Viet Nam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

2.61
17.08
28.07
50.65
36.71
12.32
139.79
0.37
1.42
0.17
51.35
208.17
4.11
81.68
3.18
0.70
1.07
69.52
0.33
3.46
7.04
50.00
3.46
1.34
21.62
340.03
2,147.80
5.32
2.79
31.69
10.89
1.86
1.11
1.58

Industrial water
use: 2000
(Km3/year)

Population:
2000
(million)

(2)

(3)

Industrial water
productivity
(IWP)
(US $ IVA/m3)
(4) = (1)÷(2)

0.04
2.03
2.69
12.75
1.37
7.97
48.66
0.01
0.06
0.01
1.61
6.60
0.31
1.61
0.36
0.56
0.03
2.14
0.01
0.08
0.07
4.11
0.19
0.05
13.28
7.19
220.69
0.04
1.20
0.59
17.23
0.04
0.13
0.12

5.50
25.66
75.65
38.61
10.02
22.44
145.49
7.61
9.42
4.41
43.31
39.91
18.92
8.84
16.19
6.09
35.12
62.81
4.53
1.30
9.46
66.67
4.74
23.30
49.57
59.63
283.23
3.34
24.88
24.17
78.14
18.35
10.42
12.63

61.90
8.42
10.42
3.97
26.87
1.55
2.87
35.11
24.32
24.86
31.99
31.54
13.33
50.67
8.74
1.25
42.31
32.46
25.22
41.98
105.03
12.18
18.34
29.40
1.63
47.28
9.73
147.69
2.33
53.82
0.63
43.74
8.45
13.15

*For some countries only 2000 statistics are available.
Note: Values for IVA and population have been rounded to two decimal places. Source: World Bank, 2001; FAO, 2003.

IWP
per capita
(US $ IVA/m3/c)

11.26
0.33
0.14
0.10
2.68
0.07
0.02
4.61
2.58
5.64
0.74
0.79
0.70
5.73
0.54
0.21
1.20
0.52
5.57
32.44
11.10
0.18
3.87
1.26
0.03
0.79
0.03
44.26
0.09
2.23
0.01
2.38
0.81
1.04

(5) = (4)÷(3)

WAT E R A N D I N D U ST RY . 3 0 3

References and Websites
Asano, T. and Visvanathan, C. 2001. Industries and water

McDonough, W. and Braungart, M. 2002. Cradle to Cradle:

recycling and reuse. Business and Industry – A Driving or

Remaking the Way We Make Things. New York, North

Braking Force on the Road towards Water Security.

Point Press.

Founders Seminar, organized by Stockholm International
Water Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 13–24.
EC (European Commission). 2004. European Pollutant
Emissions Register. Luxemburg, Office for Official
Publications of the European Communities.
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). 2004.
The ISO Survey of ISO 9000 and ISO 14001 Certificates,

Morrison, J. and Gleick, P. 2004. Freshwater Resources:
Managing the Risks Facing the Private Sector, Pacific
Institute, Oakland, California.
Shiklomanov, I.A. 1999. World Water Resources and their Use.
Paris, UNESCO and the State Hydrological Institute,
St Petersburg.
UN (United Nations). 2002. Johannesburg Plan of

Twelfth cycle: up to and including 31 December 2002,

Implementation. New York, UN.

ISO, Geneva.

www.un.org/esa/sustdev/documents/WSSD_POI_PD/English

Kuylenstierna, J. and Najlis, P. 1998. The comprehensive
assessment of the freshwater resources of the world policy options for an integrated sustainable water future.
Water International, Vol. 23, No.1, pp. 17–20.
Levine, A. D. and Asano, T. 2004. Recovering sustainable

———. 2003. Identification, assessment and prioritisation of
Pollution Hot Spots: UNIDO Methodology.
Unilever. 2003. Unilever Environment Report. Unilever, N.V.
Netherlands, Unilever.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006. Guidelines for the
Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Geneva,
WHO.
———. 2004. Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality. Geneva, WHO.
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/gdwq3/en/inde
x.html
World Bank. 2003 World Development Indicators. New York,
World Bank.

/POIToc.htm
UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa).
2002. The Way Forward. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization).
2004. Industry, Environment and the Diffusion of

water from wastewater. Environmental Science &

Environmentally Sound Technologies. Annual Report,

Technology. June, 2004, pp. 201-08.

2004. Vienna, UNIDO.

Basel Convention: www.basel.int/
Chronology of major tailings dams failures: www.wise-uranium.org/mdaf.html
The European Pollutant Emission Register: www.eper.cec.eu.int/eper/default.asp
The EU Water Framework Directive: europa.eu.int/comm/environment/water/water-framework/index_en.html
International Standards Organization: www.iso.org
Pacific Institute: www.pacinst.org
Rotterdam Convention: www.pic.int/
Stockholm Convention: www.pops.int/
UNECE Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes (Water Convention): www.unece.org/env/water/
UNECE Convention on the Transboundary Effects of Industrial Accidents: www.unece.org/env/teia/welcome.htm
UNEP description of technological disasters: www.uneptie.org/pc/apell/disasters/lists/technological.html
UNEP Disaster database: www.uneptie.org/pc/apell/disasters/database/disastersdatabase.asp
UNEP Division of Technology, Industry and Economics: www.uneptie.org/
UNIDO: www.unido.org/
Unilever: www.unilever.com/environmentsociety/
World Resources Institute: www.wri.org/
World Water Resources and Their Use – a joint SHI/UNESCO product: webworld.unesco.org/water/ihp/db/shiklomanov/index.shtml

And what is a man without energy?
Nothing – nothing at all.
Mark Twain

Part 1. Energy for Water Supply ....................308
1a. Energy use in water supply and sanitation
services .............................................................308
Extraction, conveyance and treatment..................308
Distribution .........................................................308
Consumer end-use ..............................................308
Wastewater collection..........................................308
Box 9.1: Water conservation versus energy
conservation
1b. Approaches to energy and water efficiency.......309
Identifying water/energy efficiency
opportunities ......................................................309
The systems approach .........................................310
Box 9.2: Energy conservation in the Moulton Niguel
Water District, California
1c. Desalination ......................................................310
Table 9.1: Volume of desalinated water
produced, selected countries, 2002
Box 9.3: Desalination using renewable energy,
Greece
1d. Solar energy for water supply ...........................312
Solar pumping.....................................................312
Solar water purifiers............................................312
Heating water for domestic use ...........................312

Part 2. Water for Energy Generation ...........313
2a. Hydropower in context ......................................313
Box 9.4: World Summit on Sustainable Development:
Energy targets
Table 9.2: Grid-based renewable power capacity
in 2003
Box 9.5: Climate change and atmospheric pollution:
Power generation from fossil fuels
Fig. 9.1: Global generation of electricity by source,
1971–2001
Fig. 9.2: Total primary energy supply by source, 2002
Box 9.6: The development of hydropower in Africa
2b. Focus on small hydropower (SHP) .....................319
Box 9.7: Small hydropower in China
Table 9.3: Status of small hydropower stations
in China in 2002
Box 9.8: Small hydropower in Nepal

Colorado River dam in Arizona, United States

2c. Pumped storage .................................................319
Box 9.9: Palmiet pumped storage scheme,
South Africa
2d. Sustainable hydropower solutions .....................320
Piggybacking alternative energy sources ..............320
Box 9.10: Hydro Tasmania, Australia
Adding hydropower capacity to existing
infrastructure ......................................................320
Box 9.11: Hydropower generation in Freudenau,
Austria
Extending the life and improving the efficiency
of hydropower schemes ......................................321
2e. Environmental impacts of thermal power generation
including water use ...........................................321
Table 9.4: Carbon intensity of electricity
production in 2002

Part 3. Governance of Energy and Water
Resources ...........................................................324
3a. The continuing debate on large hydropower......324
3b. Renewable energy and energy efficiency:
Incentives and economic instruments ................325
International and national mechanisms
implemented with the Kyoto Protocol ...................325
Box 9.12: Renewable Obligation Certificates:
A policy instrument promoting renewable energy
The case of rural electrification............................325
Improving energy efficiency .................................326
Box 9.13: Distributed generation: Power supply
in the future
3c. Policy-making for co-management of water
and energy resources.........................................327
Table 9.5: Access to electricity and water in 2000
Table 9.6: Hydropower: Capability at the end of 2002

References and Websites ..................................335

9
CHAPTER 9

Water and
Energy

By

UNIDO

(United Nations
Industrial
Development
Organization)

3 0 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Water and energy are two highly interconnected sectors: energy is needed throughout the water system, from
supplying water to its various users, including urban people, to collecting and treating wastewater. On the other
hand, water is essential to producing energy, from hydropower to water cooling in power stations.
In the context of a growing world population, leading to increasing demands and competition for water and energy,
it is time to integrate the management of these resources. This chapter takes stock of the various possibilities to be
explored in order to enhance water and energy efficiency and ensure sustainable development.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

While much progress has yet to be made for ensuring universal access to water supply and sanitation, even more
progress is needed to provide electricity for all. In order to achieve these challenging and urgent targets, water
supply and energy production systems both need improvements that do not jeopardize the environment.
■

There are very strong links between water and
electrical power usage which at present are not fully
taken into account in policy-making, management
and operation of both water and electricity generation
systems. The consequence is that many opportunities
for both energy and water savings are being lost.

■

Access to electricity for many poor people in lowerincome countries continues to lag a long way behind
access to an improved water supply. Access to electricity
plays a big role in poverty alleviation, improved health
and socio-economic development. Accelerating access
to electricity for the poor, although not one of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), was one of
the targets set at the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg in 2002.

■

Concern about the impact on the environment of
traditional methods of electrical power generation is
driving the introduction of a variety of non-polluting,
renewable energy sources. However, economies of
scale on large thermal and hydropower plants, existing
transmission/distribution grids plus government subsidies
for these traditional systems, put the renewable
approaches at a cost disadvantage. A wide range
of renewable electricity production options is now
available, together with a growing range of incentives
and economic instruments to promote their use and
also to promote increased efficiency of energy usage.

This page from top: Kut Al Amara dam, Iraq; Glen
Canyon Dam, Arizona; Villagers draw water from a pump
powered by solar panels, Tata, Morocco; Water pipeline
transporting water up to a valley accumulation station

■

Hydropower is available at different scales from
very large systems to small systems. It is very flexible,
permits rapid start up and can augment both thermal
power plant base loads at peak times and compensate
for fluctuating renewable supplies, as well as providing
stand-alone generating capacity for smaller and remote
communities. There is some controversy over whether
large hydropower schemes are renewable power
sources, but run-of-river systems are and there
are now many options to increase sustainability.

■

The supply of water and wastewater services of all
kinds to urban areas generally involves high electrical
energy consumption. However, by taking a total system
approach to energy management in these systems,
including energy audits, it is possible to achieve big
energy savings. Desalination of saline and brackish
water for urban water supply is growing as technology
improvements bring significant decreases in costs.

■

Experience has shown that the simultaneous analysis
of water and energy use at the policy level can enable
significant increase in productivity in the use of both
resources. Water conservation can lead to large energy
savings, as can taking full account of energy efficiency
approaches in water policy decisions.

Right: The Blue Lagoon is an artificial lake fed by the
surplus water drawn from the geothermal power station
at Svartsengi, Iceland. Captured at 2,000 m below ground,
the water reaches the surface at a temperature of 70°C,
at which point it is used to heat neighbouring cities

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 0 7

Water and electricity use are inextricably linked. Large quantities of water are used for cooling in
many electricity generating methods, such as coal and nuclear power stations. Hydropower, while not
a consumptive use of water, often requires the construction of reservoirs and other large engineering
works, which modify the aquatic environment. Conversely, large amounts of electrical power are used
to pump water from its sources to the places it is used, especially in irrigated agriculture and municipal
water systems.

Access to

Thus there is great pressure on governments in developing
countries to build power stations and to deliver more
electricity for domestic use and industrial development.
Yet increasing power generation through burning coal,
oil and gas presents its own set of sustainability issues
linked to the generation of carbon dioxide (CO2) and the
greenhouse effect. The majority of electricity worldwide
is generated by fossil fuel power stations from which
emissions exacerbate the problems of climate variability
and changes, raising the intensity of natural disasters,
which mainly impact the poor. Moving away from a carbonrich power-generating environment to more sustainable
generation methods and reducing the inefficiencies
mentioned earlier will help to alleviate this problem.

access to

In the rapidly growing urban environments in developing
countries, energy costs draw budgetary resources from
other municipal functions, such as education, public
transportation and health care. Without the provision
of reliable sustainable energy supplies, it is unlikely that
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of reducing
hunger, providing safe drinking water, providing
sanitation and improving health will be achieved.

electricity...

Further links between the water and energy sectors are
created by the frequent inefficiency and wastage in the
way both resources are used. There are serious
inefficiencies in many parts of the world in electricity
generation, transmission, distribution and usage. Likewise,
there are inefficiencies and leaks in water distribution
systems. It follows that substantial efficiency gains in
water use will reduce electric power requirements, which
in turn will lead to more savings of water otherwise used
in power generation.
A great deal of the infrastructure for both power
and water in middle- and lower-income countries is
poorly maintained. There is also a serious lack of the
infrastructure needed to extend necessary power and
water services to the many people presently unserved.
Access to electricity for the poor lags far behind access
to drinking water supply in many countries. For example,
in sub-Saharan Africa, only 25 percent of the population
have access to electricity, while 83 percent of the
urban population and 46 percent of the rural population
have access to a water supply (see Table 9.5 at the
end of this chapter).

electricity for
the poor lags
far behind
drinking water
supply in many
countries...in
sub-Saharan
Africa, only 25
percent of the
population have
access to

3 0 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 1. Energy for Water Supply
In many countries, agricultural irrigation, groundwater pumping, interbasin transfers, and urban
water supply and sanitation systems are major electricity users. Improving water use efficiency and
introducing water conservation measures can therefore significantly reduce energy use. This section
sets out to show how the two issues are interlinked, focusing upon urban water supply, and how the
two systems should be co-managed, with future implications for both water and energy policies.

...the energy
required by the
end uses of
water is far
greater than in
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

the other steps
of the urban
water cycle

1a. Energy use in water supply and
sanitation services
Nearly all modern urban water and wastewater systems
require energy in all phases of the treatment, delivery,
collection, treatment and disposal cycle. Where historical
systems once depended on surface water sources,
gravity distribution systems and dilution for wastewater
treatment, the water needs of growing urban areas need
additional energy input to safeguard human health.

Consumer end-use
Extraction, conveyance and treatment
The first step of the urban water cycle is extraction,
conveyance and treatment. The most widely used sources
of potable water are surface sources and groundwater
wells. The use of a particular source in a region depends
on the availability and the cost of water extraction. Surface
sources such as lakes, rivers and reservoirs typically require
some treatment to achieve potable quality. The quality of
the water body and the desired level and type of
treatment are key variables in energy inputs required at
this step. Groundwater sources have a more direct energy
requirement, since energy is needed to pump the water
up out of the ground, usually from bore. The amount of
energy required by a pump and motor system to extract
groundwater depends on the depth of the water table
beneath the ground. It is important to note that water
recycling and reuse, including a treatment step, is generally
far less energy-intensive than developing any new physical
source of water, other than local surface water.

Distribution

1. This involves pairs of
reservoirs with a significant
height difference. Water is
pumped up when there is
spare capacity in the network
and then allowed to flow
down again and generate
power at times of peak
demand.

energy rates, converting pumping mechanical energy
to potential energy by storing water at higher elevations.
There are areas where conveying water can be highly
energy intensive. Since water conservation saves all of
the upstream energy inputs as well as the end-use
energy inputs, water conservation in areas with energy
intensive water supplies will save substantially more
energy than water conservation in other areas.

Distribution of potable water is often the most variable
step in the urban water cycle. Ideally, the water source
is at a higher elevation than the intended destination.
In this case, gravity is used to distribute water and no
energy input is required. In most cases, though, varied
topography requires energy input through booster pumps
to generate sufficient pressure in the system to distribute
water to communities at higher elevations. Pumped
storage,1 which is further discussed later in this chapter,
is often used at this stage to take advantage of off-peak

Once water is delivered for consumer use, additional energy
inputs come from heating and cooling water. Residential
and commercial consumers heat water for bathing, radiant
heating and dishwashing and cool water for air conditioning.
Industrial consumers vary widely in their needs for heated
and cooled water based on the industrial application and
their process needs. However, the energy required by the
end-uses of water is far greater than in the other steps of
the urban water cycle. While there are efficiency
improvements that can reduce the energy inputs required
at each stage of the water use cycle, the greatest energy
and water savings come from reducing water consumed by
various end-uses (see Box 9.1). Water conservation at the
end-use stage eliminates all of the upstream energy required
to bring the water to the point of end-use, as well as all of
the downstream energy that would otherwise be spent to
collect, treat and dispose of this water.

Wastewater collection
Like distribution, wastewater collection is ideally
done using gravity systems. When this is not possible,
pumps are used to boost the wastewater to treatment
facilities. In combined sanitary and storm-water sewers,
precipitation affects the energy requirements of collection
systems and heavy rains sometimes overwhelm the
available infrastructure.
Wastewater treatment requires energy to remove
contaminants and prepare the water for discharge or reuse.
In aerobic wastewater treatment, the largest energy input is
in the aeration system itself. Some types of wastewater

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 0 9

treatment require very little energy (e.g. lagoons) but large
amounts of land. In urban areas where land is scarce, more
energy is required to treat large amounts of wastewater in a
treatment plant requiring less land area. Opportunities exist
to recover some of the energy embodied in the organic
material present in wastewater, by recovering methane gas
through anaerobic treatment and then using this fuel to
power the treatment facility. Indeed, some wastewater
treatment plants even provide electricity to the national grid.

1b. Approaches to energy and water efficiency
Because of the interconnectedness of water and energy,
it is vital to manage them together rather than in isolation.
The energy savings from water conservation and the water
savings from energy efficiency are inextricably linked, and
these linkages should be considered when determining
the best course of action from an economic, social or
environmental perspective. Energy efficiency in the water
and wastewater industry saves money in operations and
maintenance costs, reduces capital costs of new supply,
improves solvency and operations capacity of water utilities,
improves service coverage, reduces emissions and improves
water quality, among a host of other related benefits.
In order to support larger efforts to reduce energy use in
water and wastewater systems, larger-scale energy and
water management should be entrusted to the local level
for implementation. The term ‘watergy’ efficiency has

been coined to describe the combined water and energy
efficiencies which are available to municipalities and
water users (see Box 9.2).
Involvement of the energy utility provides the needed
support for implementing energy efficiency measures and
ensuring that efforts to reduce energy and water waste
are sustainable as a business practice. Energy efficiency
in any water utility never has a beginning or an end. To
sustain its energy savings, a water utility must continue
to monitor its energy use and set goals for improvement.

Identifying water/energy efficiency
opportunities

Small-scale hydro-energy
generation in Lao Cai,
Viet Nam

Energy and water audits are used to identify areas of
concern in water and wastewater systems. The boundaries
of the system to be audited are usually chosen based on
budgetary considerations and areas that are presumed
to yield the largest energy savings for the investment.
Major areas that are frequently identified as
water/energy savings opportunities in water supply
systems include the following:
■

Repairing leaks from valves, distribution pipes, etc.
Many urban water distribution systems in developed
cities were installed more than fifty years ago, and leaks
caused by corrosion of pipe material or other problems

BOX 9.1: WATER CONSERVATION VERSUS ENERGY CONSERVATION

Energy intensity measures the amount of energy

■

Water conservation may increase energy

■

Water conservation may decrease energy

used per unit of water. Some water sources are

intensity and increase total energy use:

intensity and decrease total energy use:

more energy intensive than others; for

A particular irrigation technology could reduce

The average high-efficiency clothes washer

instance, desalination requires more energy

water use by 5 percent but require so much

reduces water use by 29 percent, compared

than wastewater recycling. Water conservation

energy to operate that it increases the energy

to average low-efficiency machines, and

technology may either increase or decrease

intensity by 10 percent. This would increase

simultaneously lowers energy intensity by

energy intensity. Yet when water planners make

total energy use by 4.5 percent.

27 percent. Energy intensity declines, because

decisions, they should look not just at energy
intensity, but also at the total energy used from

mechanical aspects of the machines are also
■

Water conservation may increase energy

improved. By reducing total water use as well

source to tap. In the case of water conservation,

intensity and decrease total energy use:

as energy intensity, total energy use is

some programmes may consume a lot of energy

The average high-efficiency dishwasher

reduced by 48 percent.

at one stage in the energy/water use cycle, but

increases the energy intensity of dishwashing

still decrease the amount of energy used overall.

by 30 percent, but reduces water use by 34

The following three examples illustrate the

percent. As a result of using less water (and

interplay between energy intensity and total

therefore less energy to convey water from the

energy use:

source to the dishwater) the net total energy
needed to wash dishes declines by 14 percent.

Source: NRDC, 2004.

3 1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

can lead to the loss of significant amounts of potable
water. Distribution system losses increase the energy
intensity of water supply by requiring utilities to treat
and convey water that will be lost. Losses vary
significantly among urban water suppliers and range
as high as 30 percent in developed cities. In developing
cities, the proportion of water lost to leakage may be
even higher, typically 40 to 60 percent. (Only about
2 percent of this lost water goes to unmetered uses,
such as firefighting and construction.)

Pumping systems
are significant
energy consumers
in most water
distribution
systems, and
the potential
for substantial
energy reduction
exists in most

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

water facilities
throughout the
world
Mobile solar waterheating equipment
provided by an
environmental centre in a
slum area, Johannesburg,
South Africa

■

Correct sizing, design and maintenance of the pump
and motor system. Pumping systems are significant
energy consumers in most water distribution systems,
and the potential for substantial energy reduction
exists in most water facilities throughout the world.
Small improvements in efficiency can be achieved by
installing the most efficient pump equipment available.
More significant, however, is the saving potential
through optimizing the entire pumping system, including
the pump, motor, drive, controls, piping, valves and any
other ancillary equipment. Similarly, for large systems
made up of multiple pumps in parallel or series,
opportunities exist for optimizing control strategies.
This type of optimization can be carried out through
adopting the systems approach.

The systems approach
The cost-effective operation and maintenance of a
pumping system requires attention not only to the
needs of the individual pieces of equipment, but also
to the system as a whole. A ‘systems approach’ considers
both the supply and demand sides of the system and how
they interact, essentially shifting the focus from individual
components to total system performance. Often, operators
are so focused on the immediate demands of the
equipment that they overlook the broader question of
how system parameters are affecting the equipment.
For example, the frequent replacement of pump seals and
bearings can keep a maintenance crew so busy that they
overlook the system operating conditions that caused the
problems in the first place. Box 9.2 provides an example
of the systems approach as applied in California.

1c. Desalination
Ninety-seven percent of the world’s water is too salty for
consumption or agriculture. Desalination is not a new

concept, as it has been practised since biblical times.
However, the process typically consumes large quantities of
energy in order to produce drinking water from seawater or
polluted water, making energy cost the major determinant
of the desalination cost. Hence desalination technology has
tended to be used in water-scarce countries where energy
is cheap and plentiful. (see Table 9.1) Some 65 percent of
the world’s desalination plants are located in the Arabian
Gulf countries.
Desalination can be achieved either by removing salt from
water, or by removing pure water from a saline or polluted
source. For producing large quantities of freshwater from a
saline source, it is necessary to remove the water from the
salt. This process leaves behind a highly concentrated saline
solution, or brine, which must be disposed of as a waste
product, often in the sea.
Traditionally, thermal desalination or distillation has been
the most commonly used technology for producing large
quantities of freshwater from seawater. Different thermal
desalination processes require different magnitudes and
combinations of heat and electricity. The economic efficiency
of desalination plants is improved by combining the
purposes of power and water production. Most of the
Table 9.1: Volume of desalinated water produced,
selected countries, 2002
Country

Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Kuwait
Qatar
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Algeria
Bahrain
Oman
Malta
Egypt
Yemen
Tunisia
Morocco
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Jordan
Mauritania
Turkey
Sudan
Somalia
Djibouti
Source: FAO’s AQUASTAT, 2003.

Desalinated water
(million m3/year)

1,328.0
714.0
385.0
231.0
98.6
70.0
64.0
44.1
34.0
31.4
25.0
10.0
8.3
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.7
0.5
0.4
0.1
0.1

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 1 1

BOX 9.2: ENERGY CONSERVATION IN THE MOULTON NIGUEL WATER DISTRICT, CALIFORNIA

The Moulton Niguel Water District, located in

■

installing an energy management system

■

specifying high-efficiency (95 to 97

southern California, has a water system capacity

using programmable logic controllers that

percent) electric motors for all new

of 181 million litres per day and a wastewater

activate and de-activate pumps at seventy-

construction, while establishing a policy

system capacity of 64 million litres per day.

seven district pumping stations to take

to replace existing motors as they fail or

The water district began investigating energy

advantage of off-peak electricity rates

approach the end of their useful life.

efficiency measures when facing significant
increases in energy costs. The water district staff

■

installing variable frequency drives onto

The annual savings attributed to these efficiency

used the systems approach when evaluating

the wastewater pumps to reduce motor

improvements is over US $330,000, representing

both their water and wastewater facilities.

wear, improve control over lift station

a reduction in electricity costs of approximately

Changes implemented included the following:

wastewater levels, and help prevent

25 percent.

stagnant sewage in pipes

Source: Alliance to Save Energy, (www.ase.org).

BOX 9.3: DESALINATION USING RENEWABLE ENERGY, GREECE

Research being carried out in Greece has

approximately 37,000 parts per million (ppm)

per day; however, the operating time is boosted

linked a reverse osmosis unit for membrane

of total dissolved solids (TDS), while processing

when wind energy is available. This is a promising

desalination to a wind generator and a solar

1,000 L/h of seawater. The recovery ratio is

technology for helping remote coastal areas to

photovoltaic array, in order to create a unit that

approximately 15 percent, which is low compared

improve access to drinking water supplies.

can be used in remote areas where there is no

to other systems. During a Greek summer, the

potable water and no electricity grid. The unit

unit can operate for an average of eight hours

currently produces 130 litres per hour (L/h) of

per day on solar energy, while in winter the

potable water from seawater containing

operating time drops to an average of five hours

desalination plants operating in the Middle East and
elsewhere are dual-purpose multistage flash distillation
plants that produce both water and electricity, using oil as
the energy source. However, oil price rises undermine the
economic performance of these plants, even in the Arabian
Gulf region. As a result, nuclear power is increasingly being
considered as a viable energy source for thermal
desalination plants, particularly in countries that have local
uranium reserves. The advantages include fuel price stability
and the long-term availability of the fuel, but these need to
be balanced against the well-known drawbacks of high initial
investment costs and the disposal of spent nuclear fuel.
Reverse osmosis (membrane desalination) is an electricallydriven process that uses special membranes through which
water molecules may pass under pressure, leaving behind
larger molecules, including salt. The capital cost of reverse
osmosis units is dropping, and they are now the most
common choice for new desalination plants. The water
utility Thames Water in the UK is currently investing £300

Source: Martinot, 2004.

million (US $539 million) in a reverse osmosis plant to
treat water from the tidal estuary of the River Thames.
The plant, due for completion in 2007, will serve 900,000
customers in London, producing up to 150,000 m3/day of
drinking quality water. This technology can be combined
with renewable energy processes, as shown in Box 9.3.

Countries such

Some countries, such as Spain, increasingly prefer the
desalination option to environmentally damaging interbasin transfers, in order to bring water to arid coastal
areas. However, before advocating moving forward
with large-scale desalination, it must be recognized that
relatively little is yet known about its impact on marine
and coastal environments. Few studies have been
conducted on marine resource impacts from the large-scale
desalination facilities in the Middle East. The range of
potential adverse environmental impacts that may arise
from new desalination facilities include the impacts from
construction, waste discharge, injury and death of aquatic
life from water intakes, and the secondary impacts of

desalination

as Spain are
increasingly
choosing the
option in
preference to
environmentally
damaging interbasin transfer...

3 1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

increased energy consumption. These must all be explored
and adequately addressed before the development of
desalination facilities begins. In most cases, water
conservation and water recycling offer cheaper and
better alternatives. The heavy energy cost of desalination
also suggests the need to consider desalination plants
as an emergency water supply, to be used during water
demand peaks or droughts, rather than as a base supply.

microscopic particles (including nematodes), and
finally under an ultraviolet lamp. The ultraviolet light
kills bacteria, viruses and worm eggs. It can be activated
by the use of an electric battery, by the connection
to electricity mains or by using a 75-watt solar panel.
Maintenance and management of the unit is simple: if
the filters become blocked, they can be easily cleaned
by hand, which needs to be done daily.

1d. Solar energy for water supply

Heating water for domestic use

Small and inexpensive solar units are now available for
many water-related applications, including pumping,
water purification and solar water heating.

Solar thermal capacity for domestic hot water and space
heating is growing rapidly. Worldwide, the sector grew
by 16 percent in 2003, while in China it grew by
30 percent. Although some developing countries are
located in warm or tropical climates where hot water is not
of primary importance, in many areas, especially those that
are mountainous, there is a considerable demand for hot
water. Solar water heaters are especially useful in the
tourism sector and the hotel industry, as well as laundries,
hospitals and clinics. Where solar water heaters displace
electrical ones, they play a significant role in reducing peak
electricity demand and reduce the negative environmental
impact of fossil fuel use. Appropriate policies and economic
incentives need to be put in place to stimulate the spread
of this technology.

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Solar pumping

Reverse osmosis
desalination unit in the
Virgin Islands, United
States

Solar power can be used to help achieve the MDG of
providing safe and accessible drinking water in countries
that have plenty of sunlight. The great potential of solar
pumping is to bring freshwater to villages that have no
electricity and pump groundwater. There are many different
types of solar pumps now available for various applications.
At present, sales of solar pumps are largely to developed
countries, because the prices of the systems are still rather
high, but they are dropping rapidly as demand grows.

Solar water purifiers

By 2003 there
had been about
29 million
domestic solar
water heaters
installed
worldwide, of
which 21 million
were in
developing
countries

The simplest and cheapest solar water disinfection
system has been named SoDis (Solar Disinfection),
and is designed for use at the household level. It
improves the microbiological quality of drinking water
by using solar ultraviolet-A (UV-A) radiation and heat
to inactivate the pathogens that cause diarrhoea. The
system uses commonly available plastic soft drink bottles.
Contaminated water is filled into the transparent plastic
bottles and exposed to full sunlight for six hours. The
water must be relatively clear, and the bottles must
be clean and unscratched. The required heating can
be achieved by placing the bottles on a corrugated
iron sheet or on a rooftop.

By 2003 there were about 29 million domestic solar
water heaters installed worldwide, 21 million of which
were in developing countries. Several million are located in
China and India, while Egypt and Turkey have hundreds of
thousands of households served by solar water heaters.
In Barbados there are over 35,000 solar water heaters
installed (33 percent of all households). Each unit saves
about 4,000 kWh per year. This represents a considerable
foreign exchange savings on the import of diesel fuel for
the island, in addition to avoiding carbon emissions. It has
been calculated that these solar water heaters replace 30
to 35 MW of additional electric generating capacity that
would otherwise have to be installed in Barbados.

A more sophisticated solar water disinfection system
called Naiade has been developed for use in developing
countries. It produces safe drinking water from polluted
water in a sustainable manner, without the use of
chemicals, by means of UV irradiation. The unit weighs
44 kg and can produce on average up to 2,000 litres per
day of high-quality drinking water. Water from a well or
surface source is poured into the unit, either by hand or
pipe. The water passes through a sieve, which removes
large impurities, then through two filters, which remove

The success of solar water heaters in Barbados was
supported through various governance mechanisms.
A 30 percent consumption tax was put on electric water
heaters; furthermore, the cost of electricity is relatively
high in Barbados, which is also an incentive. Homeowners
can gain concessions on their mortgages by installing solar
water heaters. In Australia, each solar water heater with
an electricity equivalent of 1 MWh over its lifetime receives
between ten and thirty-five green certificates. These
certificates have an economic value (US $18 in 2002),

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 1 3

since electricity suppliers are obliged to purchase a certain
share of electricity from renewable energy sources, which
they can prove by presenting a corresponding number of
green certificates. In other countries, different means have
been used to foster the use of solar water heaters,

including direct grants. In Namibia, the government requires
solar water heaters to be installed in the construction of all
new government housing, while in India, the government
has introduced accelerated depreciation for commercial and
public applications of solar water heaters.

Part 2. Water for Energy Generation
Hydropower, and small hydropower (SHP) in particular, is recognized as a flexible and affordable
renewable energy source. Its role in electricity generation, especially in rapidly developing countries,
is crucial. The World Commission on Dams (WCD, 2002) focused attention internationally on the
negative environmental and social impacts of large dams, which raised questions about the
environmental sustainability of large hydropower projects. However, only about 25 percent of the
world’s large dams are involved in producing hydropower. The rest were built for other purposes, mainly
for irrigation, but also for water storage, for recreation and for assisting in river transport. Conversely,
many large hydropower projects are run-of-river projects, which do not necessitate the building of a dam,
while the role of small, mini- and micro-hydropower schemes is becoming increasingly important in the
energy security of many countries, led by the example of China. It is therefore important to disassociate
a discussion of the role of hydropower from the debate over large dams, while not glossing over the
environmental and social considerations involved in the choice of technology.

Electricity plays a
key role in
reducing poverty,
promoting
economic

2a. Hydropower in context
Governments have a pressing need to provide, at an
affordable price, the convenience and reliability offered by
electricity. The role of energy, and electricity in particular, in
meeting development targets was discussed in depth in the
first edition of the UN World Water Development Report.
Statistics show that for many developing countries, access
to electricity lags behind access to an improved water
supply (see Table 9.5 at the end of the chapter). Although
improving access to electricity is not one of the MDGs, it
was a target at the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
adopted at the World Summit on Sustainable Development
(WSSD) in 2002 (see Box 9.4). Electricity plays a key role
in reducing poverty, promoting economic activities and
improving quality of life, health, and education
opportunities, especially for women and children.
Since 1970, as worldwide demand for electricity has
steadily increased, governments have met this demand
through increasing thermal (gas, oil, coal and nuclear),
as well as hydropower generation capacity. Although the
share of hydropower in total world energy supply was only
2.2 percent in 2002, hydropower accounted for 19 percent
of all electric power generated (see Figures 9.1 and 9.2).

Over the same time period, there has been a perceptible
increase in the use of other renewable energy sources
(geothermal, solar photovoltaics, wind, and combined heat
and power2 [CHP]). Table 9.2 shows the renewable power
capacity in all countries and in developing countries in 2003.
Environmental concerns, particularly over climate change
and nuclear waste disposal, as well as safety and security
of supply, have prompted governments to introduce policies
aimed at accelerating the penetration of renewables and
CHP (see Box 9.5). Total worldwide investment in renewable
energy rose from US $6 billion in 1995 to approximately
US $22 billion in 2003, and is increasing rapidly.
The economies of scale available to the thermal and
hydropower options and the existence of transmission
and distribution grids continue to give them a significant
cost advantage when compared with renewables. Both the
thermal and hydropower options, particularly when used
together, offer the load-following capability and reliability
demanded by electricity consumers. Subsidies of all types
have historically been used worldwide to establish a topdown energy supply system favouring thermal and large
hydropower generating plants of ever-increasing capacity.
However, both thermal and large hydropower options bring

activities and
improving quality
of life, health,
and education
opportunities...

2. CHP is the simultaneous
generation of electric power
and steam used for heating.

3 1 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 9.4: WORLD SUMMIT ON SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: ENERGY TARGETS

■

■

‘Take joint actions and improve efforts to

■

‘Assist and facilitate on an accelerated basis

contribution to total energy supply...

work together at all levels to improve access

... the access of the poor to reliable,

ensuring that energy policies are supportive

to reliable and affordable energy services for

affordable, economically viable, socially

to developing countries’ efforts to eradicate

sustainable development sufficient to facilitate

acceptable and environmentally sound energy

poverty, and regularly evaluate available data

the achievement of the Millennium

services, taking into account the instrumental

to review progress to this end’ (Target III.20e).

Development Goals, including the goal of

role of developing national policies on energy

halving the proportion of people in poverty

for sustainable development, bearing in mind

by 2015, and as a means to generate other

that in developing countries sharp increases

affordable energy to rural communities,

important services that mitigate poverty,

in energy services are required to improve the

particularly to reduce dependence on

bearing in mind that access to energy facilitates

standards of living of their populations and

traditional fuel sources for cooking and

the eradication of poverty’ (Target II.9).

that energy services have positive impacts on

heating, which affect the health of

poverty eradication and improve standards of

women and children’ (Target VI.56d).
■

economically viable, socially acceptable and

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

‘Assist developing countries in providing

living’ (Target II.9g).

‘Improve access to reliable, affordable,
environmentally sound energy services and

■

■

‘Deal effectively with energy problems

‘Diversify energy supply by developing

in Africa, including through initiatives to...

resources, taking into account national

advanced, cleaner, more efficient, affordable

support Africa’s efforts to implement NEPAD

specificities and circumstances, through

and cost-effective energy technologies, hydro

objectives on energy, which seek to secure

various means, such as enhanced rural

included, and their transfer to developing

access for at least 35 percent of the African

electrification and decentralized energy

countries on concessional terms as mutually

population within twenty years, especially

systems, increased use of renewables,

agreed. With a sense of urgency, substantially

in rural areas’ (Target VIII.62j).

cleaner liquid and gaseous fuels and

increase the global share of renewable energy

enhanced energy efficiency...’ (Target II.9a).

sources with the objective of increasing its

Source: UN, 2002.

BOX 9.5: CLIMATE CHANGE AND ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION: POWER GENERATION FROM FOSSIL FUELS

In the industrialized world, the future of fossil

capped emissions sources under this scheme are

technologies have enabled new fossil fuel-fired

fuel-based electricity generation will be largely

coal-based power plants.

power plants to meet these requirements.

greenhouse gas emissions. Targets established

The EU Large Combustion Plant Directive

Unlike oil and gas, worldwide coal reserves

under the Kyoto Protocol to the UN Framework

establishes limits for emissions to air for

are plentiful and sufficient for the next 200

Convention on Climate Change amount to an

nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide and particulates

years. Coal deposits are widely distributed

aggregate reduction shared among all Parties

(dust) from combustion plants with a thermal

geographically, and coal is traded internationally.

to the Protocol of at least 5 percent from 1990

input of 50MW or more. Similar environmental

Several developing nations can be expected to

levels by 2008–12. As its Kyoto commitment, the

legislation is in place in the United States, other

continue using coal for decades to come. China

European Union (EU) agreed to an 8 percent

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

is adding 15-20 gigawatt-equivalents (GWe)

reduction shared between its Member States.

Development (OECD) Member States and several

of new coal-fired capacity each year.

The EU has also established a plan whereby

developing nations. Limits on emissions of heavy

Decarbonization of fossil fuels, particularly

sources from which emissions are to be capped

metals and organic pollutants from fossil fuel

coal, is being developed as an interim measure,

may trade their emissions allowances (the EU

combustion can also be expected. Today, flue

together with carbon sequestration, bridging the

Emissions Trading Scheme). The majority of

gas filtration and other emissions control

gap towards a fully renewable energy system.

determined by requirements for reducing

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 1 5

Table 9.2: Grid-based renewable power capacity in 2003
Generation type

Capacity in all countries
(gigawatts)

Small hydropower
Wind power
Biomass power*
Geothermal power
Solar photovoltaics
(grid connected)
Solar thermal power
TOTAL RENEWABLE POWER CAPACITY
For comparison:
Large hydropower
Total electric power capacity

Capacity in developing countries
(gigawatts)

56.0
40.0
35.0
9.0

33.0
3.0
18.0
4.0

1.1
0.4
141.5

<0.1
0
58.0

674.0
3,700.0

303.0
1,300.0

* Excluding municipal solid waste combustion and power from landfill gas.
Source: Adapted from Martinot, 2002.

Figure 9.1: Global generation of electricity by source, 1971–2001
Solar power plant in
Whitecliffs, Australia

18,000,000
16,000,000
14,000,000

GWh

12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
0
1971

1973

1975

1977

1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

■ Coal ■ Oil ■ Gas ■ Nuclear ■ Hydro ■ Combustible, renewables and waste ■ Geothermal/solar/wind

Figure 9.2: Total primary energy supply by source, 2002
Oil 35.8%

Gas 20.9%

Nuclear 6.8%
Hydro 2.2%
Combustible, renewable
and waste 10.8%
Coal 23.0%

Geothermal/solar
/wind 0.5%

Source: International Energy
Agency, 2005.

Source: International
Energy Agency, 2004.

3 1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...hydropower
offers great
benefits and
holds a unique
place in the
range of energy
options for
electricity
generation which
are currently

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

available

environmental problems and potentially unacceptable social
consequences, such as the displacement of inhabitants for
the construction of large dams, which now constrain their
deployment. Hence more sustainable approaches, smallscale alternatives and distributed generation are gaining
ground in many countries.
In 2001, hydropower generated 2,740 terawatt hours
(TWh), or 19 percent of the world’s electricity. This is the
equivalent of 2.1 billion metric tons of CO2 emissions, if
that energy had been generated by oil, gas or coal power
stations. The usage of hydropower varies greatly from
country to country. Twenty-four countries generate more
than 90 percent of their electricity through hydropower,
whereas others generate none at all. Europe makes use
of 75 percent of its hydropower potential, while Africa
has developed only 7 percent. This is seen to be the
possible future cornerstone of Africa’s development,
including significant export potential, with plans to
establish a continent-wide electricity grid (see Box 9.6).
At the end of this chapter, Table 9.6 shows countries’
capability for providing energy through hydropower.

There are several different types of hydropower, each
suitable for different needs and circumstances:
■

Reservoirs: This type of hydropower involves the
construction of a dam (large or small) and the
formation of a reservoir. Such construction is usually
multi-purpose, both for water supply and for electricity
production. This type of hydropower brings maximum
flexibility of supply and maximum efficiency.

■

Pumped storage: This involves pairs of reservoirs with
a significant height difference. Water is pumped when
there is spare capacity in the network and then allowed
to flow down again and generate power at times of
peak demand. It uses more power than it generates,
but is essential as a flexible reserve and can make an
electricity network more efficient.

■

Run-of-river: This form of hydropower uses the
stream’s flow and has little or no reservoir capacity
for storage or regulation. In social and environmental
terms, it is seen as preferable to reservoir construction.
Smaller hydropower schemes (including micro- and

BOX 9.6: THE DEVELOPMENT OF HYDROPOWER IN AFRICA

Africa is a heavy user of traditional (non-

Mozambique

Democratic Republic of Congo

commercial) energy, namely biomass. Per

Mphanda Nkuwa is a very large hydropower

The estimated cost of the 3,500 MW Inga III

capita electricity consumption is particularly low

project by international standards. The planned

power station to be built on the Congo River is

in Central, East and West Africa. In 2000, it was

capacity is 1,300 MW, making it slightly smaller

US $3,74 billion. The planned transmission lines

calculated that there were 7,730 megawatts

than Cahora Bassa, which was commissioned in

of the so-called Western Corridor – with the

(MW) of surplus installed generating capacity

the mid-1970s and has an installed capacity of

termination points being up to 3,500 km from

in the southern African grid. Hydropower

2,075 MW. The site is located on the Zambezi

Inga – will require a further investment in the

presently provides 22 percent of electricity

River between Cahora Bassa and Tete. Mphanda

region of US $652 million. In addition, two

generation in Africa; nuclear power provides

Nkuwa is rated as one of the most attractive

1,500 MW converter stations that will cost

2 percent, while thermal power stations provide

undeveloped hydropower projects in the world.

US $842 million are planned as part of the

70 percent. However, reliance on hydropower

The hydrological risk has been limited and well

project. The aim is to have Inga III and the

is 80 percent or greater in Cameroon, the

documented with long time-series of water

Western Corridor on line by 2015. This would

Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ghana,

flows. The geological risk is low and the dam

open the way for further development of the

Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda and Zambia.

site can be developed at a cost of US $640

Inga site, namely the Grand Inga project (a run-

Because of the enormous potential of Africa’s

per kilowatt of installed capacity. Since existing

of-river project) with a generating capability of

great rivers, particularly the Zambezi and the

upstream dams, such as Cahora Bassa, Kariba

up to 39,000 MW. The economic feasibility of

Congo, hydropower is seen as the motive

and Kafue Gorge, regulate the Zambezi River,

Grand Inga is seen to be dependent upon a

force for future development in Africa.

the project can be developed as a run-of-river

continental market developing throughout Africa,

hydropower plant requiring a small reservoir

with power ultimately being exported to North

relative to its size, with very limited negative

Africa and possibly even to Europe.

environmental impact.
Source: UNECA, 2004.

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 1 7

pico-hydro) are usually run-of-river projects, but
the technology is increasingly being applied in large
schemes where the topography makes it feasible,
as fast-flowing water is required.
Conventional hydropower (other than pumped storage)
is vulnerable to droughts and seasonal fluctuations in
rainfall. However, its value to the electricity system of
a country is that it brings great flexibility. Electric power

cannot be stored, yet demand is constantly fluctuating
in response to both predictable and unpredictable events.
Hydropower can be used at peak periods to supplement supply
from less flexible thermal and nuclear power stations. Water
can be held indefinitely in a reservoir and then released exactly
when it is needed to produce power (pumped storage). It is
particularly valuable in tandem with other renewable sources,
such as solar or wind power, whose outputs wax and wane

BOX 9.7: SMALL HYDROPOWER IN CHINA

China is well known for its large hydropower

SHP now accounts for about 30 percent of

disposition of SHP stations in China, according

schemes, such as the Xaolangdi power station

China’s overall hydropower capacity. Three

to installed capacity, operation mode and

on the Yellow River, which generates 1,800

hundred million people in China now use SHP-

ownership can be seen in Table 9.3.

megawatts (MW) of electricity, and the planned

derived electricity. The improvement in access

power station of the newly completed Three

to electricity in remote rural areas has been

The rapid development of SHP in China can be

Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River, which will

dramatic: 28 million people in China had no

attributed to the following:

generate up to 16,000 MW. However, China

electricity in 2000, and that figure had

has also attracted international attention due

dropped to 10.15 million by the end of 2002.

■

to its small hydropower (SHP) development,
focusing on rural electrification.

Preferential policies: The Chinese
Government introduced many preferential

Nearly half of China‘s SHP generators are linked

policies for SHP, such as tax reductions,

to local mini-grids (especially in mountainous

soft loans/grants from government,

Approximately one half of all commissioned SHP

areas), while only 10 percent are connected to

encouragement of private firms to invest

plants worldwide are located in China. Although

the national grid. The remainder of SHP stations

in SHP stations and policies protecting

the total feasible development potential of SHP

operate in isolation. Forty-four percent of

water supply areas and property ownership.

is approximately 100,000 MW throughout China,

China‘s SHP projects fall into the sub-category

The ratio of central government investment

the majority of the rapid recent development

of micro-hydro, with capacity of less than 100

in SHP to that of the private/individual

has been located in the southeast and

kW. Another 46 percent are mini-hydro, with a

contribution is only 1:24.

southwest of the country. By the end of 2002,

capacity up to 500 kW. The larger SHP projects –

China had installed 28,489 MW of capacity

with a capacity between 500 kW and 25 MW –

through building 42,221 SHP plants. The

make up the remaining 10 percent of the

view of the fact that equipment costs form

unique features of China’s SHP policy can

projects, but account for 75 percent of the

the largest percentage of the total cost of SHP

be characterized by the following features:

electricity output.

development – unlike in large hydro, where

■

its decentralized approach

The construction of SHP-based local grids to

– the Chinese government decided to promote

■

its use of local grid structures (or mini-grids)

serve specific rural supply areas is a unique

local manufacturing in order to reduce the

■

the specific policies and strategies it adopts,

electricity supply system developed by China.

overall cost of developing SHP stations.

particularly the overarching SHP policy of self-

The rate of electrification in villages and rural

construction, self-management and self-

households rose from 78.1 and 65.3 percent

utilization

in 1985 to 97.7 and 97.5 percent in 2002,

large hydropower: China has known for a

the popularization of a share-holding

respectively. The quality of electricity supply

long time that SHP has its own peculiar

investment system

was improved, and tariffs were reduced to be

advantages that cannot be achieved

its utilization of cost-effective SHP technology

equal with that of urban centres. There are

through large hydropower generation.

and equipment, the use of indigenous

two types of SHP stations: those invested,

equipment manufacturers, and the

owned and managed by local government

prioritization of training.

and small Independent Power Producers (IPPs)

■

Indigenous manufacturing capability: In

civil works generally takes a higher proportion

■
■

developed with private investment. The recent

■

Recognizing the advantages of SHP over

Source: International Networking on Small Hydropower
(www.inshp.org).

3 1 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Pumped storage

Table 9.3: Status of small hydropower stations in China in 2002

reservoirs are
smaller than

Types

Station

conventional

Installed capacity

reservoirs

Annual output

and less

Mode

controversial,

Station

since they are

Installed capacity

less dependent

Annual output

on the

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

topography

Number
percent
MW
percent
GWh
percent

Number
percent
MW
percent
GWh
percent
Ownership

Station
Installed capacity
Annual output

Number
percent
MW
percent
GWh
percent

SHP stations by Installed Capacity
Micro
Mini

18,944
44.0
687
2.6
1,860
2.1

19,606
45.6
7,171
27.3
20,245
23.2

SHP stations by Operating Mode
National Grid
Local Grid

4,722
10.9
6,412
24.5
20,097
23.1

20,465
47.6
17,869
68.0
60,792
69.8

SHP stations by Ownership
State ownership
Others

8,244.0
19.2
17,500
66.6
62,954
72.2

34,783
80.8
8,762
33.4
24,187
27.8

Small

Total

4,427
10.4
8,404
70.1
65,036
74.7

43,027
100
26,262
100
87,141
100

Isolated

Total

17,840
41.5
1,981
7.5
6,252
7.2

43,027
100
26,262
100
87,141
100

Total

43,027
100
26,262
100
87,141
100

Source: International Networking on Small Hydropower (www.inshp.org).

BOX 9.8: SMALL HYDROPOWER IN NEPAL

In Nepal, where almost 83 percent of the land is

the population, mostly in rural mountainous

Kathmandu Metal Industries, are extremely

mountainous, grid extension is not usually cost-

areas, who are currently unserved.

popular because of their simplicity and low

efficient, due to the high cost and the low load

Generally, micro- or pico-hydro electrification

capital investment. The units are very small (often

factor inherent in supplying power to remote and

schemes in Nepal are privately or community-

less than 2 kW) vertical shaft Pelton turbine and

scattered settlements. Small-scale hydropower of

owned. Since it requires a significant amount of

induction generation modular units, which require

less than 100 kW (micro-hydro), and less than

capital investment and organization to establish

very little construction to install. Polythene pipes,

5 kW (pico-hydro) can be used in circumstances

a micro-hydro scheme, it is more common for a

generally used for water supply and irrigation

where hydrological conditions (availability and

community to get together and raise capital to

purposes, guide water into the turbine from a

gradient of water flow) are adequate. Some

build a scheme that serves their village than for

canal, directly from the river or occasionally from

2,000 SHP generators represent a capacity of

a micro-hydro plant to be built privately.

a small reservoir. As of 2001, about 700 such

13 MW as well as supplying mechanical power.

Community-owned schemes are also more

projects were installed in various parts of Nepal.

Another forty small projects run by the Nepal

likely to receive support from non-governmental

For larger electrification projects of up to 100

Electricity Authority provide 19 MW of installed

organizations. However, a government subsidy

kW, Pelton and Crossflow are the most popular

capacity. The Government, in its tenth five-year

is provided irrespective of who owns the project.

turbines. There are almost twenty manufacturers

plan (2002-2007), has set itself a target of

A wide range of technology is used in micro- and

of micro- and pico-hydro turbines and other

producing a further 10 MW of electricity from

pico-hydro schemes throughout the country. Very

components in the country. All the required

decentralized micro-hydro schemes, thus

small hydropower schemes such as Peltric Sets,

hardware is manufactured locally in Nepal.

providing off-grid electricity to 12 percent of

pioneered by a Nepalese manufacturer,

Source: IT Power (www.itpower.co.uk).

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 1 9

with the weather. In addition, hydropower‘s fast response time
enables it to meet sudden fluctuations almost instantaneously.
Hence hydropower offers great benefits and holds a unique
place in the range of energy options for electricity generation
that are currently available.

2b. Focus on small hydropower (SHP)
There is no universal international consensus on the
definition of what counts as small hydropower. A generally
accepted definition is a hydropower plant up to 10 MW, but
in the US and Brazil, for example, the limit is up to 30 MW.
At the smaller end of the SHP scale, the definitions are
subdivided: mini-hydro at less than 500 kW; micro-hydro
at less than 100 kW, and pico-hydro at 10 kW or less.
SHP plants have considerable longevity, as has been
demonstrated by the successful rehabilitation of numerous
projects. The costs of a project are almost entirely in upfront capital, with fixed and predominantly small running
and maintenance costs throughout a long lifetime. There
can also be further benefits like greater control over
flooding, irrigation, water storage and supply.
When SHP plants require a reservoir, it has been found
that they use much more reservoir space per unit of
power than larger hydropower plants. On average, plants
of less than 100 MW capacity use 249 hectares per
megawatt (ha/MW), while the biggest projects, producing
between 3,000 and 18,000 MW, occupy only 32 ha/MW.

The introduction of electricity in remote communities
in developing countries with difficult terrain has been
possible only by way of decentralized small-scale
hydropower schemes. Lighting of homes and surrounding
areas is the major application of electricity generated
from such projects, and provides both economic and social
benefits. Examples of small hydropower in use in Asia can
be seen in Boxes 9.7 and 9.8 and Table 9.3. The use of
SHP can contribute to poverty alleviation through sustainable
socio-economic development, increasing employment
opportunities for local people, improving rural living
standards, and promoting environment-friendly development.

2c. Pumped storage
Pumped storage works like a giant rechargeable battery, a
reserve source of power available at any time regardless
of the weather. Pumped storage does not depend on
rivers or rainfall as it uses the same water over and
over again. When there is spare electrical capacity in an
electricity system, at night, for example, it is used to
pump water from a low reservoir to a high one. Then, at
times of peak demand, the water is allowed to flow down
again, generating extra power to supplement the grid.
Pumped storage reservoirs are smaller than conventional
reservoirs and less controversial, since they are less
dependent on the topography. They are particularly
effective in countries with limited water supplies, such
as South Africa (see Box 9.9). Japan, the biggest user
of pumped storage hydropower, has even been

The Atatürk Dam (Turkey)
is the largest in a series
of 22 dams and 19
hydroelectric stations
built on the Euphrates
and Tigris rivers

BOX 9.9: PALMIET PUMPED STORAGE SCHEME, SOUTH AFRICA

The Palmiet pumped storage scheme, just

the working days when demand for power from

of the country’s electricity comes from coal-fired

outside Cape Town, has two complementary

South Africa’s industries and people is at its highest,

power stations, which are relatively inflexible and

functions: it provides a flexible electricity

the water is allowed to flood back down through

cannot easily cope with demand fluctuations.

reserve for the South African national network

the turbines, generating electricity to pump back

and helps to supply freshwater to Cape Town.

into the grid. The higher reservoir also has a

Palmiet, which has a capacity of 400 MW, and

The project consists of two reservoirs with a

separate outlet through which spare water can flow

South Africa’s other pumped storage plant, the

height difference of 285 metres and a

down the other side of the mountain range, into

1,000 MW Drakensberg project, together

connecting conduit passing through a

the large Steenbras reservoir, effectively transferring

account for only 1.5 percent of total electricity

hydropower station with a reversible turbine.

water from one catchment area to another. From

production. However, they help the system to

there it is fed into the Cape Town city supply,

absorb any shocks from breakdowns or surges in

contributing a total of 25 million cubic metres a year.

demand and allow the thermal power stations to

Using surplus electricity from the national grid, the

run at constant, energy-efficient levels of output

reversible turbine pumps water uphill through a twokilometre chain of steel-lined tunnels to the higher

Built between 1983 and 1988, Palmiet has

reservoir at quiet periods every weekday, and for

played a vital role in providing stability to South

thirty-three hours during the weekend. Then, during

Africa’s electricity supply. More than 90 percent

(see Chapter 14).
Source: International Hydropower Association
(www.hydropower.org).

3 2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 9.10: HYDRO TASMANIA, AUSTRALIA

Hydro Tasmania, which is Australia‘s biggest

as its hydropower projects on Tasmania would

or would have to purchase tradable Renewable

hydropower producer with 2,300 MW of

provide backup if weather conditions made wind

Energy Certificates from renewable power

capacity, has a project to build wind farms

generation impossible.

producers such as Hydro Tasmania.

the Basslink undersea cable connecting Tasmania

The scheme was created by the Australian

The synergy between hydropower and other

with the rest of Australia and is scheduled to be

Government’s Mandatory Renewable Energy

energy sources not only enables an increase in

completed around the beginning of 2006.

Targets (MRET), designed as a first step towards

the penetration of renewables into the energy

Hydro Tasmania will then be able to use its joint

reducing the country’s greenhouse gas emissions

market, but by meeting peak demand, it also

wind-hydro production on the offshore territory

and heavy dependence on coal-fired power

reduces the need for additional investment in

to supply peak power to the industries of

stations. Under this initiative, Australia’s

base load generation.

Victoria State, Australia’s biggest electricity

regional authorities would have to obtain at

network, on the mainland. The state-owned

least 2 percent of their energy from renewable

company would be able to guarantee supply,

sources by 2010. Those that fail would be fined

generating 1,000 MW. The plan is dependent on

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

experimenting with seawater pumped storage, but
the technical difficulties have made this approach
economically unappealing (see Chapter 14).
The world’s pumped storage capacity amounted to 103
GW by 2003, which represents about 13 percent of total
hydropower capacity. Japan and the US account for 24 and
20 percent of this amount, respectively. Italy, France and
Germany also have substantial pumped storage capacities.
Pumped storage units can start up in very few minutes in
an emergency to provide the necessary reserve capacity.
This allows coal-fired stations to operate at constant
levels of output, thus functioning more efficiently and
reducing CO2 emissions; however, pumped storage has
an efficiency level of 70 to 75 percent and uses about a
quarter more electric power than it creates. In a system
with a substantial proportion of thermal plants, this is
more than compensated by the increase in efficiency
of the oil, gas and coal generators as well as the
subsequent reduction in the amount of greenhouse
gases they emit.
Pierre Bénite dam, France

2d. Sustainable hydropower solutions
There are three options for increasing electricity
generation through hydropower, which are especially
sustainable, and cost-effective: piggybacking an
alternative energy source, adding hydropower capacity
to existing infrastructure and extending the life and
increasing the operating efficiency of existing hydro
power projects.

Source: International Hydropower Association
(www.hydropower.org).

Piggybacking alternative energy sources
Hydropower’s flexibility and reliability of operation make
it ideally suited to working in tandem with alternative
energy sources, which means that it can play an essential
role in the development of these young industries. Few
of these can yet provide the steady, guaranteed supply
of power an electricity network requires, but when
piggybacked with hydropower, they can be effective
suppliers of electricity to a system, providing financial
incentives for developing these sectors.
When wind turbines or solar panels are injecting energy
into a grid, hydropower units can reduce their own
output and store extra water stocks in their reservoirs.
These stocks can then be used to increase hydropower
output and fill the gap when the wind drops or the sun
is covered by clouds and input from these sources falls.
This is well illustrated by the large combined wind and
hydro project in Tasmania (see Box 9.10).

Adding hydropower capacity to existing
infrastructure
It must be remembered that only about 25 percent of the
world’s dams are involved in producing hydropower. Water
supply and energy policies were often poorly coordinated
in the past, often with a reluctance to plan across sectors
and cater for both uses. In Africa, the continent with the
least developed hydropower potential, only about 7
percent of dams have hydropower as their main purpose.
This leaves a window of opportunity for adding
hydropower capacity to existing dams.

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 2 1

The hydropower industry now offers an array of different
types of equipment suitable for this purpose. This is
also relevant in parts of the world where hydropower
potential is largely developed already, such as in Europe
(75 percent) and North America (69 percent). An extra
20,000 MW of generating capacity could be added in
the US by installing generating units in some 2,500 dams
that at present have none. Many authorities are looking
at new ways to add hydropower-generating capacity
without building new dams (see Box 9.11). As the most
suitable sites from a physical, political and financial point
of view have been used, it becomes harder to win
approval for any project on a new site, as hostility to
dams is still strong among some environmental groups.
In these conditions, adding generating capacity to
existing dams is an attractive option.

Extending the life and improving the efficiency
of hydropower schemes
The structural elements of a hydropower project, which
tend to take up about 70 percent of the initial investment
cost, have a projected life of about 100 years. On the
equipment side, some refurbishment can be an attractive
option after thirty years. Advances in hydro technology
can justify the replacement of key components or even
complete generating sets. Typically, generating equipment
can be upgraded or replaced with more technologically
advanced electro-mechanical equipment two or three
times during the life of the project, making more effective
use of the same flow of water.
A turbine commissioned in the 1970s, for example,
might have a peak operating efficiency of 80 to 85
percent, whereas a modern turbine would raise this to 90
to 95 percent. The long life of hydro and extremely low
running costs make even a modest improvement in output
financially attractive. A number of techniques short of
replacing the whole turbine can be used to increase
output – using computerized testing and simulation, for
example. Changing the shape of turbine runner blades
has been effective, for example, at Arapuni in New
Zealand, where productivity was increased considerably
after an efficiency upgrade in 2002.
There are three principal ways of improving operating
efficiency within existing hydropower projects, which
allow for more electricity generation from the
same scheme:

■

Improving water management and allowing plants to
operate at their optimal level of efficiency, by adjusting
flows to maximize the available ‘head‘ (drop) at each
site. The only costs may be the testing of equipment
performance and staff training.

■

Installing equipment that is designed to have a higher
efficiency over a wider range of water flows through
the turbine. This is particularly significant for small
projects for which the volume of water flow may vary
sharply during rainy and dry seasons, and even during
the same day, depending on rainfall.

■

Increasing the flow to the turbines and reducing
losses, through minor changes to the hydraulic
passages. This solution involves some civil engineering
works. An example is the Manapouri scheme in New
Zealand, which was completed in 1971. In 2002, a new
10-kilometre tailrace tunnel was commissioned to carry
the water away from the turbines. The improved
design of the tunnel enabled the output to be
substantially increased.

Coal-fired power station
in Bergheim, Germany

2e. Environmental impacts of thermal power
generation including water use
Where electricity transmission and distribution grids
are established, thermal power is currently the major
alternative to hydropower for base-load electrical power
generation. In a thermal power plant, heat is generated
from either the combustion of fossil fuel (coal, oil or
gas), or through nuclear fission of radioactive material.
The heat is used to raise steam, which generates
electrical power by means of a steam turbine
mechanically connected to an electricity generator.
Water and steam circulate between the steam generator
(boiler) and the steam turbine in a closed circuit.
Steam exiting the turbine must be condensed, and,
since condensation employs cooling towers, where cooling
water is lost due to evaporation, there are water resources
issues associated with the deployment of thermal power
generation. Where surface water is used for cooling and
returned directly to the river or lake from where it is
sourced (once-through cooling), the return water will be
several degrees warmer, resulting in temperature changes
capable of affecting aquatic ecosystems (see Chapter 5).
In addition, a typical power plant using once-through
cooling technology can kill tons of fish each year by
trapping fish against intake screens or drawing fish
into the facility.

The long life of
hydro and
extremely low
running costs
make even a
modest
improvement in
output
financially
attractive

3 2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 9.11: HYDROPOWER GENERATION IN FREUDENAU, AUSTRIA

One example of creative thinking in hydropower

in two blind arms of the river. It improves

valves, producing an additional 5 MW of power.

generation is in Freudenau on the Danube in

navigation in related canals and includes two

This is a small amount compared with the total

Austria. This run-of-river facility in the heart

large locks for river traffic on one of Europe’s

output of the project, but it is significant in

of Vienna was completed in 1998. The project

busiest waterways.

itself, especially as it could be added without
the disruption of creating a fresh site for

is comprised of six giant Kaplan turbines, with
installed capacity of 172 MW, enough to power

The owner, the state-controlled utility Verbund,

about half the homes in the city. As well as

later added modern Matrix turbines to the

generating hydropower, it provides flood

navigation locks. These sets of small turbines

protection, has helped to raise groundwater

capture the energy from water that would

under Vienna and has restored water levels

normally be discharged through gates and

Water
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

availability is
now driving the
development of
cooling
technology for
thermal power
application

In a thermal plant, cooling is essential for efficient
operation of the steam turbine and
forecovery/recirculation of the highly purified water,
which must be returned in closed circuit to the steam
boiler. Power plant operating costs and lifetime (normally
thirty to forty years) will be seriously affected if cooling
water availability becomes constrained. Coastal plants
can obtain cooling water from the sea. However, coalfired plants are frequently located close to the coal
deposit (‘mine-mouth‘ plants) to reduce coal
transportation costs, in which case they are heavily
dependent on the availability of local cooling water.
In several major coal-producing countries, including China,
parts of India and South Africa and the US, coal deposits
are located in arid areas. In the US, about 40 percent
of daily freshwater usage is for power generation. Most
of this is returned to the source; about 2 percent is
consumed/evaporated. Water availability is now driving
the development of cooling technology for thermal
power application.
It is important to distinguish between water diversion and
consumptive use. The former indicates the amount of water
removed from a water body (river or lake), the bulk of
which is returned to the water basin albeit at an elevated
temperature that gives rise to some environmental concerns.
Consumptive use indicates the actual amount of resource
loss, because this is the amount of water evaporating in the
cooling process and not returned to its original source.
Technologies are available to control water temperature
discharged from the thermal power cooling systems, as
well as to reduce consumptive use to virtually zero, but
applying those technologies incurs additional costs.

electricity generation.

Source: International Hydropower Association
(www.hydropower.org).

In addition to impacts on the aquatic environment through
the discharge of cooling water, fossil fuel (especially
coal-based) power generation is also responsible for air
pollution. Emissions of oxides of sulphur and nitrogen are
responsible for acid rain, the deposition of which results
in the degradation of ecosystems, as well as damage to
agricultural production and to buildings. As a result of
these measures, the use of low sulphur coal, the
deployment of dust filters, flue gas desulphurization and
nitrogen oxide control technologies are common practice
at modern fossil fuel generating plants. Atmospheric
emissions from coal combustion are now the major
challenge confronting a continued deployment and
development of coal-fuelled power plants.
The greenhouse gas emission reduction targets agreed
under the Kyoto Protocol will limit releases of CO2, the
major greenhouse gas contributing to climate change.
CO2 emission mitigation will be considerably more
expensive to implement than controls on acid deposition.
This will also have a pronounced effect on the competitive
position of coal in comparison with power sources that
do not generate greenhouse gases, such as hydropower
and nuclear power generation options (the latter of
which also has environmental concerns linked to waste
storage and possible accidents).
Table 9.4 lists the fifty countries with the world’s
highest carbon intensities of electricity production (WRI,
2004). Cutting-edge ‘clean coal‘ technologies, including
supercritical pulverized fuel, pressurized fluid bed and
integrated gasification/combined cycle (IGCC)
technologies, control CO2 emissions by generating
electricity at higher efficiencies. Older coal-based
technologies have efficiencies in the range of 30 to

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 2 3

35 percent. New clean coal technologies, particularly
IGCC, reduce CO2 emissions per unit of power generated
and have the potential to achieve efficiencies of
45 percent and above. Wide-scale application of CO2
sequestration is likely to be accompanied by an
accelerated use of IGCC technology. In several OECD
countries, research is underway into the capture of
CO2 from power plant flue gas, transportation and CO2
sequestration in depleted oil/gas reservoirs, deep saline
aquifers, unmineable coal beds and in the deep ocean.
An interesting observation can be made by exploring the
relationship between the carbon intensity of electricity

production and the role of nuclear power in the electricity
sector. In the group of twenty-five countries with the
highest carbon intensity, only three countries have nuclear
power in their electricity portfolios, each at a rather modest
level. In the group of the next twenty-five countries,
however, there are five countries with nuclear electricity,
and in three of them, nuclear power provided around
30 percent of electricity in 2002. It is likely that countries
with the economic means to invest in nuclear technology
will increasingly turn to this solution as a means of reducing
their dependence on fossil fuels, achieving energy security
and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Table 9.4: Carbon intensity of electricity production in 2002
Country

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Grams of carbon per kilowatt hour

Estonia
Moldova
Kazakhstan
Qatar
Poland
China
Turkmenistan
India
Senegal
Malta
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Cyprus
Belarus
South Africa
Serbia and Montenegro
Oman
Togo
United Arab Emirates
Greece
Israel
Australia
Cuba
Azerbaijan
Brunei
Uzbekistan

328.9
314.2
309.0
300.4
286.1
259.9
245.8
240.7
237.1
234.7
232.0
231.5
229.9
229.7
227.6
222.8
222.2
220.7
220.1
215.7
215.6
214.9
212.8
208.4
207.1

Country

26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

Grams of carbon per kilowatt hour

Czech Republic
Singapore
Lebanon
Romania
Bahrain
Trinidad and Tobago
Côte d’Ivoire
Algeria
Kuwait
Morocco
Jordan
Ireland
Zimbabwe
Libya
Kenya
Indonesia
Hungary
Nicaragua
Denmark
Latvia
Russian Federation
Bulgaria
Bangladesh
Iran
Iraq

206.8
206.7
200.3
198.5
187.4
185.3
184.6
183.4
182.6
180.3
179.0
178.7
175.8
172.6
170.0
166.8
166.3
166.1
165.6
162.0
158.8
154.8
152.2
151.8
148.8

Note: These data cover fossil fuel generation, hydropower, nuclear power, renewables and waste. The countries listed generate the highest amounts of
greenhouse gases, per unit of electricity generated, and hence have the greatest potential for applying technological solutions in order to reduce their
carbon releases. Untapped hydropower options are available in China and India, as has been already discussed, as for many other countries appearing in
this table. However, for countries with a high reliance on gas and coal, technological improvements in thermal power generation will become necessary.
Source: WRI, 2004.

3 2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 3. Governance of Energy and Water
Resources
China, India
and Turkey
frequently argue
that their
electricity

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

requirements for
economic
growth and
social
development
outweigh the
environmental
concerns
surrounding
hydropower...

In the past, some hydropower projects, particularly big reservoirs, have had a negative impact on their
immediate surroundings. Damage to the local environment and inadequate provision for those affected in
the area have contributed to the hostility shown by some environmental and human rights organizations
towards the hydropower industry. The World Commission on Dams attempted to bring the various parties
together, although its recommendations were not universally welcomed (WCD, 2000). More recent
guidelines published by the International Hydropower Association (IHA) in 2004 have been broadly
accepted throughout the large hydropower industry, in particular the core principles of equity,
participatory decision-making and accountability.

3a. The continuing debate on large hydropower
IHA argues that equitable sharing of the benefits of
any power project requires a careful balance between
different stakeholders and interested parties. Hydropower
uses renewable water supplies, not finite fossil fuels. In
contrast to nuclear power, it leaves no toxic waste to
threaten future generations, and in contrast to thermal
power, it emits virtually no greenhouse gases. While the
vast majority of a project’s costs are borne at the start,
the benefits continue for 100 years or more.
Furthermore, while any negative effects of a hydropower
project are inevitably borne by the local community, the
benefits – in reliable electricity supplies – are shared by
everyone in the nation or region.
The key to managing changes lies in advance planning
and consultation with all interested parties. The IHA
Sustainability Guidelines state that hydro developers
planning a project should try to minimize the following:
■
■
■
■

health dangers, particularly from water-borne diseases
or malaria
loss of homes, farms and other livelihoods
disruption of community networks and loss of cultural
identity
changes to biodiversity in the affected area.

They should try to maximize the following:
■
■
■
■

timely consultation at all levels
the flow of relevant information to all those affected
negotiated settlement of disputes
timely and adequate payment of any compensation.

Where people or communities have to be transferred to
new sites, developers should do the following:
■
■
■
■

investigate possible alternative ways of doing the project
ensure adequate consultation with the people to be
displaced throughout the project
guarantee equivalent or improved livelihoods at the
new location
provide better living standards and public health at the
new location.

Rapidly developing countries such as China, India and
Turkey frequently argue that their electricity requirements
for economic growth and social development outweigh the
environmental concerns surrounding hydropower, and that
support for large hydropower development is a pro-poor
policy. This need was recognized in the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation (UN, 2002) where hydropower
is included among the ‘advanced, cleaner, more efficient,
affordable and cost-effective energy technologies’
required by developing countries. However, several nongovernmental organizations are campaigning to have
large hydropower excluded from global efforts to promote
renewable energy. Among the arguments advanced for
this position are the following:
■
■
■
■
■

including large hydro in renewables initiatives reduces the
available funding for new renewable energy technologies
there is no technology transfer benefit from large
hydro, which is a mature technology
large hydro projects often have major social and
ecological impacts
large reservoirs can emit significant amounts of
greenhouse gases from rotting organic matter
large hydro reservoirs are often rendered nonrenewable by sedimentation.

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 2 5

This long-standing debate is still a major issue. Many
large hydropower projects necessitate the construction
of large dams. These are structures with a long life,
which permanently alter the river downstream and affect a
significant stretch of the river upstream. They are not, strictly
speaking, renewable. However, as discussed in this chapter,
there are also very large run-of-river hydropower projects, as
well as small, mini and micro-hydropower projects, which are
all renewable energy providers. It must also be remembered
that the driving force for much new dam construction is
irrigation, rather than hydropower generation.
The water/energy nexus can be better understood by
distinguishing the issue of large dams from that of
hydropower, except in the cases of certain hydropower
projects that do require the construction of large new
reservoirs. In these specific cases, greater transparency,
accountability and oversight of the contractual process to
ensure the exposure of corrupt practices are all necessary
in order to promote social equity and good governance.

3b. Renewable energy and energy
efficiency: Incentives and economic
instruments
In the world’s developed regions, electricity is delivered
to the vast majority of consumers through vertically
integrated utility industries based on central power
generation. Over the past several decades the efforts
of energy policy-makers, utility planners, regulators
and generation technology developers have enabled
this conventional power generation and supply system
to keep pace with rising demand, but with social and
environmental impacts that are increasingly considered
unacceptable. The inertia within the power supply system
– power plants and transmission/distribution systems
have lifetimes of several decades – means that this
trend will be difficult to change.
However, with a worldwide 30 percent annual growth
rate, renewable-based generating capacity is currently
increasing faster than the conventional power option.
Accelerated interest in renewable energy can be traced
to the ‘oil crisis’ of the 1970s, but a list of environmental
concerns headed by global climate change is responsible
for the recent surge in interest in clean energy.
In developing countries where affordable power is
desperately needed, environmental concerns must be
carefully weighed against urgent development needs.
As seen earlier in this chapter, governments will be less

responsive to objections to the construction of dams for
large hydropower generation or to the deployment of
new, greenhouse gas-emitting coal-fired power plants,
when their priority is meeting rapidly growing electricity
demand. Clearly, the transition to a fully sustainable, global
energy supply system needs cooperative and innovative, if
not radically new, policy-making.

International and national mechanisms
implemented with the Kyoto Protocol
At the international level, the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI) measures
established by the Kyoto Protocol seek to provide incentives
for the use of low carbon-emitting and renewable energy
technologies in developing countries, through the sale of
carbon credits arising from clean energy investments.
Given its proven track record of decades of successful
experience, it is not surprising that hydropower projects
are prominent in the current portfolio of CDM and JI
projects. Multilateral initiatives establish emission reduction
goals and a cooperative means of achieving them.
However, they will need to be accompanied by national
policies to stimulate a thriving market for renewable energy
resources, such as wind, biomass, solar photovoltaics and
hydropower as well as for combined heat and power (CHP)
generation options. For example, feed-in tariffs oblige
utilities to buy renewable electricity from any developer in
their service area at tariffs set by government. These are
generally a little lower than zthe electricity retail price,
facilitating a good return on investment and assuring longterm support. Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS) require
the share of renewable power purchased by a utility to
increase yearly to a given percentage. An RPS creates
long-term stability and demand that establishes a
flourishing renewables-based generation market. Within a
given country, regional discrepancies arising from cost and
availability of renewable power sources can be levelled out
by means of tradable ‘renewable energy certificates‘
(called ‘green certificates‘ in Australia). Feed-in tariffs, RPSs
and tradable certificates may need the further support of
long-term and stable subsidies, such as investment tax
credits and accelerated depreciation (see Box 9.12).
In effect, renewable power markets need to be driven by a
combination of demand- and supply-side measures capable
of keeping the costs of electricity retailers and their retail
customers at a minimum.

The case of rural electrification
Rural electrification is a special case. The provision of rural
electrification through rural cooperatives was employed

Aerial close-up of Tucson
Electric Power’s cooling
towers, Arizona, United
States

3 2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 9.12: RENEWABLE OBLIGATION CERTIFICATES: A POLICY INSTRUMENT PROMOTING RENEWABLE ENERGY

Small-scale hydropower development stands

Government’s decision to allow the refurbishment

electricity supplier has to produce a certain

to benefit from policy instruments designed

of hydropower projects with a capacity of less

proportion of its power from sources qualifying

to promote renewable energy. The largest

than 20 MW to qualify for Renewable Obligation

for the Certificates, or face fines for every MW it

hydropower operator in the UK, Scottish and

Certificates. The company had previously

produces. The first of the smaller plants to

Southern Energy, is engaged in a €360 million

refurbished its larger hydro plants, for an

qualify was a 17 MW capacity plant at St Fillans,

(US $439 million) investment programme to

increase in output of 6 percent at a cost of

upgraded in 2002 for an 8 percent increase in

upgrade its older projects over ten years. This

€60 million (US $73 million). Renewable

output and a thirty-year extension to its life.

is expected to increase UK hydropower output

Obligation Certificates were then introduced by

of some 5,000 GWh per year by 200 GWh. The

the British Government to encourage the

programme was made possible by the British

development of renewable energy. Each

Although
Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

environmentally
friendly, and
free from
expensive
fuel costs,
renewables
are often
intermittent and
carry a burden
of high capital
investment

effectively in the industrialized world between the
1930s and the 1950s. This institutional model has been
employed successfully in several developing countries.
The high costs of grid extension, particularly to remote
parts of many developing countries, mean than isolated
rural communities are usually served by diesel-based minigrids rather than centrally operated electricity distribution
networks. Electricity produced by diesel sets can be two
to three times the cost of grid power in urban areas,
but still cost-effective relative to grid extension. Costs
of maintenance and transporting diesel fuel are high.
Greenhouse gas emissions per unit of generated power
from a diesel engine are particularly high.
Where renewable energy resources, in the form of
solar, wind, biomass, biogas and mini-hydro are available,
their use can replace or supplement diesel. Although
environmentally friendly, and free from expensive fuel
costs, renewables are often intermittent and carry a burden
of high capital investment. Policy reforms to make capital
resources more readily available for small-scale rural energy
investments are needed. Micro-financing is now almost a
prerequisite for rural energy development projects. Microfinance schemes are especially important for photovoltaic
and other renewable energy-based technologies. There is
also a need to stimulate local manufacturing of renewable
energy equipment and gradually increase domestic content.
Rural electrification has to be seen in the broader context
of rural development. Even though major barriers exist,
the subsidized development and deployment of renewablesbased mini-grids is proceeding in many rural parts of the
developing world. With improved knowledge of rural
development needs and a clearer understanding of the
contribution of reliable, cost-effective and clean energy

Source: UNIDO, 2004.

to rural development, these projects should lead to
replication, commercial support, the phasing-out of
subsidies and the ultimate goal of reducing poverty.

Improving energy efficiency
In the same way that innovative policies are needed
to overcome obstacles to the accelerated deployment
of renewable energy technologies, new approaches are
required to encourage energy users to take advantage
of the enormous potential for improving end-use energy
efficiency. Much of the world’s future energy demand
will have to be met by efficiency improvements.
The market for energy efficiency products and services
is far from perfect, and information is neither widespread
nor clear. The potential for industrial energy system
optimization remains largely unrealized. Production,
not energy efficiency, is the top priority of industrial
manufacturers. Plant operating budgets and capital
improvement budgets are accounted for separately,
so that the consequences of purchasing less efficient
equipment is not linked to increased operating costs,
although these can be 80 percent or more of the lifecycle
cost of the equipment. These disincentives can only be
reversed through integrated policy-making, including
changes in tax laws, and measures for incorporating lifecycle energy costs into bidding procedures for capital
projects (see Chapters 2 and 12).
Whereas manufacturers of energy-consuming equipment
have successfully improved the performance of individual
components, such as pumps, compressors, fans and steam
boilers, these components only provide a service to the
user when operating as part of a system. There is scope
to improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 2 7

BOX 9.13: DISTRIBUTED GENERATION: POWER SUPPLY IN THE FUTURE

Electricity power generators – conventional and

electricity to meet an agglomerated load curve.

plants. From a cost perspective, investment in

renewable alike – sell their product through

To accommodate an ever-increasing penetration

local generation also avoids the high expense of

distribution grids or networks. In the future,

of individually small power producers, new grid

constructing long-distance transmission networks

renewable energy will be provided from large

operating procedures and protocols are required,

that can prove vulnerable to disruption.

numbers of individually small and frequently

many of which are already available.
The function of the network is therefore

intermittent (such as combined heat and power
[CHP] and wind) power generators. The network

Distributed generation (DG) offers a promising

evolving from a supply role to that of a buffer.

needs increasingly to be managed as an

set of solutions and benefits. DG means

All network users should be required to pay

interlinking mesh, rather than a unidirectional

producing power close to the customer using

their reasonable share for the construction and

funnel of energy, so that suppliers can continue

a network supplied by several small generators.

maintenance of those networks according to the

to provide continuous and reliable electricity to

Operating in parallel with the main grid, DG

use made of them and according to the services

their customers. To attain renewables targets in

systems provide some or all of the power

provided for network reinforcement. Achieving

established grid systems, network operators will

required by the user, while the grid either

reasonable cost-recovery arrangements is

therefore need new tools and incentives, but

absorbs the surplus or provides the shortfall.

complex but manageable, and is likely to provide

this will by no means present insurmountable

On-site or local CHP generation not only reduces

a further incentive for investment in generation

challenges. Indeed, the wider use of on-site

thermal energy losses from conventional plants,

that reduces network use.

generation can reinforce stressed networks.

but also significantly decreases the network

Today’s grids support thermal and hydro central

losses arising from moving electricity long

power stations delivering ‘mass-produced’

distances from remote hydro and thermal

emissions across the entire industrial sector by improving
the design and operation of the systems that deliver
energy to the point of use. Pumping systems alone
account for 20 percent of the world’s electrical energy
demand and range from 25 percent to 50 percent of
total energy use in some industrial operations.
One way to increase the implementation and persistence
of energy efficiency measures in the industrial sector
would be for industry participants to incorporate their
commitments to energy efficiency into the ISO 9000/
14000 quality and environmental management system (see
Chapter 8). ISO certification has become a significant trade
facilitation vehicle for developing countries, with more than
155,000 plants participating in these countries as of
December 2002. Tracking energy efficiency projects and
milestones in their ISO quality and environmental
management system will help each company to maintain
a focus on its energy efficiency commitments, provide
visibility for its achievements and provide a verification
of their results for project funders. All of these measures
will help stimulate a significantly higher level of activity in
industrial energy efficiency programmes.

3c. Policy-making for co-management of
water and energy resources
Policy-makers in the water and energy sectors need to

Source: WADE (www.localpower.org).

find better ways of integrating decisions between the
two sectors in order to optimize benefits, address
financing barriers and identify potential new partnerships.
Inclusion of energy considerations can improve water
resource management decisions and avoid potentially
significant but unintended energy consequences. The key
indicators of the success of such co-management would
be the increased availability, acceptability and affordability
of both water and energy services.

...including
energy
considerations
in water
management
decisions can

A recent report based upon three detailed case studies
in California has shown clearly that including energy
considerations in water management decisions can lead to
major energy and money savings (NRDC, 2004). The case
study analysis supports two primary recommendations for
how policy-makers can begin to achieve these savings,
which are generally applicable in many areas beyond California:
■

Decision-makers should better integrate energy issues
into water policy decision-making.
Looking at energy use and water use simultaneously
generates valuable insights that do not arise from
separate policy analyses of water and energy issues.

The report makes the following recommendations:
■

modify planning tools for water resources
management to include energy use and costs

lead to major
energy and
money savings...

3 2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

■

Governments
that have
ratified the

■

Kyoto Protocol
are bound to
■

reduce
greenhouse gas
emissions and
promote clean
energy

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

investments

■

improve coordination among resource management
agencies to better identify and address the energy
implications of water policy decisions
conduct an energy intensity analysis of water
distribution systems and identifying regions and
districts where large amounts of power are required
to deliver water

Both water and energy policy-makers need to give
water conservation higher priority.
The amount of energy required for end use is the largest
component of energy use in urban water supply. Hence,
policy actions that affect the end uses of water may have
much larger energy implications than policy actions that
affect the mix of physical water sources. Conservation
has much greater stronger energy-related economic and
environmental benefits than has previously been
recognized. In addition, the energy benefits of water
conservation can generate air quality benefits as well
as climate change benefits. The report recommends
the following actions:
prioritize water conservation funding

■

enforce existing water conservation requirements

promote conservation through pricing strategies
and water metering

■

offer water conservation incentives.

There are serious weaknesses in the pricing of both electricity
and water in many parts of the world, which send the wrong
signals to consumers about the need for conservation of both
of these resources (see Chapter 12). In addition, regulatory
regimes, where these exist, are frequently not sufficiently
focused on the need for efficiency of use and conservation.
Frequently the cultures within the electricity and water
sectors of many countries are very different, and there is
rarely the level of communication required to exploit the
potential synergies of the two sectors. Availability of both
energy and water is essential for human survival and
national prosperity. In the globalized world of the twentyfirst century, energy and water supply security will require
governance regimes that are sensitive to environmental and
social, as well as political and economic, considerations. In
the many cases of countries where water/energy resource
availability and the environmental and social consequences
of using both are interrelated, a strong case can be made
for policies and regulations that address water and energy
simultaneously. Many inefficiencies in both sectors impact
not only on poverty alleviation and socio-economic
development but on other sectors of water and the
environment at large. Governments need to recognize
the very close connection between the two sectors, in
order to maximize the benefits of synergies between them.

develop partnerships designed to produce energy,
economic and environmental benefits through voluntary
water transfers away from the agricultural sector with a
focus on dry-year transfers in locations where large
water diversions upstream reduce downstream flows
and downstream hydropower generation.

■

■

Table 9.5: Access to electricity and water in 2000
Population access to improved water source

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia

Urban
(%)

Rural
(%)

19
99
94
34
97
–
100
100
93
99
100
–
74
95

11
95
82
40
73
–
100
100
58
97
100
–
55
64

Electricity
production kWh
(billions)

–
4.9
25.4
1.4
89.0
6.0
208.1
60.3
18.7
15.8
26.1
82.7
0.1
4.0

Population
access to
electricity
(%)

2.0
–
98.0
12.0
94.6
–
–
–
–
20.4
–
–
22.0
60.4

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 2 9

Table 9.5: continued
Population access to improved water source

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Hong Kong, China
Colombia
Congo, Dem. Republic.
Congo
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt, Arab Rep.
El Salvador
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran, Islamic Republic.
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica

Urban
(%)

Rural
(%)

–
100
95
100
66
91
54
78
100
89
31
99
94
–
99
89
71
99
92
–
95
–
100
90
90
99
91
63
–
81
100
–
95
80
90
–
91
–
98
72
79
49
95
100
95
90
98
96
–
–
–
98

–
90
53
100
37
77
26
39
99
57
26
58
66
–
70
26
17
92
72
–
77
–
100
78
75
96
64
42
–
12
100
–
47
53
61
–
62
–
88
36
49
45
81
98
79
69
83
48
–
–
–
85

Electricity
production kWh
(billions)

10.4
–
349.2
40.6
–
–
–
3.5
605.1
–
–
41.3
1,355.6
31.3
44.0
5.5
0.3
6.9
4.8
10.7
15.0
72.9
36.2
9.5
10.6
75.7
3.9
–
8.5
1.7
70.0
535.8
1.0
–
7.4
567.1
7.2
53.4
6.0
–
–
0.5
3.7
35.0
542.3
92.6
121.4
33.7
23.7
43.0
269.9
6.6

Population
access to
electricity
(%)

–
22.0
94.9
–
13.0
–
15.8
20.0
–
–
–
99.0
98.6
–
81.0
6.7
20.9
95.7
50.0
–
97.0
–
–
66.8
80.0
93.8
70.8
17.0
–
4.7
–
–
31.0
–
–
–
45.0
–
66.7
–
–
34.0
54.5
–
43.0
53.4
97.9
95.0
–
100.0
–
90.0

This solar voltaic panel’s
energy is used to pump
water, Kabekel village,
Gambia

3 3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 9.5: continued

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Population access to improved water source

Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Korea, Dem. Republic.
Korea, Rep.
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao Peoples Dem. Republic.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia

Urban
(%)

Rural
(%)

–
100
98
88
100
97
–
98
61
–
100
88
72
–
85
95
–
74
34
100
95
97
77
98
81
89
100
94
100
100
91
70
78
100
41
95
99
88
93
87
91
–
–
91
100
60
100
92
75
100
100
100

–
84
82
42
100
71
–
66
29
–
100
74
68
–
31
44
94
61
40
100
69
88
30
56
41
66
67
87
100
–
59
56
49
100
30
87
79
32
59
62
79
–
–
16
96
40
64
65
46
–
100
100

Electricity
production kWh
(billions)

1081.9
7.4
51.6
3.9
31.6
292.5
32.5
14.9
–
4.1
7.8
–
20.7
11.1
–
–
69.2
–
–
–
204.4
3.3
–
14.1
7.0
5.1
1.4
1.7
89.6
39.0
2.3
–
15.8
142.4
9.1
68.1
4.7
–
53.5
19.9
45.3
143.2
43.4
51.9
876.5
–
128.4
1.5
–
31.3
30.4
13.6

Population
access to
electricity
(%)

–
95.0
–
7.9
20.0
–
100.0
–
–
–
95.0
5.0
99.8
–
8.0
5.0
96.9
–
–
100.0
–
–
90.0
71.1
7.2
5.0
34.0
15.4
–
–
48.0
–
40.0
–
94.0
52.9
76.1
–
74.7
73.0
87.4
–
–
–
–
–
97.7
30.1
–
100.0
–
–

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 3 1

Table 9.5: continued
Population access to improved water source

Electricity
production kWh
(billions)

Population
access to
electricity
(%)

Urban
(%)

Rural
(%)

99
–
98
86
100
100
94
93
90
95
85
–
92
81
–
80
100
–
100
100
98
94
85
95
74
99
88
100
94

73
–
70
69
100
100
64
47
57
81
38
–
58
86
–
47
94
–
100
100
93
79
70
72
68
97
48
73
71

207.8
221.7
6.8
2.4
145.9
66.0
22.6
14.2
2.3
96.0
0.0
5.5
10.6
124.9
9.8
–
171.4
38.6
372.2
4,003.5
7.6
46.8
85.2
26.6
3.0
31.9
7.8
7.0
15,346.5

66.1
–
62.0
30.0
–
–
85.9
–
10.5
82.1
9.0
99.0
94.6
–
–
3.7
–
96.0
–
–
98.0
–
94.0
75.8
50.0
–
12.0
39.7
–

Low-income countries
90
Middle-income countries
95
Lower middle-income countries
95
Upper middle-income countries
94
Low and middle-income countries 93
East Asia and Pacific
93
Europe and Central Asia
96
Latin America and Carib.
94
Middle East and N. Africa
96
South Asia
94
Sub-Saharan Africa
83
High income
–
Europe (European Monetary Union) –

70
70
70
69
70
67
83
65
78
80
46
–
–

11,44.7
4,777.2
3,429.3
1,347.9
5,921.9
1,722.1
1,827.5
973.2
481.9
634.8
282.4
9,424.6
2,018.0

37.4
94.0
93.8
94.7
65.0
87.3
–
86.6
90.4
40.8
24.6
–
–

South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia, Fed. Republic
Zambia
Zimbabwe
World

Source: World Bank, 2003.

3 3 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 9.6: Hydropower: Capability at the end of 2002

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Gross theoretical
capability
TWh/yr

Algeria
Angola
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo
Congo Dem. Republic
Côte d’Ivoire
Egypt
Ethiopia
Gabon
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Total Africa
Belize
Canada
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
El Salvador
Greenland
Grenada

Technically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

Economically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

12
> 150
2
1
6
294
7
n.a.
> 125
1,397
46
> 125
650
200
17
26
1
> 30
5
28
321
15
> 12
n.a.
12
50
25
>3
43
1
11
17
2
73
48
4
39
4
1
> 18
52
19
> 3,892

5
108
1
n.a.
2
115
3
n.a.
> 50
774
12
> 50
> 260
80
11
19
n.a.
9
2
11
180
6
>5
n.a.
5
38
10
>1
32
n.a.
4
7
1
14
19
1
20
2
n.a.
> 13
29
18
> 1,917

–
65
–
n.a.
1
103
–
–
–
419
2
50
260
33
7
15
n.a.
–
–
–
49
–
–
–
4
32
2
1
30
–
2
–
–
5
2
n.a.
3
–
n.a.
–
11
–
–

1
1,284
223
3
n.a.
50
7
800
n.a.

n.a.
948
43
1
n.a.
9
5
14
n.a.

n.a.
522
20
–
n.a.
6
2
–
n.a.

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 3 3

Table 9.6: continued
Gross theoretical
capability
TWh/yr

Technically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

Economically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
United States of America
Total North America

54
4
16
1
135
33
26
4,485
7,122

22
1
7
n.a.
49
10
> 12
1,752
> 2,873

–
N
–
–
32
7
12
501
–

Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Paraguay
Peru
Surinam
Uruguay
Venezuela
Total South America

172
178
3,040
227
1,000
167
64
111
1,577
32
32
320
6,920

130
126
1,488
162
200
134
> 26
85
> 260
13
10
246
> 2,880

–
50
811
–
140
106
26
68
260
–
–
130
–

22
44
5
263
88
5,920
59
139
2,638
2,147
718
163
52
163
233
230
56
877
727
307
47
2,295
9
103
527
18
433
24
88
300
18,695

8
16
2
70
11
1,920
24
68
660
402
136
62
26
99
63
123
22
130
394
263
20
1,670
7
20
> 264
16
216
5
27
100
> 6,844

6
7
–
56
5
1,270
–
32
–
40
114
27
19
55
–
–
–
–
221
–
18
852
5
8
264
15
126
2
15
90
–

Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
China
Cyprus
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Japan
Kazakhstan
Korea Republic
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao People’s Dem. Republic
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Pakistan
Philippines
Russian Federation
Sri Lanka
Taiwan, China
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Uzbekistan
Viet Nam
Total Asia

3 3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 9.6: continued

Section 3: CHALLENGES FOR WELL-BEING
& DEVELOPMENT

Gross theoretical
capability
TWh/yr

Albania
Austria
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzogovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic
Moldova
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Serbia and Montenegro
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Total Europe

Technically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

Economically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

40
75
7
1
60
27
10
12
n.a.
2
1
48
270
120
80
7
184
1
340
7
6
n.a.
9
2
1
600
23
32
70
37
10
13
138
176
144
45
40
2,638

15
> 56
3
n.a.
24
15
9
4
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
25
100
25
15
5
64
1
105
6
2
n.a.
6
1
n.a.
200
14
25
40
27
7
9
70
130
41
24
3
> 1,071

6
56
1
n.a.
19
12
8
–
n.a.
–
n.a.
20
70
20
12
–
40
1
65
5
1
n.a.
–
1
n.a.
187
7
20
30
24
7
6
41
90
35
17
1
–

Iran, Islamic Republic
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Lebanon
Syrian Arab Republic
Total Middle East

176
225
125
n.a.
2
5
533

> 50
90
50
n.a.
1
4
> 195

50
67
–
n.a.
n.a.
4
–

Australia
Fiji
French Polynesia
New Caledonia

265
3
n.a.
2

> 30
1
n.a.
1

30
–
n.a.
n.a.

WAT E R A N D E N E R GY . 3 3 5

Table 9.6: continued
Gross theoretical
capability
TWh/yr

New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Total Oceania
TOTAL WORLD

Technically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

Economically exploitable
capability
TWh/yr

46
175
n.a.
2
493

37
49
n.a.
>1
> 119

24
15
–
–
–

> 40,293

> 15,899

–

n.a. = not applicable due to flat topography
– = information not available
Notes:
1. A quantification of hydropower capability is not available for Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Mauritania, Réunion, São Tomé and Principe, Guadeloupe,
Puerto Rico, St Vincent and the Grenadines, French Guiana, Afghanistan, Korea (Democratic People’s Republic) and Palau.
2. As the data available on economically exploitable capability do not cover all countries, regional and global totals are not shown for this category.
Sources: The International Journal on Hydropower and Dams; International Hydropower Association Member Committees, 2003; Hydropower Dams World
Atlas 2003.

References and Websites
Martinot, E. 2002. Indicators of investment and capacity for renewable
energy. Renewable Energy in the World. Vol. Sept/Oct.
NRDC (National Resources Defense Council). 2004. Energy down the
Drain. New York, NRDC.
UN (United Nations). 2002. Johannesburg Plan of Implementation.

Alliance to Save Energy www.ase.org: www.watergy.org
FAO’s AQUASTAT www.fao.org/ag/agl/aglw/aquastat/main/index.stm
International Energy Agency, Energy Statistics:
www.iea.org/Textbase/stats/index.asp
International Energy Agency Coal Centre: www.iea-coal.org.uk

www.un.org/esa/sustdev/documents/WSSD_POI_PD/English/WSSD_PlanI

International Networking on Small Hydropower: www.inshp.org

mpl.pdf

International Hydropower Association: www.hydropower.org/

UNECA (United Nations Economic Comission for Africa). 2004. African
Water Development Report. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
US DOE (United States Department of Energy). 2004. Improving Pumping

IT Power: www.itpower.co.uk
Naiade solar water purifiers: www.nedapnaiade.com/
Solar water Disinfection (SoDis): www.sodis.ch

System Performance: A Sourcebook for Industry. Washington DC, US

UNIDO: www.unido.org/

DOE, 2nd edition.

WCD (World Commission on Dams): www.dams.org

World Bank. 2003. World Development Indicators. New York, World Bank.
WRI (World Resources Institute). Climate Analysis Indicators Tool,
Washington, DC.

World Resources Institute: Climate Analysis Indicators Tool, Data on Carbon
Intensity to Electricity Production from 2002, available online at
cait.wri.org/
World Resources Institute: www.wri.org/

SECTION 4

Management
Responses and
Stewardship

Chapter 10 – Managing Risks:
Securing the Gains of
Development (WMO & UN-ISDR)

The climate is changing, thus
increasing the occurrence and
intensity of water-related natural disasters and creating
greater burdens on human and environmental
development. Employing an integrated approach, this
chapter explores some of the ways of better reducing
human vulnerabilities and examines the recent
developments in risk reduction strategies.
Chapter 11 – Sharing Water
(UNESCO)

Balancing the increasing competition among the diverse and
different water using sectors and the demands of upstream and
downstream users — whether within or between countries — is a
challenge in watersheds worldwide. Decisions on water allocations
have to be made at different scales, based not only on the various
demands for water, but taking into account its many values as well.
Though the urgency of many water problems means that effective
actions are needed now, water management approaches must also
be forward-looking in their ability to deal with changing contexts,
such as climate variability and its impact on water-related hazards,
namely floods and droughts. The capacity to adapt and to make
wise decisions depends upon preparedness, which depends in turn
on a sound knowledge base; the complexity of water issues
requires a more effective policy framework that builds, maintains,
extends and shares our knowledge and uses of water resources,
and respects the values we place on them.
Global Map 7: The Climate Moisture Index Coefficient of Variation
Global Map 8: The Water Reuse Index

Increasing competition for water
resources can have potentially divisive
effects. Mechanisms for cooperation
and shared governance among users must be further
developed in order to ensure that the resource become a
catalyst for cooperation and a medium for deterring
political tensions, while encouraging equitable and
sustainable development.
Chapter 12 – Valuing and Charging
for Water (UNDESA)

Water has a range of values that must
be recognized in selecting governance
strategies. Valuation techniques inform
decision-making for water allocation, which promote not
only sustainable social, environmental and economic
development but also transparency and accountability in
governance. This chapter reviews techniques of economic
valuation and the use of these tools in water policy
development and charging for water services.
Chapter 13 – Enhancing Knowledge
and Capacity (UNESCO)

The collection, dissemination and
exchange of water-related data,
information and know-how are
imbalanced and, in many cases, deteriorating. It is now
more urgent than ever to improve the state of knowledge
concerning water-related issues through an effective
global network of research, training and data collection
and the implementation of more adaptive, informed and
participatory approaches at all levels.

3 3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The Climate Moisture Index Coefficient of Variation (CMI-CV)
Water scarcity, in part, is determined by the availability of
renewable fresh water supply. One useful measure of
available water is the Climatic Moisture Index (CMI)
(Willmott and Feddema, 1992), a measure of the balance
between annual precipitation and evaporation and a
function of climate. The CMI ranges from +1 to –1 with
wet climates showing positive values and dry climates
negative values. The variability of CMI over multiple
years, critical to determining the reliability of water
supplies, is measured by the Coefficient of Variation (CV),
defined as the ratio of annual deviation to the long-term
annual mean. A CMI-CV value < 0.25 is considered low

variability, while 0.25 to 0.75 is moderate and > 0.75
high. Increased climate variability indicates larger yearto-year fluctuations, and hence, less predictability in the
climate. As shown in the map below, variability is low in
the most humid regions (i.e., the tropics) as well as the
most arid regions (i.e., major deserts) of the world.
Increased CMI variability often occurs along the interfaces
between different climate zones, for instance, between
the dry Sahelian region of North Africa and the humid
tropical zone of southern west Africa, or in the Great
Plains region of the United States. These areas are well
known for periodic severe droughts and water scarcity.

Arid/semi-arid
Low

Population (fraction of total)

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Climate Moisture Index CV

Moderate

Sub-humid/humid
High

Africa
Global

Arid

Semi-arid

Sub-humid

Humid

Low

Moderate

High

Water scarcity is fundamentally a problem of the
distributions of climate and human society, which vary
greatly around the world. Compared to the global
proportion of 52% of total population living in arid or semiarid regions, approximately 75% of all Africans live in such
conditions (mean CMI-CV < 0; see inset). In addition, 20%
of all Africans live in areas that experience high interannual
climatic variability as expressed by a CMI-CV > 0.75
(Vörösmarty et al., 2005a). This explains why Africa suffers
disproportionately from water scarcity and water stress
compared to other continents.

Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

S EC TI O N 4 . M A N A G EM E N T R ES P O N S ES A N D STE WA R D S H I P . 3 3 9

The Water Reuse Index
Water use by humans is a recursive phenomenon, by
which water is withdrawn, used and reused as
it passes from upstream source areas downstream past
agricultural, industrial and domestic users to the sea. The
Water Reuse Index (WRI) provides a measure of pressure
on river basin water resources (Vörösmarty et al., 2000,
2005a). Beginning at zero in the headwaters, the WRI
can vary widely over the course of a river according to
the pressures of different uses along its trajectory. If
demand is high relative to the available flow (e.g. when
encountering a city or major irrigation works),
the WRI will move upwards (see graph below).
If relatively low-use tributaries feed into the mainstream,
the Index will decline. In many of the world’s river

systems water reuse can exceed, sometimes greatly,
natural river flow. With high values for this Index, we see
increasing competition between water users — both
nature and society — as well as pollution and potential
public health problems. The WRI can shift markedly with
climate variability. For example, for the Orange River in
Africa (inset graph below), the relative water-use ratio
remains well below 1.0 (i.e. 100 percent use of river
flow) at mean annual flow conditions. However, water
use becomes ‘over-subscribed’ by a factor of more than
10 under 30-year low flow (drought) conditions
(Vörösmarty et al., 2005a). If water is to be delivered to
all users, then it must be reused, flowing through canals,
pipes and pumps more than ten times to satisfy all.

Water Reuse Index

0

0.1–0.4

<0.1

0.4–1

>1

Mainstem Orange River (South Africa)

5

Water reuse index

10
30-yr Low Flow

Mean Annual Flow
0
2000

1000

0

Source: Water Systems Analysis Group, University of New Hampshire. Datasets available for download at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

Better decision-making,
improved planning,
effective risk management,
innovation in development
and environmental
protection activities –
these are the human
activities that can reduce
the vulnerability of
communities. To this end,
risk assessment and
disaster reduction should
be integral parts of all
sustainable development
projects and policies.
Kofi Annan, United Nations Secretary-General

Part 1. Setting the Scene of
Water-related Disasters ..............................343
1a. Water-related hazards in the global disaster
landscape...........................................................343
Fig.10.1: Global trend of water-related disasters,
1960–2004
Fig. 10.2: Distribution of water-related disasters
by region, 1990–2004
Fig. 10.3: Number of dead and affected people
in water-related disasters, 1970–2004
1b. Disaster risk reduction at the international
level .......................................................................344
Table 10.1: The Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and disaster risk reduction
1c. Linking disaster risk reduction and
development planning........................................344
Fig. 10.4: The risk management cycle
1d. Limitations in risk reduction: lessons from
current practice .................................................346

Part 2. Risk Management Frameworks .......348
2a. Risk management over time: From response
to integration ....................................................348
Table 10.2: Response-based versus preventionoriented strategies to disaster risk reduction
Box 10.1: Value of stakeholder participation
in disaster risk reduction
2b. Managing risk-related knowledge and
information wisely: Preventing data loss...........348
Data and information for hazard analysis .............350
Data and information for vulnerability
assessment .........................................................350
2c. Advances in water-related risk management:
Examples of good practices ...............................351
Integrated flood management: A holistic
approach to policy design....................................351
Multi-hazard approaches: Integrating existing
mechanisms and tools .........................................351
Box 10.2: Example of multi-hazard assessment
in Costa Rica
User-based design of warning systems for
floods and drought .............................................352
Box 10.3: Manuals for community-based flood
management: Project in Bangladesh, India and
Nepal

Part 3. Indicators for Risk Management ....353
3a. Disaster Risk Index (DRI) ...................................353
Box 10.4: Methodology behind the Disaster
Risk Index (DRI)
Map 10.1: Physical exposure and relative
vulnerability to floods, 1980–2000
Fig. 10.5: Relative vulnerability for floods
Map 10.2: Physical exposure and relative
vulnerability to droughts, 1980–2000
Fig. 10.6: Relative vulnerability for droughts

Left: Coastal destruction in the wake of the
26 December 2004 tsunami in Indonesia

3b. Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)........................353
Table 10.3: Major components of the Climate
Vulnerability Index (CVI)
Map 10.3: The Climate Variability Index (CVI)
as applied to Peru at national and subnational
scales
3c. Indicator on flood policy effectiveness .............356
Table 10.4: Effectiveness of flood
countermeasures: Examples of indicators
Fig. 10.7: PWRI Risk Index: Case study basin
in Japan, 1980–2000

Part 4. From Frameworks to Policies ...........358
4a. Risk management frameworks...........................358
Fig. 10.8: Framework for disaster risk reduction
4b. Risk management: A matter of legislation
and policy ..........................................................358
Fig. 10.9: Framework of the Designated Urban
River Inundation Prevention Act (Japan, 2003)
Table 10.5: Public policies with water-related
risk components
4c. Example of practice: Flood risk management.....358
Fig. 10.10: Risk management at the operational level
Fig. 10.11: Risk management at the project
planning level

Part 5. Strategies for the Future ...................362
5a. Climate variability and change: Consequences
for risk reduction...............................................362
Box 10.5: Climate change and disaster
preparedness in Uganda
Disaster risk reduction and uncertainty.................362
5b. Advocating adaptive risk reduction
strategies ..........................................................362
Box 10.6: Projected impacts of climate change
in the Rhine River Basin
5c. Vulnerability assessment: An insight into
human security ..................................................363
Fig. 10.12: Pressure and Release (PAR)
model in vulnerability analysis
Box 10.7: Community risk assessment based on
vulnerability and resilience

Part 6. The Way Forward ....................................365
6a. The Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–15........365
Box 10.8: Highlights of the Hyogo Framework
for Action 2005–15 .............................................366
6b. Conclusions........................................................366

References and Websites ..................................368

10
CHAPTER 10

Managing
Risks:
Securing the
Gains of
Development
By

WMO
(World Meteorological
Organization)
and

UN-ISDR
(Inter-Agency
Secretariat, United
Nations International
Strategy for Disaster
Reduction)

3 4 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Over the past decade, there has been progress in risk management, thanks to scientific advancements and the
recognition of the political, social and cultural dimensions of risk. Yet technical and organizational constraints remain
high and slow down the design and implementation of efficient risk reduction policies.

■

Water-related disaster risk reduction calls for stronger
integration of risk-related public policies, and improved
cooperation among decision-makers, risk managers and
water managers.

■

Societies need to improve decision-making in situations
of uncertainty, in order to better adapt to ongoing and
future global changes, such as increased climate
variability.

■

Indicators are needed to detect and monitor changes in
the natural and social environment to provide a
quantitative basis for the design of disaster risk
reduction policies and to monitor the effectiveness of
these policies.

■

Based on an integrated policy and national risk
management frameworks, institutional coordination and
management mechanisms need to be strengthened.
This could be achieved through the promotion of
national disaster prevention forums including
stakeholders.

■

Implementation plans need to be developed based on
an integrated risk management policy. These plans
need to be well-resourced and underpinned by a clear
legislative framework.

■

Risk management strategies should consider the
preparedness of societies to live and deal with risks,
taking into account risk perception issues and emerging
threats such as global warming and climate change.

Above: Flooding of the Danube in Budapest, Hungary
Floods in Viet Nam
Below: Hue, Viet Nam

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Girl standing on dry, crackled ground following a drought in Turkey
Tornado damage in Osceola County, Florida, United States. This type of violent tornado,
rare in Florida, is generally linked to the climatic phenomenon of El Niño

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 4 3

Part 1. Setting the Scene of Water-related
Disasters
The number, scale and increasing impact of water-related disasters in recent years have resulted in
massive losses of lives and livelihoods. Vulnerable societies throughout the world, developing countries
in particular, are enduring the long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences of
these disasters.1 These impacts were acknowledged in both the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
(JPoI)2 and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) (UNDP, 2004).
Developing countries are disproportionately affected by
disasters; their losses are about five times higher per unit of
gross domestic product (GDP) than those of rich countries.
These losses often offset years of hard-won social and
economic development progress. Managing risks has therefore
become a priority for alleviating poverty, ensuring socioeconomic progress and securing the gains of development.
Extreme hydrometeorological events often interact with
other water-related hazards. Other threats include
pollution and chemical spills, aquifer depletion, land
subsidence, salinization of arable land, marine intrusions,
sea and storm surges, coastal flooding and water-borne
diseases.3 The scope of risk reduction policies and
activities must therefore be broadened to include these
multiple threats. Explicit links with other challenge areas
of the World Water Development Report can also be
made. These include health and sanitation (Chapter 6),
ecosystems and biodiversity (Chapter 5), food security

Children collecting water
during drought, India

(Chapter 7) and water quality (Chapter 4), as well as
development and sharing of water resources (Chapter 11).

1a. Water-related hazards in the global
disaster landscape
Statistics from the Center for Research on the
Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) in Belgium revealed that
during the ten-year period from 1996 to 2005, about 80
percent of all natural disasters were of meteorological or
hydrological origin. In the last decades, between 1960
and 2004 (see Figure 10.1), there has been a significant
rise in water-related extreme events, such as floods and
windstorms. Drought, as well as water-related and
landslide events, have also increased across the same
period equivalently to all other natural disasters (such as
earthquakes, volcanoes, etc.). During the ten-year period
1995–2004, wave-surge disasters including storm-surges
and the 2004 tsunami in the Indian Ocean threatened
increasing numbers of people worldwide.

Figure 10.1: Global trend of water-related disasters by type of hazard, 1960–2004
1. For 1992–2001, losses from
water-related disasters were
estimated at US $446 billion,
accounting for about 65% of
economic loss due to all natural
disasters (ISDR, 2004a).

800
Flood
Wind Storm

700

Drought
Water Epidemics
Landslide

Number of disasters

600

2. World Conference on
Sustainable Development,
September 2002,
Johannesburg, Republic of
South Africa.

Famine
Wave & Surge
Other Disasters

500
400

3. For risk-related terminology
see the first edition of the
World Water Development
Report (UN-WWAP, 2003) and
the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction (ISDR)
global review, Living with Risk
(ISDR, 2004a).

300
200
100
0
1960-1964

1965-1969

1970-1974

1975-1979

1980-1984

1985-1989

1990-1994

1995-1999

2000-2004

Source: Data from the Center for Epidemiology of Disasters (OFDA-CRED) in Louvain (Belgium). Analysis by the Public Works Research Institute (PWRI) in
Tsukuba (Japan), 2005.4

4. We acknowledge support from
Dr T. Merabtene, and Dr Y.
Junichi, at PWRI.

3 4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...the causes for
disasters need
to be analysed
so as to guide
investment in
reconstruction,
in particular for
infrastructure
and land use

The global distribution of water-related disasters shows
important regional differences (see Figure 10.2), with a
large share of events occurring in Asia. Figure 10.3 offers
an overview of the impact of water-related disasters in
terms of numbers of deaths and people affected.
To some extent, the increase of water-related disasters
shown in Figure 10.3 can be explained by an increase
in reporting activities. Likewise, the number of people
affected by disasters and material losses can be attributed
to population growth and increasing value of assets. In
some cases, however, risk and disaster statistics are still
difficult to produce. This is the case for instance when it
comes to giving a clear definition of people ‘affected’ by
a disaster, where health, sanitary, social and economic
dimensions must be taken into account. Differences
are also introduced when comparing developing and
developed countries. Statistical difficulties also exist
with the qualification of drought-related disasters.

1b. Disaster risk reduction at the
international level

5. For details visit
www.mrcmekong.org
6. See the final report of the
World Conference on Disaster
Reduction (18–22 January
2005, Hyogo, Japan) at
www.unisdr.org/wcdr

Milestone events during the United Nations (UN)
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
(IDNDR, 1990–2000) and in the Yokohama Strategy and
Plan of Action (UN/GA, 1994) have provided policy
guidance and tools for the mitigation of natural disasters.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Figure 10.2: Distribution of water-related disasters by region, 1990–2004

Europe
11%

Africa
21%

Americas
25%

Asia
38%

Based on a review of global disaster risk reduction
initiatives, the Secretariat of the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction (ISDR) identified the principal
limitations and challenges to the implementation of this
strategy and action plan (ISDR, 2004a). These limitations
have also become key areas for developing a relevant
framework for action in disaster risk reduction for the
International Decade ‘Water for Life’ 2005–2015 and
include the following (WCDR, 2005):
■
■
■
■
■

governance: organizational, legal and policy
frameworks
risk identification, assessment, monitoring and early
warning
knowledge management and education
reduction of underlying risk factors
preparedness for effective response and recovery.

These points are consistent with the priorities identified
in two other major policy documents agreed upon by the
international community: the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation (JPoI) and the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Table 10.1 illustrates how the latter are
related to risk reduction.
Complementary to the commitment of the international
community, many countries have also engaged, bilaterally,
regionally and internationally, in cooperative arrangements for
water-related disaster risk reduction. This is, for instance, the
case in the Mekong River Basin, where in 2001 riparian
countries established a Flood Mitigation and Management
Plan under the aegis of the Mekong River Commission.5
In southern Africa, countries of the Southern African
Development Community developed a web-based information
system to monitor regional conditions when cyclones, floods
and droughts occur in the region (see Chapter 14).
Strong linkages have been identified between poverty,
high social vulnerability to and low capacity to cope with
water-related hazards and disasters.6 The next section
discusses how risk management is a key issue of
sustainable development.

1c. Linking disaster risk reduction and
development planning
Oceania
5%

Source: Data from OFDA-CRED in Louvain (Belgium) and analysis by PWRI in Tsukuba (Japan), 2005.

Water-related disasters disrupt economic development as
well as the social fabric of vulnerable societies. This
jeopardizes the accumulated gains in social and economic
development and investments in better living conditions and
quality of life. Disaster risk reduction policies and measures

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 4 5

Table 10.1: The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and disaster risk reduction
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
MDG 1: Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger

MDG 2:

MDG 3:

MDG 4:

MDG 5:

MDG 6:

MDG 7:

MDG 8:

Related risk reduction aspects
Human vulnerability to natural hazards and poverty are
largely codependent. Exposure to hazards plays a critical
role in poverty-ridden areas. Hunger reduces individual
capacity to cope with stress caused by disasters.
Achieving universal primary education
Educational attainment is a fundamental determinant of
human vulnerability and social marginalization. Basic
literacy and numeracy enable individuals to become more
engaged in their society. Broadening participation in
decision-making is key to disaster risk reduction.
Promoting gender equality and empowering women Facilitating the participation of women and girls in the
development process is a key priority. Women across the
world play critical roles in shaping development. In some
contexts, women may be more exposed to natural hazards.
At the same time, women are often more likely than men
to participate in communal actions to reduce risk and
enhance development.
Reducing child mortality
Children under five years of age are particularly vulnerable
to the impacts of environmental hazards, ranging from the
everyday risks of inadequate sanitation and drinking water
to death and injury as a result of catastrophic events and
their aftermath. Post-traumatic psychological disorders are
also a major issue.
Improving maternal health
As environmental hazard stress or shock erodes the
savings and capacities of households and families,
marginal people within these social groups are most at
risk. In many cases, it is women, girls or the elderly who
are the least entitled to household or family assets.
Reducing drains on household assets through risk
reduction will contribute to enhancing maternal health.
Combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Interactions between epidemiological status and human
vulnerability to subsequent stresses and shocks are well
documented. For example, rural populations affected by
HIV/AIDS are less able to cope with the stress of drought.
Likewise, individuals living with chronic or terminal
diseases are more vulnerable to emergency situations.
Ensuring environmental sustainability
Major disasters, or the accumulation of risk from regular
and persistent but smaller events, can wipe out any hope
of sustainability for urban or rural environments. Again,
the equation works both ways. Increasing destruction due
to landslides, floods and other disasters related to
environmental and land-use patterns are a clear signal that
massive challenges remain in achieving this goal.
Developing a global partnership for development
Efforts to enhance sustainable development and reduce
human vulnerability to natural hazards are hampered by
national debt burdens, terms of international trade, the
high price of necessary drugs, lack of access to new
technology and new hazards associated with global climate
change, among other hurdles. Building a global partnership
for development would contribute to disaster risk
reduction.

Source: Adapted from UNDP, 2004.

3 4 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 10.3: Number of dead and affected people in water-related disasters, 1970–2004

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Note: The disasters reported in
this figure include floods,
windstorms, landslides,
avalanches, droughts, famines,
water-related epidemics and
technological water-related
disasters (such as traffic
accidents due to water). This
figure indicates a possible
improvement in crisis
management, disaster relief and
humanitarian activities, while
simultaneously illustrating that
the number of people living in
hazard-prone areas is increasing.
The alarming increase of affected
people since the start of the
twenty-first century is notable:
from 2000 to 2004 (four-year
data), 1,942 water-related
disasters claiming the lives of
427,045 people and more than
1.5 billion affected people were
reported in the CRED disaster
database.

Number of

Affected people

dead people

(in million)

(in million)
1

2500

0.8

2000

0.6

1500

0.4

1000

0.2

500

0

0
1970-1979

1980-1989

8. See, for instance, the
activities of the World
Conservation Union (IUCN) at
iucn.org/themes/wetlands/
9. For more information, visit
www.waterandclimate.org/
home.asp

2000-2004

Total affected people
Number of dead

Source: Data from OFDA-CRED in Louvain (Belgium) and analysis done in 2005 by Public Works Research Institute (PWRI) in Tsukuba (Japan).

need to be designed in such a way that they are consistent
with integrated long-term development objectives and
implementation plans. Therefore, managing water-related
risks is a matter of governance. In particular, post-disaster
relief and reconstruction activities need to be improved
with the long-term objective of ‘building back better’.
This means that the causes for disasters need to be
analysed so as to guide investment in reconstruction, in
particular for infrastructure and land use. Limiting the extent
of damage and reducing vulnerability are two interrelated
objectives of the risk management cycle (Figure 10.4).

7. For details, see the Integrated
Flood Management concept
(IFM) of the World
Meteorological OrganizationGlobal Water Partnership
(WMO-GWP) Associated
Programme for Flood
Management (APFM) at
www.apfm.info/

1990-1999

There is now international acknowledgement that efforts
to reduce disaster risks must be systematically integrated
into policies, plans and programmes for sustainable
development and poverty reduction (Abramovitz, 2001
in ISDR, 2004a). At the local level, for instance, disaster
risk reduction efforts should assist communities not only
to recover from disasters but also to move above the
poverty line. Land-use planning is another example of
integrated policies that can help reduce disaster risk, which
should take account of the positive social and economic
aspects of flooding, including sediment provision for soil
fertility, environmental flow maintenance, and ecosystem
maintenance.7 The value of wetlands for flood protection
has also been increasingly recognized as a complement to
structural measures.8

As part of national and regional plans for sustainable
development, risk assessment is needed to anticipate
possible impacts of global changes on water resources.
It is now widely recognized that climate variability and
change have the potential to threaten sustainable
development (IPCC, 2001).
A convergence of interests is emerging, and efforts have
been made since the 1990s to develop cooperative actions
with the objective of integrating climate-related coping
strategies into disaster risk reduction and poverty reduction
efforts. For instance, the Co-operative Programme on Water
and Climate aims to improve the capacity to cope with the
impacts of the increasing variability of the world’s climate.9
However, despite these national and international
investments and efforts, limitations still remain in current
disaster risk reduction activities.

1d. Limitations in risk reduction: lessons
from current practice
A recent study conducted by the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) identified challenge areas in risk
management (adapted from WMO, 2004):
■

Challenge areas related to scientific observations and
improved methodologies:

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 4 7

Sustainable development, poverty reduction, appropriate
governance and disaster risk reduction are interconnected
objectives, as reflected by the evolution of risk reduction
approaches detailed in the next section.

Preparedn
e

Preparation
• Organization
• Resource planning
• Development
planning
• Insurance

Prevention
• Land use planning
• Technical measures
• Biological measures

g
in
uc
Red

Challenge areas related to social and political issues:
– building risk management frameworks that reflect an
integrated approach to risk management
– promoting the inclusion of risk management aspects
in transboundary agreements
– enhancing public participation in risk management
programmes and activities.

Ev
en
t

Event

• Warning
• Information

Intervention
• Alert
• Rescue
• Damage mitigation
• Information/instructions

ss

RISK
ASSESSMENT

Recondition
• Provisional repair
• Supply and disposal
• Transport systems
• Communications
• Financing
• Emergency legislation

is

Recovery
an
al
y

vu
lne
rab
ilit
y

si
s

Reconstruction
• Definitive repair
• Reconstruction
• Strengthening of resilience
• Financing

Lim
iti
ng
age
dam
of
nt
te
ex

■

Figure 10.4: The risk management cycle

se
spon
Re

– improving the quantity and accuracy of data in order
to map hazards and assess impacts
– making Geographic Information Systems (GIS) more
user-friendly
– quantifying uncertainties related to forecasting
hydrometeorological extremes
– building up and disseminating knowledge of the
effects of climate variability and change
– further developing robust vulnerability assessment
methods
– incorporating integrated environmental strategies in
risk management.

s
ly
na
a
t
en

Ev

Source: Adapted from Swiss Civil Protection. This mitigation-crisis-rehabilitation cycle shows the challenges of
post-disaster reconstruction.

Flooding in Tana River Valley, Kenya, due to extended
and unseasonal rain

3 4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Risk Management Frameworks
The first UN World Water Development Report (WWDR1) showed that over the past decade, there has
been a shift from crisis management, which was mainly responsive in nature, to proactive risk
management and strategies orientated towards disaster prevention. The basic characteristics of these
different approaches appear in Table 10.2.
Fighting against rising
flood waters in Germany

2a. Risk management over time: From
response to integration
In recent years, the understanding of water-related
disaster risks has improved, thanks to advances in
modelling and forecasting of physical processes, such
as climate variability and change, and the progressive
inclusion of social and environmental dimensions in
assessment (Viljoen et al., 2001). This has been useful
in identifying the social and economic factors of disasters,
such as the value of assets exposed to hazards, livelihood
functions, social vulnerability, coping capacity, cultural
dimensions and the role played by the insurance sector
(for theory and examples of practice, see Dercon, 2004).

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

The recognition of the social dimensions of risk and
disasters has fostered research and action in developing
participatory processes for risk management (WHO, 1989;
McDaniels et al., 1999; Parker, 2004; ISDR, 2004a). The
objective is that all relevant institutions and stakeholders
that are exposed to risk have the opportunity to share
their experiences and concerns in the decision-making
process (see Box 10.1 for details).

10. For more information, visit
www.ist-osiris.org
11. Institutional knowledge
includes the expertise of civil
servants; official statistics
and databases; and hazard
and risk mapping resources.
Community-based knowledge
includes past flood
experience; empirical
knowledge; and coping and
adaptive capacities.

Such participatory approaches have been implemented
in many countries. In the Netherlands, for instance,
participatory planning for flood management has been
successfully tested (Frijters and Leentvaar, 2001). In
France, Germany and Poland, the European Union funded
a project involving floodplain communities in the design
of a flood information system based on information
technologies.10 In Cambodia, the non-governmental
organization Action Against Hunger and the Cambodian
Red Cross have developed, since 1998, a communitybased project of early warning for Mekong floods
(Affeltranger and Lictevout, 2005).
As a support tool to these community-based processes,
rapid developments in modern communication
technologies can help record and disseminate experience,
convey professional knowledge and contribute to
decision-making processes. Information and knowledge,
both of which are institutional and community-based,11

are integral to the design and successful implementation
of risk reduction policies (see also Chapter 13).

2b. Managing risk-related knowledge and
information wisely: Preventing data loss
Water- and risk-related data are needed to support
multi-hazard approaches, design risk-related indicators,
operate efficient warning systems, develop awarenessraising programmes and enable institutions to adapt to
environmental and social changes. Availability of and
access to data are therefore essential for hazard
analysis and vulnerability assessment (ISDR, 2004a).
However, risk-related knowledge and information are
often unavailable or missing. Difficulties include a loss
of institutional memory and limited access to data
and information.
Water- and risk-related data accessibility problems include
the following (ISDR, 2004a):
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

Data is restricted for presumed security purposes.
Inadequate cross-sector communication exists about
the existence of data.
Dissemination of information is not considered a
priority by the organization.
Information is maintained in non-standardized formats.
Existing information is costly to convert into more
readily accessible formats.
Data compilers have not consulted users about their
data requirements.
Information for women’s advocacy organizations and
other community-based groups is not readily available,
and gender-specific data is not consistently gathered
or disseminated.

Risk knowledge and know-how can also be lost over time
for various reasons, including lack of funding for
database maintenance, lack of information-sharing among
administrations, loss of institutional memory when civil
servants retire or leave office for a job in the private
sector. Lost knowledge and know-how include overviews
of hydrometeorological processes in river basins, the

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 4 9

Table 10.2: Response-based versus prevention-oriented strategies to disaster risk reduction
Response-based strategies (relief)
1. Primary focus on hazards and disaster events
2. Single, event-based scenarios
Emphasis
3. Basic responsibility to respond to an event

4. Often fixed, location-specific conditions
5. Responsibility concentrated in a single
authority or agency
6. Command and control, directed operations
7. Established hierarchical relationships

Operations

8. Often focused on hardware and equipment
9. Dependent on specialized expertise
10. Urgent, immediate and short-term periods in
outlook, planning, attention, returns

Time
horizons

11. Rapidly changing, dynamic information
usage, often conflicting or sensitive
12. Primary, authorized or singular information
sources, need for definitive facts
Information
13. Directed, ‘need to know’ basis of information
use and
dissemination, availability
management
14. Operational, or public information based on
use of communications
15. In-out or vertical flows of information
16. Relates to matters of public security,
Social, political
safety
rationale
Source: ISDR, 2001.

Integrated strategies
(prevention, mitigation and relief)
1. Primary focus on vulnerability and risk
issues
2. Dynamic, multiple risk issues and
development scenarios
3. Fundamental need to assess, monitor
and update exposure to changing
conditions
4. Extended changing and shared regional
or local variations
5. Involves multiple authorities, interests,
actors
6. Situation-specific functions, free
association
7. Shifting, fluid and tangential
relationships
8. Dependent on related practices, abilities
and knowledge base
9. Specialized expertise, squared with
public views and priorities
10. Comparative, moderate and long-term
periods in outlook, planning, values,
returns
11. Accumulated, historical, layered, updated
or comparative use of information
12. Open or public information, multiple,
diverse or changing sources, differing
perspectives and points of view
13. Multiple use, shared exchange, intersectoral use of information
14. Matrix, nodal communication
15. Dispersed, lateral flows of information
16. Matters of public interest, investment
and safety

Left: 2nd wave of the
26 December 2004
tsunami, Sri Lanka
Right: Desertification in
Chott El-Djerid, Tunisia

3 5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 10.1: VALUE OF STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION IN DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
■

Before the disaster:
■

improved hazard assessment by relying on

improved social understanding and ownership

After the disaster:

of official mitigation strategies.

■

local traditional or scientific knowledge
■
■
■

During the disaster:

risk perceptions and hidden weaknesses

■
■

communal good-neighbourhood protective

risk-related
information and
knowledge is a
threat to the
sustainability of
institutions and

■

improved trust in official authorities and
relief forces.
Source: Affeltranger, 2002.

location of stored data, station maintenance, the
operation of models and checking forecasts for
consistency. The loss of risk-related information and
knowledge is a hindrance to institutions and
organizations responsible for disaster risk reduction.
Options for preventing this loss of institutional memory
include improvement of legislation on the management of
information produced by national administrations, clear
allocation of duties regarding information management
and custodianship, internal procedures and total-quality
approaches.

organizations
Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

responsible for
disaster risk
reduction

12. For an example of
application, see the OSIRIS
Project at www.ist-osiris.org

of ‘building back better’.

improved understanding of warnings and

flood-prone communities

The loss of

coordinated reconstruction using the concept

disaster management activities

assessment of self-help capacity: awareness,
assessment of the information needs of

■

behaviour and helping capacity for relief

identification of most vulnerable groups and

knowledge and resources
■

analysis and debriefing activities

improved vulnerability analysis by identifying

prioritization of mitigation investment

improved commitment in post-crisis feedback

Data and information for hazard analysis
As a primary input for hazard analysis and identification
of trends in hazards, high quality comprehensive data and
information are crucial in support of research in natural
and man-made processes that govern the frequency and
magnitude of hazards. Such data are the base for
comprehensive risk assessments that are essential for
planning and monitoring purposes (WMO, 1999). The
analysis of past data, and of extreme events in particular,
is helpful for quantifying disaster trends and impacts in
terms of exposure and human and economic loss.
Data collection and management remains a key challenge
to successful hazard analysis. This is particularly the case
when dealing with extreme hydrometeorological events
about which there are limited available data, especially in
developing countries, where historical data series are
often missing or incomplete. Reasons for this can be
technical, financial or political. Climate variability and
change are other sources of uncertainty in terms of
the reliability of past series of water-related data.

These various factors usually result in forecasting
uncertainty, poor modelling results and inadequate
warnings, as well as biased hazard mapping, which in
turn can result in major losses when applied to land-use
and urban planning purposes. Lack of data can then
lead to higher risks.

Data and information for vulnerability
assessment
Efficient vulnerability assessment requires availability of
and access to data on attributes of groups and
individuals, including socio-economic class, ethnicity,
gender, age and religion. These features can be used to
help differentiate and rank the level of vulnerability to
various social groups and subgroups.
While hazard mapping has been improved by the wider
use of GIS techniques, the inclusion of social, economic
and environmental variables into GIS models still
remains a major challenge (ISDR, 2004a). Indeed,
assigning quantifiable values to the social and economic
dimensions of vulnerability is not always possible.
The various and usually interrelated scales of
vulnerability patterns also make spatial representation,
mapping and visualization difficult. In addition, the
level of data quality and detail required for GIS analysis
is often incompatible with available information produced
or provided by national administrations.
When necessary, low-technology approaches, such as
paper maps, billboards and drawings, can offer a locallevel, cheaper alternative to GIS-based techniques.
However, the use of GIS for the analysis of vulnerability
level and coping capacity is a rapidly developing field.12

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 5 1

BOX 10.2: EXAMPLE OF MULTI-HAZARD ASSESSMENT IN COSTA RICA
Turrialba is a city of 33,000 people, which is

reduction. A multi-hazard risk assessment of the

individual hazard maps to obtain graphs of

located in the central part of Costa Rica and

city was conducted based on a Geographic

probability and resulting loss values. The

regularly affected by flooding, landslides and

Information System (GIS) application for risk

resulting database is an example of a tool that

earthquakes. In order to assist the local

assessment and management. The city’s

local authorities can use to assess the effects of

emergency commission and the municipality, the

cadastral database was used in combination with

different mitigation measures and conduct cost-

United Nations Educational, Scientific and

various hazard maps for different return periods

benefit analyses.

Cultural Organization (UNESCO) sponsored a

to generate vulnerability maps for the city. Cost

project in capacity-building for natural disaster

maps were combined with vulnerability maps and

2c. Advances in water-related risk
management: Examples of good practices
The following selections of good practices have been chosen
in terms of their relevance to various aspects of disaster risk
reduction. The first example offers a holistic approach to the
design of risk reduction policies. The second example
addresses the design of multi-hazard approaches, while the
third example considers the involvement of stakeholders in
the design of warning systems.

Integrated flood management: A holistic
approach to policy design
Water-related disaster mitigation should be seen as a key
component of integrated water resources management
(IWRM) and can be found in the following principles
(APFM, 2003):
■
■
■
■
■
■

managing the water cycle as a whole (basin-wide,
including underground resources)
integrating land and water management (including
water allocation and land-use patterns)
adopting a sound mix of flood management strategies
(structural and non-structural)
ensuring a participatory approach (involving all relevant
stakeholders in decision-making)
adopting integrated hazard management approaches
breaking the poverty cycle through improved risk
management.

analysis of social, economic and ecological services by
floods, as shown by projects developed in England on
watershed management (DEFRA, 2003).

Multi-hazard approaches: Integrating existing
mechanisms and tools
A multi-hazard approach to early warning, forecasting,
preparedness and response, notably through the use of
existing observational and telecommunication systems, is
the ideal method for saving lives and protecting
infrastructure (Grabs, 2005). Such multi-hazard approaches
to warning also help to design warning messages that fit
the various hazards imposed on a human settlement or a
community. Such messages are more likely to provide
decision-makers and other stakeholders with helpful
information to cope with natural hazards.
The multi-hazard approach, advocated by WMO, also
promotes improved cooperation and coordination of
national agencies responsible for development planning,
disaster mitigation and water resources management,
including National Hydrological and Meteorological
Services (NHMSs). National Platforms for Disaster Risk
Reduction (NPs) are a major implementation instrument,
with the following objectives:
■
■

Managing extreme water-related events must be linked to
water resources management. Training programmes, tools
and awareness-raising material used for water resources
management should include a risk-related component,
such that an integrated assessment of land-use changes
and floodplain restoration can be developed in parallel to
structural measures for flood protection (Brouwer et al.,
2001). Integrated flood management requires a holistic

Source: ITC, 2005 and ISDR, 2004a.

■
■

■

increased collaboration and coordination among
national stakeholders
increased knowledge and visibility of national
situations at the regional and international levels
increased levels of knowledge and skills in the global
risk reduction community
national leadership and commitment to the
sustainability of the National Platforms for Disaster
Risk Reduction.
increased national counterparts to help strategy
implementation

Water-related
disaster
mitigation
should be seen
as a key
component of
integrated water
resources
management...

3 5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 10.3: MANUALS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED FLOOD MANAGEMENT: PROJECT IN BANGLADESH, INDIA AND NEPAL
The Community Approaches to Flood

which activities had been undertaken,

implemented in selected flood-prone areas, has

Management project, developed by WMO and its

individually and collectively, at various stages –

proven effective at improving the flood

partners, has developed country-wide manuals

before, during and after floods have occurred –

management capacity of the communities

on community flood management on the basis

with a view to reducing lost lives and destroyed

concerned and reducing their flood vulnerability.

of information provided by selected flood-prone

livelihoods and the suffering caused by floods.

communities in Bangladesh, India and Nepal.

Once drafted, the manuals were reviewed by the

Through field research, including Participatory

selected communities during workshops and

Rapid Appraisal (PRA), it was first ascertained

subsequently adopted. This approach, when

Source: Unpublished project report (as of April 2005),
WMO Commission for Hydrology and Water Resources
Management.

BOX 10.4: METHODOLOGY BEHIND THE DISASTER RISK INDEX (DRI)
A mortality-based index was developed in order

results from three components: the hazard

the Center for International Earth Science

to enable comparisons of countries hit by

occurrence probability, the elements at risk (in

Information Network, was multiplied by

different hazards types, such as droughts versus

this case the population) and their vulnerability.

frequency to compute the physical exposure.

floods. The other reason for such a choice was

By multiplying the frequency of hazards by the

This already normalized the differences between

that data on mortality is the most complete and

population affected, the physical exposure was

populations highly affected by a selected hazard

the most reliable (the Emergency Disasters

obtained. This figure represents the average

and those less frequently affected.

Database from CRED was used for this purpose).

number of people affected yearly by a specific

Other parameters, such as economic losses,

hazard. The first task was to find all the

Note: The United Nations Environmental

number of injured or losses of livelihood, all

requested geophysical data and then model the

Programme’s (UNEP) Global Resource Information

suffer from either a lack of data or a lack of

different hazards in order to obtain the

Database started a process to update the DRI

comparative potential, if not both. The formula

frequency for earthquakes, drought, floods and

methodology in April 2005.

used for risk estimation was based on the UN

cyclones for each location on the globe. The

definition of 1979, which states that the risk

model for population distribution, developed by

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

■
■

strengthened credibility across different institutions and
interest groups
increased commitment to help the most vulnerable.13

Box 10.2 provides an example of multi-hazard
assessment in Costa Rica.

User-based design of warning systems for
floods and drought

13. For more information, see
ISDR’s Guiding Principles –
National Platforms for
Disaster Risk Reduction
www.unisdr.org/eng/countryinform/docs/Guiding%20Princi
ples%20for%20NP.pdf

Designing efficient flood warning systems poses
technical, organizational and social challenges: technical
constraints include a lack of data, modelling inadequacy
and differing flood types, and organizational constraints
include weak dissemination of information and
institutional deficiencies in the coordination of joint
measures for risk management and disaster prevention.
Social and cultural limitations include a poor
understanding of warning, limited ownership, conflicting
information sources and resistance to follow guidance
and instructions.

Source: UNDP, 2004.16

The efficiency of warning systems for water-related
disasters was found to be greatly improved by the early
involvement of stakeholders in the design of the warning
system (McDaniels et al., 1999; Vari, 2004). The objective
is to design a warning message that will be most useful
to people confronting an impending hazard. Participatory
design of warning strategies has been successfully
implemented in many developed and developing
countries. These approaches aim at involving warning
receivers in the various development phases of a warning
system, including forms and contents of the message,
dissemination channel and options for feedback.
(Affeltranger, 2002; Parker, 2004; Affeltranger and
Lictevout, 2005). Box 10.3 provides an example of a
community-based approach to flood management.
The development of warning systems for droughts is
another challenge for risk managers and water
managers. Early warnings of drought help farmers
select appropriate crops and irrigation schedules and

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 5 3

methods, thus contributing to food security. Timely
warning also provides water managers with a chance
to allocate available water resources based on rational
priority criteria.
Several initiatives have been developed to improve
drought-related information management and warning
activities. For instance, at the request of twenty-four

countries in eastern and southern Africa, WMO
established two Drought Monitoring Centres (DMCs),
in Nairobi, Kenya (see Chapter 14), and Harare,
Zimbabwe, in 1989 with financial support from the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). The
main objective of the centres is to contribute to early
warning systems and the mitigation of adverse impacts
of extreme climatic events on agricultural production.14

14. For more information, visit
www.drought.unl.edu/monitor/
EWS/ch11_Ambenje.pdf

Part 3. Indicators for Risk Management
Indicators are needed to inform the design of disaster risk reduction policies and monitor the
implementation and assessment of these policies. Indicators help identify patterns in disaster losses,
as well as underlying physical, social or economic trends that influence hazard, vulnerability and risk
patterns. Such risk factors include environmental degradation, population growth and the increasing
value of assets in flood-prone areas and risk perception. Quantifiable indicators in particular are
needed when decisions involve trade-offs between development options with varying degrees of risk.
The development of indicators for water-related risk
management is a relatively new field. In water-related
risk management, risk-based indicators remain scarce
and suffer from limitations in terms of conceptual
design, paucity of data and largely insufficient
robustness. There is a clear need to further develop
indicators for risk management and encourage
governments and relevant national and international
organizations to provide the necessary data on which
these indicators are built. Such data should be of high
quality and supplied on a regular basis to enable the
development of long-term indicators, especially for
monitoring purposes.

Indicators used for the DRI aim at grasping the socioeconomic dimensions of risks. They include the Human
Development Index (HDI), the number of physicians per
1,000 inhabitants, the rate of urban growth, etc. The
results showed surprisingly high correlations.17 This
analysis provides a useful and neutral tool for the
evaluation of countries facing natural hazard risks. UNDP
hopes that this tool will help countries with both high
vulnerability and high exposure to adopt more risk
reduction measures. Maps 10.1 and 10.2 and Figures
10.5 and 10.6 show the DRI graphic results as applied to
floods and droughts.

3b. Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
Below are three examples of indicators selected to
demonstrate their actual or potential applications on
global, regional and national scales (see also Chapter 1).
These indicators are in different testing and application
stages. Some are already undergoing a revision of their
science base and robustness, underlining the necessity
for further research and development on their concepts
and applicability.

Developed for a range of scales (from community
to national and regional levels), this indicator links
climate variability and change, water availability, and
socio-economic factors (Sullivan and Meigh, 2005).18
The assessment of risk in relation to water resources
is strongly dependent on people’s vulnerability to
water-related hazards. In addition, the uncertainty
generated by climate variability and change plays an
important role.

3a. Disaster Risk Index (DRI)
This index15 has been developed to help compare disasterrisk country situations, based on a quantitative approach
to disaster impacts. Natural hazards assessed by this
index include floods, cyclones, earthquakes and droughts.
This index allows global ranking on the basis of relative
vulnerability of nations (UNDP-BCPR, 2004) (Box 10.4).

The CVI identifies a range of social, economic,
environmental and physical factors relevant to
vulnerability (see Table 10.3) and incorporates
them into an integrated index.

15. This index was developed by
the United Nations
Development Programme’s
Bureau for Crisis Prevention
and Recovery (UNDP/BCPR),
based on research done by
United Nations Environmental
Programme’s Global Resource
Information Database
(UNEP/GRID, Geneva).
16. We acknowledge the
contribution of Dr Pascal
Peduzzi (UNEP/GRID, Geneva)
in the drafting of this section.
17. A web-based interactive tool
for comparing countries is
provided at:
gridca.grid.unep.ch/undp/.
The location of frequency
and physical exposure
can be visualised at:
grid.unep.ch/preview
18. For this section, we
acknowledge the support of
Dr Caroline Sullivan, from the
Centre for Ecology and
Hydrology (CEH) in the UK.

WWDR Chapter 10e (FF)

17/2/06

09:39

Page 354

3 5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Map 10.1: Physical exposure and relative vulnerability to floods, 1980–2000

Physical exposure (people per year)
0 - 10 000
10 000 - 100 000
100 000 - 1 000 000
1 000 000 - 10 000 000
10 000 000 - 100 000 000

100 000 000 - 1 000 000 000
Relative Vulnerability (people killed
per million exposed per year)
0 - 0.1
0.1 - 1
1 - 10
10 - 100
100 - 500
No data

Data sources :
- Université Catholique de Louvain : The EM-DAT The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database (victims)
- U. S. Geological Survey : HYDRO1k Elevation Derivative Database (flood affected watersheds)
- CIESIN, IFPRI, WRI : Gridded Population of the World (GPW), Version 2 (population)
Compilation and computation by UNEP/GRID-Geneva

Source: UNDP, 2004.

Figure 10.5: Relative vulnerability for floods

10 000
Average Annual Deaths, 1980 - 2000

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Relative vulnerability
China

Venezuela

India

1 000
Afghanistan
Nepal
Viet Nam
Mexico

Somalia

100

South Africa
Yemen
Morocco
Egypt

10

High

Bangladesh
Pakistan
Indonesia

USA
Myanmar

Djibouti

Uzbekistan
Papua New Guinea

Low

Mongolia Botswana

0

0.01

Germany

0.1

1

10

100

Average Population Exposed to Floods, 1980 - 2000
Data source: The EM-DAT OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database and UNEP/GRID-Geneva.
Source: UNDP, 2004.

1 000 million

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 5 5

Map 10.2: Physical exposure and relative vulnerability to droughts, 1980–2000

Physical exposure (people per year)
0 - 10 000
10 000 - 100 000
100 000 - 1 000 000
1 000 000 - 10 000 000
10 000 000 - 35 000 000

Relative Vulnerability (people killed
per million exposed per year)
0 - 0.1
0.1 - 1
1 - 10

Data sources :
- Université Catholique de Louvain : The EM-DAT The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database (victims)
- U. S. Geological Survey : HYDRO1k Elevation Derivative Database (flood affected watersheds)
- CIESIN, IFPRI, WRI : Gridded Population of the World (GPW), Version 2 (population)
Compilation and computation by UNEP/GRID-Geneva

10 - 100
100 - 1 000
1 000 - 100 000
No data

Source: UNDP, 2004.

Figure 10.6: Relative vulnerability for droughts

Relative vulnerability

10 000

Ethiopia

D.P. Republic of Korea

High

Sudan

Mozambique

1 000
100

Mauritania

China

Chad

Indonesia
Somalia

Madagascar
Uganda
Papua New Guinea

India
Pakistan

Kenya

1

Brazil

0

Ec
u
Sp ado
ai r
n

Burundi

Al
ge
Jo ria
rd
an

iv

ia

Guinea

Philippines

1
10
Average Population Exposed to Droughts, 1980 - 2000

Data source: The EM-DAT OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database and UNEP/GRID-Geneva.
Source: UNDP, 2004.

Low

US

10

Bo
l

Average Annual Deaths, 1980 - 2000

100 000

100 million

3 5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Indicators are
needed to
assess the
effectiveness of
current policies
for risk
reduction and to
explore other
policy options

Based on a series of subcomponents, the six major
components are combined using a composite index
approach (similar to the HDI). The resulting scores range
on a scale from 0 to 100, where 100 represents the
highest level of vulnerability. The CVI can be applied at a
scale more appropriate for resource management and
disaster mitigation. Map 10.3 shows an example of CVI
application in Latin America.
The CVI provides a powerful technique for systematically
expressing human vulnerability in relation to water
resources, both for current conditions and for future
scenarios. It can therefore help risk managers and water
managers develop a warning system for water scarcity and
possible drought events.

3c. Indicator on flood policy effectiveness
Indicators are needed to assess the effectiveness of
current policies for risk reduction and to explore other
policy options.19 The indicator developed by the Public
Works Research Institute (PWRI) in Japan has provided a
clearer picture of goals and expected outcomes of a risk
index for assessing policy effectiveness.20
Based on the DPSIR Framework (Driving forces, Pressure,
State, Impact, Response), Table 10.4 shows examples of
indicators used to assess the effectiveness of flood
countermeasures.
When applied to river basins in Japan, the selected
indicators reflect policy effectiveness towards priority
objective functions (see Figure 10.7 for details and
Chapter 14).

Table 10.3: Major components of the Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
Geospatial

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Includes a range of factors specific to the location being examined that are likely to give rise to
vulnerability (such as population density and dependence on imported food), slope and temperature, etc.
Resources
The physical availability of both surface water and groundwater, taking into account temporal variability
and quality as well as the total amount of water.
Access
The extent of access to water for human use, including access to water for industry and irrigation.
Use
Water use efficiency for domestic, agricultural and industrial purposes.
Capacity
The effectiveness of people’s ability to manage water.
Environment A measure of how water use impacts on environmental integrity and on ecosystem goods and services
provided by aquatic habitats.
Source: Sullivan and Meigh, 2005.

Table 10.4: Effectiveness of flood countermeasures: Examples of indicators

19. This section is based on the
contribution of Dr Tarek
Merabtene and Dr Y. Junichi
from PWRI Institute (Tsukuba,
Japan).
20. For details on the PWRI Index
see www.unesco.pwri.go.jp

Target (T)

Framework
Driving forces (D)

Targets (MDGs):
2015 reduce by 50%
– the proportion of the
population threatened
by water-related hazards
– the total losses in
economic values

Pressure (P)

Perspective
Indicators on water use and
pressures on water systems that
would trigger disasters as a result
of socio-economic conditions
(poverty, urbanization, etc.) and
human activities
Change in state as a result of
pressure

Indicators
■ Change in precipitation
■ Change in river peak
discharge

■ Increase in land cover by

urbanization
■ Increase of population in

flood-prone area
Impact (I)

Impact of the driving forces and
pressures on social and economic
state

■ Vulnerability of property
■ Casualties and affected

people
■ Inundated areas
■ Total economic loss

Response (R)

Response (measures) to address
changes in DPSIR

Source: Public Works Research Institute (PWRI) in Tsukuba (Japan) 2005.

■ Transition in allocated

budget (i.e. investment)
for flood risk mitigation

WWDR Chapter 10e (FF)

17/2/06

09:39

Page 357

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 5 7

Map 10.3: The Climate Variability Index (CVI) as applied to Peru at national and subnational scales

The CVI provides
a technique for
expressing
human
vulnerability in
relation to water
resources, both
for current
conditions and
for future
scenarios

Source: Sullivan and Meigh, 2005.

Figure 10.7: PWRI Risk Index: Case study basin in Japan, 1980–2000
Impact indicator (total economic loss)
Response (budget allocation)

Pressure indicator (urbanization)
Impact (total inundated area)

Driving force (precipitation)
Vulnerability of property to flood

1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.00
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Japan case study five years moving average.

Source: PWRI in Tsukuba (Japan), 2005.

Note: This graphic displays the
various indicators composing the
PWRI Risk Index. Each indicator
refers to a particular dimension of
public policies for flood
mitigation. The figure shows that
as a result of the chosen flood
policy, flooded areas were
decreasing significantly over the
period of observation, while on
the other hand, economic losses
were still rising and overall
vulnerability of people to floods
has not been decreased. This
type of information is valuable as
a basis for causal analysis of this
situation and the possible review
of the flood management policy.

3 5 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. From Frameworks to Policies
The design of a risk management framework is a prerequisite step to the successful development of risk
reduction policies.

4a. Risk management frameworks
Risk management frameworks are meant to address the
multiple goals of disaster risk reduction in a way that is
consistent with the planning of social and economic
development. Such frameworks also guide the design of a
sound legislation basis, a necessary step for ensuring
good governance of risk reduction activities.
Based on an extensive, global review of disaster risk
reduction initiatives, the ISDR Secretariat designed a
framework for disaster risk reduction, which provides a
design concept for the development of risk management
policies. The framework shows that treating interrelated
issues such as ‘knowledge development’, ‘political
commitment’ and ‘application of risk reduction measures’,
involves a wide range of public policy issues (see Figure
10.8 for details and Chapter 14).

21. Much of this section has
been adapted from Plate,
2002.

The elements presented in the ISDR framework also
advocate the development of a solid institutional
background for disaster risk reduction policies.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Table 10.5: Public policies with water-related risk components
Public policy
Development
planning
Land-use
planning
Water resources
management

Risk-related aspect or impact
■ Poverty reduction
■ Urban sprawl in flood-prone areas
■ Exposure of the most vulnerable groups
■ Upstream/downstream flow of water
■ Environmental flow management
■ Erosion and sedimentation
■ Concentration time of river basin
■ Relief response capacity
■ Warning and crisis communication

■ Awareness-raising campaigns
■ Learning self-protective behaviours
■ Academic research and staff training

Diplomacy

Disaster risk reduction policies also need to be consistent
with existing policies in other sectors that have risk-related
components (see Table 10.5 for details).

4c. Example of practice: Flood risk
management
Flood risk management21 includes the planning of natural,
technical or social systems, in order to reduce flood risk.
Risk management therefore involves the value system of a
given society, because it aims at balancing the desired
state of the environment and the demands placed on it,
while managing where trade-offs are best made.
Risk management actually takes place on three different
levels: the operational level (see Figure 10.10), which is
associated with the operation of existing systems; the
project planning level, which is used when a new project
or a revision of an existing project is planned (see Figure
10.11); and the project design level, which is embedded
into the second level and describes the process of
reaching an optimal solution for the project.

■ Emergency relief response capacity
■ Water-borne disease management

Education

The legal basis for risk reduction policies is critical for
transparent decision-making and allocating public funding for
disaster mitigation. Examples include legislation, land-use
planning regulations, building codes, inter-administration
cooperation and operation rules for reservoirs. In some cases,
the adoption of a new law on water-related disaster risk
reduction has been fostered by the occurrence of a disaster
or by a noticeable change in the natural environment. Under
these circumstances, a new law concerning countermeasures
against flood damages in urban areas was enacted in Japan
in June 2003 (see Figure 10.9 for details).

■ Social and economic activities

■ Drought warning and management

Agriculture and
forestry
Civil defence and
the military
Public health

4b. Risk management: A matter of
legislation and policy

■ Cooperation for water sharing
■ Exchange of data for forecast/warning
■ International basin management

Note: This table is indicative and should be adapted to the characteristics of regional, national and local
situations.

In the operation of an existing flood protection system,
risk management involves a series of actions including
the process of risk analysis, which provides the basis for
long-term management decisions for the flood protection
system. Continuous improvement of the system requires a
reassessment of the existing risks and an evaluation of
the hazards, making use of state-of-the-art data,
information and assessment tools.

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 5 9

Figure 10.8: Framework for disaster risk reduction

Sustainable development context
Socio-cultural

The focus of disaster risk reduction

AWARENESS RAISING
for change in behaviour

Political

RISK FACTORS
Vulnerability
· Social
· Economic
· Physical
· Environmental

POLITICAL
COMMITMENT
Vulnerability /
capability analysis

Hazards
· Geological
· Hydrometeorological
· Biological
· Technological
· Environmental

RISK IDENTIFICATION &
IMPACT ASSESSMENT

Hazard analysis
& monitoring

· International, regional,
national, local levels
· Institutional framework
(governance)
- policy development
- legislation and codes
- organizational
development
· Community actions

EARLY
WARNING
DISASTER
IMPACT

APPLICATION OF RISK
REDUCTION MEASURES

PREPAREDNESS

EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT
RECOVERY

Economic

Source: ISDR, 2004a.

· Environmental management
· Social and economic
development practices (including
poverty alleviation, livelihoods,
financial mechanisms, health,
agriculture, etc.)
· Physical and technical measures
- land-use/urban planning
- protection of critical facilities
· Networking and partnerships

Ecosystems / Environmental

KNOWLEDGE
DEVELOPMENT
Information
Education & training
Research

WWDR Chapter 10e (FF)

17/2/06

09:39

Page 360

3 6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...in some cases
the adoption of
a new law has
been fostered

The project planning aspect of risk management is
summarized in Figure 10.11. This figure basically
consists of two parts: risk assessment, which yields the
basis for decisions on which solution to use, and the

implementation phase, which involves a great deal of
activities ranging from the fundamental decision to
move forward to the studied complexity design and
construction.

Figure 10.9: Framework of the Designated Urban River Inundation Prevention Act (Japan, 2003)

by the
occurrence of
disaster

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Note: The central box in this
graphic figures the logical
connections existing between the
new law and the existing laws
(River, Flood Protection, Sewerage
and City Planning).

Source: Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport (MLIT), Japan. Graphic provided by PWRI Institute (Tsukuba, Japan).

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 6 1

Figure 10.10: Risk management at the operational level

Risk management
operation
Risk control

Risk
analysis
Hazarddetermination

Maintenance
improvement
Technical
measures

Vulnerability
analysis
Risk
determination

Non-techn.
measures

Preparedness

Planning
disaster
relief
Early warning
and
evacuation

Disaster
response
Emergency
help - rescue
Humanitarian
assistance
Reconstruction

Source: Plate, 2002.

Figure 10.11: Risk management at the project planning level

Above: The Indonesian coast, between Banda Aceh and
Meulaboh, after the earthquake and tsunami of 26
December 2004

Risk management
project planning

Below: Inundated houses during a flood in New
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, United States

Risk assessment

Risk
analysis
Hazarddetermination

Disaster
mitigation
Technical
measures

Vulnerability
analysis
Risk
determination

Non-techn.
measures

Preparedness

Planning
disaster
relief
Early warning
and
evacuation

Project
implementation
Construction
decision
Project
acceptance
Project
construction

Note: Although not appearing in this graphic, a ‘public participation’ dimension is needed at all levels. Involving
stakeholders in project planning is essential to the social ownership of the process.
Source: Plate, 2002.

Left: Floating market, Mekong Delta, Viet Nam

3 6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 5. Strategies for the Future
The future of disaster risk reduction depends heavily on the capacity of societies to cope with changes
in the nature of water-related hazards, and in the nature of social vulnerability. This section therefore
advocates flexibility in the design and implementation of disaster risk reduction policies and activities.
Floating market, Mekong
Delta, Viet Nam

5a. Climate variability and change:
Consequences for risk reduction
Climate variability and change are natural trends aggravated
by the emission of natural and man-made greenhouse
gases. The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
has noted that ‘regional changes in climate have already
affected hydrological systems and terrestrial and marine
ecosystems’, and that ‘the rising socio-economic costs
related to weather damage and to these regional variations
suggest increasing vulnerability to climate change’. This in
turn is projected to ‘increase threats to human health,
particularly among lower-income populations and within
tropical and subtropical countries’ (IPCC, 2001).22

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Inhabitants of small islands and low-lying coastal areas
are particularly at risk of severe social and economic
effects from rising sea-levels, storm surges and
tsunamis.23 There are also severe threats to the
freshwater resources on many of these islands, due
to climate variability and change.

22. For additional information,
IPCC, 2001; findings of the
World Water Agenda;
MunichRe Topics Geo Annual
Review 2003; 10 Year Review
process of Barbados Plan of
Action for SIDS, etc.
23. For more information on
tsunamis, visit
www.tsunamiwave.info
On the 2004 Indian Ocean
Tsunami Warning and
Mitigation System, visit
ioc3.unesco.org/indotsunami/
and see Chapter 1.
24. For details, see
www.unisdr.org/eng/riskreduction/climate-change/
rd-cch-infolink1-03eng.htm#n1

It is now widely recognized that climate change poses a
major threat to sustainable development. The extreme
vulnerability of certain societies to present and future
climate risks necessitates integrating climate change
issues in the planning of social and economic
development. As disaster reduction has been recognized
as a developmental issue, a convergence of interests to
better manage risks related to climate and disasters for
sustainable development is emerging. Box 10.5 provides
an example of climate change impacts and governmental
response in Uganda.

For instance, and in addition to limitations in forecasting
accuracy, climate variability and change are additional
sources of uncertainty for decision-makers and risk
managers, potentially reducing the effectiveness of risk
reduction measures. Limitations also include inaccurate
hazard mapping, biased land-use planning and inefficient
warning systems.
In addition to increased investments in natural and social
science research, a way to reduce uncertainty is to
improve the information exchange between the climate
and risk management communities. This is, for instance,
the aim of the Disaster Reduction and Climate Change
(DR+CC) Infolink, an initiative that stimulates linkages and
information exchanges between the disaster reduction
and climate change communities.24

5b. Advocating adaptive risk reduction
strategies
As explained above, the issue of climate variability
and change needs to be treated as a cross-cutting
issue related to governance issues including the
following topics:
■
■
■
■
■

Disaster risk reduction and uncertainty
Dealing with uncertainty in water-related risk management
is not a new topic. Both natural and social scientists, as
well as decision-makers, risk managers and water
managers, have been dealing with this issue for decades.
However, the challenge is to devise disaster risk reduction
policies and strategies that can be adapted to uncertain
changes in the environment, which are influencing both
natural processes (e.g. global warming) and social systems
(e.g. demographic pressure).

■

climate variability change: changing rainfall and hazard
patterns (frequency, magnitude, etc.)
land degradation: deforestation, erosion, sedimentation
in rivers, landslides
migration and demographic pressure, uncontrolled
urbanization
poverty: loss of livelihoods, financial capacity for
rehabilitation, illness, weakness, health
loss of knowledge: migration to hazard-prone areas,
lack of risk-related experience
governance: failing States, corruption, political
fragmentation, etc.

In a context of potentially increased uncertainty,
successful disaster risk reduction strategies need to be
adaptive, stressing, for instance, resilience to changes in
the recurrence periods and duration of floods and
droughts, in terms of exposure to water-related risks and
to changes in patterns of social vulnerability.

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 6 3

BOX 10.5: CLIMATE CHANGE AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS IN UGANDA
Climate in Uganda, particularly rainfall, has been

to sharp rises in lake levels, widespread flooding,

around the lake shores. In order to respond to

erratic since the early 1990s (see Chapter 14).

washing away of roads and bridges, extensive soil

these risks, the Government designed a National

The incidence, duration and amount of rainfall

erosion and landslides. In Lake Kyoga, rising water

Strategy for Disaster Preparedness and

have all exhibited abnormal departures from long-

levels caused the detachment of previously firmly

Management. This strategy aims at creating an

term means. While rainfall in some years was far

anchored floating papyrus swamps, which in turn

integrated and multi-sectoral strategy to address

short of long-term means, thereby causing

caused a near total blockage in the lake. The

these threats.

droughts, in other years it was excessive and

blockage caused a further rise in lake levels and

produced catastrophic floods. The heaviest rains

led to partial inundation of marginal homesteads

in recent years were recorded in 1994 and were

and farmlands, the spread of water-borne

associated with the El Niño phenomenon. This led

diseases and the disruption of economic activities

Source: Uganda National Water Development Report, 2004
from the World Water Assessment Programme, March 2005,
Personal Communication.

BOX 10.6: PROJECTED IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE RHINE RIVER BASIN
■

■

Water supply: Demand for irrigation water will

1,250 years, the design flood may increase by

increase, which may lead to critical supply

5 to 8 percent by the year 2050 in the lower

isothermal line in the Alps, an increased

conditions in summer months. Drinking water

stretch of the Rhine River.

frequency of mudflows and slope failures is

supply may be constrained during summer
months due to extreme low flows and
reduced aquifer recharge.

expected, which can cause dangerous flash
■

floods.

Low flows: More frequent low flows have
negative impacts on inland navigation, energy
supply and the ecology of wetlands along the

■

Natural disasters: Due to a shift of the 0°C

■

Winter tourism in the Alps: By the year 2020

Floods: Winter peak floods in alpine rivers will

Rhine River. Use of processed water for

the decrease of winter sport potential in the

increase, but major changes in the flood

industrial purposes and cooling water for

Swiss Alps will be dramatic. In addition, it is

condition of small catchments in the middle

thermal power plants will be constrained due

expected that cumulated losses in income

hill section of the Rhine are not anticipated

to low flows and limits on warming up the

generation from winter tourism will be in the

using the present distribution of precipitation

river water. Low flows have a direct impact on

range from 1.8 to 2.3 billion Swiss francs

patterns. In the main stem of the Rhine River,

the costs of shipping on the river.

(US $1.4 to 1.8 billion) by 2030–2050.

an increased risk of winter floods is
anticipated. Based on a design period of

All aspects of water-related risk management need to be
considered in an adaptive perspective:
■

■

Adaptive risk reduction can be achieved through a
society’s capacity to devise new legislation and revise
institutional integration accordingly. For instance, new
public and private partners can be introduced into the
National Platforms for disaster reduction.
A better response to changing conditions also requires
a more flexible decision-making process. This can be
the case for the chains of command and response from
the forecasting services down to civil defence agencies
and local instructions for the public. These objectives
clearly require improved access to and circulation of
information for decision-makers and other key players.

Source: Grabs, 1997.

■

A capacity to anticipate changes in risk and disaster
patterns requires a further development of risk-related
indicators to monitor environmental and social
changes.

...climate
variability and
change are

A scenario-based study of hydrological impacts of climate
change is also an important option for introducing
flexibility in risk reduction policies and actions. See Box
10.6 for an example on the Rhine River Basin.

additional

5c. Vulnerability assessment: An insight
into human security

decision-makers

Kofi Annan (2005) has recently stated that ‘Human
Security can no longer be understood in purely
military terms. Rather, it must encompass economic
development, social justice, environmental protection,

and risk

sources of
uncertainty for

managers...

3 6 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 10.7: COMMUNITY RISK ASSESSMENT BASED ON VULNERABILITY AND RESILIENCE
■

Contextual aspects: analysis of current and

immigrants and visitors, socially/physically

community structures and management,

predicted demographics, recent hazard

isolated, seriously ill, poorly sheltered

suitable physical and service infrastructures,
local plans and arrangements, financial and

events, economic conditions, political
■

Identifying basic social needs/values:

material resources reservation, shared

environmental conditions, access/distribution

sustaining life, physical and mental well-

community values/goals, environmental

of information and traditional knowledge,

being, safety and security, home/shelter, food

resilience

community involvement, organizations and

and water, sanitary facilities, social links,

management capacity, linkages with other

information, sustaining livelihoods,

regional/national bodies, critical

maintaining social values/ethics

structures and issues, geophysical location,

infrastructures and systems

Practical assessment methods: constructive
frameworks and data sources including local
experts, focus groups, census data, surveys

■
■

■

Increasing capacities/reducing vulnerability:

and questionnaires, outreach programmes,

Highly vulnerable social groups: infants,

positive economic and social trends, access to

historical records, maps, environmental

children, elderly, economically disadvantaged,

productive livelihoods, sound family and social

profiles.

intellectually, psychologically and physically

structures, good governance, established

disabled, single-parent families, new

regional/national networks, participatory

Source: ISDR, 2004a.

Figure 10.12: Pressure and Release (PAR) model in vulnerability analysis
Vulnerability analysis
The progression of vulnerability

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Root causes
Limited access to:
• power
• structures
• resources
Ideologies
• political systems
• economic systems

Note: ‘Hazards’ are the natural or
man-made physical processing
threatening social systems. In
some cases (e.g. land
degradation and landslides),
hazards, characteristics are
influenced by social practices.
Besides, vulnerability level differs
depending on social groups. For
instance, some of these have
been pushed to settle in
marginal, hazard-prone areas,
therefore increasing their
exposure to hazards

Dynamic pressures Unsafe conditions
Lack of:
local institutions
• training
• appropriate skills
• local investments
• local markets
• press freedom
• ethical standards
in public life
•

Macro-forces:
rapid urbanization
rapid population
growth
• debt repayment
schedules
• deforestation
• decline in soil
productivity
•

Fragile physical
environment
• dangerous
locations
• unprotected
buildings and
infrastructures
Fragile local
economy
• livelihoods at risk
• low income levels

Hazards
Earthquakes
High winds
(cyclone/hurricanes
/typhoons)
Flooding
Volcanic eruptions

Risk =
Hazard x vulnerability

Landslides
Droughts

•

Vulnerable society
• special groups
at risk
• lack of local
institutions
Public actions
• lack of disaster
preparedness
• prevalence of
endemic deseases

Source: Blaikie et al., 1994.

Disasters

Virus and pests
Technological

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 6 5

democratization, disarmament, and respect for human
rights and the rule of law’. Safeguarding human
security requires a new approach for a better
understanding of many interrelated social, political,
economic, technological and environmental variables.
These dimensions of human security are also key
factors that influence the severity of impact generated
by environmental deterioration and hydrometeorological
extreme events.
Vulnerability is recognized as a central concept of human
security and risk management. One definition of
vulnerability is ‘the conditions determined by physical,
social, economic, and environmental factors or processes,
which increase the susceptibility of a community to the
impact of hazards’ (ISDR, 2004a). In a wider perspective,
however, the definition and effective assessment of
vulnerability need to include more dynamic elements,
such as social processes of exposure and responses to
natural disasters.
Conceptual frameworks and models that provide a basis
for vulnerability analysis in relation to specific hazards

have been developed. These models link dynamic
processes at different scales and access to resources with
vulnerability conditions. The Pressure and Release (PAR)
model (see Figure 10.12) provides a good basis for the
analysis and further identification of specific vulnerable
conditions (Blaikie et al., 1994).
The basis for the PAR model is that a disaster is at the
intersection of two opposing forces (Wisner et al.,
1994): those processes generating vulnerability on one
side, and the natural hazard event (or sometimes a
slowly unfolding natural process) on the other.
In a risk management framework, vulnerability is also
treated as a matter of scale, because individual vulnerability
can be very different from vulnerability at the scale of
communities (see Box 10.7), municipalities, regions or
nations. Likewise, vulnerability is goal-specific as it involves
activities such as knowledge management, awareness
raising, risk perception, warning systems and communication
mechanisms. Both features advocate for a strong
community-based approach when designing, implementing
and assessing disaster risk reduction strategies.

New Orleans residents
walking through flood
water in search of
gasoline after the passing
of hurricane Katrina in
August 2005

Part 6. The Way Forward
The six key messages identified at the beginning of the chapter are specifically aimed at decisionmakers, risk managers and water managers. The importance of establishing an integrated risk
management policy has been stressed throughout the chapter, with the need to seek a sturdy
framework from which implementation plans can stem. The World Conference on Disaster Reduction
organized by UN/ISDR in Kobe, Japan, in January 2005 was of particular importance in providing a venue
for reviewing disaster risk reduction strategy and its primary output, the Hyogo Framework for Action,
proposes building a new strategy for the next ten years.

6a. The Hyogo Framework for Action
2005–15

■

The World Conference on Disaster Reduction (WCDR), held
in January 2005 in Kobe, Japan, provided essential
recommendations to decision-makers and risk managers.
Although it dealt with all kinds of natural hazards, its
framework provides very relevant guidance for waterrelated disaster risk reduction.

■

National delegates to the WCDR and international
organizations both agreed on the following key challenge
areas for developing a relevant framework for action for
the International Decade ‘Water for Life’ 2005–15 (ISDR,
2005):

■
■
■

governance: organizational, legal and policy
frameworks; public participation
risk identification, assessment, monitoring and early
warning
knowledge management and education
reducing underlying risk factors
preparedness for effective response and recovery.

WCDR participants also recognized the need to
enhance international and regional cooperation, as
well as assistance in the field of disaster risk reduction,
by the following means for advanced international
and regional cooperation in disaster risk reduction
(ISDR, 2005):

The Indonesian coast,
between Banda Aceh and
Meulaboh, after the
earthquake and tsunami
of 26 December 2004

25. Revised Version Oct 2005.

3 6 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 10.8: HIGHLIGHTS OF THE HYOGO FRAMEWORK FOR ACTION 2005–2015
■

■

Ensure that the reduction of disaster risk from

building, regional and emerging risks.

hydrometeorological events is a national and a

Improve regional and international

environmental and natural resources

local priority. An IWRM approach is needed,

cooperation for hazard assessment and

management; social and economic

together with a strong institutional basis for

data sharing.

development practices, water resources

implementation: national institutional and
legislative frameworks, resources, community
participation.

management and development, land-use
■

to build a culture of safety and resilience

Identify, assess and monitor hydro-

exchange, education and training, research,

meteorological disaster risk and enhance

public awareness. Foster applied research

early warning: national and local risk

in technical and social aspects of hydro-

assessments, early warning systems, capacity

meteorological hazards, risks and disasters.

■
■
■

■

■
■
Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

planning and other technical measures.

Use knowledge, innovation and education
at all levels: information management and

■

Reduce the underlying risk factors:

transfer of knowledge, technology and expertise to
enhance capacity building for disaster risk reduction
sharing of research findings, lessons learned and best
practices
compilation of information on disaster risk and impact
at all scales in a way that can inform sustainable
development and disaster risk reduction
appropriate support to enhance governance for disaster
risk reduction, for awareness-raising initiatives and for
capacity-development measures at all levels in order to
improve the disaster resilience of developing countries
consideration of the impact of disasters on the debt
sustainability of heavily indebted countries
financial assistance to reduce existing risks and avoid
the generation of new risks.

The Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015 sets a useful
road map for the design of improved risk management
frameworks and implementation plans. Finally, and in view
of the practical implementation of the recommendations
made above, WCDR identified key actions to improve
disaster risk reduction. See Box 10.8 for details, from a
water-related disaster perspective.

■

Strengthen disaster preparedness for effective
response at all levels.

Source: ISDR, 2005.

as well as in indicator development. Indicators are
essential to identifying and monitoring underlying trends
in disasters, hazards, vulnerability and risk.
It is necessary that risk-related knowledge be made
available to decision-makers, risk managers and water
managers. Access to information is vital for the design of
comprehensive risk management frameworks. Integrated
policies for risk reduction need a sound governance
framework, which includes a good legislation basis and
efficient cooperation among the various administrations
and institutions involved.
Disaster risk reduction is a key component of IWRM and
sustainable development. Consequently, disaster risk
reduction objectives need to be integrated into social and
economic development planning. Moreover, risk reduction
policies need to be consistent with other risk-oriented
policies of different organizational entities such as
different ministries or line departments and agencies. Risk
assessment is therefore an important step on the route to
sustainable development. At the local level, the
involvement of stakeholders in the design, implementation
and assessment of policies must be ensured.

6b. Conclusions
The future of living with water-related risks lies in the
capability of societies to anticipate and adapt to changes
occurring in their natural and social environment.
Improved management of risk-related knowledge and
information is therefore a first and necessary step in that
direction. There is a need to support further investment
in data collection and analysis and modelling capacities,

Global processes, such as climate variability and change,
increase the level of uncertainty for both water-related
physical processes and the social processes of exposure to
hazards, vulnerability and adaptation to change. Again,
theoretical and applied research in the natural and social
sciences needs to receive additional financial support with
the purpose of improving our understanding of the physical

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 6 7

and social processes leading to increased vulnerability.
Climate variability and change is a strong incentive for
advocating more adaptive policies for disaster risk reduction.
The main points raised in this chapter also show explicit
links to challenge areas – and related chapters – of the
World Water Development Report:
First, the need to incorporate disaster risk planning into
national policies for socio-economic development
confirms the governance dimension of risk management
(see Chapter 2). This dimension is itself related to
vulnerability assessment for human settlements – in
particular when it comes to marginal communities and
smaller social groups.
Second, managing the aftermath of water-related disasters
requires continued investment in epidemiology and public
health, as well as in water and sanitation development
(see Chapter 6). Providing these resources to water
users should however integrate features of the water
cycle. These include: ecosystem functions, pollution and
consequences of climate variability and change (see
Chapters 4 and 5). In particular, managing risks cannot

be separated from food security issues, such as livelihood
functions of riverine environments (see Chapter 7).

Access to
information is

Third, controversies related to water resources
development such as hydropower, show that the
management of water-related risks is related to the
broader debate on energy security, policies and technical
choices (see Chapters 8 and 9). This dimension is
particularly acute on transboundary river basins, where
risk management very much depends on the institutional
choices made for sharing water resources and conflict
avoidance (see Chapter 11).

vital for the
design of
comprehensive
risk
management
frameworks

These various, interrelated dimensions of risk
management all point to the common issue of knowledge
management. Despite an increasing volume of
environmental data produced worldwide, technologies for
analysing water-related information remain insufficient –
especially in developing countries, where information
exchange remains very low. One of the key challenges
related to risk management is the adequate sharing of
water-related data and information, both within and
among countries.

3 6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

References and Websites
Affeltranger, B. 2004. Flood forecasting on the Mekong: The

www.unisdr.org/eng/about_isdr/bd-yokohama-strateng.htm

Scientific Assessment of Climate Change, Summary for

Canadian Consortium for Asia-Pacific Security Studies,

Policymakers, Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report of

9–12 December 2004, Quebec, Canada.

the IPCC Third Assessment Report. XVIII Session of the

Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development.

IPCC, Wembley, United Kingdom, 24–29 September 2001.

New York, UNDP/BCPR Bureau for Crisis Prevention and

———. 2002. User-based design of efficient flood warnings.
Proceedings of the International Workshop on Flood

ISDR (International Strategy for Disaster Reduction). 2005.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004.

Recovery. www.undp.org/bcpr/disred/rdr.htm
UNDP-BCPR (United Nations Development Programme –

Forecasting and Early Warning Systems (FFEWS), Mekong

Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–2015, Building the

River Commission Secretariat, Phnom Penh, Cambodia,

Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters,

Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery). 2004.

February–March 2002.

Advance Copy www.unisdr.org/wcdr/

Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development.

Affeltranger, B. and Lictevout, E. 2005 (in press). Communitybased development of flood warning systems in Cambodia.
F. Lasserre and A. Brun (eds) Local Level Management of

———. 2004a. Living With Risk: A Global Review of Disaster
Reduction Initiatives. 2nd edn. Geneva, UN-ISDR.
———. 2004b. Second World Conference on Disaster Reduction,

Water Resources: Principles and Challenges. Quebec,

January 2005, Kobe, Japan, First Announcement Flyer, 20

Canada, Presses Université du Québec.

February 2004, Geneva, UN-ISDR.

Annan, K. 2005. Towards a culture of peace: Letters to future

———. 2003. Drought, Living With Risk: An Integrated Approach

generations. www.unesco.org/opi2/lettres/TextAnglais/

to Reducing Social Vulnerability to Drought. Report of the

AnnanE.html

Ad Hoc Discussion Group, April 2003, Geneva, ISDR.

APFM (Associated Programme on Flood Management). 2003.
Integrated Flood Management (IFM) Concept Paper.
WMO-GWP APFM, Geneva, WMO. www.apfm.info/
Blaikie, P., Wisner, B., Cannon, T. and Davis, I. 1994. At Risk:
Natural Hazards, People’s Vulnerability and Disasters,
2nd edn. London, Routledge.
Brouwer, van Ek, Boeters and Bouma. 2001. Living with floods: An

———. 2001. Living With Risk: A Global Review of Disaster
Reduction Initiatives. 1st edn. Geneva, UN-ISDR.
McDaniels, T. L., Gregory, R. S. and Fields, D. 1999.
Democratizing risk management: Successful public
involvement in local water management decisions. Risk
Analysis, Vol. 19, No. 3.
Merabtene, T. and Yoshitani, J., 2005. Technical Report on

integrated assessment of land use changes and floodplain

Global Trends of Water-related Disasters. PWRI Technical

restoration as alternative flood protection measures in the

Memorandum, ISSN 0386-5878, No 3985, pp. 124. Also

Netherlands. CSERGE Working Paper ECM 01–06.
www.uea.ac.uk/env/cserge/pub/wp/ecm/ecm_2001_06.pdf
Burton, I., Kates, R. W. and White, G. F. 1993. The
Environment as Hazard, 2nd edn. New York/London,
Guilford Press.
DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs,
UK). 2003. Wetlands, land use change and flood
Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2001.

politics of hydrological data. Paper presented at the

available online at unesco.pwri.go.jp
Parker, D. J. 2004. Designing flood forecasting, warning and

Development Report: Water for People, Water for Life.
Paris/Oxford, UNESCO, Berghahn Books.
Vari, A. 2004. Hungarian experiences with public participation
in water management. Water International, Vol. 29, No.
3, pp. 329–37.
Viljoen, M. F., du Plessis, L. A. and Booysen, H. J. 2001.
Extending flood damage assessment methodology to
include sociological and environmental dimensions. Water
SA, Vol. 27, No. 4, Oct. 2001, pp. 517–21.
WCDR (World Conference on Disaster Reduction). 2005. Hyogo
Framework for Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience
of Nations and Communities to Disasters, Extract from the
final report of the WCDR (A/CONF.206/6).
WHO (World Health Organization). 1989. Le personnel local
de santé et la communauté face aux catastrophes
naturelles [Local health personnel and the community
faced with natural catastrophes]. Technical Guide with the

Meteorologische Zeitschrift, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 5–11.

International Federation of Red Cross/Red Crescent,

Plate, E. J. 2002. Flood risk and flood management. Journal of
Hydrology, Vol. 267, pp. 2–11.
Sullivan, C. A. and Meigh, J. R. 2005. Targeting attention on
local vulnerabilities using an integrated index approach:

fcd/policy/wetlands/Wetlands3.pdf.

The example of the Climate Vulnerability Index. Water

Oxford University Press.

Programme). 2003. The United Nations World Water

response systems from a societal perspective.

management, Joint statement, www.defra.gov.uk/environ/
Dercon, S. (ed.) 2004. Insurance Against Poverty. Oxford,

New York, UNDP-BCPR. www.undp.org/bcpr/disred/rdr.htm
UN-WWAP (United Nations – World Water Assessment

Sciences and Technology, (Special Issue on Climate
Change) Vol. 51, No. 5, pp. 69–78.

Geneva, World Health Organization.
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2005. Climate,
water and disasters: A call for a millennium development
target, Keynote Address, CSD-13 Side Event, 14 April
2005, New York.
———. 2004. Practices, approaches and methods in risk
management related to flooding and climate variability.

Sullivan, C. A., Meigh, J. R. and Acreman, M. C. 2002. Scoping

Web-based study, Contribution to the Project on Risk

Katastrophenmanagement. 5th edn. Bonn, German

study on the identification of hot spots: Areas of high

Management, WMO Commission for Hydrology (CHy),

IDNDR-Committee.

vulnerability to climatic variability and change identified

Eikenberg, Chr. 1998. Journalistenhandbuch zum

Frijters and Leentvaar. 2001. Participatory planning for flood

using a Climate Vulnerability Index. Report to the

management in the Netherlands. www.unescap.org/

Dialogue on Water and Climate, Centre for Ecology and

esd/water/disaster/2001/netherlands.doc

Hydrology, Wallingford, UK.

Grabs, W. (ed.) 1997. Impact of climate change on

UN/GA (United Nations General Assembly). 1994. Yokohama

hydrological regimes and water resources management in

Strategy and Plan of Action, International Decade for

the Rhine basin. CHR Report No. I-16, Lelystad.

Natural Disaster Reduction.

August 2004, Geneva, WMO.
———. 1999. Comprehensive Risk Assessment for Natural
Hazards. WMO/TD No. 955, Geneva.

MANAG ING RISKS: SECU RING THE GAINS O F D EV ELO PM ENT . 3 6 9

UN Agencies
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UN-ISDR): www.unisdr.org/
UNESCO Intergovernmental Oceanagraphic Commission (IOC): ioc.unesco.org
United Nations Development Programme, Disaster Reduction Unit, Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery (UNDP-DRU-BCPR): www.undp.org/bcpr/disred/rdr.htm
United Nations Environment Programme, Division of Early Warning and Assessment, Global
Resource Information Database (UNEP-DEWA-GRID): www.grid.unep.ch/
United Nations University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS):
www.ehs.unu.edu/
World Meteorological Organisation (WMO): www.wmo.ch/index-en.html

International NGOs
Action Against Hunger (AAH): www.actionagainsthunger.org/
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC): /www.ifrc.org/

Research Centres & Universities
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (UK): www.ceh.ac.uk/
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED, Belgium): www.cred.be/
Flood Hazard Research Center (FHRC, UK): www.fhrc.mdx.ac.uk/
Natural Hazards Center (USA): www.colorado.edu/hazards/
Public Works Research Institute (Japan): www.pwri.go.jp/eindex.htm

Other Organizations
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center (ADPC, Thailand): www.adpc.net/
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA, USA): www.noaa.gov/

Water is not a commercial product like any other, but
rather a heritage that must be protected, defended and
treated as such.
European Commission Water Framework Directive

Part 1. Towards Integration and
Cooperation .......................................................373

Part 3. Preventing, Managing and Resolving
Shared Water Conflicts ................................385

1a. Setting the context............................................373
Map 11.1: Transboundary aquifers of the Americas
Table 11.1: Transboundary aquifers of the Americas
1b. The emerging water use paradigm...............376
1c. The challenges to sharing water........................377
Box 11.1: Shared aquifers between Argentina,
Bolivia and Paraguay

3a. The search for relevant indicators in water
sharing...............................................................386
Box 11.4: Traditional approaches to wise water
sharing
3b. Capacity-building and institutional
mobilization.......................................................388
Box 11.5: Major initiatives in building institutional
capacity timeline
3c. Mechanisms for cooperation and crisis
avoidance ..........................................................388
Table 11.4: Timeline of selected international
conferences
Map 11.2: National water footprints around the
world, 2004
3d. Contentious water sharing and environmental
security..............................................................390
Map 11.3: Water savings around the world
Box 11.6: Virtual water and the water footprint
Map 11.4: Net virtual water imports around the
world

Part 2. Water and Geopolitics .........................379
2a. Trends in geopolitical developments ..................379
2b. The case of aquifer systems ..............................381
Box 11.2: Cauvery River dispute in Southern India
Table 11.2: Timeline of geopolitical developments:
Interstate water-related conflicts and cooperation
since 2002
2c. Water regimes and hydrodiplomacy ...................381
2d. Water sharing and the public good ...................382
Table 11.3: The right to water timeline
2e. Institutions, procedures and regulatory
principles ...........................................................383
Box 11.3: Transboundary aquifers on the agenda
of the International Law Commission

Part 4. The Dynamics of Cooperation ..........394
References and Websites ..................................397

Geothermal power plant with bathers enjoying
geothermally-heated water, Blue Lagoon, Iceland

11
CHAPTER 11

Sharing Water

By

UNESCO
(United Nations
Educational,
Scientific and Cultural
Organization)

3 7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
The emerging water culture is about sharing water: integrated water resources managements (IWRM) looks for a more
effective and equitable management of the resource through increased cooperation. Bringing together institutions
leading with surface water and aquifer resources, calling for new legislative agreements all over the world, increasing
public participation and exploring alternative dispute resolutions are all part of the process.
■

Sharing water resources constitutes a major part of
integrated water resources management (IWRM).

■

There is a need to further expand special indicators for
measuring efficient, effective and equitable water
sharing.

■

Increasing complexity and interdependence regionally,
nationally and internationally requires new approaches
to shared water systems.

■

There is a need for developing new knowledge and
new capabilities in order to understand aquifers and
the difficulties of underground boundaries that are
difficult to define.

■

There is a need to concentrate on the implementation
of mechanisms for conflict avoidance and conflict
management.

Above: A man-made
entrance to an
underground aquifer in
Quintana Roo, Mexico
Right: Itaipu dam and
hydro-electricity power
station on the river
Parana, Brazil / Paraguay

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Below: Tea plantation in
Kerala, India

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 7 3

Part 1. Towards Integration and Cooperation
The comprehensiveness of water resource planning and sharing has been the subject of much
controversy and debate. It has been widely recognized that in order to maximize the benefits from any
water resource project, a more systematic analysis of the broader environment is needed. In addition to
a broadening of traditional management approaches, there needs to be increased sensitivity to decisionmaking that involves multi-purpose actions and multi-user considerations.
A proposed framework for sharing water would mean
taking the following issues into account:
■
■
■
■
■

natural conditions (e.g. aridity and global changes)
variety of uses (irrigation, hydropower, flood control,
municipal uses, water quality, effluent control, etc.)
various sources of supply (surface water, groundwater
and mixed sources)
upstream/downstream considerations
socio-demographic conditions (population composition
and growth, urbanization, industrialization, etc.).

The mismatch between political boundaries and natural
river basins has become a focal point for the difficulties
of joint planning, allocation of costs and benefits, advantages of scale and other integrated water management
issues and is usually referred to as transboundary (the
terms transnational, trans-state and international have
also been used), which refers to any water system that
transcends administrative or political boundaries, which
often do not coincide with river basins’ or watersheds’
natural boundaries (see Chapter 4).
The time lag between the implementation and impact
of management decisions – sometimes measured in
decades – significantly reduces the power of
contemporary water resource institutions. Efforts to
implement more integrated shared water resources
management are confronted with continuous changes in
values, structural transformations in society and
environment, as well as climatic anomalies and other
exogenous shifts. These transformations have created a
context of complexity, turbulence and vulnerability. The
emerging water sharing paradigm attempts to bring
together the above concerns with cross-cutting
sustainability criteria, such as social equity, economic
efficiency and environmental integrity.
Access to adequate water is becoming a highly contested
issue, which is further complicated by traditional values

and customs, cultural and religious considerations,
historical factors and geographical variations. As for
sharing the resources of an aquifer system, in which
upstream-downstream relationships do not apply, current
thinking is moving away from ‘equitable utilization’, a
remarkably vague notion, given the predominance of slow
responding storage overflows, towards ensuring the
sound functioning and integrity of the aquifer system.1

1a. Setting the context
Sharing water is essential to meeting the goals of equity,
efficiency and environmental integrity and answering the
more complex questions that stem from broader
challenges, such as the issue of overall security. Water
sharing mechanisms (i.e. new institutional arrangements)
help us adapt to these challenges through structural
changes (specific organizations, joint engineering
structures, etc.) and more resilient political institutions.
In 2002, UNESCO and the Organization of American
States (OAS) launched the International Shared Aquifer
Resource Management (ISARM) project for the Americas,
which organized three workshops, in 2003, 2004 and
2005, to present the data gathered on transboundary
groundwater in North, Central and South America and
highlight the need to follow up on this cooperative project.
The UNESCO-IHP ISARM project initiated transboundary
aquifer resources inventories, covering the Americas
(sixty-five aquifers; see Map 11.1 and Table 11.1) and
Africa (thirty-eight aquifers) as well as a recent update
including the Balkan countries (forty-seven aquifers) and
plans to extend coverage to Asia and the Pacific.2
Table 11.1 provides detailed information on shared
aquifers located in Central and South America. To date, the
UNESCO-ISARM project has inventoried over 150 shared
aquifer systems with boundaries that do not correspond to
those of surface basins. Progress in the consolidation of
these newly created inventories has resulted in
unprecedented development in global transboundary
aquifer resources assessment.

Efforts to
implement more
integrated
shared water
resources
management are
confronted with
continuous
changes in
values

1. The integrity of an aquifer can
be destroyed if, for example,
saline intrusion invades to
such an extent that the
aquifer system ceases
functioning and cannot be
effectively rejuvenated.
2. A publication on the
achievements of the project is
under preparation. Maps for
these regions can be found on
the CD-ROM accompanying
the book and at
www.unesco.org/water/wwap

3 7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The depletion of

Map 11.1: Transboundary aquifers of the Americas (in progress)

national water
resources,
recurring
droughts and
expanding
socio-economic
demands have
all fuelled
confrontations
and forced
international
exchanges and

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

cooperation

Source: UNESCO-OAS ISARM. 2005.

Underlying such broad considerations are apprehensions
about the prospects for achieving the necessary
cooperation for managing shared water systems, owing,
for example, to persistent national sovereignty demands
and further political fragmentation in many regions,
despite cooperative efforts (see Chapter 2). Upstream
states and regions lack incentives to enter into conflict
resolution negotiations and other cooperative mechanisms
driven by principles of comprehensive sustainable river
development.

The geopolitical nature of water – a function of both
geography and technology – produces different and
complex cultural, historical and ecological adaptations, as
well as varying power to use resources. The depletion of
national water resources, recurring droughts and
expanding socio-economic demands have all fuelled
confrontations and forced international exchanges and
cooperation. (This has generally been the case for surface
waters, which are more visible, though attention is now
also turning to transboundary aquifers.) There are more

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 7 5

Table 11.1: Transboundary aquifers of the Americas (in progress)
Map

Ref.

Transboundary
aquifers

Countries

Country
number

NORTH AMERICA

Map

Transboundary
aquifers

Countries

5

Litoral - Sistema Acuífero
en Areniscas Cretácicas

Argentina-Uruguay

2
2

Ref.

Country
number

52

Tijuana

Mexico-United States

2

53

Valle de Mexicali

Mexico-United States

2

6

Probable

Argentina-Chile

54

Valle San Luis Rio Colorado (Yuma)

Mexico-United States

2

7

El Condor

Argentina-Chile

2

8

Caiua

Argentina-Brazil-Paraguay

3

9

Serra Geral; Serra
Geral-Arapey

Argentina-Brazil-Paraguay-Uruguay 4

Ignimbritas Cordillera

Bolivia-Peru

55

Rio Santa Cruz

Mexico-United States

2

56

Nogales

Mexico-United States

2

57

Rio San Pedro

Mexico-United States

2

58

Conejos - Medanos

Mexico-United States

2

59

Bolson (Valle de Juarez)

Mexico-United States

2

11

Solimoes

Bolivia-Brazil-Colombia-Ecuador-Peru 5

60

Cambrian - Ordovician

Canada-United States

2

12

Jaci Parana y Parecis

Bolivia-Brazil

2

13

Pantanal

Bolivia-Brazil-Paraguay

3

CENTRAL AMERICA

14

Permianos

Brazil-Uruguay

2

36

Sixaola

Costa Rica-Panama

2

15

Ica

Brazil-Colombia

2

37

Coto

Costa Rica-Panama

2

16

Sedimentos Paleo-Proterozoicos Brazil-Guyana-Venezuela

2

17

Serra do Tucano

Brazil-Guyana

2

Boa Vista

Brazil-Guyana

2

38

Hondo San Pedro

Guatemala-Mexico

10

2

Occidental

3

39

San Pedro

Guatemala-Mexico

2

18

40

Usamancita

Guatemala-Mexico

2

19

Sem Denominacao

Brazil-Surinam

2

41

Chixoy - Xaclbal

Guatemala-Mexico

2

20

Costeiro

Brazil-Guyana (F)

2

42

Selegua - Cuilco

Guatemala-Mexico

2

21

Furnas e Altos Gracas

Brazil-Paraguay

2

43

Coatan - Suchiate

Guatemala-Mexico

2

22

Zarumilla - Machala

Ecuador-Peru

2

44

Bajo Suchiate

Guatemala-Mexico

2

23

Concordia - Caplina

Chile-Peru

2

45

Cuenca La Paz
(Ahuachapan-Las Chinamas)

El Salvador-Guatemala

2

24

Ascotan - Silala - Ollague

Bolivia-Chile

2

25

Puna

Argentina-Chile

2

46

Alto-Paz - Ostua/Metapan

El Salvador-Guatemala

2

26

Tulcan

Colombia-Ecuador

2

47

Motagua Norte

Guatemala-Honduras

2

27

Brazil-Paraguay

2

48

Motagua Sur

Guatemala-Honduras

2

Coronel Oviedo Basamento
Cristalino

61

Olopa

Guatemala-Honduras

2

28

Agua Dulce Palmar de las Islas

Bolivia-Paraguay

2

62

Rio Negro

Honduras-Nicaragua

2

29

Titicaca

Bolivia-Peru

2
2

30

Arauca

Colombia-Venezuela

CARIBBEAN

31

Guajira

Colombia-Venezuela

2

49

Artibonito

Haiti-Republica Dominicana

2

32

San Antonio Urena Santander

Colombia-Venezuela

2

50

Masacre

Haiti-Republica Dominicana

2

33

Sedimentos Grupo Roraima

Brazil-Venezuela

2

2

34

Zanderji; Coesewijne; A-sand

Guyana-Surinam

2

35

Jurado

Colombia-Panamá

2

63

Rio Negro-Itapucumi

Bolivia-Paraguay

2

Argentina-Brazil-Paraguay-Uruguay 4

64

Tumbes - Puyango

Ecuador-Peru

2

65

Chira - Catamayo

Ecuador-Peru

2

51

Pedernales

Haiti-Republica Dominicana

SOUTH AMERICA
1

Guarani

2

Yrenda-Toba -Tarijeno

Argentina-Bolivia-Paraguay

3

3

Salto Chico - Salto Chico

Argentina-Uruguay

2

4

Litoraneo-Chuy

Brazil-Uruguay

2

Source: UNESCO-OAS ISARM. 2005.

3 7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

On an
international
scale, sharing
and cooperative
efforts can
provide benefits
that far exceed
those that
attempt to
maximize
individual and
national selfinterests...

than 3,800 unilateral, bilateral or multilateral declarations
or conventions on water: 286 are treaties, with 61
referring to over 200 international river basins.3 Such
agreements, which serve to emphasize the importance of
cooperation in many shared water settings, are expected
to expand in the future. A new impetus to adopt
transboundary aquifer agreements could also arise from
the anticipated publication of the United Nations (UN)
International Law Commission’s (ILC) draft Convention on
transboundary aquifers (see Box 11.3).
Vulnerability is increasingly discussed in the literature of
environmental change, where it is associated with the
shift in environmental studies from impact analysis to crisis
assessment and vulnerability evaluation. Such assessment
steps reflect the large number of variables involved;
cumulative, interactive, synergistic and unexpected
consequences, as well as multiple sources of threats.
Moreover, vulnerability has been tied (especially in
transboundary water systems) to security in all its forms –
from food security, economic security and political
security, all the way down to individual security. This
dynamic evolution also coincides with the evolution from
simple linear models to more complex non-linear feedback
approaches. When combined with volatility and greater
resilience to risks, the powerful new theme of expanding
the timeframe of analysis and assessment emerges.

1b. The emerging water use paradigm

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Traditional reactive crisis approaches were replaced by
risk assessment and other proactive strategies at the
beginning of the twenty-first century. These new
approaches call for anticipatory action and multistakeholder involvement. Rapid socio-economic changes,
socio-political upheavals and the transitions witnessed
during the turbulent decades of the 1980s and 1990s
underscored the need for a greater emphasis on environmental challenges – from the search for sustainable
development and the promotion of integrated planning
and governance to the attempt to combine structural and
non-structural solutions to persistent water resources
problems and transnational interdependencies.

3. For more information, see
Wolf et al., 2003 and
www.unesco.org/water/wwap/
pccp/

In this setting of increasing complexity, interdependence
and vulnerability, there is an urgent need for
intergovernmental integration of the following issues:
■

hydrological interdependencies: in terms of both uses
(agricultural, urban, industrial and recreational) and
water regimes (surface water and groundwater, quality
and quantity)

■

political interdependencies: both in terms of horizontal
coordination in space and vertical cooperation between
levels of government units

■

transboundary interdependencies: representing both
social and hydrological trans-state interdependencies

■

exogenous interdependencies: the most notable of
which are the potentially dramatic impacts and
consequences of climatic change.

It is important to recognize water as a catalyst for
cooperation; regions with shared international waters are
often subject to water-related controversies. When
coupled with reasonable and equitable utilization of the
resource, cooperative efforts allow for more effective
approaches to allocating and sharing water. However,
cooperation is not simply an abstract term for peaceful
coexistence, but also an important mechanism for
managing natural resources by addressing the underlying
historical, political, economic and cultural causes of
water-stressed environments. It emphasizes the need for
combining technological capabilities with political will and
is an important part of international agreements,
proclamations at water conferences and in millennial
declarations, future scenarios and goal-oriented planning
efforts, as well as in environmental law, conventions and
regulatory provisions. On an international scale,
cooperative efforts can provide benefits that far exceed
those that attempt to maximize individual and national
self-interests (Sadoff and Grey, 2002).
Since complexity, interdependence and rapidly changing
socio-economic conditions each increase the likelihood
of water conflict, we are faced with considering more
complex models for understanding cooperation and
contestation. Looking beyond the environmental debates
and differing perspectives (optimism/pessimism, society/
individualism, market/common good, etc.), we can see
the broad outlines of a newly emerging paradigm for
sharing water. This new paradigm emphasizes integrated

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 7 7

management, the duty to cooperate, equitable utilization,
sustainable use, minimization of harm and true cost, in
addition to public participation (EC, 2005).
This new water culture paradigm recognizes the intergenerational, inter-spatial and inter-species
differentiations in allocating water resources. We must
work towards setting up protocols for environmental
protection, regulatory reform and sustainable use, such as
the National Environmental Policy Act in the United States
(US) and the Water Framework Directive (WFD) in the
European Union (EU) (see Chapter 14), which can lead to
more detailed practices, such as treaties and bilateral
agreements, which, in turn, prescribe implementable
action and monitoring performance mechanisms. Also
needed is the allocation of finances to support the
transaction costs of transforming contemporary
institutions.
Many international conferences and other fora, including
the UN’s Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater
Resources of the World (Kjellén and McGranahan, 1997),4
have warned that we must fundamentally alter the way
we think about and manage water. They have also made
it clear that we must embrace new policies that are not
only comprehensive, participatory and anticipatory, but
also environmentally sound. Sound shared water
management should promote intergovernmental dialogue
and address long-term goals and objectives.
This shifting emphasis in water sharing has led to greater
attention to cooperation rather than conflict, the latter
including conflict prevention, management and resolution.
Equally important is the emphasis on intra-state
approaches, which address competing and conflicting
uses of water through the concept of subsidiarity, or
relegating responsibility to the lowest appropriate level of
governance and decision-making. Other complementary
approaches reinforce the need for capacity-building, the
creation of an enabling environment and the mobilization
of finances, as well as citizen participation. However,
despite these positive trends, there remain many
challenges to sharing water.

1c. The challenges to sharing water
Water resources are unequally distributed, and water
scarcity and abundance are further affected by political
changes, mismanagement and climatic anomalies. These
create massive upheavals, demographic transformations
and uneven development efforts, all of which, in turn,
contribute to significant socio-economic differentiations.
Ecological degradation and political instability can
produce conflict or be catalysts for cooperation. At the
same time, competition for water is also manifested in
the demands between different uses – urban versus rural,
present uses versus future demands, competing regions,
water quantity versus water quality and water concerns
versus other social priorities. Past research has stressed
the following types of conflicts:
■

direct (competing and conflicting demands)

■

indirect (migration, environmental refugees or seasonal
high peak demands from tourism)

■

structural sources that emphasize a broader socioeconomic context, such as limited institutional and
social capacity, fragmented authority, transboundary
interdependencies, insufficient public participation, etc.

...we must
embrace new
policies that are
not only
comprehensive,
participatory
and anticipatory,
but also
environmentally
sound

The above list supports the observation that more
emphasis has been placed on conflict, with less
importance given to efforts towards the peaceful sharing
of water and long-term cooperation.
Geography suggests that – by virtue of physical unity and
regardless of political divisions – a river basin should be
developed and managed as an indivisible whole. Moving
water ties land together, and interference with its
movement has repercussions elsewhere in the basin. While
geographic ties prescribe the unitary development of river
basins and aquifer systems, politics, culture and history
distort this process. The nation state covets its sovereignty
and attempts to maximize benefits for itself. However, this
state-central behaviour can generate international friction
and even lead to conflict. We are, therefore, faced with a
situation in which states confronted with limited choices
tend to adopt a non-cooperative stance. But an increasing
amount of literature argues that conflict is not the
inevitable result of scarcity (Carius et al., 2004). A number
of variables, such as cultural traditions, the degree of
social cleavages, the nature of institutions and ideologies
about or perceptions of the environment, can lessen the
possibility of conflict due to water scarcity.

4. See also Guerquin et al., 2003;
Cosgrove and Rijsberman,
2000; 3rd World Water Forum,
2003.

3 7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 11.1: SHARED AQUIFERS BETWEEN ARGENTINA, BOLIVIA AND PARAGUAY

The Yrenda-Toba-Tarijeño aquifer system

transition (fresh in Bolivia, to brackish and saline

the recharge zones, as well as the discharge

occupies about 300,000 square kilometres

in Paraguay and Argentina) may be changing.

zones, is lacking.

Americano region. Its recharge zone, located in

There are many pressures on the land in the

A case study by the UNESCO International Shared

Argentina and Bolivia, determines groundwater

region, which have arisen from the expansion of

Aquifer Resource Management Programme

flow towards the east and crosses national

poorly planned mechanized agriculture, which has

(UNESCO-ISARM) is part of a Plata Basin project

boundaries, emerging in low-lying lands and

in turn led to land degradation, the decline of

financed by Global Environment Facility (GEF). The

draining into a series of streams that discharge

wetlands and the deterioration of water quality.

case study’s activities focus on raising awareness

into the Paraguayan-Argentine Chaco and

Increased rain intensity from anticipated climate

of the aquifer system, as well as ensuring the

eventually into the Parana River in Paraguay.

change could trigger erosion, and re-

sustainability of its resources, the lifeline of the

sedimentation in recharge zones could inhibit

local population and the aquifer-dependent

The livelihood of the 1 million indigenous people

aquifer infiltration from stream beds. Due to poor

environment. The project will help further develop

in the region is closely linked to the aquifer’s

awareness and divergent regulations, current

engaged and strengthened institutions that practise

surface area. Increasing pressure on scarce water

aquifer management by institutions in the sharing

sound aquifer management and offer educational

resources, poor land quality and soil degradation

countries is inadequate. Therefore, coordination

and technical support to the community.

is causing alarm. The natural water quality

for the long-term management and protection of

Source: www.isarm.net.

(km2), located mostly in the Gran Chaco

High altitude landscape at the border between Argentina and Bolivia

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 7 9

Part 2. Water and Geopolitics
Given the interdependencies of water resource uses, spatial variations and surface water and
groundwater, as well as upstream and downstream differentiations, the need to develop mechanisms for
the sustainable sharing of water is obvious. Attention to environmental security exemplifies the growing
regional and global environmental concerns that could also lead to new forms of conflict.

2a. Trends in geopolitical developments
History shows few outright transboundary water-related
conflicts. Although strong competition does occasionally
occur between users, such as in the Tigris-Euphrates
Basin, in the Jordan Basin and the Paraná-La Plata Basin
(see Box 11.2 for an example in southern India), there is
an increasing trend towards inter-state collaboration (as
in the case of the Nile), as well as cooperation through
increased public participation, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), the common search for alternative
water sources and the collaborative spirit of international
water conferences, arbitration mechanisms and mediating
agents (see Box 11.3). Efforts like the Division of Early

Warning and Assessment (DEWA), UNESCO’s From
Potential Conflict to Cooperation Potential (PCCP) and
ISARM have been developing case studies on the
management of transboundary water resources,
illustrating the impressive range of examples of water as
a catalyst for peace and cooperative capacity-building.
Many programmes – financed through the International
Waters focus area of the Global Environment Facility
(GEF) in Eastern Europe – are working together to
develop cooperative frameworks and encourage the
development and implementation of policies that support
the equitable use of water and the sound functioning of
other water-related natural resources.

BOX 11.2: CAUVERY RIVER DISPUTE IN SOUTHERN INDIA
In India, the federal government plays a

shared. The agreement was open for review

hence, their livelihoods crucially depend on

mediating role in river water disputes. The Inter-

once it expired, but no agreement has been

maintaining the sharing scenario as accepted in

State Water Disputes Act of 1956 requires the

reached between the two main riparians, Kerala

the 1924 agreement.

government to encourage states to settle

and Tamil Nadu, since the 1970s. A tribunal was

disputes through dialogue. If that does not work,

constituted in 1990, and an interim judgement

There have been attempts to promote citizen

a tribunal is to be constituted. After a hearing,

was passed in 1991. The tribunal is expected to

efforts towards conciliation through people-to-

the tribunal makes a binding judgement.

make its final decision soon.

people dialogues, and most recently, to form a

The Cauvery Basin in southern India has 75,000

The dispute is based on the fact that the

encouraging informed dialogue and building

‘Cauvery family’. Such efforts should help in
(km2)

demand for irrigation far exceeds the irrigation

trust. Collective action theory suggests that it is

riparian states: Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu

potential of the river. In drought years, this

possible for riparian states to voluntarily reach

and Pondichery. The basin is mainly drained by

leads to a flash-point. The monsoon pattern is

self-enforcing agreements, provided the costs

the 780 km-long, rain-fed, perennial Cauvery

peculiar: the southwest monsoon brings rains to

and benefits are considered in a transparent

River, which flows from west to east into the Bay

the upstream areas in June and July. The

manner and sustainable development priorities

of Bengal. In addition to being a major source of

downstream and delta regions depend mainly on

are given primacy.

irrigation and hydroelectric power, the Cauvery

the weaker northeast monsoon (September-

River is an important water supply source for

October). In the Cauvery Delta in Tamil Nadu,

Bangalore, a centre for information technology

three crops are grown annually, but the summer

and the software industry.

crop depends on the timely release of waters

square kilometres

of area spread over four

from upstream areas. However, upstream farmers
When a dam project was developed by the

argue that it is unfair to be forced to share their

upstream state of Mysore (now in Kerala), two

water in summer when demand for water is at

agreements were made (in 1892 and in 1924)

its highest. The downstream farmers argue that

detailing how the river waters were to be

historically they have grown three crops and

3 8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 11.2: Timeline of geopolitical developments: Inter-state water-related conflicts and cooperation since 2002
2002

2003

● In early 2002, Friends of the Earth Middle East launched the Good Water Neighbors project to raise awareness about regional water and environmental issues. A variety of
cooperative programmes have been set up in Jordan, Palestine and Israel to promote exchange of information and ideas between different communities in the region. These
programmes have also furthered the campaign to protect the Jordan River, which brings stakeholders from the entire region together to work on sustaining the flow of this
important river.
● During the Joint River Commission (JRC) talks between India and Bangladesh – held in September 2003 – India agreed to involve Bangladesh in future discussions on the
controversial US$ 200 billion (EUR 172 billion) river-linking project which will bring water for irrigation from the Ganges, Brahmaputra and Meghna river basins to Haryana and
Gujarat. In February 2004, Bangladesh called on the Indian government to assess the impact on both the environment and biodiversity before it begins implementing the project.
● In October 2003, the United States and Mexico came to an agreement over water used for irrigation. Mexico – in water debt to the United States due to prior agreements – agreed
to release water from its reservoirs to relieve Texan farmers of the local drought.
● In November 2003, the Limpopo Basin Permanent Technical Committee created the Limpopo Watercourse Commission (LIMCOM). The objective of the commission is to facilitate
capacity-building to better manage the shared water resources in the basin states of South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe.
● Iran signed a contract with Kuwait on 13 December, 2003 to provide the country with drinking water for almost 30 years. Three hundred million cubic metres per year will be
pumped to Kuwait through a 540 kilometres pipeline, to be built at an estimated cost of US$ 2 billion.

2004

● In 2004, Kazakhstan warned of a potential environmental disaster in reaction to China’s plans to divert water from the Irtysh and Ili Rivers. Similar concerns were expressed in
reaction to Russian scientists’ suggestion to revive an old Soviet plan to divert Siberia’s Ob and Irtysh Rivers in order to replenish the Amudarya and Syrdarya Rivers. Kazakhstan
and China have signed a transboundary water management agreement, but a joint commission has failed to address their concerns.
● The Dniester-Odra Project – launched in 2004 – is an Eco-TIRAS project in partnership with Polish and Ukrainian NGOs, which promotes cooperation between local NGOs as well as
state and local governments in large European river basins. The focus of the project is to share knowledge of integrated transboundary water management between the Dniester
and Odra Rivers.
● In 2004, countries sharing the Amazon River Basin – Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Surinam, Peru and Venezuela – renewed their commitment to contain
environmental damage and protect the planet’s biggest reserve of freshwater. Representatives of these countries agreed to create three working groups to address the impact of
pollution on the Amazon at a meeting of the Amazonian Cooperation Treaty Organization (OTCA) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
● Despite sporadic challenges, the riparians of the Nile Basin continue work on the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI). The initiative – formally launched in 1999 – is an important project
geared towards cooperative development and institutional capacity-building for the entire East Africa region as well as all riparian states: Burundi, Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania and Uganda. In late May 2004, the Nile Basin Transboundary Environmental Action Programme was implemented; the first of eight on-the-ground
projects to be initiated by the Shared Vision Programme of NBI.
● On 13 July 2004, seven of the eight riparian nations of the Zambezi River signed the Zambezi Watercourse Convention (ZAMCOM). The signatory states have initiated the
ratification process and the convention will enter into force when two-thirds of the signatories have ratified it, to occur most probably by the end of 2005.
● Improving Water Governance in the Volta Basin – a project initiated by the World Conservation Union (IUCN)/the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) in
September 2004 – aims to aid Burkina Faso and Ghana to define shared principles and construct a framework for international cooperation in the management of the Volta Basin.

2005

● In early 2005, the European Union launched the Water and Environmental Resources in Regional Development (WERRD) project which has the objective of examining policies in
improving livelihoods in international river basins. The project is currently being carried out in the Okavango River with the participation of Botswana, England, Namibia, South
Africa and Sweden.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

● In 2005, Bolivia and Chile came to an agreement in sharing the groundwater of the Silala Aquifer – a potent source of conflict for years. The status of the Silala River – a disputed
body of water flowing from Bolivia to Chile – however, is yet to be decided. Talks between the two countries have stopped due to the interim government in Bolivia, formed after
the resignation of President Carlos Mesa.
● In 2005, the governments of Honduras and Nicaragua approached the Organization for American States (OAS) for financial and technical assistance to improve their border
relations after the Rio Negro was diverted as a result of Hurricane Mitch.
● In April 2005, Friends of the Earth Canada and Friends of the Earth US called on the Canadian government to take the United States to the International Court of Justice in The
Hague to stop the completion of the Devils Lake Emergency Outlet in North Dakota. According to the groups, the completion of the outlet threatens to move polluted waters and
invasive species from the United States into a Canadian river that flows into Hudson’s Bay.
● After several years of attempting to stop India from constructing the Baglihar Dam on the Chenab River, claiming that it is in violation of the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960, Pakistan
invoked the dispute resolution mechanism outlined in the Treaty, marking the first time the mechanism was invoked by either party. The Treaty states that the original broker of
the Treaty, the World Bank, should appoint a neutral arbitrator to resolve the issue.
● In May 2005, Green Cross International launched the La Plata Dialogues ‘Water for Life’ through its Water for Peace program, in cooperation with Itaipu Bi-National and the
Intergovernmental Coordination Committee of the Plata Basin Countries (CIC). These high-level talks included stakeholders from all sectors of society to identify projects for
improving the management of the La Plata River Basin.
● In June 2005, Guinea rejoined the Organisation pour la mise en valeur du fleuve Sénégal (OMVS, the Senegal River Basin Organization) and thereby brought together all four
countries of the river basin – Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Senegal – for the first time in more than 30 years.
● A Memorandum of Understanding between Israel, Jordan, and the Palestinian Authority, signed in July 2005, agreed to a two-year study to investigate the social and environmental
impact of transporting large quantities of water through 200 kilometres of piping from a small canal on the Red Sea to the Dead Sea. The World Bank facilitated the $15 million
agreement.
● In 2002, UNESCO and the Organization of American States (OAS) launched the International Shared Aquifer Resource Management (ISARM) project for the Americas. The project –
International Transboundary Aquifers of the Americas – organized three workshops in 2003, 2004 and 2005 presenting the data gathered on transboundary groundwater in North,
Central and South America and highlighting the need to follow-up on this cooperative project.
● In October 2004 UNESCO and the Aristotle University of Tessaloniki, Greece, presented in a joint workshop the draft inventory of internationally shared aquifers in southeast
Europe. These were the first results of the ISARM-MED project. The results are published in this chapter.
● In 2005, UNESCO and FAO published a review of all existing treaties and other legal instruments related to the use of groundwater resources, in a publication entitled:
Groundwater in International Law: Compilation of Treaties and Other Legal Instruments.
● In 2005, the UN International Law Commission continues work on the draft legal instrument on transboundary groundwater resources begun in 2002.

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 8 1

2b. The case of aquifer systems
The equally important challenge of demarcating aquifer
systems, as well as the need to manage them through
appropriate inter-state compacts or multilateral
agreements, has begun in earnest. Unlike inter-state
surface water compacts (legal agreements specially made
for allocating and managing shared water systems among
various water users and uses), the focus of the aquifer
compact is the design of a joint resource allocation and
management system that would ensure the sound
functioning of the systems through appropriate policies
adopted by all the overlying countries. Although pilot
studies to develop such mechanisms and approaches have
been initiated, it is still too early to deliver firm guidelines
(UNESCO-IHP/ISARM, 2001).
New inter-state aquifer agreements have to be carefully
crafted to fit retroactively into existing inter-state river
agreements in which the groundwater component may
have been given insufficient prominence. Reviews and
reassessments, coupled with new agreements, offer the
possibility of managing groundwater resources in a holistic
way, as opposed to disparate groundwater administrations
based on artificial state boundaries. Administrative bodies
could be created to address present and future disputes
over claims of excessive groundwater withdrawal between
neighbouring states or basins, provided that the
institutional transaction costs can be covered.
Parallel conceptual and methodological advances have
raised the questions of indicators, both in terms of flash
points and red flags for conflict and obstacles to
cooperation. In addition to the traditional sources of
conflict outlined above, especially for transboundary
conflicts, much literature also emphasizes rivers forming a
shared boundary, human action triggering disruptions like
dams, power asymmetries, unilateral basin development
and extreme hydrological events like droughts and floods.
On the other hand, the shifting interest in conflict
management and resolution has also helped support
efforts that aim to better understand obstacles to and
mechanisms for cooperation. An interesting conceptual
scheme by Sadoff and Grey (2002) exemplifies types of
cooperation by distinguishing between increasing benefits
to the river (the ecological river), increasing benefits
from the river (the economic river), reducing costs
because of the river (the political river) and increasing
benefits beyond the river (the catalytic river). A similar
conceptual scheme for aquifers could also be formulated.

All such considerations point to two conclusions: first, water
conflicts are intertwined with other, larger socio-political
issues, and second, the development of indicators and early
warning signs for preventing and mitigating conflict must be
coupled with parallel indicator systems of cooperation that
complement the challenge of water sharing in both intraand inter-state situations (see Table 11.2).

Reviews and
reassessments,
coupled with
new agreements, offer the

2c. Water regimes and hydrodiplomacy
The notion of water regimes also helps to better
delineate water sharing challenges. Water regimes imply a
specific set of rules, institutions and practices, as well as
relationships of power, position and interest. Such
regimes exemplify a specific hydroculture of established
cultural and socio-political traditions, attitudes and
practices. For example, one can think of river basins as
water regimes where voluntary cooperation has emerged
over time (as in the case of the Columbia basin between
the US and Canada), or where external incentives, such as
foreign investment and even threats by a major power in
the basins, as in the Nile River Basin and the Mekong,
have contributed to cooperation. It is interesting to note
that such a culture is lacking for groundwater resources,
except in regions where cultural norms and traditions
have brought cooperative forces together (qanats or
kharez,5 for example) and where land management and
groundwater sustainability go hand-in-hand.6

possibility of
managing
groundwater
resources in a
holistic way...

Supporting water sharing efforts is also a general
principle of conduct in international law, treaties, binding
acts and judgments of international courts that shape the
rules and procedures of shared transboundary waters.
The five major legal principles that shape hydrodiplomacy,
including intra-state practices, are as follows:
■

the principle of international water and the concept of
an international watercourse

■

the principle of reasonable and equitable utilization,
which has generated perpetual debates and interpretations of the terms ‘reasonableness’ and ‘equity’

■

the obligation not to cause significant harm and the
exercise of due diligence in the utilization of an
international watercourse

■

the principle of notification and negotiations on
planned measures

■

the duty to cooperate, including regular data exchange

5. A qanat is a traditional Middle
Eastern subsurface network of
tunnels and wells used to
transport water from an
elevated mountainous area
downwards to the ground
surface. Kharez is the term
used in Baluchistan, which is a
region on the border areas of
Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan.
6. See the activities of the
recently created UNESCO
Centre on Qanats and other
hydraulic structures in Yazd,
Iran.

3 8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Harvest in Two Buttes,
Colorado, United States

The draft articles prepared by UN-ILC on the use of
transboundary aquifers are developing similar though
alternate principles for groundwater resources that
encourage aquifer system states to focus on the integrity
of the functions of the aquifer systems.

agreements given the obstacles to cooperation, which
include the increasing split between the North and the
South, the persistence of national sovereignty and the
lack of sufficient incentives to bring nations to the table
for sustained negotiations.

The legally binding and far-reaching WFD of the European
Commission (EC, 2000) established a detailed process for
community action in water policy that accentuates many
normative aspects (social preferences, goals and
established practices) of valuing and sharing water. It also
placed a renewed emphasis on public participation.
Existing legal approaches to water resources law (from the
1966 non-binding Helsinki Rules on the Uses of Waters
and International Rivers to the International Law
Association Berlin Conference of 2004) have now been
further elaborated.7 At the same time, declarations,
international law organizations’ drafts, the creation of the
World Water Council and international water conferences
(such as the Fourth World Water Forum in Mexico City in
2006) all aim to expand the spatial envelope (from
narrowly local to national and transnational, if not global,
geographical units) and accentuate integrated approaches
to sharing water.

2d. Water sharing and the public good

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Progress in the twenty-first century will require an
institutional order of cooperation, comprehensive
management principles and sharing of experiences gained
through the practice of ecosystemic principles in water
resource projects. Paths towards further effectiveness for
some authors (Rogers and Kordab, 2004) entail boosting
governmental concern; enhancing the contractual and
bargaining environment and, finally, building national
capacity.

7. This is especially evident in
articles 10–16 dealing with
internationally shared water.
8. The now famous essay,
‘Tragedy of the Commons’
(Hardin, 1968), is the
metaphor for the problem of
sharing this public good, and
the shift from exploitation for
growth to the preservation of
ecosystem health.

There is widespread interest in a paradigm shift to a new
model that questions the traditional methods of
governing water resources, as well as an ongoing debate
as to what this new paradigm entails. This involves the
search for new judicial norms, flexible institutions,
demand-driven water policies, new concepts of water
types (blue and green water, see Chapter 4, or virtual
water, see Chapter 12), as well as sustainability,
transparency and public participation. Conflict prevention
and similar concepts of interdependence in other efforts
to share water resources in a sustainable manner are also
pivotal.
Noble as these goals may be, there have been repeated
warnings about the difficulties of generating international

The use of the terms ‘reasonable’, ‘equitable’ and
‘sustainable’ in the last three decades illustrates the
increasing emphasis on water sharing as a public good. It
also stresses the importance of accommodating
competing demands and expresses the underlying wish to
manage water by hydrological boundaries rather than by
administrative or political borders. The complexity of the
physical river system, the interdependence of surface
water with groundwater, is not a new phenomenon. But
the spate of activities and declarations in international
water meetings have served to redefine efforts of
purposeful water sharing and laid the ground for new
upstream-downstream institutional arrangements. The
Global Water Partnership’s (GWP) effort to clarify and
utilize toolboxes (specific methodological guidelines for
defining ethical variables and relevant measurable
indicators) is now joined by other institutional
mobilization efforts, methodological advances and
mechanisms for measuring performance and output.
The desire to maintain communal control and support
public participation in upstream-downstream relations
further expands the recognition of water as a public good
and also points out the danger of commodifying water by
distinguishing between the value, price and cost of
supplying water8 (see Chapter 12).
In articulating general principles of integrated shared
water resources, one must also raise questions about the
criteria for evaluating institutional performance. Here, in
addition to the standard literature, the early UN Water
Conference in Mar del Plata (1977) promulgated a set of
performance criteria by blending practical experiences
from the social sciences. Criteria include a cluster of
institutional characteristics: clarity of water ownership,
legal authority capable of enforcing decisions,
transparent national policies and mechanisms for
coordination. They also include other institutional
performance criteria, such as consideration of
alternatives, incorporation of externalities, responsiveness
to national and local priorities and expeditious movement
from planning to implementation.

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 8 3

A good example of capacity-building comes from the
WFD (2000), which refers to five cross-cutting principles
for implementation:
■

■
■
■
■

opportunities for integrated approaches between
different sectors (the environment and agriculture,
for example)
scale of intervention through a distinction between
large and smaller river basins
timing in terms of early implementation
participation and encouragement of building on
traditions of public or stakeholder involvement
capacity, or the historical existence of strong technical
and scientific traditions or expertise.

The right to water is already recognized in several legal or
political instruments (see Table 11.3). It guarantees
access to water, without discrimination, in a permanent
and sustainable manner – and at a socially and
economically acceptable cost. It also addresses the issues
of subsidiarity, solidarity, and cooperation. Finally, it takes
into account the interests of disadvantaged populations
and the importance of decision-making at local levels.

2e. Institutions, procedures and regulatory
principles
Institutions are defined as established and organized
procedures; water institutions represent established
values, norms and practices that provide a policy, legal
and administrative framework for sharing water.
A variety of actors – local institutions, NGOs, research
institutions, private sector participants, donors, riparian
government institutions and transnational river basins –
face problems of vertical and horizontal integration, not
only in water resources projects, but also within and
between other resource management entities and
organizations.
Cutting across this complex setting are the theoretical
problems of legal doctrines, as well as the power of all
encompassing international agreements. The UN
Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of
International Watercourses, as well as the non-binding
Helsinki Rules, have adopted the principles of limited
territorial sovereignty with equitable and reasonable

Table 11.3 The right to water timeline
Several acts, declarations, conventions and constitutions make explicit or implicit provisions for the right to water:

1949-1977

■ The international humanitarian law applicable to armed conflicts and human rights law:

– Convention (I) for the Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field. Geneva, 12 August
1949.
– Convention (II) for the Amelioration of the Condition of Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of Armed Forces at Sea.
Geneva, 12 August 1949.
– Convention (III) relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War. Geneva, 12 August 1949.
– Convention (IV) relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. Geneva, 12 August 1949.
– Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International
Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), 8 June 1977.
– Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of NonInternational Armed Conflicts (Protocol II), 8 June 1977.

1979

■ The 1979 Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, adopted by the UN General Assembly on

1989

■ The 1989 Declaration on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the General Assembly and opened for signature, ratification and

18 December 1979 (resolution 34/180), entered into force on 3 September 1981.
accession by on 20 November 1989 (resolution 44/25), entered into force on 2 September 1990.

1997

■ The 1997 Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses, adopted by the UN General

Assembly on 21 May 1997 (Resolution 51/229).

2000

■ Resolution A/RES/54175 of the UN General Assembly of 2000: The Right to Development.

2001-02

■ General Comment No.15 of the Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights of November 2002: The Right to Water (arts.

11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights).
■ The Council of Europe and the European Parliament declared themselves in favour of this right, successively in 2001 and 2002.

2003

■ The Johannesburg Declaration and the documents produced at the Third World Water Forum (Kyoto 2003) include the right to

basic sanitation as part of the right to water.

3 8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 11.3: TRANSBOUNDARY AQUIFERS ON THE AGENDA OF THE INTERNATIONAL LAW COMMISSION
In 2002, the International Law Commission (ILC)

definition, the obligation not to cause harm, the

seventh session of the ILC (May-July 2005), and

of the United Nations incorporated in its work

general obligation to cooperate, the regular

was generally well received. A working group

programme the topic of shared natural

exchange of data and information and the

was set up to review all the draft articles and

resources, including groundwater, oil and gas. In

relationship between different kinds of uses. The

will be reconvened at the ILC’s next session in

his First Report on Outlines submitted in 2003,

addendum contained case studies and models of

2006 to complete its work. The third report was

the Special Rapporteur presented the

several types of transboundary aquifers.

discussed at the last session of the sixth
Committee of the UN General Assembly in

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

background of the topic at the ILC, and indicated
his intention to start with groundwaters. He also

In his third report of 2005, the Special

October and November 2005. Member State

presented an addendum technical in nature and

Rapporteur proposes a complete set of draft

delegates presented their comments and

containing general information on groundwater

articles for an instrument on the law of

expressed their appreciation of the work being

(importance, characteristics, uses, causes of

transboundary aquifers. In addition to the

achieved by the Special Rapporteur.

degradation, non-renewable).

previous draft articles, the Special Rapporteur
introduces the distinction between recharging

An ad hoc groundwater multidisciplinary experts

In his Second Report on Shared Natural

and non-recharging aquifers; articles on bilateral

group was established, and meetings were

Resources: Transboundary Groundwaters, of

and regional arrangements in relation to other

organized in Paris and Tokyo. Experts convened

2004, the Special Rapporteur expressed his

conventions; the need for equitable and

by UNESCO-IHP participated in briefings on

decision to consider all groundwaters, and

reasonable utilization; monitoring; protection;

aquifers and the science of hydrogeology for the

introduced the concept of aquifers. He

preservation and resource management (with

members of the ILC in Geneva and the members

presented an outline of a future framework

provisions on ecosystems, recharge and

of the sixth Committee in New York.

instrument for transboundary aquifers and seven

discharge zones); and activities affecting other

draft articles dealing with aquifers’ scope and

states. The report was discussed at the fifty-

utilization. They currently make up the accepted doctrine
in international water law (at least for surface water). In
the draft articles submitted by the Special Rapporteur on
transboundary aquifers, the principle of equitable and
reasonable utilization was also introduced and is currently
being debated at the International Law Commission
(see Box 11.3). The doctrines of absolute territorial
sovereignty and absolute territorial integrity are
increasingly becoming outdated.
River basin planning and management have been a long
honoured tradition – from the development of the
Tennessee Valley Authority in the US in the 1930s to the
Senegal development plans of more recent years. The
common thread underlying these efforts has been the
development of water resources for a variety of uses.
The existing literature raises the important question of
whether such integrative regional water plans can fit
within the geographic limits of a river basin or watershed,
and if so, how water can be shared in an equitable
manner. Can such joint management take place in the vast
expanses of the Aral, Nile, Amazon, Mekong and the
Parana-LaPlata basins? Or should it be restricted to
regional, specific socio-political conflicts and well-defined

Source: UN, 2005; 2004; 2003.

geographic, cultural, environmental and economic
boundaries?
What implications does this have for the long-term
process of sharing water? First, we need to recognize the
difficulties associated with legalistic approaches that tend
to emphasize conduct rather than formal governance,
especially in cases where there is no agreed-upon river
regime. Second, existing legal approaches can be
supplemented by flexible mechanisms, such as second
track diplomacy (environmental diplomacy or
hydrodiplomacy); alternative dispute resolution (ADR)9
through international bodies or in the spirit of Agenda
21, a technical professional or an independent panel of
experts (water ombudsmen or a water cooperation
facility); and public participation and mobilization.
The operational terms for the above are complementarity
and implementation. However, there are three troublesome
problems in multilateral agencies: the historical and cultural
inertia of past differences and practices, the calculation of
all costs involved in the development of shared waters and
incorporating social and environmental concerns related to
effective water sharing. Cooperation and conflict are also

9. Alternative dispute resolution
(sometimes referred to as
appropriate dispute
resolution) is a general term,
used to define a set of
approaches and techniques
aimed at resolving disputes in
a non-confrontational way. It
covers a broad spectrum of
approaches, from party-toparty engagement in
negotiations as the most
direct way to reach a
mutually accepted resolution,
to arbitration and
adjudication at the other
end, where an external party
imposes a solution.
Somewhere along the axis of
ADR approaches between
these two extremes lies
mediation, a process by
which a third party aids the
disputants to reach a
mutually agreed solution
(Shamir, 2003).

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 8 5

expressions of the need to accommodate geographic
realities and hydrogeology into the social context of shared
water. Donors who provide incentives for the creation of

voluntary agreements are necessary for a true community
of riparians, in addition to their willingness to come
together in joint institutional mechanisms.

Part 3. Preventing, Managing and Resolving
Shared Water Conflicts
There is a long history of water-related disputes, from conflicts over access to adequate water supplies
to deliberate attacks on water systems. As growing populations, urbanization and economic
development will all require more water for agricultural, municipal and industrial uses, there is a risk
that such contestations will increase. At the same time, water availability may be coming up to what
Falkenmark (1999) has described as the ‘water barrier’, a level of supply below which serious constraints
to development arise. These limits may be further stretched by potential climatic anomalies, which in
turn, could intensify regional conflicts between upstream and downstream users.
There are three distinct phases in water conflicts: conflict
creation, management and resolution. In the first phase,
the emphasis is on diagnosis, anticipation and prevention,
problem architecture and joint fact-finding. The second
phase represents a trust-building stage through
mechanisms such as mediation, arbitration and neutral
expert fact-finding. Finally, conflict resolution involves
consensus-building and the depolarization of conflicting
interests through public fact-finding processes or
adjudication.10
The search for a typology for conflicts and appropriate
responses has led to several conceptual schemes. One
conclusion is that we should pay particular attention to
international river basins and aquifer systems, where
confrontations and conflicts can be far-reaching. Sources
of potential water conflicts include the following:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

scarcity (permanent and temporary)
differences in goals and objectives
complex social and historical factors (including
pre-existing antagonisms)
misunderstandings or ignorance of circumstances
and data
asymmetric power between localities, regions or
nations
significant data gaps or questions of validity and
reliability
specific hydro-political issues at stake (dam
construction or diversion of water)

■

non-cooperative settings and value conflicts, especially
in terms of water mythology, culture and water
symbolism.

Alternative dispute resolution mechanisms have become
important means for resolving conflicts. The search for
alternatives to legal institutions for arbitration was
prompted not only by the saturation of legal mandates,
but also by increasing litigation and confrontation.
Mediation – a compromised discussion between
disputants aided by a neutral third party – has become a
viable alternative to adversarial processes. The gamut of
adjudication, arbitration, mediation, conciliation and even
principled negotiation illustrates several more alternative
processes of dispute resolution. Public participation and
negotiation can be tools in maximizing agreement not
only about the nature of a problem but also about the
desirability of specific outcomes.
The outcome of conflicts for all water regimes will also
depend on other variables: the number of actors involved,
external factors, preventive rather than corrective emphasis
in potential cooperation, information available to all
parties concerned, bureaucratic rigidity, lack of relevant
institutions, historical animosities, etc. It is difficult to
determine which variables are most important and how
they interact with larger processes, such as demographic
and socio-political pressures or with resource scarcity and
environmental degradation.

10. Training courses on conflict
management and
cooperation-building have
been instrumental: see
UNESCO’s PC-CP project
(webworld.unesco.org/
water/wwap/pccp/cd/
educ_tools.html) and the
World Bank’s ‘Shared Water,
Shared Future’ course
workbook and the
International Water
Academy’s Building a
Curriculum for Training in
Water Conflict Resolution,
Prevention, and Mediation
(www.thewateracademy.org/
OppActivities/index_
main.html), among others.

3 8 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Relevant
indicators – as
well as the
combination of
data and sound
judgment – are
needed in order
to establish a
baseline of the
status of shared
water
resources...

3a. The search for relevant indicators in
water sharing
Recent literature has highlighted the need to move from
descriptive studies towards the creation of measurable
indicators that measure the performance of shared water
systems, monitor the process of equitable sharing and
provide the mechanisms for monitoring both the current
state and changes in interdependent water systems, in
addition to gaining more realistic insights through field
studies (Carius et al., 2004; Gleick, 2005; Millennium
Ecosystems Assessment, 2003).
Theoretical approaches must be counterbalanced by
practical examples of water sharing at every level.
Although there is great difficulty in measuring the
performance, process and product of water sharing
through quantitative and qualitative indicators, they can
help us to develop the critical thresholds; articulate the
interesting differences, as well as significant trends and
developments; and put forward the data necessary for
balanced decision-making.
Relevant indicators – as well as the combination of data
and sound judgment – are needed in order to establish a
baseline of the status of shared water resources in order
to discern the nature and rate of changes, provide a solid
base for understanding the process of equitable
allocation and offer early warnings of emerging problems.

measuring potential conflict or cooperation in
international basins. By identifying sets of parameters
that appear to be interrelated and using these sets for
advanced statistical analyses, two findings stand out.
First, most cases show cooperation rather than conflict;
and second, rapid changes – in institutional capacity or in
the physical system – have historically been at the root of
most water conflicts. These changes were measured by
three indicators: internationalized basins (i.e. in newly
independent states); basins that include unilateral
developments (and the absence of cooperative regimes);
and cases where basin states show hostility over nonwater issues (Wolf et al., 2003).
Important methodological and policy questions for
cumulative, interactive, synergistic effects and
consequences remain. In addition, many of the water
sharing indicators intersect with other dimensions of
water discussed in this volume.
The list of potential indicators can be summarized across
the following dimensions:11
■

Operational/administrative interdependencies for
sharing water
– number of international basins and transboundary
aquifers
– dependency on inflow from other river basins
– serious impact on upstream water diversions and
impoundments
– impact on groundwater ecosystems
– upstream and downstream integrative mechanisms
– systematic considerations of water users and uses
interdependencies
– high water stress/scarcity/poverty conditions
– basin-wide operational water planning and
management
– surface/groundwater conjunctive use
– number of treaties/cooperative events.

■

Cooperation/conflict
– existing conflict accommodation and resolution
mechanisms
– significant number of water treaties or
conventions
– economic, scientific or industrial agreements
– cooperative events involving transboundary rivers
– unilateral projects, highly centralized water
megaprojects

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

It is important to indicate the broad complementary goals
of indicators: policy relevance as well as technical
credibility and relevance. Specific criteria for indicator
selection include analytical soundness (expressed in
scientific and technical terms); measurability (readily
available, adequately documented, valid and reliable data
and information); and utility to users (simple to interpret,
showing trends over time, responsive to change,
comparable and providing threshold or reference value
against which one can assess ultimate significance).

11. The approach followed was
to provide a set of indices,
or potential indicators, which
were then examined against
the recent literature. These
indicators were the basis for
discussion at the ‘Indicators
of water conflict and
cooperation’ workshop
convened in Paris in
November 2004 by
UNESCO-PCCP.

The critical question is how to combine metric data with
more qualitative approaches that offer ordinal data, at
best. The question between quantitative and qualitative
measurement reflects the difficulties of the availability,
validity and reliability of existing data and information,
not to mention the challenges of statistical manipulation.
The first World Water Development Report (2003) noted
that beyond the general commentary of other studies’
indicators, there is no empirical derivation of testing. This
chapter has preliminary empirical results of indicators

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 8 7

– existence of laws and regulations for fair water
allocation
– stakeholders’ involvement and participation
mechanisms
– publication of joint inventories of transboundary
resources
– effectiveness of community-based management
– newly internationalized river basins.
■

■

Vulnerability/fragility
– high degree of rivalries, disputes and contestation
within and between countries or areas
– ratio of water demand to supply
– environmental and social fragility, non-robust social
system
– diminishing water quality and degraded groundwater
dependent ecosystems
– poverty, lack of good sanitary conditions
– extreme hydrological events and periodic water
disasters (flood and droughts)
– demand changes (sectoral) and distribution
– dependence on hydroelectricity.
Sustainability/development
– expressed and implementable water conservation
measures
– competence for dealing with and managing waterrelated conflicts
– desire for and implementation of balanced
environmental policies
– capacity to recover the true costs of water projects
– importance of virtual water in food trade
– unaccounted-for water
– integrated resources water management (IWRM).

The underlying concern, as far as interdependencies are
concerned, has to do with types of conflict and
cooperation, over water or over efforts to adapt to
scarcity. Ohlsson (1999) makes distinctions between
stages like supply management challenges, end-use
efficiency and allocative efficiency, while using first-order
and second-order disputes. Here concerns with upstreamdownstream relations also appear, as well as the varieties
of water shortage, such as scarcity, stress and poverty.
Also included in this category are a large number of
groundwater indicators, such as total resource, recharge
rates, total abstraction, depletion rates and risks and
composite measurements of conjunctive water use.

The cooperation/conflict dimension raises questions about
institutional mechanisms and conflict resolution efforts. The
conflict management techniques outlined earlier support a
cooperative context in conflict prevention, management
and resolution. Some even suggest friendship/hostility
indicators and supportive water cultures for cooperative
efforts. Box 11.4 shows how traditional societies have put
water at the core of their values. Others emphasize
conflict-processing capabilities, including risks of
victimization or critical thresholds in forecasting political
crises, social and geographical spread of conflict, and
increasing competition over water and land distribution.

The underlying
concern has to
do with types of
conflict and
cooperation –
over water or
over efforts to
adapt to scarcity

The vulnerability/fragility dimension emphasizes volatility
and turbulence in terms of the surrounding environment
and society. The larger issues of poverty, sanitation,
environmental degradation and a lack of social resilience,
community mobilization, preparedness and disaster
absorption institutions are all indications of the tenuous
fabric of environmental and social structures. Questions
of environmental security, risks and the inability to adapt
to threats and disasters – referred to as the index of
human insecurity in the combination of environment,
economy, society and institutions – also belong in this
category.
The sustainability/development dimension emphasizes not
only cleavages in expectations and achievements, but the
current preoccupation with balances between
environment, economy and society. It also addresses
questions of growth and carrying capacity as well as the
underlying debates of survival and fulfilment. A vast array
of socio-economic indicators on income distribution,
environmental damages, effects on cultural heritage,
freedom of action, resilience, adaptability, recuperability,
environmental integrity and IWRM are likewise considered.
It is important to emphasize the dynamics of the
coordination/cooperation/collaboration continuum, which
stresses attempts to minimize a catastrophic water crisis
preoccupation, and forces us to explicate pragmatic cases
of environmental conflict management, stakeholders’
engagement and trade-off considerations more clearly.
Articulating and testing a few central indicators in various
settings is also important. These indicators form the
water interdependency indicator, exemplified by the
amount of water inflow from other river basins; the
cooperation indicator, measured by the number of
significant joint projects, treaties or other formal
agreements; the vulnerability indicator, resulting from the

3 8 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 11.4: TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO WISE WATER SHARING
Modern statutory law often overrides and

beyond the modern utilitarian perception. It is

water governance and conflict resolution with

marginalizes traditional methods of managing

this broader understanding of water that is the

modern mechanisms. Questions that we need to

natural resources, usually to the detriment of

basis for traditional mechanisms of cooperative

examine more thoroughly include the following:

the rural poor. A technocratic approach to water

water management and governance, which often

How can traditional and modern approaches be

as an exploitable resource has become the

differ considerably from modern state-centred

harmonized? How and to what extent can

standard outlook in modern states. Traditional

approaches. Yet these mechanisms offer

traditional mechanisms be transferred from the

societies, by contrast, consider water and other

sophisticated methods for water-related conflict

local to the national and international levels?

natural resources as embedded in a holistic

resolution.

Can traditional ways contribute to non-statecentred modes of natural resource governance?

world view, deeply rooted in the traditional lives
of their communities. Water is, therefore, not

Traditional laws and rights should be included in

Wise water governance can only occur if local

only of economic and social importance but also

efforts to share and govern water wisely. A

indigenous water management knowledge is

of cultural and spiritual importance. It is the

participatory approach that takes the inclusion

tapped.

focus of community building and has a broad

and empowerment of local stakeholders

range of non-economic values that go far

seriously should combine traditional methods of

ratio of water demand and supply; the fragility indicator,
measured in terms of environmental deterioration and
social unrest (especially poverty and rivalries), within and
between countries; and the development indicator,
summarized by competence/commitment for managing
water-related conflicts.

3b. Capacity-building and institutional
mobilization

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Winnowing rice in
Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India

As world attention turns to questions of sustainable
development, the restoration of degraded environments
and the creation of cooperative arrangements for shared
water resources, it is clear that institution-building,
comprehensive management and alternative dispute
resolution efforts will be central endeavours for many
years to come (see Box 11.5). One of the main
challenges is bringing together surface water and
groundwater management institutions – the former
dominated by irrigation interests and the latter dominated
by mineral resource interests. Degraded water resources
and their potential impacts on international security also
provide opportunities for cooperative institutions and
transnational cooperation.
The arid environments of the Middle East, the fragmented
entities of the Balkans and other volatile regions will
force us to consider, once again, the pivotal role of water
as an agent of peace. To what extent will states,
multinational corporations, NGOs and existing
international bodies respond to sharing power and
implementing action that promotes ecological

interdependence and addresses other environmental
challenges? Traditional areas of contestation – historical
areas of concern like the Middle East, the Nile River and
the Himalayan Basins – remain priorities. The transformation of the former Soviet Union and its newly
independent states has opened up new areas of concern,
such as the emergence of new states in Eastern Europe
and the Balkans and enclosed seas such as the Aral and
Caspian seas. The Tumen River in Asia and the Lauca and
Parana/La Plata rivers in Latin America are also water
systems of growing concern.
Future sources of conflict are likely to be diverse and
reflect a combination of internal and external
considerations, as well as the larger conditions of
environmental change, such as climate and land-use
questions. Resource degradation and depletion, in
addition to political confrontations and climate-based
environmental changes, become the backdrop for
potential sources of discord, which are difficult to manage
with the tools that are currently available.

3c. Mechanisms for cooperation and crisis
avoidance
Increasing sensitivity about the need to integrate
competitive demands and stakeholders’ interests, in
addition to the evolving need for political accommodation
and the proactive stance in avoiding conflict, have all
contributed to a shift from confrontation to cooperation,
from monologue to dialogue and from dissent to
consensus.

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 8 9

BOX 11.5: MAJOR INITIATIVES IN BUILDING INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY TIMELINE
Launched in 2002, the Consultative Group on

Ukraine, in May 2003. The Protocol will give

In December 2004, UNESCO launched the Water

International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)

individuals affected by the transboundary impact

Cooperation Facility, which promotes

Challenge Programme includes a project on

of industrial accidents on international

cooperation, peace and prosperity in developing

Transboundary Water Policies and Institutions. The

watercourses – fishermen and operators of

and managing transboundary waters, in

five major themes make reference to nine

downstream waterworks – a legal claim for

cooperation with the World Water Council, the

benchmark basins, most of which are international.

adequate and prompt compensation.

Universities Partnership for Transboundary

In April 2003, the Woodrow Wilson International

In November 2003, the parties of the UNECE

Center for Scholars launched a Working Group

Convention opened up the possibility of

for a three-year project, Navigating Peace:

acceding the Convention and its articles on

In 2005, the International Network of Basin

Forging New Water Partnerships. Meetings have

Protection and Use of Transboundary

Organizations (INBO) launched the TwinBasin

been held regularly and a report of the project is

Watercourses and International Lakes to

project, which enables the mobility of staff

forthcoming.

countries outside the UNECE region. This will

between twinned Basin Organizations and

allow others to use the Convention’s legal

capitalizes on the knowledge thus acquired.

Waters and many others involved in the
management of shared water resources.

The United Nations Economic Commission for

framework and benefit from the experience in

Europe (UNECE) finalized the agreement on the

transboundary water cooperation that has been

In May 2005, the Euphrates-Tigris Initiative for

Protocol on Civil Liability and Compensation for

gained, since it was signed in Helsinki in 1992.

Cooperation (ETIC) was established in Kent, Ohio,
US in order to facilitate cooperation within the

Damage Caused by the Transboundary Effects of
Industrial Accidents on Transboundary Waters,

In August 2004, the International Law

Euphrates-Tigris System and in the riparian

which was formally adopted and signed by

Association (ILA) developed the Berlin Rules, an

countries of Syria, Turkey and Iraq in the

twenty-two countries at the Ministerial

update of the 1966 Helsinki Rules, which aim to

domains of technical, social and economically

Conference Environment for Europe in Kiev,

codify customary international water law.

sustainable development.

Although there are many conflict resolution methods
available, there is no standard legal structure for proceeding.
A series of non-legally binding voluntary methods – such as
arbitration, adjudication, negotiation, mediation, enquiry and
conciliation – are used to settle disputes. Positive evidence
from these efforts and other voluntary mechanisms of ADR
allow us to be realistically optimistic about our ability to
resolve future potential conflicts. In 2004, an international
conference was organized by UNESCO in Zaragoza, Spain on
the use of these techniques in finding solutions to difficult
shared water resources.
Collaboration in addressing environmental disputes
involves three phases: problem setting (problem
definition or problem architecture); direction setting
(predominantly negotiations over substantive problems);
and implementation (systematic management of interorganizational relations and monitoring of agreements).
All proposed alternative processes (direct negotiations,
good offices mediation, conciliation, etc.) could allow the
parties to reach a more timely and appropriate resolution
of disputes.

Furthermore, in many countries citizen involvement has
been formally incorporated into decision-making
processes and is an important means of social regulation,
as well as a key component of integrated natural
resources management. The current emphasis on public
participation is not only an attempt to fight the problem
of elitism in planning, but also part of the commitment to
address public demands, involve all stakeholders and
increase awareness about the nature of water resources
development, as well as the potential for conflicts within
and between countries. Instructive here is the CABRIVolga project, an international coordination action aimed
at facilitating cooperation in large river basins in the EU,
Russia and Central Asia.
Public involvement can range from simply supplying public
information releases to undertaking joint planning and
decision-making. A proactive public can lead to conflict
management and increased consensus, and in
international cases, a reinforcement of the spirit of
transnational commons. Public awareness involves oneway information by alerting the community to issues.

3 9 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 11.4 Recent international conferences of interest
■ Second Israeli-Palestinian International Conference on ‘Water for Life’, Turkey, October 2004, sponsored by the Israel-Palestine Center for Research

and Information.
■ ‘Water Conflicts and Spiritual Transformation: A Dialogue’, Vatican City, 13-15 October 2004, co-sponsored by Oregon State University, Pacific

Institute, International Water Academy, and the Pontifical Academy of Sciences
■ Second International Conference, Zaragoza, Spain, October 2004, organized by UNESCO’s PCCP project. The conference brought together water

managers, decision makers, students, trainers and a broad range of other stakeholders involved in the management of shared water resources. A
series of interactive role-plays enhanced participants’ conflict management skills and improved their knowledge of selected basins.
■ ‘Water as a Source of Conflict and Cooperation: Exploring the Potential’, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, United States, February 2005.

This working group brought together some the brightest minds in the field of international waters, to discuss whether or not cooperation over
water resources acts as a catalyst for cooperation in other areas (www.tufts.edu/water/WorkshopLogin.html for more information.)
■ The Third Biennial International Waters Conference, Brazil, June 2005, organized by the Global Environment Facility (GEF). The primary objective of

the meeting was to ‘foster knowledge sharing and collaboration between participating governments, GEF International Waters projects, GEF
Implementing and Executing Agencies, donor partners, and the private and non-profit sectors.’ This idea was proposed by, and supported by the
Dushanbe International Fresh Water Forum held 29 August - 1 September 2003. Following the UN General Assembly initiative,
■ The Government of Tajikistan organized an International Conference on Regional Cooperation on Transboundary River Basins in Dushanbe, on 30

May – 1 June 2005. This event was organized as a follow-up of the United Nations General Assembly’s Resolution A/RES/58/217, dated 23
December 2003, declaring the period from 2005 to 2015 the International Decade of Action 'Water for Life', upon the recommendations of the
President of the Republic of Tajikistan, and the President of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea.
Source: Prepared by Aaron T. Wolf, Department of Geosciences, Oregon State University and Joshua T. Newton, The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University

A proactive
public can lead
to conflict
management
and increased
Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

consensus

Public involvement implies two-way communication and is
a means of engaging community members in information
exchange and dialogue. Finally, public participation, the
most intense form of interaction between authorities,
experts and citizens, implies shared leadership, truly joint
planning and a democratic delegation of power.
In the last two decades, the simultaneous growth of
participatory democracy and expertise in decision-making
have been advocated, although it is difficult to maximize
both value preferences. There is a distinction between the
idealized conceptions of citizen participation and the
harsh demands of public policy-making, especially in
transboundary considerations. Again, participation is a
double-edged sword: planners and decision-makers must
be open to collaborating with citizens, while citizens must
be active and competent in planning and negotiation. It
remains true that the broader the base of citizen
participation, the more potential influence on managing
conflict there is.

3d. Contentious water sharing and
environmental security
12. Brauch et al. (2003) offer a
rich conceptual discussion of
the emerging difference
between traditional and
environmental security.

Water sharing also raises other challenges: the quest for
environmental security and cooperative water agreements
that deal with the more strategic issues of conflict
prevention. What was previously a concern mainly with

overt military conflicts has now expanded to incorporate
environmental disasters, such as chemical spills in the
Danube and the destruction of the Aral Sea. These cases
broaden our definition of security to incorporate
contested water bodies that, according to the UN, are
issues of human security and involve human life and
dignity. A growing body of literature addresses water
conflicts and hydrodiplomacy, not only as strategic sociopolitical issues, but also as environmental interventions
that affect claims on water bodies and groundwaterdependent ecosystems.
In the end, reducing the risk of conflicts and promoting
equitable water sharing require regional and international
approaches. However, there are limited international
mechanisms for environmental security issues concerned
with access to water and the restoration of polluted
habitats (e.g. the restoration of rivers in Eastern Europe
polluted by military bases during the Cold War).
Concern about volatile and stressed regions, as well as
water-scarce environments and discussions of complex
shared waters, have raised questions about potential
future contestation areas, critical thresholds and red
flags.12 Perhaps even more to the point, terrorist attacks
have also increased the concern about security of local
water supplies.

WWDR Chapter 11e (FF)

17/2/06

10:13

Page 391

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 9 1

Insightful works are linking water resources to
vulnerability, a function of many factors that include
economic and political conditions, water availability,
population growth, climate variability and the extent to
which a source of water supply is shared. ‘Regions at risk’
are suggested as a result of basic qualitative calculations.
The scarcity of water is replacing that of oil as a
flashpoint for conflict between high-risk countries
(Brauch et al., 2003; Gleditsch, 1997). On the other
hand, shortages can also stimulate cooperative solutions
or international intervention for profit management.
Extreme hydrological events – droughts or floods,
institutional problems and expanding populations – are
exacerbating problems in these regions.
Regions can therefore be characterized by three particular
vulnerabilities:
■

■

ecological vulnerability: arid regions and regions of
limited resources
economic vulnerability: concerned with past practices
of traditional exploitation and state economics

■

social vulnerability: over-utilizing resources, as well as
complex social economic and ecological forces affecting
an area’s natural equilibrium.

Hence the terms ‘fragility’, ‘volatility’ and ‘carrying
capacity’13 have become indicators of conflict or
cooperation in shared water systems.
Concern about water privatization and civil unrest, which
can also lead to conflict, has increased with the acquisition
of national water companies by multinational corporations.
The commodification of water has raised questions about
poverty alleviation, water markets’ effect on local
economies and the search for a water democracy (see
Chapter 12). Human rights issues, visionary declarations
and the centrality of water equity all raise questions of
fairness, distributive justice and the responsibilities of
international communities vis-à-vis water sharing.14
Finally, the role of virtual water needs further attention
as well. A broad indicator – a water footprint – links
virtual water and world trade: via the sum of domestic
water use and virtual water, we can then consider how

Map 11.2: National water footprints around the world, 2004

WFP (m3/cap/yr)
600-800
800-1000
1000-1200
1200-1300
1300-1500
1500-1800
1800-2100
2100-2500
No data
Note: Average national water footprint per capita (m3/capita/yr). Green means that the nation’s water footprint is equal to or smaller than global average.
Countries with red have a water footprint beyond the global average.
Source: Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004.

13. Carrying capacity is the
measure of an environment’s
ability to sustain itself and
its ecosystem.
14. Ethics and Water, a series of
short volumes compiled by
UNESCO, raises fundamental
questions about our ethical
and moral duties in sharing
non-renewable groundwater
resources and creating
cooperative mechanisms.
Available online at
webworld.unesco.org/ihp_db/
publications/GenericList_
themes.asp. See also
Cosgrove, 2000.

3 9 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Below: Iguazu Falls, Brazil

water used for the production of export commodities on
the global market can contribute significantly to the
changes in local and regional water systems (Box 11.6).
It has been noted, for example, that since Japan
consumes large quantities of American cereals and
soybeans, it might be suggested that this in turn leads to
the mining of aquifers (Ogallala, for example) and further
water use of rivers in North America. Map 11.2 shows
national water footprints around the world. The concept

of virtual water was first defined by Allan (2003) as the
‘water embedded in commodities’. In terms of global
trade, not only does it raise awareness about water
interdependencies, but it can also serve as a means for
improving water efficiency (see Map 11.3 on water
savings around the globe and Map 11.4 on net virtual
water imports). In addition, it can be an indicator of
sharing water, as well as a sign of contributing to water
security in water-poor regions.

BOX 11.6: VIRTUAL WATER AND THE WATER FOOTPRINT
International virtual water flows

of trade creates opportunities to increase global

of water used from domestic water resources,

The International trade of commodities implies

water use efficiency (see Chapter 12).

whereas the external water footprint is the water
used in other countries. Water footprints of

flows of virtual water over large distances, where
virtual water should be understood as the volume

Globally, water is saved if agricultural products are

individuals or nations can be estimated by

of water required to produce a commodity. Virtual

traded from regions with high water productivity

multiplying the volumes of goods consumed by

water flows between nations can be estimated

to those with low water productivity. At present,

their respective water requirement. The US appears

from statistics on international product trade and

if importing countries produced all imported

to have an average water footprint of 2,480 cubic

estimates of the virtual water content of

agricultural products domestically, they would

metres per capita per year (m3/cap/yr), while China

m3

products. The global volume of virtual water flows

require 1.6 trillion

related to the international trade in commodities

the products are being produced with only

is 1.6 trillion

m3/yr.

About 80 percent of these

virtual water flows relate to the trade in

1.2 trillion

m3/yr

of water per year; however,

in the exporting countries,

saving global water resources by 352 billion m3/yr.

global average water footprint is 1,240 m3/cap/yr.
The four major factors that determine the water
footprint of a country are volume of consumption
(related to the gross national income);

agricultural products, while the remainder is

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

has an average footprint of 700 m3/cap/yr. The

related to industrial product trade. An estimated

The water footprint

consumption patterns (e.g. high versus low meat

16 percent of global water use is not for

The water footprint shows the extent and locations

consumption); climate (growth conditions); and

producing domestically consumed products, but

of water use in relation to consumption. The water

agricultural practice (water use efficiency).

rather products for export. With the increasing

footprint of a country is defined as the volume of

globalization of trade, global water inter-

water needed for the production of the goods and

dependencies and overseas externalities are likely

services consumed by the inhabitants of the

to increase. At the same time, the liberalization

country. The internal water footprint is the volume

Sources: Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004; Chapagain,
et al., 2005.

WWDR Chapter 11e (FF)

17/2/06

10:13

Page 393

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 9 3

Map 11.3: Water savings around the world

Global water saving = 352 x 109 m3/yr
Note: Global water savings (>5.0 Gm3/yr) associated with international trade of agricultural products. Period 1997-2001. The arrows represent the trade flows. The numbers show the global water
savings, calculated as the trade volume (ton/yr) multiplied by the difference between water requirement (m3/ton) in the importing country and water requirement (m3/ton) in the exporting
country. Global water savings occur if an exporting country requires less water per ton of product than an importing country.
Source: Chapagain, et al., 2005.

Map 11.4: Net virtual water imports around the world

Net virtual water import
(billionsm3/yr)
-108
-107
-70
-45
-30
-16
-5
2
13
18
47
150
152
No data

Note: Regional virtual water balances and net interregional water flows related to the trade in agricultural products. Period 1997-2001. Only the biggest
net flows (>10Gm3/yr) are shown.
Source: Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004.

3 9 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. Conclusions and Recommendations:
The Dynamics of Cooperation
...water
transcends

Benefits to sharing can be identified at any level of cooperation; from initial description or analysis,
through series of negotiations and, finally, to concrete, implementable steps. Benefits and costs can be
calculated under alternative management, development scenarios and institutional analysis. Capacitybuilding can delineate the best form of cooperative agreements. At the same time, no supranational
agency has the mandate to handle transboundary water disputes, even though third-party mediation
boards have helped to bring contending parties together.15

national
boundaries and
must be

A useful way of articulating the dynamics of cooperation
is to summarize them under a continuum:
■

Coordination relates to sharing of information,
communication, as well as some preliminary regional
assessments.

■

Cooperation elevates the level of contact through joint
projects, exchange of scholars and researchers, active
planning, adaptation of national plans to capture
regional costs and benefits, contingency alternatives or
joint water flow forecasts.

■

Collaboration implies formalized agreements,
continuous interaction, integrated river basin
management, joint institutions, river basin
commissions, permanent secretariat and staff and
other forms of joint management.

how to induce affected parties to discuss cooperation
on joint water management where no prior agreement
exists (in terms of identifying common interests,
initiatives, future collaboration, and implementable
action)

■

for those countries that have agreements, treaties and
established coordination mechanisms, deciding how to
hold the parties accountable for implementation, which
enforcement mechanisms and sanctions exist and how
existing agreements can be strengthened and modified.

managed
cooperatively
and equitably,
using the best
science

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES & STEWARDSHIP

available

15. Between 2003-06 a number
of institutes and centres
were established, all
contributing to facilitating
the management of shared
water resources: the
International Centre for Water
Hazard and Risk Management
(ICHARM) in Tsukuba, Japan;
the International IHP-HELP
Centre for Water Law, Policy
and Science in Dundee,
United Kingdom; the Regional
Water Centre for Arid and
Semi-arid Zones of Latin
America and the Caribbean
(CAZALAC) in La serena,
Chile; the European Regional
Centre for Echohydrology
in Lodz, Poland (all at
www.unesco.org/water/ihp/
partners.shtml); UNESCO-IHE
Institute for Water Education
(www.unesco-ihe.org);
Regional Centre on Urban
Water Management
(RCUWM) in Teheran, Iran
(www.rcuwm.org.ir/).

expressed in National Water Policies, such as access to
urban water, sanitation and agricultural development.
Local and focused activities on a smaller scale as well as
specific projects and programmes are found at the microlevel.

■

For transboundary waters, there are two key interrelated
water sharing issues:

One can see the basis for indicators and indices that
could measure efficiency, effectiveness and equity in
evaluating and monitoring performance, processes and
results of comprehensive water sharing efforts. At the
same time, we also need to recognize levels of water
sharing ranging from macro-level or transboundary river
basin management (overall water allocation), to mesolevel or country river basin (emphasizing water use
allocation) and micro-level, which refers to multiobjective, multi-purpose and multi-stakeholder water
activities, such as irrigation districts and water users’
associations.

Again for transboundary cases, we can summarize
coordination, cooperation and collaboration dynamics as
part of a three-step process. The first step is to outline
incentives and accepted cooperative mechanisms for
water sharing at the international level. The second step
is to reinforce the mechanisms by referring to different
paradigms of equity and fairness that run through the
variety of declarations, treaties, conventions and
frameworks. The third step is to develop success
indicators that reflect the results of implementation.

Macro-scale cooperation aims to identify water issues
that act as barriers to implementing national water
efforts, such as Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
that fall within the capabilities of particular nations. At
the national or meso-scale, the appropriate emphasis
centres around the achievement of water use priorities

This chapter has continued to expand the discussion on
the increasing complexity, volatility and vulnerability of
water resources in a fast-changing socio-economic and
environmental context. A general framework for sharing
water resources tends to outline sources of tension,
competing demands and the mismatch between political

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 9 5

boundaries, natural river basins and aquifer systems. At
the same time, it is also important to note the positive
role of cooperative efforts brought about by recent
legislative and institutional developments, as well as
recognition of the need for capacity-building,
governance, and equitable and sustainable sharing of
water. Also notable are the widespread international
agreements towards peaceful settlement of differences
and the concern about the consequences of present
water use trends and developments.
Reflecting on recent developments since 2003, one can
see noteworthy progress in water sharing. To start with,
the case studies series, published by UNESCO’s PCCP
programme, new programmes and centres, and a series
of volumes on water security have raised awareness
about potential conflicts as well as the crucial role of
cooperation. Similarly, there has been a steady stream of
major meetings on IWRM, integrated river basin
management, the application of WFD and other global
water initiatives on comprehensive approaches, public
participation and the sustainable management of water.
Research centres have increased their efforts in extensive
data collection, modelling, indicator development and
practical applications of findings. UNESCO’s Water
Cooperation Facility (WCF) initiative, the World Water
Council and other partners, for example, will turn
attention to cooperation in managing transboundary
waters. Visionary declarations in various international
conferences, coupled with detailed guidelines for
participatory assessment methods and multi-stakeholder
manuals and additional water sharing agreements,
illustrate the spirit and practice of the past several years.
Varady and Iles-Shih (2005) point out that such
initiatives have proliferated largely because of the belief
that water transcends national boundaries and must be
managed cooperatively and equitably, using the best
science available.
An increasing number of examples of successful
cooperation illustrate yet again that interdependence and
changing socio-political conditions do not only produce
conflicts, but also lead to collaboration. A body of formal
guidelines and lessons learned from expanding sharing
efforts – both nationally and internationally – are now
available.
It is important to reiterate the distinction in incentives
between coordination, cooperation, and collaboration.
Indeed, the challenge for cooperation and the risk for

conflict raise two overarching issues: namely, how to
induce the affected parties to discuss cooperation on
joint water management when no prior agreements exist
and how, when such treaties do exist, to hold the parties
accountable for implementation, promote enforcement
mechanisms and continuously monitor both performance
and acceptable outcomes.

Political will and
commitment are
important
preconditions
for successful

The great difficulty in measuring water systems
performance, levels of significance, critical thresholds and
comparability of data and measurement over time is
repeated in all recent literature. There are emerging
agreements about specific indicators, but they tend to be
evasive and difficult to pin down when there is an
attempt to describe socio-political and institutional
dimensions. Improving techniques in ADR and public
participation complement more reasonable and acceptable
solutions to water challenges. Political will and
commitment are important preconditions for successful
water sharing. This also implies the coordination of water
resources with other natural resources, especially landuse controls and comprehensive planning and
management.

water sharing

Feluccas on the Nile river
near Philae, Egypt

3 9 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

We can hope

A review of recent literature and ongoing practices reveals
the following lessons learned:

that shared
water management becomes a

■

Cooperation, not conflict, is the norm in inter-state water
relations in an increasing number of water courses.

■

Treaties, agreements and the principles of international
water law help crystallize mechanisms for conflict
management and dispute resolution.

realistic and
thoughtful
instrument for

■

Strengthening institutional mechanisms and legal
frameworks for IWRM is needed to ensure that
associated transaction costs can be covered.

■

More emphasis should be placed on building capacity
in terms of IWRM and conflict prevention. Involving
excluded or weaker groups, especially at the local
level, may prevent them from developing grievances.

■

Adopting alternative dispute resolution mechanisms
and confidence-increasing measures among affected
parties is necessary.

■

Data, information and comparative indicators can
provide an arena of focused disagreement and help
concentrate the debate on concrete points of
contention, as is the case for Regional Water Data
Banks Project and the recent efforts of UNEP’s Global
Environment Monitoring System.

a balanced

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

approach...

■

New paradigms of complexity and interdependence need
not imply only optimal solutions and complicated models.
Reasonable approximations are parts of necessary tradeoffs, as are efforts to balance the relationship between
ideal futures and real, or pragmatic, considerations of
unfolding changes and practical solutions.

From security studies to management schemes and from
administrative guidelines to conventions and bilateral
agreements, a recurrent theme is the importance of the
role of law and informal ties in reducing conflict and
increasing cooperation. This new emphasis favours the
development of contingency preparedness for continuous
changes, building resilience into vulnerable systems, the
ability to cope realistically with the challenges of
upstream/downstream interdependencies, long-term
planning and diversity and flexibility in thinking and
practice. Such a combination of management would be
based on regional cooperation principles, focusing on
river basins and aquifer systems, with an emphasis on
ecosystemic and social needs. It would focus on
functionally interrelated natural resources problems,
reduce potential points of friction and stress in advance
and eliminate conflicting demands through risk
management and vulnerability assessment. We can, then,
hope that shared water management becomes a realistic
and thoughtful instrument for a balanced approach and a
useful tool for managing long-standing competitions,
confrontations and potential outright water conflicts.

S H A R I N G WAT E R . 3 9 7

References and Websites
Allan, J. A. 2003. Virtual Water – the Water, Food, and Trade

Creighton, J. L. 2004. Designing Effective Public Participation

Rogers, P. and Kordab, I. 2004. ‘Conflict Resolution in Water

Nexus: Useful Concept or Misleading Metaphor? Water

Programs: A U.S. Perspective: A Water Forum Contribution.

Resources Management: Ronald Coase meets Vilfredo

International, Vol. 28, No. 1.

Water International, Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 384–91.

Pareto.’ Presented at Symposium on Challenges Facing

Appelgren, B. (ed.). 2004. ISARM Africa: Managing Shared

EC (European Commission). 2005. European Decalartion for a

Aquifer Resources in Africa. Proceedings of the

New Water Culture, Madrid 18 February 2005.

International Workshop, Tripoli, Libya, 2–4 June. IHP

www.unizar.es/fnca/euwater/index2.php?x=3&idioma=en

Groundwater Series No. 8. Paris, UNESCO-IHP.
Bayarsaihan, T. and McKinney, D. 2002. Past Experience and
Future Challenges: Cooperation in Shared Water

framework for Community action in the field of water
policy. Official Journal of the European Communities,
Brussels, EC.

Series/Past_And_Future/default.asp
Brauch, H. G., Liotta, P. H. Marquina, A. Rogers, P. F. and ElSayed Selim, M. (eds). 2003. Security and Environment in
the Mediterranean: Conceptualizing Security and
Environmental Conflicts. Berlin, Springer.
Bruch, C.E. 2003. New Tools for Governing International
Watercourses. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 14.
pp. 15–23.
Burchi, S. and Kerstin, M., 2005. Groundwater in International

benefits of cooperation on international rivers’ Water

and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a

Development Bank Workshop in Almaty, Kazakhstan,
online at www.adb.org/Documents/Books/Water_for_all_

Regions, American University of Beirut, 7–9 October, 2004.
Sadoff, C.W. and D. Grey. 2002. ‘Beyond the River: the

———. 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament

Resources in Central Asia. Paper presented at Asian
26–28 September 2002. ADB, Water for All Series 12

Water Resources Management in Arid and Semi-Arid

Policy 4 (2002) pp. 389–403.
Shamir Yona 2003 UNESCO Technical Document in Hydrology,
PCCP series, 2003, Vol. 7.
World Water Council. 2003. The 3rd World Water Forum Final

Falkenmark, M. 1999. Forward to the future: A conceptual
framework for water dependence. Ambio Vol. 28, No. 4,

Report. Marseille, World Water Council.
UN (United Nations). 2005. Third Report on Shared Natural

pp. 356–61.
Gleditsch N. P. (ed.). 1997. Conflict and the Environment.

Resources. UN Doc A/CN.4/551 New York, UN.
———. 2004. Second Report on Shared Natural Resources:

Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic.

Transboundary Groundwaters. UN Doc. A/CN.4/539, New

Gleick, P., Cain, N., Haasz, D., Henges-Jeck, C., Hunt, C.,
Kiparsky, M., Moench, M., Palaniappan, M., Srinivasan, V.,

York, UN.
———. 2003. First Report on Outlines. UN Doc. A/CN.4/533,

Wolff, G. 2005. The World’s Water 2004–2005: The
Biennial Report on Freshwater Resources. Washington

New York, UN.
———. 1977. Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational

DC, Island Press.

Uses of International Watercourses. UN Doc. A/51/869,

Guerquin, F., Ahmed, T., Hua, M., Ozbilen, V. and Schuttelar.

New York, UN.

Law: Compilation of Treaties and Other Legal

2003. World Water Actions : Making Water Flow for All.

Instruments. Rome, FAO/UNESCO.

World Water Council, Japan Water Resources Association,

2000. Guidelines on Monitoring and Assessment of

UNESCO.

Transboundary Groundwaters. Lelystad, UNECE Task Force

Carius, A., Dabelco, G. D. and Wolf, A. T. 2004. Water, Conflict,
and Cooperation. ECSP Report, Issue 10, pp. 60–66.
Chapagain, A. K. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2004. Water Footprints
of Nations, Volume 1: Main Report. Value of Water
Research Report Series No. 16., Delft, UNESCO-IHE.
Chapagain, A. K., Hoekstra, A. Y. and Savenije. 2005.
“Saving water through global trade”, Value of

Hardin, G. 1968. The tragedy of the commons, Science, Vol.

Law. Paper presented at the Berlin Conference, 4–21
August 2004.

Mediation.

in Hydrology, PCCP series, Vol. 29.
Cosgrove William J. and Rijsberman Frank R. 2000. World

and International Lakes (Helsinki 1992).
UNESCO/ISARM (United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization/International Shared Aquifer

International Water Academy. 2002 Building a Curriculum for

Delft, The Netherlands
Earthscan Publications Ltd.

the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses

ILA (International Law Association). 2004. Water Resources

Training in Water Conflict Resolution, Prevention, and

Cosgrove William J. (ed.). 2003. UNESCO Technical Document

on Monitoring and Assessment, under the Convention of

162, No. 3859, pp. 1243–48.

Water Research Report Series No. 17, UNESCO-IHE,
Clarke, R. and J. King. 2004. The Atlas of Water. London,

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).

www.thewateracademy.org/OppActivities/index_main.html

Resource Management). 2001. International Shared
Aquifer Resource Management: A Framework Document.
IHP Groundwater Series No. 1. Paris, UNESCO.
Varady, Robert G. and Matthew Iles-Shih (forthcoming) ‘Global

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and

Water Initiatives: What do the Experts Think? in

Human Well-Being. Washington DC, Island Press and

A.K.Biswas (ed) Impacts of Mega-Conferences on Global

World Resources Institute.
Ohlsson, L. 1999. Environment, Scarcity, and Conflict –

Water Development and Management. Springer Verlag.
Wolf, A., Yoffe, S. and Giordano, M. 2003. International

Water Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business.

A Study of Malthusian Concerns. Department of Peace

waters: Identifying basins at risk. UNESCO Technical

London, Earthscan.

and Development Research, Gothenburg University.

Document in Hydrology, PCCP Series, Vol. 20.

European Union water policy: www.europa.eu.int/comm/environment/water/
Global Water Partnership (GWP): www.gwpforum.org/servlet/PSP
Integrated River Basin Management (IRBM): www.panda.org/about_wwf/what_we_do/freshwater/our_solutions/rivers/irbm/index.cfm
International Network of Basin Organizations (INBO): www.riob.org/
International Rivers Network (IRN): www.irn.org
International Water Management Institute (IWMI): www.iwmi.cgiar.org
River Basin Initiative (RBI): www.riverbasin.org/ev_en.php
Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI): www.siwi.org
United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP): www.unep.org/themes/freshwater
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) water portal: www.unesco.org/water
World Bank: www.worldbank.org/water.htm
World Water Council (WWC): www.worldwatercouncil.org
Organization of American States (OAS)/UNESCO: www.oas.org/usde/isarm/ISARM_index.htm
INWEB: www.inweb.gr/workshops/documents/groundwater_final_report.html
European Declaration for a New Water Culture: www.unizar.es/fnca/euwater/index2.php?x=3&idioma=en

Nowadays people know the price of everything and the
value of nothing.
Oscar Wilde

Part 1. Understanding the Multi-faceted
Value of Water .................................................401
Part 2. The Socio-cultural Context ................402
Box 12.1: The high cost of bottled water
Box 12.2: Valuing water, valuing women
Map 12.1: World Heritage Sites with important
water-related value
Map 12.2: Ramsar sites with important
water-related value

Part 3. The Role of Valuation...........................405
3a. The special case of water ..................................406
Table 12.1: The high cost of coping with
source water pollution in selected communities
in the US
3b. Non-market economic valuation .................407
Table 12.2: Classifying goods and services
provided by water
Box 12.3: Willingness to pay for improved water and
wastewater services: Cairo, Egypt
Box 12.4: Economic valuation of returns to
irrigation water investments in Asia
Box 12.5: Benefits versus costs of improved
water and sanitation services
3c. Application of valuation techniques in
evaluating alternative governance strategies .....410

Part 4. Charging for Water Services .............413
Criteria applied to tariff-setting............................413
Structuring user charges......................................413
Fig. 12.1: Comparing the cost and value
of water
4a. Charging for municipal water services ................414
4b. Charging for irrigation water..............................415
Box 12.6: Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT)
as a cost recovery tool
4c. Charging for discharge of industrial effluent ......416
Fig. 12.2: Actual and planned water pollution
charges in the River Narva and Lake Peipsi
Catchment Area, 1993–2005

Part 5. Responding to the Challenge of
Valuing Water ...................................................418
5a. A shared management approach:
Public-private partnerships ................................418
Sharing Skills and resources.................................418
Box 12.7: Water and sewerage services in
Yerevan, Armenia
Fig. 12.3: Share of private sector participation
in water supply and sanitation by region
Reconciling cost recovery and affordability ...........419
Box 12.8: The ‘water war’ in Cochabamba,
Bolivia
An inclusive approach..........................................419
Box 12.9: Targeting the poor through
grassroots mechanisms in Manila,
the Philippines
The value of public-private partnerships...............420
5b. Virtual water trade ............................................421
Fig. 12.4: Estimated annual water savings
attributed to trade in wheat, Egypt, 1997–2001
5c. Payments for environmental services ................423
Box 12.10: Lessons learned in paying for
environmental services

Part 6. Indicators under Development ........426
Fig. 12.5: Affordability of utility services,
Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 2003–04

Part 7. Conclusions and
Recommendations ..........................................427
References and Websites ..................................429

12
CHAPTER 12

Valuing and
Charging for
Water

By

UNDESA
(UN Department of
Economic and Social
Affairs)

4 0 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Because of the unique characteristics and socio-cultural importance of water, attempts to value water, or more
specifically water services, in monetary terms is both difficult and, to some people, inappropriate. Nevertheless,
economic valuation – the process of attaching a monetary metric to water services – is an increasingly important tool
for policy-makers and planners faced with difficult decisions regarding the allocation and development of freshwater
resources. With market prices unable to capture the full spectrum of costs and benefits associated with water services,
economists have developed special techniques to estimate water’s non-market values. Two important occasions when
these tools are employed are assessments of alternative government strategies and tariff-setting. In this chapter,
we examine valuation tools, explain how they are used, and explore underlying social, economic and environmental
principles that condition their application. Finally we look at the emerging issues including private-sector participation,
‘virtual water’ trade, and payments for environmental services, which are playing an ever more prominent role in the
debate on the allocation and development of scarce freshwater resources.
Top to bottom:

I

Given its unique, life-sustaining properties and multiple
roles, water embodies a bundle of social, cultural,
environmental and economic values. All of these must
be taken into consideration in the selection of waterrelated policies or programmes if the goals of integrated
water resources management (IWRM) are to be realized.

I

Public policy analysis employing economic valuation
provide a rational and systematic means of assessing
and weighing the outcomes of different water policies
options and initiatives and can assist stakeholders,
planners and policy-makers to understand the tradeoffs associated with different governance options.

Men and women bathing in
the Ganges, India
above: Irrigated paddies,
Viet Nam
Women washing clothes at
the Ralwala spring in Siaya
district, Kenya. The spring
serves 30 households
Public water pump in
Amboseli Reserve, Kenya
below: Public water pump in
Amboseli Reserve,
Kenyaenya

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

I

Charging for water services – household, commercial,
industrial and agricultural – requires, firstly, consensus
on the underlying principles and objectives (e.g. full
cost recovery, protecting the needs of the poor and
the marginalized, etc.); secondly, a thorough, systematic
analysis of all costs and perceived benefits; and thirdly, a
tariff structure that endeavours to maximize governance
objectives within prevailing socio-economic conditions.

I

Public-private partnerships, though not appropriate to
all situations, can play a significant role in developing
cost-efficient water service systems. Government
authorities, however, must be open to a variety of
initiatives, including local enterprise, public-private
partnerships, community participation and water
markets, and must take an active regulatory role in
ensuring that societal goals are met with regard to
social equity and environmental sustainability –
as well as economic efficiency.

I

There is a great need not only for planners and
policy-makers who understand the advantages and
limitations of economic valuation techniques and
their potential role in informing decisions regarding
water resources management, but also for technicians
who can clearly express these concepts, utilize these
tools, and assist stakeholders in expressing their
values and preferences. In this way, economic
valuation can contribute more fully to information
sharing and transparency, all of which are important
for good governance.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 0 1

Part 1. Understanding the Multi-faceted
Value of Water
Water is vital for all life on this planet, but is also essential for food production, many manufacturing
processes, hydropower generation, and the service sector. The value of water varies for different users
depending on the ability to pay, the use to which the water will be put, access to alternative supplies,
and the variety of social, cultural and environmental values associated with the resource.
Acknowledging the totality and interdependence of water-related values important to stakeholders and
water users is critical to realizing Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM). Understanding the
distinction between the value of water – determined by its socio-cultural significance and the broad
spectrum of direct and indirect benefits it provides – the price of water, as charged to consumers, and
the cost of water as derived from the expense of providing water to consumers, is a critical first step
to understanding the role of economic valuation in water governance and management.
The Dublin principle1 to treat water as an economic good
follows a growing consensus on the need to maximize
benefits across a range of water uses. Still, the
importance of ensuring equitable access and meeting
the needs of the poor and disadvantaged members of
society is widely recognized. How to finance this task
remains a key challenge. While higher-income countries
move toward systems of water tariffs based on full cost
recovery and metered service, low-income countries
struggle to cover basic operating costs and, for the most
part, still tolerate various systems of subsidies as many
users are unwilling or unable to pay for water services.
According to the World Bank, pro-poor policies relying on
cross-subsidization have created an inefficient and
unsustainable water services sector with serious impacts
on the environment in many countries. Similarly, the
‘polluter pays’ principle, like the ‘user pays’ principle,
although broadly accepted, suffers from poor
enforcement due to a weak governance environment.
While some countries favour decentralization and
management transfer as a way to relieve cost burdens,
others see private sector participation as a means of
achieving better services and improved cost recovery.
Pricing or tariff-setting is widely supported in the
financial community both to raise the needed investment
capital and to curb inefficient use. None of these options
are without problems.
Difficulties associated with decentralization often stem
from political weakness and lack of institutional capacity
at the local level. Half-hearted support by national and
international organizations for community-driven
development of water services has also been a problem
in some areas. Private sector involvement, often touted

as a key to solving financial problems in this sector,
remains limited in many areas while the transfer of
management models from one region to another has
met with mixed results. Pricing, expected to serve a
variety of objectives, including cost recovery, more
prudent use of water, distributive justice and assured
supplies for poor, has generally led to rising prices and
a decline in water use in some countries. Many would
argue that the poor would be better served by more
focused tariff systems, which would be gradually
introduced and underpinned by a minimal level of
free service, or complimentary vouchers for water
service rather than cross-subsidization.
Although economic valuation is recognized by many as an
important tool in water management and substantial efforts
have already been made in clarifying concepts associated
with this technique, valuing water remains a controversial
issue. Many stakeholders still feel that economic valuation
is incapable of fully capturing the many social, cultural and
environmental values of water. However, the variety of
innovative initiatives attempted worldwide illustrates an
increasing sensitivity to local needs and a growing
understanding that the development and management
of water resources must be a shared responsibility.

Although
economic
valuation is
recognized by
many as an
important tool
in water
management…
valuing water
remains a
controversial
issue

1. See Chapter 1 for definition.

4 0 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. The Socio-cultural Context
We speak of a crisis in water management because in many places the available freshwater is
insufficient to meet all demands. As discussed in previous chapters, demand for water is increasing
because, despite falling fertility rates in many countries, the world’s population continues to increase
while freshwater water supplies remain constant. Meanwhile, economic growth in many countries,
especially in India and China, has increased disposable income and instigated lifestyle changes that
have often meant increased water consumption. Agriculture and industry, also growing in response
to these changes, require water for production, processing and transport, while electric utilities look
increasingly to hydropower to meet ‘clean’ energy demands. Urbanization, a seemingly unstoppable
trend worldwide, intensifies the pressure.
As the competition for water resources accelerates, one
becomes increasingly aware of water uses in different
areas. The essential value of water is universally
recognized: without water there is no life. For many

ecosystems, such as rivers, lakes and wetlands,
freshwater is the defining element. The utility of water
as a raw material, as a solvent, and as a source of kinetic
energy has long been recognized. The role of water in

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

BOX 12.1 THE HIGH COST OF BOTTLED WATER
Over the last decade, sales of bottled water

most companies market this product on the basis

largest demand for bottled water comes from

have increased dramatically to become what

that it is safer than tap water, various studies

city dwellers, for in rural areas people are too

is estimated to be a US $100 billion industry

indicate that bottled water regulations are in

poor to pay for this alternative (Yardley, 2005).

(Gleick et al., 2004). From 1999 to 2004,

fact inadequate to ensure purity or safety.

global bottled water consumption grew from

The World Health Organization (WHO, 2000)

Most water bottles are meant to be recyclable.

approximately 26 billion gallons to over 40

warns that bottled water can actually have a

However, only 20 percent of polyethylene

billion gallons (IBWA, 2005). In several cities of

greater bacterial count than municipal water.

terephthalate (PET), the substance used for

the developing world, demand for bottled water

In many countries, the manufacturers themselves

water bottles, is actually recycled (Gleick et al.,

often stems from the fact that the municipal

are responsible for product sampling and safety

2004). In Greece, it is estimated that 1 billion

water supplies – if available at all – fail to meet

testing. In the United States, for example, the

plastic drinking water bottles are thrown away

basic criteria for drinking water quality. But

standards by which bottled water is graded

each year (BBC, 2005). In addition, the PET

companies manufacturing bottled water are

(regulated by the Food and Drug Administration)

manufacturing process releases harmful

also generating large revenues in developed

are actually lower than those for tap water

chemical emissions that compromise air quality.

countries. Bottled water sales in the United

(regulated by the Environmental Protection

States in 2004 – higher than in any other

Agency) (Gleick et al., 2004).

Where safe tap water is temporarily unavailable,
bottled water can provide an effective short-term

country – totalled over US $9 billion for 6.8
billion gallons of water, that is, enough water

The explosive increase in bottled water sales

solution for meeting a population’s needs. But

to meet the annual physiological needs of a

raises important questions related not only to

as noted above, the massive growth in sales of

population the size of Cambodia (IBWA, 2005).

health, but also to the social and environmental

bottled water worldwide comes at a cost. A

Countries in the top ten list of bottled water

implications of the phenomenon. It remains to

better appreciation of how people value water

consumers include Mexico, China, Brazil, Italy,

be seen, for example, how the growth of this

may help us understand how the bottled water

Germany, France, Indonesia, Spain and India.

industry will affect the extension and upkeep

phenomenon is impacting society’s health,

of municipal water services upon which the

economic and environmental goals.

When asked why they are willing to pay so much

poor depend. In fact, those most likely to need

for bottled water when they have access to tap

alternative, clean water sources are also those

water, consumers often list concerns about the

least likely to be able to afford the high cost of

safety of tap water as a major reason for

bottled water. In China, where roughly 70

preferring bottled water (NRDC, 1999). While

percent of rivers and lakes are polluted, the

Sources: BBC, 2005; Gleick et al., 2004; IBWA, 2005;
NRDC, 1999; WHO, 2000; Yardley, 2005.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 0 3

BOX 12.2: VALUING WATER, VALUING WOMEN
In most, if not all, developing countries,
collecting water for the family is women’s
work. While water for drinking and cooking
must be carried home, dishes, clothes and often
children may be carried to the water source for
washing. Women and girls are often seen
queuing with their water pots at all-tooscarce taps, then walking long distances home
balancing them on their heads or hips. If the
water is contaminated and a family member
falls ill, it is often the woman who must care

women have been given access to education

society as a whole, when women have income-

for them. Children in particular are vulnerable.

and to money-making work, such as handicrafts

earning opportunities. Thus, investments made to

In parts of the world where AIDS is rampant,

production, and are permitted to sell their

improve access to safe drinking water are both a

individuals with weakened immune systems also

products and to earn income for the family,

reflection of the value placed on water for human

easily fall prey to pathogens in the water supply.

their social as well as financial position

well-being and the value accorded women.

improved dramatically.

Providing regular and dependable access to
safe drinking water is one way of improving the

The low status of women in many societies
means that their contribution – in terms of the

Attitudes toward water-collecting can also shift.

time and energy spent, for example, in fetching

The time women spend collecting water,

water – is considered to be of little value.

especially when simple and readily available

In economic terms, the opportunity cost2 of

technological alternatives exist, looks very

their labour is perceived as near zero. Where

different and far more costly to the family and

human health is, of course, critical. Recently we have
seen the growth in bottled water consumption, which
although a necessity in some cases, is also a growing
trend in places where safe and inexpensive water is
readily available on tap (see Box 12.1).
As a physical, emotional and cultural life-giving element,
water must be considered as more than just an economic
resource. Sharing water is an ethical imperative as well
as an expression of human identity and solidarity (see
Chapter 11). Accordingly, the high value placed on water
can be found in the cosmologies and religions and the
tangible and intangible heritage of the world’s various
cultures. The unique place water holds in human life has
ensured it an elevated social and cultural position, as
witnessed by the key role water plays in the rituals of all
major faiths. The proposition that water is a human right
alongside the increasing competition between water
users has resulted in water becoming a political issue in
many regions (see Chapter 2). The amount of time spent
in collecting water – a task mainly performed by women
and children – is increasing in many areas. Water supply

position of women as well as society as a whole.

Source: UNICEF/WHO, 2004.

must, therefore, also be viewed as a social issue and,
more specifically, a gender issue (see Box 12.2).
Restored interest in ethnic and cultural heritage in many
societies around the world has lead to a revival of
numerous traditional rituals, festivals and social customs,
many of which feature water as a key element. Thus, the
tradition of social bathing endures, for example, in Turkey
and Japan. Water sports too play an important role;
currently nearly one-third of Olympic sports use water,
snow or ice. Many archaeological sites – the Roman
aqueducts, the Angkor ruins, the Ifugao and Inca
terraces, among others – are monuments to ancient
societies’ ingenuity in water engineering. Listing these
historic sites on the roster of World Heritage protected
cultural properties is in effect formal recognition of the
high value that the international community accords
these locations (see Map 12.1).

Water splashing at a
festival in the Dai ethnic
Minority Village, China

2. Opportunity cost is defined as
the maximum worth of a good
or input among possible
alternative uses (OMB, 1992).

WWDR Chapter 12f (F)

10/3/06

15:36

Page 404

4 0 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Map 12.1: World Heritage Sites with important water-related value
1. Venice and its Lagoon, Italy
2. The Old Bridge of Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina
3. Rice Terraces of the Cordilleras, the Philippines
4. Angkor, Cambodia
5. Nubian Monuments, Egypt
6. Heritage Medal for City of Potosi, Bolivia
7. Xochimilco and Mexico City, Mexico

Note: These are just a few of the water-related sites on the World Heritage Cultural Properties list. The list contains more than 628 cultural sites that have been
cited as having ‘outstanding universal value to humanity’. With the 1972 Convention concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, UNESCO
seeks to encourage the identification and protection of cultural and natural heritage around the world so that it may be enjoyed by all peoples. More information
on this programme and these and many other sites can be found at whc.unesco.org.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Map 12.2: Ramsar sites with important water-related value

1. Everglades National Park, US
2. Danube Delta, Romania

3. Bundala, Sri Lanka
4. Marshlands, Iraq

5. Lake Naivasha, Kenya
6. Rio del Plata, Uruguay

Note: The Convention on Wetlands, signed in Ramsar, Iran, in 1971, is an intergovernmental treaty providing the framework for national action and international
cooperation for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources. There are presently 146 Contracting Parties to the Convention, with 1,459 wetland
sites, totalling 125.4 million hectares designated for inclusion in the Ramsar List of Wetlands of International Importance.
Source: www.ramsar.org/key_sitelist.htm

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 0 5

A growing appreciation of ecological processes is
developing in many countries as society’s experience of
pollution and other environmental disasters increases.
The wholesale destruction of the natural environment,
as in the case of the Aral Sea, is no longer socially or
politically acceptable. Increasingly, society has come to
value healthy ecosystems and accordingly has instituted
legally-binding accords to better protect the environment.
The Ramsar Convention, setting aside more than 1,400
wetland sites around the world for preservation and
protection (see Map 12.2), is a testimony to the
international recognition of the environmental, social
and economic importance, and correspondingly the
value, accorded to these special ecosystems.

invaluable partners for scientists in the quest for
solutions to the challenges facing planners and
practitioners pursuing IWRM (see Chapter 13). Given
their fundamental role in human life and society, waterrelated traditions and practices are deep-rooted and thus
changing them could have significant social impact.
The strong cultural and social dimensions of water
management and use must be understood in all their
diversity if we are to find sustainable solutions to global
water problems. Valuing water, including sustaining and
fostering water-related cultural diversity, heritage and
knowledge, is critical to enhancing our ability to adapt
in a changing world. Economic valuation of water
resources must be recognized as existing within this
larger and more complex context of valuing water.

The interaction between people and their environment
is embedded in their culture. The ways in which water is
conceived and valued, allocated and managed, used and
abused, worshipped or desecrated, are influenced by the
cultural and environmental context. Cultural diversity –
the result of millennia of human development – includes
a treasure trove of practical approaches to water
husbandry. Indigenous knowledge holders can be

Angkor, Cambodia

Cultural
diversity…
includes a
treasure trove of
practical
approaches to
water husbandry

Part 3. The Role of Valuation
In formal models of policy analysis, valuation is the process of assessing significance against the
projected results of proposed strategies. Values, in this sense, are weights assigned to outcomes of
specific policy proposals, and can vary depending on which services are being valued, on the location
of the services and other circumstances. Valuation assesses situations with versus situations without
governance intervention, in other words, incremental gains and losses.
Essentially a tool for policy-makers and planners,
public policy evaluation (including benefit-cost analysis),
is a process of ‘reasoned’ decision-making and involves
several logical, sequential steps. First, identify the
relevant social goals. Second, characterize the perceived
problems (defined as discrepancies between goals and
the current situation). The third step is to specify
alternative courses of action (governance strategies) to
achieve the agreed goals. Fourth, predict and evaluate
the predicted outcomes, both costs and benefits.
The fifth and final step is to choose and implement the
strategy that seems best able to achieve society’s goals
(MacRae and Whittington, 1997).
Economic valuation thus refers to the application of
special techniques to determine the economic value

(demand or willingness to pay)3 of water services for
purposes of informing policy decisions regarding the
management and allocation of water resources. In the
context of selecting governance strategies, valuation is
seldom applied to water itself, but rather to the
consequences of proposed policy initiatives. The
beneficial and adverse effects of proposed initiatives
(or the benefits and costs) are identified, and values
(monetary assessments) assigned to these effects.
In the context of public water supply policy, charging, for
instance, is a governance strategy, and the choice of how
much of the cost of water supply to recover, and from
whom, is an important policy issue. Non-specialists
sometimes incorrectly equate the observed price, or
charge to the user, with economic value. Although tariffsetting must reflect both cost and value considerations, it

3. Willingness to pay is the
maximum amount an
individual would be willing to
pay, or give up, in order to
secure a change in the
provision of a good or service
(OMB, 1992).

4 0 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

must be remembered that the upper level of charges is
limited by willingness to pay, rather than being defined by
it. Under-valuing, or under-pricing ecological resources not
only affects resource allocation, but can bias the direction
of technological development (Dasgupta and Mäler, 2004).

consideration of various different water policies and
programmes. Three of the most important of these are the
principles of economic efficiency, user-pays and water security.
I

Economic Efficiency: Efficiency speaks to the
importance of maximizing returns for the money,
manpower and materials invested – more ‘crop per
drop’. Given the growing competition for freshwater,
making more efficient use of the resources available
is critical. Efficiency contributes to equity to the extent
that if some users are discouraged from wasteful use,
more water will be available for sharing with other
users. Economic efficiency is summed up in the
measure ‘net present value’5 or ‘present value of net
benefits’. Equivalent alternative measures include the
‘benefit-cost ratio’6 and the ‘internal rate of return’7.
The formulas for all of these measures involve
generating monetary estimates of the costs (including
damage costs and opportunity costs8) and benefits of
the proposed programme for each year and, with the
application of a social interest rate, discounting the
stream of expected annual net benefits to a single
number in current value terms. The goal of economic
efficiency can and should serve the parallel goals of
social equity and environmental sustainability – the
three pillars of IWRM.

I

User Pays: The ‘user pays’ principle contends that
consumers should pay an amount equivalent to the
burden (i.e. the full social cost) that their consumption
places on society. Full social costs include both the
capital, operating and maintenance expenditures to
keep the system operating, and also the opportunity
costs. They would also include the costs of damage
resulting from the water pollution imposed on the
society – the ‘polluter pays’ principle.

I

Water Security: Often perceived to conflict with
the above ‘user pays’ principle, the notion of water
security holds that resources should be distributed
according to ‘need’. Accordingly, all individuals have
the right to an adequate, reliable and affordable
supply of potable water. Because of the importance
of potable water for human health and well-being, it
is usually regarded as a ‘merit good’, meaning that in
certain cases, people deserve more water than they
are willing or able to pay for. Thus ‘security’ in the
context of domestic water supply refers to governance
policies designed to help the poor satisfy basic water
needs. This may involve setting tariffs according to the

3a. The special case of water

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

A variety of physical, social, cultural, political and
economic factors make water a special case with regard
to economic valuation. This in turn presents special
challenges in selecting appropriate governance
mechanisms. Because of its variable physical nature –
it flows, seeps and evaporates, but sometimes is a
stationary solid – it is difficult or costly to establish and
enforce property rights over water. Another critical
aspect is its variability, and increasing uncertainty, in
terms of space, time and quality. Because of the many
environmental services provided by water and aquatic
ecosystems, water is considered a ‘public good’ – the two
defining characteristics being ‘non-rivalry in consumption’
and ‘non-excludability’ of non-paying users. However, as
shown in Table 12.2, it also has many private uses. The
general perception of water as ‘different’ has political as
well as economic consequences, all tending to dissuade
the private sector from investing in the water sector.

4. Economies of scale are the
savings achieved in the cost
of production by larger
enterprises because the cost
of initial investment can be
defrayed across a large
number of producing units.
5. Net present value (NPV) is the
discounted or present value of
an annual or periodic stream
of benefits minus costs over
the life of a project (OMB
1992).
6. The benefit-cost ratio (BCR) is
the ratio of the present value
of periodic benefits to the
present value of periodic costs
over the life of the project
(Boardman et al., 2000).
7. Internal rate of return (IRR) is
the discount rate that will
render the present value of a
future stream of net benefits
equal to zero (OMB, 1992).
8. Opportunity cost is the
maximum worth of a good or
input among possible
alternative uses (OMB, 1992).

The importance of water for public health means that
governments generally attempt to provide some minimal
level of water supply and sanitation services, whether or
not the full cost of these services can be recovered from
users. The water sector is exceptionally capital-intensive –
not only as compared to manufacturing and industry
generally, but to other public utilities – with assets that
are fixed, non-malleable and very long-lived (Hanemann,
2005). An industry typified by economies of scale4,
where a single supplier can provide the least-cost service,
is considered a ‘natural’ monopoly and public ownership
or regulation is customary. Such is the case for the water
sector, which makes economic analysis a particular
challenge. Some argue that the poor appreciation of
the complexities of water as an economic commodity
contributes to the current water crisis (Hanemann, 2005).
Due to the special nature of water and its particular role in
human life and development, there are certain socially and
politically determined principles that must be taken into
consideration when assessing the value of any policy or
programme. These principles reflect collective social values
that set the tone for the debate and, in some cases,
determine the boundary parameters and influence the

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 0 7

criterion of ability to pay, for example, a basic charge
less than a certain fraction of net consumer income.
A recent OECD (2003) report suggests a ‘macroaffordability indicator’, or ‘water charges as proportion
of income or expenditure’ be considered. In a given
network, lower income households will generally pay a
larger proportion of income for water services than the
average household.
Numerous additional social and cultural considerations
may influence the selection and implementation of water
governance policies. The valuation of water resources
needs to take into account traditional cultural values that
affect how water is perceived and used. Religious and
ethical teachings regarding the appropriate use of
water can have an important influence on public water
management activities. Experience has shown that
cultural perceptions of the role of water and perceived
rights associated with its use strongly affect social
acceptance of government attempts to effect policy
changes in this sector. As noted earlier, differential
effects with regard to gender also need to be considered
in assessing policy initiatives.
Environmental considerations are also receiving growing
emphasis worldwide. Protests against the environmental
impacts of water development projects have been known
in the United States since the early twentieth century,
although at that time there were few theoretical tools
to aid in water policy analysis. Models for evaluating the
environmental as well as the economic impacts of water
projects only emerged in the post-Second World War era
with the work of Arthur Maass and Maynard Hufschmidt
at Harvard University. In the United States, The Omnibus
Water Resources Act of 1970 mandated that water
project planning consider a range of objectives including
social and environmental concerns. The 1983 guidelines
of the Water Resources Council strongly influence such
analyses still today.
The OECD’s Management of Water Projects (1985)
takes a similar approach, advocating measurement of
incremental environmental impacts. A dozen general
categories of impacts are suggested for consideration in
the evaluation process. Among these are: water quality
(including as appropriate for the given case, specific
pollutants such as dissolved oxygen, temperature,
biochemical oxygen demand, pH, bacteria etc.), amenity
and recreation values (e.g., clean water, turbidity; colour
and, odour), natural hazard exposure, aquatic ecosystems

and aesthetics (loss of valued scenery, or historical
or archaeological sites). The Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment (2005) report forcefully reiterates the
importance of considering environmental and ecosystem
values. The economic significance of anticipating and
avoiding environmental damages becomes apparent
when one considers the costs of remediation, not to
mention the social costs. Table 12.1 illustrates the high
cost of restoring a clean water source in a selected
sample of cities across the United States.

3b. Non-market economic valuation
Economic evaluation of resource allocation requires
some means of estimating resource values. When markets
operate appropriately, a set of market values (prices)
appear which serve to allocate resources and commodities
in a manner consistent with the objectives of producers
and consumers. In the case of freshwater, however,
markets seldom operate effectively, or, more likely, are
absent. Non-market economic valuation can be defined as
the study of actual and hypothetical human behaviour to
derive estimates of the economic value (often called
shadow prices or accounting prices) of goods and services
in situations where market prices are absent or distorted.
Such estimated prices are an essential component of
economic assessment of public water policy choices. Table
12.2 illustrates some of the various types of water-related
goods, services and impacts that might be measured by
non-market valuation techniques.9
Most applied methods of water valuation fall into one
of two broad categories depending on mathematical
procedures and types of data employed: deductive and
inductive approaches. Deductive methods involve logical
processes to reason from general premises to particular
conclusions. Applied to water valuation, the deductive
methods commence with abstract models of human
behaviour that are fleshed out with data that is
appropriate to projected future policy, economic or
technological scenarios. Assumptions can be varied and
the sensitivity of the results to varying assumptions can
be determined. The advantages of deductive models are
simplicity, flexibility and the ability to analyse a
hypothesized future. In principle, they can incorporate
alternative assumptions about prices, interest rates and
technology, thus testing the projections about unknown,
future conditions.
Inductive methods, on the other hand, involve a process
of reasoning from the particular to the general, that is,

Fishery, India

Economic
evaluation of
resource
allocation
requires some
means of
estimating
resource values

9. See Freeman, 2003 for a
state-of-the-art review of the
theory of non-market
economic valuation of
environmental goods and
services.

4 0 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 12.1: The high cost of coping with source water pollution in selected communities in the US
Community
Perryton, Texas
Camden-Rockland,
Maine

Type of problem
Carbon tetrachloride1 in groundwater
Excess phosphorus in Lake
Chickawaukie

Response
Remediation

Costs (USA)
$250,000 (estimated)

Advanced treatment

$6 million (projected)

Moses Lake,
Washington

Trichloroethylene2 in groundwater

Blend water,
public education

$1.8 million
(to date)

Mililani, Hawaii

Pesticides, solvents in groundwater

Build and run treatment plant

Tallahassee, Florida

Tetrachloroethylene3 in groundwater

Enhanced treatment

Pittsfield, Maine

Land-fill leachate in groundwater

Replace supply, remediation

Rouseville,
Pennsylvania
Atlanta, Missouri

Petroleum, chlorides in groundwater

Replace supply

Volatile Organic Compounds
(VOCs)4 in groundwater
Solvents, freon5 in groundwater

Replace supply

$2.5 million +
$154,000/yr
$2.5 million +
$110,000/yr
$1.5 million (replace
supply)
> $300,000
(to date)
$500,000 to $600,000

Install water lines, provide
free water
Upgrade water system;
immediate water utility;
Health Department costs
Replace supply
Replace supply
Remediation, enhanced
treatment, replace supply

$3 million + $45,000/yr
for 50 years
$89 million to upgrade
system; millions in
immediate costs
$180,000
$500,000
$54 million (capital
costs only)

Montgomery County,
Maryland
Milwaukee, Wisconsin

Hereford, Texas
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho
Orange County,
California

Cryptosporidium6 in river water

Fuel oil in groundwater
Trichloroethylene2 in groundwater
Nitrates, salts, selenium, VOCs in
groundwater

Note: This table features a sampling of localities of various sizes that have borne high, readily quantifiable costs due to source water
pollution. It attempts to isolate community costs, excluding state, federal and private industry funding. Not included here are the costs
to individuals, such as lost wages and medical costs, reduced property values, higher water bills, and, in extreme cases, death.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

1. A manufactured chemical most often found in the air as a colourless gas, used in the production of refrigeration fluid and
propellants for aerosol cans, as a pesticide, as a cleaning fluid and degreasing agent, in fire extinguishers, and in spot removers;
soluble in water.
2. A colourless or blue organic liquid with a chloroform-like odour used as a solvent to remove grease from fabricated metal parts and
some textiles.
3. A manufactured chemical used for dry cleaning and metal degreasing. Exposure to very high concentrations can cause dizziness,
headaches, sleepiness, confusion, nausea, difficulty in speaking and walking, unconsciousness,
and death. See also:
www.atsdr.cdc.gov/tfacts18.html
4. Volatile organic compounds; for more information see: glossary.eea.eu.int/EEAGlossary/N/non-methane_volatile_organic_compound
5. FREON (trade name) is any one of a special class of chemical compounds that are used as refrigerants, aerosol propellants and
solvents.
6. A parasitic protozoa found in soil, food, water, or surfaces that have been contaminated with infected human or
animal faeces.
Source: NCSC, n.d. ca. 2000.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 0 9

Table 12.2: Classifying goods and services provided by water
Commodity (or Private) Goods
Producers’ Goods

Non-Commodity (or Public) Goods

Consumers’ Goods

Use Values

1. Agricultural Producers
I Crop Irrigation
I Aquaculture

1. Residential water supply

2. Off-stream industries
I Manufacturing
I Commercial services
3. In-stream industries
I Hydropower
I Transportation
I Fisheries

2. Residential sanitation

1. Enhancing beneficial
effects
I Ecosystem services
I Recreation
I Aesthetics
I Wildlife habitat
I Fish habitat
2. Reducing adverse effects
I Pollution abatement
I Flood risk reduction

Non-use Values
(Existence and bequest
values)
1. Protection of aquatic
environment

2. Protection of wild lands

3. Protection of biodiversity
and endangered species

Source: Young, 2005.

from real-world data to general relationships.
Observations on water-user behaviour are tabulated
and subjected to formal statistical analysis to control for
external factors influencing willingness to pay. Use may
also be made of surveys of expressed preferences for
recreation or environmental improvements, observations
of prices on various elements from water rights to land
transactions, responses to survey questionnaires, and
secondary data from government reports. Because
inductive techniques are based on observations of actual
behaviour and real-life situations, they are preferred by
many analysts. With data from published sources or
surveys, these can be readily used to analyse the
outcome of previous policies. One limitation in the
evaluation of future or hypothesized policies is that
analysis may involve assumptions outside the range of
available historical observations. The accuracy of inductive
techniques depends on several factors, including the
representativeness and validity of the observed data used
in the inference, the set of variables and the functional
form used in fitting the data, and the appropriateness of
the assumed statistical distribution. For readers interested
in detailed discussion of these methods and the specific
contexts in which they may be useful, there are numerous
texts available for consultation.10
Examples of the application of different methods are
provided in Boxes 12.3 to 12.5. In Box 12.3 we see how
contingent valuation was used to evaluate the willingness
to pay for a proposed improved wastewater disposal

program in Cairo, Egypt. Box 12.4 summarizes several
statistical (inductive) studies using historical government
data to develop estimates of investment returns to
irrigation in Asia. Box 12.5 provides an example of a
major benefit-cost analysis of global improvements of
water supply and sanitation services, using an alternative
cost (deductive) approach.
Economic valuation has been criticized for its lack of
transparency and difficulty of use. Certainly, competence
with survey research and other data collecting methods
and complex mathematical and statistical skills, plus
significant time and resources are necessary to perform
valid economic valuations. A related problem is the
dependence of techniques, based on consumer surveys
and choice experiments, on public knowledge of the
subject in question (Powe et al., 2004). One major criticism
is that many stakeholders feel that economic valuation fails
to capture all relevant value, especially social, cultural and
environmental aspects, of typical water and environmental
policy issues. Finally, non-specialists may find it difficult to
understand and interpret study results.
Over the last several decades, the theory and practice
of non-market economic valuation of water and
environmental resource policies have been greatly
improved, and those with the skills, time and resources
can effectively derive conceptually consistent and
empirically valid measures for the value of water and
the benefits of water governance strategies. The primary

10. See, for example, Young,
2005.

4 1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 12.3: WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR IMPROVED WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICES: CAIRO, EGYPT
A review of the status of wastewater disposal

sample of about 1,000 households was

per household per month, while a connection to

in Cairo, Egypt – one of the world’s largest

interviewed for each of the four programmes.

the wastewater network was valued at US $7.60

and fastest growing urban areas – showed

Statistical analysis of responses showed

versus a cost of US $6.30 for a net benefit of US

inadequate water supply and wastewater

willingness to pay for a water connection was

$1.30 per household per month. However, if the

conveyance, treatment and disposal capacities.

US $7.70 per household per month compared to

wastewater investment programme was designed

Contingent valuation methods employing a

an estimated cost of US $2.50 per household per

so as to require the household to pay for

referendum-type questionnaire to collect

month for a net economic benefit of US $5.40

treatment in addition to disposal, willingness

information on consumer preferences were

per household per month (evaluated with a 10

to pay was insufficient to justify that form of

used to develop estimates of the willingness to

percent discount rate in 1995 US dollars).

investment programme. And, although the mean

pay and economic net benefits for each of four

Respondents also showed a positive net

net willingness to pay was positive for most of

potential investment programmes: (a) opportunity

willingness to pay for reliability of US $0.50

these plans, the distribution of responses

to connect to the water supply network; (b)

per household per month. For the wastewater

showed that some lower income households

improved reliability: provision of all-day water

programmes, an estimate of willingness to pay

would be unwilling to participate if charges

service; (c) wastewater maintenance to eliminate

of US $2.20 per household per month was

were set at full costs.

sewer overflows; and (d) an in-home connection

derived for the programme to eliminate sewer

to the wastewater disposal network. A separate

flooding which compared to a cost of US $0.20

advantage of applying these techniques is that they
generate information on different beneficial and adverse
effects in a common denominator – money. This, in
turn, enables policy-makers and stakeholders to better
understand the trade-offs to be made and be better
prepared to make the necessary decisions regarding
the most appropriate water development strategies.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

3c. Application of valuation techniques in
evaluating alternative governance strategies
Public policies addressing water resources allocation and
management must serve societal goals, such as equity and
environmental sustainability, as well as financial feasibility,
administrative practicality and economic efficiency. Thus,
choosing the best governance strategy is a challenging
process. In the context of water governance, the
application of non-market valuation methods to estimate
benefits (reflecting demand or willingness to pay) for
water services have been used to assess and compare
alternative proposed policies and programmes for the
management and allocation of water resources.
Governance strategies should be selected to optimize the
achievement of societal goals. In this context, valuation
can be viewed as a fairly neutral and objective process
by which social goals and trade-offs can be identified
and debated and the optimal governance strategies
chosen. In benefit-cost analysis (BCA) (e.g. Boardman
et al., 2000), policy outcomes are assumed to be

Source: Hoehn and Krieger, 2000.

quantifiable and values are assigned to them in the single
monetary metric. Although many impacts, positive and
negative, are not properly or fully measured, if at all, by
market prices, non-market economic valuation techniques
can be used to assign monetary values to these impacts.
In BCA, monetary values must be assigned to each
physical unit of input and product. The primary sources of
these values are the observable market prices. However,
in the case of water, as discussed above, market prices
do not adequately reflect all the goods and services
associated with water resources nor the true social value,
for example, when agricultural commodity prices are
controlled by government regulation or when minimum
wage rates are set above market clearing prices. In such
cases, prices must be adjusted to reflect the full costs
and benefits. In many cases where market prices do
not exist at all, it is necessary to construct surrogate
prices. Whatever the source, the prices used in BCA are
interpreted as expressions of willingness to pay (WTP)
for, or willingness to accept compensation (WTA) for
going without, a particular good or service by individual
consumers, producers or units of government. For market
prices, this presumption is straightforward, since the
market price represents the willingness to pay at the
margin for the potential buyers of the good or service.
For non-market economic goods, WTP is also the
theoretical basis on which surrogate (or shadow) prices
are calculated. The assertion that willingness to pay is an

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 1 1

BOX 12.4: ECONOMIC VALUATION OF RETURNS TO IRRIGATION WATER INVESTMENTS IN ASIA
Several recent studies to assess the relative

econometric study, found that irrigation

Thailand, Fan et al. (2004) report that for

contribution of policies designed to enhance

development distantly trailed road building,

1970–2000, estimated economic benefits of

rural economic growth and reduce poverty in

agricultural research and development, and

irrigation investment failed to exceed costs,

Asia have been reported by the International

education in its impact on poverty reduction,

while agricultural research and development,

Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). Each study

although irrigation showed a somewhat more

electricity and education yielded quite generous

used inductive methods to analyse state or

favourable impact on productivity. Fan et al.

rates of return. Overall then, one can infer that

provincial time series data on public

(2002) also compared returns to irrigation

rates of economic return to investments in

expenditures and economic output measures.

investments in China with other rural

irrigated agriculture have been low in recent

Evenson et al. (1999), having analysed data

development programmes from provincial data

decades, particularly when compared to the

from nearly all districts of thirteen states in India

for 1970–97. For the nation as a whole and for

opportunity cost of capital or to the return on

from 1956 to 1987, found that the marginal

each of three economic zones, the authors

alternative programmes aimed at improving the

internal rate of return (IRR) to investments in

reported high returns to investment in

livelihoods of the rural poor. These conclusions

irrigation was only about 5 percent. In contrast,

education, agricultural research and

suggest that the deductive methods typically

public expenditures on agricultural research and

development, and rural infrastructure, but

used to evaluate proposed investments in

extension were reported to yield marginal IRR of

‘[i]nvestments in irrigation had only modest

irrigation may have been overly favourable to

58 percent and 45 percent, respectively. Also for

impact on agricultural production, and even less

such programmes.

India, Fan et al. (1999), using 1970–93 state

impact on poverty reduction, even after trickle-

data in a cross-sectional, time-series

down benefits were allowed.’ Similarly, for

appropriate measure of value or cost follows from the
postulate that public policy should be based on the
aggregation of individual consumer preferences.
Not all agree with this approach, however. Major
opponents challenge the view that the economic
efficiency impacts measured by benefit-cost analysis
fully reflect society’s goals. Sagoff (2004), the wellknown and outspoken advocate of the widely held
position that benefit-cost analysis has little role to play
in environmental planning, argues that political resolution
of value conflicts is the most appropriate approach. The
basic argument is that other important goals relevant
to decisions on appropriate water governance strategies
cannot be reduced to the common denominator of
money. When values conflict, as they often do, a dilemma
arises. Some solution must be found which reconciles the
disparate, competing perspectives. A widely used method
of reconciliation is called the ‘approved process approach’
(Morgan and Henrion, 1990). This approach, roughly
speaking, requires all relevant parties to apply the
concept of ‘due process’, or to observe a specified set
of procedures, to estimate a proposed policy’s impacts on
all relevant indicators of value. According to this method,
any decision reached after a mutually acceptable
mediator balances the competing values according to the
specified procedures is deemed acceptable.

Source: Young, 2005.

One variant of the approved process approach often
applied in water resources analyses is called ‘multiobjective planning’. Multi-objective assessment of water
projects and policies has been promoted for some time in
both the US and Europe with two well-known manuals by
the Water Resources Council (1983) and by OECD (1985).
Both emphasize a similar framework of analysis with
three goals in common: economic efficiency,
environmental quality and social well-being. Each
provides advice on developing indicators to reflect the
degree of goal attainment by particular strategies
focusing on indicators both for beneficial as well as
adverse effects for the with versus the without policy
situation. Both approaches call for environmental impacts
to be balanced against economic and social welfare
considerations. In each case, the manuals emphasize the
point that the task of technical analysts is not to come
to a final decision on governance strategy, but to
illustrate the expected impacts in the appropriate metrics.
With many values or goals considered incommensurate
(i.e. not reducible to a common denominator), it is
assumed that the ultimate resolution or weighting of
conflicting values will be referred to the political arena.

Watering ramp in a field,
Senegal

4 1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 12.5 BENEFITS VERSUS COSTS OF IMPROVED WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES
estimated benefit-cost ratios for selected

Adoption of the Millennium Development Goals

4. Providing disinfectant at point-of-use over

(MDGs) that deal with extending the availability

and above increasing access to improved

regions. Economic benefits were found to greatly

of water and sanitation services has prompted

water supply and sanitation.

exceed the costs for all interventions, particularly

interest in assessing the net economic benefits

5. Providing regulated piped water supply in

of such programmes. Hutton and Haller (2004)

house and sewerage connection with partial

evaluated five different scenarios with different

sewerage connection for everyone.

level (4), a result that was robust for all regions
and under alternative intervention scenarios.

levels of intervention for seventeen World Health
Organization (WHO) sub-regions. The five levels

Costs were determined to be the annualized

of intervention were:

equivalent of the full capital cost of the
intervention. Benefits were measured in terms of

1. Water improvements required to meet the

several variables: the time saving associated with

Source: Hutton and Haller, 2004.
www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
wsh0404.pdf

MDG for water supply (halving by 2015 the
proportion of those without safe drinking

WHOaccess
Sub-Region
Population
better
to water and sanitation,
the gain

water).

in productive time due to less time (million)
lost to

Benefit-cost ratio by intervention level
1

for water supply plus the MDG for sanitation

illness,
patient and
healthcare
sector savings
Sub-Saharan
Africa
(E)
481 due 11.50
toAmericas
reduced need
(D) for treatment of diarrhoeal
93
10.01

(halving by 2015 the proportion of those

Europe (C)
223
diseases,
and the value of prevented deaths.

without access to adequate sanitation).

South
Eastbenefit
Asia (D)
The
largest
was from the value1689
of time
Western Pacific (B)
1488

2. Water improvements to meet the water MGD

3. Increasing access to improved water and
sanitation for everyone.

savings due to better access to water and

6.03
7.81
5.24

3

4

5

12.54
10.21
3.40
3.16
3.36

11.71
10.59
6.55
7.88
6.63

15.02
13.77
5.82
9.41
7.89

4.84
3.88
1.27
2.90
1.93

Note: The
parenthetical
letters
identify
sanitation
services.
The Table
below
showsWHO
the sub-regions as classified by epidemiological
(health risk) indicators. See source for definitions.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

2

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 1 3

Part 4. Charging for Water Services
For both municipal and irrigation water services in developing countries, performance, efficiency
and conditions of water delivery systems tend to fall far short of normal standards. Many people, but
mostly the poor, lack access to safe water supplies and/or sanitation facilities, and for many others,
the only access may be via water vendors or public latrines. Often over one-third of water transmission
is lost to leakages or to unregulated access. The World Water Council’s report ‘Financing Water for All’
(commonly known as the Camdessus Report), addressed the issue of mustering financial resources to
meet internationally agreed water supply and sanitation goals, concluding that currently available
sources will be insufficient to maintain and expand coverage (Winpenny, 2003). As the financing of
water services is becoming ever more urgent, recovering costs is seen to be central to improving the
conditions of water services. In this context, charging for water services is increasingly being promoted
as an appropriate response.

Criteria applied to tariff-setting
Multiple criteria influence policy decisions on how to
finance water services and how much revenue to collect
from beneficiaries (cf. Herrington, 1987, 1999;
Hanemann, 1997). In addition to the goals of safe and
affordable water for all and maximum net social benefits,
two key criteria are:
I

financial sustainability, requiring the collection of
sufficient revenue to meet present and future financial
obligations, that is, operating costs as well as the
capital costs of facilities and infrastructure, and the

I

user pays principle, which holds that consumers
should pay an amount equivalent to the burden of
their consumption on society. This implies that charges
should attempt to recover full costs, including not only
operation, maintenance and capital replacement, but
taking into account foregone benefits (opportunity
costs), as well as any externalities (damages to third
parties) (see Figure 12.1).

Other characteristics important in the successful
implementation of any charging plan are:
I

simplicity, which means that the selected tariff plan
should be open, understandable and straightforward
with users able to see how usage patterns affect the
amount payable

I

transparency, enabling consumers to understand how their
own tariffs and those of other user classes are set, and

I

predictability, permitting customers to reasonably
anticipate and plan for their water-related expenses.

These criteria often come into conflict. For example,
assuring that the less fortunate members of society are
charged an affordable rate is likely to clash with both the
user pays principle (recovering full costs) and maximizing
net social benefits (pricing at marginal social cost). As
shown in Figure 12.1, tariff-setting must balance both
cost and value considerations as the upper level of
charges is limited by user willingness to pay. Resolving
the conflicts of rate-setting is inherently a political
process. Any assessment of the various charging options
must consider carefully the incidence of all costs and
benefits, if charging is to be equitable as well as efficient.

Structuring user charges
For most marketed goods and services, units are obvious
and the price per unit is easily understood. The case of
water tends to be more complex. Water users may pay
only a charge for access to the delivery network, but
not for water itself. Charges may include a fixed periodic
(e.g. monthly) access fee as well as a variable charge
based on volume used. Many utilities require an initial
connection fee. Hence, there is no single ‘price’. In
general the tariff structure for water services can be
described in two dimensions: form and level.
The form refers to if and how the charge relates to the
quantity used, while the level refers to the proportion of
the cost of service to be recovered from users. Flat rates
are more or less independent of the quantity used or
may be linked to the projected level of use, according
to, say, the number of family members or size of pipe
connection. Conversely, charges may vary directly with
the quantity of water used. Rate structures are changing
because of the falling costs of metering, the increasing
tendency to define water as a commodity (rather than a

An increasingly
important
aspect of water
governance is
the regulation
of water quality

4 1 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 12.1: Comparing the cost and value of water
Full Cost

Social and
Environmental
Externalities

Intrinsic Value: Cultural, Aesthetic and
Merit Values

Adjustment for
Societal Benefits

Economic Externalities Cost

Full
Economic
Cost

Opportunity Costs

Capital Charges

Full Supply
Cost

Operation and
Maintenance Costs
a. Components for cost of water supply

Full Value

Full Economic
Value

Net Benefits from
Return Flows

Net Benefits from
Indirect Uses

Net Value to Water Users

Immediate Use
Value

b. Components of water use value

Source: Derived from Rogers et al., 1998, Savenije, H. H. G. and van der Zaag, P. 2001, and Matthews et al., 2001.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

public good), and the perceived need to use charging
to restrain water use as well as to recover costs.
The level of charges refers to the proportion of costs to
be recovered from users and how these costs are divided
among user groups. Although previously, water was widely
regarded as a public good to be made available to all
without charge and financed by from general public
revenues, increasingly, policy is changing to one of full
cost recovery, except where poverty is an issue. Charging
each customer according to the cost each imposes on the
system is seen to be consistent with both the criterion of
the sustainability and the principle of fairness. Because of
the importance of water for health and well-being, less welloff customers may be charged according to ability to pay,
rather than full cost. In the residential sector, affordability is
often measured by the fraction of household income spent
on water. Although the determination of this fraction may
be subjective and policies vary by country, commonly the
aim is for household expenditures on water to be below 3
percent of annual income (OECD, 2003). Where the balance
of costs must be raised elsewhere, one common solution has
been cross-subsidization, that is, revenues from better-off
residential or industrial users or from city, state or national
government coffers covering the cost of less affluent users.
One major problem stemming from the politicized nature
of rate setting is that subsidized rates are inadvertently

made available to too large a proportion of the service
base. As a result, revenues are insufficient to operate
the utility efficiently and to extend service to potential
new users. Over time infrastructure deteriorates or other
sources of financing must be sought.

4a. Charging for municipal water services
Two conceptual positions vie for the main charging
formula: the average historical cost method and the
incremental future cost (or long-run marginal cost)
method. Critics of the first model point out that only
a small portion of the charge to consumers varies with
the amount used. However, they contend that with a
low marginal charge, customers have insufficient
incentive to restrain water use and to invest in watersaving appliances, xeric landscaping and other
conservation measures. Sceptics also observe that the
historic costs model with its annual depreciation of
historic capital costs ignores price inflation and current
value or the replacement cost of assets. More generally,
critics hold that with low marginal charges, historical
cost models in practice encourage profligate water
use, and stimulate construction of increasingly expensive
supply systems ahead of need, which leads to calls for
rate hikes only to support excess capacity. Finally, in
practice, the historical cost method ignores social costs,
such as the opportunity costs and detrimental
environmental impacts.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 1 5

Advocating an alternative approach, public utility
economics literature (e.g. Hall, 1996, 2000) proposes
that the relevant costs for determining municipal water
charges is long-run incremental social cost. The purpose
of charging at long-run incremental social cost is to
produce price signals that induce water-use levels that
maximize net benefits of the water utility’s services.
This concept, it is argued, reflects the true scarcity of the
resources required to deliver water. A rate structure based
on incremental cost, in theory, provides incentives for
users to reduce water use, the value of which to them is
less than the cost of provision. It would also, it is argued,
encourage water users to make investments in plumbing
fixtures and appliances for which the cost savings in
water is less than the supplier’s incremental cost of
provision. In contrast to the historical cost method,
social costs would include not only the costs of inputs
and services acquired on the market, but non-market
opportunity costs of the potential value of the water in
alternative uses, and the unintended side effects on third
parties. One difficulty of adopting the incremental future
cost approach is the relative complexity of determining
future as opposed to past costs, particularly opportunity
and social costs. Another is the large rate hikes that
could result unless tariff increases were phased in.11

the amount of water applied per irrigation or by shifting
to less water-intensive crops. The main alternative to an
area-based charge is volumetric charging, which requires
some agreed-upon method of measuring volume, such
as length of time of water delivery based on a stable
and known rate of flow. In fact, many different types of
tariffs exist. Typically, the organization and configuration
of irrigation water supply influence the feasibility of
alternative methods of charging for irrigation water.

4b. Charging for irrigation water

Both cost and benefit considerations suggest that
volumetric pricing of irrigation water may not be as
desirable as it might first appear. The extra costs of
assessing volumetric-based charges are often judged not
worth the cost of implementation, thus volumetric-based
charges are even less common in agriculture than in
municipal and industrial water systems. From the
perspective of benefits, the issue of volumetric pricing
to encourage water saving is further confounded by the
distinction between water withdrawn and water consumed.
Water leaked from permeable canals, ditches and fields
returns to the hydrologic system (surface or groundwater)
hence becoming available from streams or wells. Only
when leaked water is permanently degraded and/or lost
to future use is it true that water saving at the farm or the
district level is important. Thus, the evaluation of the
technical efficiency of water use in the agricultural sector
must be addressed on a case-by-case basis.

Around the world, it is rare that water users are charged
the full cost of water services. Subsidized irrigation water
is justified not only on users’ limited ability to pay but on
the (disputed) economic grounds of secondary economic
benefits, for example, the boost in agricultural production
due to increased availability of irrigation water. For public
irrigation systems, the aim is to recover only operating and
maintenance costs from users, with initial capital costs
covered by the general public budget or donor agency
contributions. Even in self-supplied pumping systems,
typically no account is made for the opportunity cost of
water or for the cost of damages to third parties. With
cost recovery difficult in practice, inadequate revenues
generally force some higher level of government to cover
shortfalls or lead to a deterioration of the system.12
Of the several potential methods of charging for irrigation
water, the most common is area-based charging, set
according to the area irrigated, but also possibly
according to the season, irrigation method or crop grown
(Tsur et al., 2004). Area-based charges are criticized,
however, for lacking any incentive to conserve water, for
instance by reducing the number of irrigations, by limiting

A review of policy reforms to increase farmers’ cost
shares and apply volumetrically based charges reveals
several problems. One is that within the irrigation sector,
non-economic goals tend to be more influential than
economic efficiency, so in practice, full cost recovery and
incremental cost pricing are less important. Moreover, with
irrigation charges designed both to signal scarcity and
reduce the taxpayer burden, adversely affecting farmers’
incomes, governments find such polices neither in the
public interest nor in their own political interest.
Complicating the issue is the fact that governments often
undertake irrigation projects to foster economic
development in disadvantaged regions. Moreover, there
is the perceived issue of national food security and the
belief that production from irrigated land is more stable.13

Some observers (e.g. Young, 2005) contend that
governments and donor agencies tend to overestimate
potential economic returns to irrigation and, as a result,
farmers’ actual ability to pay for water (see Box 12.4).
As a result, projects have experienced lower than

A farmers' son uses a
motorized pump to irrigate
a greenhouse in
Mborucuya, Argentina. This
small farm has received
credit from a support
project for small scale
producers to finance both
the greenhouse and the
irrigation pump

11. Recent texts with in-depth
discussion of this topic
include Shaw, 2005 and
Griffin, 2006.
12. Further detailed discussion
can be found in Tsur et al.,
2004 and Cornish et al.,
2004.
13. A more cynical view holds
that these below-cost
charging policies are merely
the result of successful
political efforts to obtain
government subsidies on
behalf of political supporters.

4 1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

BOX 12.6: IRRIGATION MANAGEMENT TRANSFER (IMT) AS A COST RECOVERY TOOL
Many developing countries (aided by international

part of a package called ‘Irrigation Management

many smallholders, costs of administration and

donors) have in the past several decades invested

Transfer’ (IMT). These programmes assume that

revenue collection are necessarily high, and the

large sums in irrigation systems with the

farmer management of public irrigation systems

users have ended up with lower productivity and

expectation of increasing agricultural productivity

would make the system more responsive to

income. In some cases, the systems have

and improving incomes for poor farmers. It was

members, and thereby encourage water users

collapsed. The conclusion seems to be that IMT

assumed that most such schemes would be

to be more receptive to paying costs. Expectations

can work in cases where irrigation is essential to

economically and financially self-sufficient

were that local control would not only improve

high-performing agriculture, and farmers are not

under reasonable management. However, most

the cost-effectiveness but by transferring costs

too numerous, better educated and behave as

developing countries have not implemented

to users reduce costs to the public exchequer.

businessmen. Furthermore, the cost of operating

charging programmes to recover actual operating

Results of such reforms have been, at best,

and administering the irrigation system must

and maintenance costs, let alone to pay for the

mixed. While IMT programmes have been

represent a modest proportion of the increment in

capital costs of the investments. As governments

somewhat successful in more developed countries

farmers’ income expected from irrigation. Where

have been unable or unwilling to adopt cost-

(US, New Zealand and Mexico), elsewhere the

the system serves numerous, small farms

recovery policies that keep pace with inflation or

results are less promising. In many cases, charges

producing low-value staple crops (such as in the

the need for periodic system rehabilitation, they

to farmers did increase, but farmer-managed

rice-producing regions of Asia), in terms of cost

have found that budgetary demands of the

systems have tended to under-invest, thus

recovery, system efficiency and productivity, IMT

irrigation sector increasingly compete with other

necessitating public rescue. Little evidence of an

has not produced the expected results.

public needs. Policy reforms to transfer more of

overall increase in agricultural productivity or farm

the irrigation costs to water users have come as

incomes has been observed. In large systems with

expected net returns to water. With subsidies to irrigation
capitalized into higher land prices, governments find that
levying higher user charges may not only depress farm
income, but risk imposing significant capital losses on
landowners. Nevertheless, many countries are moving
toward collecting a larger proportion of irrigation costs
from farmers. As part of a larger reform and
decentralization effort, this trend aims not only to reduce
public subsidies, but also to increase efficiency and the
responsiveness of irrigation delivery. Such policies, often
called irrigation management transfer (IMT), seek to shift
the administration of all or part of irrigation water
delivery to associations of water users, thus sharing the
responsibility of water management. Box 12.6 reviews the
experience in various developing countries for transferring
responsibility for irrigation water delivery to user groups.

4c. Charging for discharge of industrial
effluent
An increasingly important aspect of water governance is
the regulation of water quality. Water’s solvent properties
and widespread availability provide both producers and
consumers with an inexpensive means of waste disposal.
With public expectations of near zero effluent discharge,
policy-makers face a paradoxical situation with regard to
water use and quality. In many countries minimum waste

Source: Shah et al., 2002.

disposal would be enormously expensive, even
impossible, unless some important industries were closed
altogether. Assessing the costs and benefits in such
cases demands careful consideration of the relative
effectiveness and desirability of the alternatives, not only
from an economic perspective, but also in terms of the
distribution of costs and benefits, the ease of monitoring
and enforcement, and industry flexibility, among other
factors. Although direct regulation has been the main
tool of water quality management in the past, water
pollution is increasingly being addressed by decentralized
systems of incentives and disincentives, such as effluent
charges (see Chapter 8).
The effluent charge, also called an emissions or
pollution tax and essentially a fee levied on each unit
of contaminant discharged, is based on the principle of
‘polluter pays’. Initially this principle was intended to
‘suggest’ to governments that they should refrain from
subsidizing investments required to comply with pollutioncontrol regulations. A more recent interpretation holds
that emission charges should be set so that the costs, or
the economic value, of the damages inflicted by polluters
on third parties are borne by the polluters themselves, in
effect ‘internalizing’ the previously externalized costs of
production. With the unit charge set to rise with

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 1 7

Figure 12.2: Actual and planned water pollution charges in the River Narva and Lake Peipsi Catchment, 1993–2005
40000

35000

Charge (EEK/t)

30000

25000

20000

15000
BOD7
10000

Suspended solids
Ntot

5000

Ptot
Phenols
Oil products

0
1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Note: EEK/t is Estonian Kroon per ton. 1 Estonian Kroon (EEK) = 0.06390 Euro (2005).
Source: Environmental Information Center, Tallinn, Estonia.

increased levels of discharge, polluters may respond as
they choose, that is, reduce effluent or pay the charges.
Firms facing low pollution reduction costs relative to the
charges imposed would presumably move to reduce
discharges. Others might find it cheaper to pay the
tax than to make the necessary pollution control
expenditures. Such charges should provide incentives
for pollution discharge to be reduced by the least cost
methods available. All firms would find it in their interest
to seek changes in processes, technologies and/or in
discharge treatments that reduce the cost of coping
with the problem of residuals disposal.
Criticisms have come from all sides but most prominently
from polluters, who complain of potential impacts on
profits and hence, over the longer term, on net worth
and share value. Public officials, on the other hand, are

concerned producers may be forced into reducing output
and employment with corresponding negative effects on
tax revenues. From the viewpoint of regulatory agencies,
effluent charges present challenges of monitoring and
enforcement. Environmental groups object to effluent
charges on the grounds that they convert the
environment into a commodity. Surveys of pollution
control strategies in OECD nations show that
environmental charges for the most part were not
applied to induce less polluting behaviour nor to
compensate damaged parties, but to fund specific
environmental expenditures. Despite all criticism,
effluent charges for water pollution management
are seeing increasing application (see Figure 12.2).

Chemical outflow, Germany

4 1 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 5. Responding to the Challenge of
Valuing Water
In this section, we introduce some of the issues at the forefront of the debate on valuing water.
The subjects addressed include public-private partnerships, virtual water and payments for environmental
services. Private sector participation in water resources development can assist not only in meeting
financial and management needs of this sector but in tailoring water services to better address local
concerns and values. The concept of ‘virtual water’ – recognizing the value of water embedded, directly or
indirectly, in various products and services – has come to influence both production and trade policy in an
attempt to maximize returns to water as a scarce factor of production. Payment for environmental
services, that is, paying upland farmers for land husbandry that preserves the output of clean and regular
water supplies, directly acknowledges the value of the water to downstream users.

5a. A shared management approach: Publicprivate partnerships

Sharing skills and resources
Despite the wide acknowledgement that the public sector
in many regions lacks not only the economic resources,
but also the technical and management skills required
to meet water services demand in an efficient and
environmentally sustainable manner, private participation
in water services remains controversial because of water’s
essentiality for life (Cosgrove and Rijsberman, 2000;
Gresham, 2001). In countries where the political and
institutional climate make it difficult for governments
to involve the private sector, contracting-out services,
operation and management of the water supply, allows
the public sector to take advantage of private sector
technology and skills, while maintaining ownership of

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are essentially a
management tool designed to bring the strengths of both
public and private sectors to water utilities. They combine
the social responsibility, environmental awareness and
public accountability of government with the technology
and management skills and finance of the private sector
(UNDP, 2004). Depending on the extent of private sector
participation (PSP), public-private partnerships are also
characterized by the state’s changing role, that is, from
one of sole service provider to monopoly regulator in
charge of controlling tariffs and service quality (World
Bank, 1994; Estache et al., 2005).

BOX 12.7: WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICES IN YEREVAN, ARMENIA
The World Bank made two loans worth US $80
million to Yerevan for improving water and
sewerage services, in particular in poorer areas.
In 2000, ACEA (Italy), C. Lotti & Associati and

Service indicators
Water provision (hours/day)
Percentage of metered apartments
Percentage of revenue collected

1999
6
56
21

2003
13
–
87

2004
16
95
100

WRc (UK) undertook an operations and
management contract for Yerevan. At that time

Instead of charging domestic customers a

metering has improved service affordability for

just 21 percent of billed accounts were paid.

nominal per capita consumption of 250

these people. In 2002, the bottom quintile spent

Billing collection was revived through the

litres/day, customers are now being billed for

8.1 percent of their income on water services.

introduction of metering from 2002. With an

actual usage, on average about 100–120

This fell to 5.0 percent in 2003 and is expected

increase in the number of registered customers

litres/capita/day.

to reach about 4 percent in 2005, despite a 50
percent overall tariff increase in April 2004.

from 275,500 in 2002 to 311,056 by April 2004,
245,000 of these were metered and 28,000 filed

Some 30 percent of Yerevan’s population lives

as non-active accounts (empty apartments, etc).

below the poverty line. The introduction of

Sources: OECD, 2005; World Bank, 2005.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 1 9

Figure 12.3: Share of private sector participation in water supply and sanitation by region
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Sub-Saharan
Africa 20%

East Asia
64%

Eastern Europe
61%

Latin America
41%

Middle East
18%

South Asia
13%

Source: Estache et al., 2005.

key assets (see for example Box 12. 7) (World Bank,
1997; Gresham, 2001; Estache et al., 2005). Private
corporations are now involved in some dimension of
large-scale water supply in almost half the countries of
the world, particularly in the developed world, but also
increasingly in the developing world as shown in Figure
12.3. The private sector’s proportion of the water and
sewerage sectors in developing countries comprises, on
average, only 35 percent, whereas in developed countries
it constitutes 80 percent of the market – in particular
because of already high coverage rates and an
institutional climate conducive to private investment
(Estache and Goicoechea, 2004).

Reconciling cost recovery and affordability
Population growth and burgeoning water demand have
convinced most policy-makers that the cost of water
system development will increasingly have to be met by
users, especially if the Millennium Development Goals are
to be achieved. Meeting the financial challenge of water
supply means the involvement of all stakeholders, with
funds from governments, financial markets, international
aid and users. However, with private sector participation –
ranging from small water vendors to large private utilities
– projected to increase in the next decades, the issue of
pricing is critical, not only to improve access and quality
of service and discourage theft and wasteful use, but to
ensure affordability and fairness to all customers
(Whittington, et al. 2002).
Recent problematic PSP experiments in some developing
countries, such as Bolivia (see Box 12.8) and Ghana,
highlight the need to ensure the availability of affordable

water supply and sanitation for poor households
(Finnegan, 2002). PSP arrangements – particularly those
transferring the responsibility for capital investment to
the private sector – can increase tariffs to levels often
unaffordable for the poor. Accordingly, there is an urgent
need to better understand consumers’ conditions and to
improve subsidy mechanisms in PSP schemes. Research
has revealed that these benefits have been captured by
middle-income and rich consumers rather than the poor
and that the poor in many cases are willing to pay for
improved water supplies. In sprawling cities of the
developing world, poorer populations typically lack access
to formal water systems and may pay more than ten
times per cubic metre of water than people with
household connections (Raghupati and Foster, 2002).

An inclusive approach
Technological change and more cost-effective, smallerscale systems continue to alter market structures in
water delivery, actively engaging civil society both
through community-level initiatives as well as through
large-scale water supply schemes (Estache et al., 2005).
Public-private community partnerships incorporate
innovative grassroots mechanisms to enable service to
poor populations in small regions at more affordable
levels. The ‘private’ side of these partnerships refers to a
range of different actors, from households to community
organizations, NGOs and small businesses. The ‘public’
side of the partnerships involves not only the public
utility and the independent regulator, but local
governments committed to facilitating grassroots
initiatives (Franceys and Weitz, 2003). As in traditional
public-private partnerships, each of these options may

Population
growth and
burgeoning
water demand
have convinced
most policymakers that the
cost of water
system
development will
increasingly
have to be met
by users

4 2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 12.8: THE ‘WATER WAR’ IN COCHABAMBA, BOLIVIA
The city of Cochabamba, Bolivia, the third-largest

concession contract to rehabilitate and operate

coalition of workers, farmers and environmental

city in Bolivia, has a chronic water shortage.

the municipal water supply system, as well as the

groups, ‘Coalition for Defence of Water and Life’,

A sprawling city of 800,000 people, whose

smaller ones. The contract provided for exclusive

organized a general strike and massive protests

population has exploded during the last decades

rights to all the water in the city, including the

in opposition of the rate hikes. Bolivians blocked

with immigrant workers from the countryside,

aquifers used by the water cooperatives. Billing

highways, and the city was shut down. Police

it has many poor neighbourhoods lacking

and metering was implemented, with the cost of

forces and the military were sent to take control

connection to municipal water supplies. In recent

these services, as well as of connections, being

of the city, and martial law was declared. As

years, residents in peri-urban areas pushed for

reflected in the tariffs.

protests grew stronger despite being suppressed,
the private operator withdrew from the city and

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

workable community initiatives with the help of
foreign aid. Small-scale water companies built

Within weeks of taking control of the city’s water

the government rescinded the concession

electric pumps to access well water and distribute

supply, prices were raised to unaffordable levels,

contract. This experience led the government

it throughout these neighbourhoods, at a total

effectively leaving the poor in marginal areas

to reconsider private sector participation, and

cost of US $2 to US $5 per month. In 1997,

without access to any water as they were no

to enact a law granting legal recognition to

conditions on the World Bank US $600 million

longer permitted to draw water from their

traditional communal practices, under which small

loan for debt relief included the privatization of

community wells. Workers living on the local

independent water systems shall be protected.

the water supply in Cochabamba, and in 1999, a

minimum wage of US $60 per month suddenly

private operator was granted a 40-year

had to pay US $15 for the water bill. In 2000, a

allocate ownership rights and responsibilities for
investments and management differently.
In larger-scale initiatives private corporations can also
partner with local governments and NGOs. NGOs can
provide local governments with information on the
specific needs of poor areas, which then can be better
addressed in negotiating concession contracts, for
example, by defining specific connection targets or
obligations for expansion into peri-urban areas. NGOs
and communities can also participate in tariff collection
on behalf of the private utility in exchange for deferred
payment of connection fees. Likewise, municipal
governments can facilitate connections by, for example,
waiving the land title requirements for slum dwellers.
To reduce connection costs, NGOs can help by providing
transportation and materials, while the community
contributes labour, for instance carrying pipes, digging
trenches and laying lines (Franceys and Weitz, 2003).
As described in Box 12.9, researchers have discovered
such innovative approaches in Manila in the Philippines.

Source: Finnegan, 2002.

Likewise, the global replication of community-driven
arrangements is not viable on a large-scale. Experience
with both public and private delivery of water services
over the past decade has taught us that ownership of
water infrastructure, whether public or private, has no
significant effect on efficiency nor on the selection of the
public versus private sector as service provider (Estache
and Rossi, 2002; Wallsten and Kosec, 2005). Indeed,
ownership has proved less significant than governance,
and thus a good institutional climate is important, not
only for private sector investment, but for the transfer
of relevant technical knowledge and management skills
(Estache and Kouassi, 2002; Bitrán and Valenzuela,
2003). Similarly, institutional mechanisms that enable
various degrees of engagement by consumers must be
put in place in order for efficiency-oriented water supply
schemes to be successful. Ultimately, the decision as to
whether to involve the private sector, civil society and
government is political and influences the kinds of
governance mechanisms needed to ensure efficient
and equitable service.

The value of public-private partnerships
Both the value and economic valuation of water are
important in assessing water supply and sanitation
alternatives. While privatization may not be suitable in
all cases, neither are underfinanced public utilities a
sustainable solution given burgeoning water demand.

Provided that mechanisms to ensure affordable access
by those without ability to pay are put into place, the
potential economic and social benefits of improved access
to water services are great. In addition to the considerable
health benefits gained from connection to the official

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 2 1

BOX 12.9: TARGETING THE POOR THROUGH GRASSROOTS MECHANISMS IN MANILA, THE PHILIPPINES
In 1997, a twenty-five-year concession contract

usage. Each group chooses a representative,

contributed labour for carrying pipes into the

for water supply and sewerage in the city of

who is in charge of collecting and paying the

city, which helped decrease connection costs. The

Metro Manila, Philippines, was granted to two

bill to Manila Water. Besides group taps, Manila

number of connections has increased dramatically,

companies: Manila Water Company to supply

Water has a programme of community-managed

and poor consumers, who now pay less for water

the east side, and Maynilad Water Services to

water connections whereby a metered master

than under their previous informal supply

provide the west side of the city, with an aim

connection is provided, and a community

arrangements, are able to enjoy the same kind

at having spare capacity in case of failures. In

association acts as water distributor through

of services provided to other sectors of society.

order to increase access to the poor, the

individual or shared connections, which allows

concession agreement provided for public

local residents to manage water according

In specific focus group discussions, several

standpipes for every 475 customers in

to their needs.

residents stated that connecting to the urban
water supply had greatly decreased their water

‘depressed’ areas. Instead of implementing
this conventional solution, both companies have

Maynilad Water Services favours individual to

bills. In the Liwang Area of Manila, one resident

devised innovative approaches to extend

shared connections. Under its ‘Water for the

related that, after being hooked up to the

service to poor areas.

Community’ programme, the land title

network, her monthly bills came to on average

requirement for connections is waived and

between 25 and 50 pesos per month, in contrast

Manila Water has a programme which relaxes

payment of connection fees is deferred over a

with 40 pesos per day spent on informal water

some application requirements in order to

period of six to twelve months, and in some

vendors. Another resident, who used to pay a

enable water connections for poor customers.

cases twenty-four months. NGOs were crucial

flat fee of 300 pesos per month to a neighbour

Group taps are designed for every two to five

in providing information to the private utilities,

with access to the system, now pays 60 pesos

households where users get together to apply

as well as in information campaigns aimed at

per month for a larger amount of water.

for a single connection. The group is given a

community mobilization. They helped with the

‘mother meter’ and thus, share the cost of their

provision of materials while the community

network, poor people freed from the burden of water
collection can expect to have more time to engage in
productive poverty-alleviating pursuits. Similarly, the
public sector can expect to benefit from a reduction in
unaccounted-for water losses, enabling them to price
water more efficiently and potentially reduce subsidy
mechanisms. Finally, participation of all kinds, from
information-sharing, to consultation in PSP arrangements,
to having a voice in decision-making and management in
public-private community partnerships, is crucial for the
long-term success of improved water supply and sanitation.
The choice of public-private partnership depends on the
political, institutional, social and cultural features of the
area where the service is to be provided. An assessment
of the capability of governments to provide service in the
target areas plus an analysis of the costs and benefits of
different options and associated tariffs – including their
potential impact on different sectors of society – will
enable policymakers to make more informed choices as
to which management tool can provide water services
that best meet the societal goals of equity, efficiency
and environmental sustainability.

Source: Franceys and Weitz, 2003.

5b. Virtual water trade
Virtual water, a concept that emerged more than a
decade ago, is defined as the volume of water required
to produce a given commodity or service. Allan proposed
the term ‘virtual water’ to describe a phenomenon he
observed in countries of the Middle East. They were using
imports in the form of water-intensive products, such as
food, to create a ‘virtual’ inflow of water as a means of
relieving pressure on scarce domestic water resources
(Allan, 1997). Several Middle Eastern nations, most
notably Jordan and Israel, have altered their trade and
development policies to promote the import of waterintensive products, generally agricultural crops, and the
export of crops of high water productivity, that is, high
income per unit of water consumed in production
(Hofwegen, 2003). The adoption of such policies,
in effect, recognizes the value of water.
As Allan (1997) noted, ‘It requires about 1000 cubic
metres of water to produce a ton of grain. If the ton of
grain is conveyed to … [an] economy short of freshwater
and/or soil water, then that economy is spared the
economic, and more importantly the political stress of

Wetlands in Amboseli
Reserve, Kenya. These
wetlands are fed by the
Kilimanjaro mountain
glaciers

WWDR Chapter 12f (F)

10/3/06

15:36

Page 422

4 2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 12.4: Estimated annual water savings attributed to trade in wheat, Egypt, 1997–2001

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Note: Negative figures indicate the amount of water consumed in the production of the quantity of wheat exported, whereas positive figures indicate the amount of water savings by the
importing country. Conversion formulas vary by country depending on various factors, including seed stock, type of technology used, and water management efficiency in the different countries.
Source: Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2005.

mobilizing about 1000 cubic meters of water.’ These
‘water savings’ can be used to produce alternative,
higher-value agricultural crops, to support environmental
services, or to serve growing domestic needs. As seen in
Figure 12.4, the imported goods may require more water
during production in the alternative source country, but
presumably this would be a country suffering from less
water stress so that, overall, the efficiency of water use
is promoted. Thus, ‘virtual water’ embedded in products
is increasingly perceived as an alternative source of water
for some water-stressed nations (see Chapter 11).
Recent research has revealed that the flow of such virtual
water between nations is substantial (Hoekstra and Hung,
2002; Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004; Chapagain et al.,
2005). As observed by Allan (1997) ‘more water flows

into the Middle East each year as virtual water than flows
down the Nile into Egypt for agriculture’. Worldwide, the
virtual water in international trade totals 1,625 Gm3
annually. This amounts to about one-fifth of total world
trade with approximately 80 percent of virtual water
flows as trade in agricultural products, and the remainder
as industrial products (Chapagain and Hoekstra, 2004)
(see Chapters 7 and 8).
Increased trade in ‘virtual water’ has been proposed as a
means to increase ‘global water use efficiency’, improve
‘water security’ for water stressed regions, and alleviate
environmental impacts due to growing water demand
(Turton, 2000). Emerging from the apartheid era, South
Africa realized the potential benefits of adopting policy
supporting virtual water imports as opposed to an

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 2 3

ambitious programme of inter-basin water transfers
(Allan, 2003). However, the concept of virtual water
has not been accepted worldwide. Attempting to link
agricultural imports directly to water dependency is
difficult as numerous factors besides water availability
affect farmers’ planting decisions and production
methods. Special trade arrangements, access to foreign
exchange credits, market advantage – all affect the
market and thus, decisions in the agricultural sector.
Changing patterns of trade based on water conservation
concerns need to be examined in the context of larger,
national issues, including food security, food
sovereignty14, employment, foreign exchange
requirements and perceived vulnerability to external
political pressure. Additional research needs to be
conducted on the social, economic, political as well as
environmental ‘implications of using virtual water trade
as a strategic instrument in water policy’ (Hofwegen,
2003). In the current period of political, economic and
environmental uncertainty and instability, it is unlikely
that societies will soon abandon the goal of food
security. The new concept of food sovereignty introduced
in recent years reflects the concerns of the small-scale
agriculturalists. Llamas (2003) has argued that adopting
‘virtual water trade’ as a policy would require that the
World Trade Organization or another international
institution guarantee a prohibition on food embargos.
It should be noted that the concept of virtual water is
still in developmental stages and several computational
difficulties remain to be overcome. Figures on virtual
water trade must be viewed cautiously as considerable
uncertainty is associated with some of the underlying
assumptions. Given the significant spatial and temporal
variability in crop productivity and irrigation efficiency,
extrapolations across geographic area and cultures
could be problematic. Distinction should also be made
with regard to the origin of the ‘virtual water’ in question
(Llamas, 2003). Groundwater and surface water (see
Chapter 4) have many alternative uses whereas options
for soil moisture are more limited. One key question
raised is: does adopting the concept of virtual water in
designing trade policy contribute to an improvement in
water availability?
Virtual water is an interesting concept, especially where
water is in critically and chronically short supply and it
will undoubtedly play an important role in influencing
production and trade strategy for some nations. However,
water is not the only factor of production and other

factors, such as energy costs, may come to play an
increasingly important role in determining water resources
allocation and use. It has been suggested that the
concept of ‘virtual water’ trade is most applicable to the
developed or high-income countries and that policies that
might work for the relatively rich Middle East countries,
however, may not work for the poorer economies of subSaharan Africa. This raises the question as to whether
this approach will serve to alleviate or accentuate the
differences between the rich and the poor countries.
The concept of virtual water could be valuable in
promoting the production and trade in goods most suited
to local environmental conditions and the development
and adoption of water efficient technology. Adopting this
approach, however, requires a thorough understanding of
the impacts of such policies on socio-cultural, economic
and environmental conditions, from local to national and
regional levels. As the rigour of the analytical tools
improves, undoubtedly so too will the usefulness of the
concept of virtual water in terms of integrating the
concerns of different sectors. However, as Allan (2003)
observed, it may be that ‘the virtual water remedy to local
water scarcity will be shown to depend more on political
processes rather than the scientific authority of the idea
or precision with which it is defined’. In effect then, the
success of the concept of virtual water may well turn on
the achievements of global trade negotiations.

5c. Payments for environmental services
‘Valuing’ water is increasingly being extended to include
an appreciation of human activities in upper catchment
areas that contribute to maintaining the regular flow of
clean water for downstream users (Pagiola and Platais,
2002; FAO, 2004). As increasingly recognized, land use
and land cover management in the uplands affects water
cycling through the Earth’s natural systems. Healthy,
intact ecosystems and their geologic substrate facilitate
the hydrological cycle, filtering percolating water,
distributing nutrients, providing a nurturing habitat for
a wide diversity of wild animal and plant populations
(biodiversity), and storing carbon. These and other
functions, known as ‘environmental services’, endure
only if fragile areas are protected, over exploitation
of resources is avoided, pollution limited, and human
intervention mediated by natural buffers. With the
increasing recognition of the value of environmental
services over the past decade, a variety of schemes have
emerged that propose ‘paying’ for ecosystem services, or
rewarding human actions contributing to preserving these

Local community installing
water pipes for their
village in Kinhare,
Tanzania. This project will
bring safe drinking water
to the region for the first
time. Previously people
had to collect often unsafe
drinking water from distant
streams and carry it in
buckets
14. Food sovereignty has been
defined as the right of
peoples, communities and
countries to define their own
agricultural, labour, fishing,
food and land policies so
that they are ecologically,
socially, economically and
culturally appropriate to their
unique circumstances. It
includes the right to food
and to produce food, which
means that all people have
the right to safe, nutritious
and culturally appropriate
food and to food-producing
resources and the ability to
sustain themselves and
societies. (Source: ‘Food
Sovereignty: A Right for All’,
a political statement of the
NGO/CSO Forum for Food
Sovereignty. Issued on
13 June 2002, in Rome).
www.foodfirst.org/
progs/global/food/
finaldeclaration.html

4 2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

functions. In effect, these schemes attempt to link the
‘benefits’ enjoyed by downstream users to the ‘costs’
incurred by the de facto catchment managers.
In one sense, paying for environmental services is an
extension of the concept of ‘cost recovery’ discussed
above. Payments for environmental services would fall into
the category of indirect operating costs (see Figure 12.1).
Acknowledging and compensating those individuals who
actually manage the environment by those who benefit
from these services attempts not only to reward good land
husbandry, but in formalizing the relationship between the
two groups of users, also enhances the long-term security
of these ecosystem functions and the downstream benefit
flows. Formal legislative support for payments for
environmental services is recognized as one means of
developing a sustainable source of environmental funding
perhaps less vulnerable to political vagaries.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Payment for environmental services (PES)15 has been
commonly considered in the context of watershed
management, biodiversity conservation, and more
recently, carbon sequestration. Watershed-based PESs
have a longer history and thus seem more
straightforward. They avoid many of the constraints
inherent in some of the newer schemes focusing on
biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration. As
Scherr et al. (2004) observed, [m]arkets for watershed
services are site and use specific and currently are limited
to situations where the downstream beneficiaries – such
as hydroelectricity power generation, irrigators, municipal
water supply systems and industry – are directly and
significantly impacted by upstream land-use’. Most
payment schemes are in their infancy with analysts
still learning from pilot projects both in developed and
developing countries. The wide diversity of approaches
reflects the variety of services supplied, participants’
concerns, and physical and cultural environments.
Ongoing programmes show promising results, however,
with good prospects for scaling up to the basin, regional
or national level (Scherr et al., 2004; Gouyon, 2003).

15. Another related term is
‘green water credits’, which
are payments proposed as a
mechanism for the transfer
of cash to rural people in
return for better
management of ‘green water’
(see Chapter 4) resources
(Dent, 2005).

Typically, we find that watershed-based payment
schemes fall into one of three categories: public payment
programmes, self-organized private arrangements and
open trading. Latin America and several of the developed
countries have most experience with such schemes (FAO,
2004). The types of payment mechanisms associated with
catchment protection include: best-management practices
contracts, protection contracts, water quality credits,

stream flow reduction licences and reforestation
contracts. Compensation generally comes in a variety
of formats but mainly occurs as: direct financial
remuneration; payment in kind, for example,
infrastructure and equipment; and/or privileged access
to resources or markets, for example, land-use rights.
Case studies show that compensation programmes can
have significant positive impacts on local livelihoods
(InfoResources, 2004). In Costa Rica, landholders in
watersheds designated critical are paid between US
$30 and US $50 per hectare per year for good land
management practices (Scherr et al., 2004). In Mindanao
in the Philippines, regular payments to residents in the
catchment area of the Mount Apo geothermal facility
have been ongoing for many years (Warner et al., 2004),
while in Europe a new PES project is being planned for
the lower Danube River Basin (see Chapter 14).
Whereas typically, development programmes channel
funds to or through local governments, it is proposed
that new programmes could more efficiently and
effectively target funds directly to the environmental
stewards themselves. Transparent processes and multistakeholder involvement with emphasis on locally
determined priorities and participatory planning,
implementation and monitoring are needed to bridge
the gap between proposed and existing programmes.
Given the close links between poverty and resource
dependency, designing PES programmes that reward
the poor for good natural resources stewardship is
key to effective conservation. While the vulnerability
of hydroelectric facilities to poor land management in
catchments is of growing concern, for many countries
the not unrelated issue of poverty alleviation, particularly
in rural areas, has become a national priority, as has the
decentralization of government services. The potential
of PES schemes to address these several issues is
increasingly recognized. Indeed, paying for environmental
services, in particular as related to hydroelectric
production, responds to the demands for clean energy –
hydroelectricity being a well-known example (see
Chapter 9) – for better catchment area management,
for greater local responsibility, and for poverty reduction.
Lessons have already been learned, as indicated in Box
12.10. In building on royalty programmes traditionally
associated with resource extraction, PES seems to have
the potential to serve as a new paradigm for sustainable
watershed management, integrating the concerns of
users throughout the basin.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 2 5

BOX 12.10: LESSONS LEARNED IN PAYING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
A review of programmes in which payments for

I

transaction costs are minimized

I

rights and responsibilities of all parties

I

environmental services have been made
concluded that these schemes are most

and disbursement are locally determined,

successful when:

clearly defined, and transparent

including intermediaries are clearly defined
I

I

financial sustainability is promoted by

I

independence from long-term external

especially providing women and

regularly

disadvantaged groups with opportunities to
participate in planning, implementation and

I

resource rights and tenure are secured

I

legal and institutional frameworks create an

locally defined best management practices
are taken into consideration

poverty reduction is explicitly addressed,

payment is linked to performance monitored

financial support
I

mechanisms for fees assessment, collection

monitoring, for example, targeting smallholders as service providers.

enabling environment

According to many analysts16, ‘[m]arkets for forest
ecosystem services are expected to grow in both
developed and developing countries over the next two
decades’ (Scherr et al., 2004). Currently nearly onethird of the world’s largest cities depend on forested
watersheds for their water supplies (see Chapter 3).
Water demand, projected to double if not triple in the
coming half century, will grow fastest in the developing
world. It is increasingly apparent to water providers and
water users that investments in watershed protection
can be far more economical than investments in costly
engineered solutions, such as water treatment plants
or long-distance canals. For governments – principal
purchasers of many ecosystem services but also catalysts
for many private-sector payment schemes – incorporating
PES schemes in basin-wide integrated water resources
management programmes has the potential to deliver
rural poverty alleviation as well as environmental
conservation and enhanced water security. Thus,

Source: Warner et al., 2004.

recognizing the value of environmental services in the
very real sense of financial compensation may be an
attractive alternative to governments facing growing
rural-to-urban migration and increasing pressure on
already overstretched urban water supply systems.
The assessment of strictly anthropogenic impacts is
tricky, especially as the timing and scale of the impacts
of different land-use and vegetation management
practices on hydrological function and resources vary
according to local environmental conditions – which are
sometimes confounded by natural phenomena. Experience
has shown that although the effects of human actions
are more directly observed in smaller catchments, they
are also visible on larger scales. More extensive
monitoring and evaluation is needed in order to better
understand land-use and water linkages so as to refine
the diverse mechanisms emerging for compensation for
environmental services (Fauré, 2004).

16. Founded in 2000, the
Katoomba Group is a
collection of government
officials, private sector
professionals, academic
researchers and NGO
representatives devoted to
sharing information and
experience on development
of financial markets for
ecosystem services.
www.katoombagroup.com/

4 2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 6. Indicators under Development
Economic valuation has been defined as the task of assigning a money metric to the benefits and costs
associated with different policies so that different governance options can be compared and ranked.
To enable the comparison of actual achievements against targets or projected outcomes, we must look
to selected variables for quantitative measures that we could employ as ‘indicators’. The indicators
noted below are those that could be used to monitor progress towards society valuing water in a
manner likely to realize societal objectives, including efficiency, equity and environmental sustainability.
The indicators noted are still in developmental stages and clearly more research and experience is
needed to assess their ease of use, robustness, and reliability with regard to understanding their utility
for cross-country comparisons.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Water Sector Share in Public Spending: In highlighting
public-sector spending in the water sector, this indicator
illustrates the level of political commitment to meeting
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) on water.
Expressed as a percentage, this indicator shows the
proportion of the total public budget allocated to water
systems development. Data on annual investments by
sector are generally available from national statistical
yearbooks, country-wide economic reviews, and the
government office responsible for water sector
development. Widely applicable, this indicator could
be used at any level where statistics are available.
Ratio of Actual to Desired Level of Investment: This
indicator illustrates the extent to which investments
required to meet water-related MDGs are on track.
Computed as AL/DL, where AL is the actual level and
DL refers to the desired level of investment, this ratio
indicates the degree to which planned investment is
realized. Although not an indicator of actual hook-ups,
the allocation of funds for the installation of the necessary
infrastructure is a crucial first step. The data required
for this calculation should be available from the national
budget documents. Data on desired level of investment
could be obtained from the project documents and
feasibility studies of relevant infrastructure development
projects, or perhaps government offices in charge of
water resources planning and infrastructure development.
Rate of Cost Recovery: This indicator measures the total
amount of fees actually collected as a proportion of total

revenues scheduled to be collected. It reflects as well
the effectiveness of fiscal administration and institutional
governance in the water sector. Data required to prepare
this indicator include: total water charges to be collected
and those actually collected. These are usually available
from the published annual reports of water utilities and
national budget documents. The rate of cost recovery
could also be viewed as an indicator of the population’s
willingness to pay for water services. The effectiveness
of the fee collection system will have a direct influence
on private sector willingness to invest in this sector and
the ability of public water systems, which depend on cost
recovery through charging, to meet projected expansion
plans as well as maintenance obligations.
Water Charges as a Percentage of Household
Income/Expenditure: Water charges are seen as an
important instrument for improving cost recovery in
the water utilities sector. Expressed as a proportion of
household income or household expenditure, water
charges illustrate the pressure of this expense on
household finances (see Figure 12.5). Indirectly, this
figure may also serve as an indicator of household
willingness to conserve and use water efficiently. A very
low rate would indicate little incentive to conserve or use
water efficiently. The potential for introducing effective
demand management measures would depend on this
figure. Data required to estimate this indicator are
generally collected through household income and
expenditure surveys conducted by governments at
regular intervals.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 2 7

Figure 12.5: Affordability of utility services in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 2003–04

Electricity
Heating

CIS

Water

SEE

CEB

0

2

4

6

8

10

Percentage of total household expenditures
Key:

CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
SEE = South Eastern Europe: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, FYR Macedonia, Romania and Serbia and Montenegro.
CEB = Central Eastern Europe and Baltic States: Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovak Republic and Slovenia.
Note: Affordability estimates are unweighted averages. Data on district heating were not available for Albania and Georgia, where heat networks
are not functioning.
Source: Fankhauser and Tepic, 2005.

Part 7. Conclusions and Recommendations
The supply and affordability of water is of growing political and economic concern as it is increasingly
recognized that safe water is not only essential for health, but also for social and economic
development. As the world’s population grows in numbers and wealth, the demand for more and better
water supply and sanitation services increases, as does the competition between sectors serving other
societal needs, such as food, manufactured goods and environmental services. Understanding the value
of water is essential if this ever more scarce resource is to be more effectively and efficiently applied to
meeting societal goals.
Valuation is the process of assessing the impact of
various policies and initiatives then assigning weights
to various policy outcomes based on the importance of
various policy objectives or criteria. Value, in this sense,
is not assigned specifically to water but to consequences
of a change in governance or policy initiatives. Values
vary depending on the services in question, the location,
the policy context and other circumstances. Economic
valuation assesses outcomes based on willingness to
pay and willingness to accept compensation. Other
considerations include social values, such as rights to
clean water and adequate sanitation irrespective of ability

to pay, gender equity, and respect for religious and cultural
beliefs and environmental concerns, including concern for
biodiversity preservation and wetland protection.
Economic valuation can be useful for assessing the
potential net benefits of proposed public policy initiatives
as well as the realized benefit of previous policies. For
example, research indicates that the economic returns to
public investments in irrigation in Asia over the past three
decades have been quite modest as compared to returns
from alternative investments (e.g. research, rural roads
and education) or even the cost of capital. High benefit-

4 2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

cost ratios for investments in water supply and sanitation
in areas where such facilities are lacking suggest that a
reallocation of resources toward domestic water services
would improve social welfare.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Though considerable effort has gone into expanding
and refining the analytical methods for measuring
water-related values, results are only as reliable as the
assumptions and data upon which the analyses are
based. More work needs to be done on refining these
tools and improving data collection. Economic valuation
is rarely seen as a wholly acceptable solution. Although
helpful in elucidating the trade-offs between different
objectives in alternative scenarios, it is often necessary to
enter the political realm or formalized negotiations in
order to resolve the dissonance inherent in situations
containing multiple conflicting objectives. Greater
attention needs to be focused on understanding more
clearly ‘who benefits’ and ‘who bears the costs’ in any
water resources policy or development initiative. Seeming
inconsistencies in governments’ stated objectives and
activities can often be understood by analysing the
distributional aspects of government investments.
Charging, as a governance policy, aims to balance
multiple competing objectives. Most water professionals
now feel that the reform of charging policies is critical to
improving the performance of the water services sector.
Revised charging structures need to be more widely
implemented to improve cost recovery, to facilitate
adequate maintenance and expansion of water supply
systems, and to provide incentives for conservation, while
making water services affordable and available to all.
The political unpopularity of increased charges will need
to be overcome with phased tariffs in some areas but also
programmes to help consumers understand the true costs
and value of regular, reliable water and sanitation
services. Given that willingness to pay, the limit to
charging, is a function of information, better informed,
and better served, customers should facilitate cost
recovery and thus the development of water services.
For the moment, however, many poor find full-cost
charging, unaffordable, so subsidies will probably need
to be maintained in many areas if MDGs on water supply
and sanitation are to be met in the near term.
Several factors, but especially the shortfall of funds for
infrastructure development, have led many national and
local governments to look to the private sector for
assistance in water systems management and

development. The experience of private sector
involvement in the water sector, however, has been
decidedly mixed. Indeed, dissatisfaction with water
services after private sector involvement brought
consumers onto the streets in Bolivia. Given the nature
and role of the resource, the nature of associated
infrastructure investment and the social sensitivity
regarding water supply, it is almost impossible to
depoliticize water. However, an increasing number of
examples of successful public-private partnerships should
serve to enlighten future developments. Governments, for
their part, need to take more seriously their regulatory
responsibilities to ensure quality service and socially
equitable access.
Virtual water, that is, the water embedded in various
goods, has become a topic of increasing interest as
water-stressed countries reassess their production
priorities. Many nations have realized that they can in
effect import ‘virtual water’ in the form of goods
requiring significant water for their production, for
example, food. Thus, countries experiencing severe and
persistent water stress may opt for trade policies focused
on importing water-intensive goods while exporting more
high-value water-efficient products. Similarly, the growing
interest in payment for environmental services reflects
societies’ and governments’ heightened appreciation of
the value – including cost savings – of ecosystem
functions especially as related to water supply. These
include filtering water, regularizing water flows, and
buffering against flood and tidal surges.
Throughout this chapter the concept of measurement has
dominated the discussion. Although we acknowledge that
some values of water are difficult if not impossible to
measure, informed decision relies upon such information
developed largely through regular monitoring and data
collection. Indicators which focus on critical aspects of
water resources management and allocation have an
important role to play in developing efficient and effective
systems of water governance. Continued work is needed to
further refine the art and science of developing indicators,
particularly with regard to the social and environmental
dimensions of value, and at the local and national level.
Both theoretical and real-world studies are needed.
As freshwater becomes ever scarcer and increasingly
contested, the importance of understanding the diverse
values of water increases. Recognizing the distinction
between ‘valuing’ and ‘valuation’ is critical. Valuing water

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 2 9

is not solely a matter of applying sophisticated economic
techniques and calibrating various water-related goods
and services in terms of a money metric. Rather, it means
involving all stakeholders in a process of determining
priorities and making informed decisions on specific
courses of action that will enable society to better meet
its water-related goals. Economic valuation is a tool that
can assist in this process and charging is but one strategy

among many possibilities. It is important not only that
more individuals involved in policy making and planning
are made aware of the strengths and weaknesses of the
various economic techniques that can be applied in
assessing governance strategies, but that stakeholders
become better capable of understanding and articulating
the wide spectrum of values that water holds for them.

References and Websites
Allan, J. A. 2003. Virtual Water – the Water, Food, and Trade
Nexus: Useful Concept or Misleading Metaphor? Water
International Vol.28, No.1, pp. 4–11.
———. 1997. Virtual Water: A Long-term Solution for WaterShort Middle Eastern Economies? Paper delivered at
British Association Festival of Science, 6 Sept. Leeds, UK.
Bitrán, G. and Valenzuela, E. 2003. Water Services in Chile:

Utilities. (Policy Research Working Paper 2890).
Washington DC, World Bank.
Estache, A. and Rossi, M. 2002. How Different is the Efficiency
of Public and Private Water Companies in Asia? World
Bank Economic Review Vol.16, No.1.
Estache, A., Perelman, S. and Trujillo, L. 2005. Infrastructure
Performance and Reform in Developing and Transition

Comparing Public and Private Performance. (Public Policy

Economies: Evidence from a Survey of Productivity

for the Private Sector, Note No. 255). March. Washington

Measures. (Policy Research Working Paper

DC, World Bank.

3514).Washington DC, World Bank.

Boardman, A. E., Greenberg, D. H., Vining, A. R. and Weimer,

Evenson, R. E., Pray, C. and Rosegrant, M. W. 1999.

D. L. 2000. Cost-Benefit Analysis: Concepts and Practice

Agricultural Research and Productivity Growth in India.

(2nd edn). Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall.

(Research Report 109). Washington DC, International

BBC (British Broadcasting Corporation) 2005. Recycling
Around the World.
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/4620041.stm
news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/4373350.stm

Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Fan, S., Hazell, P. and Thorat, S. 1999. Linkages between
Government Spending, Growth and Poverty in Rural India.
(Research Report 110). Washington DC, IFPRI.

Chapagain, A.K. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2004. Water Footprints of

Fan, S., Jitsuchon, S. and Methakunnavut, N. 2004. The

Nations. (Value of Water Research Report Series No. 16).

Importance of Public Investment for Reducing Rural

Delft, UNESCO-IHE.

Poverty: Thailand. (Discussion Paper 7). Washington DC,

Chapagain, A. K., Hoekstra, A. Y. and Savenije, H. H. G. 2005.
Saving Water through Global Trade. (Value of Water
Research Report Series No.17). Delft, UNESCO-IHE.
Cornish, G., Perry, C. and Bosworth, B. 2004. Water Charging
in Irrigated Agriculture: an Analysis of International
Experience. Rome, FAO.
Cosgrove, W. J. and Rijsberman, F. R. 2000. World Water

IFPRI.
Fan, S., Zhang, L. and Zhang, X. 2002. Growth, Inequality and
Poverty in Rural China: The Role of Public Investments.
(Research Report 125). Washington DC, IFPRI.
Fankhauser, S. and Tepic, S. 2005. Can Poor Consumers Pay
for Energy and Water? An Affordability Analysis for
Transition Countries. (Working Paper No. 92). London,

Freeman III, A. M. 2003. The Measurement of Environmental
and Resource Values: Theory and Methods (2nd edn).
Washington DC, Resources for the Future.
Gleick, P. H., Cain, N., Haasz, D., Henges-Jeck, C., Hunt, C.,
Kiparsky, M., Moench, M., Palaniappan, M., Srinivasan, V.
and Wolff, G. 2004. The World’s Water 2004-2005.
Washington DC, Island Press.
Gouyon, A. 2003. Rewarding the Upland Poor for
Environmental Services: A Review of Initiatives from
Developed Countries. Rome, World Agroforestry Centre,
IFAD. www.worldagroforestrycentre.org/sea/Networks/
RUPES/download/paper/Agouyon_RUPES.pdf
Gresham, Z. 2001. Lessons from the Field: Private Sector
Involvement in Water Projects. Morrison and Foerster,
www.mofo.com/news/updates/files/update545.html
Griffin, R. C. 2006. Water Resource Economics: The Analysis
of Scarcity, Policies, and Projects. Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press.
Hall, D. C. 2000. Public Choice and Water Rate Design. A.
Dinar, (ed.) The Political Economy of Water Pricing
Reforms. New York, Oxford University Press.
———. (ed.) 1996. Marginal Cost Rate Design and Wholesale
Water Marketing. Greenwich, CT, JAI Press.
Hanemann, W. M. 2005. The Economic Conception of Water.
(Working paper No. 1005). Berkeley, California, California
Agricultural Experiment Station.
———. 1997. Prices and Rate Structures. D. D. Baumann, J. J.

Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. London,

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

Boland and W. M. Hanemann (eds), Urban Water Demand

Earthscan.

(EBRD).

Management and Planning. New York, McGraw Hill, pp.

Dasgupta, P. and Mäler, K. G. 2004. Environmental and

Fauré, J.-M. 2004. Land-water linkages in rural watersheds:

Resource Economics: Some Recent Developments. Beijer

implications for payment schemes and environmental

International Institute of Ecological Economics, Stockholm.

services. Payment Schemes for Environmental Services in

Dent, D. 2005. Green Water Credits. Paper delivered at FAO
International Conference on Water for Food and
Ecosystems: Make it happen! The Hague, 31 January –
4 February.
Estache, A. and A. Goicoechea. 2005. A Research Database on

31–95.
Herrington, P. 1999. Household Water Pricing in OECD
Countries. Paris, OECD.

Watersheds, Land and Water. (Discussion Paper 3). Rome,

———. 1987. Pricing of Water Services. Paris, OECD.

FAO.

Hoehn, J. P. and Krieger, D. P. 2000. An Economic Analysis of

Finnegan, W. 2002. Letter from Bolivia: Leasing the Rain, New
Yorker, 8 April.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2004. Payment

Water and Wastewater Investments in Cairo, Egypt.
Evaluation Review Vol.24, No.6, pp. 579–608.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Hung, P. Q. 2002. Virtual Water Trade: A

Infrastructure Economic Performance. (Policy Research

Schemes for Environmental Services in Watersheds, Land

Quantification of Virtual Water Flows Between Nations in

Working Paper 3643). Washington DC, World Bank.

and Water. (Discussion Paper 3). Rome, FAO.

Relation to International Crop Trade. (Research Report no.

Estache, A. and Kouassi, E. 2002. Sector Organization,
Governance, and the Inefficiency of African Water

Franceys, R. and Weitz, A. 2003. Public-Private Community
Partnerships in Infrastructure for the Poor. Journal of
International Development Vol.15, No.8.

11). Delft, UNESCO-IHE. www.ihe.nl/downloads/projects/
report11-hoekstra-hung.pdf

4 3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs and
Benefits of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the
Global Level. Geneva, WHO.

Water Policy Vol.6, No.5, pp. 427–41.
Raghupati, U. and Foster, V. 2002. Water Tariffs and Subsidies

van Hofwegen, P. 2003. Virtual Water: Conscious Choices.
Stockholm Water Front, 2 June. (4).
Wallsten, S. and Kosec, K. 2005. Public or Private Drinking

in South Asia: Understanding the Basics, A Scorecard for

Water? The Effects of Ownership and Benchmark

(CES): A Catalyst for Ecosystem Conservation and Poverty

India. (Water and Sanitation Program, Paper No. 2).

Competition on U.S. Water System Regulatory Compliance

Alleviation? Focus, 3/04. Geneva, InfoResources.

Washington DC, World Bank.

and Household Water Expenditures. (Working Paper

InfoResources. 2004. Compensation for Ecosystem Services

International Bottled Water Association (IBWA). 2005. 2005

Rogers, P., Bhatia, R and Huber, A 1998. Water as a Social

Market Report Findings. www.bottledwater.org/public/

and Economic Good: How to Put the Principle into

BWFactsHome_main.htm

Practice. Stockholm, Global Water Partnership/Swedish

Llamas, R. 2003. Online Conference on virtual water at the
World Water Council, Marseilles.
MacRae Jr, D. and Whittington, D. 1997. Expert Advice for

International Development Agency.
Rogers, P., de Silva, R. and Bhatia, R. 2002. Water is an
Economic Good: How to Use Prices to Promote Equity,

Policy Choice: Analysis and Discourse. Washington DC,

Efficiency and Sustainability. Water Policy Vol.4, No.1,

Georgetown University Press.

pp. 1–17.

Matthews, O., Brookshire, D. S. and Campana, M. E. 2001. The
Economic Value of Water: Results of a Workshop in
Caracas, Venezuela, August. Water Resources Program,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and
Human Well-Being: A Framework for Assessment.
Washington DC, Island Press.

Sagoff, M. 2004. Price, Principle and the Environment.
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Savenije, H. H. G. and van der Zaag, P. 2001. ‘Demand
Management’ and ‘Water as an Economic Good’:

Analysis. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.

Forest. (ITTO TS-21). Yokohama, International Tropical
Timber Organization.
Shah, T., van Koppen, B., Merrey, D., de Lange, M. and

Town and Rural County Strategies for Protecting Critical

Samad, M. 2002. Institutional Alternatives in African

Water Supplies. Washington DC, NCSC and Environmental

Smallholder Irrigation: Lessons from International

Protection Agency (EPA).

Experience with Irrigation Management Transfer.

www.nrdc.org/water/drinking/nbw.asp
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 1992. Guidelines
and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal

(Research Report 60). Colombo, Sri Lanka, International
Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Shaw, W. D. 2005. Water Resource Economics and Policy: An
Introduction. Northampton, MA, Edward Elgar.
Tsur, Y., Roe, T. Doukkali, R. and Dinar, A. 2004. Pricing

Programs. (Circular No. A-94 [Revised]). Washington DC,

Irrigation Water: Principles and Cases from Developing

US Government.

Countries. Washington DC, Resources for the Future

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2005. Financing Strategy for Urban Wastewater

Press.
Turton, A. R. 2000. Precipitation, people, pipelines and power:

Collection and Treatment Infrastructure in Armenia. Paris,

Towards a political ecology discourse of water in

OECD.

Southern Africa, P. Stott and S. Sullivan (eds), Political

———. Environment Directorate. 2003. Social Issues in the
Provision and Pricing of Water Services. Paris, OECD.
———. 1985. Management of Water Projects: Decision-making
and Investment Appraisal. Paris, OECD.
Pagiola, S. and Platais, G. 2002. Payments for Environmental
Services. (Environmental Strategy Notes, No.3).
Washington DC, World Bank.
Powe, N. A., Garrod, G. D., McMahon, P. L. and Willis, K. G.
2004. Assessing customer preferences for water supply

Environmental Resources. Washington DC, Winrock
International and US Agency for International
Development (USAID).
Water Resources Council (WRC). 1983. Economic and
Environmental Principles and Guidelines for Water and
Related Land Resources Implementation Studies.
Washington DC, Superintendent of Documents (US).
Whittington, D., Boland J. and Foster, V. 2002. Water Tariffs
Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and

Scherr, S., White, A. and Khare, A. 2004. For Services
Markets for Ecosystems Services Provided by Tropical

Water: Pure Drink or Pure Hype?

Incentives to Communities for Stewardship of

and Subsidies in South Asia: Understanding the Basics.

Dealing with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy

Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC). 1999. Bottled

Regulatory Studies.
Warner, K, Huang, M and Middleton, D. 2004. Financial

series No. 8). Delft, UNESCO-IHE.
Rendered: The Current Status and Future Potential of

2000). Action Guide for Source Water Funding: Small

05–05). Washington DC, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for

Paradigm with Pitfalls. (Value of Water Research Report

Morgan, M.G. and Henrion, M. 1990. Uncertainty: A Guide to

National Center for Small Communities (NCSC). n.d. (ca.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

options using mixed methodology choice experiments.

Ecology: Science, Myth and Power, London: Edward
Arnold, pp. 132–53.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004. What

the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), (Paper No. 1).
Washington DC, World Bank. www.wsp.org
Winpenny, James. 2003. Financing Water for All: Report of the
World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure [a.k.a. The
Camdessus Report]. Marseilles, World Water Council.
World Bank. 2005. Yerevan Water and Wastewater Project:
Europe and Central Asia Region. (Project Appraisal
Document 30251). Washington DC, World Bank.
———. 2004. Reforming the Water Sector. Reforming
Infrastructure: Privatization, Regulation and Competition.
Washington DC, World Bank.
———. 1997. Selecting an Option for Private Sector
Participation: Toolkits for Private Sector Participation in
Water Supply and Sanitation. Washington DC, World
Bank.
———. 1994. World Development Report: Infrastructure for
Development. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2000. Bottled Drinking
Water. w3.whosea.org/en/Section260/Section484/
Section487_7866.htm
Yardley, J. 2005. China’s Next Big Boom Could be Foul Air.
New York Times, 30 October.
Young, R. A. 2005. Determining the Economic Value of Water:

are Public-Private Partnerships?

Concepts and Methods. Washington DC, Resources for

pppue.undp.org/index.cfm?module=ActiveWeb&page=

the Future Press.

WebPage&s=what
UNICEF/WHO. 2004. Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and
Sanitation Target. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF.

VA L U I N G A N D C H A R G I N G FO R WAT E R . 4 3 1

Beijer Institute website on environmental economics: www.beijer.kva.se/
European Commission on the Environment on water policy: europa.eu.int/comm/environment/water/index.html
IUCN’s Water and Nature Initiative on valuing water: www.iucn.org/themes/wani/value/index.html
OECD website on water financing: www.oecd.org/document/7/0,2340,en_2649_201185_33719751_1_1_1_1,00.html
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on public-private partnerships (medium-sized): pppue.undp.org/index.cfm
UNESCO-IHE website on virtual water: www.waterfootprint.org/
WWF Freshwater programme: www.panda.org/about_wwf/what_we_do/freshwater/index.cfm
World Bank Water Supply and Sanitation programme website: www.worldbank.org/watsan
World Bank’s Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) regarding large scale PPPs: www.ppiaf.org/
World Water Council on virtual water: www.worldwatercouncil.org/index.php?id=866
For definitions:
www.ecosystemvaluation.org

Knowledge has to shuttle between the local and the global
level, taking account of the retroactive effect of the global
on the particular.
Edgar Morin

Part 1. Assessing Knowledge and
Capacity ...............................................................435

Part 3. Enhancing Local Capacities ...............449
3a. Human resources development ..........................449
Box 13.9: Implementing capacity at all level
Basic education..................................................449
Box 13.10: GIS for school sanitation and hygiene
education: Tamil Nadu, India
Higher education/training ....................................450
3b. Strengthening institutional capacity..................451
Box 13.11: The need for gender balance
Box 13.12: Initiatives to enhance access to
finance at sub-sovereign level
3c. Creating an enabling environment .....................452

1a. From knowledge to capacity development.........435
Fig. 13.1: Capacity development: Levels,
activities, outputs and goals
1b. Identifying socio-economic benefits..................436
Box 13.1: Enhancing education and capacity:
An economic proposition

Part 2. Enhancing the Knowledge Base ......438
2a. Data acquisition.................................................438
Ground monitoring systems .................................439
Box 13.2: Hydrological networks: The cases of
Venezuela, Mexico and India
Map 13.1: WMO’S World Hydrological Cycle
Observing System (WHYCOS)
Remote sensing...................................................440
Box 13.3: Advances in the practical use of
satellite remote sensing for water resources
Box 13.4: TIGER Initiative: Improving water
systems observation in Africa
Box 13.5: Advances in remote sensing
technologies
Databases...........................................................442
Modelling systems...............................................442
2b. Knowledge sharing and accessibility .................443
Box 13.6: The Global Development Learning
Network (GDLN)
The language barrier and quality assurance and
control................................................................444
Map 13.2: The Knowledge Index, 2005
Knowledge networks ..........................................445
Box 13.7: FarmNet – Farmer Information Network
for Rural Development
Map 13.3: Cap-Net
Map 13.4: PoWER
Local and indigenous knowledge .........................447
Box 13.8: Local and indigenous knowledge for
sustainable IWRM

Part 4. Identifying Knowledge and
Capacity Needs.................................................454
4a. Indicators...........................................................454
Table 13.1: General framework for capacity
development
4b. The distribution of knowledge and capacity
needs .................................................................457
4c. Assessment tools and challenges ......................457
Table 13.2: Some capacity assessment tools

Part 5. The Way Forward ....................................459
References and Websites ..................................460

Madhukari Ganokendra (People’s Centre), in
Rajapur village, western Bangladesh, holds monthly
meetings to discuss primary school attendance and
other important issues for the community to take
action

13
CHAPTER 13

Enhancing
Knowledge
and Capacity

By

UNESCO-IHE
(Institute
for Water Education)

4 3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key messages:
Financial investments made in the last decades in the water sector have often failed to bring about the expected
outcomes, largely due to lack of attention given to enhancing knowledge and capacity. While infrastructure is needed,
it is doomed to deteriorate if not properly maintained by adequate human resources and institutional capacity within
an enabling environment. In a time of climate change and declining hydrological data collection systems, all countries
need to take seriously the threat to their water resources and invest in capacity development.

An education programme provides
free of cost relevant life skills
ranging from reading, writing,
simple calculating to tailoring,
furniture making, etc. to out of
school youth and adults in Bhutan

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Katha public school provides an
education to 5–16 years olds in
Govinpuri slums, south Delhi, India

■

Self-assessments of knowledge and capacity needs are
urgently required to assist water resources managers in
all challenge areas in setting priorities, identifying gaps
and improving the effectiveness with which they can
respond to a continuously changing environment.

■

It is essential that the knowledge base of capacity
development be enhanced through case studies,
best practices, twinning organizations and shared
experiences and that the capabilities of national
statistical agencies to deal with water sector data
be improved.

■

Increased access to education at all levels through
information and communication technologies is a
cornerstone for development, and efforts to broaden
individual capacities through education should be
actively pursued.

■

Knowledge requires continuous investment to enable
society to adapt to an uncertain future generated by
climate change. In particular, increased investments in
the hydrological data network and remote sensing are
needed to provide the information necessary for
modelling future scenarios.

■

The capacity of water management institutions
should be increased to ensure that they have a
clear mandate, an effective organizational system,
and improved decision support through lessons
learned and indigenous knowledge.

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 3 5

Part 1. Assessing Knowledge and Capacity
Spurred by the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), many nations are now intensifying their actions
to improve water services and infrastructure development. Over the past two decades, developing
countries have invested hundreds of billions of dollars in water services and water resources, a
substantial portion of which has failed to bring about the desired outcomes and impacts. The
operations assessments by the development banks and other donors attribute this in many cases
to inadequate knowledge bases and weak capacities.
As our understanding of the interactions between
water management and society develops, it becomes
increasingly evident that the past focus on developing
infrastructure has overlooked the need for a strong
knowledge base and capacity to plan, manage and use
that infrastructure and enable proper governance of the
water sector. Today, there is a growing consensus that
knowledge and capacity in the water sector is a primary
condition for sustainable development and management
of water services.
Knowledge development and accessibility lie at the
heart of this concern. Knowledge takes a variety of
forms: as databases; as the competence to integrate
and interpret data and create meaningful information
that can inform decisions; as capacity to generate new
data and information, to identify gaps, to learn from
past experiences and to explore the future; and
educational and dissemination mechanisms. A knowledge
system extends well beyond data pertaining to physical
and technical parameters. Involving civil society and
increased community participation foster a greater
understanding of the interactions of the complex
social and environmental processes involved in
water management, which enables the rethinking
of approaches to effective water development.
The knowledge base is made up of databases,
documents, models, procedures, tools and products.
It also includes knowledge that may not be explicitly
available because it is contextual, cultural and relates to
skills, heuristics, experience and natural talents (such as
local or indigenous knowledge). This implicit knowledge
leads the way for capacity-to-act or a competence to
solve problems, but describing and communicating such
implicit knowledge remains challenging (Snowden, 2003).
The support of a strong knowledge base can greatly
improve capacity development and spur the kind of informed
decision-making that drives policy directives, which enable

local institutions to be better equipped to direct their
own self-sufficient and sustainable futures in the face of
change. As such, research, assessment, know-how and
communication are not simply components of a development
initiative that compete with other components: they are
primary targets in any effort towards effective and
sustainable development in water-related sectors.

1a. From knowledge to capacity
development
Capacity development is the process by which individuals,
organizations, institutions and societies develop abilities
(individually and collectively) to perform functions, solve
problems and set and achieve objectives (UNDP, 1997;
Lopes and Theisohn, 2003). A country’s capacity to
address water-related issues is not just the sum total of
individual capacities, but rather a broad holistic view of
the central concerns of management, namely how to
resolve conflict, manage change and institutional
pluralism, enhance coordination, foster communication,
and ensure that data and information are collected,
analysed and shared. This involves not only individual
capacities (human resources), but also the effectiveness,
flexibility and adaptability of organizational processes
(institutional capacity) and an enabling and stimulating
management framework (the enabling environment).
These three levels of capacity development are presented
in Figure 13.1 with its associated activities, outputs and
goals. A detailed description of these three levels is
included in Part 3 of this chapter.
Sustainable development increasingly requires countries
to have the capacity to put in place effective knowledge
generation and learning mechanisms. This capacity-tolearn or ‘adaptive capacity’ is the potential or capability
of a system to adjust or change its characteristics or
behaviour, so as to better cope with existing and future
stresses. More specifically, adaptive capacity refers to ‘the
ability of a socio-ecological system to cope with novelty
without losing options for the future’ (Folke et al., 2002)

The knowledge
base is seen to
be of a higher
order than a
database... it
relates to how
such collected
explicit
knowledge on
the world’s
water resources
and their use is
archived and
analysed

4 3 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

In order to
achieve

Figure 13.1: Capacity development: Levels, activities, outputs and goals
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL

sustained
progress,

Education
Formal – informal
Basic, vocational, professional
experience

Knowledge

Training
Competency – task oriented
Vocational, on the job, seminars,
workshop, short courses, exposure,
coaching

knowledge

Skills
Attitude
BEHAVIOUR

building and
INSTITUTIONAL LEVEL

capacity
development

Incentive structure

Defining structure, tasks and internal
accountability mechanisms

Coaching
SERVICE DELIVERY
PERFORMANCE

must be viewed

Defining mission, responsibilities and
external accountability mechanisms

as development
objectives in

Human resource development

ENABLING
ENVIRONMENT

Development of policies, legislation,
organizations, regulations and
procedures

SECTOR PERFORMANCE

and of
themselves...

Source: van Hofwegen, 2004.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

and ‘is an aspect of resilience that reflects learning,
flexibility to experiment and adopt novel solutions, and
development of generalized responses to broad classes of
challenges’ (Walker et al., 2002). There is a need therefore
to build into capacity development a concern that individuals
have the skills to innovate when faced with a non-standard
problem and a structural flexibility that does not penalize,
but rather rewards and capitalizes on such innovation.
A new paradigm for water development has begun to
emerge. It stresses the importance of country ownership
and shifts the focus from passive knowledge transfer
(e.g., from the North to the South) to knowledge
acquisition and integration within the developing
countries themselves. It does this by supporting homegrown processes for knowledge development – often
using existing local and indigenous capacities – while
also specifically including local participatory processes.
In order to achieve sustained progress, knowledge
building and capacity development must be viewed as
specific development objectives, which command their
own resources, management attention and evaluation
standards, much along the lines of gender, poverty
or environmental issues (Morgan, 2000).
The concept of capacity development implies that
improved water services delivery and sustainable
development are to be achieved as much through

improving the enabling environment, the institutional
frameworks and human resources as through the
technocratic approach of investments in infrastructure.
Capacities must be developed at all three levels while
acknowledging that these layers of capacity are
mutually interdependent – if one is pursued in isolation,
development still remains skewed and inefficient (FukudaParr et al., 2002). The right combination of actions
depends on the local situation, which calls for extensive
prior analysis and priority setting, for instance, by region
or by river catchment (Alaerts et al., 1999).

1b. Identifying socio-economic benefits
While high-income countries have been able to couple large
investments in infrastructure with human and institutional
knowledge building many middle- and low-income nations
lag behind in their ability to adapt to the ever-increasing
pace of change in a complex world (Alaerts et al., 1999).
Industrialized countries, for example, can afford to invest
in better understanding and preparedness for the effects
of climate change. Middle-income countries are generally
characterized as having built sufficient infrastructure assets
to provide adequate water services and prepare for the
‘conventional’ larger water-related risks such as floods.
They may still however lack the necessary institutional
and human knowledge base that is needed to reap a
greater benefit from water resources development for more
sustainable growth. Lower-income countries typically have

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 3 7

not yet been able to invest in a minimum stock of water
infrastructure, and often do not have the capacity to govern
and manage these investments effectively once they are
made. They thus have a strong incentive to invest their
scarce resources in infrastructure that brings rapid returns.
However, past experience shows that heavily investing in
infrastructure without enhancing existing local capacities
can result in dilapidated infrastructure, exasperated water
problems and increased debt.
Even though there exists in the world at large the knowhow and knowledge to solve many, if not most, of the
world’s pressing water problems, this knowledge is often
slow to make an impact. National governments, often with
overburdened and underpaid staff, possess only limited
capability to acquire and interpret that knowledge, and
turn it into practical action and realistic proposals. Vested
interests often prevent the adoption of new approaches,
and staff are forced to respond to short-term priorities.
While it is agreed that good governance and management
require local government involvement, the devolution of
responsibility for managing a range of water services from
national to lower levels further raises the need to strengthen
capacities. This is because local-government staff tend to have
benefited less from proper education than their colleagues in
central-government agencies, and because the local
administrative procedures are even less geared to appreciate
the value of sound knowledge. Similarly, better governance
hinges on users and communities that are informed and have
the capacity to access and use information with which they
can hold government accountable.
Each country needs a development strategy that
recognizes the balance between knowledge, capacity
and infrastructure in order to adopt the most suitable
governance strategy and utilize its water resources in
line with sustainable development. Such a development
strategy must acknowledge that radical social,
environmental and technological changes are taking place
at an increasing rate. As discussed throughout this Report,
these include the burgeoning population growth in lowerincome countries, the global consequences of climate
change, the pervasive influences of globalization and the
exponential growth in Internet-based communication.
The ability to predict the trends, measures and potential
consequences of such complex systems depends on our
capacity to understand and integrate information and
knowledge, as well as on our assessment of the

effectiveness of the knowledge economy both of which
are fuelled by the new information and communication
technologies (ICTs) that facilitate the collection, storage
and sharing of data and information globally.

...the devolution

More than ever before, our increasingly interconnected
world can enable more societies to identify opportunities
and means for determining their own path to sustainable
development. However, while the communication of
lessons learned, and the sharing of experiences have
allowed the international community to better articulate
the objectives of water management in various sectors,
the knowledge base and the development of capacity to
implement and effectively achieve these objectives remain
very much ‘work in progress’. Major constraints include
the large sizes of the funds required to build these
knowledge bases and capacity; the low sense of urgency
at political levels; and, perhaps most importantly, the
fact that people must first recognize the value of better
knowledge and capacity, and that capacity-building is
inevitably a long-term and continuous process.1

of a range of

Yet because of the complexities faced in turning the social
and economic benefits of research and development into
knowledge generation and building capacity, economic
returns are often overlooked, and there remains a strong
reluctance to invest the necessary resources as a
sustained initiative (see Box 13.1). Understanding and
appreciating the need to change the approach to water
development is the first step in overcoming deficiencies.
The private sector has long since recognized the
difficulties involved in designing and managing
programmes of intentional change in corporations, and
it has accepted occasional failures as normal episodes
on a learning curve, spurring efforts to master change as
a process (Pasmore, 1994; Senge et al., 1999; Kotter and
Cohen, 2002). The response from development agencies,
in contrast, has typically been to minimize risks and boost
the apparent benefits to be achieved (Morgan et al.,
2005). Without further intensive efforts to understand the
dynamics of the complex processes of institutional change
in international development, initiatives to enhance
knowledge and capacity will fail to be properly targeted
and will not produce the desired outcomes. Indeed,
compared with other sectors, the water sector has been
slow to seek out and internalize knowledge from other
sectors, affecting issues such as climate change, and to
investigate more deeply the longer-term scenarios needed
for proper governance.

of responsibility
for management
water services
from national to
lower levels
further raises
the need to
strengthen
capacities...

1. These long-term goals are
gradually becoming
recognized, and development
banks like the World Bank, the
Inter-American Development
Bank, the Asian Development
Bank, the African Development
Bank and the international
donor community are
providing increasing support
for capacity-building.

4 3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 13.1: ENHANCING EDUCATION AND CAPACITY: AN ECONOMIC PROPOSITION
Conventional financial analyses of investment

launched large-scale pilot programmes across

rate of return (ERR) of 10 to 18 percent,

projects tend to calculate the rate of return

the country where Farmer/Water User

depending on the state of the assets and the

based only on investment in physical assets.

Associations (WUAs) were empowered through

productivity of the scheme. However, when the

The capacity development component is typically

capacity-building and appropriate regulatory

enhanced knowledge and capacity of the WUAs

treated as an appendix, to which no separate

changes that created an enabling environment.

was factored in, the ERR rose to 30 to 40

economic relevance is allocated. However, the

As part of this, the local staff of the Irrigation

percent. The ERR over the incremental

methodological difficulty in determining the

Services were trained as ‘facilitators’. Because of

investment for the capacity-building component

correlation between investment in capacity and

the availability of comparative data, it was

was approximately 32 percent. Thus, the larger

improved sectoral performance is not proof that

possible for the first time to separate out the

benefits were created by the investment in the

there is no return.

value of investments in capacity-building as

empowerment and training of the users,

opposed to investments in physical assets. The

increasing the ‘social capital’ of the local

The Indonesian Government has gone through

analysis showed that conventional rehabilitation

communities and strengthening governance.

a period of intense institutional change since

projects (to repair irrigation schemes after the

1998. To improve its irrigation performance, it

recent economic crisis) would bring an economic

Source: World Bank, 2003.

Part 2. Enhancing the Knowledge Base
An adequate knowledge base must be available to the water sector worldwide in order to understand
and deal with current changes. Besides data describing the state of water resources and their
management, there is an urgent need for good applied research to generate knowledge on the current
challenges facing the water sector and to collect and share the existing experiences of communities as
they develop capacity. Because the knowledge base must also address the socio-cultural and economic
processes that feed into all three levels of capacity, factors related to collective learning processes,
and democratic participation and empowerment must also be taken into account, requiring knowledge
acquisition covering areas far beyond those concerned solely with the state of the resource.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

2a. Data acquisition
Faced with climate change and population growth, it is
now more urgent than ever that measures be undertaken
to improve the state of knowledge on water services and
water resources for better management. The knowledge
base of the water sector is very broad; it touches on
health, agriculture/aquaculture, industry, energy and
ecosystem issues and draws on skills and knowledge
from technological, scientific, medical, economic, legal and
social realms. In order to appreciate the complexity of the
interaction between these different issues it is essential to
have relevant and reliable data that relate to them and their
connection to the water sector. The World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) Global Runoff Data Centre reported
that there has been a significant reduction in the data
collected since mid-1980s. Agenda 21 (UN, 1992) states
that the lack of data ‘seriously impairs the capacities of
countries to make informed decisions concerning the
environment and development’. Indeed, raw data from

monitoring the physical and socio-economic systems of our
water resources is the foundation on which we assess their
state. Because of the high cost of data acquisition, data
collection should be targeted at what is critically important.
An examination of the current state of the data in the
knowledge base on integrated water resources management
(IWRM) reveals some distinct trends. On the one hand,
due to political, institutional and economic instability, there
has been a severe decline in basic hydrological monitoring
for estimating sustainable water supplies (IAHS Ad Hoc
Committee, 2001; Grabs, 2003). On the other hand, there
have been considerable advances in the acquisition of data
on water resources from remote sensing (Vörösmarty et al.,
2005). These advances are due in part to the governments’
expectations of the availability and capabilities of remote
sensing technology and its spatial coverage, in addition
to the large costs and uncertainties involved in sustaining
ground-based hydrological monitoring networks.

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 3 9

Ground monitoring systems
Ground-based monitoring systems are essential for
characterizing a country’s water resources. Despite the
spatial coverage of remote sensing, such data is generally
still less accurate than that of ground-based monitoring,
which is needed for confirming remote sensing data and
for measuring parameters such as precipitation, discharges
and sediment transport in rivers and groundwater levels.
Today, however, there is a lack of ground-based
hydrological station networks. In large parts of the world,
basic networks have been seriously threatened in the
last fifteen years as pressure on funding agencies and
governmental organizations to reduce their size has
often resulted in the elimination of the technical staff
responsible for their operation (Box 13.2). It was
mistakenly believed that the introduction of automation,
among other reasons, would justify such staff reductions,
resulting in widespread personnel removal, extremely low
remuneration and little political support – the effects of
which will only be felt in the mid to long term. Political
decision-making has sometimes been in conflict with
scientific research (see Chapter 1), even in countries with
an advanced scientific capability, like the US: ‘There is a
deep disconnection in American politics between scientific
knowledge and political decisions’ (Sachs, 2005).2
WMO’s World Hydrological Cycle Observing System3
(WHYCOS) is making an important contribution to an

overall assessment of the world’s water resources
(see Map 13.1) by strengthening the technical and
institutional capacities of the hydrological services to
collect, transmit and store hydrological data and produce
information responding to the needs of the end users.
However, it is ironic that the dilapidation of ground-based
monitoring networks is happening at a time when remote
sensing coupled with geographic information systems
can truly complement these traditional labour-intensive
methods of data collection with better archiving, access
and analysis of the data. Due to the uncertainties in their
formulation and application, even sophisticated modelling
systems are dependent on good ground-based data.
Today, in large part due to vast technological monitoring
advances, the global and regional water balance (as well
as water use statistics) has been estimated to a level
of detail not achieved previously. However, in these
estimates there are still significant uncertainties that
need to be addressed by both the new technologies
and the ground-based monitoring systems. It is a paradox
that governments and agencies are willing to invest
many millions of dollars in projects that have such fragile
hydrological data foundations and may not be sustainable,
but are unwilling to spend the much smaller sums needed
to ensure that data are collected and processed to meet
current and future needs and demonstrate the
sustainability of projects (WMO/UNESCO, 1997a).

Preparations of a
remote sensing test in
Delft, Netherlands

2. See also UNESCO’s World
Commission on the Ethics of
Scientific Knowledge and
Technology (COMEST).
3. See www.wmo.ch/web/homs/
projects/whycos.html for more
details.

BOX 13.2: HYDROLOGICAL NETWORKS: THE CASES OF INDIA, MEXICO AND VENEZUELA
In 1998, approximately 250 hydro-

In the case of Mexico, the river discharge network

technical capabilities and physical facilities. Among

meteorological observer jobs (the technicians

was traditionally operated by approximately 800

others, 265 new river gauging stations were built

responsible for the operation and maintenance

technicians, each living near one of the

and 650 stations upgraded, with 2,239 purpose

of the hydro-meteorological network) were

measuring stations (see Chapter 14). In the

built piezometres and thousands of digital water

eliminated in the National Hydrological Service

last six years, the policy of downsizing the public

level recorders for groundwater monitoring, 14

of Venezuela, as part of the downsizing of the

administration has meant that no new recruitment

water quality laboratories were upgraded with

Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources.

to replace retiring personnel has been authorized

modern equipment and 9,000 employees were

The plan, supported and encouraged by several

by the competent authorities. As a consequence,

trained with 27,000 training units. In 2004, an

development banks and financing institutions,

approximately 200 discharge stations were

additional phase was approved including enlarging

was to fulfil responsibilities through a number

inoperative as of 2003, and more were expected

the geographic scope to four additional states

of micro-enterprises that would be constituted

to cease operating in the future.

until 2011. The implementation of the project
provides a quantum leap in the understanding

by the same personnel who would be
contracted on a need basis. Unfortunately,

In contrast to these cases, India built a huge

almost six years later, these enterprises have

Hydrology Information System covering nine states

not yet been created, and as a result most of

(1.7 million square kilometres) between 1996 and

the stations of the original network are no

2003, of which the main activities were to improve

longer operational.

institutional and organizational arrangements,

of the state of the water resources in India.

Sources: Misión de Evaluación OMM/PROMMA, 2003; WL
Delft Hydraulics, 2004; World Bank, 2004.

4 4 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Map 13.1: WMO’S World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS)
ARCTIC

BALTIC

MED
HKH
CARIB-CIC

AOC
MEKONG

NIGER
VOLTA

IGAD
SADC-2

PACIFIC

SADC-1

PACIFIC

Implemented
Under implementation
Advanced development
Preparatory stage

Note: The WHYCOS programme is implemented through various regional HYCOS components, as shown in the coloured areas of the map above. Each
component concerns either a transboundary basin or a community of countries. As for 2006, three components have been implemented:
■
■
■

MED-HYCOS (Mediterranean see medhycos.mpl.ird.fr/ for more details)
AOC-HYCOS (West and Central Africa see aochycos.ird.ne/ for more details)
SADC-HYCOS (South African Development Community).

Moreover, three components are still under implementation (in blue):
■
■

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

■

Niger-HYCOS
Volta-HYCOS
SADC-2HYCOS.

The main activities of each project include updating the observing network, developing regional databases (see www.r-hydronet.sr.unh.edu/), establishing
websites for easy data access and dissemination, and training personnel. Data collected through the HYCOS components also contribute to a better
understanding of the global water cycle and its variability.

India is regarded
as a world
leader in using
satellite data
techniques for
managing its
natural
resources and
supporting rural
development

Source: WMO-WHYCOS, 2005.

Remote sensing
In recent years, water resources management has
benefited from the powerful assessment tools provided
by remote sensing. Since the Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development in 1992, a number
of major developments have occurred. Over 100 new
satellite sensors for sustainable development have been
put into operation, and advanced warning for extreme
storms and floods has increased in some instances
to over 100 hours (UNESCAP, 2003). Remote sensing is
used for the provision of simple qualitative observations,
the mapping/detecting features of hydrological
importance and the direct estimation of hydrological
parameters and water quality (see Box 13.3).

India is regarded as a world leader in using satellite
data techniques for managing its natural resources and
supporting rural development. However, most countries,
including relatively developed ones, do not yet use these
techniques on a day-to-day basis to support decisionmaking in water resources management. Because of this,
the United Nations (UN) has made the enhancement of
the capacity of countries to use and benefit from remotesensing technologies a key focus for many space-related
activities (UN, 2004). Of particular note is the TIGER
Initiative led by the European Space Agency (ESA) in
partnership with the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the United Nations
Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOOSA) and others, which

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 4 1

BOX 13.3: ADVANCES IN THE PRACTICAL USE OF SATELLITE REMOTE SENSING FOR WATER RESOURCES
Considerable improvements in the assessment

monitored using active or passive radar is the

can also be measured with high precision by

of hydrological parameters for water resources

moisture of the uppermost soil layer.

radar interferometry.

two decades using remote sensing from

Important progress has also been made in

Imaging spectrometry (or hyperspectral remote

satellites (Schultz and Engman, 2000). Using a

surveying the land surface. The Shuttle Radar

sensing) provides information about the water

combination of radar and thermal sensors from

mission has made freely available a worldwide

quality of optically deep-water bodies. The first

weather satellites, the accuracy of precipitation

coverage of digital terrain models, required for

operational applications from airborne platforms

estimates for crop forecasting, flooding and river

example, by rainfall-runoff modelling. Satellites,

were reported in the 1990s, and the first

flows over large areas and basins has improved

through radar altimetry, are now surveying water

imaging spectrometry satellites were launched

considerably, as has the extent of snow cover

levels in lakes and large rivers within a few

in 2000. The most successfully monitored water

and water equivalents. In addition, satellite data

centimetres accuracy. This is particularly

quality parameters are chlorophyll, a blue-green

provide a unique means of assessing separately

important for remote water bodies. Satellite

(or cyannobacterial) pigment, total suspended

the actual evaporation over different areas, such

images with resolution of 1 or 2 metres can

matter, vertical light attenuation coefficient and

as river basins, irrigated areas and wetlands,

be purchased, enabling the rapid preparation

turbidity. The technique can be used in coastal

using the surface energy balance equation. This

of maps through digital photogrammetry and

waters for the assessment of the health of coral

has led to methods for determining crop water

showing terrain heights of floodplains or coastal

reefs and for bathymetric mapping.

efficiencies, water use by groundwater irrigation,

areas, which are required for assessing flood

and wetland water requirements. Another

risks and the propagation of floods. Land

important hydrological parameter that is

subsidence, often due to groundwater extraction,

management have been made during the last

Sources: Schultz and Engman, 2000; Dekker et al., 2001.

BOX 13.4: TIGER INITIATIVE: IMPROVING WATER SYSTEMS OBSERVATION IN AFRICA
Established in 2003, the European Space

■

Global Monitoring for Food Security (GMFS):

mapping and subsidence monitoring, so that

Agency’s (ESA) TIGER Initiative aims to make

maintains a continental-scale overview of

new aquifers can be identified and existing

earth observation services more accessible for

sub-Saharan Africa in order to produce sub-

aquifers exploited in a sustainable manner.

developing countries, with particular focus on

national and selected high-resolution crop

Africa. In 2005, there were four separate ESA

production forecasts.

projects operating under the TIGER umbrella:

Remote Sensing satellite data are freely available
■

■

The Envisat environmental satellite and European

Epidemio: uses satellites to provide

for African hydrology research. TIGER also enhances

GlobWetland: provides land cover and land-

environmental information in the service of

capacities in space technologies in African regions,

use change maps on fifteen African wetland

epidemiology, including the charting of water

while supporting its integration within the user’s

sites to support reporting obligations for the

bodies in order to prepare malaria risk maps.

traditional working procedures to improve the
sustainability of water resources management.

Ramsar Convention on Wetlands.
■

Aquifer: generates land-use cover and land-use
change charts, digital terrain maps, soil moisture

aims to provide earth observation data, capacity-building
and technical support services for IWRM in developing
countries with a particular focus on Africa (Box 13.4).
The advantages of remote sensing lie in its ability to map
conditions across regional, continental and even global
scales on a repetitive basis at a relatively low cost
compared to ground-based monitoring. The coupling

Sources: ESA, 2004; earth.esa.int/tiger/

of biophysical, socio-economic, hydrometric and remote
sensing data with modelling now leads to the emergence
of valuable new information on water stress at global,
regional and local levels (see Box 13.5). The United
States National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) and ESA plan to launch special water
management and hydrology-related satellites (see, for
example, Alsdorf and Rodriguez, 2005), optimized for

4 4 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 13.5: ADVANCES IN REMOTE SENSING TECHNOLOGIES
Research undertaken at the University of New

developed indices for local relative water use

about 2.5 km resolution. Results show that

Hampshire by Vörösmarty et al. has pioneered a

and reuse and water stress in order to assess

chronic water stress is high for about 25 percent

means of coupling a range of different data

the current state and future trends. They

of the African population; 13 percent of the

types in order to generate new information,

conclude that in 1995, 1.76 billion people were

population experiences drought-related stress

such as spatially discrete, high-resolution remote

under severe water stress and that ‘rising water

once each generation, 17 percent are without a

sensing data, model-generated climate change

demands greatly outweigh greenhouse warming

renewable supply of water, and many are

data, population density, growth and migration,

in defining the state of global water systems to

dependent on highly variable hydrological runoff

and industrial development indicators (see

2025’. Such an analysis is carried out globally at

from a far distant source.

global maps at the head of each section).

a resolution of about 50 kilometres (km) but has

Based on the integration of such datasets with

also been done for Africa at 8 km resolution and

appropriate modelling, the researchers have

for the river basins of Lake Victoria down to

Countries
require
organizations
with individuals
who are able to
collect, store
and analyse
data in order to

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

generate
knowledge...

4. Those countries include
Angola, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brunei, Cambodia, Djibouti,
Eritrea, Gambia, Guinea
Bissau, Haiti, Lebanon, Libya,
Namibia, Qatar, Samoa and
Yemen.
5. See www.iwmbd.org/ for more
information.

special measurements of water-related state variables,
such as water levels and discharges in rivers. Research
efforts have recently concentrated on developing
methods that need limited in situ measurements, but a
large number of applications still depend on correlation
and/or combination with measurements from land-based
monitoring systems. The usefulness of information will
ultimately depend on its suitability for assimilation
within hydrological forecasting.

Databases
Thanks to the establishment of water databases and
monitoring guidelines, many countries have made
strides since 2004 to set up and maintain national
water databases.4 Still, 61 out of 239 countries have
not supplied the necessary data to international repository
centres, making it extremely difficult to establish the overall
state of the world’s water resources, and in particular those
of a particular region or river basin in a given year, month
or day (GRDC, 2005). Such data is needed for inter-country
comparisons in order to identify similarities, differences,
strengths and weaknesses, to alert better governance and
to improve management. The willingness to share data
among countries remains a key obstacle to effective
transboundary river management (see Chapter 11).
However, even when data is openly shared, differences in
data characterization and record duration make it difficult
to compare data from different databases. Often data
collection is initiated by and limited to the duration of
specific projects, and ongoing data collection is either
ignored or grossly under-funded. These important problems
need international attention. While a full assessment of
global water database initiatives is beyond the scope of
this report, given the scope and scale of the entire field

Sources: Vörösmarty et al., 2000, 2005; wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/

of water data, the list of useful websites at the end of the
chapter provides some key listings and some of the better
examples of current databases in the water sector.

Modelling systems
It is one thing to acquire data from the real world, but
it is another to interpret and utilize that data to better
understand water-based processes and systems. The
ability to extract, understand and interpret such data and
information is crucial for taking advantage of the processes
and systems in water management. Computer simulation
models are now commonplace tools for assisting in such
understanding and interpretation. Such models encapsulate
scientific knowledge in their development and application,
while operating with data to replicate real-world
phenomena. In addition, when possible, the sophisticated
use of graphics and video with Geographic Information
System (GIS) provides opportunities for visualizing and
anticipating new information and knowledge in order
to understand complex phenomena.
Models are extremely important for effective water
resources management, and the use of computer-based
models has increased considerably in the last ten years;
indeed, no major water-related project is undertaken
without the use of models and corresponding decisionsupport tools. Centres such as the Institute of Water
Modelling in Bangladesh5 have been established in order
to capitalize on local expertise, while using advanced
modelling tools for better water management.
A very important trend in modelling is the linking of
hydrologic and hydrodynamic models to GIS, groundbased monitoring systems, remote sensing data, numerical
weather prediction models and quantitative precipitation

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 4 3

forecasts. Such links, properly implemented using
information and communication technologies, contribute to
the building of integrated hydroinformatics systems leading
to considerable improvements in predictive accuracy,
especially important in the context of managing extreme
events (see Chapter 10) and water resources management
in transboundary river basins. OpenMI is a European
project that is committed to developing a protocol that
enables hydrological modelling software from different
suppliers, to be linked so that the integrated software will
support and assist the strategic planning and integrated
catchment management required by the European Water
Framework Directive.6 This opens up opportunities for a
better management of transboundary rivers.

2b. Knowledge sharing and accessibility
Access to and sharing of knowledge by individuals and
groups are critical to addressing water-related problems.
In many developing countries, however, the water
resources and services knowledge base has often been
limited due to budget constraints, the emphasis on
developing new infrastructure, and a lack of professional
education and language barriers. This results in
decreased capacity to translate available data into usable
knowledge. Consequently, data collection has all but
ceased in some countries. Countries require organizations
with individuals who are able to collect, store and analyse
data in order to generate knowledge, which requires
first and foremost better education of these individuals.
In addition, the willingness to share information and the
importance of building trust between parties is critical
in the development of a shared vision for water
management (UN, 2003b; Chapter 11).
New ICTs have facilitated the mechanisms and practices
of sharing knowledge.7 ICTs have made an incomparable
contribution to development in water-related sectors,
from the rapid collection and exchange of hydrological

information and the integration of advanced warning
systems to virtual classrooms, video conferencing (see Box
13.6) and networking with GIS (see Box 13.10). While
telecommunications still favour urban areas, the coverage
in rural areas is growing rapidly in many developing
countries. In Cambodia, for example, one year after the
introduction of a mobile cellular phone network, mobile
subscribers had already surpassed the number of fixed
telephone lines in the country (UNESCAP, 2004). The media
(newspapers, radio, television, films) also has an important
role in disseminating information to the general public.
Better information management has repercussions at every
level of society, whether on the development of national
and international knowledge resources, the efficiency and
effectiveness of government services, the focus of donor
community programmes or project ownership by local
stakeholders through participatory decision-making.
Uganda provides an excellent example of this as indicated
in the Uganda National Water Development Report (see
Chapter 14). The Directorate of Water Development

Analysis of water
samples for trace
elements in Athens,
Greece

6. www.harmonit.org/
7. The UN Millennium Declaration
includes a specific
commitment to ensure that
the benefits of new
technologies, especially ICTs,
notably the telephone, mobile
phone, Internet and broadcast
networks, are available to all.

BOX 13.6: THE GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT LEARNING NETWORK (GDLN)
The Global Development Learning Network

developing countries. In the future, the network

estimated 26,000 people around the world.

(GDLN) is a global network of learning centres

is expected to grow dynamically. In middle-

During 2004, the GDLN centre located at

that uses advanced information and

income countries across Latin America and

UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education hosted

communication technologies to connect people

Asia, emerging in-country networks are

fifty water-related videoconferences, connecting

around the world working in development.

further increasing GDLN’s reach and use on a

1,600 water experts worldwide.

Initiated by the World Bank in June 2000, this

remarkable scale. GDLN facilitated more than

network has grown from eleven to over ninety

850 videoconference-based activities between

affiliated centres, most of which are located in

July 2003 and June 2004, connecting an

Source: www.gdln.org

4 4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Networks of

Map 13.2: The Knowledge Index, 2005

all kinds,
representing all
sectors, such as
professional
associations, are
powerful tools
for knowledge
sharing and
distribution
Map Legend (0 is the lowest score and 10 is the maximum score)
0 <= KI <= 2
2 < KI <= 4
4 < KI <= 6
6 < KI <= 8
8 < KI <= 10
No data
Note: The Knowledge Index (KI) benchmarks a country’s position vis-à-vis others in the global knowledge base. It is the average of the performance of a
country or region in three knowledge economy pillars (education, innovation and information and communications technology) and is calculated considering
the following variables: adult literacy rate, secondary enrolment, tertiary enrolment, researchers in research and development per million population, patent
applications per million population, scientific and technical journal articles per million population, telephones per 1,000 people, computers per 1,000
people, and Internet users per 10,000 people.
Source: World Bank Institute, 2005.

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Arsenic Removal Family
Filter being set up in a
Bangladeshi home

8. See www.dwd.co.ug
9. www.worldbank.org/kam

(DWD) established a Management Information System for
the water sector in 1998 in order to improve management
and facilitate decision-making processes. With the purpose
of monitoring financial and physical activities, it has
since produced a series of design reports that currently
constitute the archives for the sector, and it has
developed data collection procedures that are used in all
the districts of the country. Data are collected, processed
and shared with other stakeholders through reports,
Intranet and the DWD website.8

Assessment Methodology uses a series of relevant and
widely available measures that can allow for a preliminary
country comparison and the identification of strengths
and weaknesses in order to focus policy attention or
future investments in making the transition to the
knowledge economy. The assessment tool is available
online.9 The state of the global knowledge economy,
weighted by population, is presented in Map 13.2.

However, despite considerable progress in recent years,
access to ICTs remains unequally distributed. There are,
for example, more computers in Brazil, more fixed line
telephones in Italy, more mobile phones in Japan and
more Internet users in France, than in the whole
continent of Africa. Yet the population of Africa and
the needs of its people greatly exceed those of these
other countries (ITU, 2004). In response, the World
Bank Institute’s Knowledge for Development Programme
has developed a user-friendly tool designed to assist
decision-makers in understanding and benchmarking
their strengths and weaknesses in terms of their ability
to compete in the global knowledge economy. While not
specific to water-related fields, the Knowledge

Today, due to the ever-increasing speed with which
technology can collect, store and disseminate data, we are
possibly encountering for the first time a situation in which
human individuals and their capacities are the primary
bottleneck in the chain of information processing, making
people the limiting factor for further understanding (Maurer,
2003). Knowledge has to be presented in a way that people
can assimilate it. One barrier is that information and
knowledge on water management and water use often
uses terminology that only academicians, theoreticians and
technical people can understand, or worse, in a language
foreign to the end user. Language barriers constitute a critical
obstacle to local information for literacy and education as
well as a level playing field in the global digital knowledge

The language barrier and quality assurance and
control

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 4 5

economy. This is unfortunate, considering the potential value
that this knowledge could contribute to alleviating the water
crisis by increasing public engagement in the process.
With roughly 7,000 living languages in the world
(Gordon, 2005), participatory approaches to water
management immediately become more complex. SIL
International, for example, works to develop communitylevel capacities to enable communities to carry out their
own research, translation, and production of literature
in their native tongue. In addition, with more than 90
percent of Internet content today existing in just
twelve languages, UNESCO’s Initiative B@bel10 uses ICTs
to support linguistic and cultural diversity, protect and
preserve languages in danger of disappearing and
facilitate access to this important communication medium.
To further facilitate the use of software products and
websites across multiple platforms, languages and
countries, the Unicode Consortium has developed a
standardized computer language.11 This could support
the increasing trend in the development and use of
online water information networks that can provide
another means of surmounting the language barrier.
This is particularly appropriate for the translation of
technical terms that are peculiar to water development.12
Another major problem that arises in using information
or knowledge from elsewhere is assuring its quality.
Information or knowledge can originate from a reputable
source, such as a peer-reviewed journal or the website
of a trusted organization, but this hardly accounts for
the majority of information found on the Internet. Almost
anyone can put anything online. In doing so, they bypass
many of the benefits of traditional publications –
issuance by an authoritative source, editorial or peer

review, evaluation by experts, etc. Quality is still a matter
of trust by the recipient in the trustworthiness of the
supplier. Third-party confirmation of any information and
knowledge is generally recognized as one of the best
ways of assuring quality. Responsibility for the use
and application of the data provided remains largely
in the hands of the user, who has to rely on his or
her education and experience to exercise discernment.
Networking and involvement in professional associations
largely stimulate quality assurance through continuous
peer review, as in the case, for example, of the peerreviewed web-based information service provided by
FAO’s International Programme for Technology and
Research in Irrigation and Drainage (IPTRID).13

There are more

Knowledge networks

users in France,

Networks of all kinds, representing all sectors, such
as professional associations, are powerful tools for
knowledge sharing and distribution. They offer a
framework for resource optimization and knowledge
combination, saving valuable financial and time resources,
in addition to providing an excellent platform for peer
discussions (see Box 13.7).
Networks for capacity-building in integrated water
management are a relatively new phenomenon. The
advantages of networking for scaling up capacitybuilding to reach the MDGs are gaining recognition in
the international water community. The advantages
are predominantly in providing a more coherent and
coordinated approach to capacity-building, increased
impact, relevance and sustainability from working with
local institutions, improved sharing of knowledge and
expertise and a platform for cross-disciplinary and crossregional discussions.

computers in
Brazil, more
fixed line
telephones in
Italy, more
mobile phones
in Japan and
more Internet
than in the
whole continent
of Africa

10. See www.unesco.org/
webworld/multilingualism for
more details.
11. See www.unicode.org/
standard/whatisunicode.html
for more details.
12. See water.usgs.gov/wsc/
glossary.html, for example.
13. See www.fao.org/iptrid for
more details.

BOX 13.7: FARMNET – FARMER INFORMATION NETWORK FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Since the early 1990s, the UN Food and

provided the electronic network designs, some

per metric quintal as opposed to US $72,

Agriculture Organization (FAO) has assisted

basic equipment, logistical support, coordination,

which was the price local buyers were trying

in the development of networks among

technical backstopping and training to local

to impose. Vegetable producers reported that

rural farmers and supported intermediary

extension and farm organization personnel.

the information on meteorological conditions

organizations using ICTs and conventional

The impact of FarmNet has been significant.

informed them of climatic conditions faced by

communication media for capacity development.

Transmitting price and market information

competitors in other regions and countries. This

Operated by farmers, these FarmNets

through computer-based networks cost 40

enabled them to plan their irrigation strategies

disseminate locally relevant information that

percent less than using traditional extension

and market their produce more successfully.

is needed to improve livelihoods. FAO adopted

methods. In one case, by using the market

a participatory approach to performing the

information provided by the network, a farmer

preliminary assessment of needs and then

association was able to sell cotton for US $82

Source: FAO, 2000.

WWDR Chapter 13e (FF)

17/2/06

10:07

Page 446

4 4 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Local knowledge

Map 13.3: Cap-Net

can lead to a
better
understanding
of the water
cycle and could
play a vital role
in providing
solutions to the
world’s water
crisis

Note: Cap-Net is an international network made up of autonomous international, regional and country networks and institutions committed to integrated
water resources management (IWRM) capacity-building. The networking concept is being used by Cap-Net to bring cooperation and coherence to scale up
capacity-building in water management.
To date, the programme has trained 550 trainers, who have in turn impacted thousands of decision-makers, water managers, and fellow capacity builders –
exponentially increasing capacity in IWRM. The programme has addressed issues such as legal and institutional reform, conflict resolution, IWRM planning,
gender and water, and other aspects of IWRM are to follow.
■
■
■

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Literacy project in
Cheikh Anta Diop
village, Senegal

■

Twenty geographic networks and four thematic networks affiliated with Cap-Net.
Over 1,000 member institutions organized in regional and country networks.
Fifty-five planned network training events and education programmes.
Nine operational topic or geographic e-discussion groups on capacity-building in IWRM.

Source: Cap-Net, 2005.

When Cap-Net, a United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) initiative, was described in the first UN World
Water Development Report (2003), their international
network committed to capacity-building in IWRM consisted
of a partnership of four regional networks at their
early stages of development. Today, twenty geographic
capacity-building networks, with special attention given
to IWRM, and four international thematic networks, with
expertise in specific thematic areas relevant to IWRM
(water supply and sanitation, wetland management,
gender mainstreaming in water, and international
waters), form the global network (see Map 13.3).
The UNESCO-IHE PoWER Programme, a partnership
between seventeen member institutions throughout
the world, has also made substantial progress in initiating
the development of joint education and training packages
(see Map 13.4).

WWDR Chapter 13e (FF)

17/2/06

10:07

Page 447

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 4 7

Map 13.4: PoWER

.

Networks stimulate regional collaboration by addressing
and solving water-related problems, and, as such,
contribute to an increase in trust and stability
throughout the world.

Local and indigenous knowledge
Local and indigenous knowledge refers to the cumulative
and complex bodies of knowledge, know-how, practices
and representations (including language, attachment to
place, spirituality and worldview) as maintained and
developed by peoples with extended histories of
interaction with their natural environment. Despite
the fact that such peoples number about 300 million,
representing over 5,000 languages and living in more
than 70 countries in all of the world’s regions (including
17 countries that are home to more than two-thirds of
the Earth’s biological resources), they must still struggle
for their rights over the water resources they have been

using and protecting for generations (UNESCO, 2003a,
2003b). In fact this knowledge is typically dismissed by
planners and still far from internationally recognized as
vital to sustainable development and biodiversity
management, particularly as it relates to the holistic
approach so sought after in IWRM. Worse still, while
knowledge development efforts today aim to empower
local stakeholders in efforts to move towards effective
IWRM (see Chapter 2) changing values, globalization
and the drive for commercialism have all but extinguished
these indigenous practices despite the vital role they
could play in providing solutions to the global
community’s water crisis (Box 13.8). And yet such
knowledge and habits (constituting the ‘social capital’
of a community) can lead to a better understanding
of the water cycle, of local seasonal effects and of
their relationship with nature and agriculture. They also
encompass social skills such as the resolution of water

4 4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 13.8: LOCAL AND INDIGENOUS KNOWLEDGE FOR SUSTAINABLE IWRM
Indian communities have a long tradition of

movement has started to re-introduce the local

Many countries have learned how to cope with

coping with the recurrent hot and dry seasons

tank system.

seasonal floods. In some countries houses are
built on stilts; in others, such as Bangladesh,

by constructing small to medium-sized reservoirs
(or tanks). Villages in the past would each have

The island of Bali, Indonesia, has a sophisticated

villages are built on artificial mounds for which

their own tank(s), maintained by the villagers

Hinduist culture in which water and irrigation are

the soil was taken from ‘borrow pits’ that in

themselves. With the advent of modern

central. Long before the government started to

the dry season were neatly maintained to

technology, planners preferred to construct very

train and empower irrigators, and indeed started

provide water for the household and for cattle.

large reservoirs that would serve a whole region

to construct large irrigation systems, the

Transportation in the flood season took and

and needed to be constructed and operated

Balinese operated complex irrigation on hillside

still takes place by canoe. This approach proved

by a dedicated bureaucracy. As a consequence,

terraces (subak), including water allocation by

effective, causing minimum disruption of daily life,

many of the local tanks went out of use.

rotational schedules, and sustainable

allowing the floodwater to deposit fresh fertilizing

Over time, however, it has become clear that

maintenance procedures.

silt on the fields, and sustaining large fisheries.

the centralizing technocratic approach cannot
address all local water shortages and a new

14. See UNESCO’s Local and
Indigenous Knowledge
Systems (LINKS) project,
www.unesco.org/links
15. See www.nuffic.nl/ik-pages
16. See www.unesco.org/most/

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

17. See www.ik-pages.net

conflicts and water allocation, as well as technologies to
harvest, store and canalize water.
UNESCO’s Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(LINKS) project focuses on the interface between local
and indigenous knowledge, and the MDGs of poverty
eradication and environmental sustainability.14 It addresses
the different ways that indigenous knowledge, practices
and worldviews are drawn into development and resource
management processes. It also considers the implications

Source: Agarwal and Narain, 1997.

this may have for building equity in governance, enhancing
cultural pluralism and sustaining biodiversity. In addition,
the Netherlands Organization for International Cooperation
in Higher Education/Indigenous Knowledge (NUFFIC/IKUnit)15 in cooperation with UNESCO’s Management of
Social Transformations (MOST) Programme16 established
in 1999 a database of best practices on indigenous
knowledge, which initially contained twenty-seven best
practices and gained an additional twenty-two cases
during the second phase of work (2001–2002). Recently,
the International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (IIRR),
a rural development organization working in developing
countries, was chosen as a strategic partner in a phased
transfer of published indigenous knowledge materials to
the global ‘south’. Forty documents related to indigenous
knowledge for water development are available online.17
Overall, there remains a serious challenge to properly
understand and appreciate the value of such traditional
approaches, and to turn them into local tools to achieve
better water management.

Literacy course for women in Praia, Cape Verde

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 4 9

Part 3. Enhancing Local Capacities
When challenge areas discussed in this report describe deficiencies and propose goals for a better
tomorrow, it is the enhancement of knowledge and local capacities that are needed to fill the gap
between the current state and the desired sustainable solution. Success in water development can
only be achieved when local capacities have been enhanced to address the water-related problem.

3a. Human resources development
Human resources development is a continuous process
aimed at imparting knowledge, developing skills and
changing attitudes and behaviours, which allow the
maximization of the benefits of knowledge sharing
and participatory processes. While all levels of capacity
development – human resources, institutional capacity
and the enabling environment – are ultimately of equal
importance (see Box 13.9), adequately skilled staff to
develop policy and legal frameworks and the necessary
institutions are the starting point of any successful
venture. In all capacity-building efforts, attitude,
behaviour, education and training, as well as workforce
incentives, career paths, and accountability mechanisms
in the workplace all influence the capacity to make
knowledge-based decisions, and are critical components
of human resources development. Developing knowledge
through effective sharing at and between each level of
capacity development is one of the most important
challenges in the water sector.
The many technocrats within the water sector generally
do not have the skills to deal effectively with governance
issues, such as conflict mediation, mobilization of

communities, managing processes of stakeholder
participation, etc. ‘Social facilitators’ can be introduced to
complement the technocrats with skills to manage diverse
and dynamic social and political processes that typically
did not receive much attention in the past.

If children are
taught proper
hygiene, primary
schooling can

Basic education
People’s effectiveness in managing and using water
is only brought about with the provision of a basic
education on water, sanitation and hygiene. If children
are taught proper hygiene, primary schooling can
transform them into health educators for their families,
thereby passing on vital information and skills that can
reduce household vulnerability to deadly diarrhoeal
diseases by at least 40 percent (see Chapter 6). This is
particularly true for women and girls who are responsible
for household hygiene, food and water, and who are,
with the elderly, the most at risk from water-related
hazards. Increased and safe access to primary education
for girls will pave the way to more gender-balanced
decision-making processes for water management
(see Chapter 1), in line with MDG Goal 3 to promote
gender equality and empower women.

transform them
into health
educators for
their families...

BOX 13.9: IMPLEMENTING CAPACITY AT ALL LEVELS
Brazil is expected to achieve the Millennium

Brazilian Congress approved a Water and

economic, legal and systems frameworks have

Development Goals (MDGs) target in water

Sanitation Policy in 1993, only to be revoked

been established. However, in accordance with a

supply and to come close to achieving the

by the Government in 1994. It was not until

similar needs assessment, the country struggles

sanitation goal (see Chapter 14). According

2005 that a new policy document to regulate

with a lack of qualified human resources.

to a needs assessment undertaken in several

the sector was put forward for discussion.

Mozambique, with a population of about 20
million, has one university and about fifteen

Latin American countries, this is partly due to
a sufficient number of professionals graduating

Contrary to the situation in Brazil, it is still

postgraduate professionals involved in water

from 120 water-related postgraduate

uncertain whether the water and sanitation

resources management and services provision.

programmes in the country. However, an

targets of the MDGs will be achieved in

unfavourable enabling environment has

Mozambique (WHO/UNICEF, 2004). The country

been one of the main reasons behind the

has implemented water sector reforms during

underperformance of the water and sanitation

the last decade, and implementation agencies

sector in the last decades. For example, the

have been strengthened, while robust policy,

Sources: Mejia-Velez and Rodic-Wiersma, 2005a; 2005b.

4 5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Higher
education and
training has an
important role
in knowledge
transfer, not
just as a onetime diploma
course but also
throughout
the active
professional life

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

of the recipient

18. See www.freshschools.org for
more information on the
FRESH Institute and Toolkit
on Hygiene, Sanitation and
Water in Schools.

As described in the Ethiopia National Water Development
Report (see Chapter 14), 30 to 40 percent fewer girls
than boys attended school at the national level. UNICEF’s
report on gender parity and primary education (2005)
indicated that girls make up most of the 115 million
children currently out of school, and 80 percent of children
not attending primary school in West/Central Africa, South
Asia and Middle East/North Africa had mothers with no
formal education at all (UNICEF, 2005a). Reasons for
this include the need for girls and women to walk long
distances to bring water to the home and/or lack of
sanitation facilities in schools, forcing girls to seek refuge
in the woods and risk sexual attack, ridicule and shame.
A recent study in Bangladesh indicated that a separate toilet
could increase the number of girls in school by as much as
15 percent (UNICEF, 2005b). As Carol Bellamy, the former
executive director of UNICEF, aptly noted: ‘We will only reap
the rewards of investment in education if we safeguard
children’s health while they learn’ (UNICEF, 2005b).
As part of its Water for African Cities Programme, UNHABITAT has since 2003 embarked on an innovative
Value-based Water Education campaign that seeks to
impart information on water, sanitation and hygiene
to children and communities, all the while inspiring
and motivating learners to change their behaviour and
adopt attitudes that promote hygienic living and wise
and sustainable use of water.
Another interesting initiative is The Focusing Resources
on Effective School Health (FRESH), an inter-agency
collaboration between UNESCO, UNICEF, WHO, and the
World Bank, which has produced a toolkit that offers
information, resources, and tools that provide support
to the preparation of Hygiene, Sanitation, and Water
in Schools policies and projects (World Bank, 2000).18

Educational systems in general need to strengthen
education and training delivery mechanisms through
networking and the use of professional associations.
Curricula, in addition to ensuring high scientific
standards, must constantly adapt to concrete problems.
An integrated and multidisciplinary competence in general
problem solving rather than in purely technical subjects
will prove valuable in many new fields. The use of GIS
in support of mapping the sustainability of schools is
a growing trend around the world, including education
sectors in developing countries. In some cases, building
geo-spatial databases and using GIS ‘is becoming a
standard and/or a requirement for funding (Al-Hanbali
et al., 2004) (see Box 13.10).

Higher education/training
Higher education and training has an important role
in knowledge transfer, not just as a one-time diploma
course but also throughout the active professional life
of the recipient. The value of such education and training
is that appropriate knowledge on water can be packaged
and even tailored for professionals and other
stakeholders. New blended learning approaches
encourage active and participatory learning. Peer-to-peer
technology that links users in two-way communication
enables collaborative working and distance learning.
Whereas face-to-face communication is preferable, the
increasing availability of distance learning facilities
enlarges the possibilities and opportunities for lifelong
learning and continued development of the knowledge
and expertise of professionals. Online education has
increased tremendously since the UN Conference on
Environment and Development in 1992, but the challenge
of educating the world’s population has never been
greater, particularly at a time when over 40 percent of
the global population is under twenty years old (van
der Beken, 2004).

BOX 13.10: GIS FOR SCHOOL SANITATION AND HYGIENE EDUCATION: TAMIL NADU, INDIA
GIS has been applied innovatively in Tamil Nadu

This triggered significant changes in planning for

districts and decided to take up joint planning and

for improving the school sanitation programme.

SSHE, especially the use of spatial data. When the

use pooled resources. The data has been used to

With UNICEF assistance, GIS was used for the first

first GIS maps were displayed during a regional

prepare district action plans for SSHE, jointly

time in India in the village of Panchayat to create

workshop, they shocked the district officials, as

owned by the local governments. Higher officials

water and sanitation facility mapping for schools

they did not have any idea about the coverage

in offices far away also became sensitized to local

focusing on five indicators: availability of drinking

of water and sanitation facilities in schools. They

problems after looking at the GIS data.

water, toilets, water for toilets, washing and

were drawn towards the GIS maps and started

school sanitation and hygiene education (SSHE).

comparing coverage levels between different

Source: DDWS, 2004.

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 5 1

Preliminary needs assessments indicate that nearly
all countries lack the numbers of adequately trained
individuals in order to meet the MDGs, and large numbers
of technical and scientific personnel lack a holistic
perspective on water management and use. Appropriate
training programmes need to be designed and delivered
in order to tackle the problems that affect people in their
local realities. Adapted training and awareness raising must
be provided to the myriad of professional perspectives that
play a role in water sector development. This situation was
made clear in a needs assessment carried out in 2001 in
Bolivia (Lake Titicaca) (see Chapter 14 on case studies).
The assessment showed how many managers already
identified the need to combine knowledge and tools from
social sciences with traditional engineering skills, and in a
related survey, water resources management emerged as
the most needed postgraduate programme, leading to the
creation a Masters-level programme on sustainable water
resources management. In Egypt, the activities of the
Regional Centre for Training and Water Studies of Arid and
Semi-arid Zones (RCTWS), working under the auspices of
UNESCO as an international knowledge institution since
January 2002, help to contribute to capacity-building in
the field of Integrated Water Resources Management
specifically for the Arab and Nile Basin countries.

3b. Strengthening institutional capacity
Institutional capacity relates to the overall performance
of the organization and its capability to function properly,
as well as its ability to forecast and adapt to change. An
organization’s personnel, facilities, technology, knowledge
and funding constitute its ‘resource base’. Procedures and
processes for managing its resources, programmes and
external relationships determine its ‘management capacity’.
Together, this resource base and the management capacity
make up the overall capacity of the organization (Horton et
al., 2003). Such capacities must be operational (day-to-day
activities) and adaptive (response to changing
circumstances). If the organizational structure within the
water sector is conducive to efficient, effective and
expedient decision making, it is likely that the country’s
capacity to address water-related problems is strong. To
ensure effectiveness in services delivery and efficiency in
water use, the public sector needs to establish partnerships
with local communities and user groups. By empowering
and strengthening their capabilities, they can assume part
of the management responsibility and authority over the
infrastructure and the resource itself. Directly affected
sectors or user groups, like water user associations,
industrial estates, municipalities or wards, and irrigators,

can be empowered by establishing and formalizing a
platform that allows all interested water users to present
their interests and have ‘voice and choice’ in the decisionmaking and management process of water services.
This enhances transparency and accountability and
fosters the local sense of ownership, while partially
relieving the financial burden on the agencies. However,
such user groups need also to have their capacities
strengthened through training and access to information to
allow them to take informed decisions and play their roles.
At the institutional level, three capacity development
needs stand out in particular:
■

■
■

a clear mandate for managing agencies, water providers
and policy-making bodies that promote and enhance
the institutionalization of good water management and
water use throughout all levels of society
an organizational system conducive to effective and
efficient management decisions
improved decision support mechanisms through
research on lessons learned and indigenous knowledge.

Water management agencies continue to close the door on
opportunities for effective integrated water management if
they do not provide a voice to relatively powerless groups,
such as women (Box 13.11), who are central in providing,
managing and safeguarding water, and indigenous people
(Box 13.8) who are custodians of sound, ancestral water
management practices. As many ministries and nongovernmental institutions deal with water within a
country, a national apex body19 can play a crucial role in
coordinating activities and disseminating responsibilities
in the network of organizations operating on the ground
within a river basin. By considering all stakeholders, a
national apex body may adopt policies and laws, carry out
institutional reforms and formulate a national water agenda
(Asian Development Bank, 2004).

Visiting South African
children playing the
World Water Game,
aimed at increasing
awareness and
knowledge about
water resources, at the
Waterdome during the
World Summit on
Sustainable
Development in
Johannesburg

...the public
sector needs to
establish
partnerships

It is crucial to deal with employment issues in order to
improve organizational performance. Both public and
private sectors need to provide adequate salaries, as
well as professional development opportunities and
incentives. If the incentives for the staff as individuals
and as an organization point in the wrong direction, the
possession of other capacities is of little value (Alaerts
et al., 1999). This is illustrated by a study of retention
rates in a poorly performing public sector in Africa. It
was found that the retention rates of trained individuals
were much higher than expected for the perceivably low

with local
communities...

19. An apex body is a national
organization that guides the
water sector in water services
and resource management.

4 5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 13.11: THE NEED FOR GENDER BALANCE
Women produce between 60 and 80 percent

activities. In addition, the Gender and Water

experience. Although the audits indicated that

of the food in most developing countries and

Alliance (GWA) was established at the World

the approach to gender equity is not reflected in

provide up to 90 percent of the rural poor’s

Water Forum in 2000.

sector policies – nor is the impact of programmes
and projects on local women and men

food intake. Women are major stakeholders in
all development issues related to water. Yet they

The GWA has developed a training methodology

systematized with feedback to decision-making

often remain on the periphery of management

geared towards building capacity to mainstream

levels – issues related to gender responsiveness

decisions and planning for water resources.

gender equity in integrated water resources

are becoming increasingly important.

management. The Vice Ministry of Basic Services
To overcome this deficiency, an inter-agency

and the Ministry of Agriculture of Bolivia have

Task Force on Gender and Water was

undertaken gender audits in both institutions,

inaugurated to work towards the implementation

turning this unique research and analytical

of gender-sensitive water and sanitation

initiative into a ‘learning by doing gender’

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Mid-career
professionals receive
on-the-job training by
local experts in
Indonesia

salaries, lack of equipment, demoralized environment and
the bureaucratically inefficient management. As it turned
out, the trained personnel stayed in the public sector
but were underperforming because ‘the opportunity
to use office hours and equipment to significantly
augment official salaries through private-income earning
activities provided a major incentive to stay in the civil
service’ (Cohen and Wheeler, 1997). The institution’s
performance therefore suffered not from a lack of skilled
human resources, but from lack of incentives coupled
with poor accountability and management structure.
Sound demand-driven research on water-related issues
enhances the ability for more rational decision-making on
costs, impacts, and benefits of alternative policy options
and institutional arrangements. Investing in research and
development and its associated infrastructure, equipment
and human resources means that conventional
approaches to recurring problems can be challenged
and new ways of addressing local engineering, social,
economic and environmental issues may begin to flourish.

3c. Creating an enabling environment
The enabling environment consists of the broader political,
policy, legal, regulatory and administrative frameworks
that set the boundary conditions for the execution of the
organizational and operational functions of the agencies
and institutions entrusted with the development and
management of water resources and services. A truly
enabling environment is created primarily by policies that
focus on sustainable development, consider water as a
social and economic good, and are supported by legal and
financial frameworks that ensure the policies are

Sources: See www.un.org/esa/sustdev/sdissues/
water/Interagency_activities.htm#taskforce_water for more
information; UN, 2003a; Arce, 2005;
www.genderandwateralliance.org

implemented. A proper enabling framework will also
emphasize the need for sector agencies to continuously
improve their performance, through knowledge creation
and acquisition, and through reform. For a broader sector
reform to run its course, governments must be able to
rely on realistic fiscal and monetary policies in the water
sector, including adequate cost-recovery mechanisms, and
transparent and equitable judicial systems (van Hofwegen
and Jaspers, 1999). Civil society has an important role in
developing the enabling environment. Well-informed civil
groups and the media can enhance the awareness of the
public at large of the need for particular actions, and can at
the same time provide the information that empowers and
motivates them to change their attitudes (social learning).
As a consequence of their decentralization policies,
many governments such as Indonesia and Pakistan are
now discussing and facilitating the possibilities of subsovereign financing and decentralized funding. Enhancing
availability and access to finance especially is an essential
element of the institutional capacity and was identified
as one of the main recommendations of the Camdessus
Panel, an initiative of the World Water Council, the Global
Water Partnership and the Secretariat of the 3rd World
Water Forum (Winpenny and Camdessus, 2003).
To support the investment requirements at subsovereign level, various innovative initiatives and
financing mechanisms have been recommended and
some of them have been launched. These initiatives
enhance the amount of financing available as they
mobilize local capital markets by provision of guarantees
for especially local political and currency risks and they
enable financing at sub-sovereign level. Some of them,

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 5 3

BOX 13.12: INITIATIVES TO ENHANCE ACCESS TO FINANCE AT SUB-SOVEREIGN LEVEL
The Municipal Fund that was established in May

supporting the delivery of basic services where

poor. Some other initiatives are the European

2003 is a joint World Bank/International Finance

policy concerns justify the use of public funding

Union Water Facility for the African, Caribbean

Corporation (IFC) initiative to invest in projects at

to complement or replace user fees. OBA

and Pacific Countries (ACP-EUWF) and the Asian

the state and municipal level - without taking

approaches utilize targeted subsidies that are

Development Bank Water for All initiative.

sovereign guarantees.

performance-based and paid largely after the
delivery of specified outputs (e.g. water supply

The Department and International Development

connections) and mobilize private capital and

(DFID)/World Bank Global Partnership on Output-

management. The most common form of OBA is

Based Aid (OBA) provides a strategy for

subsidizing water supply connections for the

like Output Based Aid and ADB-Water for All initiatives,
focus particularly on reaching the poor (see Box 13.12).
Capacity development is dependent on the government’s
political will to change the existing policy, legal, management
and economic frameworks and to implement reforms,
as well as on the introduction of new governance
systems and the familiarization of decision-makers and
implementers with improved ways of managing water.
This implies that capacity development actions have to
include the political, social, economic and administrative
dimensions of systems that may affect management of
water resources and delivery of water services. This can go
as far as the inclusion of policies in relation to organization
of government, delegation of authority, career planning,
salary and reward systems within the civil service and the
creation of incentive mechanisms to enhance effective
governance. It also implies development of policies
that enhance access to finance for development and
management of water infrastructure and services.
Until now capacity development has often been focused
at the level of new utility management, communities
or basin and water users associations. However, the
decentralization and management transfer policies in
many countries add a new dimension to capacity
development: the development of new regulatory
and governance systems at the decentralized levels.
Unfortunately, the changing roles of government are
not always accompanied with the associated capacity
development and incentive systems required to
effectuate the change. This is often due to a
combination of a lack of knowledge on the
implementation of these new roles, inherent
resistance to innovation and a lack of appreciation
of local capacity, knowledge and experience.

Source: Spicer, 2005; Veevers-Carter, 2005; van Hofwegen,
2005; www.ifc.org/municipalfund

It follows that an important aspect of good governance
in stimulating capacity development is related to research
and education. Governments have to provide incentives
and mechanisms that stimulate education and research
institutions to address the real societal issues and demand.
This can be done through applied-oriented research funds
and through activation of professional, commercial, civil
society and political institutions in the development of
education and research programmes. The European Union has
provided instruments through its fifth and sixth framework
programmes that support the development of such linkages
in society and among education and research institutions.

...retention rates
of trained
individuals were
much higher
than expected
for the
perceivably low
salaries, lack of

A country may even have to modify its national laws and
regulations to enable education institutions to adjust their
curriculum in response to demands from society. One such
example is the new law on higher education in Indonesia
(2003). This law has opened up the possibility to include
private education institutions with their linkages to
professional organizations and the private sector. Moreover,
the accreditation system has been changed from pre-approval
of the curricula to post-approval by an accreditation board.
This is a big step towards the development of dynamic and
society responsive education and research environment.

equipment,
demoralized
environment
and the
bureaucratically
inefficient
management

Similarly, supply-oriented programmes for education
and training of water user associations and community
organizations have to be changed into demand-driven
programmes with a menu structured delivery system
of training services where the communities or user
organizations can match their needs and priorities.
This will facilitate a better assimilation of new knowledge
and put it into practice more quickly.
National and international meetings are another way of
providing a platform for local authorities, politicians, water

4 5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Ensuring access
to public
information is an
aspect of good
governance

sector institutions and education and research institutions
to get exposure and exchange knowledge and experiences.
Such interactions among different stakeholder groups
provide new insights and ideas on priorities and
approaches to capacity development and the development
of governance structures. The 4th World Water Forum in
Mexico in March 2006, which focuses on strengthening
local action, is an example of such a platform.

Ensuring access to public information is yet another aspect
of good governance. Unfortunately, the financial support
to generate basic information especially in the domain of
basic water quality and hydrological and meteorological
data has been dwindling. A new discussion is needed on
the meaning and implications of property rights, especially
in the public domain, and the ethics around charging for
information in the public domain, which should also
include the international organizations.

Part 4. Identifying Knowledge
and Capacity Needs
...little data is
available to allow
the identification
of national
capacities to

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

address
development
problems specific
to water

It is widely acknowledged that greater efforts are required to understand the complex processes of change
within all levels of development. While case studies, working papers, reports, manuals, best practices,
guidelines, and the like are all valuable sources of knowledge, comprehensive cross-country comparisons
(regional, national and/or basin wide assessments) of existing knowledge and capacity are needed as are
analyses of capacity development initiatives undertaken in the past. Today, little data is available to allow
the identification of national capacities to address development problems specific to water.
Identifying methods to measure capacity and monitor
development initiatives has proven to be difficult. National
statistical agencies must improve and strengthen the
collection, storage and analysis of information conducive
to the knowledge base of water management. At the
international level, such needs are being carried out in order
to move the process of water assessments along, and the
UN Statistical Commission’s Intersecretariat Working Group
on Environment Statistics (IWG-ENV) is currently reviewing
measures to improve the contribution of statistical work to
the management of development in water-related sectors.
Other organizations involved with enhancing capacity within
national statistics agencies include Paris21, the World
Bank, and UNESCO Statistics. Through discussions between
the international statistics community, water experts and
development agencies, it is expected that the existing
sustainable development questionnaires could be adapted
and new survey material created in order to segregate and
better measure the capacity-enhancing initiatives specific
to water development en route to meeting the MDGs.
Thinking in terms of a non-traditional approach to capacitydevelopment assessment will help to overcome limited
international agreement on how to adequately measure
such complex qualitative processes.

4a. Indicators
To date, indicators for measuring capacity are very much
in their infancy. Rather than a final, easily measurable
outcome or output, capacity development is a complex
process that leads to more varying degrees of capacity in
an ever-changing environment. Traditional measurement
methods have often concentrated on ‘harder’ issues (e.g.
systems improvements, equipment supply, training,
organizational structuring, etc.), with a focus on a specific
entity (societal, organizational or individual), rather than
reflecting the broader system or environment in which they
function and the ‘softer’ issues of learning, adaptation
and changes in attitude. Under these circumstances, when
output-based performance indicators conclude that the
majority of capacity development projects implemented
during the 1980s failed, we learn whether the capacities
were ‘adequate’ or ‘good’ overall but gain little information
about which aspects of the process were failing, where
partial successes exist or whether or not the initiative
was doomed to fail from the start (Mizrahi, 2004).
By only considering the barriers to capacity development
without better assessing the causes of good and bad
performance, the opportunity to identify and confirm
strengths is forfeited. Because a number of indirect and

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 5 5

unrelated inputs can contribute to the good performance
of an institution, an excellent agricultural output in one
country might be the result of a market collapse in
another without any institutional reform or capacity
enhancements being made.
Potential indicators for a global assessment might include
the identification of users of the growing number of waterrelated databases or the human resource needs to meet
specific water-related goals on the global agenda. However,
while aggregated global indicators can make an important
contribution to the awareness of global capacity gaps,
they can oversimplify the complex processes involved in
addressing the myriad of water-related problems and would
therefore provide little information on accomplishments,
needs or failures. Worse, such aggregated indicators could
degenerate into a form of conditionality designed mainly for
the reporting needs of the international community, thereby
undermining a nation’s efforts to address the water-related
challenges being assessed.
An effective global assessment demands that a bottom-up
approach be undertaken, which endorses ownership,
promotes participation and considers the contextual
aspects of a sector’s objectives. The design and
implementation of suitable strategies for change must
adopt a focused approach based on region/nation/basin/
community ownership. There is no panacea for assessing
and enhancing capacity. When we ask ourselves, ‘What are
the crucial capacity gaps?’ We must also ask, ‘For what?’
and ‘For whom?’ The capacity for a nation to meet the
MDGs water supply and sanitation targets will be different
from that same nation’s capacity to monitor the resource
for better risk management. The capacity required for a
government to enable better agricultural trade will be
different from the Farmers Association’s capacity needs
for increasing pressure on the government to do so.
Capacity development is, by definition, a process
leading to outcomes. As such, benchmarking is required
to measure the degrees of capacity attained. However,
identifying benchmarks is particularly difficult because a
common understanding of the abstract notions of human
knowledge, institutional performance and cultural change
across the community, basin, national and international
levels of society must be achieved among the various
actors. Therefore, a participatory, locally oriented
approach must be adopted when designing capacity
assessment programmes. The ability to prioritize goals
and improve self-evaluation methodologies can be

strengthened through negotiation from the beginning of
the capacity development initiative.

It is important
that countries

As each country faces its own water-related problems
within the context of its own national priorities and
agendas, it must choose its own methodological
approach to identifying capacity needs while taking
varying political, socio-economic and technical factors
into account. It is essential that these assessments be
entirely country-driven, undertaken by national
institutions and experts to the fullest feasible extent,
and responding to national situations and priorities.
External agencies cannot effectively assess the capacity
needs of a country, nor should they play any role other
than that of facilitating the process of analysis and
developing capacities to manage and implement change.
It is therefore important that countries be self-sufficient
in their ability to undertake capacity-needs assessments
in water-related sectors, and it should be incumbent on
those countries to be forthright in sharing the
assessment information with the international community
in order to gain from lessons learned, prove institutional
strength or direct attention to their capacity needs.
By this approach, better clarity of the global capacity
needs to address water-related problems will begin to
be realized, and actions to address these needs can be
undertaken. To enable some consistency in the regional
and sector assessments, the general framework for
capacity outlined in Table 13.1 could be used as
guidance for indicator development. The framework
provides a conceptual map that can be adapted and
used to assess capacity related to specific development
objectives and then reported within each of the challenge
areas of the next UN World Water Development Report.
This way, future assessments of the various challenge
areas within this Report will inherently incorporate
knowledge and capacity needs into their cross-country
comparisons. For example, by viewing Chapter 7 on
water for food through the lens of knowledge and
capacity, future indicators may include the number of
irrigation associations per capita or farmers’ access to
meteorological information. These sector-based capacity
assessments will contribute to the much-needed
statistical data on existing capacity and associated
initiatives. In addition, they will promote awareness of
capacity gaps and be themselves a capacity-enhancing
process to those involved.
The readiness of governments to undertake capacityneeds assessments in various water-related sectors would

be selfsufficient in
their ability to
undertake
capacity-needs
assessments in
water-related
sectors...

Lawyers and water
managers from
Southern Africa playing
a negotiation game
during a short course
on conflict prevention
in Maputo,
Mozambique

4 5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Table 13.1: General framework for capacity development
Human Resources
Refers to the process of changing attitudes and behaviours – imparting knowledge and developing skills while
maximizing the benefits of participation, knowledge exchange and ownership.
Job requirements and skill levels
Are jobs correctly defined and are the required skills available?
Training/Retraining
Is the appropriate learning taking place?
Career Progression
Are individuals able to advance and develop professionally?
Accountability/Ethics
Is responsibility effectively delegated and are individuals held accountable?
Access to Information
Is there adequate access to needed information?
Personal/Professional Networking
Are individuals in contact and exchanging knowledge with peers?
Performance/Conduct
Is performance effectively measured?
Incentives/Security
Are these sufficient to promote excellence?
Values, Integrity and Attitudes
Are these in place and maintained?
Morale and motivation
Are these adequately maintained?
Work Redeployment and Job Sharing Are there alternatives to the existing arrangements?
Inter-relationships and teamwork
Do individuals interact effectively and form functional teams?
Interdependencies
Are there appropriate levels of interdependence?
Communications skills
Are these effective?

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Institutional Capacity
Focuses on the overall organizational performance and functioning capabilities as well as the ability of an organization
to adapt to change.
Mission and strategy
Do the institutions have clearly defined and understood missions and mandates?
Culture/Structure/Competencies
Are institutions effectively structured and managed?
Process
Do institutional processes such as planning, quality management, monitoring
and evaluation work effectively?
Human resources
Are the human resources adequate, sufficiently skilled and appropriately
deployed?
Financial resources
Are financial resources managed effectively and allocated appropriately to
enable effective operation?
Information resources
Is required information available and effectively distributed and managed?
Infrastructure
Are material requirements such as building, offices, vehicles and computers
allocated appropriately and managed effectively?
The Enabling Environment
Focuses on the overall policy framework in which individuals and organizations operate and interact with the external
environment.
Policy framework
What are the strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats according to the
socio-political, government/public sector, economic/technological and physical
environment factors operating at the societal level?
Legal/Regulatory framework
Is the appropriate legislation in place, and are these laws effectively enforced?
Management/Accountability
Are institutional responsibilities clearly defined, and are responsible institutions
framework
held publicly accountable?
Economic framework
Do markets function effectively and efficiently?
Systems-level framework
Are the required human, financial and information resources available?
Process and relationships
Do the different institutions and processes interact and work together
effectively?
Source: Lopes and Theisohn, 2003.

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 5 7

provide an indication of a government’s own capacity to
appreciate and to adapt to change. The degree to which
a participatory process is incorporated in performing the
assessment and the utility of the assessment to identify
capacity gaps and priorities could also be considered as a
global indicator to assess countries in future editions of
the UN World Water Development Report. Such
information could be compiled in a map on countries’
readiness to meet the Johannesburg implementation plan
target on IWRM Plan preparation by 2005. As presented
in the case studies of this Report (Chapter 14),
governments of some countries such as Ethiopia and
Uganda have taken a positive first step in performing
preliminary assessments of needs to operationalize
IWRM and their foresight should be recognized in
global country comparisons (see Chapter 14).

4b. The distribution of knowledge and
capacity needs
The knowledge base that supports decision-making and
the capacities of individuals, institutions and societies
to perform functions, solve problems and set and achieve
objectives pertain to all the challenge areas discussed
in the preceding chapters. Lopes and Theisohn (2003)
present a simple indication of the relative significance
of different aspects of capacity development. Their work
aims to arrest the ambivalence about capacity issues
that remains within many international development
agencies and partner countries by illustrating capacity
development that does not only depend on individual
training courses, but also on every aspect of a country’s
ability to address water-related problems within all
sectors of its development.

4c. Assessment tools and challenges
In recent years, a few examples of national capacity selfassessment handbooks have been created for various
development objectives. Of particular note is WMO’s and
UNESCO’s Water Resources Assessment - Handbook for
Review of National Capabilities (WMO/UNESCO 1997b),
which is designed to assess a country’s ability to measure
and monitor effectively its water resources. The handbook
specifically aims to provide guidance for reviewing levels
of activity of the basic water resources assessment in
the whole or part of a country or region. The activities
are compared, when possible, with minimum acceptable
requirements in terms of installation density, degree
of computerization, skilled human-power and related
management structure and education, training and
research programmes. The comparisons then provide a

basis for proposing actions considered necessary for
achieving minimum requirements.

Countries should
use the water

This methodology has been applied in Latin America
and further expansion to other regions is desirable. The
guidelines are not prescriptive in any sense and are not
meant as a standard methodology that can be applied
to all countries at all times under varying political, socioeconomic and water resource conditions. Countries should
use the water resource and capacity needs self-assessment
guidelines to the extent that they consider them to be
feasible, or they may choose other methodologies better
suited to their national situations and preferences.
Though not widely available, assessments have been
undertaken addressing specific sector needs that make
them difficult to compare. Moreover, assessments
undertaken have followed approaches intended to
specifically address different levels of capacity
development. At the regional level, assessments have
been undertaken in Asia and Latin America to make
inventories of the human capacities required and
available to address the Millennium Development Goals
in water and sanitation (Mejia-Velez and Rodic-Wiersma,
2005a; 2005b; Rodic-Wiersma and Sah, 2005). At the
country level, some examples are included in Chapter 14
on case studies. Additional examples are the Mali Long
Term Training and Capacity Building Needs Assessment
(Academy for Educational Development, 2003), and the
Capacity Building Project in the Water Resources Sector
in Indonesia (Asian Development Bank, 2005). The first
example concerns the individual human resources and
the second the nature of the institutions. A brief
description of the multilevel assessment and
implementation of capacity development initiatives in
Mexico is described in Capacity Building for the Water
Sector in Mexico: An Analysis of Recent Efforts
(Tortajada, 2001). Some key sources for information
on how to perform capacity assessments are included
in Table 13.2.
In addition, the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
Secretariat and UNDP launched the Capacity Development
Initiative (CDI), which produced a National Capacity SelfAssessment (NCSA) process. The primary goal of the
NCSA is to identify, through a country-driven consultative
process, priorities and needs for capacity-building, in
order to identify, confirm or review priority issues for
action within the GEF’s thematic areas of biodiversity,
climate change and desertification/land degradation.

resource and
capacity needs
self-assessment
guidelines to
the extent that
they consider
them to be
feasible...

4 5 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

...the true test
for any country
will be its
formulation of a
strategic plan of
action and the
successful
implementation
of appropriate
capacity
development
initiatives

Table 13.2: Some capacity assessment tools
The UNDP’s Capacity Development Resource Book (available at magnet.undp.org/cdrb/Default.htm) is a collection of
electronic documents assembled for capacity development practitioners.
UNDP website on capacity development (www.capacity.undp.org/) includes key sources for generic information on
how to perform capacity assessments. Additionally, it includes initiatives, networks, resources and tools. It offers access
to the Capacity 2015 initiative developed to operationalize the MDGs.
The South African Capacity Initiative (SACI) (www.undp-saci.co.za) developed a Capacity Mobilization Toolkit for
Southern African countries, which takes into consideration the particularly complex human capacity challenges associated
with the impacts of HIV and AIDS, poverty and recurring disasters on sustaining basic social services to the public at all
levels of the Millennium Development Goals.
The World Bank provides an online Capacity Development Resource Centre, which provides an overview of case
studies, lessons learned, ‘how to’ approaches and good practices pertaining to capacity development. It is available at
www.worldbank.org/capacity
The Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) has developed a Tool-Kit for Capacity Development, available
at www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/ that includes reference documents for capacity development.
The European Centre for Development Policy Management’s Capacity Development website (www.capacity.org) aims
to look at policy and practice of capacity development within international development cooperation and provides a
newsletter and a comprehensive material related to capacity development in all sectors.
The International Development Research Centre (IDRC), the International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (IIRR) and
the International Service for National Agricultural Research (ISNAR) implemented a project to better understand how
capacity development takes place and how its results can be evaluated. Further information is available at
www.idrc.ca/en/ev-31556-201-1-00-TOPIC.html

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

A team of the German Technical Cooperation (GTZ) supported the Indonesian Government in preparing guidelines on
how to organize and manage a capacity-building needs assessment process in the regions, resulting in a medium-term
regional capacity-building action plan. These very well structured guidelines, field-tested before they became final, are
available at www.gtzsfdm.or.id/cb_nat_fr_work.htm.

Country capacity needs and priorities to achieve goals
related to conventions in these three areas are then
documented globally (excluding high-income countries).
This methodology provides a good direction for the
implementation of global assessments in the various
water-related sectors of the next World Water
Development Report.
When assessing capacity needs, the true test for any
country will be its formulation of a strategic plan of
action and the successful implementation of appropriate
capacity development initiatives. This assessment
can help identify an entry point to initiate a capacity
development programme under conditions of resistance
to change (see Chapter 2). If the capacity development

process starts through legal reforms, institutional
strengthening or awareness-building is necessary, which
entails the identification of a suitable entry point among
the different levels of capacity. Principles summarizing
the implementation of capacity development initiatives
are beginning to be formulated (Lopes and Theisohn,
2003). An effective ongoing monitoring programme
must accompany the process to improve the capacities of
individuals and institutions, such that they can develop
a culture of self-assessment and establish an approach
to thinking strategically about capacity and performance.
Since capacity development is a process, a monitoring
system is necessary to understand changes in the process
and to feed this information back to those managing it,
so that they can enhance the efficiency and effectiveness
of the intervention.

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 5 9

Part 5. The Way Forward
This chapter highlights the need for knowledge acquisition and integration to become the responsibility
of the country concerned, supported on the one hand by participatory processes for knowledge
development that capitalize on existing local and indigenous knowledge and on the other hand by the
unprecedented access to the global knowledge base and professional networks in order to adopt a
holistic and integrated approach to enhance all levels of existing capacities. As solutions are only found
when problems are understood, comprehensive capacity assessments are urgently needed to identify
where understanding is deficient and to meet water development objectives. To date, such assessments
have not yet been done in developing countries. This trend should be reversed.
Comprehensive capacity assessments will set the baseline
to gauge progress on locally owned strategies to address
country-specific water-related problems. The information
gained will stimulate the adaptive capacity of countries
to anticipate and manage change by fostering a culture
of self-assessment and by establishing a strategic
approach to sustainable development. In this way the
goal of sustainable development of water resources and
services and the capacity to manage them effectively and
efficiently can be achieved through a continuous renewal
process that is at the heart of good governance.
It follows that there should be increased international
commitment to statistical capacity-building in water
with a focus on the three levels of capacity and their
sub-components. Similarly, there should be greater
emphasis on sharing knowledge, particularly amongst
riparian nations of a transboundary basin, in order to
build regional capacity to address water-related
problems together.
That part of the knowledge base that concerns the
data from monitoring the water resources and services
performance is essential for both global comparison
and local assessment. Further investment and better
management of ground-based networks and remote
sensing facilities are needed to ensure that adequate
information is available to facilitate sound decisionmaking at all levels of a country’s capacity. At the same
time emphasis should be placed on improving the human
component of the knowledge base. This acknowledges
that all staff and stakeholders, including the general
public, require education and training about the pressing
issues of water development in the region. Although
there is a need for countries to create apex bodies at
the basin level, the decentralization of responsibilities
will require attention directed at strengthening local
institutional capacities. In doing so, the roles of the local

institutions must be clearly defined, and a culture of
innovation should be encouraged that appreciates and
takes advantage of local and indigenous knowledge and
experience. Only by building upon the existing foundation
can water development be effective.
If the Millennium Development Goals are to be met,
in particular Goal 8 to develop a global partnership for
development, it is incumbent upon donor nations to
embrace the new paradigm for water development by
providing the necessary support (increased aid and debt
relief, opening of trade, accelerated transfer of
technology and improved employment opportunities)
to allow developing nations to expand their knowledge
base and enhance their existing local capacities rather
than transferring short-term solutions as was common
in the past. Likewise, it is the responsibility of the
leaders of developing countries to create an enabling
environment to enhance the existing local capacities
and the knowledge base on water, by setting policies,
ensuring adequate funding, and empowering local
institutions and stakeholders with decision-making
responsibilities, and to monitor performance to ensure
good governance and transparency.
In viewing the assessments and country comparisons for
each of the challenge areas presented throughout this
Report, we can identify the gap between the existing
situation and the desired situation. These identified gaps
are the deficiencies in knowledge and capacity within
each of the associated sectors (i.e. food, health, energy,
etc.). To continue to be ambivalent about enhancing the
knowledge base, or to ignore the holistic approach to
capacity development and view it simply as a one-off
course for individual training would mean that countries
will go on pouring untold resources and time into
unsustainable solutions and these gaps will see little
reduction in future World Water Development Reports.

If the
Millennium
Development
Goals are to be
met... it is
incumbent upon
donor nations to
embrace the
new paradigm
for water
development...

4 6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

References and Websites
Academy for Educational Development. 2003. Mali Long Term
Training and Capacity Building Needs Assessment: Africa
Agriculture Capacity Development Training Initiative

assessment for the achievement of the Millennium

SEMUHV0A90E_economy_2.html

Development Goals in Latin America. International IWA

———. 2000. FarmNet: Farmer information network for

Strategic Technical Assistance for Results with Training

agricultural and rural development. Rome, FAO Research,

(START). Report submitted to the United States Agency

Extension and Training Division, SDR and World

for International Development. October 2003.

Agriculture Information Centre. ftp://ftp.fao.org/sd/

Washington, DC. www.usaid.gov/our_work/agriculture/

farmnet.pdf

bifad/mali_training_assessment_oct_03.pdf
Agarwal A. and Narain, S. 1997. Dying Wisdom: Rise, Fall and

Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling, C.
S. and Walker, B. 2002. Resilience and sustainable

Conference AGUA 2005, From Local Action to Global
Targets. Cali, Colombia, 31 October – 4 November 2005.
———. 2005b. Higher education in water and sanitation: An
assessment in selected African countries. (draft paper)
Milburn, A. 2004. E-mail communication. Kingston-upon
Thames, UK, December, 2004
Misión de Evaluación OMM/PROMMA. 2003. Evaluación

Potential of India’s Traditional Water Harvesting Systems.

development: Building adaptive capacity in a world of

técnica del PROMMA 2003. Proyecto de Modernización

New Delhi, Centre for Science and Environment.

transformations. Ambio, Vol. 31, No. 5, pp. 437–40.

de Manejo del Agua (PROMMA) No. 160. Mexico.

Al-Hanbali, N., Al-Kharouf, R. and Bilal Alzoubi, M. 2004.

Fukuda-Parr, S., Lopes, C. and Malik, K. (eds). 2002. Capacity

Mizrahi, Y. 2004. Capacity Enhancement Indicators: Review of

Integration of geo imagery and vector data into school

for Development: New Solutions to Old Problems.

the literature. Washington DC, World Bank Institute.

mapping GIS data-model for educational decision support

London, UK and Sterling, VA, Earthscan and United

siteresources.worldbank.org/WBI/Resources/wbi37232Mizr

system in Jordan. ISPRS Commission II, WG II/5 – Design

Nations Development Program. www.undp.org/dpa/

and Operation of Spatial Decision Support Systems,

publications/CapforDevelopment.pdf

Istanbul, Turkey.
Alaerts, G. J., Hartvelt, F. J. A. and Patorni, G. M. (eds). 1999.
Water sector capacity-building: Concepts and instruments.
Proceedings of the Second UNDP Symposium on Water
Sector Capacity-building, Delft, The Netherlands.
Alsdorf, D. and Rodriguez, E. 2005. WatER: The Water
Elevation Recovery Satellite Mission. First Mission
Document for the WatER Mission. www.geology.ohiostate.edu/water/WatER_Document.pdf
Arce, M. 2005. Personal interview. Executive Secretary of
Gender and Water Alliance. Delft, The Netherlands.

Gordon Jr., R.G. 2005. Ethnologue: Languages of the World,
15th Edition. Dallas, SIL International.
www.ethnologue.com
Grabs, W. 2003. Networks, availability and access to

ahi.pdf
Morgan, P., Land, T. and Baser, H. 2005. Study on Capacity,
Change and Performance - Interim Report. Discussion
Paper, 59A, Maastricht, The Netherlands, ECDPM.
Morgan, P. 2000. Some observations and lessons on capacitybuilding. I. Grunberg and S. Khan (eds), Globalization:

hydrological data. Hydrology and Water Resources

The United Nations Development Dialogue: Finance,

Department. Geneva, World Meteorological Organization.

Trade, Poverty, Peace-Building. (UNU Policy Perspectives

grdc.bafg.de/servlet/is/9921/
GRDC (Global Runoff Data Centre). 2005. GRDC Station
Catalogue. Global Runoff Data Centre. Koblenz, Germany.
grdc.bafg.de/servlet/is/910/
Horton, D., Alexaki, A., Bennett-Lartey, S., Noële Brice, K.,

4.) New York, United Nations University Press.
Pasmore, W. 1994. Creating Strategic Change: Designing the
Flexible High-Performing Organization. Chichester, UK,
Wiley.
Rawls, W. J., Kustas, W. P., Schmugge, T. J., Ritchie, J. C.,

ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2005. Project Completion

Campilan, D., Carden, F., de Souza Silva, J., Thanh Duong,

Jackson, T. J., Rango, A. and Doraiswamy, P. 2003. Remote

Report on the Capacity Building Project in the Water

L., Khadar, I., Maestrey Boza, A., Kayes Muniruzzaman, I.,

sensing in watershed scale hydrology. Proceedings of the

Resources Sector in Indonesia. Manila, The Philippines.

Perez, J., Somarriba Chang, M., Vernooy, R. and Watts, J.

First Interagency Conference on Research in Watersheds,

www.adb.org/Documents/PCRs/INO/pcr-ino-26190.pdf

2003. Evaluating Capacity Development: Experiences

———. 2004. First Regional Meeting of National Water Sector

Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

3 Nov 2004. European Space Agency. www.esa.int/esaEO/

From Research and Development Organizations Around

27–30 October, 2003, Benson, Arizona. pp. 580–85.
Rodic-Wiersma, Lj. and Sah, R. D. 2005. Professional capacity

Apex Bodies: Leadership in Water Governance. Report of

the World. ISNAR (International Service for National

needs assessment for Millennium Development Goal on

the meeting, Hanoi, Vietnam, 18–21 May 2004.

Agricultural Research); IDRC (International Development

water supply and sanitation in Asia. XII World Water

Research Centre), ACP-EU Technical Centre for Agricultural

Congress of IWRA - Water for Sustainable Development

United Nations Development Programme. www.cap-

and Rural Cooperation. www.isnar.cgiar.org/publications/

Towards Innovative Solutions, 22–25 November 2005,

net.org/file_aboutCapnet/3_1_Annual_Report_2004.doc

ecd-book.htm

Cap-Net. 2005. Annual Report. Project No. GLO/02/115 2004.

Cohen, J. M. and Wheeler, J. R. 1997. Training and Retention

IAHS Ad Hoc Committee. 2001. Global water data: A newly

in African Public Sectors: Capacity-Building Lessons from

endangered species. AGU EOS-Transactions, Vol. 82,

Kenya. M. S. Grindle (ed.), Getting Good Government:

No. 5, pp. 54–58.

Capacity-building in the Public Sectors of Developing

ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2004. World

Countries. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.

Telecommunication Indicators Database. ITU. Geneva.

Dekker, A. G., Brando, V. E., Anstee, J. M., Pinnel, N., Kutser,
T., Hoogenboom, E. J., Peters, S. W. M., Pasterkamp, R.,

www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/
Kotter, J. P. and Cohen, D. S. 2002. The Heart of Change:

Vos, R., Olbert, C. and Malthus, T. J. M. 2001. Imaging

Real-Life Stories of How People Change their

spectrometry of water. F. van der Meer and S. M. de Jong.

Organizations. Boston, Harvard Business School Press.

(eds), Imaging Spectrometry: Basic Principles and

Lopes, C. and Theisohn, T. 2003. Ownership, Leadership and

Prospective Applications. Dordrecht, The Netherlands,

Transformation: Can We Do Better for Capacity

Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Development? London, UNDP and Earthscan Publishing.

DDWS (Department of Drinking Water Supply). 2004. School

Maurer, T. 2003. Intergovernmental arrangements and problems

sanitation and hygiene education in India: Investment in

of data sharing. Contribution to Monitoring Tailor-Made IV

building children’s future. DDWS, Government of India.

Conference, Information to support sustainable water

Presented at the SSHE Global Symposium, ‘Construction is

management: From local to global levels, St. Michielsgestel,

Not Enough’. Delft, The Netherlands, 8–10 June 2004.
ESA (European Space Agency). 2004. TIGER Workshop puts
focus on space for African water management. ESA News.

Netherlands, 15–18 September 2003.
Mejia-Velez, D. and Rodic-Wiersma, Lj. 2005a. Higher
education in water and sanitation: A preliminary needs

New Delhi, India
Sachs, J. 2005. Bush inherits the wind. Project Syndicate.
20 September 2005. www.project-syndicate.org
Schultz, G. A., and E. T. Engman (eds) 2000. Remote Sensing
in Hydrology and Water Management. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Senge, P., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R., Roth, G. and
Smith, B. 1999. The Dance of Change: The Challenges of
Sustaining Momentum in Learning Organizations. New
York, Doubleday/Currency.
Snowden, D. 2003. Complex Knowledge. Presentation at the
Gurteen Knowledge Conference, June 2003, Cynefin
Centre for Organizational Complexity IBM, UK.
Spicer, M. 2005 Encouraging private investment in water and
sanitation: new and traditional approaches. Presentation
of Municipal Fund during CSD 13, New York, April 2005.
Tortajada, C. 2001. Capacity building for the water sector in
Mexico: An analysis of recent efforts. Water International,
Vol. 26, No. 4, pp. 490–98, December 2001.
www.thirdworldcentre.org/waterinternational.pdf

E N H A N C I N G K N O W L E D G E A N D C A PA C I TY . 4 6 1

UN (United Nations). 2004. Water for the world: Space

———. 2005b. Lack of safe water and sanitation in schools

solutions for water management. UN/Austria/ESA

jeopardizes quality education. Press release, New York,

Symposium on Space Applications for Sustainable

UNICEF.

Development to Support the Plan of Implementation of the

UN-WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme). 2003. UN World Water Development Report:

World Summit on Sustainable Development, Graz, Austria.

Water for People, Water for Life. Paris/London,

———. 2003a. New inter-agency gender and water task force

UNESCO/Berghahn Books.

established. Press release for the International Year of
Freshwater 2003, 15 September 2003.

van der Beken, A. (ed.). 2004. Water-related education,
training and technology transfer. Encyclopaedia of Life

———. 2003b. Shared Natural Resources: First Report on
Outlines, First report of the special rapporteur on Shared

Support Systems, Oxford, EOLSS Publisher.

Natural Resources, Amb Chusei Yamada, International Law

etnet.vub.ac.be/ePUBLICATIONS21/watereducation.pdf

Commission, 55th Session, UN Doc. A/CN.4/533.

van Hofwegen, P. J. M. 2005. E-mail communication.
Marseilles, France. September, 2005

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1997.
Capacity development, Technical advisory paper 2. New

———. 2004. Capacity-building for water and irrigation sector

York, UNDP – Management Development and Governance

management with application in Indonesia. Capacity

Division, Bureau for Policy Development.

Development in Irrigation and Drainage Issues,

UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Pacific). 2004. Trade and Investment
Policies for the Development of the Information and
Mekong Subregion. (Studies in Trade and Investment,

Guidelines for Assessment of Institutional Frameworks.
IHE Monograph 2. Rotterdam, The Netherlands, A.A.
Balkema.
Veevers-Carter, P. 2005. Output-based aid and its use in water

New York, United Nations Economic and Social

and sanitation programmes. Stockholm Meetings on the

Commission for Asia and the Pacific.

EU Water Initiative ACP-EU Water facility session,
24 August 2005.
Vörösmarty, C. J., Douglas, E. M., Green, P.A. and Revenga, C.
2005. Geospatial indicators of emerging water stress: An

Knowledge. MOST/NUFFIC (IK-Unit) Database. UNESCO.

application to Africa. Ambio, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 230–36.

www.unesco.org/most/bpikreg.htm
———. 2003b. International Year of Freshwater Website.

Vörösmarty, C. J., Green, P., Salisbury, J. and Lammers, R. B.
2000. Global water resources: vulnerability from climate

Indigenous Peoples, Paris. www.wateryear2003.org/facts
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education. 2002. Capacity
Building: Methods and Instruments. Delft, UNESCO-IHE
Institute for Water Education.

Development of a Hydrological Information System (HIS).
Project Description Q1990. Delft, The Netherlands.
www.wldelft.nl/proj/pdf/3uk00227.scherm.pdf
Winpenny, J. T. and Camdessus, M. 2003. Financing Water for
All: Report of the Global Panel on Financing Water for
Infrastructure (The Camdessus Panel). World Water
Council, Global Water Partnership, Secretariat of the 3rd
World Water Forum.
WMO/UNESCO (World Meteorological Organization/United
1997a. The World’s Water – Is there enough? Geneva,

52.) New York, UNESCAP, Trade and Investment Division.

Organization). 2003a. Best Practices on Indigenous

Progress. www.unicef.org/wes/mdgreport/index.php
WL | Delft Hydraulics. 2004. The Hydrology Project, India:

Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization).

Framework for Integrated Water Resources Management:

UNESCO (United Nations Educational Scientific, Cultural

Children’s Fund). 2003. Meeting The MDG Drinking Water
and Sanitation Target: A Mid-Term Assessment of

Rome, FAO.

Communication Technology Sector of the Greater

Alleviation: Trends, Strategies and Policy Frameworks.

1, p. 14. www.consecol.org/vol6/iss1/art14/main.html.
WHO, UNICEF (World Health Organization, United Nations

Challenges and the Way Ahead. (FAO Water Reports, 26),
van Hofwegen, P. J. M. and Jaspers, F. G. W. 1999. Analytical

———. 2003. Use of Space Technology Applications for Poverty

participatory approach. Conservation Ecology Vol. 6, No.

WMO.
———. 1997b. Water Resources Assessment: A Handbook for
Review of National Capabilities. www.wmo.ch/web/
homs/documents/english/handbook.pdf
WMO/WHYCOS. 2005. Guidelines for Development
Implementation and Governance (2005) WMO/TD No.
1282. Geneva.
World Bank. 2004. Implementation completion report (Ida27740 Tf-28729) Report No. 28775–IN, 12 May 2004.
Washington DC, World Bank.
———. 2003. Water resources and irrigation sector management
project. Appraisal Document, Washington, DC, The World
Bank.
———. 2000. FRESH Initiative. School health toolkit.

change and population growth. Science, Vol. 289, pp.

Washington, DC. www.schoolsanitation.org/Resources/

284–88.

Readings/Fresh%20School%20Health%20toolkit.doc

Walker, B., Carpenter, S., Anderies, J., Abel, N., Cummings, G.,

UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2005a. Progress for

Janssen, M., Lebel, L., Norberg, J., Peterson, G. D., and

Children: A Report Card on Gender Parity and Primary

Pritchard, R. 2002. Resilience management in social-

Education. New York, UNICEF.

ecological systems: A working hypothesis for a

United Nations water-related portals
Earthwatch: earthwatch.unep.net
FAO Water Portals: www.fao.org/ag/agl/portals.stm
GEO-3 Data Portal: geodata.grid.unep.ch
International Year of Freshwater: www.wateryear2003.org
UNEP Freshwater Portal: freshwater.unep.net
UNESCO Water Portal: www.unesco.org/water
For a comprehensive list of Water-related UN programmes, portals, and databases see www.unesco.org/water/water_links/Type_of_Organization/United_Nations_System_Programmes_and_Agencies/

Some global water-related databases
AQUASTAT: www.fao.org/waicent/faoinfo/agricult/agl/aglw/aquastat/main/index.stm
FAOSTAT: apps.fao.org
Global International Waters Assessment (GIWA): www.giwa.net
Global Online Research in Agriculture (AGORA): www.aginternetwork.org
Global Resource Information Database (UNEP GRID): www.grida.no/
Global Runoff Data Centre (GRDC): grdc.bafg.de
International Disasters Database and Complex Emergencies Database: www.cred.be/cred/index.htm.
International Groundwater Resources Assessment Centre (IGRAC): igrac.nitg.tno.nl/homepage.html
Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database: www.transboundarywaters.orst.edu

4 6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

UNEP GEMS/Water Programme: www.gemswater.org
US National Academies’ Water Information Centre: water.nationalacademies.org
Water and Sanitation International Benchmarking Network (IBNET): www.ib-net.org
Water and Sanitation Programme: www.wsp.org
Water Research Network: water.nml.uib.no/
WCA infoNET: www.wca-infonet.org

Some international water networks and professional associations
American Institute of Hydrology (AIH): www.aihydro.org/
Freshwater Action Network: www.freshwateraction.net
International Association of Hydraulic Engineering and Research (IAHR): www.iahr.org/
International Association of Hydrogeologists (IAH): www.iah.org/
International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS): www.cig.ensmp.fr/~iahs/
International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage (ICID): www.icid.org
International Network of Basin Organizations: www.inbo-news.org/
International Water Association (IWA): www.iawq.org.uk/
International Water Resources Association: www.iwra.siu.edu/
International Waters Learning Exchange and Resource Network (IW:LEARN): www.iwlearn.org/
Latin American Network for Water Education and Training (LA WETnet): www.la-wetnet.org/
Nile Basin Capacity-Building Network for River Engineering (NBCBN-RE): www.nbcbn.com
Streams of Knowledge: www.streams.net
Water Environment Federation (WEF): www.wef.org/
WaterNet: www.waternetonline.ihe.nl/
World Meteorological Organization – World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS): www.wmo.ch/web/homs/projects/whycos.html
For additional professional associations see www.unesco.org/water/water_links/Type_of_Organization/Professional_Organizations/
Environmental & Water Resources Institute (EWRI): www.ewrinstitute.org/
Global Development Learning Network (GLDN): www.gdln.org
International Water Management Institute (IWMI): www.iwmi.cgiar.org and www.iwmidsp.org/iwmi/info/main.asp
Research Institute for Development (IRD): www.ird.fr

Some international institutions for water education and research
UNESCO Centre for Water Hazard and Risk Management: www.unesco.pwri.go.jp/
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education: www.unesco-ihe.org
Water Virtual Learning Centre: www.inweh.unu.edu/inweh/Training/WVLC.htm
For additional information on institutions for water-related training, education and research, visit www.unesco.org/water/water_links/Type_of_Organization/
Section 4: MANAGEMENT RESPONSES
& STEWARDSHIP

Educational_Training_and_Research_Institutions/.

SECTION 5

Sharing
Responsibilities
Local-level actions and on-the-ground insights are the starting
point of the global strategy to improve the overall quality and
quantity of the world’s water resources. Lessons learned —
successes and failures — are invaluable sources of information and,
if properly shared, will help us to solve some of the world’s most
pressing freshwater-related problems.
Improving water management and stewardship means meeting
basic needs, reducing vulnerabilities, improving and securing
access to water and empowering the poverty-stricken to manage
the water upon which they depend.

Chapter 14 – Case Studies: Moving
Towards an Integrated Approach

These 16 case studies from around
the world examine water resource
challenges and provide valuable onthe-ground insights into the facets of the water crisis
and different management responses: The Autonomous
Community of the Basque Country (Spain), Danube River
Basin (Albania, Austria, Bosnia-Herzogovina, Bulgaria,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Moldova,
Poland, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovak
Republic, Slovenia, Switzerland, Ukraine), Ethiopia, France,
Japan, Kenya, Lake Peipsi (Estonia, Russian Federation),
Lake Titicaca (Bolivia, Peru), Mali, the State of Mexico,
Mongolia (Tuul Basin), La Plata Basin (Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay), South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Uganda.
Chapter 15 – Conclusions and
Recommendations for Action

Drawing on the essential points and
key messages presented throughout
the Report, this chapter weaves
together a set of conclusions and recommendations to
guide future action and enhance the sustainable use,
productivity and management of the world's increasingly
scarce and polluted freshwater resources.

Water links us to our neighbour in a way more profound and
complex than any other.
John Thomson

Case Studies: An Overview ...............................469
WWAP case study findings ......................................470
Map 14.1: Case study overview
Box 14.1: The European Union Water Framework
Directive

1. The Autonomous Community of the
Basque Country ..............................................473
Map 14.2: Overview of the river basins in the ACB

7. Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
Basin ...................................................................486
Map 14.8: Overview of the Lake Peipsi/
Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Basin
Changing climatic and socio-economic contexts......486
Reforms underway ..................................................487
Box 14.5: Building a community framework
Environmental issues and meeting the MDGs..........487
Conclusion...............................................................487

2. The Danube River Basin .............................474

8. Lake Titicaca Basin .......................................488

Map 14.3: Overview of the Danube River Basin
Ecosystems and transportation ...............................475
Managing pollution and floods ...............................475
Box 14.2: The Danube River Basin Management
Plan: Converging with EU-WFD
Energy in DRB countries ..........................................476
Conclusion...............................................................477

Map 14.9: Overview of the Lake Titicaca Basin
Poverty and conflict: Persistent challenges.............488
The impact of climate change on glaciers ...............488
Fig. 14.1: Areal and volumetric variation of
the Chacaltaya Glacier
Conclusion...............................................................489

9. Mali.......................................................................489
3. Ethiopia ..............................................................477
Map 14.4: Overview of the river basins in Ethiopia
Water resources ......................................................477
Challenges to life and well-being ............................477
The effects of water-related natural disasters........478
Table 14.1: Number of people affected by
recent droughts
Water policy implementation ..................................478
Conclusion...............................................................479

4. France ..................................................................479
Map 14.5: Overview of the river basins in France
The Adour-Garonne Basin ........................................480
The Artois-Picardy Basin..........................................480
The Loire-Brittany Basin ..........................................480
The Rhine-Meuse Basin ...........................................480
The Rhone-Mediterranean Basin..............................480
The Seine-Normandy River Basin.............................481
Conclusion...............................................................481

5. Japan ....................................................................481
Map 14.6: Overview of the river basins in Japan
Ensuring drinking water supply and access to
sanitation................................................................481
Safeguarding ecosystems ........................................481
Water for agriculture, industry and energy .............482
Coping with water-related disasters .......................482
Box 14.3: Ensuring the knowledge base
Conclusion...............................................................483

6. Kenya ..................................................................483
Map 14.7: Overview of the river basins in Kenya
Major challenges: Poverty, access, food and energy ..483
Water sector reform................................................485
Enhancing water sector capacity .............................485
Box 14.4: Disasters and income
Conclusion...............................................................486

Map 14.10: Overview of the river basins in Mali
Poverty, increased irrigation, access to safe water
and environmental degradation...............................490
Challenge areas: Health, food, and energy..............490
Management responses and stewardship................491
Box 14.6: Shared water management
Conclusion...............................................................491

10. State of Mexico ..............................................492
Map 14.11: Overview of the river basins in the State
of Mexico
Water and land resources........................................492
Water and land uses................................................492
Water transfer.........................................................493
Water and health ....................................................493
Water management .................................................493
Water and ecosystems ............................................493
Box 14.7: Water resources development in the
State of Mexico
Risk management ....................................................494
Conclusion...............................................................494

11. Mongolia with special reference to
the Tuul River Basin .....................................495
Map 14.12: Overview of the river basins in Mongolia
Current contexts......................................................495
Water and ecosystems ............................................495
Box 14.8: Transboundary water resources in
Mongolia
Challenges to well-being and development .............496
Water for food ........................................................496
Water and industry..................................................496
Water and energy....................................................496
Risk management and responses ............................497
Water resources management .................................497
Conclusion...............................................................497

14
CHAPTER 14

Case Studies

4 6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

12. La Plata River Basin .....................................498

15. Thailand..............................................................509

Map 14.13: Overview of La Plata River Basin
Water and environment...........................................498
Levels of Poverty ....................................................499
Access to safe water and sanitation .......................499
Table 14.2: Percentage of urban and rural
populations with access to drinking water and
sanitation services
Water and health ....................................................499
Water and industry..................................................500
Water and energy....................................................500
Box 14.9: The Paraguay-Paraná Waterway
(Hidrovía) Project
Sharing water resources..........................................500
Managing the resource: Institutional framework ....501
Conclusion...............................................................501

Map 14.16: Overview of the river basins in Thailand
Water and ecosystems ............................................509
Natural resources management...............................509
Poverty and Progress towards MDGs ......................510
Water and health ....................................................510
Water for food ........................................................510
Water for energy and industry ................................510
Water allocation......................................................510
Water-related disasters...........................................511
Box 14.11: The impact of the tsunami in
Thailand
Transboundary water resources...............................511
Conclusion...............................................................511

Map 14.14: Overview of the river basins in
South Africa
Water and ecosystems ............................................502
Water and settlements ............................................502
Water and health ....................................................503
Water for food ........................................................503
Water and energy....................................................503
Water and Industry..................................................504
Water management and risk mitigation ..................504
Sharing water..........................................................504
Ensuring the knowledge base..................................504
Conclusion...............................................................505

Map 14.17: Overview of the river basins in Uganda
Water and ecosystems ............................................512
Rural areas ..............................................................512
Urban settlements ...................................................512
Cost recovery ..........................................................512
Water and health ....................................................513
Box 14.12: The impact of rising temperatures
Food security...........................................................513
Poverty ...................................................................513
Water and industry..................................................514
Water and energy....................................................514
Legal framework and reform of the water sector....514
Water-related disasters...........................................515
Conclusion...............................................................515

14. Sri Lanka ............................................................505

References and Websites ..................................515

13. South Africa .....................................................502

Map 14.15: Overview of the river basins in Sri Lanka
Water and ecosystems ............................................505
Poverty....................................................................506
Water and health ....................................................506
Water and food .......................................................506
Water for energy.....................................................507
Water and industry..................................................507
Management responses...........................................507
Risk management ....................................................507
Box 14.10: The social, economic and
environmental costs of the tsunami in Sri Lanka
Ensuring the knowledge base..................................508
Conclusion...............................................................508

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

16. Uganda................................................................512

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 6 9

Case Studies: An Overview
As explained in the first World Water Development Report (WWDR1), many countries lack the institutions, legislation and financial means
to assess the state of their water resources. Self-assessment and recognition of problems are the first and most important steps towards
addressing these problems. WWDR1 noted, ‘Water professionals need a better understanding of the broader social, economic and political
context, while politicians need to be better informed about water resource issues’, pointing to the urgent need for capacity enhancement at
all levels (UN-WWAP, 2003). One of the key objectives of the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is to help countries improve their
self-assessment capability by building on existing strengths and experiences. WWAP fulfils this mission by assisting in the preparation of case
studies in countries around the world in order to highlight the state of water resources where different physical, climatic and socio-economic
conditions prevail. In this regard, case studies show the diversity of circumstances and different human needs. The second purpose of the
case studies is to highlight the challenges that need to be addressed in the water resources sector. In the process, the skills and experience
of both local water professionals and policy-makers are engaged and enhanced.
The World Water Assessment Programme is both global and local in
scale, for it must check the accuracy of the big picture on the basis
of snapshots of water in the field. In the global strategy to improve the
overall quality of water resources, local actions often present the starting
point to the most fruitful efforts. The WWAP case studies aim to provide
a snapshot of those efforts while showing the significance of the
decisions taken at local, subnational and national levels. The lessons
learned, from both successes and failures, may be shared with other
countries interested in addressing such issues. For WWDR1, seven pilot
case studies involving twelve countries were prepared. In WWDR2, this
has increased to sixteen case studies and thirty-eight countries (see
Map 14.1). Due to this increase, the case study chapter in the present
Report includes an executive summary of each case study report, briefly
highlighting its water-related challenges. Given that each case study
report is an important point of reference in time they will be available
in their entirety on WWAP’s website as they become available.1
The case studies included in this report were conducted at three different
scales – the subnational (regions or basins), national and at international
levels – with a focus on transboundary river basins and lakes. Together,
they illustrate how water-related challenges are experienced at various
scales. For example, transboundary basin studies focus on the challenges
of sharing water resources in an international setting, while national and
subnational studies are aimed at assessing the state of water resources
and progress towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). As a
long-term goal, WWAP aims to achieve global coverage by adding a
number of new case studies in each edition as more countries undertake
the important task of water resources assessment (WRA). WWAP support
is important in assisting participating countries in this crucial task while
the WWDR and the WWAP website serve as valuable platforms for
sharing ideas and stimulating discussion on water issues worldwide.
Case studies are conducted within a multi-objective framework.
The overarching goal is to help enhance national institutions, but
one of the main objectives and the point of departure for this exercise is
bringing key stakeholders – intergovernmental organizations (IGOs), nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), universities, the private sector, etc. –

opique
Cancer

uateur

corne
Tropique du Capri

Map 14.1: Case study overview

in the water sector together through a series of national workshops
to promote dialogue (not only between IGOs and NGOs but also between
IGOs themselves while emphasizing the need for vertical integration
between levels of government), identify priorities and create guidelines
for the compilation and exchange of information. This step also serves
to raise public awareness of existing and emerging problems. In this
context, WWAP case study methodology brings bottom-up and top-down
approaches together. The most important aspect of the case studies
conducted in Africa, for example, was setting up national working groups,
which in turn followed up on the group meetings and directed the overall
process of national case study preparation. Although the composition
of such committees varied, most included governmental institutions,
universities, research centres and NGOs. The common challenge faced
by nearly all case study working groups was bringing together institutions
and agencies that have traditionally been accustomed to working in
isolation, and helping these groups to communicate better and work
together. This enhanced dialogue contributes to a more voluntary and
open exchange of information among the various institutions.

1. See www.unesco.org/water/wwap/case_studies

4 7 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

This interaction also permitted the identification of institutional and
technical deficiencies in the water sector as a whole. Some of the
reported problems recognized to be hindering progress were as follows:
■

lack of adequate or reliable data, training and qualified manpower

■

lack of communication between the organizations responsible for
water management

■

lagging implementation of integrated water resources management
(IWRM) due to financial constraints and lack of appropriate tools and
policies, fragmented institutional structures and an abundance of
government agencies without clear-cut definitions of their responsibilities.

In sum, through WWAP’s process of case study preparation, case
study partners were able to reach a consensus on the challenges to
be addressed in the water sector, thus making the first step towards
addressing them.
The WWAP case studies are also intended to benchmark the current
situation in order to provide a basis on which to analyse change taking
place in the water sector over time. In this context, and with its capacitybuilding directive in mind, WWAP not only facilitated the testing of
indicators suggested in WWDR1, but also assisted various countries in
developing their own sets of indicators. These indicators are recognized
to be critical building blocks of a larger monitoring, evaluation and
reporting (MER) system and a key element of good water governance.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

WWAP’s case study partners have widely varying development profiles.
For example, Japan and France have fully functional MER systems in
place based on a very comprehensive set of indicators and are also in
the process of developing additional indicators to suit their special needs.
On the other hand, some countries have either no MER system or are
only in the very early stages of implementation. Research evaluating
the effectiveness of proposed WWAP indicators by South Africa concluded
that there was a high level of relevance and linkage between the WWAP
challenge areas and the core components of the South African water
resources management policy. Furthermore, our South African partners
felt that WWAP indicators highlighted potential priority issues of interest
to decision-makers and stakeholders more broadly (IWMI, 2004).
Progress in the identification of a comprehensive set of sectoral and
national indicators is promising but slow. The biggest roadblocks in this
process are a lack of data, which stems from the only partial coverage
of established hydrological monitoring systems, and outdated and
unreliable information currently available. Experience has shown that
indicator development is a lengthy and iterative process, which requires
significant and sustained financial and technical support.

Currently, indicator development is the responsibility of the specialized
United Nations (UN) agencies. With regard to water issues, these efforts
are coordinated by a core group of experts in cooperation with WWAP
with the aim of bringing all the relevant expertise and experience of UN
agencies together in preparation of indicators for the WWDR. Given that
indicator development should be an inclusive process open to the benefit
of all external expertise, case study countries may play a valuable role in
this process. Broadly relevant indicators that have been developed by our
case study parties can be evaluated by the other case study partners and
considered for wider utilization or further refinement. WWAP plays a
catalytic role in bringing the know-how and information accrued by our
case study partners to a wider audience. Involvement of UN Member
States in indicator development could also facilitate UN agencies’ access
to local knowledge and information while improving the data availability
problem that has so often plagued indicator development in the past.
It is important to remember that enhanced country involvement in indicator
development is a complex, long-term process that needs sustained support.
Case study development should be considered as the fusion of many
parallel but complementary WWAP activities conducted at the local,
subnational and national levels. They address water issues from a very
practical perspective and thus are critical to developing policy-relevant
information for decision-makers committed to better water governance.

WWAP case study findings
The current case studies illustrate the complexity of water resources
management in different geographic settings of the world with varying
water-related stress, socio-economic circumstances and human needs,
complementing the picture drawn in WWDR1. The findings are alarming.
In many developing countries with abundant water resources, socioeconomic problems present an obstacle for better access to safe
water and sanitation services, whereas in other countries, water
scarcity continues to be a limiting factor for development.
The disparities in water resources are blatant. For example, available per
capita water resources in Peru are more than 60,000 cubic metres per
year (m3/y), but only 1,000 m3/y in South Africa. Yet the incidence of
poverty in Peru is greater than in South Africa, which means that a large
amount of available water resources is not sufficient in and of itself to
combat poverty; good management of these resources is also necessary.
Mali’s rich water resources cannot be fully put to use, due to economic
difficulties and the spatial distribution of water resources. In many African
countries, the livelihoods of rural dwellers are dependant on rainfed
agriculture. However, due to the absence of large-scale irrigation schemes,
droughts severely affect harvest and undermine food security. Furthermore,
access to food for the poor and other marginalized people of society
continues to be a great challenge. Local poverty and the hope of finding
better living conditions often drive people from rural areas to migrate to
urban settlements. The urban population in the La Plata River Basin, for
example, has increased from an average of 45 percent in the early 1960s,

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 7 1

to almost 87 percent. Here, as in other regions, the accelerating rate of
urbanization often hampers the extension of safe water and sanitation
service provision, and general water coverage statistics do little to elucidate
the fact that though coverage is often greater in urban settlements, water
supply and sanitation facilities are generally insufficient in the peripheral
areas of these centres where many of the poor and marginalized groups
of society live. However, as demonstrated in the case of Brazil and the
PROSANEAR project, when the poor become organized and involved in
decision-making processes, this greatly contributes to the provision of
better services. Such projects have demonstrated that even the poor are
willing to pay as long as they are well-informed of what they are paying
for and what kind of services to expect in return.
Water-borne diseases continue to be among the major causes of
morbidity in developing countries. Millions of people are suffering from
diseases that could be prevented by better hygienic practices such as
handwashing. In Thailand, for example, despite the development of
water supply and sanitation infrastructures, hygiene-related problems,
such as acute diarrhoea and food poisoning are still on the rise,
whereas other water-related diseases (such as enteric fever, dysentery
and helminths) have decreased. Some case study partners, such as
Argentina, Mexico, Peru, Sri Lanka and Thailand, have reported on the
dangers of groundwater resources with naturally high arsenic content.
Meeting the growing need for energy is a challenge for our developing
partners. Although hydropower is considered among the cheapest source
of energy and its development is promoted, its environmental and social
impacts are also given careful consideration. Energy is the number one
requirement for a better quality of life and industrial development. The
hydroelectric potential of our case study partners is not being utilized
to its full extent. For example, in Ethiopia, the contribution of hydropower
to annual energy production is approximately 1 percent. While an
estimated 30,000 megawatts (MW) of hydropower could be generated
using available water resources, a mere 670 MW (approximately 2
percent) of hydropower potential is actually used, due to economic
difficulties. Instead, fossil fuels and firewood are often used. Likewise,
in Mali, 90 percent of basic energy needs are met through firewood
and charcoal. The environmental implications (e.g. deforestation and the
emission of greenhouse gases) stemming from these sources are serious.
In addition, while the electricity grid is being expanded to serve most of
the previously marginalized rural areas, energy consumption in residential
and commercial sectors seems to have risen only gradually, due to the
low income of households served.
Industrial development is closely linked to urbanization. As industry
creates jobs, the expectation of finding a job often results in mass
migrations to industrial centres. The continuation of the current industrial
development and population migration trends will likely place increased
pressures on the scarce water resources and limited service infrastructure
in these locations, such as in the case of Gauteng in South Africa.

Gender equity in education continues to be a problem in developing
countries. The main reason for this is that girls and women are
considered as a source of cheap or free labour. In Sri Lanka, although
40 percent of agricultural workers are women and almost 80 percent of
them are involved in straining physical activities, more than 70 percent
of the women workers render their services without receiving anything in
return. Furthermore, in many developing countries, carrying water home,
sometimes from considerable distances, is seen as the responsibility of
women and girls. These kinds of hard living conditions unfortunately
put them at an educational disadvantage. Funds that are devoted to
improving educational systems have so far been unable to address these
issues and increase the enrolment of girls. Furthermore, higher learning
and research institutions specialized in the technical and management
aspect of water resources are insufficient in quantity and variable in
quality. This in turn limits the institutional capacities of national
organizations due to the absence of trained manpower.
MER systems are at different stages of implementation in the countries
of our case study partners. In Europe, for example, the implementation
of the European Union Water Framework Directive has been a positive step
towards a comprehensive MER system (see Box 14.1). WWAP’s efforts to
help countries improve their MER systems have been very well received
by our case study partners. For example in Uganda, the national process
initiated by the WWAP Secretariat facilitated the bringing together of
several institutions and agencies to better communicate and work together.
Agriculture is the most water-demanding sector, in addition to being a
major source of employment and a major contributor of the national
gross domestic product (GDP) of many of our case study partners in
Africa. Agriculture in Ethiopia, for example, provides 86 percent of
employment and generates 57 percent of its GDP. However, the
industrial sector is becoming increasingly important to many of our
case study partners. In South Africa, it has developed into the fastest
growing economic sector, generating 29 percent of South Africa’s GDP
and employing over 25 percent of the work force. Mining also has a
big share in international trade.
The challenge of meeting the increasing water needs of industry while
preserving the ecosystem remains a prominent challenge. The mining
industry in Mongolia contributes approximately 20 percent of national
GDP and accounts for over 50 percent of the country’s overall exports,
but has caused a detrimental effect on the well-being of ecosystems.
On the other hand, however, with almost 80 percent recycling efficiency,
Japan is a prime example of how high-level technology and up-to-date
regulations can contribute to the effective use of water in industry.
Regardless of their level of development, managing risks is a concern for
all our case study partners. Water-related disasters continue to claim the
lives of many and cause considerable socio-economic damages. In many
countries, both structural and non-structural measures have been

4 7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

implemented to mitigate the negative effects of droughts and floods.
However, experience has shown that defensive action against waterrelated hazards alone is insufficient. The action programme, recently
adopted by the members of the International Commission for the
Protection of the Danube River, recognizes floods as a natural part of
the hydrologic cycle and emphasizes the need to be cautious when
planning development activities in flood-risk areas and manage risk
through a basin approach, with the participation of governments,
municipalities and stakeholders. Within the framework of the programme,
which primarily refers to United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) Guidelines on Sustainable Flood Prevention and adopts EU Best
Practices on Flood Prevention, Protection and Mitigation, conservation
and improvement of water-related ecosystems are a high priority, since
wetlands act as a buffer against floods, thereby reducing their intensity.
In several regions, both surface and groundwater resources are under
varying levels of stress due to growing population and continuing
industrialization. In many instances, water resources are not utilized in
a sustainable manner. In the State of Mexico, it is estimated that
groundwater resources are used at twice their rate of natural recharge
which causes land subsidence up to 40 centimetres (cm) per year due to
the shrinking of aquifers as water is drawn out and leads to the disruption
of water and sanitation infrastructure and increases vulnerability to floods.
Droughts are also a part of the water cycle and take place with varying
frequency and severity. The outcomes of our case studies show how
drought aggravates the level of poverty and famine, especially in Africa.
In Ethiopia, one of the poorest countries in the world, there have been

about thirty major drought episodes over the past nine centuries, thirteen
of which were severe at the national scale and put millions of Ethiopians
in dire need for basic food assistance. Even countries with abundant rainfall
are prone to droughts. In Sri Lanka, twenty-three droughts were reported
between 1947 and 1992, severely disrupting the Sri Lankan economy.
During the 2001 drought, for example, the country faced power cuts for up
to eight hours per day. In 2004, over fifty thousand hectares of crops were
damaged, and the government had to appeal for assistance to provide food
rations for approximately one million people for a six-month period. Flood
and drought forecasting systems are necessary to take precautionary
measures and to reduce the socio-economic impacts of such natural
disasters. However, lack of funding or limited funding slows down the
effective implementation of such systems. Consequently, flood-warning
systems are missing in a great number of flood-prone basins. Floodforecasting models in Sri Lanka fail to simulate real-life situations due to
the poor mathematical algorithms employed. In Kenya, disaster management
has not been viewed as an integral part of development planning, and
water-related disasters were responded to in an ad hoc manner whenever
they occurred. As a result, the variation in rainfall has had a significant
effect on rainfed agriculture, upon which Kenya’s economy heavily relies.
Climatic variations affect livelihoods of urban and rural dwellers. For
example, in the Lake Titicaca Basin (Peru and Bolivia), glaciers, which
are the major source of water for drinking and irrigation, are receding
and reducing volumetrically. This trend will spell disaster for small and
medium-scale irrigation, causing an increase in water prices, possibly
aggravating poverty and triggering social movements.

BOX 14.1: THE EUROPEAN UNION WATER FRAMEWORK DIRECTIVE

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Abundant and clean water is a given for most of
the people living in the European Union (EU).
However, many human activities put a pressure
on both water quality and quantity. Polluted
water from industry, agriculture and household
use causes damage to the environment and
affects the health of those using the same
water resources. The EU Water Framework
Directive (WFD) came into force on 22 December
2000 and aims to establish a framework for the
protection of surface and groundwater, as well
as coastal waters.
This directive requires all inland and coastal
waters to reach ‘good status’1 by 2015. The
definition of the good water status includes the
chemical composition of water and the ecological
elements. In order to reach this goal, a river

basin structure is established within which
certain environmental targets are set. The most
important aspects of the WFD is that it calls for
sustainable development, requires the adoption
of integrated river basin management and links
and coordinates all previous water policies,
such as the directives on urban waste water
treatment, nitrates, bathing or drinking water
into a common framework. Finally, the integration
of water policy with other major EU policies
(like agriculture, hydropower and navigation,
for example) is a prerequisite for successful
protection of the aquatic environment.
In 2009, measurement programmes will be
established in each river basin district for
delivering environmental objectives (article 11).
The first river basin management plan for each

river basin district, including environmental
objectives for each body of surface or
groundwater and summaries of programmes
of measures (article 13) will also be published.
Recognizing that water management must
respond to local conditions and needs, the WFD,
has strong public information and consultation
components that encourage all interested parties
to become involved in the production, reviewing
and updating of river basin management plans.

1. The values of the biological quality elements for the
surface water body type show low levels of distortion
resulting from human activity, but deviate only slightly
from those normally associated with the surface water
body type under undisturbed conditions.
Source: EC, 2000.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 7 3

The importance of Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM)
is becoming increasingly recognized throughout the world and the
legislative and regulatory frameworks needed for putting IWRM tools
into use are being created and revised. The involvement of stakeholders
is encouraged through the establishment of community councils and river
basin organizations, which share the responsibility of water management
with national institutions. However, the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (WSSD) target for the preparation of IWRM and efficiency
plans in all countries by 2005 has not been fully met. Furthermore,
although water management laws, policies, programmes and regulations
do exist, their enforcement and implementation remain problematic.
Implementation has proven to be particularly difficult in cases where
there has been little public involvement. Hence, facilitating the
participation of water users and stakeholders in the management
and allocation of water resources remains an important challenge.
The major problem plaguing many of our case study partners is the lack
of coordination between institutions and agencies responsible for drafting
and implementing policy. This is especially critical for multi-state

countries, such as Mexico where decisions taken at the federal level
need to be implemented at the state level. In the State of Mexico, the
legal framework has been revised to allow the creation of the Secretariat
of Water, Public Works and Infrastructure for Development (SAOPID),
which is single-handedly responsible for preparing and implementing
State policy guidelines concerning public works and infrastructure
development. This secretariat, which reports back to National Water
Commission at the federal level, is the first of its kind in Mexico.
Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, the case studies demonstrate that
where gross inadequacies exist in the provision of water and sanitation
facilities, a lack of financial and human resources capacity can clearly be
seen. Human resources capacity is not only essential to the implementation
of policies and programmes, but to the proposal of innovative solutions
overall. Furthermore, a lack of synergy and an unclear division of
responsibility among institutions often exacerbates these problems
and inhibits reforms from reaching the local level. Until these issues
can be addressed, they will likely remain the most outstanding problems
challenging the water sector of developing countries in the near future.

1. The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country
The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country (ACB) is one of
seventeen autonomous bodies in Spain. It is densely populated, with
5 percent of the overall population of Spain (over 2 million people)
living in 1.4 percent, or 7,234 square kilometres (km2), of the total
surface area of Spain (EUStat, 2005). Accordingly, the population
density was 292 inhabitants per km2 as of 2003. The surface area
of exclusive internal basins is around 2,200 km2 with a population
density of over 600 inhabitants per km2.
The ACB is a highly mountainous territory located across the western
end of the Pyrenees and the eastern part of the Cantabrian Mountains.
The Cantabrian-Mediterranean water divide formed by mountain ranges
of modest altitude (1,000 to 1,600 m) divides the territory. A great
portion of the ACB lies in the Bay of Biscay-Mediterranean watershed.
However, on both sides of this basin, there are a series of small
catchments, generally characterized by a high level of rainfall and
extremely uneven terrain. Rainfall is abundant throughout the ACB,
with an annual average of over 1,000 mm and a long-term variability
of about 20 percent. Despite its relatively constant levels of rainfall, the
region has experienced serious flooding and a number of droughts. The
region’s rugged surface conditions and high rainfall have prompted ACB
to establish an extremely dense hydro-meteorological monitoring
network, with over 330 control stations currently in operation.
Urban settlements are the biggest user of water resources. In fact, 72
percent of the overall water demand is utilized for urban consumption,
whereas 14 percent is utilized by industry, and the remaining 14 percent

Map 14.2: Overview of the river basins in the ACB
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

is used by agriculture. Although non-consumptive demands like
hydroelectric energy production and aquaculture exert considerable local
pressure on the movement of water in the region, these activities do not
constitute an important part of the regional economy.
In parallel to industrial and urban development, the quality of the
region’s water resources and aquatic ecosystems has constantly
degraded. In response to this situation, a network with 360 operational
sampling points has been set up in order to survey the environmental

4 7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

status of all aquatic ecosystems and regional water bodies (rivers, lakes,
reservoirs, transitional waters, coastal waters and groundwater). The data
collected from these points is used to assess the current condition of
all water bodies in accordance with the EU’s Water Framework Directive
(WFD) which entered into force in 2000 (see Box 14.1). In order to
comply with the WFD, the Basque Government carried out a detailed
study exclusively on its internal basins, comprising 122 rivers, 4 lakes,
14 transitional water bodies, 44 aquifers and 4 coastal waters, in an effort
to characterize the freshwater resources and their associated ecosystems
from an environmental and socio-economic perspective.
The Hydraulic Administration of the Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country submitted a detailed study to the EU, in which the economic
aspects of water use and the environmental impact of humans were
analysed for each water body and all protected areas were registered.
The results of these studies have indicated that improving water quality
and curbing the destruction of ecosystems remain challenges for the
region. While the reclamation and restoration of rivers and estuary banks
are, to a degree, feasible and currently underway in the ACB, the

likelihood of their success will depend upon the degree of damage
that has previously occurred. Though such projects may not be able to
completely restore water resources to their prior conditions, they can
nevertheless help to improve their current state. These projects,
combined with an increase in the level of public awareness, new laws
and directives concerning the region’s water resources, have been key
in initiating a trend towards the restoration and better preservation of
fragile ecosystems.

Conclusion
In order to promote the sustainability of water resources while meeting
the water demands of various sectors, IWRM policies are actively being
implemented. Accordingly, the varying water needs of Basque society
are fully met, and the full cost of providing these services is recovered
through the current water management scheme. The central challenge
for the future is to define and successfully implement a series of casespecific and efficient programmes to protect and improve the status of
valuable water resources and the associated ecosystems.

2. The Danube River Basin

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Danube River Basin (DRB) covers a vast area of 801,463 km2, making it the second largest river basin in Europe, after the Volga. It is
also the basin that covers the greatest number of countries in the world, with a total of eighteen states. The DRB lies to the west of the
Black Sea in Central and Southeast Europe (see Map 14.2). It discharges into the Black Sea via the Danube Delta, which lies in Romania and
Ukraine. With an average discharge of about 6,500 m3/sec, the Danube is the Black Sea’s largest tributary.
Due to its large surface and diverse relief, the Danube River Basin has
a varied climate and a multiplicity of habitats. The upper regions in the
west have high precipitation, whereas the eastern regions have lower
precipitation and cold winters. Depending on the region, precipitation
can range from less than 500 mm to over 2,000 mm per year, which
strongly affects surface run off and discharge levels in streams.

In the DRB, there are several freshwater lakes of varying sizes.
The most prominent are the ‘Balaton’ in Hungary (605 km2) and the
‘Neusiedlersee’ (also called Fertö tó), which is shared by Austria and
Hungary (315 km2). Furthermore, the Razim-Sinoe Lake System is
composed of several interlinking large brackish lagoons that are
separated from the sea by a sandbar.

Transboundary and regional aquifers are common in the DRB region.
In some cases, groundwater resources represent as much as 30 percent
of the countries’ total internal renewable water resources. Although
aquifers are the main sources of drinking and industrial water in the
DRB region, there is little information concerning the availability of
groundwater or potential extraction capacity in many countries.

Some countries such as Austria, Hungary, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro and the Slovak Republic are almost completely situated
within the DRB, whereas less than 5 percent of the territories of Albania,
Italy, Macedonia, Poland and Switzerland lie in the basin. More than 26
percent of the overall basin population is Romanian. This is by far the
largest population group in the DRB, followed by populations from
Germany, Hungary, and Serbia and Montenegro.

There are 26 major tributaries of the Danube River, all of which have
their own sub-basins. The Tysa (also called Tisza or Tisa) River Basin is
the largest sub-basin in the DRB (157,186 km2). It is also the Danube’s
longest tributary (966 km). By flow volume, it is the second largest
after the Sava River. The Sava River is the largest Danube tributary by
discharge (average 1,564 m3/s) and the second largest by catchment
area (95,419 km2). The Inn is the third largest by discharge and the
seventh longest Danube tributary.

The International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River
(ICPDR) was established in 1998 to promote and coordinate sustainable
and equitable water management practices, including conservation,
improvement and rational water use. The ICPDR, with thirteen
cooperating states2 and the EU, pursues its mission by making
recommendations for the improvement of water quality, developing
mechanisms for flood and industrial accident control, agreeing on

4 7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

status of all aquatic ecosystems and regional water bodies (rivers, lakes,
reservoirs, transitional waters, coastal waters and groundwater). The data
collected from these points is used to assess the current condition of
all water bodies in accordance with the EU’s Water Framework Directive
(WFD) which entered into force in 2000 (see Box 14.1). In order to
comply with the WFD, the Basque Government carried out a detailed
study exclusively on its internal basins, comprising 122 rivers, 4 lakes,
14 transitional water bodies, 44 aquifers and 4 coastal waters, in an effort
to characterize the freshwater resources and their associated ecosystems
from an environmental and socio-economic perspective.
The Hydraulic Administration of the Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country submitted a detailed study to the EU, in which the economic
aspects of water use and the environmental impact of humans were
analysed for each water body and all protected areas were registered.
The results of these studies have indicated that improving water quality
and curbing the destruction of ecosystems remain challenges for the
region. While the reclamation and restoration of rivers and estuary banks
are, to a degree, feasible and currently underway in the ACB, the

likelihood of their success will depend upon the degree of damage
that has previously occurred. Though such projects may not be able to
completely restore water resources to their prior conditions, they can
nevertheless help to improve their current state. These projects,
combined with an increase in the level of public awareness, new laws
and directives concerning the region’s water resources, have been key
in initiating a trend towards the restoration and better preservation of
fragile ecosystems.

Conclusion
In order to promote the sustainability of water resources while meeting
the water demands of various sectors, IWRM policies are actively being
implemented. Accordingly, the varying water needs of Basque society
are fully met, and the full cost of providing these services is recovered
through the current water management scheme. The central challenge
for the future is to define and successfully implement a series of casespecific and efficient programmes to protect and improve the status of
valuable water resources and the associated ecosystems.

2. The Danube River Basin

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Danube River Basin (DRB) covers a vast area of 801,463 km2, making it the second largest river basin in Europe, after the Volga. It is
also the basin that covers the greatest number of countries in the world, with a total of eighteen states. The DRB lies to the west of the
Black Sea in Central and Southeast Europe (see Map 14.2). It discharges into the Black Sea via the Danube Delta, which lies in Romania and
Ukraine. With an average discharge of about 6,500 m3/sec, the Danube is the Black Sea’s largest tributary.
Due to its large surface and diverse relief, the Danube River Basin has
a varied climate and a multiplicity of habitats. The upper regions in the
west have high precipitation, whereas the eastern regions have lower
precipitation and cold winters. Depending on the region, precipitation
can range from less than 500 mm to over 2,000 mm per year, which
strongly affects surface run off and discharge levels in streams.

In the DRB, there are several freshwater lakes of varying sizes.
The most prominent are the ‘Balaton’ in Hungary (605 km2) and the
‘Neusiedlersee’ (also called Fertö tó), which is shared by Austria and
Hungary (315 km2). Furthermore, the Razim-Sinoe Lake System is
composed of several interlinking large brackish lagoons that are
separated from the sea by a sandbar.

Transboundary and regional aquifers are common in the DRB region.
In some cases, groundwater resources represent as much as 30 percent
of the countries’ total internal renewable water resources. Although
aquifers are the main sources of drinking and industrial water in the
DRB region, there is little information concerning the availability of
groundwater or potential extraction capacity in many countries.

Some countries such as Austria, Hungary, Romania, Serbia and
Montenegro and the Slovak Republic are almost completely situated
within the DRB, whereas less than 5 percent of the territories of Albania,
Italy, Macedonia, Poland and Switzerland lie in the basin. More than 26
percent of the overall basin population is Romanian. This is by far the
largest population group in the DRB, followed by populations from
Germany, Hungary, and Serbia and Montenegro.

There are 26 major tributaries of the Danube River, all of which have
their own sub-basins. The Tysa (also called Tisza or Tisa) River Basin is
the largest sub-basin in the DRB (157,186 km2). It is also the Danube’s
longest tributary (966 km). By flow volume, it is the second largest
after the Sava River. The Sava River is the largest Danube tributary by
discharge (average 1,564 m3/s) and the second largest by catchment
area (95,419 km2). The Inn is the third largest by discharge and the
seventh longest Danube tributary.

The International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River
(ICPDR) was established in 1998 to promote and coordinate sustainable
and equitable water management practices, including conservation,
improvement and rational water use. The ICPDR, with thirteen
cooperating states2 and the EU, pursues its mission by making
recommendations for the improvement of water quality, developing
mechanisms for flood and industrial accident control, agreeing on

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 7 5

Map 14.3: Overview of the Danube
River Basin
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment
Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

standards for emissions and by ensuring that these measures are
reflected in the Contracting Parties’ national legislations and applied in
their policies (see Box 14.2).

Ecosystems and transportation
Floodplain forests, marshlands, deltas, floodplain corridors, lakeshores
and other wetlands form the basis of the rich biodiversity in the DRB.
In fact, the Danube River Basin extends into five of the eight
biogeographical regions of Europe, each with its own particular
characteristics. However, in those regions, industrialization, population
growth and agriculture have had a negative impact on the size and
biodiversity of wetlands.
Regulation works for navigation in the Upper Danube region started as
early as the nineteenth century. Navigation is now possible in the Danube
River itself and in some tributaries in the lower portions of the basin.
In order to make the river navigable, the meanders were cut off in several
places, the main channel was straightened and lateral dams were built to
narrow the river’s width. Consequently, in some parts of the river, the
length of the watercourse was shortened considerably. Additional artificial
waterways were also built along the Danube River for transport purposes.
These include the Main-Danube Canal in Germany, which provides a link to
the Rhine and the North Sea, the Danube-Tysa-Danube Canal System in
Serbia and Montenegro, and the Danube-Black Sea Canal in Romania. The
Danube itself is now regulated along more than 80 percent of its length.
The canals, in some areas, also serve as flood protection measures while
providing recreational areas and tourist attractions.
The hydraulic works for navigation improvement have had a major impact
on natural floodplains and their ecosystems. In many places along the
2. The cooperating states are Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Germany, Hungary, Moldova, Romania, Serbia and Montenegro, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia and Ukraine.
3. To learn more about this please refer to the ICPDR website: www.icpdr.org/

river, the floodplains and meanders were cut off from the river system.
As a result, 80 percent of the historical floodplain on the large rivers of
the Danube River Basin has been lost during the last 150 years. Some of
the remaining areas have either received protection status under different
national or European legislation or international conventions (such as the
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands) while other areas remain vulnerable
(e.g. the Middle and Lower Drava-Mura wetlands in Croatia, Hungary
and Slovenia). Large dikes and disconnected meanders also suppressed
the exchange of surface and groundwater, which reduced the recharge
of groundwater utilized for the drinking supply.
Given the ecological and hydrological importance of wetlands (preserving
a diversity of species, recharging groundwater aquifers, flood buffering,
etc.), the protected areas within the DRB are being compiled into an
inventory. This inventory will help to provide crucial input for the
preparation of the DRB Management Plan (see Box 14.2). The timetable
for completion of the inventory is based on the European Commission’s
progress in the establishment of ‘Natura 2000’, which will represent an
authoritative network of protected sites in the European Community with
the highest value for natural habitats and rare, endangered or vulnerable
plant and animal species.

Managing pollution and floods
Six EU Member States (Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and
the Slovak Republic) and three accession countries (Bulgaria, Croatia and
Romania) are working towards implementing WFD requirements in the
DRB. Parallel efforts are also underway in the DRB, within the framework
of the ICPDR, to record all the significant point sources of pollution
(municipal, industrial and agro-industrial) and specific discharges. The
ICPDR has prepared inventories for point source emissions for the years
2000 and 2002, which is becoming more complete as states continue to
provide more detailed information.3 In addition, chemical and biological
variables are measured in thirteen ICPDR member countries at seventynine monitoring stations on the Danube and its major tributaries to

4 7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 14.2: THE DANUBE RIVER BASIN MANAGEMENT PLAN: CONVERGING WITH EU-WFD

The International Commission for the Protection

achieve a single basin-wide coordinated Danube

of the Danube River (ICPDR) serves as the

River Basin Management Plan. To this end, each

platform for coordinating the development

country is in the process of preparing national

of the Danube River Basin Management Plan,

reports and ‘roof reports’, which give an

which is to be implemented by 2009. Preparation

overview of WFD issues such as the pressures on

of basin management plans by this date is

the Danube River Basin (DRB) main surface and

compulsory for all European Union (EU) countries

groundwater resources and related impacts

as per the requirements of Water Framework

exerted on the environment. The ‘roof reports’

Directive (WFD).

will be the basis for the preparation of the
Danube River Basin Management Plan.

In the ICPDR, all Contracting Parties support the
implementation of the WFD in their territories

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

and cooperate in the framework of the ICPDR to

basin-wide coordinated management plan.
Albania, The FYR of Macedonia, Poland and
Switzerland have offered their support. On the
operational level, it is the obligation of the
Contracting Parties to ensure the necessary
coordination with their DRB neighbours.

Source: Modified from Danube Basin Analysis (WFD Roof
Report, 2004). For further examples of the implementation
of the WFD, see the case studies for France and Lake
Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe.

The ICPDR has also requested that other DRB
countries cooperate in order to achieve a

analyse the impact of organic pollution. In fact, based on the results of
the biological impact assessment, the Danube is classified as ‘moderately
polluted’ to ‘critically polluted’ in the Saprobic system – a method used to
detect biodegradable organic pollution by measuring presence or absence
of certain indicator species in water.4 The major cause of organic pollution
is insufficient urban wastewater treatment, due to a lack of wastewater
treatment plants. The construction of wastewater treatment plants is
therefore expected to be included as a priority action within the programme
of the ICPDR’s Basin Management Plan by the end of 2009 (see Box 14.2).

Many large floods have occurred in the DRB, causing numerous human
casualties and material damage. While floods are naturally occurring
events of the water cycle, human impacts increase the risk of flooding
through inappropriate land-use in high-risk areas and by interfering with
natural processes. The extreme and devastating floods along the Morava
and Odra rivers in 1997, the Tysa River between 1998 and 2001 and the
Elbe and Danube rivers in 2002 have clearly demonstrated the destructive
and unpredictable nature of floods and the need for careful planning for
development projects in flood-sensitive areas.

In addition to biological pollutants, pollution from other hazardous
substances are also significant in the DRB. Unfortunately, other than
the data available for heavy metals and pesticides, the full extent of
contamination by hazardous substances cannot be evaluated to date.
Cadmium, lead and pp’-DDT (a derivative of DDT) levels are substantially
higher than current ICPDR standards. The risk of industrial accidents is
also high in several parts of the DRB. In order to minimize the occurrence
of such incidents, the Accident Emergency Warning System (AEWS) was
put into place in 1997. Still, the cyanide accident in the Tysa River
Basin in January 2000 caused massive harm to the environment and had
a substantial impact on the economy of the entire region. This clearly
demonstrated the need for better preparedness against such events.

Climatic variations are expected to further increase the risk of floodrelated damages. As a response, in 2004, ICPDR adopted the long-term
Action Programme for Sustainable Flood Prevention in the Danube River
Basin. This initiative is based on the sustainable flood protection
programmes developed in the various Danube countries and utilizes
existing networking structures. The most important point of the action
programme is that it deviates from the common practice of mainly taking
defensive action against water-related hazards and recognizes floods as a
natural part of the hydrologic cycle. It emphasizes the need to learn how
to live with floods and manage risk through a basin approach, with
governments, municipalities and stakeholder participation. Conserving
and restoring water-related ecosystems is also given high priority within
the terms of the action programme, as wetlands play an important role
by buffering and reducing the intensity of floods. The action programme
primarily refers to UNECE Guidelines on Sustainable Flood Prevention and
adopts EU Best Practices on Flood Prevention, Protection and Mitigation.

Agricultural activities also exert pressure on water resources. Although
some DRB states are highly industrialized, other countries like Bulgaria,
Croatia and Romania rely on agricultural activities which generate around
10 percent of their GDPs. This share is between 1 and 3.7 percent in the
remaining countries of the basin. Overall 47.4 percent of land resources
in the DRB is used for agriculture.

4. To find out more about Saprobic Indices in Water Quality Assessments see:
www.who.int/docstore/water_sanitation_health/wqassess/ch10.htm

Energy in DRB countries
In DRB countries, various technologies are used for energy production.
Austria relies on hydropower to generate almost two-thirds of its overall
energy production. On the other hand, some other basin countries rely
heavily on conventional thermal power, such as the Croatia (67 percent),
Czech Republic (53 percent), Hungary (57 percent), Romania (61 percent)

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 7 7

and Serbia and Montenegro (67 percent), whereas Bulgaria and the
Slovak Republic have mostly invested in nuclear power (over 50 percent).

Conclusion
The main problem in the DRB is the water quality rather than quantity.
Nine countries (six EU members and three concession countries) are at
different stages of implementation of the WFD. The other contracting
parties of the ICPDR are also working towards the common goal of

improving the quality of water resources. However, marked differences in
economy, sociology and topography complicate the tasks of the states.
For this reason, neither WFD nor ICPDR goals are yet to be implemented
uniformly throughout the region, and there is still a substantial amount
of work to be done at the national level. However, members of ICPDR
consider the sustainable utilization of water resources as the overriding
priority and work together to this end.

3. Ethiopia
Ethiopia is located in East Africa and constitutes a major portion of the Horn of Africa. Its terrain consists mostly of a huge central plateau
and surrounding lowland plains, producing three climatic zones: tropical in the south and southwest, cold to temperate in the highlands and
arid to semi-arid in the northeastern and southeastern lowlands. As a result, the amount of rainfall and surface run off is highly variable and
depends on location and altitude. In fact, four basins located on the western part of the country contribute 83 percent of the national surface
water potential, while other areas produce very low surface runoff.
Ethiopia has 71 million inhabitants, half of which live at around
2,200 metres above mean sea level (m.a.s.l), in the areas with cooler
temperatures, higher rainfall and fewer instances of malaria. Another 40
percent lives between 1,400 and 2,200 m.a.s.l. The remaining population
lives at altitudes below 1,400 m.a.s.l. Thus, Ethiopia’s population is also
unevenly distributed, with nearly 80 percent of the 71 million inhabitants
living in only 37 percent of the total area of the country.

groundwater can be developed for utilization. Currently less than 5 percent
of surface water potential is used for consumptive purposes.

Challenges to life and well-being
Ethiopia is largely dependent on the agricultural sector, which provides
86 percent of the country’s employment and 57 percent of its GDP.
Rainfed crop cultivation is the principal activity and is practised over
an area of 27.9 million hectares (ha), or approximately 23 percent of

Ethiopia has seven transboundary basins that carry over 95 percent of
annual runoff. However, there is no comprehensive agreement binding
riparian states. The riparian countries of one of these basins, the Nile
Basin, taking into consideration the challenges of meeting their growing
water needs in a sustainable manner, have launched the Nile Basin
Initiative (NBI) in 1999. While basin countries are currently engaged in
negotiations, it is hoped that the NBI will provide the basis for a
permanent legal and institutional framework.
With a per capita gross national product (GNP) of US $100 in 1994,
Ethiopia ranks as one of the poorest countries in the world. In 1994,
the per capita GNP income in Ethiopia was less than half of those in
sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, where per capita GNP was approximately
US $259. Overall, it is estimated that nearly 52 percent of the population
is below the national poverty line,5 with poverty in urban and rural areas
estimated at 58 percent and 48 percent respectively.

Water resources
Ethiopia has nine major rivers and twelve big lakes. Lake Tana, for example,
in the north is the source of the Blue Nile. However, apart from the big
rivers and major tributaries, there is hardly any perennial flow in areas
below 1,500 m. While the country’s annual renewable freshwater potential
is 122 billion m3, only 3 percent of this amount remains in the country. It is
estimated that 54.4 billion m3 of surface runoff and 2.6 billion m3 of

Map 14.4: Overview of the river basins in Ethiopia
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

4 7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

potentially arable land. Frequent and severe droughts cause serious
decreases in the incomes of rural inhabitants who tend to rely heavily on
agriculture. While estimates have shown that up to 3.7 million ha can be
irrigated, a mere 300,000 ha of irrigation has been developed. To make
matters worse, projected large- and medium-scale irrigation schemes will
likely do little to secure the food supply for the rapidly growing population.
Wetlands in Ehiopia are very valuable areas for rural communities. They
contribute directly to food security by providing vegetables in the early
rainy season when the supply of food from the upland fields is running
out for many families. Moreover, many rural inhabitants obtain drinking
water from the springs around the wetlands. However, wetlands are being
degraded due to human-related activities, such as draining for agriculture,
cattle grazing, industrial pollution and unsustainable utilization of
resources. Although there are some policies that specifically address
wetlands, there is, at the national level, an overall lack of wetland policy.
Ethiopia’s urban population is close to 10 million people, 25 percent of
whom are located in Addis Ababa. Half of the urban population lives in
towns smaller than 30,000 inhabitants. Although Ethiopia is rural-centred
(85 percent of the population lives in rural areas), the rate of urban
growth is increasing at a yearly average rate of 5 percent, which is much
higher than the average national growth rate of 2.9 percent per year.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The status of water and sanitation infrastructure is very poor in Ethiopia:
only 10 percent of Ethiopians have access to proper sanitation facilities
and 31 percent to safe water. Service coverage is considerably higher
in urban areas than in rural areas (74.4 percent and 23.1 percent
respectively). Furthermore, almost 25 percent of water installations in
rural areas are not functional at any given time. Central Statistic Authority
(CSA) results from 1998 showed that 63.8 percent of people living in
rural areas had to fetch water from a source within a distance of 1 km.
The situation gets worse during dry periods, as water carriers have to
walk longer distances for even smaller quantities of lower quality water.
Accordingly, the incidences of diseases related to unsafe water supply
and inadequate sanitation are very high. High population growth rates,
low education levels and high rates of illiteracy have also contributed to
the burden of ill health.
The major causes of morbidity among patients seeking treatment in health
facilities include respiratory infections, malaria, skin infections, diarrhoeal
diseases and intestinal parasitic infections. About three-quarters of
Ethiopia is known to be a breeding ground for mosquitoes, the vector
of malaria. Malaria is especially endemic in hot lowlands, which prompts
many Ethiopians to live in the highlands. Diarrhoea, the most prevalent
water-related disease, accounts for 46 percent of the under-five child

5. National poverty line is deemed appropriate for a country by its authorities. For this reason,
the national poverty line should not be used for comparison between other countries as it
varies significantly (Human Development Report, 2005).

mortality rate. The five illnesses mentioned above account for over 63
percent of all reported cases of child morbidity. Women and girls are
particularly vulnerable to water-borne and water-related diseases as
they more frequently come into contact with contaminated water
(they are usually responsible for fetching water for the family).
The main source of energy production in Ethiopia (about 93 percent) is
biomass (fuel wood, coal, agricultural residues, animal wastes, etc.), which
leads to rapid forest depletion. The contribution of hydropower to annual
energy production is approximately 1 percent. It is estimated that 30,000
MW of hydropower can be generated using available water resources.
However, merely 670 MW of hydropower potential is currently developed.
Household consumption accounts for 87.5 percent of total energy
consumption, while industry accounts for 5 percent. As Ethiopia’s economy
depends almost entirely on subsistence agriculture, the need for electricity
has been quite low. However, this situation is changing, as urbanization and
industrialization increase energy demands. The Ethiopian Electric Power
Corporation aims to set up a variety of hydroelectric, oil and gas resource
development schemes in order to improve access to electricity from 15
percent to 20 percent by 2010.

The effects of water-related natural disasters
As most of the rivers in Ethiopia flow in deep gorges, floods have not traditionally
been a common phenomenon. However, due to massive deforestation and loss in
surface vegetation, flooding now annually occurs in some areas, such as in the
banks of the Blue Nile River and in the vast plains of the Baro Akobo Basin in
the country’s southwestern region. Although sometimes associated with
economic and social damages, floods provide much needed water to ensure
the fertility of grazelands, making them anticipated events, especially for
nomads, whose incomes are dependant on animal husbandry.
Drought is a frequent natural disaster in Ethiopia. Recent observations
have shown that the frequency of droughts have increased over the last
few decades. There have been about thirty major drought episodes over
the past nine centuries. Of these drought episodes, thirteen were very
severe at the national level. Table 14.1 shows the number of people
affected by droughts and the population which required basic food
assistance between 1990 and 2004.
The contingency plans for water-related natural disasters are prepared
by the Disaster Prevention and Preparedness Commission (DPPC), which
brings together all concerned stakeholders to draft a plan of action to
be implemented by all relevant organizations.

Water policy implementation
The Federal Water Resources Management Policy, issued in 1999, elaborates
on the water supply and sanitation, irrigation and hydropower sectors.
It promotes the sustainable development of water resources for equitable
social and economic benefits through public participation and IWRM. In order
to implement the requirements set forth in the policy, various legal and

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 7 9

Table 14.1: Number of people affected by recent
droughts
Year
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

Population
affected
3,429,900
1,850,000
5,228,530
1,644,040
889,000
3,994,000
3,153,000
1,932,000
5,820,415
2,157,080
7,732,335
6,242,300
5,181,700
14,490,318
9,369,702

Food assistance requirements
(number of people)
374,400
838,974
1,288,737
739,280
577,586
492,460
253,118
199,846
572,834
1,138,994
836,800
639,246
557,204
1,461,679
964,690

institutional capacity-building efforts are currently underway. For example,
the fifteen-year Water Sector Development Programme (WSDP) was put into
effect in 2002, and the Water Resources Management Proclamation was
issued the same year to provide legal ground for the implementation of the
Water Policy. The Water Sector Development Programme is composed of five
programmes and sets the targets on water supply and sewerage, irrigation

and drainage, hydropower development, general water resources programme
and institutions/capacity-building. Furthermore, vocational and technical
training centres, operational since 2003, have been established to train
technicians on irrigation development schemes and water supply and
sanitation services. In addition, the government has taken the initiative to
establish basin institutions. For this purpose, with the financial and technical
aid of international donors, an institutional study has been initiated for the
Blue Nile (Abbay) Basin as a pilot project. Upon the successful completion
of this project, the establishment of similar institutions in other basins are
foreseen. However, awareness-raising activities to disseminate existing plans
and policies at various levels (public and national institutions) are lacking.
Furthermore, due to the absence of a functioning monitoring and evaluation
system, the rate of implementation and the effectiveness of policies have
not yet been assessed.

Conclusion
most of the Ehiopians do not have access to safe water and sanitation.
The Water Sector Development Programme (WSDP) prepared for 2002-2016
aims to improve the existing situation; however, the investment required for
the implementation of this programme cannot be financed by national funds
alone. Attracting international donors will therefore likely remain a priority in
order to alleviate the heavy burden of disease, poverty and hunger that the
country currently faces.

◆

4. France
◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

There are six major river basins in France: the Adour-Garonne, the ArtoisPicardy, the Loire-Britanny, the Rhine-Meuse, the Rhone-Mediterranean
and the Seine-Normandy. These basins are managed by separate basin
agencies that were established by the 1964 Water Law and further
reinforced by the 1992 Water Act.

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Excluding its overseas territories, over 60 million people live in
France, within a surface area of 551,695 km2.

◆
◆

◆

◆
MEDITERRANEAN SEA

Map 14.5: Overview of the river basins in France
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

◆

◆
SPAIN

France’s six major river basins have different climatic, hydrological and
socio-economic characteristics. Consequently, six basin agencies have
been set up to address the differing challenges of each basin. The
specific basin challenges are briefly summarized below.

◆
◆

◆

◆

The WFD is similar to the French institutional system in that it requires
the implementation of IWRM at the basin level. The most recent French
water law (passed in 2003) takes the WFD into account, calling on all EU
Member States to achieve ‘good status’ for all of their water bodies by
2015 (see Box 14.1 on the WFD and the case studies for the Danube
River Basin and the Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Basin for further
information on the implementation of the WFD).

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

Loire-Britany

4 8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

The Adour-Garonne Basin
The Adour-Garonne Basin covers 116,000 km2, or 21 percent of France.
In this basin, 35,000 farmers irrigate 645,000 ha of land, approximately
40 percent of the total irrigated surface area in France. Although there is
a dense network of tributaries, there are no major rivers. Low rainfall in the
summers results in severe low-water levels from the end of spring. Normally,
irrigation water accounts for 35 percent of the water abstracted throughout
the year; however, this ratio increases to 80 percent during low-water-level
periods. In order to cope with the adverse affects of such conditions,
planning tools like strict low-water target flow (DOE, Débit Objectif d’Etiage)
and low-water management scheme (PGE, Plans de Gestion d’Etiage) were
put into practice. DOEs are the fixed flow rates at strategic points of the
basin during low water periods. PGEs involve all relevant stakeholders and
set the rules concerning how to allocate limited water resources at the
basin scale and specifically in water deficit areas. Those tools have had
overall positive results, such as the establishment of better dialogue among
stakeholders and reduced frequency of low water crises. Furthermore, the
basin administration constantly provides sound advice for promoting rational
water use and equipment for monitoring water abstraction. However,
irrigation charges are still highly subsidized, and as a result, the revenues
collected for irrigation water are still far from adequate for meeting the real
cost of providing services (€3.83 million collected in 2002 versus a full cost
of €107 million) (see Chapters 7 and 3).

The Artois-Picardy Basin
The Artois-Picardy Basin covers 3.6 percent of the national territory.
As an area previously dominated by the coal and steel industries, both
surface water and groundwater resources have been highly contaminated
by various hydrocarbons and toxic metal salts. Furthermore, the abundant
water resources of the region were previously used by factories in an
unsustainable fashion, which resulted in a considerable lowering of
the water table. In order to preserve water resources, groundwater
abstraction and pollution charges were implemented and have been
kept consistently high since the 1970s. As a result, pollution has been
considerably reduced. Discharges of organic matter went down from
440 to 74 tons a day. Furthermore, underground water abstraction has
decreased from 300 million tons in 1971 to 100 million tons in 2003.
Undoubtedly, the adoption of technical solutions, such as wastewater
treatment plants, recycling of water and utilization of advanced
manufacturing processes, to reduce or in some cases omit water usage
has played an important role in reducing the damage caused to the
basin’s water resources (see Chapter 8).

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Loire-Brittany Basin
The Loire-Brittany Basin is the biggest basin in France, covering 28
percent of the country: 58 percent of the total number of farms and 65
percent of the livestock production in France is located in this basin. The
surface area utilized for agricultural purposes covers 64 percent (100,000
km2) of the basin and produces 50 percent of national cereal production.
Following the end of Second World War, policies were adopted towards

ensuring food for all and creating jobs. Although this resulted in a boost
in the productivity of livestock-raising and cereal production, it resulted
in excessive nitrate pollution in surface and underground waters. After
the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 1992, appropriate
measures were taken, such as agro-environmental measures and a
nitrogen absorption programme at the European level, to reduce the
impact of agricultural activities on water quality. In addition, the farm
pollution management programme (PMPOA, Programme de Maîtrise
des Pollutions d’Origine Agricole) was introduced at the national level
to monitor pesticides and fertilizer pollution, which provides financial
incentives through subsidies for the farmers to upgrade their livestock
effluent management. Despite positive signs emerging in some subbasins concerning nitrate and pesticide content, the overall progress
on water quality remains modest thus far. However, given that most
developments have been undertaken recently and agro-environmental
policy is based on voluntary participation, it will take some time to
observe the real outcomes.

The Rhine-Meuse Basin
The Rhine-Meuse is a transboundary basin that encompasses nine countries:
Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, the
Netherlands and Switzerland. The Rhine River is 1,320 km long and the size
of its catchment area is 186,765 km2. The biggest part of the basin lies in
Germany (106,000 km2), followed by Switzerland (28,000 km2), France
(23,000 km2) and the Netherlands (22,700 km2). The total population of
the catchment area is 78 million inhabitants, 1.7 million of which live in
France. In order to create a transboundary cooperation forum among the
Rhine Basin countries, the International Commission for the Protection of
the Rhine (ICPR) was established in 1950. The ICPR was given the task of
determining pollution levels and adopting appropriate measures for the
protection of the Rhine. In 1986, an industrial accident in Basel, Switzerland
caused approximately 20 tons of highly toxic pesticides to flow into the
Rhine. This has had a devastating impact on the ecosystem. Following
this incident, the Rhine Action Plan (RAP) was put into effect in 1987 and
completed in 2000. Within the RAP framework, a warning network with six
international warning centres has been set up to notify downstream states
and riverside inhabitants in case of accidents. Based on the achievements
of the RAP, the Rhine 2020 Programme on Sustainable Development of
the Rhine was initiated in 2001. In addition, an action plan on flood defence
was adopted in 1998. Combined, they focus on flood protection, prevention
and improving water quality through waste discharge control, industrial
accident prevention and the ecological restoration of the Rhine. The
adoption of the WFD is likely to have a positive effect on the quality of
the Rhine River, as by 2015 all the rivers in EU states will be required to
reach ‘good water’ status (see Chapter 11 and Box 14.1).

The Rhone-Mediterranean Basin
The Rhone-Mediterranean Basin covers 25 percent of the surface area of
France. The basin is characterized by a dense network of rivers of varying
length, 6,500 of which are longer than 2 km. The Rhone River, the

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 8 1

biggest river in the basin, is shared with Switzerland. In order to meet
the energy requirements of developing industry, the construction of
hydroelectric power plants (HEPP) was started in 1946, and by 1986,
eighteen HEPPs were installed on the Rhone River. Overall, the dams
installed in this basin generate 64 percent of the national hydroelectric
production and 8 percent of the total national energy production. Today,
hydropower ranks as the second biggest (after nuclear) source of energy
production in France. The dams built for energy production also serve
different purposes, such as flow regulation and water supply for drinking,
irrigation, navigation and recreational activities. However, the dams divert
more than 80 percent of the river flow and so have a direct impact on
the aquatic environment by preventing fish migration and altering the
natural flow regime. These problems are being addressed by specific
action plans that aim to increase water flow in the bypassed sections of
the river. Consequently, a reduction of eutrophication and an increase of
flora and fauna diversity has occurred. However, the measures taken to
restore the free movement of fish have not been successful, due to a
lack of monitoring and enforcement.

The Seine-Normandy River Basin
The Seine-Normandy River Basin accommodates 17.5 million people,
which corresponds to 30 percent of the overall population of France.

The capital city, Paris, and other big urban settlements such as Rouen,
Caen, Le Havre, Reims and Troyes, are also located in this basin. Of the
1.5 billion m3 water used in the basin, 40 percent comes from surface
waters and 60 percent from groundwater resources. The main problem in
the basin remains improving water quality under the strain of increasing
pollutant concentrations, particularly nitrates and pesticides. Given this
problem, it is anticipated that despite the current action plans and high
capacity wastewater treatment plants, meeting the targets required by
the WFD will not be possible for many years to come (see WWDR1
case study).

Conclusion
France’s great productivity in agricultural and industrial products has
caused complex environmental problems, stemming from the pollution
of surface and groundwater resources by agricultural, domestic and
industrial wastes. Water legislation reform of 1992 laid out the principles
for a balanced management of water resources with the aim of keeping
the needs of humans and the environment in balance. Furthermore, the
WFD has already been integrated into French law. However, finding a
compromise between the needs of ecosystems and other water uses
continues to be a real challenge for the six basin agencies.

5. Japan
Located off the East Asian coast in the North Pacific Ocean, Japan is comprised of a chain of 6,852 islands. The four largest islands –
Hokkaido, Kyushu, Honshu and Shikoku – make up 98 percent of Japan’s total land area of 377,899 km2 (see WWDR1 case study for a
discussion of the water challenges of the Greater Tokyo region).
Japan receives abundant precipitation, due to regular monsoons.
Nevertheless, water shortages are frequent, due to the spatial and
temporal variation of rainfall, marked topographic differences, small river
catchments and sudden drops in altitude causing short and swift rivers.
This situation is further aggravated by severe droughts. The amount of
available water resources per capita is 3,300 m3/year.
Total annual water use is approximately 85.2 billion m3, 88 percent of
which is obtained from rivers. The agriculture sector makes up more
than 65 percent of annual water abstraction, followed by domestic
and industrial uses (20 and 15 percent respectively).

Ensuring drinking water supply and access to sanitation
Based on the 1961 Water Resources Development Promotion Law,
comprehensive water resources development (including infrastructure like
water supply reservoirs) and efficient use of water resources have been
advanced in order to ensure a stable supply of water resources over a
wide area to respond to the rapid development of industry and increase
in urban population. Nearly 100 percent of the population in Japan is
connected to safe drinking water supplies. The average per capita daily

water consumption of 320 litres (L) has remained unchanged since the
1990s. The total population connected to public sewerage was estimated
to be about 68 percent in 2004, whereas the rate in towns and villages
with population less than 50,000 is only 36 percent. The government’s
target for 2007 is to expand the coverage of the public sewer system
to 72 percent and increase the proportion of population served with
advanced wastewater treatment from 13 to 17 percent. Thanks to the
adoption of proper waste management techniques, water-borne diseases
have been drastically decreased.

Safeguarding ecosystems
Japan’s varied landscape and climate provide a rich but fragile natural
environment for thousands of different plant and animal species, which
has been deteriorated by industrialization and urbanization. In order to
prevent further degradation of freshwater sources and the surrounding
environment, the government strictly regulates effluent from the industrial
and public sectors and imposes regulations on agricultural chemicals.
Accordingly, the environmental quality parameters (e.g. biological and
chemical oxygen demands) of rivers, lakes and reservoirs are improving.

4 8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

implementation of this strategy is the National Census on River
Environment, which aims to periodically survey the status of rivers
and dam reservoirs from an environmental perspective.

◆

◆

N

◆

◆

◆

◆

✱

◆
◆

CHINA

✱✱

◆
◆

✱

✱

▲

Water for flooded rice paddy fields and fish culture comprises most
of Japan’s agricultural water use. For the last two decades, agricultural
surface area has been decreasing. However, due to increasing
requirements for higher crop productivity and measures on water quality,
the amount of water utilized for irrigation has not changed significantly.
Due to its limited amount of cultivatable surface area, Japan imports
many products, especially grains, crops and meat.

✱✱

◆

◆

✱
✱

Water for agriculture, industry and energy

✱

✱

Starting in the 1960s, a period of high economic growth, the water
requirement of Japanese industry increased. The industrial water
consumption has been stabilized since 1975 in response to the
regulations on drainage and efficient water use. Currently, with an
average water-recycling rate of around 79 percent, industry is the
sector that consumes the least amount of water in Japan.
The share of hydropower energy accounts for about 9.5 percent of the
total electrical energy generated. As of 2004, there were over 1,800
hydropower plants across the country, generating about 47 billion watts,
or 17 percent of the maximum generating capacity of all electric power
plants in Japan.

Map 14.6: Overview of the river basins in Japan
This map shows major river basins in each nine regions in Japan including Greater
Tokyo. The major hydroelectric power plants on the map are those whose power
generation is ranked in the top ten in Japan.
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Law was fully put into
force in 1999. The purpose of this law is to ensure that environmental
considerations are taken into account when implementing large-scale
projects by conducting EIAs and reflecting on the results in decisionmaking. For this purpose, the EIA Law sets forth the procedure and
defines the responsibilities of government regarding the EIA.
The River Law, which was originally enacted in 1896 for flood control,
was comprehensively amended in 1964 and 1997. The latest amendment
promotes the establishment of a comprehensive river administration
system for flood control, water use and environmental conservation,
which has resulted in an increase in the number of river restoration
programmes throughout the country. It has also put more emphasis
on public involvement in the planning process. In 2003, the Promotion
of the Nature Restoration Act came into force, and the New Biodiversity
National Strategy was put into place by the government as a
comprehensive and systematic plan to protect natural biodiversity and
restoration of the fluvial environment and ecosystems. A practical

Coping with water-related disasters
Given Japan’s unstable geology, mountainous topography and small
amount of inhabitable land, there have been significant variations in
land-use and population concentrations over the centuries. Currently,
50 percent of the nation’s total population and 75 percent of its total
physical assets are concentrated on the alluvial plains, which account
for only 10 percent of Japan’s total land area. The natural and social
constraints exacerbated flood damage and prompted the creation of a
national programme for comprehensive flood disaster control measures.
The programme promotes the holistic integration of structural measures
such as river improvement schemes (e.g. levees, channel improvement,
dredging, floodway construction, etc.) and non-structural measures,
such as controlling basin land development, the creation of a warning
system, the establishment of a community flood fighting corps and the
dissemination of flood hazard maps. Yet despite these measures, the
flooding of a number of small rivers in 2004 caused a reported 275
deaths and about US$ 17 billion in damage. As a response, the
Flood Fighting Act was revised in 2005 to expand the scope of flood
forecasting activities to include smaller rivers in order to promote a more
responsive and timely emergency evacuation. The amended act also aims
to enhance and adopt extensive flood information and communication
systems for an additional set of rivers, while improving already existing
flood forecast systems to disseminate information necessary for ensuring
a smooth evacuation operation.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 8 3

BOX 14.3: ENSURING THE KNOWLEDGE BASE
The Law for Enhancing Motivation on

education are National Water Day on August 1,

scientific research and development but also

Environmental Conservation and Promoting

the Annual Forum on the Water Environment and

actively make policy recommendations for better

Environmental Education was established in July

the Disaster Prevention Poster Competition,

management. The National Institute for Land

2003 and enforced in October 2004 to promote

among other local activities.

and Infrastructure Management (NILIM) and
the Public Works Research Institute (PWRI) in

environmental education in schools and
community workplaces and enhance public

In addition to universities, there are several

Tsukuba City are the leading water-related

awareness and education about the different

high-level research institutes and centres that

research institutes in the country, the latter of

issues of environmental protection and the

focus on issues concerning water resources,

which hosts the International Centre for Water

conservation of natural water bodies. Some of

environmental protection and disaster

Hazard and Risk Management (ICHARM) under

the programmes and campaigns aimed at public

prevention. These institutions not only pursue

the auspices of UNESCO.

The Sediment-Related Disaster Prevention Law was enacted in 2000 with
the aim of implementing comprehensive non-structural measures that
would protect people from sediment-related disasters. Measures included
raising public awareness on high-risk areas prone to sediment-related
disaster, the development of a warning and evacuation system, the
restriction of new land development for housing and other purposes and
the promotion of relocation for some existing houses. After the revision
of the Law in 2005, new regulations to prevent housing development in
hazardous areas were introduced and the preparation and dissemination
of hazard maps for smooth evacuation mechanisms made obligatory.
The development of advanced forecasting and warning systems in
Japan is backed by the dense network of rain gauges and water-level
telemeters. These observation points, in combination with twenty-six
radar systems, provide high precision information concerning the spatial
and temporal distribution of rainfall (see Chapter 10).

Conclusion
Risk reduction and the mitigation of water-related disasters is
considered as one of Japan’s main challenges. Accordingly, it has revised
and amended disaster-related legislation. To ensure the sustainability of
water resources, comprehensive water resource development plans have
been put into action and the efficient use of water resources have
been promoted in all sectors. In the sanitation sector, the government is
attempting to expand the coverage of the public sewer system. In order
to combat environmental degradation caused by human activities new
legislation to regulate the use and discharge of effluent has been
brought into action. Water-related decisions and policies aim to increase
public prosperity by integrating the needs of modern life into a wellfunctioning healthy ecosystem. In the light of these facts, the
Government of Japan is continuously striving to overcome current
and future water challenges.

6. Kenya
Kenya is a water-scarce country. Located in East Africa, Kenya sits on the coast of the Indian Ocean, which serves as an important outlet.
Surface waters cover only 2 percent of Kenya’s total surface area. The climate varies from tropical along the coast of the Indian Ocean to arid in
the interior, and two-thirds of the country is covered by semi-desert or desert land. As a result, only about 160,000 km2 of land, most of which
is situated in the wetter southwest area, is suitable for the current population of approximately 33 million. Per capita available water is about
650 m3/year. Future projections show that by the year 2020, per capita water availability will drop to 359 m3 as a result of population growth.
The uneven distribution of rainfall in addition to temporal and spatial
variations often lead to recurring droughts in the north and east and
flooding during rainy seasons. More than 50 percent of annual water
abstraction is used for domestic purposes and livestock production, and
the remainder is used for irrigated agriculture. The demand management
strategies are lacking, and water resources allocation decisions related to
surface and groundwater abstractions are made without adequate data. It
is estimated that more than 50 percent of water abstractions are illegal.
Water metering systems are used in few projects; as a result, revenue

collection is very low and corresponds to just 55 percent of the total
operation and maintenance costs.

Major challenges: Poverty, access to safe water and
sanitation, food and energy
Due to a steady decline in economic performance during the last two
decades, the level of poverty in Kenya is steadily increasing, especially in
semi-arid and arid areas. The welfare monitoring survey indicated that
between 1994 and 1997 the poverty level rose from 47 to 53 percent in

4 8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

rural areas and from 29 to 49 percent in urban areas. As of 2005,
approximately 42 percent of the population is below the national poverty
line (UNDP, 2005). The poverty line for urban settlements is about US
$35 per adult per month and US $16 for rural settlements.
In order to alleviate poverty levels, the Kenyan Government proposed the
Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth and Employment Creation (ERS),
which charts the country’s economic course from 2003 to 2007 and
asserts that past institutional arrangements were simply insufficient to
win the battle against poverty. The ERS promotes initiatives that would
facilitate the achievement of MDGs, recognizes water as a pivotal
element in poverty reduction and emphasizes the importance of providing
services to the poor while ensuring adequate water for competing
demands. It suggests undertaking comprehensive institutional reforms to
facilitate ‘pro-poverty water and sanitation programmes’. In this context,
Kenya’s poverty reduction strategy programme, initiated in 2000, commits
the government to providing water and sanitation services to the majority
of the poor at a reasonable distance (less than 2 km). The proposed
strategy is to involve communities and local authorities more actively in
the management of water and sewerage systems and services.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Over 70 percent of the population, about 24 million people, live in
rural areas. However, half of the urban population is settled in informal
settlements. The percentage of people with access to safe water is 68
percent in urban areas and 49 percent in rural settlements, according to
the most recent data from 2003. In urban areas, almost 40 percent of
water goes unaccounted for, lost through either leakage or illegal
connections. Access to sanitation in urban areas is at 65 percent compared
to 40 percent in rural areas. Accordingly, water-borne or sanitation-related
diseases make up the majority of Kenya’s morbidity rate and are
responsible for over 60 percent of premature deaths. The most common
instances of disease in Kenya are malaria (32.6 percent), respiratory system
infections (24.6 percent) and diarrhoea and intestinal worms (17 percent).
Agriculture is the leading sector of the national economy, employing
about 80 percent of the population and accounting for 26 percent of
Kenya’s GDP. However, Kenya has not yet put its available land resources
to full use. Out of 9.4 million ha of potentially cultivable land, only 2.8
million ha are devoted to agriculture, which heavily relies on rainfed
production with very little irrigation. The irrigation potential for the
country is estimated at approximately 550,000 ha, but only about
109,000 ha has been put to use. Irrigation is the only way to ensure
food security considering the variation in rainfall patterns and recurring
droughts (Box 14.4). Kenya has been struggling to achieve food
security for the last two decades; however, recent surveys reveal that
the situation is getting worse. For example in 2004, the ‘food poor’,
those who cannot meet the daily necessary minimum of 2,250
kilocalories, stood at 15 million people, up from 7.3 million in 1973.
Of these, 3 million are in constant need of relief, and the number of
malnourished children is also mounting.

▲

Ath

i

Map 14.7: Overview of the river basins in Kenya
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Kenya is mainly dependant on biomass for energy. Both fuelwood and
charcoal accounted for 66 percent of the total energy consumption in
1996. In the same year, petroleum ranked second in energy production
(24 percent) and electricity (hydropower combined with geothermal
energy) produced the lowest amount of energy (9 percent). Seventy
percent of the electricity supply comes from hydropower generation.
Official technically feasible hydro potential is 2,023 MW, of which 677
MW (about 33 percent) is put into use. Generally, a heavy dependence
on hydropower increases vulnerability to droughts, as low water supplies
can cause power shortages. However, new hydropower projects have
been implemented less frequently since 1996, decreasing the percentage
of hydroelectricity in energy production. Instead, Kenya is becoming more
dependent on fossils fuels, which emit higher amounts of greenhouse
gases and other pollutants.
While less than 10 percent of the population is connected to the national
grid, demand for power is increasing at the rate of 6 percent per year.
This lag in the development of energy supply has had a negative impact on
urban and industrial development. In 1997, reforms initiated in the power
sector led to the creation of the Electricity Regulatory Board (ERB), which
formulates policy and regulates the energy sector. The objectives of the
energy sector are to enhance the energy supply and delivery capacity to

WWDR Chapter 14 (G)

14/3/06

20:21

Page 485

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 8 5

all sectors of the economy, institutionalize environmental impact
assessments in energy development, promote energy conservation through
the use of efficient and cost-effective technologies and create an enabling
environment for private sector participation in the supply of energy
including electricity. Currently, the Kenya Generating Company (KenGen) is
the major supplier of energy and provides almost 90 percent of national
power. The Kenya Power and Lighting Company (KPLC) is the only
organization responsible for the transmission and distribution of power.

Water sector reform
The level of water scarcity in some regions of Kenya has become a
serious limiting factor for development activities. Consequently, the
need to change the scattered structure and functioning of the water
management system has arisen. In 2002, major reforms were initiated
with the revision of the Water Act, which defines clear roles for the
different actors involved in the decentralized institutional framework that
separates policy formulation from regulation and services provision. When
possible, the participation of stakeholders in the decision-making process
is promoted by involving communities and other actors such as NGOs,
community-based organizations (CBOs) and the private sector.
Under the revised system, the Ministry for Water Resource Management
and Development (MWRMD) is responsible for formulating the National
Water Policy and for carrying out reforms by bringing together all the

stakeholders in the water sector. This is achieved through transferring the
responsibility of water management to basin organizations. Furthermore,
since 2004, the provision of water and sanitation services are being
transferred to private companies as a part of the decentralization process.
National legislation like the Environmental Management Coordination Act
from 1999 aims to ensure the sound management of the environment.
All projects that might have a potential impact on water bodies must
complete an Environmental Impact Assessment. In addition, there are
approved standards for drinking water quality and effluent discharges;
however, the relevant rules and regulations are not strictly enforced due
to a lack of skilled personnel and limited funds. As a result, water pollution
from urban and industrial wastes continues to degrade water quality; the
heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers in agriculture leads to deterioration
of surface water and underground resources; deforestation for firewood
production continues at an increasing pace; and the overall exploitation
of the country’s resources remains an imminent threat to ecosystems.

Enhancing water sector capacity
Water education in Kenya is carried out through university degree
programmes at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. In addition,
the Kenya Water Institute provides short-term courses tailored to meet
the specific needs of clients in the water and sanitation sectors. These
courses train approximately 600 candidates per year on topics like water

BOX 14.4: DISASTERS AND INCOME
The effects of natural disasters on the

there were three major droughts. The effect of

and affected an estimated 1.41 million people.

national income

the 1991–1992 drought in the arid districts led

The third and worst drought affected Central,

In the past, disaster management has not

to livestock losses of up to 70 percent and high

Eastern, Rift Valley, Coast and North Eastern

been viewed as an integral part of development

rates of child malnutrition of up to 50 percent.

Provinces, with 4.4 million people requiring food

planning, and water-related disasters have been

During this drought, 1.5 million people in

assistance in the year 2000. The energy sector,

responded to in an ad hoc manner whenever

seventeen arid and semi-arid districts of four

which suffered huge financial losses, and rice

they occurred. Similarly, the important elements

provinces received relief food assistance. The

production, which dropped by 40 percent, were

of disaster management, such as prevention,

second major drought occurred in 1995–1996

particularly impacted.

mitigation, disaster preparedness, recovery
and rehabilitation have been either ignored or
haphazardly dealt with. As Kenya’s economy
heavily relies on rainfed agriculture, the variation
in rainfall has a significant affect on the gross
domestic product (GDP). The following figure
shows the rainfall variability between 1979
and 2000. During drought years, the agricultural
GDP shows a massive deficit with the overall
GDP following it.
The effects of drought have become more
pronounced in recent decades: in the 1990s,

4 8 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

meter installation, servicing and reading; the operation and maintenance
of pumping and treatment plants; and water pollution control assistants.
Although these efforts are a good way to build up the necessary
technical human resources base, a detailed analysis of the water sector
has not yet been done to identify current existing gaps in capacity (i.e.
required skills, levels of competency and experience), which makes it
difficult to estimate the impact of higher-level water education and
short courses for technician training.

Conclusion
The food deficit in Kenya is a major problem, resulting in millions of
chronically undernourished people. National food policies, while aiming to

boost productivity, do not address access to food and quality. Access to
safe water and sanitation services have not caught up with the needs of
the growing population. Inadequate funding curbs the rehabilitation and
expansion of the water supply and sewerage systems, and as a result,
many diseases claim the lives of poor people every year. The need for
domestic, industrial and agricultural water supply is growing, but the
absence of demand-management strategies means that the increase in
demand will likely outstrip the available supply. The construction of new
dams is essential for providing the energy needed for development and
meeting the increasing demand for drinking and irrigation water. The
absence of international funding, however, remains a major obstacle for
development efforts.

7. Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe (referred to here as Lake Peipsi) is
the fourth largest and the biggest transboundary lake in Europe. It
consists of three unequal parts: the biggest northern Lake Peipsi
sensu stricto (s.s.)/Chudskoe, the southern Lake Pihkva/Pskovskoe
and the narrow strait-like Lake Lämmijärv/Teploe connecting Lake
Peipsi s.s. and Lake Pihkva/Pskovskoe.
The Lake Peipsi Basin is situated in Russia (59 percent), Estonia (33
percent) and Latvia (8 percent), although the last has a negligible effect
on the basin. It is officially managed by a joint commission of Estonia and
Russia; Latvia is not a member of any agreements or commissions
concerning the lake.
The case study report published in WWDR1 (see WWDR1 case study)
concluded that lake pollution (see Chapter 12), eutrophication and
economic growth were the most critical problems facing the region. The
fishing industry, which has been the lake’s major economic activity, has
suffered from environmental damage inflicted by pollution and overfishing,
both of which have led to a depletion of fish populations. Although some
improvements have taken place, the prior trends have not significantly
changed.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Changing climatic and socio-economic contexts
Although there has been no specific research conducted on the effects of
climate change in the region, the analysis of data collected over the last
fifty-four years shows a slight decrease, approximately 3 cm, in the
average thickness of ice cover.

Map 14.8: Overview of the Lake Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe Basin

There has been a slight change in the demographic characteristics of
the region (the birth rate in Russia has started to increase). However
due to aging populations in both countries the departure of younger
and educated people for big urban areas continues to be a problem.
On the other hand, economic activities in the region are improving and
diversifying in both Estonia and the Russian Federation. This change is

due to several factors, including the accession of Estonia into the
European Union, the economic recovery of the Russian Federation from
its recent crisis and an increased profit from oil exportation because of
record high prices. Furthermore, both countries are eager to develop
joint economic activities and gain more access to neighbouring markets.
Accordingly, economic difficulties are easing, and the high levels of
unemployment are decreasing.

Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2002.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 8 7

Reforms underway

Environmental issues and meeting the MDGs

The Joint Lake Peipsi Management Programme, an integrated water resources
management tool, is being developed by both countries in accordance with
the requirements of the WFD. When completed, the Estonian-Russian
Transboundary Water Commission will be responsible for its implementation
and updating. The programme will take into consideration both the surface
and groundwater resources of the basin as a unity.

In the last few years, considerable investments have been made in both
countries to improve water supply facilities and wastewater treatment
plants. For example, recent improvements in wastewater treatment
facilities in Tartu has helped reduce the basin’s pollution load. Due to
its unique characteristics, several international and national projects
and programmes have been launched with the aim of preserving the
biodiversity of the lake and its protected areas. The promotion of regional
ecotourism is also considered as a way to improve the regional economy
while contributing to current reclamation efforts in the lake.

At the institutional level, there have been changes in both countries. As a
result of the administrative reform in the Ministry of Natural Resources of
the Russian Federation, the Water Resources Agency performs all activities
related to the utilization, protection and rehabilitation of water resources.
In Estonia, WFD rules and norms are being implemented (see Box 14.5),
including the development of water basin administrations. As a result,
the West Estonia, East Estonia and Koiva River Basin Administrations were
established. The East-Estonian River Basin includes Lake Peipsi and the
Narva River, which is shared with the Russian Federation.
In order to promote better communication among different stakeholders
and build partnership in the region, the Peipsi Council was elaborated as
a joint effort.
A bilateral agreement concerning water transportation in Lake Peipsi,
Lake Lämmijärv and Lake Pskovskoe was signed in March 2002. One
objective that has been facilitated by the agreement and is being
currently pursued is the opening of a ferry line between the Russian city
Pskov and the Estonian city Tartu. The ferry line is meant to support the
local and bilateral development activities of the two countries.
As elaborated in WWDR1, Lake Peipsi is a relatively new transboundary
water basin (the control line was formed when Estonia separated from
the Soviet Union in 1991). Therefore, the border between the Republic
of Estonia and the Russian Federation, a big portion of which runs along
Lake Peipsi, has not yet been officially determined, since the official
border has not been finalized.

Progress towards the MDGs in the Russian Federation is reflected in the
reporting under the state development programmes, which correspond
partially to MDGs and incorporate other state-specific aims and
objectives. Estonia, on the other hand, as a member of the EU, addresses
water supply and sanitation issues as part of the implementation stage
of the WFD. Both countries are on track for achieving the water-related
MDGs (UNDP, 2005).

Conclusion
The region’s economy is improving and Estonia and Russia are looking
to further increase their economic relations through the establishment
of new ferry lines. The water sector in both countries is also improving
to face current challenges: Estonia, as a relatively new member of the
European Union, has adopted the WFD and is in the process of
implementing it, while the Russian Federation is going through
administrative reform and revamping its water code. Furthermore the
Joint Lake Peipsi Management Programme is in the process of elaboration
which would promote implementation of IWRM. Consequently, the
changes in both countries will help to create a sustainable utilization
of lake resources while protecting the ecosystems.

BOX 14.5: BUILDING A COMMUNITY FRAMEWORK
A prime example of the implementation of the

rural municipalities), environmental departments,

Environment Fund) project. The goal of the

EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) is the

land reclamation bureaus, health protection

project was to facilitate the planning processes

preparation of the Viru-Peipsi water

departments and water companies. In April and

of the Joint Lake Peipsi Management

management plan. In November 2002, the

July 2004, two seminars were organized for the

Programme, taking into account the

project implementation unit, in cooperation with

participation of local stakeholders in Jõgevamaa,

requirements of both the European Union

the environmental departments of four counties

Tartumaa, Võrumaa and Põlvamaa counties.

(EU) and the Russian Federation. Meetings and
seminars were carried out mainly in Pskov region

(Tartu, Põlva, West-Viru and East-Viru),
organized four seminars for ten counties.

On the Russian side, such consultations took

and resulted in a number of proposals and

The main target groups were local authorities

place within the context of a UNDP/GEF (United

recommendations for the future Management

(county governments, city governments and

Nations Development Programme/Global

Plan (see Boxes 14.1 and 14.2).

4 8 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

8. Lake Titicaca Basin
The Lake Titicaca Basin is composed of four major basins: Lake
Titicaca, Desaguadero River, Lake Poopó and Coipasa Salt Lake. These
four basins form the TDPS System, the main element being Lake
Titicaca, the largest lake in South America and the highest navigable
lake in the world. The TDPS System stretches approximately 140,000
km2 and is located between 3,600 and 4,500 m.a.s.l.

Titicaca
basin

◆

◆

Poverty and conflict: Persistent challenges

▲

The initial case study report presented in WWDR1 (see WWDR1 case
study) concluded that poverty was the most critical social problem in
the TDPS system, affecting both rural and urban populations and
undermining attempts to implement solutions to various problems.
Unfortunately, in the past three years, no significant progress has been
made to improve the situation.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

These events can be linked to structural poverty (see WWDR1 for
more information), which stems from the combination of several socioeconomic factors. Some of these factors are land property fragmentation
(causing the under-utilization of land resources and thus low
productivity) and indigenous cultural patterns leading to social exclusion.
The effects of these factors are more pronounced in rural areas.
Consequently, migration to urban settlements becomes the only choice
for the rural poor, who hope to find better living conditions and mostly
end up in crowded degraded districts. These migrants, the inhabitants
of the Bolivian urban TDPS System, were the real actors of the social
upheaval that took place in October 2003.

The impact of climate change on glaciers
During dry seasons, glaciers are the main source of drinking and irrigation
water for many urban dwellers and farmers living in Peru and Bolivia. However,
the climate variability and associated changes in ambient temperatures have
started affecting the tropical glaciers of the region. The loss in volume of these
unique tropical glaciers is alarming, and continuing melting trends will translate

Desaguadero
basin

▲
▲

Poópoa
basin
Coipasa
basin

◆

In January 2005, the inhabitants of El Alto, Bolivia (located near La Paz),
the main city of the TDPS System with 800,000 inhabitants (Instituto
Nacional de Estadistica, 2005), protested the contract with Aguas del
Illimani (Waters of Illimani), a subsidiary of French Suez Lyonnaisse des
Eaux that was running a thirty-year concession for the water and sewage
services in La Paz and El Alto. A week of civil disturbances finally came to
an end with the resignation of the Constitutional President of Bolivia and
the government’s unilateral decision to end the water concession with
Aguas del Illimani. The political transitions occurring in some Latin
American countries since the 1980s have further added to the complexity
of finding a solution to poverty. Peru was among the first Latin American
countries to shift to a democratic regime. However, an increasingly
authoritarian regime led to public outrage and caused the president
to flee the country in 2000.

EL ALTO-LA PAZ

◆

▲

▲

Map 14.9: Overview of the Lake Titicaca Basin
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

into drought for thousands of people. Figure 14.1 illustrates the impact of
climate change on the availability of water resources in the TDPS System.
The consequences of glacial melting for local populations are serious. Acting
as reservoirs, glaciers regulate stream flow and diminish seasonal discharge
variation. This effect is vital, especially between September and November,
when ice melting (and water demand) is at its maximum. Discharges in
glacier basins are important during those months, since the flows of other
rivers in the Altiplano Basins reach minimum levels.
To counterbalance the negative effects of glacial melting, more dams and
reservoirs will have to be constructed, increasing the cost of the water supply
to Andean cities. It can be expected that the additional cost will be
transferred to urban users by means of tariff increases, particularly in El Alto
and La Paz, where the urban water supply is under private administration.
Judging from recent social movements, any tariff increase would likely
trigger potential conflicts, particularly in the poorest areas of El Alto.
The additional costs of flow regulation in glacier basins could also be hard
to afford for small and medium-sized irrigation systems, rendering rural
poor more vulnerable.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 8 9

9. Mali

Figure 14.1: Areal and volumetric variation of the Chacaltaya Glacier
6000

25
Area

Volume

4000
15
3000
10
2000
5

1000

0
1940

Volume(million m3)

5000

20

Area(ha)

Poverty remains the underlying cause of many social problems
experienced by both rural and urban populations. Since the first WWAP
case study was conducted in 2003, there has unfortunately been no
improvement in living conditions. The poor are still struggling to meet
the most basic of food and water needs. The expectation of better living
conditions tempts young people to migrate to the cities; however, most
of these people find themselves living in degraded crowded informal
settlements, which lack even the most basic of utilities. The poor, even
if they have physical access to water and health services, can only
marginally take advantage of them due to poverty. In this context, the
water-related problems of basin countries cannot be isolated; they must
be addressed within the greater social framework. Better management
of these countries’ land, water and gas resources is the only means to
break the vicious circle of poverty.

0
1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

The data collected in the TDPS System shows the receding trend of tropical glaciers. Between
1991 and 2003, Zongo and Chacaltaya glaciers suffered both areal and volumetric losses. In
fact, the accumulated mass balance, expressed as water depth, was -11.02 m for Zongo and 15.06 m for Chacaltaya. Chacaltaya glacier, a small glacier located at a medium altitude, lost
97 percent of its mass between 1960 and 2003 and is expected to disappear completely by
2010. This figure clearly shows that the receding trend started in the 1960s and has
accelerated in the last twenty years.

◆

Conclusion

◆

Despite its northern desert, Mali has a number of important water
resources. Two major rivers – the Niger River and the Senegal River –
run through Mali. These two rivers constitute the majority of Mali’s
perennial surface water resources, providing the country with 56 billion
m3 of water. Important non-perennial surface waters are estimated at a
volume 15 billion m3. Mali also has seventeen large lakes situated near

◆

●

◆

Three climatic groups can be discerned: arid desert in the northern
region, arid to semi-arid in the centre and savannah in the south.
The Sahara region, in the northwest tip of Mali, covers up to 57 percent
of the national territory with an arid and semi-arid desert climate (rainfall
usually does not exceed 200 mm per year). At its centre, the country’s
climate is characterized by the Sahel, encompassing about 18 percent
of the land. The humid rainy season (June to October) usually brings
between 200 and 700 mm of rainfall per year. The Niger River is an
important part of this region, as the annual flooding of the river makes
the surrounding land fertile for agricultural production. In the southern
region of Mali, the rainy season generally brings over 1,200 mm of rain
per year. This region and climate covers approximately 25 percent of
the country. It is by far the most fertile area, where the majority of the
population resides and where most agricultural activities take place.

◆

Located in the heart of western Africa, Mali has a surface area of
1,241,000 km2, over 50 percent of which is located in the Sahara
Desert. More than 1,000 km away from the sea, the country is
completely landlocked. Mali’s location means that the country’s
climate can sometimes be quite unpredictable: years of abundant
rainfall and years of extreme drought.

■

◆

Map 14.10: Overview of the river basins in Mali
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

the Niger River, and renewable groundwater resources from aquifers have
been assessed at 66 billion m3. The volume of renewable water resources
per capita per year is 10,000 m3.
However, these water resources are geographically dispersed and not
always available when needed, greatly limiting their exploitation and
economic development: overall, only 0.2 percent of Mali’s potential
water resources is put into use. Furthermore, the country has had many
droughts in the past, compounding problems of water shortage issues.

4 9 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Poverty, increased irrigation, access to safe water and
environmental degradation
Mali is one of the world’s poorest countries, with a per capita GDP of
US $296, where over 90 percent of the population lives on less than
US $2 a day. Like many other African countries, Mali’s economy is heavily
dependent on agricultural production, as well as on herding and fishing,
with more than 80 percent of the population working in agro-pastoral
activities. The agricultural sector represents 40 percent of the country’s
GDP, whereas the industrial sector represents 16 percent and the service
sector 40 percent. Mali’s agriculture is largely rainfed, but irrigation also
plays a major role for some crops, such as rice. A number of droughts
have devastated agricultural production and livelihoods in the past.
As of 1998, Mali had approximately 9.8 million inhabitants and over
10,000 villages with a population growth rate of 2.2 percent. Population
density was around 8 inhabitants per km2, with notable disparities
between regions. Ninety percent of the villages are situated in five
regions that occupy approximately 38 percent of the country’s surface
area. Although all these regions have at least one major urban centre,
the areas are still largely rural. In fact, almost 70 percent of all Malians
live in rural areas.
Approximately 30 percent of the population lives in urban settlements.
There are seven major cities in Mali, the largest being the capital city
Bamako, with a population of about 1 million inhabitants. In 1992,
only nineteen urban centres were equipped with water facilities,
whereas today twenty-seven centres out of thirty-three have been
set up. Recently, much water infrastructure work has been implemented
to improve access to safe water. National studies indicate that the
percentage of rural and urban populations with at least one point of
access to water has risen from 55 percent in 1998 to about 84 percent in
2002, based on one modern point of access to water per 400 inhabitants.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

As these statistics indicate, a concerted effort has been made to provide
drinking water to cities with populations of 10,000 or more inhabitants.
However, the disorderly development of housing settlements has
influenced the availability of water infrastructure in urban areas over the
last two decades. This situation is further aggravated by the rapid growth
of drinking water needs. The shortage of functioning infrastructure also
continues to be highly problematic in rural areas. Additionally, mounting
pollution combines with these factors to seriously impact the quantity and
quality of water available to residents, dramatic affecting Malians’ health.
Mali’s main environmental challenge is the continual degradation of
natural resources and the environment as a whole. Desertification and
deforestation are two particularly menacing environmental problems
for the country. Population growth, increasing desertification, soil
degradation, intense firewood and charcoal production as well as a lack
of a waste treatment system for the industrial and other sectors have
seriously contributed to growth of environmental problems. In addition,

deforestation and desertification have decreased the area of the natural
habitats of numerous plant and animal species and contributed to an
increase in human migration further south. An increase in population
growth in these areas has quickly led to an over-cultivation of the
soil and increase in pollution. After the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, legislative and
regulatory measures were set up as guidelines for the protection of
water resources in Mali. However, few of these guidelines have been
implemented, and the country’s water resources are being increasingly
polluted by industrial urban and agricultural pollution.

Challenge areas: Health, food, and energy
Water-related diseases, such as cholera, diarrhoea and the guinea worm
disease, represent more than 80 percent of all illnesses in Mali. However,
other water-related diseases stemming from poor hygiene and parasites
also frequently occur. For very young children, malaria and diarrhoeal
problems are very common. Furthermore, 11 percent of children under
the age of 5 suffer from acute malnutrition and emaciation, and 33
percent of all children are underweight – the latter being more
pronounced among children aged twelve to twenty-three months (48
percent), children born with a frail build (48 percent) and children living
in a rural environment (37 percent). Though access to water is, on the
whole, increasing, access to adequate quantities of quality water remains
highly problematic in both rural and urban areas.
The ability to ensure the continual provision of food for the population
of Mali remains a major challenge. Droughts in the 1970s and 1980s
were particularly harmful to food production. However, more recently, a
number of diverse actions, including enlarged irrigation schemes, have
been carried out to address the challenge of food security. Accordingly,
annual grain production reached an average of 2.26 million tons
(between 1990 and 2002) compared to an annual average of 1 million
(between the years 1964 and 1990), signalling a two-fold increase in
production in approximately twenty years time.
Currently, 270,000 ha of land is irrigated. Water abstraction for irrigation
is about 4.5 billion m3, 98 percent of which is obtained from surface
water resources. However, it is estimated that in order to ensure food
security, the amounts of irrigated land and water allotted for irrigation
both need to be expanded at least two-fold. The current shortage in
food supply is mainly due to the inability of agricultural production to
keep up with the rapid growth of the population and greater climatic
volatility. However, the water sector suffers from a lack of coherent
national pricing policies and causing serious difficulties in collecting the
amounts owed by consumers leading to a poor track record for attracting
private investments.
According to the data presented in 2002 by the National Energy
Commission, Mali has an energy potential of 1,119 MW, which could
allow it to produce 4,849 gigawatt hours (GWh) per year. Out of this

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 9 1

identified potential, 378 MW could come from the Niger River and 740
MW from the Senegal River. Currently, two large dams (the Selingue and
Manantali) provide 980 GW per year, which represents 20 percent of the
identified potential and 98 percent of what is actually produced. Despite
the country’s sizeable energy potential, hydroelectricity only represents 1
percent of total energy consumption at the national level, whereas 90
percent of basic energy needs are met through firewood and charcoal.
The dependence on firewood is one of the main causes of deforestation,
which contributes to the process of desertification in fragile
environmental zones. Until the economic advantages of pursuing
alternative energy sources become clearer in practice, firewood will
continue to be the main source of energy for households.

Management responses and stewardship
Since the early 1990s, Mali has been managing its water resources
according to the Water Resources Development Framework. This strategy
focuses on decentralizing water and sanitation administrative bodies
between the central government and local communities involving a
multitude of government agencies in water resource management. At the
national level, the water sector falls under the responsibility of the Ministry
of Mining, Energy and Water, which operates under the structure of the
National Water Directorate (DNH, Direction Nationale de l’Hydraulique).
Sanitation is the responsibility of the DNH and the ministries of
Environment and Health. At the local level, over 700 communal councils
have been created to share the responsibility of water management and
infrastructure maintenance. These communal councils are funded by
national authorities and help to ensure that implemented water
infrastructure and service costs are recoverable through fee collection.

development of strong assessment indicators, namely the density of hydrologic
and hydro-geologic stations, the quality of the information available about the
water sector and the quality of the training and research institutions operating
in the sector. Still, some knowledge has been accumulated and monitoring
processes have been established and implemented in several projects.
Unfortunately, however, the overall development of indicators is still fairly
limited. Measures are being taken to correct this, but it will take time and
money before they produce concrete results.

Conclusion
Many of Mali’s water problems can be characterized as problems of
access, largely provoked by an uneven temporal and geographical
distribution of water combined with an under-exploitation of available
water resources. In recent decades, the Government of Mali has taken a
number of steps to ameliorate the situation in an attempt to meet the
population’s basic needs. However, a great deal of work remains, notably
in the provision of infrastructure for safe drinking water and sanitation.
Other enormous challenges for the country include controlling the level
of pollution, developing alternative energy sources and decreasing
deforestation and desertification. Mali’s ability to address these issues
will depend on a number of factors: namely, the country’s capacity to
raise the level of national technical expertise through increased
educational programmes and research institutions, to develop strategies
to better utilize available national water resources, to decrease the
negative impact of urban population growth on water resources, as well
as to attract investment for sustainable future water schemes.

Increasing the knowledge base and technical expertise of water resources
remains a major challenge in Mali. There has been limited progress made in the

BOX 14.6: SHARED WATER MANAGEMENT
Mali shares two large transboundary rivers, the

to the development of future sustainable water

Mali also participates in the Organization for the

Niger and Senegal rivers, with many other

projects.

Development of the Senegal River. A 1972
Convention and 2002 Charter established the

countries and is highly dependent upon these
two large basins, particularly the Niger River

Mali’s Niger River Agency aims to safeguard the

organization’s legal and regulatory framework and

Basin, as it is where most of the country’s

Niger River, its tributaries and catchments, as

clearly state that river water must be allocated to

economic activity is centred and where more

well as the integrated management of its

each of the various sectors. There is no agreement

than half of its population resides. These basins

resources. Under the aegis of the organization,

allocating the river’s water to riparian states in terms

are managed by two basin organizations, in

Mali has recently participated in a project to

of volumes of water to be withdrawn, but rather to

which Mali participates. Since the United Nations

reverse damage done to the Niger and its

use as a function of possibilities (i.e. agriculture,

Conference on Environment and Development in

surrounding land area. Pollution of the Niger has

livestock-raising, hydroelectric energy production,

Rio de Janeiro in 1992, these two organizations

been a significant problem, since large amounts

drinking water supply, navigation, environment, etc.).

have functioned on the principles of integrated

of wastewater stemming from the capital city,

The Senegal River Basin and its organization was

water resources management. Continued

Bamako, flows back into the Niger.

presented in WWDR1 (see WWDR1 case study).

cooperation in both organizations seems crucial

4 9 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

10. State of Mexico
Mexico’s total surface area is slightly less than 2 million km2. Annual runoff from its rivers is 399 km3, of which 87 percent comes from the
thirty-nine main rivers of the country, whose basins occupy 58 percent of the country’s total surface area. Average annual per capita water
availability is 4,547 m3, with great variation between the southeast (13,566 m3) and the north, centre and northeast of the country (1,897
m3) (CNA, 2004). This uneven distribution of water resources causes water shortages in densely populated areas. The north, centre and west
of the country, where only 32 percent of the runoff takes place, is home to 77 percent of the country’s population and 85 percent of Mexico’s
GDP (CNA, 2004).
In so far as water stress is concerned, one of the country’s most critical
cases is the State of Mexico, with a population of almost 15 million
inhabitants corresponding to approximately 14 percent of the nation’s
total population but only 1 percent of the country’s total surface area.
The State of Mexico is an industrial centre with a wide range of
economic activities; it is ranked second in the nation in terms of its
GDP contribution, about 9.5 percent.

Valley of Mexico Pánuco River Basin

✱
✱

Lerma River Basin

Water and land resources
The State of Mexico is located within the geographical area of three main
basins, namely the Valley of Mexico, the Lerma River and the Balsas River
basins. The Valley of Mexico Basin lies in the north and northeast of the
State and includes the Federal District6 and parts of the states of Hidalgo
and Tlaxcala. There are 22 million inhabitants living in these states, 10
million of which reside in the State of Mexico’s part of the basin (CAEM,
2004). Combined, they represent 20 percent of the national population
and contribute 31.5 percent of the total GDP. Conversely, the amount of
available water resources in the basin is only 3.9 km3, or only 0.9
percent of the country’s total water availability (CNA, 2004).

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The Lerma River Basin is the lifeline of the city of Toluca, the capital of
the State of Mexico, with approximately 1.5 million inhabitants living in the
metropolitan area and 2.5 million living throughout the basin (CAEM, 2004).
This region is also a centre of heavy economic activity. The high water
demand in this basin has necessitated the implementation of water transfer
schemes from the Balsas River Basin, located 130 km from Mexico City.
As for groundwater resources, there are nine aquifers in the State of
Mexico, six of which are shared with Mexico City7 (CAEM, 2004). Since
these aquifers are the main source of water supply for the State of
Mexico and Mexico City, they are exploited well beyond their renewal
capacity. In general, it is estimated that underground water resources
are overexploited at a rate of 100 percent or more, with the Texcoco
aquifer in the Basin of the Valley of Mexico being overexploited at a
rate of more than 850 percent (CAEM, 2004). As a direct consequence,
in many aquifers the hydrostatic pressure has been lost, some springs
have dried, and the ground is sinking up to 40 cm per year in some areas
6. The capital of Mexico.
7. The Metropolitan Area of Mexico City (henceforth Mexico City) includes the Federal District
and some boroughs of the States of Mexico and Hidalgo.

▲

✱

✱

Balsas River Basin

✱

✱

Map 14.11: Overview of the river basins in the State of Mexico
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

of the Valley of Mexico. The intense overexploitation is further
aggravated by the fact that the clayey topsoil in both the Valley of
Mexico and the Lerma Valley enhances the runoff of rainwater and
substantially reduces the natural recharge of aquifers. In order to curb
the destruction of aquifers, the Federal Government has forbidden
further development. However, unauthorized usage remains a problem.

Water and land uses
Of the available water resources in the State of Mexico, 48 percent is
utilized for domestic purposes, 34 percent for irrigation and 5 percent for
industry. The remaining 13 percent is transferred to the Federal District
for consumption.
Agriculture is the main economic activity in the state, practised over
approximately 50 percent of the overall surface area. Irrigation for
agriculture is practised on a smaller scale, covering only 7 percent of the
State’s land surface. Almost 80 percent of the water used for irrigation is
pumped from aquifers.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 9 3

Water transfer
Water shortage in the State of Mexico is already at an alarmingly critical
level. The situation is expected to worsen due to increasing domestic,
industrial and agricultural water demands. Although the state
government is constantly pursuing new mechanisms to slow down urban
growth and promote efficient water use, water transfer from other water
basins remains necessary to meet growing demand. Currently, water is
transferred from both surface and groundwater resources to meet the
demands of Mexico City and, to a lesser degree, the State of Mexico
itself. For example, water is transferred from the Balsas River Basin to
the Lerma River Basin and the Valley of Mexico, mainly to provide the
Federal District’s potable water supply. Underground water resources of
the Alto Lerma System are also channelled to the Mexico City, causing
their overexploitation. The extent of these transfer schemes (i.e. the
distance from which the water is diverted), is also likely to grow, which
could trigger disputes over water resources.

Water and health
In 1990, a cholera outbreak initiated in Peru and expanded throughout
the continent. The first sign of cholera was seen in the State of Mexico in
June 1991, signalling deficiencies in proper chlorination. Since then, the
Government of the State of Mexico has assumed responsibility for the
production of the chlorine supply and the maintenance of chlorination
equipment. As a result, chlorination effectiveness has increased by 300
percent in the past decade.
The coverage of water and sanitation services in the State of Mexico
is above the national average. Over 90 percent of the population has
access to safe water and approximately 80 percent to sanitation services.
However, water scarcity is still the major factor behind water-borne
diseases. Through state social programmes, public awareness is being
raised concerning preventive health measures, such
as handwashing and cleaning water storage tanks.
Since underground water resources are exploited on a regular basis, the
water wells are sealed to protect the naturally high quality of groundwater
by preventing direct contamination by pollutant leakage. However, human
activities pose a constant threat to groundwater quality. For example, in
the State, wastewater is generated approximately at the rate of 30 m3
per second (m3/s), about 19 percent of which is directly discharged
without any kind of treatment. Solid wastes are disposed of into open
pits or partially controlled waste disposal sites. In addition to this is
agricultural pollution, caused by the utilization of wastewater for
irrigation and the use of fertilizers and insecticides. There is no exact
data concerning the health consequences of such activities.

common policy of integrated management for the sustainable utilization
of water resources. In the State of Mexico, the Water Commission of the
State of Mexico (CAEM, Comisión del Agua del Estado de Mexico) is an
independent decentralized government institution authorized to manage
the country’s water resources, as well as to formulate national water
policy. The Secretariat of Water, Public Works and Infrastructure for
Development (SAOPID, Secrataría de Agua, Obra Pública e Infraestructura
para el Desarrollo), the Water Consulting Council and the Water
Commission of the State of Mexico are the coordinating bodies for the
planning and programming of the state’s water sector and for the
surveillance of compliance with policies, strategies, plans and
programmes. Laws, standards and regulations have been issued at
federal, state and municipal levels. However, the full enforcement of such
regulations is missing. Furthermore, a lack of consolidation of the bodies
in charge of providing and maintaining the water and sanitation services
has led to the inefficient use of water supply. In order to minimize this
problem, in 2004, the Federal government started PROMAGUA, a
programme aimed at modernizing the water operating bodies, and
established an independent body for the regulation of the supply of
potable water, sewer systems and wastewater treatment utilities. In
addition to national funds allocated for the modernization and extension
of utility services, the collaboration of the private sector is also being
sought through public-private partnerships. Unfortunately, low levels of
revenue collection coupled with a lack of respect for efficient water use
might pose a problem for private sector involvement.

Water and ecosystems
The State of Mexico is ranked fourth in the world in terms of diversity
of flora and fauna, after Brazil, Indonesia and Colombia (CNA, 2004).
However, as a consequence of human activities, many species have
become extinct, and wetlands and forests have either decreased in size
or have been completely destroyed. Early records from the seventeenth
century show that more than 58 percent of the State of Mexico’s territory
was forest, covering more than 1.3 million ha, and wetlands of the Lerma
Swamp and the lakes of the Basin of the Valley of Mexico extended over
88,000 ha. Today, in the valleys of Mexico and Alto Lerma, the natural
water bodies have been reduced by more than 80 percent overall; some
of them having totally disappeared with their ecosystems. It is estimated
that the forest area was reduced to one-third of its original area.
The main causes of deforestation are stockbreeding, human settlements,
road systems and firewood production for domestic use. Deforestation
causes the surface run off to carry greater amount of debris, silting
up dams, rivers and channels, reducing the capacity of storage and
evacuation of storm water. The loss of vegetal cover also enhances
surface run off, thus reducing the amount of water of infiltration and
severely affecting the recharge of aquifers.

Water management
The water policies adopted in the State of Mexico (see Box 14.7)
complement the National Development Plan for 2001-2006, which
correctly identifies water as a scarce resource and puts forward the

The National Development Plan of Environment and Natural Resources for
2001-2006 (PND, Plan Nacional de Desarrollo) was formulated to pursue
economic development while reversing environmental degradation as

4 9 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 14.7: WATER RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT IN THE STATE OF MEXICO
In the State of Mexico, the following criteria set

■

the main framework of water resources
development:
■
■

Implementation of IWRM throughout the State
Giving priority to enhancing the quality and

Assisting in the consolidation and efficiency of

■

bodies in charge of rendering services
■

construction, operation, maintenance and
administration of infrastructure

Establishing a ‘water culture’ that prioritizes
the efficient and sustainable utilization of
water resources

Involving the private sector in the financing,

■

Promoting modernization of the legal
framework

the extent of water utilities for raising the
quality of life of citizens

much as possible. In this regard, the State of Mexico’s Secretariat of
Ecology is responsible for executing state policy and evaluating its
effectiveness.

Risk management
Urban settlements in the state have experienced high growth rates
accompanied by the rapid expansion of informal settlements.
Consequently, people living on settlements that are constructed on slopes,
old lacustrine areas, river and stream banks and beds are highly vulnerable
to water and mud floods. Furthermore, the overexploitation of aquifers
has caused differential ground sinkage and impeded the surface run off of
storm water. Water and sewer services have also been either interrupted
or completely disconnected due to ground sinkage.
Flood risk is especially high in the plains of the Valley of Mexico and
Alto Lerma. Due to the lacustrine origin of the land, the natural drainage
is very limited. The situation is worsened by the fact that the largest
percentage of the State’s population lives within this area. In order to
reduce the risk of catastrophic floods, large-scale drainage systems have
been implemented. However, as mentioned previously, the sinking of the
ground and the extreme siltation caused by the loss of vegetal cover
lower the discharge capacity of the drainage systems.
During the last eleven years, the State Government has compiled a flood
atlas that gathers information on the social and economic impacts of waterrelated extreme events. The latest flood event in 2004 affected over 35,000
people in diverse municipalities of the State of Mexico.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The National Development Plan of 2001-2006 defined water-related risk
reduction as a priority. In this context, the structural measures against flood
prevention will continue to be financed at the federal and state levels.

approximately 20 million inhabitants. The increasing water demands of
various sectors have led to 100 percent or more overexploitation of
underground water resources. The effects of the overuse of aquifers
are striking: ground has been sinking up to 40 cm per year; piezometric
levels have dropped significantly; aquifers have lost their hydrostatic
pressure; and some springs have dried up. Water and sewer infrastructure
has been either disconnected or become unusable due to sinking ground.
This further complicates the challenge of providing the public with safe
water and sanitation services. Although further abstraction of
underground water resources is forbidden, illegal utilization continues
to grow. Population growth has also had a toll on the vegetation cover
and ecosystems. Forests have decreased by one-third and natural water
bodies have been reduced by more than 80 percent in area; the
associated ecosystems have shrunk dramatically or disappeared
altogether. Because of deforestation, topsoil has lost its ability to
retard surface run off, which in turn has reduced the infiltration rate
and recharge of aquifers. Intra-basin water transfer schemes have
been implemented to cope with the growing demand for water, but
this unfortunately caused disputes between user groups. The quality
of surface and groundwater resources is decreasing due to domestic,
industrial and agricultural pollution. Although the construction of
treatment plants is underway, financial problems have hindered their
full realization. The capacity of existing wastewater treatment facilities
cannot cope with the sheer volume of discharge.
The National Development Plan has underlined the importance of
water resources as well as the necessity for integrated basin-wide
management and stakeholder participation in decision-making. This plan
is further backed by specialized agencies and coordinating bodies that
are responsible for implementing projects and surveying the compliance
with rules and regulations. However, the enforcement of such regulations
has not been effective.

Conclusion
Although Mexico has sufficient water resources, the State of Mexico is
under severe water shortage stemming from a very dense population
coupled with an accelerated growth of approximately 380,000 thousand
inhabitants per year. The situation is even more critical in the Valley of
Mexico, where the Metropolitan Area of Mexico City contains

Hydrological and economic difficulties are unfortunately compounded
by the lack of social awareness towards efficient use of water resources.
Raising public awareness will facilitate the sustainable utilization of water
resources in an environmentally sound fashion.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 9 5

11. Mongolia with special reference to the Tuul River Basin
Mongolia has an annual precipitation of 361 km3, about 90 percent of which is lost to evapotranspiration. Of the remaining 10 percent, 37
percent infiltrates into the soil while 63 percent turns into surface runoff. Almost 95 percent of the surface runoff component flows out of
the country (Box 14.8). Consequently, only 6 percent of Mongolia’s annual precipitation is transformed into available water resources in
surface water bodies (Altansukh, 1995). The total surface water resource of Mongolia is estimated as 599 km3/year and is composed of water
stored in lakes (500 km3/year), glaciers (63 km3/year) and rivers (36 km3/year) (Myagmarjav and Davaa, 1999). The amount of renewable
groundwater resources has been estimated at 10.8 km3/year. Groundwater resources continue to be a major source of water, especially during
winter when many surface water resources are frozen.
There are approximately 3,500 lakes in Mongolia with a total surface
area of about 15,600 km2, about 54 percent of which is located in the
Gobi region, mainly in the form of small shallow or salty lakes. As a
consequence of human activities, many of these lakes are now severely
depleted or dry (Altansukh, 1995).
Large rivers originate in the country’s mountainous northern and
western areas, while very few surface streams are found in the south.
The country’s largest watershed is the Selenge River Basin in the north
with its major sub-basins the E’Gyin, Ider, Orhon and Tuul Rivers.
The height of the Tuul River Basin varies from 1,200 to 2,700 m.a.s.l.
The Tuul River, the main river in the basin, is formed by the confluence of
the Namiya and Nergui streams at the southwestern slope of the Khentei
Mountain, which is a world watershed divide that separates the Arctic and
Pacific ocean basins and the internal drainage basin in Central Asia. The
Tuul River is 704 km long, with a catchment area of 49,840 km2. It drains
into one of the main tributaries of the Selenge River, which is the main
artery of the Lake Baikal, the world’s largest freshwater lake by volume.
The Tuul River Basin covers only 3.19 percent of the country’s territory,
but is home to more than half of the country’s population.

Current contexts
Administratively, the country is divided into provinces (aimags), each of
which is divided into sum (territorial administrative unit subordinate to
district) and bag (the smallest administrative unit in rural district).
The capital city Ulan Bator is located in the Tuul River Basin and is
home to 772,000 inhabitants, or about 32 percent of the country’s
population. About 60 percent of the nation’s population is classified
as urban, and more than half of this urban population lives in the
capital city Ulan Bator.
Forty percent of the population lacks access to safe water resources and
only 25 percent of the population has adequate access to sanitation
facilities. Clearly, poverty is one of the main reasons. Official figures suggest
that almost one-third of the population lives below the national poverty
level, defined as the inability to afford a basket of basic food and non-food
items. Urban poverty is on the rise due to increased migration from rural

Map 14.12: Overview of the river basins in Mongolia
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

areas; almost half of the poor live in urban areas and one-quarter of the
urban poor is located in Ulan Bator. Recent statistics show that the depth
of poverty and disparity has increased following several calamities in
1999, which caused a loss of livestock and a sharp decline in agricultural
production in 2000 and 2001. If this trend is not reversed, the MDG target
of halving the poverty headcount by 2015 will not be met (MFA, 2004).

Water and ecosystems
Growing urbanization and the mining industry have significantly polluted
surface and underground water resources, which has had a significant
impact on associated ecosystems. Furthermore, overuse of groundwater
resources has led to lowering of the groundwater table, which has
consequently caused some springs, lakes and their associated ecosystems
to dry up. Increasing numbers of livestock and uncontrolled grazing
practices are also affecting the balance of ecosystems.
Currently, there are forty protected areas, twelve of which include
lacustrine ecosystems. The Government has declared its intention to
raise the surface area of protected areas. The National Development Plan,
adopted by the Mongolian Parliament in 1994, assigned a high priority to
ecosystem protection. The basic guidelines for environmental protection
were further identified in the Ecological Policy of the Mongolian State
directive in 1997. These initial steps were followed by more than twenty
laws on conservation. Practically speaking, the legal basis for sound
environmental management is in place. Furthermore, the Ministry of
Education, Culture and Science has included an environmental education

4 9 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 14.8: TRANSBOUNDARY WATER RESOURCES IN MONGOLIA
There are about 210 rivers flowing through

the governments of Mongolia and the Russian

water resources concerning Lake Buir, the

Mongolia into Russia and China. Mongolia aims

Federation in 1995 on the protection of

Kherlen, Bulgan, Khalkh rivers, and eighty-seven

for international cooperation concerning the

transboundary water resources focuses on over

small lakes and rivers located near the border.

equitable utilization of transboundary waters with

100 small rivers and streams located in the

Transboundary water resources shared with China

its neighbours. The first international agreement

western part of the country. In general, the

include surface water bodies in Dornod, Khovd,

on transboundary water resources was between

drainage basins of transboundary rivers between

and Bayan-Ulgii provinces and groundwater

the governments of Mongolia and the USSR in

Mongolia and the Russian Federation cover about

resources in Gobi-Altai, Umnugobi, Bayankhongor,

1974 on the use of water and protection of the

31.4 percent of the Mongolia’s territory.

Sukhbaatar and Dornogobi provinces.

Selenge River Basin, which plays an important role
for the economic and industrial development of

In 1994, an agreement was signed between China

both countries. The agreement made between

and Mongolia on the protection of transboundary

programme into the secondary school curriculum. However, due to
the competing interests of different sectors and a lack of incentives
for environmental protection, the rate of implementation of rules and
regulations has been weak (MFA, 2004).

Challenges to well-being and development
Average per capita water consumption in Mongolia is very low. The
average water consumption of populations living in yurt (the traditional
tent-like structures used by nomads) districts of big settlements is
around 10 litres per person per day, far from being enough to meet
sanitary requirements. There are 10,000 cases of diarrhoea every year
in Mongolia and almost 70 percent of these cases occur in Ulan Bator.
Dysentery and hepatitis are also common. These infections stem from
a lack of access to safe water and sanitation infrastructure.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Water for food
Nomadic livestock husbandry has long been the dominant economic
activity in Mongolia. This sector employs 47 percent of the total
population, produces 34.6 percent of agricultural gross production
and accounts for 30 percent of the country’s exports. Until recently,
crop production was not considered a significant economic activity in
Mongolia. Intensive land cultivation only began in 1958. Currently, about
130 million ha of land is used for agriculture. Almost 98 percent of this
surface area is utilized as pastureland whereas farmland occupies less
than 1 percent (806,000 ha) of this land (UNEP, 2002). As of 2000,
agriculture employed 48 percent of the total work force, made up about
35 percent of Mongolia’s GDP and 30 percent of total export products.
Until 1990, crop production was sufficient to surpass the total domestic
demand for flour, and surpluses of flour, potatoes and vegetables were
exported. However, after the collapse of Soviet Union, both cropping
area and yield have declined, due to a lack of funding and technical and
managerial problems. Today, wheat production satisfies only 50 percent
of domestic demand, and potato and vegetable production barely meets
40 percent of demand. Yet irrigation continues to be the most water-

demanding sector. Approximately 43 percent of annual water abstraction
is used for agriculture.
In recent years, climate changes have caused groundwater levels to fall,
which has resulted in the drying up of some wells and springs (NSO,
2000). This has a great impact on animal herders living in remote areas
of Mongolia. Consequently, the risk of livestock losses during the dry
periods has increased enormously, and pastures near abundant water
sources have become overused. The increasing number of livestock
(from 25 million in 1990 to 30 million in 2000) clearly indicates that
the problem is likely to get worse.

Water and industry
The mining industry contributes approximately 20 percent of national
GDP and accounts for over 50 percent of overall exports. While mining
is the largest industry in Mongolia, traditional industries such as fur
and leather processing have also caused water pollution and affected
ecosystems. Industrial water demand corresponds to 26 percent of
annual supply. This rate of utilization is expected to increase in parallel
to economic growth: since the 1990s, many new enterprises have been
established, but environmental problems have increased due to lack of
adequate environmental precautions.

Water and energy
Mongolia experiences an extremely cold climate for eight months of
the year, making energy for heat generation crucial for survival. The
large geographical area of the country and its low population density
makes the provision of energy services a very difficult task. Wood and
coal are commonly used for heating and cooking purposes. During the
last decade, however, deforestation caused by firewood production has
become one of the most serious and urgent environmental concerns
in the country. Currently, only about 8 percent of Mongolia’s territory
(mostly in the north) is covered by forest. Using coal and wood for
heat generation leads to serious air pollution.

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 9 7

People living in steppe, Gobi and desert areas face serious fuel shortages.
The government of Mongolia has given top priority to developing the
energy sector as the main electricity grid covers only 30 percent of the
total land area, supplying power to about 1 million people.
Mongolia’s hydropower potential is stagnant, due to a lack of funds
for the implementation of large-scale hydropower projects. Currently,
hydroelectricity is produced at five small hydropower plants in the
western region of Mongolia.

Risk management and responses
The central and northern parts of the country are prone to floods during
the periods of heavy rain. The inhabitants of yurt settlements are the
most affected, as they are usually located in flood-prone areas. Floods
cause greater economic damages when they take place in densely
populated areas. For example, in July 1966, the water level of the Tuul
River increased by 3 m. This flooded the industrial region of Ulan Bator,
claiming the lives of 130 people and causing US $7.5 million in economic
damages (UNEP, 2002).
Due to low average rainfall, drought is very common, especially in the
desert-steppe zone of country, where droughts up to three consecutive
years have been recorded. The biggest impact of drought is definitely on
the agriculture sector, including animal husbandry. For example, in the
central and southern regions of the country, droughts are frequently
observed during the first stage of the growing period (UNEP, 2002).
As a result, crop cultivation is becoming more and more dependent on
large-scale irrigation schemes.
Unfortunately, neither flood nor drought prevention measures are
organized in a systematic manner. In the case of floods, communities lack
the advantage of early warning systems. Furthermore, there is a definite
lack of public awareness.

Water resources management
The Government recognizes that conservation of water resources is of
primary importance for the long-term development of the economy.
This is reflected in the terms of reference of the National Water
Programme, which aims to ensure sustainable development of the
country by the efficient use and protection of water resources. In 2000,
the National Water Committee (NWC) was established with the purpose
of coordinating and monitoring the National Water Programme’s
implementation. It serves as the coordinating body of a number of
ministries and local governments. However, there are no resources
allocated for the realization of the National Water Programme.
Furthermore, no specific milestones were identified. As a result, the
NWC struggles to coordinate the actions of several ministries within
the fragmented management scheme of water sector.

The legislative and regulatory framework for the use of water resources is in
place and updated when necessary. For example, the Water Law, which was
adopted in 1995, was amended in 2004 to integrate river basin
management practices (including the establishment of enhanced water
resources information systems, the development of river basins management
plans and the establishment of river basin organizations) with the goal of
better utilizing water resources while protecting ecosystems. The Water Law
also recognizes the economic value of water, requires capacity-building in
the water sector, focuses on the decentralization of water management,
puts forward the need for environmental impact assessments and sets new
penalties for violating water legislation. However, the provisions of the law
are vague and open to interpretations by different sectors. Furthermore,
although the newly amended law foresees provisions for IWRM, public
involvement at the local level is missing. Therefore, developed policies and
programmes lack any public ownership. Facilitating the involvement of
water users and stakeholders in managing the allocation of water
resources remains a challenge.
Water-related policies and programmes developed at the national level
often do not reach the local level. Policy implementation and monitoring
mechanisms are also strained. At the institutional level, financial and
human resource capacity is limited. The coordination of numerous
institutions at national and local levels is missing, and the division of
responsibility is not clear. Due to financial limits, laws and regulations
are not adequately enforced.
Ulan Bator and the surrounding settlements located upstream of the Tuul
River Basin are the biggest water users. However, no management plan
currently exists for the water resources of the Tuul River Basin.
Mongolia’s pricing policy is decentralized; local authorities are entitled
to set up and revise the water tariffs. Although in theory, the Mongolian
Government gives priority to the interests and water needs of the poor
and marginalized, in practice, the current pricing scheme has become
pro-industry and pro-wealthy due to weak regulations. Water tariffs
for the mining industry are about US $0.006 per 1,000 L, whereas
small businesses pay about US $0.48 per 1,000 L (eighty times more).
For metered apartment users, a fixed rate of between US $1.5 and $7.5
per month is charged per inhabitant. The rate for yurt consumers, similar
to small businesses, is eighty-four times higher than for industries and
mining companies. As a result, those with the lowest income pay the
highest and consume the least.

Conclusion
After the fall of the Soviet Union, Mongolia has been going through
a profound economic and political transition period. Poverty is on the
rise, only a limited portion of the population has access to safe water,
sanitation facilities are poor, the quality of water resources are decaying,
water-related diseases are common, and health services are out of reach
for the poor. These problems are further accentuated by water scarcity, a

4 9 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

very cold climate and recent disasters. The Government of Mongolia is
committed to implementing reforms in water resources management and
environmental protection, but due to lack of financial resources and the
limited number of trained personnel, policies cannot be implemented, and
laws and regulations cannot be enforced. Improving the implementation of

legal frameworks and policy coordination in the water sector are dire
necessities. Sectoral interests have prevented the adequate protection
of water resources and the environment. The decentralization of water
pricing has promoted economic growth by providing low-cost water
to business and industry but has disregarded the needs of the poor.

◆

12. La Plata River Basin
◆
◆

The La Plata River Basin is the fifth largest river basin in the world,
extending over 3.1 million km2, and its surface area is second only to
the Amazon River Basin in South America. It covers an extensive part
of central and northern Argentina, southeast Bolivia, almost all the
southern part of Brazil, the whole of Paraguay and a large part of
Uruguay (see Map 14.12).

◆

✱

◆

✱

◆

✱
✱
▲

✱

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆◆

✱ ✱✱
✱✱

◆

◆

◆

✱

◆

▲

✱

✱

✱

✱

✱

◆
◆

◆

✱

◆
✱

◆

The La Plata River Basin has four main sub-basins: the Paraná, Paraguay
and Uruguay River systems and the La Plata River sub-basin itself.
The Paraná River system is the biggest of the three, constituting 48.7
percent of the basin’s overall surface area. The Paraguay and Uruguay
River systems respectively comprise 35.3 percent and 11.8 percent of
the basin. The remaining 4.2 percent corresponds to the La Plata River
sub-basin itself.

✱

✱

◆

With over 100 million inhabitants, close to fifty major cities, seventy-five
large dams and an economy that represents 70 percent of the per capita
GDP of five countries, the basin has enormous economic and social
importance for the region overall.

✱

◆

✱

✱

Map 14.13: Overview of La Plata River Basin

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

In terms of discharge, the Paraná River System is the most important
in the basin, with a mean annual flow of about 17,100 cubic metres
per second (m3/s) at Corrientes.8 The Uruguay River system has a mean
annual flow of about 4,300 m3/s, while the Paraguay River System has the
lowest capacity with a mean annual flow of approximately 3,800 m3/s at
Puerto Pilcomayo.9
Long-term measurements over a large part of the La Plata Basin show
certain trends in climate and rainfall patterns. For example, annual minimum
temperatures are increasing by about 1°C per century. Furthermore,
hydrological records show evidence of an increase both in rainfall and runoff
in the La Plata Basin after 1970. El Niño has also had an impact on stream
flows in the basin. For example, in the middle section of the Paraná River,
the four largest discharges on record followed the four El Niño events of
1905, 1982–1983, 1992 and 1998. In 1982 and 1983, more than 40,000
people were affected in more than seventy towns along the reach of the

8. Located on the left bank of the Paraná River (Argentina), after its confluence with the
Paraguay River.
9. Located on the right bank of the Paraguay River (Argentina), after its confluence with the
Pilcomayo River.

Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Uruguay River within the Brazilian state of Rio Grande do Sul. Severe
flooding, with extensive damage to infrastructure and economic production,
are frequent occurrences, especially in the Paraná and Uruguay sub-basins.
The Paraná River and its tributaries have many riverside towns that are
frequently flooded. This is the case in the Argentinean cities of Resistencia,
Corrientes, Rosario, and Santa Fe. In the La Plata Basin as a whole, losses
associated with El Niño events were estimated at more than US $1 billion.

Water and environment
Thanks to climatic conditions, rainfed agriculture is common in the basin.
In fact, the proportion of irrigated land to the overall agricultural area is
relatively low, varying between 0.3 percent (in Paraguay) to 16.8 percent
(in Uruguay). Soybean, maize and wheat are widely produced in the basin,
and animal husbandry and fisheries are other important sources of food
and income.
However, soil loss from agricultural areas and organic and chemical
contamination stemming from agriculture and animal husbandry are also

C A S E STU D I ES . 4 9 9

sources of pollution. Furthermore, pollutants and heavy metals from
mining operations and inadequately treated urban sewage are other
causes of environmental concerns in the basin. Increased tourism is
also leading to overfishing, damage to flora and fauna and the illegal
exportation of endangered species. In addition, it is argued that the
Hidrovía project, which has been proposed as a means of facilitating the
transport of agricultural products, might negatively affect the extremely
rich array of wildlife in Pantanal ecosystem (see Box 14.9).
With the support of the World Bank, the Government of Brazil initiated
the Pantanal Project in 1991. The resulting Plan for the Conservation
of the Upper Paraguay River Basin (PCBAP, Plano de Conservação da
Bacia do Alto Paraguai) employed an environmental zoning approach
to delineate general and site-specific guidelines for the conservation,
rehabilitation and preservation of degraded lands; created a geographic
information system (GIS) to facilitate the dissemination of available
physical, biological, social, legal and economic information; and
proposed the operation of a real-time flood warning system.

insufficient or non-existent, increasing the percentage of people suffering
from diseases that stem from a lack of water and sanitation. Problems
related to informal settlements in the region have aggravated in the
last twenty years.

Table 14.2: Percentage of urban and rural populations
with access to drinking water and sanitation services
Safe water (%)
Countries
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Paraguay
Uruguay

Sanitation (%)

Urban areas Rural areas Urban areas Rural areas
85
30
89
48
93
44
82
35
96
65
94
53
70
13
85
47
99
93
95
85

Access to safe water and sanitation
Environmental problems are not only limited to Pantanal. In the last
few decades, rapid population growth, road development, expanding
agricultural frontiers, mining and large-scale hydraulic engineering
(including dams, waterways, and irrigation projects) have resulted in
a decrease in the overall quality of the basin environment and created
ongoing problems, such as siltation of waterways and resevoirs, intense
deforestation and degradation (e.g. in the Chaco semi-arid woodland),
tropical forest loss and fragmentation of the rainforests of Argentina,
Brazil and Paraguay.

Access to safe water and sanitation varies significantly between urban
and rural areas in the La Plata Basin. In all the countries, urban areas
have better access to safe water and sanitation services than rural areas.
In fact, between 70 and 99 percent of the urban population has access
to safe water and 82 to 95 percent has access to sanitation services.
Meanwhile, in rural areas between 13 and 93 percent of the population
have access to safe water and 35 to 85 percent have access to sanitation
services (Table 14.2).

Water and health
Severe erosion on the eastern slopes of the Andes has caused
agricultural land loss in Bolivia and Argentina, as well as a devastating
siltation process on the Bermejo and Paraguay rivers, which extends into
the Paraguay, Paraná and La Plata rivers. A large part of fertilizers and
pesticides used in farming are carried by runoff into watercourses. This
toxic pollution puts the populations that depend on the rivers’
productivity for their livelihoods at risk and threatens the biodiversity of
the maritime front of the La Plata River.

Biological contamination stemming from a lack of proper sanitation
infrastructure and inadequate wastewater treatment facilities constitutes
a severe problem in several urban and rural settlements in the basin.
Consequently, occurrences of waterborne diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera,
malaria and dengue are quite common in certain regions. Other diseases of
fewer occurrences are leptospirosis, leishmaniasis and yellow fever. Diarrhoea
is by far the most common waterborne disease, affecting children especially.
In 2003, in Argentina alone, over 900,000 people suffered from diarrhoea.

Levels of poverty

In different zones of Argentina, among several other Latin American countries,
the population has to constantly utilize water resources with naturally high arsenic
content, surpassing acceptable limits for drinking water standards. Arsenic is a
naturally occurring element found in the earth’s crust (see Chapter 6). Water
resources that are in contact with rock layers that are rich in arsenic get polluted
by this carcinogenic mineral. Arsenic is also utilized in some industrial processes
and can leak into water bodies if not handled with care. Significant efforts are
made to minimize or eliminate arsenic contamination in urban drinking water by
chemical treatment. However, although low-cost methodologies for removal of
arsenic at home level have been tested with success, some rural communities
continue using groundwater resources that are contaminated with arsenic.

Important economic crises at the beginning of this decade have affected
all basin countries and had a negative impact on the success of poverty
reduction strategies. The poverty rates in Argentina and Uruguay
decreased rapidly in the 1990s and then increased again between 1999
and 2002, more than doubling in Argentina. On the other hand, poverty
decreased rapidly in Brazil between 1992 and 1995 and has remained
more or less stagnant since then. Lately, poverty has also been on the
rise in the urban areas of Bolivia and Paraguay.
People with low incomes often live in informal settlements established in
marginal areas where safe water and sanitation infrastructure is either

5 0 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Water and industry
The La Plata River Basin comprises a great potential for economic activities.
In this regard, there are several industrial centres in the five countries situated
along numerous tributaries. However, the most significant industrial centres
are located in Brazil, in the São Paulo metropolitan area, and in Argentina,
along the industrial strip on the Paraná River and in the metropolitan area of
Buenos Aires. Mining sector is prominent at the upper part of Paraguay River
sub-basin and in Bolivia close to the Pilcomayo River tributaries.
The greatest industrial water demand occurs in the Paraná River System
(20 percent), where the industrial sector is mostly concentrated. In the
La Plata River sub-Basin, almost 98 percent of the water abstracted is
utilized along the Argentinean bank by factories located in the Buenos
Aires metropolitan area.
The industrial centres, although providing employment and contributing
to the national GDP, are a source of pollution in the basin. Consequently,
depending on the type and extent of industrialization and the absorption
capacity of rivers, the level of contamination varies in the four river subsystems. However, there are localized cases of contamination where big
urban settlements, industrial zones and mining pits are located. In order
to curb industrial pollution, the five countries of the La Plata River Basin
are drawing policy guidelines and implementing programmes for promoting
cleaner industry.

Water and energy
Growing population and industrialization necessitate an increase in energy
production. Given an estimated potential of 92,000 MW, the production of

hydropower has thus become a regional priority. So far, approximately 60
percent of this potential has been put to use.
More than 90 percent of the energy used by Brazil comes from
hydropower, the greater part of which is generated by dams on the
Paraná River and its tributaries. By taking into consideration the
environmental and social impacts that the dams cause, a financial
compensation tax has been placed on the hydroelectric sector for the
utilization of water resources. By law, 6 percent of the value of the
electric energy produced is channelled back to the areas where the
facilities for energy production are located or areas that have been
flooded due to the dam reservoirs. Furthermore, a certain percentage of
these funds is allocated to the Ministry of Environment for the
implementation of the National Water Resources Management System.
Hydropower development projects are not only national in character.
Riparian countries have implemented joint projects such as the Salto
Grande (Argentina and Uruguay), Itaipú (Brazil and Paraguay) and Yacyretá
(Argentina and Paraguay) dams to further improve their energy production.

Sharing water resources
There are substantial underground water resources in the La Plata River
Basin. The Guaraní Aquifer System (GAS), for example, is one of the
world’s most important fresh groundwater reservoirs, due to its extent
and volume. It underlies portions of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and
Uruguay, stretching over an area of approximately 1.2 million km2, with
almost 15 million inhabitants. The capacity of the GAS is estimated at
around 40,000 km3.

BOX 14.9: THE PARAGUAY-PARANÁ WATERWAY (HIDROVÍA) PROJECT
The waterways of the La Plata Basin have been

of transport of goods and improve links with

changes in water levels at the confluence of

navigated since the early sixteenth century. The

commercial centres, while granting an outlet to

the Paraná and Paraguay rivers. Other concerns

Paraguay and Paraná Rivers are natural transport

the sea to landlocked Bolivia and Paraguay.

include the alteration of natural aquifer systems,
increased water contamination due to expected

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

corridors extending in a north-south direction,
connecting the heart of South America to the

However, the project’s construction and

growth in local populations and increased

Atlantic Ocean. Although they remain an important

operation may have a number of severe and

commerce, industry and irrigation.

transportation artery linking the five riparian

complex impacts on the environment of the

countries, the continuous maintenance of those

region, particularly the Pantanal, an immense

As a result, this project is under debate by

waterways poses a problem to riparian countries.

plain located in the Upper Paraguay River Basin,

scientists and conservation organizations.

considered to be one of the world’s largest

A more in-depth environmental impact

The Hidroviá waterway, as planned, runs from

wetlands (with an estimated area of 140,000

assessment is necessary to address the various

Puerto Cáceres (Brazil) in the north to Nueva

km2). This large and rich ecosystem, which has

social, environmental and economic aspects of

Palmira (Uruguay) in the south, following the

so far remained relatively untouched, might be

this development project.

Paraguay and Paraná rivers over 3,000 km.

seriously damaged due to a significantly

The aim of the project is to expand the five

modified flow regime, whose repercussions

countries’ navigation possibilities, promote

might not only be limited to a decrease in

development of the region by reducing the cost

biodiversity but might also lead to significant

Sources: Modified from Bucher and Huszar, 1995; Gottgens
et al., 1998; and Petrella and Ayuso, 1996.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 0 1

A joint project is currently under way to support GAS countries in
implementing a common institutional framework for managing and
preserving the GAS. The project also aims to expand and consolidate
the current knowledge base through monitoring and evaluating water
resources, in order to promote stakeholder participation in decisionmaking and control pollution.
An international legal framework for the management of transboundary
groundwater resources currently does not exist. However, transboundary
groundwater management is necessary in regions that are subject to
water scarcity and fierce competition among users (see Chapter 11).
In the case of the GAS, helping to shape an institutional framework
regarding transboundary groundwater can make a contribution that
could serve as a potential model for other countries and regions.
With respect to surface water, the main concern is the sustainability of
the resources in the long term. For this purpose, many bi- or multilateral
projects are currently in progress. Some examples are the integrated
management and master plan of the Pilcomayo River Basin (Argentina,
Bolivia, and Paraguay) and the strategic action programme for the
Bermejo River Binational Basin (Argentina and Bolivia). Through these
projects, basin countries aim to promote better utilization of water and
land resources while conserving and rehabilitating ecosystems. These
projects also facilitate information exchange in addition to providing a
basis for strengthening regional information systems.

Managing the resource: Institutional frameworks
The first step towards the initiation of a comprehensive basin-wide
study was taken in 1967, as a decision of the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of the five countries. The direct outcome of this decision was the
establishment of the Intergovernmental Coordinating Committee of the
Countries of La Plata Basin (CIC). In 1968, the committee was entrusted
to draw up a treaty in order to enforce the institutionalization of the
basin. Approved in 1969, this treaty provides the basis for further
bilateral and multilateral agreements concerning jurisdictional matters,
navigation, fishing, pollution prevention, scientific research, etc.

Currently, the CIC has a new ‘Program of Action’ and is preparing a
Framework Programme, with the support of the Global Environment
Facility (GEF), through the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
and the Organization of American States (OAS), in order to implement the
environmentally and socially sustainable economic development of the La
Plata Basin, specifically by protecting and managing its water resources
and adapting to climatic change and variability.

Conclusion
The La Plata River Basin is the fifth largest river system in the world and
has enormous economic and social importance for the region.
Due to a series of economic crises affecting the countries of the basin,
rising poverty remains the most important social issue to be addressed.
Given limited funds allocated, meeting safe water and sanitation needs
of the people, and especially the poor, is a big challenge. As a result,
water-borne diseases stemming from lack of water and sanitation
continue to be among one of the major causes of morbidity in the basin.
The basin is blessed with a rich array of wildlife and extensive
ecosystems, however, rapid population growth, expanding industrial,
agricultural and mining activities and large-scale hydraulic engineering
have caused extensive environmental deterioration in the basin.
Basin countries share the common vision of sustainable development
through bilateral and multilateral cooperation in utilising the extensive
surface and groundwater resources in an optimal fashion. For this purpose,
many joint projects are currently in progress. through these projects, basin
countries aim to promote better utilisation of water and land resources
while conserving and rehabilitating ecosystems. The La Plata Treaty, based
on a basin-wide institutional framework, provides the foundation for such
efforts towards the protection and integrated management of water
resources and adaption to climate change and variability.

5 0 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

13. South Africa
South Africa is the fourth largest country in Africa, with a surface area of 1,219,090 km2 and an estimated population of 48 million. Average
rainfall is 450 mm per year, but can vary significantly from less than 100 mm along the west coast to more than 1,000 mm on the east coast
and along the escarpment. In the interior, seasonal rivers generate 27 percent of the runoff from 54 percent of the surface area, while in the
west 24 percent of the surface area is drained by episodic rivers without any significant contribution to the runoff. The natural mean annual
runoff (MAR) is about 49,000 million m3 per year, of which only 27 percent is currently available as reliable yield. Due to the high temporal
and spatial variation in rainfall, high evaporation and the location of water users, the remaining economic development potential is only
5.4 million km3 per year (11 percent of MAR). Accordingly, per capita water availability is approximately 1,060 m3 per year (based on MAR),
of which the utilizable portion is only 300 m3 per person per year. South Africa’s existing water resource availability comprises 77 percent
surface water, 9 percent groundwater and 14 percent re-use of return flows.

◆
◆

◆ ◆◆

◆

◆

◆
◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

◆

South Africa is home to six world heritage sites, sixteen international
Ramsar sites, twenty national parks and over 500 terrestrial reserves.
However, ecosystems are under the threat of extensive land use,
urbanisation, industrialisation and water resources development. Although
over 50 percent of wetlands have been destroyed for land-use changes,
such as a reduction of 40 percent of the area of Mfolozi Swamp (South
Africa’s largest fluvial plain), South Africa has successfully managed and
protected numerous other wetland conservation areas – many with
increased biodiversity thanks to environmental and natural resource
management policies and practices. For example, the National Water
Act of 1998 includes formal provisions for the protection of the aquatic
ecosystems, including the classification of water resources, determination
of the Reserve and setting of resource quality objectives. Consequently,
no water use is licensed without first determining the Reserve
(environmental requirement) and its possible impacts on the
functioning of ecosystems.

◆

Water and Ecosystems

Map 14.14: Overview of the river basins of South Africa
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Water and settlements
South Africa is an urbanizing nation. Approximately 28 million people
(59 percent of the overall population) live in more than 3,000 urban
communities, including informal settlements. The nine largest cities are
home to 16 million inhabitants (37 percent of the national population)
and provide 50 percent of the nation’s work force. These cities cover
only two percent of the overall surface area of the country.

The rural population (about 20 million people or 41 percent of the
total population) also presents a major challenge for ensuring sustainable
livelihoods. Although groundwater represents only about 9 percent of
available water resources, 74 percent of South African rural communities
are dependent entirely on groundwater, while another 14 percent
depend partially on it.

The rapid growth of informal urban settlements presents a major
challenge. According to recent statistics, approximately 5 million people
(28 percent of the urban population) live in such settlements without
proper water services infrastructure. Some informal settlements are
located along river reaches, which exposes them to waterborne diseases
and makes them vulnerable to flooding. The fast growth of settlement
development poses major challenges to municipalities and service
providers. Extensive effort and funding is directed to water services,
housing and integrated programmes to address urbanization and the
creation of sustainable human settlements. This goes hand-in-hand
with social development programmes and associated job creation.

South Africa has initiated a comprehensive basic water services
programme to provide effective, affordable and equitable water services
to all (see Chapter 6). South Africa successfully achieved the MDG
target of halving the proportion of people lacking access to safe
water by 2015 (reduced from 40 percent to 19 percent since 1994).
The remaining challenge is to address the remaining 9 million people
who still lack access to water supply, 64 percent of which live in rural
settlements. In addition, 16 million people are still without acceptable
basic sanitation facilities, 56 percent of which are rural inhabitants.
The scattered nature of rural settlements presents major challenges
for providing sustainable services.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 0 3

Poverty is a profound socio-economic challenge in South Africa, which
particularly affects female-headed households and rural inhabitants.
Over 34 percent of the population live on less than US $2 per day and
70 percent of the country’s poorest households live in rural areas.

Water and health
Nineteen percent of the population still lack access to safe water, and
33 percent lack basic sanitation services. Public institutions also suffer
from a lack of access to safe water and sanitation services: 59 percent
of all schools (over 16,000) and clinics (over 2,500) lack access to
acceptable sanitation facilities, while 27 percent of all schools (over 7,500)
and 48 percent of all clinics (over 2,000) lack access to safe water supply.
Water-related epidemics and diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera,
dysentery, hepatitis and schistosomiasis occur in South Africa. In 2004,
there were 2,780 cholera infections with 35 fatalities and 9,503 hepatitis
A infections with 49 fatalities. Malaria is also a common disease;
between 2000 and 2004, there were 77,854 reported incidences of
malarial infection, 875 of which ended with fatality. Each year, some 2.5
million people fall ill with bilharzia (schistosomiasis), of whom about 10
percent are ‘severely infected’, although few die of the disease.
Schistosomiasis infections are highest (up to 70 percent) amongst
children living in lower-lying areas of Limpopo Province, Mpumalanga
and KwaZulu-Natal. Infections of shigella dysenteriae vary significantly;
there was a total of 894 cases recorded in 2004. Diarrhoea is a result
of various types of bacteriological, viral and parasitic infections, affecting
more than 3 million patients each year and causing up to 3 percent of
annual deaths (over 15,000 deaths), of which not all are directly related
to water. The high prevalence of HIV/AIDS is also a major concern (see
Chapter 6). These diseases significantly affect the economic productivity
and social activities of affected households.
The free basic water (FBW) programme to ensure access to effective
water supply and sanitation services, in association with access to health
facilities and services, plays a major role in addressing water-related
diseases and improving the health and quality of life of all people. The
South African Government is also promoting improved hygiene practices
through national programmes, campaigns and education awareness at
schools and in communities. Furthermore, the provision of free basic
water services to the poor has become a national policy since 2000.
This programme aims to ensure that poor households receive 6,000 litres
of FBW per month. Beyond this basic allowance, users must pay for their
consumption. The programme is progressively implemented by the Water
Services Authorities, and over 76 percent of the population already
receives access to FBW. Progress is also being made to ensure access
to water supply and sanitation services at all schools and clinics.

Water for food
South Africa’s agricultural production is limited by the availability of
natural resources (soil, climate and water), as only 15 percent of the

country is suited for conventional cultivation. Approximately 10 percent
of the surface area is currently cultivated. In spite of the semi-arid
climate, over 70 percent of crop production is rainfed, and less than 30
percent is produced with irrigation. In total, agriculture accounts for over
60 percent of total water utilization. Primary and processed agriculture
currently contribute 15 percent to the GDP. Furthermore, agriculture is
the main economic activity of rural areas and a major supplier of jobs,
with almost 40 percent of poor households involved in agriculture for
food or cash crops.
South Africa is self-sufficient in most major food crops and a main
exporter of food to neighbouring states, largely through production on
large commercial farms. In addition to this, approximately 1.6 million
households (35 percent of rural households) depend on their own
farming and food production abilities to meet their nutritional needs.
The Government is giving increasing attention to social programmes in
poverty-stricken areas to reduce the vulnerability of poor households.
An example of this is the development of food plots and vegetable
gardens for poor communities. Furthermore, institutional reform is
underway to facilitate equitable access to water resources and
representation in water management institutions.

Water and energy
South Africa is the world’s sixth largest producer of coal, which
constitutes about 74 percent of the country’s total energy consumption.
Coal-fired thermal plants supply 93 percent of the country’s total energy
requirements. The energy sector has a considerable share in the economy
as it employs about 240,000 people, which corresponds to approximately
1.5 percent of the economically active population and contributes 13
percent to the GDP. South Africa is the largest energy consumer on the
continent, with an electricity consumption equivalent to two-thirds of
the overall electricity use in Africa. To ensure the security of electricity
supply, the energy sector receives a preferential allocation of water
resources, while it only accounts for 2 percent of national water use.
Hydropower plants contribute only 0.4 percent to current electricity
generation. This is mainly due to limiting factors like the quantity and
variability of surface water. However, South Africa has prioritized
hydropower development for managing electricity demand peaks and
as a development potential within the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). The SADC is a regional economic community that
aims to combat poverty, ensure food security and promote industrial
development through the integration of regional economies. Within the
context of the SADC, the hydroelectric potential of the Zambezi and
Congo rivers are explored in collaboration with Mozambique, Zimbabwe
and Democratic Republic of Congo. Given the variability of surface
water runoff, South Africa relies on dams and transfer schemes to ensure
access to water in locations of high economic activity. In fact, the total
storage capacity currently represents 66 percent of the total MAR.

5 0 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

To serve growing energy demands, South Africa is currently planning
additional nuclear and thermal power generation schemes as well as
some smaller solar and hydropower plants. In line with the national water
resource strategy, water conservation measures have been introduced in
the energy sector, resulting in savings of up to 40 percent of water
consumption per energy unit generated.

skills and the capacity-building of newly established water institutions.
South Africa is also in the process of establishing a comprehensive
integrated monitoring framework for water resources and water services.
These various governance initiatives instill an effective, participative and
sustainable water management culture in South Africa.

Sharing water
Water and industry
The industrial sector is the most prominent and the highest growing
economic sector in South Africa. It generates 29 percent of the GDP and
54 percent (including mining) of all exports and employs over 25 percent
of the total work force. Together, industry and mining account for 11
percent of the total water use in South Africa. Many industries and
mines are located far from available water resources, which necessitates
extensive water infrastructure developments to transfer water from other
basins, sometimes in neighbouring countries.
These sectors are major impactors on water resources, and as a result,
pollution control and water resource quality management receive high
priority. Specific attention is given to effective use and conservation
measures through various legislations such as the 1998 National
Water Act.

Water management and risk mitigation
In South Africa, water is governed by the National Water Act and the
Water Services Act, supported by a dedicated Minister, a National
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, as well as various water
institutions at various levels. Legislation in South Africa recognizes
water as a national asset and a strategic resource for economic and social
development. It also recognizes the need to protect the environment and
ensure quality of life. IWRM has been adopted to achieve these goals.
To date, four of the nineteen planned Catchment Management Agencies
have been established. A further 170 municipalities have been given the
responsibility to act as Water Services Authorities. This is supported by
various infrastructure, finance, capacity-building and management
programmes. Currently almost 3 percent of the national budget is
allocated to water governance, and additional funds are provided for
specific water-related programmes and infrastructure development.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Disasters like drought, floods, fires and epidemic outbreaks of diseases
are common in South Africa. To manage these risks, South Africa has
adopted a proactive planning and management approach. Through the
national disaster management policy, institutional arrangements and
early warning systems have been established.
Water resources and water services management is guided by a National
Water Resource Strategy, catchment management strategies, integrated
strategic perspectives and water services development plans. These are
supported by institutional reform and the development of comprehensive
regulatory frameworks. A key challenge is the development of appropriate

There are four major transboundary river basins in South Africa,
encompassing 65 percent of the country’s surface area, 72 percent of
the population and 40 percent of available water resources. These are
the Limpopo (South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, and Mozambique), the
Komati (South Africa, Swaziland, and Mozambique), the Maputu/Usuthu
(South Africa, Swaziland and Mozambique) and the Orange basins (South
Africa, Lesotho and Namibia).
South Africa subscribes to IWRM and therefore promotes equitable
allocation of water resources among uses and users at both the
national and international level. Accordingly, South Africa has entered
into nineteen international water agreements and treaties with its
neighbouring countries, such as the revised protocol on shared
water resources of the SADC.
South Africa is also sharing water across national river basins. The uneven
distribution of water availability in South Africa in relation to the location
of the country’s economic growth centres necessitated the building of
various inter-basin transfer infrastructure to facilitate optimal water
utilization and sharing between economic sectors and stakeholders.

Ensuring the knowledge base
South Africa’s strong science base is well reflected in the water sector.
However, the science and technology disciplines have a much skewed
human resource base, with only 20 percent of the country’s science,
engineering and technology capacity constituted in the previously
disadvantaged population groups. The knowledge base of the water
sector, at present, reflects a similar disparity. For this purpose, various
capacity-building programmes have been directed towards local
authorities and water institutions. These initiatives include IWRM
programmes, as well as other specific training, support and capacitybuilding programmes. This is further promoted by a participatory and
cooperative governance approach, as well as various information,
knowledge and advisory systems.
Water research plays a major role in establishing and maintaining the
knowledge base. The Water Research Act of 1971 established the Water
Research Commission (WRC), mandating it to coordinate and support
water research, using funds from a dedicated Water Research Fund.
Besides the direct impact on water resources, governance, management
and development, these research projects also play a major role in
capacity-building: more than 100 Masters and thirty PhD degrees
were awarded in 2004.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 0 5

Research is also carried out by universities and other institutions, as
well as government-subsidized science councils, including the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research, the Agricultural Research Council and
the Human Sciences Research Council.

Securing household food security is a common concern, as many families
live a subsistence lifestyle and depend on rainfed irrigation to produce
their own food. Although irrigation plays a strategic role in providing
food security during dry years, water scarcity impedes irrigation on a
wider scale.

Conclusion
In South Africa, water scarcity is a limiting factor for development.
The value of water is therefore high in all aspects of society, the economy
and the environment.
South Africa is a country emerging from a history of political oppression to
become a nation of democratic values for human dignity, equality and freedom.
Poverty is the foremost social concern, and the government aims to address
the needs of the poorest in society by ensuring access to basic services
through dedicated programmes for infrastructure and free basic water services.
The social value of water is founded in the desperate need of the 3.6 million
people (8 percent of the population) who currently do not have access to any
water supply infrastructure, and the 9 million people (39 percent of the
population) who do not receive minimum basic water supply services.

The industrial and mining sectors are major contributors to the overall
wealth of South Africa. To support economic growth and development,
South Africa must reconcile the growing demands of the different uses with
limited water availability, while ensuring the sustainability of ecosystems.
To address these challenges, South Africa has undertaken a
comprehensive policy and legislative reform and is in the process of
implementing these through various national programmes. This goes
hand-in-hand with institutional reform and capacity-building programmes
in order to ensure that IWRM is implemented and sustainable effective
service delivery is ensured.

14. Sri Lanka
Over a surface area of 65,600 km2, 19.5 million people live in Sri Lanka. Water bodies, a considerable portion of which are man-made, cover
about 4 percent of the land. The terrain of the island is mostly made up of coastal plains, with mountains rising only in the south central part.
Sri Lanka has more than 100 water basins, varying from 10 km2 to
over 10,000 km2 in size. The Ruhuna Basins,10 which are located at
the southern part of the island, were featured in WWDR1 (see WWDR1
case study).

forty-one wetland sites included in the Asian Wetland Directory. Coastal
ecosystems are diverse, but their fragmentation, in addition to that of
forests, is extremely high (UN, 2002). In 1999, the Government imposed
a ban on logging in all natural forests in order to curb deforestation.

The climate of Sri Lanka is tropical and heavily influenced by monsoons that
bring rain throughout the year. The mean annual rainfall volume is
approximately 120 km3. Rainfall totals range from under 1,000 mm to over
5,000 mm. Sri Lanka’s groundwater resources are considered minor
compared to its surface water resources. The estimated groundwater
potential in Sri Lanka is 7.8 km3 per annum and is widely used for domestic,
small-scale irrigation, industrial and other uses. However, in recent years,
due to increased irrigation and population growth, both shallow and deep
aquifers have been subject to over-extraction. Consequently, the drying up
of domestic wells during dry periods has become more common.

Sixteen of Sri Lanka’s coastal lagoons are classified as threatened and
constitute nearly half of the country’s threatened wetlands.
Environmental degradation of the coastal zone is a major hazard faced by
Sri Lanka as an island state. During the last two decades, there has been
increasing pressure for development in the coastal zone, particularly for
tourism and recreational purposes, near shore fisheries, fish farming,
industrial development and housing. Communities have exploited the
use of natural resources, such as sand and coral, on a commercial basis.
Development pressures have also led to the reclamation of estuarial,
lagoon and marsh waters and the unrestricted disposal of untreated
sewage, leading to major pollution problems. The main threat to natural
ecosystems, however, is population growth and migration, reducing the
available habitat for ecosystems to thrive. Some other threats to the
island’s biodiversity are natural disasters, soil erosion, sedimentation
and large-scale sand mining.

Water and ecosystems
There is a rich diversity of ecosystems in Sri Lanka, including wetlands,
natural forests and marine and coastal ecosystems. Sri Lanka is
considered one of the world’s twenty-five ‘Biodiversity Hotspots’ (i.e.
very rich in biodiversity). Overall, there are three Biosphere reserves, one
World Heritage site, three Ramsar sites (see Chapters 5 and 12) and

10.See www.unesco.org/water/wwap/case_studies/ruhuna_basins/ for more information.

5 0 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

◆

4

with active support from NGOs. However, the limited annual budget of
the Ministry of Environment necessitates external sources of funding
for any substantial progress to be made (UN, 2002).

◆

Poverty
Over 45 percent of the population lives on less than US $2 per day, and
the percentage of the population living below the national poverty line
is 19 percent. The estimated number of preschool children suffering from
stunting11 is 330,000, while 210,000 are wasted12 and 540,000 are
underweight.13 Furthermore, 620,000 preschool children and about 36
percent of pregnant women were found to be anaemic. Although the
nutritional status shows a slight improvement from the 1990 levels, it is
necessary to enhance food production in the country and improve the
accessibility of food for the poor and other vulnerable populations at the
household level. This can be done through the efficient mobilization and
equitable allocation of land and water for food production.

4

◆

◆

Water and health

4

4
4
4

4
4

4

▲

4
4 4
4 4
▲ Maussakele

4 4

Samanala
Wewa
4

4

◆

4

◆

◆

◆

Map 14.15: Overview of the river basins in Sri Lanka
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

In order to address these concerns, the Ministry of Environment was
established in 1990. This was followed by the creation of two legal
instruments, namely the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and
Environment Protection Licence (EPL). All approved development projects
are required to obtain EIA and EPL clearance. These legal instruments
ensure the integration of environment protection measures into
development projects at the early stages of planning. Environmental
concerns are being addressed through ongoing government programmes

11. A child is stunted if his or her height-for-age is two standard deviations or more below
the median of the reference population.
12. A child is wasted if his or her weight-for-height is two standard deviations or more below
the median of the reference population.
13. A child is underweight if his or her weight-for-age is two or more standard deviations
below the median of the reference population.

Approximately 78 percent of the population in Sri Lanka is rural. Although
the availability of safe drinking water varies, on average, 75 percent of the
rural population and 95 percent of the urban population has access to
safe water resources. Furthermore, the percentage of households with safe
sanitation is between 85 and 90 percent. However, it should be noted that
there are considerable population groups in the peripheral areas of urban
centres where water supply and sanitation facilities are generally poor.
About 70 percent of the urban population is served by piped water
systems, whereas drinking water for rural populations are mainly supplied
by dug and tube wells. However, studies have shown that deep wells in
fractured crystalline rock yield water containing excessive amounts of
fluoride, which can lead to dental problems (fluorosis) among children
(see Chapter 6). The Government aims to provide 100 percent of the
urban population with a piped water supply by 2010 and all the major
urban areas with piped sewerage systems by 2015. The target is to provide
safe drinking water for the entire population by 2025. Diarrhoeal diseases
are still one of the ten leading causes of hospitalization in Sri Lanka. In
recent years, there were several outbreaks of diarrhoeal diseases, but
better medical practices have helped to decrease the diarrhoea-related
mortality rate. Vector-related diseases, such as malaria and Japanese
encephalitis, still continue to be a major public health problem and socioeconomic burden in Sri Lanka. However, effective vaccination programmes
and spraying of host areas have reduced the number of incidences.

Water and food
For the past 2,500 years, Sri Lanka has remained mainly rural and
agriculture-based. Agriculture is practised over 1,8 million ha of land, or
28 percent of overall surface area. Rice is the major agricultural crop, and
paddy land, 80 percent of which is under irrigation, covers 40 percent of
agricultural land. It is estimated that approximately 85 percent of the
overall water extraction is used for agriculture.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 0 7

Women make up 40 percent of the agricultural workforce, but are rarely
allowed to take part at the decision-making level, serving instead mostly
as cheap labour. Studies in minor irrigation systems show that 75 to 85
percent of women are involved in considerable physical activities, such as
land preparation, on-farm water management, sowing, transplanting,
harvesting and selling products. More than 70 percent of the women
agricultural workers render their services without receiving anything in
return. On the other hand, there are few female landowners (4 to 8
percent) who play major roles in agricultural activities.
National capital investment in irrigation and drinking water supplies, as
a ratio of total capital investment, declined from 7.7 percent in 1993 to
2.2 percent in 2003. Since the 1980s, the irrigation sector has stressed
better water resources management and planning, which partially justifies
the declining trend of the proportion of public investment, especially in
the construction and restoration of irrigation infrastructure. However,
there is still need for investment in the water sector.
Considering the limited nature of Sri Lanka’s water resources, demand
management has become a necessity. Demand management in the
irrigation sector involves the adoption of a cultivation calendar and an
irrigation schedule. Active community participation in decision-making is
customary in Sri Lanka, and farmers, through their institutions,
participate in the planning processes with formal irrigation officials.

Water for energy
There are over 10,000 dams of varying sizes in Sri Lanka (of which eighty are
classified as large dams), but hydropower contributes only 9 percent to annual
energy production. The country’s major energy sources are petroleum (41
percent) and fuel wood (50 percent). The contribution of hydropower to
electricity generation has decreased from about 100 percent in 1990 to about
42 percent in 2000. This drop was mainly due to the fact that there was an
inability to produce enough energy during frequent droughts, especially in the
late 1990s and early 2000s. However, dams and reservoirs have helped to
compensate for water deficiencies in dry areas, and the Government plans
to pursue the development of all possible hydropower options in the future.
Almost half of the electricity consumed in Sri Lanka is used for domestic
purposes. At the beginning of the year 2002, only 65 percent of the
population had access to electricity from the national grid, although this
ratio is scheduled to be increased to 77 percent by the end of 2006.

Water and industry
The pollution of surface and groundwater resources by industries is a grave
concern. For example, Kelani River, which is the main source of drinking water
for over 2 million inhabitants in the capital city Colombo, is polluted by
industries. Groundwater pollution has also been detected in well-water in mixed
residential and industrial areas. The Central Environmental Authority and local
government authorities are given the responsibility for controlling industryrelated water pollution.

Management responses
Demand management in the irrigation sector involves the adoption of
a cultivation calendar and an irrigation schedule to optimize water use.
Both irrigation officials and farmers take part in this joint effort. The
utilization of different kinds of seeds (like the introduction of short-term
rice paddy varieties) is another method for maximizing productivity.
Community participation in irrigated agriculture is now common in Sri
Lanka, although this was accepted as government policy only after the
mid-1980s. Since then, farmer institutions have been included in the
formal institutional structure. In the water supply sector, public
participation in rural water supply schemes is substantial, and
communities contribute by sharing costs and management roles.
Demand management in other sectors is mainly affected through the
tariff structure. For example, per unit of industrial water use is priced up
to six times higher than domestic water use charges. In allocating water
among different sectors, water for drinking, sanitation, irrigation, ecology,
environment and hydropower generation has priority over industrial and
commercial water requirements.

Risk management
Floods, droughts and landslides are the most common and destructive
types of natural disasters in Sri Lanka, with twenty-three droughts
reported to the Department of Social Services between 1947 and 1992.
More recent droughts occurred in 1995-1996, 2001, 2002 and 2003. The
disruption of livelihoods and productivity losses that occurred as a result
of these droughts severely disrupted the Sri Lankan economy. During the
2001 drought, for example, the country faced power cuts for up to eight
hours per day. In 2004, an estimated 52,000 ha of crops were damaged
in seven districts, and the government had to appeal for assistance to
provide food rations for over 1 million people during a six-month period
(Ministry of Social Welfare, 2004).
Several basins in Sri Lanka are flood-prone. The most recent flood, which
took place in May 2003, was one of the worst since 1947. It affected
139,000 families, completely destroyed 9,500 houses and claimed the lives
of 250 people. The cost of the damage was estimated at US $76.8 million.
For drought and flood mitigation, a number of structural and nonstructural measures have been taken. Reservoirs built for irrigation
purposes also serve as flood protection and drought mitigation. Flood
warning systems are unfortunately missing in a great number of basins.
Furthermore, flood-forecasting models fail to simulate real-life situations,
due to the poor mathematical algorithms employed. Efforts to minimize
the possible damages of water-related disasters include raising public
awareness and arranging insurance schemes for those who are frequently
subjected to floods and other natural disasters. However, inadequate
resources for data collection and dissemination and the inadequacy of
early warning systems remain major constraints for effective disaster

5 0 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

BOX 14.10: THE SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL COSTS OF THE TSUNAMI IN SRI LANKA
The 26 December 2004 tsunami was the biggest

railways, harbours, schools and

remains a continuing challenge and a grave

natural disaster to strike Sri Lanka. It resulted in

telecommunications networks was highly

responsibility even today.

38,900 deaths and displaced about 443,000

damaged as well as fishing vessels, water

people on the eastern and southern coasts.

supplies and many dwellings, including hotels..

Ongoing research has revealed that environmental
damage to coastal ecosystems, such as coral

The damage to homes, infrastructure,
ecosystems and agricultural lands was

However, cost estimates alone do not fully reveal

reefs and mangroves, reduced the capacity of the

enormous. The cost of the damage to assets

the human loss and suffering that occurred as a

natural barriers to mitigate the tsunami force and

is estimated at US $1 billion, while the cost of

result of the tsunami. It is estimated that more

thus intensified the destruction. Therefore, the

full recovery is about twice that.

than 900 children were orphaned or separated

Government and non-governmental organizations

from parents, and many parents lost all of their

are planning to restore these natural barriers where

Coastal populations earning their livelihoods

children. Clearly, women and children were the

possible and preserve the ecosystems with the

from fishing and tourism have been deeply

most affected groups during the disaster as well

participation of the community (for a discussion of

affected. Infrastructure, such as roads, bridges,

as in the aftermath, and ensuring their security

early warning systems, see Chapters 1 and 10).

management (see Chapters 1 and 10). Box 14.10 gives an overview of
the dramatic damages caused by the 2004 tsunami.

Ensuring the knowledge base
Sri Lankan universities do not offer undergraduate courses specifically
on water resources, but the curricula of civil engineering, agricultural
science and some other science programmes contain water-related
courses. However, the scopes of these courses vary depending on the
nature of the degree. Because water-related courses are taught as
optional subjects, in-depth water topics usually do not exceed 15 to 20
percent of the total course content.
Currently, universities and a few government agencies carry out
scientific research on water resources and related topics. On the other
hand, several government agencies carry out research relevant to their
primary responsibilities, which include pollution control, irrigation,
agriculture and sanitation.

Conclusion
About half of the Sri Lankan population struggles to survive on an
income of less than US $2 per day. Hundreds of thousands of children
suffer from malnutrition. However, the use of high-yielding crops,
more fertilizers, better pest management practices and improved irrigation
infrastructure have contributed to an increase in food production. As a
result, Sri Lanka is on track to achieving the hunger-related MDGs.
Industrialization and poor agricultural practices are threatening the
quality of surface and groundwater. Although water-related legislation
exists, the fragmentation of institutions, unclear responsibility, a lack of
accountability and inadequate resources prevent the satisfactory
implementation of provisions for controlling water pollution. Waterrelated disasters also present a great concern, as their financial and
social damages put a heavy burden on the island’s already fragile
economy. Early warning systems are lacking in many basins, and
forecasting models fall short of making accurate predictions.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The great challenge lying ahead is to improve the quality of life for
inhabitants without jeopardizing ecosystems. The establishment of river
basins organizations for the better management of valuable resources
will help to alleviate poverty and environmental degradation.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 0 9

15. Thailand
◆

▲

◆

◆

▲

▲

◆

The Kingdom of Thailand’s population is estimated to be around 63
million inhabitants, and its surface area is approximately 513,000 km2,
with elevations ranging from sea level in the south to high mountains
in the northwest. The country’s centre is dominated by the
predominantly flat Chao Phraya River valley, which was studied in
the case study chapter of WWDR1 (see WWDR1 case study). Thailand
has a tropical monsoonal climate with a distinct wet season and a long
hot dry season. The monsoon season is from mid-May to early
September, during which time most parts of the country receive over
four-fifths of their annual rainfall. Thailand possesses abundant water
resources; total internal renewable water resources are estimated to
be approximately 210 km3 (FAO, 2000), 20 percent of which is used
for agriculture.

Thailand’s diverse coastal and marine areas and tropical and subtropical
mountain ranges have made tourism a major part of the Thai economy.
Unfortunately, tourism has also contributed to the clearance of coastal
mangrove forests, the pollution of near-shore marine environments and the
destruction of coral reefs. These environments are vital to sustained tourism
revenues as well as the nation’s important commercial fisheries (ICEM, 2003).

◆

◆
◆

▲

◆

Thailand has over 40,000 wetlands, which are important at the local,
national and international levels. As a contracting party of the RAMSAR
convention (see Chapters 5 and 12), Thailand has twelve designated
sites. Nonetheless, investment in agriculture has caused the
overexploitation of forests. Between 1960 and 1990, the area devoted to
agriculture doubled, while forest area was reduced by more than half,
consequently producing widespread watershed degradation. Industry has
recently become Thailand’s main source of GDP. Though this has, in part,
helped to decrease rural agricultural production and its related
deforestation pressure, industrial areas have polluted wetlands with toxic
chemicals. In an effort to lessen these negative trends, environmental
concerns have been included in national socio-economic development
plans.

◆

Water and ecosystems

◆

Map 14.16: Overview of the river basins in Thailand
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Natural resources management
The National, Economic and Social Development Plan (NESDP), prepared
every five years, is the main mechanism for policy development and
planning for the improved utilization of natural resources and
environmental protection. Since the eighth NESDP (1997 to 2001), a
participatory approach has been adapted to include important civil society
organizations in its preparation. This was followed by an institutional
reform and a restructuring of agencies responsible for the conservation
and management of protected areas, which resulted in the establishment
of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment in 2002.

A framework for environmental conservation has been established
under the Policy and Prospective Plan for National Environmental
Quality Enhancement and Protection (1997-2016) in addition to an
Environmental Management Plan (2002-2006). However, despite of
the reforms and changes in the institutional system, the management
of natural resources has not been fully integrated into sectoral planning.
Different ministries have varying responsibilities, objectives and priorities
for managing water resources and the environment. The efforts of
individual ministries responsible for different sectors are isolated and not
well-coordinated. This lack of coordination renders IWRM implementation

5 1 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

difficult, in addition to impeding the Government in reaching its
objectives in water management (ICEM, 2003).

Poverty and progress towards MDGs
Thailand’s economy has undergone rapid development in the last three
decades, and the level of poverty has greatly reduced. The number of
people living in poverty dropped from 3.4 million in 1975 to fewer than
500,000 in 1995 (Ahuja et al., 1997). During the same period, however,
income inequities between urban and rural areas increased. The
proportion of poor living in rural areas rose to 92 percent in 1992, and
the Asian economic crisis of 1997 and 1998 exacerbated the situation.
Nevertheless, under 10 percent of the overall population currently lives
below the poverty level. Thailand has made good progress towards
achieving several of the MDGs, including those related to water. For
example, access to safe water and basic sanitation is above 90 percent
in both rural and urban areas. The current challenge is to address the
opportunity disparities that exist between different regions.

Water and health
The most serious diseases in Thai people are helminthes, diarrhoea,
dysentery and enteric fever (typhoid and paratyphoid fever), which are
mainly caused by poor sanitation and insufficient hygiene (see Chapter 6).
Despite the development of water supply and sanitation infrastructures,
morbidity rates remain high due to the high bacterial contamination of
water. The Bureau of Epidemiology (2001) found that acute diarrhoea
and food poisoning are still increasing, whereas between 1983 and 2001,
the incidences of enteric fevers, dysentery and helminthes decreased.
The main reasons for increasing diarrhoea and food poisoning are
considered to be unhygienic food handling and a lack of awareness
concerning the protection of water resources. Also alarming is the
increasing number of diseases caused by chemical and toxic substances
contaminating water resources. These contaminants are of domestic,
industrial and agricultural origin. For example, lead and tin poisoning
has been linked to improper mining practices, and high concentrations
of fluoride in groundwater resources have also caused dental problems.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Management conflicts in local authority wastewater treatment systems
often result in ineffective and non-continuous performance, which
causes high bacterial contamination of receiving water bodies. The major
obstacles preventing effective functioning of wastewater treatment
facilities are insufficient financing for system operation and a lack of
regular maintenance.

equivalent to approximately 70 percent of the total water storage
capacity of all reservoirs and structures. Agricultural production, although
it comprises only 10 percent of the national GDP, is the major source of
income for the rural poor. Accordingly, food security remains the primary
issue on the political agenda. Thailand allocates about 10 percent of its
national budget to irrigated agriculture, and its water policy calls for
the nation-wide distribution of water for subsistence irrigation (up to
the capacity limits of the river basins). In the mid-twentieth century,
government policy promoted conversion of forests and swampland for
agriculture, leading to significant deforestation. However, in recent
decades, increasing urban migration and employment has reduced
Thailand’s rural farming population (from around 90 percent in 1950
to 40 percent), creating opportunities for reforestation.

Water for energy and industry
Thailand has a growing energy demand due to rapid industrial development
and an increase in domestic demands. Imported fossil fuels and especially
natural gas is the main source for energy production. In 2002, fossil fuels
provided over 90 percent of national electricity production whereas
hydropower was in the vicinity of 3 percent. To be able to meet growing
energy demand, Thailand also imports hydro-electricity from neighbouring
countries. In order to reduce external dependency on energy and to curb
pollution, the government has plans to increase the share of renewable
energy through the utilization of solar, wind, biomass and hydropower.
Micro-hydropower development schemes, in particular, are considered as
good choices given the topographic conditions and ecological sustainability.
The main source of water in industry is aquifers. However, over-utilization
of these water resources, especially around Bangkok region, has caused
serious land subsidence. For this reason, the government promotes the
utilization of alternative sources of water supply and water-efficient
processes in industry. The availability of freshwater can thus be a
constraint to industrial development in the future. At present, the Thai
government encourages the private sector to provide water to industry as
well as to the municipalities. For example, Provincial Waterworks Authority
of Thailand (PWA) has engaged a private company (East Water Company)
to supply water to the industrial sector in the eastern part of Thailand.

Water allocation
In the dry season, the water stored in reservoirs is distributed
according to priorities. The first allocation priority is water for
household consumption, followed by other sectors, such as agriculture.
The allocation system also takes into account the provision of water for
the ecosystems and for the prevention of sea water intrusion.

Water for food
Its fertile and well-watered central plains have helped to make Thailand a
major international exporter of agricultural crops (rice in particular) and
processed agricultural products. The cultivated area in Thailand is 28
million ha (54.5 percent of the total land area), approximately half of
which is used for growing rice. At present, water used for irrigation is

Water allocation for agriculture is conducted at two levels:
■

From its main storage to secondary or sometimes tertiary canals, water
is allocated by government agencies, which are fully responsible for
operation and maintenance.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 1 1

BOX 14.11: THE IMPACT OF THE TSUNAMI IN THAILAND
The tsunami created by an earthquake in the

the private sector to recover. Furthermore,

The tsunami has also caused severe damage on

Indian Ocean on 26 December 2004 caused

thousands of low-income Thais who are

near shore aquifers as well as ecosystems in

heavy social and economic damages in

dependent on tourism-related industries have

coastal wetlands and coral reefs. Furthermore,

Thailand. According to official figures, there

lost their jobs.

the spread of various kinds of wastes and
industrial chemical solids further threatens the

were over 5,000 dead, 8,400 injured and 3,000

■

missing persons. The sectors most badly

The extensive destruction of fishing boats has

environment (see Chapter 1 and Box 14.10 for

damaged have been tourism and fishing. The

also affected food security in Thailand. It has led

discussions on the 2004 tsunami).

beach resorts along the Andaman Sea coast

to a loss in livelihoods for individual fishing

have been extensively damaged and large

families who also lost their homes and cannot

amounts of investment are needed to enable

afford to replace their fishing equipment.

At the farm level, it is allocated by farmers and water user
groups/organizations.

Thailand increasingly encourages water user groups/organizations to
more actively participate in the management and allocation of water in
secondary canals.

Water-related disasters
In Thailand floods of varying severity, size and duration are associated
with tropical typhoons and usually occur between May and October.
However, no matter how small or how large, floods cause serious social
and economic damage. In 1995, a flood in the Chao Phraya River basin
caused about US $290,000 in damage and was the costliest in the last
seventeen years. In order to prevent flood damage, many structural and
non-structural measures are being implemented, including the utilization
of GIS and the creation of a flood risk map covering twenty-five basins.
Furthermore, the installation of warning systems, such as supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA), are being suggested.
As Thailand is located in a monsoon-risk area, with low precipitation
from December until May or June, drought becomes a problem in various
areas of the country. Although the impact of droughts is not as violent
as that of floods, from 1989 to 2003, the cumulative damage from
drought was in the vicinity of US $112 million. The droughts especially
affect agricultural production, since rainfed irrigation is quite common,
and only 23.7 percent of farmland is irrigated.
To prevent and mitigate flood and drought in Thailand, the Department
of Water Resources has established the Water Crisis Prevention Center
for collecting data, monitoring and formulating disaster policy responses.
Unfortunately, at this stage, risk management activities remain
poorly implemented.

Transboundary water resources
The Mekong River is the twelfth longest river in the world and has a
water basin with nearly 60 million inhabitants distributed over 800,000
km2. It encompasses six countries, including Cambodia, China, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic (PDR), Myanmar, Thailand, and Viet Nam.
The Mekong River Commission (MRC) aims to protect the rich and diverse
resources of the Mekong River Basin as a combined effort of Cambodia,
Lao PDR, Thailand and Viet Nam. The Cooperation for the Sustainable
Development of the Mekong River Basin Agreement, signed in 1995,
provides the framework of the MRC and promotes basin-wide
cooperation. The issue that is given the foremost importance in the
1995 agreement and its strategic plan is ensuring the sustainability of
water resources and the environment while promoting overall basin
development. Fisheries, agriculture and navigation are only some of the
important issues that are also central to the agreement. The programmes
established under the MRC strive for capacity enhancement and focus
on the current and future needs of riparian countries and are meant to
complement and support national and bilateral development initiatives.14

Conclusion
While Thailand possesses abundant water resources, growing demand
coupled with pollution puts an increasing pressure on these resources.
For many rural communities, cultivation has been the main source of
livelihood and survival. Although the significant expansion of agriculture
has contributed to ensuring food security and reducing poverty in
Thailand, it has caused significant deforestation and widespread
watershed degredation. While industry has become the major source of
GDP, toxic wastes have polluted surface and groundwater supplies and
damaged aquatic ecosystems. As a country that has achieved most of the
MDGs, effective systems for conserving and protecting natural resources
have become central to national development projects.

14. More information concerning the MRC can be found at www.mrcmekong.org

5 1 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

16. Uganda
▲

▲

Situated southeast of Uganda is Lake Victoria, the principal source
of the White Nile and the second largest freshwater lake in the
world. Uganda’s rivers and lakes, including wetlands, cover about
18 percent of the total surface area of the country.

▲

▲

▲

◆

Lake Victoria is very significant for the Ugandan economy, since it is
the source of almost all of the country’s hydropower and provides the
domestic and industrial water supply for the three biggest towns in
Uganda: Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. It is also an important location
for the fishery and horticulture industries. Additionally, the lake serves
as a key transport link between Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania.

▲

◆

◆

◆

Uganda’s total annual renewable water resources are estimated to be 66
km3. With an annual average of 2,800 m3 of water available per capita,
Uganda is better off than many other African countries. However, rapid
population growth, increased urbanization and industrialization,
uncontrolled environmental degradation and pollution are placing
increasing pressure on the utilization of freshwater resources.

◆

Water and Ecosystems
With 13 percent of its total surface area covered by wetlands, Uganda is
very rich in biodiversity. In spite of the existence of national policies and
laws for the conservation of ecosystems, there has recently been an
observed decline in aquatic biodiversity in most of Uganda’s water
bodies. This has mainly been attributed to destructive fishing habits,
increasing eutrophication as a result of pollution, degradation of riparian
watersheds and deforestation (see Chapter 5 for a discussion of the
alarming loss of biodiversity in Lake Victoria).

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Rural areas
The percentage of rural inhabitants with access to improved sanitation
increased from 68 percent in 1991 to 85 percent in 2002. However,
access to clean and safe water is still far from universal (see Chapter 6).
In 2003, only 59 percent of rural inhabitants had such access. Frequently,
people have to collect water from distant locations. This burden falls
mainly on women and children, who are the most vulnerable members of
society. The long distances they travel significantly reduce their productive
time and subsequent contribution to the economic development of the
country. Furthermore, the amount of water that can generally be collected
is insufficient to meet drinking, cooking and hygiene needs. According to
National Surveys conducted in 1996 and 1999, average rural per capita
water consumption was found to be about 13 litres per day. Though the
sanitation coverage has increased significantly, in some rural areas, basic
sanitation still remains elusive, due to poverty and low hygiene and
sanitation awareness.

Map 14.17: Overview of the river basins in Uganda
Source: Prepared for the World Water Assessment Programme by AFDEC, 2006.

Urban settlements
In Uganda, urban areas are defined as settlements with over 5,000
inhabitants. Towns of 5,000 to 15,000 inhabitants are classified as small,
and those with more than 15,000 inhabitants as large. Based on these
criteria, there were 106 small towns and 43 large towns in Uganda in
2004. The current urban population is estimated to be 3.7 million out of
a total population of 25 million. The urban population has been growing
faster than that in rural areas – the overall population growth rate is 3.4
percent, while that in urban areas is 4.1 percent. The percentage of the
population residing in urban areas increased from 12 percent in 1993 to
14 percent in 2003. National urban water coverage is an estimated 65
percent, up from 54 percent in 2000. The sanitation coverage is equally
low, 65 percent.

Cost recovery
The current tariff structure of Ugandan water resource systems is aimed
towards covering only operation and maintenance costs. Full cost recovery
(operation and maintenance, depreciation and investment) would require
a significant increase in tariffs. Therefore, major investments in system
improvement and extension are financed separately through grants from the
Government and international donors. The collection efficiency of revenues,
although variable, is about 79 percent on average. Although funding levels
are increasing, significant investment is still required to raise the safe water
and sanitation coverage to meet the national targets and MDGs.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 1 3

Water and health
Low access to clean water has had many health implications in Uganda.
According to a study carried out in 2002, diarrhoea alone accounted for
approximately 19 percent of infant mortalities in the country. Furthermore,
statistics from the Ministry of Health indicate that malaria is the leading
cause of child morbidity. Approximately 70,000 to 100,000 children in
Uganda die every year from malaria. This represents 30 percent of the
country’s child mortality rates (between the ages of 2 and 4), and
accounts for 23 percent of total disability-adjusted life years (DALYs)
lost and 25 percent of all instances of illness in Uganda. Estimates from
the Ministry of Health indicate that the average expenditure on malariarelated treatments are as high as US $300 million annually. AIDS is the
leading cause of death for people between the ages of 15 and 49 and
is responsible for 12 percent of all annual deaths (see Chapter 6).

districts. Animal husbandry is a considerable source of income. It
represents 7.5 percent of the GDP and 17 percent of the agricultural
GDP. However, water scarcity in the cattle corridor reduces productivity
and triggers conflict among herders.
Fisheries also contribute to food security in Uganda and are crucial
to populations living along rivers, lakes and islands as well as the
disadvantaged rural poor. Current annual fish consumption is estimated
to be 10 kg per capita. In the past, Uganda’s fishing industry boasted
over 300 endemic fish species, but unsustainable fishing practices and
a deterioration in the quality of local water bodies have greatly reduced
the number of commercial fish species. Today, only twenty-three
remain. The Ugandan Government is also promoting aquaculture to
boost fisheries production to better meet the increasing fish demand
in both the domestic and international markets (see Chapter 5).

Food security
The total potential irrigable area in Uganda is approximately 202,000 ha
(FAO, 1995). However, a recent study by JICA (2004) revealed that about
14,000 ha of the potential irrigable area is under official irrigation and
6,000 ha under unofficial irrigation, particularly for rice production. The
total amount of water used for irrigation is 12 km3 per year, whereas the
annual total renewable water resources are 66 km3. These figures reveal
the high potential for irrigated agriculture in Uganda. Currently, most of
Uganda’s agriculture is rainfed and thus more vulnerable during climatic
variations. Food shortages and nutritional deficiencies are common in
many parts of the country: 40 percent of deaths among children in
Uganda are due to malnutrition. According to the 2002 Uganda
Population and Housing Census, the country’s annual population growth
rate was 3.4 percent, while the annual growth rate of food production
was only about 1.5 percent. If food production levels do not increase,
food shortages will become more acute in the near future.
Livestock production is concentrated along ‘the cattle corridor’ which runs
southwest to northeast across Uganda, encompassing twenty-nine

Poverty
As of 2002, close to 40 percent of Uganda’s population lives below the
poverty line, giving Uganda a rank of 142 out of 162 countries in terms
of poverty. Poverty reduction has been a leading objective of Uganda’s
development strategy since the early 1990s. The Government, in its
combat against poverty, prepared a Poverty Eradication Action Plan
(PEAP) in 1997. The plan, which has been revised twice, employs a multisectoral approach that takes into consideration the multi-dimensional
nature of poverty and the inter-linkages between influencing factors.
In this regard, the government is making continuous efforts for
development in the areas of agricultural modernization, land
management, rural credit and microfinance, rural electrification, primary
health care, primary education and water supply and sanitation. Of all
these, perhaps the PEAP’s most critical intervention is the modernization
of agriculture. Considering that the agricultural sector employs 82
percent of Uganda’s labour force and is the mainstay of the economy,
these efforts have the potential of improving the living standards of
most Ugandans. Furthermore, through the Plan for the Modernisation of

BOX 14.12: THE IMPACT OF RISING TEMPERATURES
The continent of Africa’s temperature has risen

Malaria has for long been the leading cause of

Rising temperatures will have a detrimental

by 0.5°C in the past century. The five warmest

illness in Uganda and accounted for almost 39

effect on the agriculture sector of Uganda.

years in Africa’s recorded history all occurred

percent of all mortality cases in 2002. Today,

For example, if the current trend continues,

after 1988. Recent studies have shown that

malaria incidences in the highlands (1,500 to

a further 2°C rise in temperature would lead

the glaciers and ice fields on Rwenzoris, one

1,800 m a.s.l.) are thirty times higher than at

to an 85 percent shrinkage in the area suitable

of a few of permanently ice-capped mountains

the beginning of the twentieth century. Rising

for growing rubusta coffee, which constitutes

in Africa, have decreased markedly both in

temperatures in addition to heavy El Niño rains,

a significant portion of Uganda’s export (see

number and size and that the greatest rate

local climate changes arising from wetland

Chapters 4 and 10 for discussions on

of shrinkage has been after 1990.

drainage, population growth and human

climate change).

migrations are thought to be some of the most
important factors contributing to this increase.

5 1 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Agriculture (PMA), the Government has initiated programmes to boost
agricultural production and the marketing and processing of agricultural goods.
In recent decades, Uganda’s elaborate plans and investments to combat
poverty have started to pay off. Income poverty levels declined from 50
percent in 1992 to 35 percent in 2000. However, the economic recession
that hit many parts of the world after 2000 slowed down the steady
progress and returned poverty levels to around 40 percent in 2002.
In recognition of the progress made by Uganda in implementing economic
reforms and poverty reduction, the international community, through the
International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Initiative, has cancelled a large part of Uganda’s external debt –
between 1998 and 2000, approximately US $2 billion or 60 percent of
Uganda’s external debt. These measures have enabled the country to
rechannel its financial resources to the fight against poverty.

Water and industry
The major industries in Uganda are agro-processing oriented, mainly fish
processing, sugar, tea, cooking oil, diary processing, breweries and soft
drinks. Factories for textile, paper products and tobacco processing are
also fairly common.
The current low level of economic development in Uganda is partly
attributable to an inadequate power supply, which cannot support largescale manufacturing industries and agro-processing factories. Industry
employs only 5 percent of the total labour force, whereas agriculture
employs 82 percent and the service sector about 13 percent. The
Ugandan Government is working to steer the country away from an overdependence on agriculture by increasing the importance of the industrial
and service sectors.
The industrial sector is a source of pollution due to the discharge of
untreated or partially treated industrial effluent into nearby water bodies.
Pollution stemming from mining activities, on the other hand, is still
low and does not yet threaten the general quality of surface and
groundwater. Localized pollution, however, exists in the areas where
mining activities take place.

Water and energy

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Biomass, principally firewood and charcoal, is the most important
energy source in Uganda, constituting about 93 percent of the country’s
consumed energy. Petroleum products contribute only about 6 percent
and electricity about 1 percent of annual energy demand.
Hydropower is the major source of electrical power in Uganda. Most
of Uganda’s hydropower potential is concentrated along the White Nile,
with a total estimated potential of 2,000 MW. In addition, there are also
several small rivers in different parts of the country, with a potential for
mini- and micro-hydropower development (see Chapter 9). Currently,

only about 15 percent of of existing hydropower potential (300 MW)
is utilized, and power demand, which is growing at a rate of 8 percent
per year, exceeds available supply. The shortage in generation capacity
limits growth in many sectors of the Ugandan economy. The Government
formulated a Hydropower Development Master Plan to guide the
hydropower planning and development process in Uganda. The Master
Plan includes a comprehensive study of all the potential large- and
small-scale hydropower schemes in the country and outlines the energy
development strategy based on criteria such as power demand forecast,
project generation potential, environmental effects and cost criteria.
Overall, only 9 percent of Uganda’s population is supplied with grid
electricity (20 percent in urban areas compared to only 3 percent in
rural areas), and 70 percent of these customers reside in the three
major towns of Kampala, Entebbe and Jinja. Official records show that
there are about 230,000 grid electricity users. The national average
annual per capita electricity consumption is about 44 kilowatts per hour
(kWh), compared with an average of 170 kWh for the major urban areas
and 10 kWh for rural areas.
Rural electrification forms an integral part of the Government’s wider
rural transformation and poverty eradication agenda. In this context, the
most noticeable programme is the Uganda Photovoltaic Pilot Project for
Rural Electrification, which aims to expand the access to electricity using
solar technology in isolated and dispersed rural areas that will not have
access to electricity grid in the near future and have both the ability and
the will to pay the unsubsidized cost of the systems. As a result, more
people in rural areas are switching from kerosene to solar lighting.

Legal framework and reform of the water sector
In order to meet the emerging challenges of the water sector, a Water
Action Plan (WAP) was prepared in 1993–94, which recognized that
water is an economic good with an economic value. The WAP principles
were followed by a set of policies and laws throughout the 1990s.
In order to ensure efficiency and cost effectiveness in water resources
management, government-initiated reforms in the water sector were
established in 1997. As part of the reform process, a comprehensive
Water Sector Strategy, detailed sub-sectoral investment plans and a
clear definition of national targets for the sector were prepared. One of
the key strategic outcomes of the reforms is the adoption of a Sector
Wide Approach to Planning (SWAP). The SWAP framework, which has
been embraced by both the Government and water sector development
partners, promotes the participation of all stakeholders in the planning
and implementation of water sector activities. This transparency has
resulted in increased confidence from development partners who have
agreed to finance water sector programmes through the regular
government budget, contrary to the project-specific funding of the
past. This is an important step, as 75 percent of the sector’s funding
comes from donors.

C A S E STU D I ES . 5 1 5

In addition, the water sector is also implementing a comprehensive
sector-wide capacity-building and sensitization programme. The sectorwide approach to capacity-building mainly focuses on equipping sector
personnel with relevant skills and knowledge in the management of
water and sanitation programmes through specific tailor-made training
courses and formal graduate training.

Water-related disasters
Water-related disasters, such as droughts, floods, landslides, windstorms
and hailstorms contribute to well over 70 percent of natural disasters
in the country and destroy an average of 800,000 ha of crops annually,
causing economic losses in excess of approximately US $65 million.
Large-scale atmospheric events, such as El Ninõ and La Ninã, are
identified as the principal causes of the most severe water-related
disasters in Uganda.

Disaster Preparedness and Management Strategy is designed to establish
and improve national and local capabilities to minimize the damages
caused by natural hazards and ensure that they do not result in disasters.
The fundamental principle underlying the strategy is that the costs of
responding to disasters once they strike far exceed those of disaster
prevention and risk reduction activities. Further efforts are also being
made to strengthen legal and institutional frameworks and ensure
involvement of all relevant sectors. Raising public awareness has
proven to be a pivotal point for effective hazard mitigation.

Conclusion
Uganda is on track for meeting the MDG targets for safe water and
sanitation. However, the funds required for achieving those targets are
in the vicinity of US $1.5 billion, an amount too high for the Ugandan
national budget. Therefore, raising funds remains a critical issue. The
country would also greatly benefit from an improved technical capacity
within governmental institutions and a greater exchange of information
among water-related agencies.

References and Websites
Case Studies: An overview
EC (European Commission). 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October
2000 establishing a framework for Community action in

Chapman, D. (ed.). 1996. Water Quality Assessments: A

5. Japan

Guide to Use of Biota, Sediments and Water in

All references are from the information provided by the

Environmental Monitoring. Cambridge, Cambridge

Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transportation

University Press with UNESO/WHO/UNEP.

(MLIT).

ICPDR (The International Commission for the Protection of the
6. Kenya

the field of water policy. Bruxelles.

Danube River). 2004. Action Programme for Sustainable

europa.eu.int/comm/environment/water/waterframework/

Flood Protection in the Danube River Basin.

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

index_en.html

www.ecologicevents.de/danube/en/documents/INFOFlood

preliminary version of the Kenya Case Study Report.

Walmsley, R.D., Havenga, T., Braune, E., Schmidt, C., Prasad,

ActionPlanEN_000.pdf

K. and van Koppen, B. 2004. An Evaluation of Proposed

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe)

World Water Programe Indicators for Use in South Africa.

Draft Guidelines on Sustainable Flood Prevention:

Working Paper 90. Colombo, Sri Lanka, Internaitonal

www.unece.org/env/water/publications/documents/guideli

Water Management Institute.

nesfloode.pdf

1. The Autonomous Community of the Basque Country

3. Ethiopia

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

Executive Summary of the Case Study Report of the

preliminary version of the Ethiopia Case Study Report.

Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.
Basque Government Department of the Environment:
www.ingurumena.ejgv.euskadi.net/
EUStat, Basque Statistics Office:

UNDP(United Nations Development Programme). 2005.

UNDP(United Nations Development Programme). 2005.
Human Development Report: International Cooperation
at a Crossroads, Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal
World. Nairobi, UNDP.
7. Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
All information is from the preliminary version of the
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Case Study Report.
8. Lake Titicaca Basin

Human Development Report: International Cooperation

All information is from the preliminary version of the

at a Crossroads, Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal

Lake Titicaca Case Study Report and the National

World. Nairobi, UNDP.

Institute of Statistics.

www.eustat.es/about/a_euskadi-general_i.html and
www.eustat.es/document/datos/1.medio_físico_i.pdf
2. The Danube River Basin
Unless otherwise noted, all information is from ICPDR
(The International Commission for the Protection of the

4. France

9. Mali

All information was provided by the Ministère de

All information is from the preliminary version of Mali

l'écologie et du développement durable (Ministry of

Case Study Report.

Ecology and Sustainable Development).
10. Mexico

Danube River). 2004. Danube Basin Analysis (WFD Roof

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

Report, 2004).

preliminary version of the State of Mexico Case Study

www.icpdr.org/pls/danubis/danubis_db.dyn_navigator.show

Report, SAOPID (Secretaría de Agua, Obra Pública e

5 1 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Infraestructura para el Desarrollo). 2005. Damages

12. La Plata River Basin

UN (United Nations). 2002. Sri Lanka Country Profile. The

Caused by the Overexploitation of Aquifers in the State of

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

2002 Country Profiles Series. World Summit on

Mexico, Mexico. Mexico City. 2005.

executive summary of the La Plata River Basin Case

Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, 2002.

CAEM (Comisión de Agua del Estado de México. 2005. Atlas
de Inundaciones No. 11.
——— 2004a. Prontuario de Información Hidráulica del Estado
de México. Mexico City.
——— 2004b. Situación Actual y expectativas del Subsector
Agua y Saneamiento en el Estado de México. Mexico
City.
CNA (Comisión Nacional del Agua). 2004. Estadísticas del
Agua en México. Mexico City.

Study Report.
Bucher, E. and Huszar, P. 1995. Critical Environmental Costs of
the Paraná-Paraguay Waterway Project in South America.

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the
preliminary version of the Mongolia Case Study Report.
Altansukh, N. 1995. Country Report to the FAO International
Techincal Conference on Plant Genetic Resources. Ulan

The Case of the Paraguay-Paraná Waterway (Hidrovía)
and its Impact on the Pantanal of Brazil: A Summary
Report to the Society of Wetlands Scientists. Wetlands
Bulletin pp. 12-18.
Waterway: Towards Convergence with the Plata Regime,
a Personal Approach. Proceedings of an International
Conference, Harvard University, David Rockefeller Center
for Latin American Studies, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
3-4 April 1996.

Bator, National Plant Genetic Resources Research and
extension Programme.
Myagmarjav, B and Davaa, G. (eds). 1999. Surface waters of
Mongolia. Ulan Bator (in Mongolian).

Assistance, Initial Assessment of Emergency Requirement
(Revised). Colombo.

Ecological Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 3-9.
Gottgens, J., Fortney, R., Meyer, J, Perry, J. and Rood, B. 1998.

Petrella, F. and Ayuso, A. 1996. The Paraguay-Paraná
11. Mongolia

Ministry of Social Welfare. 2004. Request for Drought Relief

15. Thailand
Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the
executive summary of the Thailand National Case Study
Report.
ICEM (International Centre for Environmental Management).
2003. Review of protected areas and development in the
Lower Mekong River Region, Indooroopilly, Queensland,
Australia.
Ahuja, V., Bidani, B., Ferreira, F. and Walton, M. 1997.
Everyone’s Miracle? Revisiting Poverty and Inequality in
East Asia. New York, World Bank.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2000. Irrigation

13. South Africa
All information is from the preliminary version of the
South Africa Case Study Report.

water use per country in the year 2000, Aquastat 2000.
www.fao.org/ag/agl/aglw/aquastat/water_use/index.stm
Mekong River Commission:www.mrcmekong.org/

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2002. State
of the Environment, Mongolia. Ulan Bator, UNDP.
NSO (National Statistical Office). 2000. Child and
Development Survey. Ulan Bator.
MFA (Ministry of Foreign Affairs). 2004. Millennium
Development Goals: The 2004 National Report on the

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

Status of Implementation in Mongolia. Ulan Bator.

14. Sri Lanka

16. Uganda

Unless otherwise noted, all information is from the

All information is from the preliminary version of the

executive summary of Sri Lanka Case Study Report.

Uganda Case Study Report.

All know the way, but
few actually walk it.
Bodhidharma, 6th Century

Key Recommendations ................................520
Part 1. Water and Poverty..............................522
1a. Insecure and overcrowded housing ................522
1b. Inadequate access to public infrastructure
and basic community services .........................522
1c. Lack of safety nets and adequate legal
protection of rights .........................................523
1d. Lack of voice and power within political and
administrative systems ....................................523

Part 3. Water and Governance.....................525
3a. Awareness and advocacy .................................525
3b. The cost-effectiveness of water
investments ......................................................526
3c. Integrated Water Resources Management .....526
3d. The need for international and national
cooperation ......................................................527

Part 4. Cautious Optimism .............................528
4a. Economic progress is being made ...................528
4b. Reform is underway in the water sector ........528

Part 2. Water and the Environment .........524
2a. The worrying deterioration of natural
capital ...............................................................524
2b. The growing pressures on natural systems ....524

Flooded slum on the edge of Pasig River, Manila,
Philippines

References ...............................................................529

15
CHAPTER 15

Conclusions and
Recommendations

5 2 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Key Recommendations:
1. We need to recognize that access to clean
water is a fundamental right. In 2002, the
UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights affirmed that ‘sufficient, affordable,
physically accessible, safe and acceptable water
for personal and domestic uses’ is a fundamental
human right of all people and a pre-requisite to
the realization of all other human rights.
Although not legally binding for the more than
140 countries ratifying the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, this decision carries the weight of a
moral obligation on the signatories to
progressively ensure that all the world has
access to safe and secure drinking water and
sanitation facilities, equitably and without
discrimination. As the world is currently falling
short of meeting the targets set to ensure
adequate water services for all, it is our shared
responsibility to maintain vigilance and continue
to monitor our progress towards this goal.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

2. Poverty remains the biggest problem
facing the world today. The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) adopted at the 2000
United Nations Millennium Summit focused world
attention on this issue. Inadequate drinking water
and sanitation services are key aspects of poverty
with serious implications – death, disease and
delayed development in the populations
immediately affected. Broader ramifications
include wasted economic opportunities, social
and political unrest and environmental pollution.
These problems are especially acute in the fastgrowing human settlements of the developing
world, particularly in shanty towns and slums
with little if any water services. Rapid industrial
growth and pollution in this context exacerbate
the competition for water resources, often
without providing the needed jobs for migrants.
We need to focus on better water
governance that embraces all
stakeholders and civil society, in both the
public and private sectors, with strong
support from the international community
as the only plausible solution to these
expanding problems.
3. Climate change with increased variability
exacerbates the spatial and temporal variability
of water resources and intensifies the urgent
need for the sound management of water
resources. Given the finite quantity of
freshwater, the current business-as-usual
approach to development can only limit usable

water resources as a result of continual and
widespread physical and chemical pollution from
virtually all sectors. Inadequate data collection,
poor reliability of existing data and our limited
understanding of the functioning of hydrological
systems are a serious handicap to good planning
and management. We need to better
understand complex environmental
systems and the impacts of human
activities, if society is to anticipate,
mitigate and adapt to environmental
changes and changing circumstances.
4. We need to recognize that sectorally and
geographically, water problems and
challenges are neither independent nor
isolated. Their solutions thus need to be
addressed in a comprehensive and holistic
manner, taking into account a variety of
circumstances with solutions tailored to the
situation. Hence we see the emergence and
broad acceptance of the concept of Integrated
Water Resources Management (IWRM). While
IWRM may vary in different socio-economic
settings and should be flexible enough to fit the
attitudes and principles of local people, its core
principles of equity, efficiency and environmental
sustainability are invariable. Yet only a very few
countries were able to meet the Johannesburg
target calling for IWRM to be incorporated into
national plans by 2005.
5. It is increasingly recognized that healthy
ecosystems have importance far beyond their
amenity or biodiversity preservation value.
Healthy ecosystems are integral to the proper
functioning of the hydrological cycle, thus
environmental preservation must be at the heart
of IWRM. Environmental pollution and the
disruption of natural flows from all sectors
(municipal, agricultural, industrial, energy,
transport, etc.) must be addressed both in terms
of detrimental impacts on aquatic habitats and
the broader implications for the sustainable
availability of clean freshwater resources.
We need to understand that water moves
within natural limits, which usually do
not correspond to the administrative
units within which societies organize
themselves. Addressing water management
issues from the perspective of natural
boundaries, rather than political administrative
units, will facilitate the consideration of
environmental issues in IWRM. The urgent
need for the integration of environmental and

socio-economic concerns must be overcome
with the greater collection and use of georeferenced data.
6. With growing demand and decreasing
supply, competition among different
sectors and users is increasing, requiring
greater wisdom in the allocation of the
resource and greater efficiency of water
use. The implementation of an IWRM approach
with transparent mechanisms, e.g. tariffs, for
allocating water among competing sectors is
necessary to ensure sustainable widespread
availability of limited freshwater resources. More
efficient water use must be accomplished not
only through the adoption of a variety of new
technologies and the application of proven
traditional knowledge, but also, and most
importantly, through better water governance
and the recognition that demand management
must be a shared responsibility across all sectors.
7. With fast changing socio-economic
conditions occurring against the backdrop
of unprecedented environmental change,
water crises in many parts of the world are
becoming increasingly severe. Whether the
problem is too much water or not enough,
extreme pollution or excessive diversion, water
remains a critical necessity for social and economic
development. The solution to many, if not most,
water-related problems lies first and foremost in
better governance. Regardless of the particular mix
of characteristics within a society or polity, the
principles of transparency and accountability
should prevail. Monitoring and indicator
development at all levels are critical to supporting
these critical aspects of good governance and
informing important policy decisions.
8. We must increase focus on the governance
aspects of water management. Good
governance, although increasingly recognized as
the key to more equitable, efficient and
sustainable resource management, continues to
encounter problems on the ground. Inadequate
institutions, weak and ineffective legal
frameworks, and limited human and financial
resources continue to plague implementation and
impede reform in water resources management.
We need to enhance capacity across all sectors,
and build awareness so that citizens and policymakers may be better informed about water
issues in order to encourage responsible decisionmaking at all levels.

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S . 5 2 1

Chapter 1 sets out a wide range of the issues at stake in
the water sector and the global contexts in which they
are taking place. These are further discussed, as
appropriate, in the different water challenge areas
covered by subsequent chapters. The many aspects of
water, as they relate to poverty and environmental
degradation, are briefly reintroduced together here,
before moving on to recommendations for the future,
such as ensuring that water-related factors do not
contribute to the prolongation of poverty and
environmental decay; facilitating the productive and
sustainable use of water to reach the MDGs’ aims of
socio-economic development and environmental
protection; and ensuring the use of a holistic approach to
water and land-use management, which embraces
Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) as its
central principle.
As we have seen throughout the Report, even though
there is plenty of freshwater at the global scale, it is
unevenly distributed over time and space. For example,
many of the relatively rich and sparsely populated
countries in temperate zones have bountiful freshwater
resources and rainfall throughout the year in addition to
low evaporation, whereas poorer, more densely populated
areas in tropical zones generally have less water per
capita, and the bulk of their precipitation often occurs
during a period of several weeks each year. In the
tropics, water evaporation is high due to warmer climate,
and dry spells occur frequently in some areas. It is
expected that climate change and variability will have the
most dramatic effect on tropical zones. Floods and
hurricanes are already increasing in number and severity
in many countries in the tropics. The hydrology and
climatology of these regions differ from those of the rest
of the world and thus may require completely different
institutional and technological means of providing
sufficient water throughout the year.
Uneven distribution of water resources also occurs
between regions, communities and income groups within
countries. In many cases, large- and small-scale
infrastructure development, such as irrigation canals,
water reservoirs and water transfer canals, has made it
possible to distribute water more evenly both over time
and space, benefiting households and various productive
uses of water. However, many regions, such as the Middle
East and North Africa, have reached a point where it is
too expensive or logistically unfeasible from a
hydrological point of view to respond to water crises by
increasing the supplies of water.

Increases in water shortages and stress are a pressing
problem in many countries. Although in absolute terms,
water in many countries is not scarce, many people still
lack sufficient and reliable access to clean water and
sufficient water for food production and other productive
uses. For example, water is wasted by inefficient irrigation
and the poor operation and maintenance of water works.
In many places of the world, a staggering 30 to 40
percent of water or more goes unaccounted for due to
water leakages and illegal tapping. The Food and
Agriculture Organization (FAO) has estimated that the
overall water-use efficiency for irrigated agriculture in
developing countries averages 38 percent. A basic insight
– which has not yet attracted enough attention – is that
the insufficiency of water, particularly drinking water
supply and sanitation, is primarily driven by an inefficient
supply of services rather than by water shortages (see
Chapter 2).

The water

A lack of basic services is often due to mismanagement,
corruption, lack of appropriate institutions, bureaucratic
inertia and a shortage of new investments in building
human capacity as well as physical infrastructure. Water
supply and sanitation have recently received more
international attention than water for food production,
despite the fact that in most developing countries,
agriculture accounts for 80 percent of total water use. It
is increasingly agreed that water shortages and growing
pollution levels are to a large extent socially and
politically induced challenges, which means that they are
issues that can be addressed by changes of water
demand and uses through, for example, increased
awareness, education and water policy reforms. The
water crisis is thus increasingly about how we, as
individuals, and as part of a collective society, govern the
access to and control over water resources and their
benefits.

and their

crisis is thus
increasingly
about how we,
as individuals,
and as part of
a collective
society, govern
the access to
and control over
water resources
benefits

This final chapter draws on some of the key issues
identified in the previous chapters and references of the
Report, looking at them through the lenses of poverty,
the environment and governance.

Freshwater ecosystem,
Cambodia

5 2 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 1. Water and Poverty

Many poor
families suffer
from housing
insecurity,
because they
are in rented
property or
occupying land
illegally

The lifestyle of the extreme poor is almost literally handto-mouth; what they earn, in an urban area on a good
day, will buy food and water for the family for that day.
In rural areas, the food and water needed by families is
taken largely from the natural environment: water carried
from a distant spring or water body and some not very
nutritious food grown on or gathered from marginally
productive land, insufficient to satisfy hunger and provide
needed nourishment. Very poor people struggle to pay
for adequate food and water, rent for housing, medicines
and drugs to treat sick family members, transport to get
to places of work or carry sick family members to
treatment centres, the education of their children and so
forth. Very often, the quantity of water needed for good
personal and domestic hygiene, laundry, etc. is too
expensive to buy from street water vendors, too far to
carry in the case of distant water sources, or necessitates
the use of polluted water from nearby, heavily used rivers
and streams. Rarely do they have access to improved
sanitation, and where this may be available from a public
facility in towns and cities, the cost to the whole family
may be prohibitive.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

The payment structure for many utility services like water
and electricity, including up-front connection and monthly
consumption charges, are often too expensive for the
poor (see Chapter 12). Water-related disease (Chapter
6) and threats from water-related hazards (floods,
landslides, droughts, etc., see Chapter 10) add to the
precarious nature of their environments and lifestyles.
Very poor farmers, working marginal farms, cannot afford
the soil nutrition additives (agricultural chemicals) and
the irrigation services needed to improve the reliability
and productive capacity of their land (Chapter 7). On top
of all of this, indebtedness frequently adds to the
burdens of poor households.

capital by poor communities – excessive cutting down of
trees for fuel wood, exhausting the nutrition of soils, over
fishing, among many others (Sachs, 2005). Most of the
extremely poor are illiterate and unskilled. Women and
girls in particular often have the least entitlement to
household or family assets (see Chapters 12 and 13).
In urban areas, the land occupied by the poor is mainly
the most marginal, prone to flooding, steep hillsides, etc.
Often, they live right alongside streams and rivers that
are grossly polluted, frequently by small-scale industries,
involved in metal finishing, textiles, tanning, etc., using
older chemical-based processes inherited from the
industrialized countries and for which there is little or no
affordable treatment technology. Chronic overcrowding is
common, and the close proximity of households provides
opportunities for the transmission of a range of infectious
diseases. Many poor families suffer from housing
insecurity, because they live in rented property or occupy
land illegally (see Chapter 3).

1b. Inadequate access to public
infrastructure and basic community services

1a. Insecure and overcrowded housing

Very poor households are rarely connected to urban
infrastructure – piped water and sanitation, electricity
supply, etc. The latter is a significant problem; in many
parts of the world, access to electricity lags far behind
access to improved water supplies. Drainage systems for
urban rain and storm water are frequently inadequate; no
formal systems for solid waste collection are provided; and
there is a lack of paved areas – footpaths, roads etc. The
latter are important not just for movement, they also
provide a location for the installation, operation and
maintenance of network utility services, such as water,
drainage and electricity. There is a lack of flood protection
infrastructure. All of this creates an ideal environment for
disease transmission, vulnerability to loss of housing and
possessions and, overall, a low quality of life.

Many poor families occupy land over which they have no
formal legal rights – in a squatter community or slum, or
farming on marginal lands owned by others with limited
access to reliable water (see Chapter 3). They lack the
savings and stores of surplus food and water to tide them
over during lean times. In fact, most official statistics
probably over estimate the savings of the poor, because
they make no allowance for the depletion of natural

For the rural poor, the lack of paved roads makes access
to markets and health services very difficult. Water plays
a very big role in transportation – many waterways, large
and small, provide essential transport corridors, while
many key roads and bridges are washed away in the rainy
season. The rural poor are often at the end of irrigation
systems, and dependent on richer upstream users for

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S . 5 2 3

water, or pushed out onto land dependent totally on
what may receive increasingly erratic rainfall as a result of
growing climate variability.

food aid, etc.) can distort markets and marginalize the
rural poor, and inadequately organized and non pro-poor
international trade liberalization can exacerbate this.

Whether because of inadequate provision of basic
community services by local authorities – health care,
transport, education and training, emergency services, law
enforcement, etc. – or their inability to pay for some of
these, the poor are excluded from many vital opportunities.
Confronting water-related disease – including malaria, which
causes 300 to 500 million episodes of sickness and 1.6 to
2.5 million deaths each year – must also be done. While
the urban poor may be close to many of these services, the
rural poor often face the added burden of distance and
transport costs. All of this increases vulnerability and
prevents the development of much needed livelihood skills
and, collectively, the capacity needed for greater self
sufficiency and enhanced resilience.

1d. Lack of voice and power within political
and administrative systems

1c. Lack of safety nets and adequate legal
protection of rights
Poor families find it difficult to accumulate any surpluses,
be they nutritional or financial, which means that it is
hard to maintain consumption when their incomes are
interrupted or their crops fail. In such circumstances, it can
be a big problem to find ways to ensure access to water,
food, healthcare, education, essential transportation and
other necessities. The insurance provisions that are part of
the way of life in higher-income countries are almost
always denied to poor people.
In addition, there is a common lack of protection, while
laws, regulations and procedures that concern legal and
political rights, environmental health and protection,
occupational health and safety, crime prevention and
safeguarding from exploitation and discrimination are
often limited or unenforced. Many rural poor suffer from
limited rights to land, water and other natural resources.
Indigenous people frequently have to struggle for rights
to the water they have been using and protecting for
generations. Deep well water abstractions by richer
farmers and industries can lower water tables to the
extent that poorer families and communities cannot then
access groundwater. Untreated municipal and industrial
effluents pollute the surface and groundwater sources
relied on by the poor for their water supplies. Unbridled
competition from richer farmers and industrial concerns
for water, productive land and fisheries often puts the
poor at a serious disadvantage. The implementation of
national food policies (through subsidies, taxes, tariffs,

It is often very difficult for the poor to assert their rights
and needs in order to receive a fair entitlement to public
goods and services and hold service providers, NGOs and
bureaucracies accountable. Local authorities fail to
identify and put in place measures to protect poor
communities from water-related hazards and disease.
Indigenous communities find their detailed understanding
of local water resources and its management is often
ignored, while gaining access to information on waterrelated hazards and water resources is difficult. Many
local authorities have little experience in dealing with
poor community groups and may indeed be afraid to
enter slum and squatter areas. Corrupt practices, in all
aspects and levels of society, further complicate matters.
These matters affect the approximately 1 billion people
worldwide (one-sixth of the total population) in extreme
poverty, who through sickness, hunger, thirst, destitution
and marginalization find it nearly impossible to climb out
of the cycle of poverty (Bass et al., 2005).
Other water-related factors further inhibiting economic
growth, such as landlocked countries with poor
transportation links, inadequate roads prone to waterrelated damage, lack of navigable waterways and good
natural harbours. Widespread poverty and a lack of savings
mean that governments cannot borrow from domestic
sources or collect tax to provide essential public goods and
services, so they borrow heavily, creating international debt
burdens, which they cannot then service. Governments
may fail to create the environment favourable to private
business investment, both foreign and domestic.
Cultural barriers that discourage an active role for women
marginalize an invaluable productive resource and prolong the
demographic transition from high to low fertility. This
exacerbates the problems of affordable education for all the
children in a poor family and providing enough food and
healthcare as well as reducing the amount of land per person
to be passed on to the next generation. Poor countries tend
to be very low on innovation, as they do not have the
financial resources for the research and development needed
to support economic growth. Trade sanctions put barriers in
the way of trade by poor countries, often, remarkably,
between adjacent poor countries (Sachs, 2005).

Slum in Jakarta, Indonesia

Public water pump in
Amboceli Reserve, Kenya

Untreated
municipal and
industrial
effluents pollute
the surface and
groundwater
sources relied
on by the poor
for their water
supplies

5 2 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 2. Water and the Environment
2a. The worrying deterioration of natural
capital

The time when
countries could
industrialize with

Chapter 6 points to an alarming deterioration in
freshwater aquatic ecosystems and species. In addition,
the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA), in a review
of some twenty-four ecosystem services (including a
stable climate, freshwater replenishment, fresh air, soil
fertility, pollination of crops, waste clean-up and nutrient
recycling) highlighted the fact that fifteen of these are
being degraded or used unsustainably.

no regard for
pollution and
then invest in a
massive cleanup, once and if
they could afford
to do so, is long

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

gone

In 2000, the total forest area of the planet was about 3.9
billion hectares (ha), or around 30 percent of the world’s
total area. During the 1990s, FAO estimated that some
94,000 square kilometres of forest (km2), an area roughly
the size of Portugal, was lost to clearances of one sort or
another each year. Forests contribute directly to the lives
and livelihoods of over a billion people living in great
poverty, providing them with freshwater, food, meat,
medicines and building materials. As a result of such
deterioration, poor communities face reduced levels of food
protein, clean water and income-generating potential, which
undermines poverty reduction strategies and is causing
unprecedented rates of species extinction rates. Normal
aquatic biodiversity is very rich, with high levels of endemic
species. As species decline, biodiversity is reduced and
essential ecosystem resilience diminishes.
The UN Millennium Project has made plain that long-term
success in meeting the MDGs depends on environmental
sustainability. Without it, any gains will be short-lived and
inequitable. Yet, apart from climate change and warning
systems for natural hazards, very little is being done on
an international scale. Part of the problem is the very
modest political effort devoted to sustainable
development, compared with global economic growth.
Although specific action programmes for forests, climate
change and biological diversity were put into place in the
latter part of the last century, they were mostly agreed
before the MDGs and retain rather limited backing now
(Concern/Guardian, 2005).

Some 13 percent of the world’s population, over 800
million people, do not have enough food to live healthy
and productive lives. Providing the water needed to feed a
growing population and balancing this with all the other
demands on water, is one of the great challenges of this
century. Providing water for environmental flows and
industry will tax water resources even more. Extending
water services to the 1.1 billion unserved with improved
water supply and the 2.6 billion lacking improved
sanitation, will enlarge the challenge even further.
Energy’s water needs also need to be recognized: whereas
some 90 percent of the urban world has access to
improved supplies, only 37 percent has access to energy.
Water pollution worldwide is of huge concern, but has
not received adequate attention. Chapter 4 indicates the
vast amount of water used to dilute and transport
wastes. It has now become clear that dilution is not a
viable solution to managing pollution. Chapter 1 explains
that the world’s sinks for pollution are filling up fast –
rivers, seas, atmosphere. The water sector has done little
long-term forecasting or scenario development, but what
has been done suggests that ‘the problem of water is the
most important global scale issue of the present
century’(Simovic, 2002). In particular, the current use of
clean water for the dilution and transport of wastes is
not sustainable.
Yet the world has a vast knowledge of a wide variety of
wastewater treatment systems – at all scales, many
different degrees of ease of use and a wide range of
affordability. We can treat household and industrial wastes,
we have farm management practices which inhibit the
polluting run-off from the use of agricultural chemicals into
rivers, streams, the sea and groundwaters. Urgent steps
must be taken worldwide to begin to implement tried and
tested methods of wastewater treatment before the
situation gets out of control. The time when countries
could industrialize with no regard for pollution and then
invest in a massive clean-up, once and if they could afford
to do so, is long gone. The world no longer has the sinks
for pollution that can accept this approach.

2b. The growing pressures on natural systems
As this Report points out, there has been a significant
growth in freshwater-related disasters since the turn of
the century in rich and poor countries alike, with over
400,000 lives lost and 1.5 billion people affected.

The net effect of this broad range of increasing pressures
on water is a serious worsening of global water quality
and a steady reduction of available per capita quantities
of clean freshwater.

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S . 5 2 5

Part 3. Water and Governance
As made plain in this report, water is absolutely central to
alleviating poverty, protecting the environment, promoting
socio-economic development and achieving the MDGs. Yet
despite this, not very many lower-income countries
include water as a key feature of their national planning
and budget processes, according to the Poverty Reduction
Strategy papers and the outputs from the UN World
Summit in 2005. Furthermore, the evidence suggests a
widespread mismanagement of water in many countries,
characterized by a lack of integration, sectoral approaches
and institutional resistance to change by large public
agencies in a context of increasing competition.
The available information alarmingly suggests that very
few of the world’s many significant and often
transboundary rivers (of which there are 264, with 40
percent of humanity living in shared river basins) have
well resourced, competent basin management
commissions. The same is true for many of the world’s
important aquifers. Along the same lines, too few
competent, properly resourced, independent basin
regulatory agencies are operating with the needed
powers. Too few water and electricity utilities in lowerincome countries function even moderately well or are
even close to recovering their full operating costs, not to
mention depreciation. Much of their infrastructure is run
down and degraded, and additional capacity –
infrastructure and human and other resources – needed
to meet the MDGs is lacking.
In many countries there is a huge deficit of water storage
and flood protection infrastructure at all levels and scales,
which will be aggravated, especially in the light of
increased climate variability and volatility.
Only a minority of local authorities and water associations
have the resources needed to carry out the delegated
responsibilities they have inherited from central
governments. Yet it is at the local level that authorities
can empower community groups to self-manage the
installation and operation of water supply and sanitation
systems and safely collect and dispose of solid waste.
Just what is the total demand for community health and
agricultural extension services in lower-income countries
worldwide? Given that the knowledge to solve many, If
not most, of the world’s pressing water-related problems

exists, how well is this knowledge shared with those who
really need it? Again, it is difficult to be precise, but
general demand for advice, expertise and skills vastly
outstrips the resources to provide it.
Previous chapters provide clear and convincing evidence
that data on almost every subject related to water issues
is usually lacking, unreliable, incomplete or inconsistent.
We have learned that merely collecting data is not
enough. It must be brought together, analysed and
converted into information and knowledge (see Chapter
13), then shared widely within and between countries
and stakeholders to focus attention on water problems at
all scales. It is only when the data has been collected and
analysed that we can properly understand the many
systems that affect water (hydrological, socio-economic,
financial, institutional and political alike), which have to
be factored into water governance.
To facilitate understanding, advocacy and access to
needed resources, the sector’s many challenges need to
be summarized and presented in simple but realistic terms.
Trends must be discerned and progress monitored so that
those who are falling behind can be helped, successful
experiences can be identified and the lessons shared. The
key to this is good, robust indicators, an ongoing iterative
process that is impeded by a lack of good, reliable and
consistent data, which needs input from sources external
to the UN system to expedite the process.

3a. Awareness and advocacy
Each of the Report’s chapters point to the challenges
facing the water sector in order to raise awareness and
advocate early action to tackle the world’s outstanding
water problem – poor water governance – by reminding
the world that its water problems are not going away.
The lack of coverage of water in the Poverty Reduction
Strategy Papers and the UN World Summit in 2005 is a
matter of serious concern to the water sector, which must
rigorously investigate the reasons for these omissions and
set out systematically to change perceptions about water,
while making clear that it occupies a central place at the
head of the development agenda.
Lack of such understanding has contributed to serious
under-investment and inadequate donor aid to the sector.

...there seems
to be a huge
deficit of water
storage and
flood protection
infrastructure at
all levels and
scales...

5 2 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Private investors are deterred because they feel that the
water sector offers higher risks, but longer and lower
returns on investment, than other sectors. Both public
and private sector investors are deterred by what they
perceive to be inadequate governance. Yet the costeffectiveness of water investments is plain to see, as
discussed below. This evidence and their supporting
arguments need to be better organized and more
forcefully projected to secure needed resources.

3b. The cost-effectiveness of water
investments
Children playing in the
river, Cambodia

Investment in
improved water
supply and
sanitation has a
strong potential
for yielding
three to thirtyfour times the
original
investment...

Recently, an impressive range of information has become
available relating to the cost-effectiveness of investments
in water resources, water supply and sanitation service
delivery, and in ecosystem protection.1
Investment in improved water supply and sanitation has a
strong potential for yielding three to thirty-four times the
original investment, depending on the local circumstances.
By adding rapidly deployable interventions targeted at the
poor, such as improved household water treatment and
storage, returns can go up to sixty times the original
investment. It has been estimated that 322 million
working days per year, with an annual value of US $750
million, would accrue from meeting the MDG water and
sanitation targets. Furthermore, the World Health
Organization (WHO) has estimated that meeting these
targets would yield time and convenience savings of US
$7 billion and a further US $340 million in savings due to
the costs avoided in seeking treatment, including the
costs of care, drugs and transport and the opportunity
costs of time spent in seeking medical attention.

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

By comparison, the annual per capita costs of meeting
the MDG water and sanitation targets are extremely low:
somewhere between US $4 and $7 in countries like
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Ghana, Tanzania and Uganda.
Illustrating the effect this can have on a country, those
with improved water supply and sanitation enjoyed an
annual growth rate of 3.7 percent of GDP, whereas those
without grew at a paltry 0.1 percent.

1. This section has been adapted
from SIWI/WHO, 2005.

For the irrigation sector, drip irrigation and treadle pumps
(see Chapters 1 and 7) are two ways in which access to
small-scale water technology can be provided to poor
farmers. Research has shown that the direct total net
benefit of promoting small-scale water technologies to
100 million poor farmers would mean gains estimated at
US $100 to $200 billion.

Well-managed ecosystems more than pay for themselves,
while providing a wide range of services, as indicated
earlier. Yet many lower-income countries are losing a
staggering 4 to 8 percent of their GDP through
environmental degradation. Industrial income lost to
water pollution in China in 1992 alone amounted to
US $1.7 billion. On the other hand, an investment in
watershed protection can save anywhere from 7.5 to 200
times the original investment in costs of waster treatment
saved. The annual benefits of protecting a wetland in
Cambodia, for example, have been estimated at
US $3,200 per household.
With respect to climate variability, for example, it has
been estimated that improved resilience to floods and
drought could help Kenya’s GDP to grow at an annual rate
of 5 to 6 percent – the amount needed to start effectively
reducing poverty – rather than its current 2.4 percent.

3c. Integrated Water Resources Management
Change is virtually the only constant of modern times, as
emphasized by Chapter 1, with globalization,
urbanization, climate variability, hydrological variability,
cooperation and conflict all vying for attention within the
water management setting. All of which emphasizes the
necessity for societies and their socio-economic systems
to be adaptive and resilient.
The political systems of the world vary greatly, driven by
different underlying cultures, attitudes, relationships and
natural environments. Relationships between different
levels of government also vary, within their institutions,
legislative, regulatory and socio-economic settings.
Watershed and basin boundaries often do not coincide
with administrative boundaries, causing many overlaps to
occur. Strategic basin and watershed issues cannot always
be dealt with at the local level. Growing demands for
water, availability reduced by pollution, competition from
the various sectors and the many and growing number of
users, is another constant. Globally, regionally, nationally
and locally, ecosystems are under growing threats.
All of this emphasizes that the various water issues are
not independent of each other and focuses on the need
for greater foresight in the allocation and management of
water resources. At both strategic and local levels, a
flexible approach is essential. The answer to all of this,
including meeting the MDGs, lies in a holistic, ecosystembased approach, known as Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM).

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S . 5 2 7

The different chapters of the Report, which address the
challenge areas associated with meeting the MDGs, set
out what needs to be done in the different water-using
sectors. Each stresses how the IWRM approach is
essential to an optimum and efficient response to the
challenges. But there is no panacea for implementing
IWRM; it must be tailored to prevailing conditions and
flexible enough to permit this. Local circumstances can
put obstacles in its way:
■
■
■
■
■
■
■
■

lack of appropriate governance
lack of proper coordination of management activities
lack of appropriate management tools
institutional fragmentation
insufficiently trained or qualified manpower
shortfalls in funding
inadequate public awareness
limited involvement by communities, NGOs and the
private sector.

Probably because of these and other difficulties, very few
countries have met the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation (JPOI) target that IWRM should be
incorporated into national water resources plans by the
end of 2005. Thus, it is clear that more analysis of the
practical means of moving from a fragmented, sector-bysector approach to IWRM needs to be carried out for
lower-income countries, and these experiences need to
be shared widely (see Chapter 14).

3d. The need for international and national
cooperation
The necessary overhauls of water governance and the
challenge of meeting the MDGs are closely linked. In
order to succeed in both, action at all levels of society is
required. Individuals must take greater responsibility, both
for their families and their communities. Provincial and
national governments, with full transparency and
accountability, must take steps towards making resources
available and creating enabling environments for
beneficial change, while ensuring that water policies and
plans are set firmly within the context of regional and
national development plans and budgets. Action to
increase progress on the MDGs must be initiated within
countries themselves, involving the whole country and
maximizing the capacity for community self-organization.
At the international level, industrialized countries must
play their part. Chapter 1 makes clear that the MDGs are
a joint project. The first seven goals are directed at
alleviating poverty; while the eighth goal is to create the
partnerships of rich and poor countries to meet the first
seven. Lower-income countries are tasked with delivering
promised policy changes and improvements to
governance, and the industrialized countries must follow
through with their long-standing commitments to
increase Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) and
technical assistance.

Globally,
regionally,
nationally and
locally,
ecosystems are
under growing
threats

Women’s group for microfinance, Andra Pradesh,
India

5 2 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Part 4. Cautious Optimism

‘In economic
terms, the
human race has
never been
richer, or better
armed with the
medical
knowledge,
technical
prowess and
intellectual
firepower to
make poverty

Section 5: SHARING RESPONSIBILITIES

history’
2. It is not certain how many
microfinance organizations
there are worldwide, but the
number is thought to be
large and growing. Indonesia
alone claims 600,000 and
other countries in Asia and in
Africa claim many thousands
more. Today, some of the
world’s biggest banks
(Deutsche Bank, Citigroup,
HSBC and ABN Amro) are
showing an interest. Credit
rating agencies are beginning
to provide affordable services
to microfinance organizations,
and big banks are finding their
way into the sector through
the remittances that overseas
workers send to their families
back home.

4a. Economic progress is being made

4b. Reform is underway in the water sector

As previous chapters indicate, there should be cause for
cautious optimism. We know that economic development
can and does work in many parts of the world. Despite
the sometimes daunting data and statistics on the extent
of poverty, at least five-sixths of the world’s population is
at least one step above extreme poverty. Nearly 5 billion
people are living in countries where average incomes rose
in the 20 years between 1980 and 2000. Over a similar
timeframe, life expectancy increased in a range of
countries in which some 5.7 billion people live. Out of the
total world population of 6.3 billion people, nearly 5
billion have managed to advance into at least the first
stages of social and economic development. The truth is
that, thankfully, the scale of extreme poverty is
lessening, both in terms of the total numbers affected
and as a proportion of the total world population
(Sachs, 2005).

Although evidence of its effectiveness is hard to come by,
a tremendous worldwide revolution is ongoing in the
reform of the water sector’s many institutions. Progress is
patchy, sometimes slow and not as synchronized with
national development planning and budgeting as it should
be. Many local initiatives, often by poor communities, are
underway but usually under-reported. Rapidly growing
lower-income countries, such as Brazil, China and India,
are coming up with a wide range of novel initiatives to
deal with their water governance and water service
delivery challenges, which are robust and could be
adapted by other countries. The UN Millennium Project
(see Chapter 1) has produced a range of plans and ideas
to meet the MDG targets on time, much of which involves
activities within and directly related to the water sector.
Universities training water managers have shown that they
understand the issues and challenges of contemporary
water management and are responding positively to them.

In addition, the growth of microfinance is proceeding and
has great potential for speeding up poverty alleviation.2
Microfinance is a system of providing small loans to the
very poor, which can then be used by local communities
to build a well, for example. Microfinance is presently
receiving a lot of attention from policy-makers, with its
proponents asserting that it has enormous potential in
the fight against poverty – sweet music indeed for those
who fight for the rights of the poor and the abolition of
poverty (Economist, 2005). It is showing signs that it
may be about to expand substantially by providing
financial services that can be made available to the very
poor, or low-cost insurance to protect them against the
risks and setbacks to which they are particularly
vulnerable – water-related hazards, crop and livestock
losses, death of the family breadwinner and others.
Among the barriers to providing financial services to the
very poor are inflation, incompetent governments (which
allow corruption and fail to provide an enabling
environment for financial services) and property laws that
make it impossible for homes (for those who own their
own) to be used as security for loans. Funding for
microfinance organizations must go beyond governments,
aid agencies and charities, and the cost of operations
must be brought down, because as it is presently
organized, microfinance is very labour-intensive.

This report covers a lot of ground, reflecting the breadth
and scope of what needs to be done in the water sector
worldwide and indeed what is being done. It has made
plain just how central water is to poverty alleviation and
development and how little this fact has been recognized
and acknowledged. There are other important sectors
that would wish to claim priority for scarce resources and
investments, yet water is primus inter pares – the first
among equals. No matter how many mobile phones are in
circulation, how many new drugs and new seed varieties
are produced, without access to secure water supplies,
development will stall and the MDG targets will fall short.
The same can be said about the environment, which is
also dependent upon good quality water to sustain it.
It is not that the world does not have the resources to do
what is needed, both for water and the MDGs. The
Millennium Project has made clear that the world does
have the wealth and the tools to do what is needed, an
idea that The Economist (2004) has succinctly
summarized: ‘Optimism is certainly justified. In economic
terms, the human race has never been richer, or better
armed with the medical knowledge and technical prowess
and intellectual firepower … to make poverty history’.
Given the nature of the challenges, the thoughts of the
2005 Stockholm Water Prize winner, Ms Sunita Narain,

C O N C L U S I O N S A N D R E C O M M E N D AT I O N S . 5 2 9

seem particularly appropriate. She noted that water is
about more than just water; it is about building people’s
institutions and their power to take control over
decisions. However, water cannot be made everyone’s
business without fundamental changes in the way we do
business with water: ‘Humanity must realise, policy
makers and public alike, that water management which
involves communities and households needs to become
the greatest cooperative enterprise in the world.’

reconfirmed at the 2005 UN World Summit, the MDGs can
be achieved, and the water sector can be reformed.
There is a danger of complacency however. The fast
changing context of today's world, especially the
accelerated pace of climate change, can only heighten the
urgency with which we must address our water-related
challenges. We all share the responsibility to ensure that
water – critical to every aspect of our life – remains at the
forefront of the political agenda.

Jiuzhaigou valley,
Sichuan, China

Given the state of water around the world, and the
challenges facing contemporary water managers, there
has probably never been a more exhilarating time to be in
the profession. Certainly, managing water today is a
tough proposition, but the rewards are immense: world
poverty alleviation and environmental sustainability.
In some of the concluding remarks to WWDR1, it was said
that, given the evidence available at that time, the
prospects for hundreds of millions of poor people in
lower-income countries, as well as the natural
environment, did not look good. Has the situation
improved since then, in the intervening years? Yes, it has.
Certainly the major water-related challenges have not
changed very much, but a worldwide process of reform of
water is underway. We have convincing evidence of the
very positive cost-effectiveness of investments in water.
The growth in microfinance has the potential to provide
essential capital for the extension of water service
provision, through a much enhanced availability of funds
to the very poor, while also contributing to lessening their
insecurity in many other ways. The MDG review has been
carried out; we know what has to be done to meet the
targets, and a plan to do this has been produced. We
know that there has been and continues to be progress in
poverty alleviation and socio-economic development. We
know, in fact, how to bring to an end the exclusion of the
poor from their fair share of the Earth’s resources. With
determination and political will, the levels of international
cooperation agreed on in the Millennium Declaration, and

References
Bass, S., Reid, H., Satterwaite, D. and Steeple, P. 2005.
Reducing Poverty and Sustaining the Environment: The
Policies of Local Engagement. London, Earthscan
Publications
Concern/Guardian. 2005. Look into the Future: Are the MDGs
a Ray of Hope for the Poorest People? Booklet prepared

for the 2005 UN World Summit by Concern Worldwide

21st century. Paper presented at the 2001 Stockholm

and The Guardian, London/Manchester, England.

Water Symposium. Water Science and Technology. Vol.

Economist. 2005. The hidden wealth of the poor: A survey of
microfinance. 5 November 2005. London, England.
———. 2004. Making poverty history. 18 December 2004.
London, Economist Group.
Sachs, J. 2005. The End of Poverty: How We Can Make it
Happen in Our Lifetime. London, Penguin Books.
Simonovic, S. 2002. Global water dynamics: Issues for the

45 No. 8. pp. 53-64. London, IWA Publishing.
SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute). 2005.
Stockholm Waterfront. 2005. Forum for Global Water
Issues. Stockholm, Sweden.
SIWI/WHO (Stockholm International Water Institute/World
Health organization). 2005. Making Water a Part of
Economic Development, Stockholm/Geneva.

5 3 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Boxes by chapter
Chapter 1: Living in a
Changing World

Box 1.1:
Box 1.2:
Box 1.3:
Box 1.4:
Box 1.5:
Box 1.6:
Box 1.7:
Box 1.8:
Box 1.9:
Box 1.10:
Box 1.11:
Box 1.12:
Box 1.13:

The particular problems of Africa
Environmental refugees
Tourism and globalization
Mobile phones and the water sector
The EU and South Africa: Inclusive water management
Thirteen key IWRM change areas
The particular problems of tropical countries
Inland water transport: A tool for promoting economic and sustainable development
Hurricane Katrina
The tsunami disaster and future preparedness
Policy-making and scientific integrity
Water and the Millennium Development Goals
Recommendations of the Millennium Task Force on Water and Sanitation

8
9
10
11
13
14
19
22
26
27
29
30
34

Chapter 2: The
Challenges of Water
Governance

Box 2.1:
Box 2.2:
Box 2.3:
Box 2.4:
Box 2.5:
Box 2.6:
Box 2.7:
Box 2.8:
Box 2.9:
Box 2.10:
Box 2.11:
Box 2.12:
Box 2.13:
Box 2.14:
Box 2.15:
Box 2.16:

Gender, poverty, improved governance and water access in Punjab, Pakistan
Criteria for effective governance
Developing indicators for assessing governance
Water in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs)
Integrating land and water governance
The policy process: Decision-making versus implementation
The right to water: General Comment 15
Safeguarding water supply to low-income groups
Safeguarding the right to safe water supply
Corruption in the irrigation sector in Pakistan
Corruption in the water supply and sanitation sectors in India
Experiences in private sector involvement in water supply and sanitation
Improved governance for better water services in Brazil
The active role of water user associations in Morocco
Traditional systems under threat in India
Access to information and public participation in the water sector

47
49
51
53
55
58
63
65
66
67
68
70
72
73
76
79

Chapter 3: Water and
Human Settlements in
an Urbanizing World

Box 3.1:
Box 3.2:
Box 3.3:
Box 3.4:

Water supply inadequacies weigh heaviest on women
92
Lack of provision in secondary urban centres around Lake Victoria (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda)
105
Demand-side water management: Beijing’s water scarcity
106
Providing fundamental rights to refugees: Excerpts from an all-staff message by UNHCR’s Acting High
Commissioner on World Water Day 2005
108

Chapter 4: The State
of the Resource

Box 4.1:
Box 4.2:
Box 4.3:
Box 4.4:
Box 4.5:
Box 4.6:

Index of water resources availability – Total Actual Renewable Water Resources (TARWR)
Acid rain impacts on water resources
Impacts to surface water quality from human activity
Impacts to groundwater quality from human activity
Accelerating glacial decline
Management of aquifer recharge (MAR) – An example from Viet Nam

131
138
139
140
145
146

Chapter 5: Coastal
and Freshwater
Ecosystems

Box 5.1:
Box 5.2:

Lake Victoria: An ecosystem in decline
Threatened South and Southeast Asian wetlands

163
169

B OX ES BY TH EM E . 5 3 1

Box 5.3:
Box 5.4:
Box 5.5:
Box 5.6:
Box 5.7:

Dams and their alternatives
Biodiversity in Lake Chad
Dramatic decline of the Aral Sea
The ecosystem approach in action
Restored ecosystems and livelihoods

179
182
183
187
190

Chapter 6: Protecting
and Promoting Human
Health

Box 6.1:
Box 6.2:
Box 6.3:
Box 6.4:
Box 6.5:
Box 6.6:
Box 6.7:
Box 6.8:
Box 6.9:
Box 6.10:
Box 6.11:

The emergence of malaria in India’s Thar Desert
Control of diarrhoeal diseases
Malaria control through stream water management
A new strategy against Aedes aegypti in Viet Nam
Recreational water use, pollution and health
Availability and quality of drinking water in the Ruhuna Basins, Sri Lanka
User-based versus provider-based data
Water safety plans (WSPs)
Benefits of improved sanitation
Domestic use of irrigation water
Successful water supply in Phnom Penh

205
211
216
218
219
220
226
228
230
232
234

Chapter 7: Water for
Food, Agriculture and
Rural Livelihoods

Box 7.1:
Box 7.2:
Box 7.3:
Box 7.4:
Box 7.5:
Box 7.6:
Box 7.7:
Box 7.8:

Measuring hunger and undernutrition
Integrated resources management in support of food production in rural areas
The role of women in irrigated farming in sub-Saharan Africa
Mali, Office du Niger: The successful reform of an irrigation monopoly
Revised World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for the safe use of wastewater in agriculture
Tonle Sap: The benefits of seasonal flooding for livelihoods, nutrition and biodiversity
Positive impacts of irrigation on rural communities
Local governance to secure access to land and water in the Lower Gash watershed, Sudan

247
251
259
260
264
265
269
269

Chapter 8: Water and
Industry

Box 8.1:
Box 8.2:
Box 8.3:
Box 8.4:
Box 8.5:
Box 8.6:
Box 8.7:
Box 8.8:

Identification, assessment and prioritisation of pollution ‘hot spots’
Industrial disasters around the world
International agreements and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs)
Best Environmental Practices (BEPs)
Definitions of water reclamation, reuse and recycling
Cleaner cheese production in El Salvador
Cleaner beer production in Cuba
The TEST strategy in the Danube Basin

280
283
285
289
291
295
296
296

Chapter 9: Water and
Energy

Box 9.1:
Box 9.2:
Box 9.3:
Box 9.4:
Box 9.5:
Box 9.6:
Box 9.7:
Box 9.8:
Box 9.9:
Box 9.10:
Box 9.11:
Box 9.12:
Box 9.13:

Water conservation versus energy conservation
Energy conservation in the Moulton Niguel Water District, California
Desalination using renewable energy: Greece
World Summit on Sustainable Development: Energy targets
Climate change and atmospheric pollution: Power generation from fossil fuels
The development of hydropower in Africa
Small hydropower in China
Small hydropower in Nepal
Palmiet pumped storage scheme, South Africa
Hydro Tasmania, Australia
Hydropower generation in Freudenau, Austria
Renewable Obligation Certificates: A policy instrument promoting renewable energy
Distributed generation: Power supply in the future

309
311
311
314
314
316
317
318
319
320
322
326
327

5 3 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Chapter 10: Managing
Risks: Securing the
Gains of Development

Box 10.1:
Box 10.2:
Box 10.3:
Box 10.4:
Box 10.5:
Box 10.6:
Box 10.7:
Box 10.8:

Value of stakeholder participation in disaster risk reduction
Example of multi-hazard assessment in Costa Rica
Manuals for community-based flood management: Project in Bangladesh, India and Nepal
Methodology behind the Disaster Risk Index (DRI)
Climate change and disaster preparedness in Uganda
Projected impacts of climate change in the Rhine River Basin
Community risk assessment based on vulnerability and resilience
Highlights of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–15

350
351
352
352
363
363
364
366

Chapter 11: Sharing
Water

Box 11.1:
Box 11.2:
Box 11.3:
Box 11.4:
Box 11.5:
Box 11.6:

Shared aquifers between Argentina, Paraguay and Bolivia
Cauvery River dispute in Southern India
Transboundary aquifers on the agenda of the International Law Commission
Traditional approaches to wise water sharing
Major initiatives in building institutional capacity timeline
Virtual water and the water footprint

378
379
384
388
389
392

Chapter 12: Valuing
and Charging for
Water

Box 12.1:
Box 12.2:
Box 12.3:
Box 12.4:
Box 12.5:
Box 12.6:
Box 12.7:
Box 12.8:
Box 12.9:
Box 12.10:

The high cost of bottled water
Valuing water, valuing women
Willingness to pay for improved water and wastewater services: Cairo, Egypt
Economic valuation of returns to irrigation water investments in Asia
Benefits versus costs of improved water and sanitation services
Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) as a cost recovery tool
Water and sewerage services in Yerevan, Armenia
The ‘water war’ in Cochabamba, Bolivia
Targeting the poor through grassroots mechanisms in Manila, the Philippines
Lessons learned in paying for environmental services

402
403
410
411
412
416
418
420
421
425

Chapter 13: Enhancing
Knowledge and
Capacity

Box 13.1:
Box 13.2:
Box 13.3:
Box 13.4:
Box 13.5:
Box 13.6:
Box 13.7:
Box 13.8:
Box 13.9:
Box 13.10:
Box 13.11:
Box 13.12:

Enhancing education and capacity: An economic proposition
Hydrological networks: The cases of Venezuela, Mexico and India
Advances in the practical use of satellite remote sensing for water resources
TIGER Initiative: Improving water systems observation in Africa
Advances in remote sensing technologies
The Global Development Learning Network (GDLN)
FarmNet – Farmer Information Network for Rural Development
Local and indigenous knowledge for sustainable IWRM
Implementing capacity at all levels
GIS for school sanitation and hygiene education: Tamil Nadu, India
The need for gender balance
Initiatives to enhance access to finance at sub-sovereign level

438
439
441
441
442
443
445
448
449
450
452
453

Chapter 14: Case
Studies: Moving
Towards an
Integrated Approach

Box 14.1:
Box 14.2:
Box 14.3:
Box 14.4:
Box 14.5:
Box 14.6:
Box 14.7:
Box 14.8:
Box 14.9:
Box 14.10:
Box 14.11:
Box 14.12:

The European Union Water Framework Directive
The Danube River Basin Management Plan: Converging with EU-WFD
Ensuring the knowledge base
Disasters and income
Building a community framework
Shared water management
Water resources development in the State of Mexico
Transboundary water resources in Mongolia
The Paraguay-Paraná Waterway(Hidrovía) Project
The social, economic and environmental costs of the tsunami in Sri Lanka
The impact of the tsunami in Thailand
The impact of rising temperatures

472
476
483
485
487
491
494
496
500
508
511
513

B OX ES BY R E G I O N . 5 3 3

Boxes by region
Africa
Box 1.1:
Box 2.14:
Box 3.2:
Box 5.1:
Box 5.4:
Box 7.3:
Box 7.4:
Box 7.8:
Box 9.6:
Box 9.9:
Box 10.5:
Box 12.3:
Box 13.4:
Box 14.4:
Box 14.6:
Box 14.12:

The particular problems of Africa
The active role of water user associations in Morocco
Lack of provision in secondary urban centres around Lake Victoria (Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda)
Lake Victoria: An ecosystem in decline
Biodiversity in Lake Chad
The role of women in irrigated farming in sub-Saharan Africa
Mali, Office du Niger: The successful reform of an irrigation monopoly
Local governance to secure access to land and water in the Lower Gash watershed, Sudan
The development of hydropower in Africa
Palmiet pumped storage scheme, South Africa
Climate change and disaster preparedness in Uganda
Willingness to pay for improved water and wastewater services: Cairo, Egypt
TIGER Initiative: Improving water systems observation in Africa
Disasters and income
Shared water management
The impact of rising temperatures

8
73
105
163
182
259
260
269
316
319
363
410
441
485
491
513

The tsunami disaster and future preparedness
Gender, poverty, improved governance and water access in Punjab, Pakistan
Corruption in the irrigation sector in Pakistan
Corruption in the water supply and sanitation sectors in India
Traditional systems under threat in India
Demand-side water management: Beijing’s water scarcity
Management of aquifer recharge (MAR) – An example from Viet Nam
Threatened South and Southeast Asian wetlands
Dramatic decline of the Aral Sea
The ecosystem approach in action
The emergence of malaria in India’s Thar Desert
Malaria control through stream water management
A new strategy against Aedes aegypti in Viet Nam
Availability and quality of drinking water in the Ruhuna Basins, Sri Lanka
Domestic use of irrigation water (Pakistan)
Successful water supply in Phnom Penh (Cambodia)
Tonle Sap: The benefits of seasonal flooding for livelihoods, nutrition and biodiversity
Small hydropower in China
Small hydropower in Nepal
Manuals for community-based flood management: Project in Bangladesh, India and Nepal
Cauvery River dispute in Southern India
Economic valuation of returns to irrigation water investments in Asia
Water and sewerage services in Yerevan, Armenia
Targeting the poor through grassroots mechanisms in Manila, the Philippines
Enhancing education and capacity: An economic proposition
Hydrological networks: The cases of India, Mexico and Venezuela
Local and indigenous knowledge for sustainable IWRM
GIS for school sanitation and hygiene education: Tamil Nadu, India
Ensuring the knowledge base

27
47
67
68
76
106
146
169
183
187
205
216
218
220
232
234
265
317
318
352
379
411
418
421
438
439
448
450
483

Asia
Box 1.10:
Box 2.1:
Box 2.10:
Box 2.11:
Box 2.15:
Box 3.3:
Box 4.6:
Box 5.2:
Box 5.5:
Box 5.6:
Box 6.1:
Box 6.3:
Box 6.4:
Box 6.6:
Box 6.10:
Box 6.11:
Box 7.6:
Box 9.7:
Box 9.8:
Box 10.3:
Box 11.2:
Box 12.4:
Box 12.7:
Box 12.9:
Box 13.1:
Box 13.2:
Box 13.8:
Box 13.10:
Box 14.3:

5 3 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Box 14.8: Transboundary water resources in Mongolia
Box 14.10: The social, economic and environmental costs of the tsunami in Sri Lanka
Box 14.11: The impact of the tsunami in Thailand

496
508
511

Europe
Box 2.8:
Box 2.16:
Box 8.1:
Box 8.8:
Box 9.3:
Box 9.5:
Box 9.11:
Box 9.12:
Box 10.6:
Box 14.1:
Box 14.2:
Box 14.5:

Safeguarding water supply to low-income groups (Spain)
Access to information and public participation in the water sector
Identification, assessment and prioritisation of pollution ‘hot spots’
The TEST strategy in the Danube Basin
Desalination using renewable energy: Greece
Climate change and atmospheric pollution: Power generation from fossil fuels
Hydropower generation in Freudenau, Austria
Renewable Obligation Certificates: A policy instrument promoting renewable energy
Projected impacts of climate change in the Rhine River basin
The European Union Water Framework Directive
The Danube River Basin Management Plan: Converging with EU-WFD
Building a community framework

65
79
280
296
311
314
322
326
363
472
476
487

Latin America and the Caribbean
Box 2.9:
Box 2.13:
Box 8.6:
Box 8.7:
Box 10.2:
Box 11.1:
Box 12.8:
Box 13.2:
Box 13.11:
Box 14.7:
Box 14.9:

Safeguarding the right to safe water supply (Argentina)
Improved governance for better water services in Brazil
Cleaner cheese production in El Salvador
Cleaner beer production in Cuba
Example of multi-hazard assessment in Costa Rica
Shared aquifers between Argentina, Paraguay and Bolivia
The ‘water war’ in Cochabamba, Bolivia
Hydrological networks: The cases of India, Mexico and Venezuela
The need for gender balance
Water resources development in the State of Mexico
The Paraguay-Paraná Waterway(Hidrovía) Project

66
72
295
296
351
378
420
439
452
494
500

North America
Box 1.9:
Box 9.2:

Hurricane Katrina
Energy conservation in the Moulton Niguel Water District, California

26
311

Hydro Tasmania, Australia

320

Oceania
Box 9.10:

Global
Box 1.2:
Box 1.3:
Box 1.4:
Box 1.5:
Box 1.6:
Box 1.7:
Box 1.8:
Box 1.11:
Box 1.12:
Box 1.13:
Box 2.2:
Box 2.3:

Environmental refugees
Tourism and globalization
Mobile phones and the water sector
The EU and South Africa: Inclusive water management
Thirteen key IWRM change areas
The particular problems of tropical countries
Inland water transport: A tool for promoting economic and sustainable development
Policy-making and scientific integrity
Water and the Millennium Development Goals
Recommendations of the Millennium Task Force on Water and Sanitation
Criteria for effective governance
Developing indicators for assessing governance

9
10
11
13
14
19
22
29
30
34
49
51

B OX ES BY R E G I O N . 5 3 5

Box 2.4:
Box 2.5:
Box 2.6:
Box 2.7:
Box 2.12:
Box 3.1:
Box 3.4:

Water in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs)
Integrating land and water governance
The policy process: Decision-making versus implementation
The right to water: General Comment 15
Experiences in private sector involvement in water supply and sanitation
Water supply inadequacies weigh heaviest on women
Providing fundamental rights to refugees: Excerpts from an all-staff message by UNHCR’s Acting High
Commissioner on World Water Day 2005
Box 4.1:
Index of water resources availability – Total Actual Renewable Water Resources (TARWR)
Box 4.2:
Acid rain impacts on water resources
Box 4.3:
Impacts to surface water quality from human activity
Box 4.4:
Impacts to groundwater quality from human activity
Box 4.5:
Accelerating glacial decline
Box 5.3:
Dams and their alternatives
Box 5.7:
Restored ecosystems and livelihoods
Box 6.2:
Control of diarrhoeal diseases
Box 6.5:
Recreational water use, pollution and health
Box 6.7:
User-based versus provider-based data
Box 6.8:
Water safety plans (WSPs)
Box 6.9:
Benefits of improved sanitation
Box 7.1
Measuring hunger and undernutrition
Box 7.2:
Integrated resources management in support of food production in rural areas
Box 7.5:
Revised World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for the safe use of wastewater in agriculture
Box 7.7:
Positive impacts of irrigation on rural communities
Box 8.2:
Industrial disasters around the world
Box 8.3:
International agreements and Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs)
Box 8.4:
Best Environmental Practices (BEPs)
Box 8.5:
Definitions of water reclamation, reuse and recycling
Box 9.1:
Water conservation versus energy conservation
Box 9.4:
World Summit on Sustainable Development: Energy targets
Box 9.13: Distributed generation: Power supply in the future
Box 10.1: Value of stakeholder participation in disaster risk reduction
Box 10.4: Methodology behind the Disaster Risk Index (DRI)
Box 10.7: Community risk assessment based on vulnerability and resilience
Box 10.8: Highlights of the Hyogo Framework for Action 2005–15
Box 11.3: Transboundary aquifers on the agenda of the International Law Commission
Box 11.4: Traditional approaches to wise water sharing
Box 11.5: Major initiatives in building institutional capacity timeline
Box 11.6: Virtual water and the water footprint
Box 12.1: The high cost of bottled water
Box 12.2: Valuing water, valuing women
Box 12.5: Benefits versus costs of improved water and sanitation services 412
Box 12.6 Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT) as a cost recovery tool
Box 12.10: Lessons learned in paying for environmental services
Box 13.2: Hydrological networks: The cases of India, Mexico and Venezuela
Box 13.3: Advances in the practical use of satellite remote sensing for water resources
Box 13.5: Advances in remote sensing technologies
Box 13.6: The Global Development Learning Network (GDLN)
Box 13.7: FarmNet – Farmer Information Network for Rural Development
Box 13.9: Implementing capacity at all levels
Box 13.12: Initiatives to enhance access to finance at sub-sovereign level

53
55
58
63
70
92
108
131
138
139
140
145
179
190
211
219
226
228
230
247
251
264
269
283
285
289
291
309
314
327
350
352
364
366
384
388
389
392
402
403
416
425
439
441
442
443
445
449
453

5 3 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Maps
Map 3.1:
Map 3.2:
Map 4.1:
Map 4.2:
Map 4.3:
Map 4.4:
Map 5.1:
Map 5.2:
Map 5.3:
Map 5.4:
Map 5.5:
Map 6.1:
Map 6.2:
Map 7.1:
Map 7.2:
Map 10.1:
Map 10.2:
Map 10.3:
Map 11.1:
Map 11.2:
Map 11.3:
Map 11.4:
Map 12.1:
Map 12.2:
Map 13.1:
Map 13.2:
Map 13.3:
Map 13.4:
Map 14.1:
Map 14.2:
Map 14.3:
Map 14.4:
Map 14.5:
Map 14.6:
Map 14.7:
Map 14.8:
Map 14.9:
Map 14.10:
Map 14.11:
Map 14.12:
Map 14.13:
Map 14.14:
Map 14.15:
Map 14.16:
Map 14.17:

Urban slum incidence in developing countries, 2001
Change in slum population in developing countries, 1990–2001
Distribution of GRDC water measurement stations, March 2005
Global groundwater regions: predominant mode of groundwater occurrence and mean rate of renewal
Groundwater abstraction rate as a percentage of mean recharge
Principal regions of land-based and mountain glaciers
Biological oxygen demand (BOD) for major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and 1991–2003
Inorganic nitrogen concentrations for major watersheds by region, 1979–90 and 1991–2003
Fragmentation and flow regulation by large river system (LRS)
Levels of Lake Chad from 1963 to 2001
Major irrigation areas in the Aral Sea Basin
Coverage with improved drinking water sources, 2002
Coverage with improved sanitation, 2002
Distribution of areas under irrigation in the world, 2000
Proportion of undernourished people in total population, 2000–2002
Physical exposure and relative vulnerability to floods, 1980–2000
Physical exposure and relative vulnerability to droughts, 1980–2000
The Climate Variability Index (CVI) as applied to Peru at national and subnational scales
Transboundary aquifers of the Americas (in progress)
National water footprints around the world, 2004
Water savings around the world
Net virtual water imports around the world
World Heritage Sites with important water-related value
Ramsar sites with important water-related value
WMO’S World Hydrological Cycle Observing System (WHYCOS)
The Knowledge Index, 2005
Cap-Net
PoWER
Case study overview
Overview of the river basins in the ACB
Overview of the Danube River Basin
Overview of the river basins in Ethiopia
Overview of the river basins in France
Overview of the river basins in Japan
Overview of the river basins in Kenya
Overview of the Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Basin
Overview of the Lake Titicaca Basin
Overview of the river basins in Mali
Overview of the river basins in the State of Mexico
Overview of the river basins in Mongolia
Overview of the La Plata Basin
Overview of the river basins in South Africa
Overview of the river basins in Sri Lanka
Overview of the river basins in Thailand
Overview of the river basins in Uganda

98
99
128
129
144
145
174
175
176
182
183
222
223
253
266
354
355
357
374
391
393
393
404
404
440
444
446
447
469
473
475
477
479
482
484
486
488
489
492
495
498
502
506
509
512

M A P S A N D F I G U R ES . 5 3 7

Figures
Figure 1.1:
Figure 1.2:
Figure 2.1:
Figure 3.1:
Figure 4.1:
Figure 4.2:
Figure 4.3:
Figure 4.4:

The reiterative policy-making process
The DPSIR framework of analysis
Dimensions of water governance
Comparative distribution of the world’s urban population, 1950-2000
Global distribution of the world’s water
Schematic of the hydrologic cycle components in present-day setting
Oxygen-18 content of stream water along the main stem of large rivers
Variations in continental river runoff through most of the twentieth century
(deviations from average values)
Figure 4.5: Typical hydrographs in accordance with climatic settings
Figure 4.6: Acid rain and its deposition processes
Figure 4.7: Five-year mean of the pH level in rainfall in the eastern regions of Canada and the US
Figure 4.8: Primary sources of groundwater pollution
Figure 5.1: Estimated mean value of marine biomes
Figure 5.2: Living Planet Index, 1970–2000
Figure 5.3: Trends in waterbird populations in the African-Eurasian (AEWA) regions
Figure 5.4: Fragmentation and flow regulation by biome type
Figure 5.5: Declines in the concentrations of organic contaminants in Russian and Chinese rivers
Figure 5.6: Surface area and degree of protection of major terrestrial biomes
Figure 5.7: Distribution and degree of protection of wetland habitats by region
Figure 5.8: Total area designated as Ramsar sites (1974–2004)
Figure 6.1: Projected population without access to improved sanitation
Figure 7.1: Per capita food consumption by region, 1965–2030
Figure 7.2: Main sources of global food supply, 2002
Figure 7.3: Dietary changes in developing countries, 1965–2030
Figure 7.4: Blue and green water in the hydrological cycle
Figure 7.5: Evolution of cropland, 1961–2000
Figure 7.6: Water productivity of different crops, Cyprus
Figure 7.7: Grain yield under improved and traditional technologies, 1977–2001, Andhra Pradesh, India
Figure 7.8: Examples of institutional reforms and implications in terms of ownership and management
Figure 7.9: World Bank lending in irrigation, 1960–2005
Figure 7.10: Proportion of undernourished people in selected developing countries, 2000–2002
Figure 7.11: Estimated and projected number of undernourished people by region, 1991–2030
Figure 8.1: Trends in industrial water use by region, 1950–2000
Figure 8.2: Total world industrial water use, 1950–2000
Figure 8.3: Water use by industry vs domestic use and agriculture
Figure 8.4: Industry shares of biological oxygen demand (BOD), by industrial sector and in selected countries
Figure 8.5: Release of total organic carbon (TOC) directly or indirectly to water in thirteen European
Union Member States, 2003
Figure 9.1: Global generation of electricity by source, 1971 to 2001
Figure 9.2: Total primary energy by source, 2002
Figure 10.1: Global trend of water-related disasters, 1960-2004
Figure 10.2: Distribution of water-related disasters by region, 1990–2004
Figure 10.3: Number of dead and affected people in water-related disasters, 1970–2004
Figure 10.4: The risk management cycle
Figure 10.5: Relative vulnerability for floods
Figure 10.6: Relative vulnerability for droughts

12
35
46
89
121
122
124
126
127
138
138
140
165
170
170
178
180
188
188
189
221
247
249
249
251
252
256
257
259
261
266
267
278
278
279
281
282
315
315
343
344
346
347
354
355

5 3 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Figure 10.7: PWRI Risk Index: Case study basin in Japan, 1980–2000
Figure 10.8: Framework for disaster risk reduction
Figure 10.9: Framework of the Designated Urban River Inundation Prevention Act (Japan, 2003)
Figure 10.10: Risk management at the operational level
Figure 10.11: Risk management at the project planning level
Figure 10.12: Pressure and Release (PAR) model in vulnerability analysis
Figure 12.1: Comparing the cost and value of water
Figure 12.2: Actual and planned water pollution charges in the River Narva and Lake Peipsi
Catchment Area, 1993–2005
Figure 12.3: Share of private sector participation in water supply and sanitation by region
Figure 12.4: Estimated annual water savings attributed to trade in wheat, Egypt, 1997–2001
Figure 12.5: Affordability of utility services, Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 2003–04
Figure 13.1: Capacity development: Levels, activities, outputs and goals
Figure 14.1: Areal and volumetric variation of the Chacaltaya Glacier

357
359
360
361
361
364
414
417
419
422
427
436
489

Tables
Table 1.1:
Table 2.1:
Table 2.2:
Table 2.3:
Table 3.1:
Table 3.2:
Table 4.1:
Table 4.2:
Table 4.3:
Table 4.4:
Table 4.5:
Table 4.6:
Table 4.7:
Table 5.1:
Table 5.2:
Table 5.3:
Table 6.1:
Table 6.2:
Table 6.3:
Table 6.4:
Table 6.5:
Table 6.6:
Table 6.7:
Table 6.8:
Table 6.9:
Table 7.1:
Table 7.2

Proposed WWDR2 indicators by challenge area
Country readiness to meet the Johannesburg target on IWRM planning by 2005
Public participation rights in constitutional and legal frameworks
Quality and accessibility of water data, selected countries
The distribution of the world’s urban population by region, 1950–2010
The distribution of the world’s largest cities by region, 1800–2000
Precipitation distribution into surface water and groundwater components (by climate region)
Selected large aquifer systems with non-renewable groundwater resources
(simplified after UNESCO Working Group on Non-Renewable Resources, 2004)
Water availability information by nation (AQUASTAT, FAO 2005)
Major principal sources and impacts of sedimentation
Freshwater pollution sources, effects and constituents of concern
Spatial and time scales within which pollution occurs and can be remediated
Potential applications for reclaimed water
Estimated value of selected wetlands in Africa and Asia
Major threats to coastal and freshwater ecosystems and services
Introductions of invasive species by region
The relationship between the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and water,
sanitation and hygiene
Global burden of disease: Deaths by age, gender, region and cause for the year 2002
Global burden of disease: DALYs by age, gender, region and cause for the year 2002
Estimated global burden of disease associated with soil-transmitted intestinal
helminth infections, 1990
Global estimates of prevalence and the number of cases of soil-transmitted helminth i
nfections by region and age group, 2003
Global estimates of people at risk of four vector-borne diseases
Classification of improved and unimproved drinking water sources
Classification of improved and unimproved sanitation facilities
Requirements for water service levels and health implications
Governance issues at different levels in agricultural water management
Virtual water content of selected products

36
57
77
80
90
91
124
130
132
137
141
142
149
166
172
181
206
209
209
212
213
214
224
225
227
246
258

TA B L ES . 5 3 9

Table 7.3:
Table 8.1:
Table 8.2:
Table 8.3:
Table 8.4:
Table 9.1:
Table 9.2:
Table 9.3:
Table 9.4:
Table 9.5:
Table 9.6:
Table 10.1:
Table 10.2:
Table 10.3:
Table 10.4:
Table 10.5:
Table 11.1:
Table 11.2:
Table 11.3:
Table 11.4:
Table 12.1:
Table 12.2:
Table 13.1:
Table 13.2:
Table 14.1:
Table 14.2:

Shifting towards a livelihood-based approach in rural areas
Release of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes directly or indirectly to water
in eight European Union Member States, 2003
Trends in ISO 14001 certification regionally and globally, 1997–2002
Wastewater treatment requirements as a function of end-use for industrial water supply
Industrial water productivity by country, 2000/2001
Volume of desalinated water produced, selected countries, 2002
Grid-based renewable power capacity in 2003
Status of small hydropower stations in China in 2002
Carbon intensity of electricity production in 2002
Access to electricity and water in 2000
Hydropower: Capability at the end of 2002
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and disaster risk reduction
Response-based versus prevention-oriented strategies to disaster risk reduction
Major components of the Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
Effectiveness of flood countermeasures: Examples of indicators
Public policies with water-related risk components
Transboundary aquifers of the Americas (in progress)
Timeline of geopolitical developments: Inter-state water-related conflicts and cooperation since 2002
The right to water timeline
Recent international conferences of interest
The high cost of coping with source water pollution in selected communities in the US
Classifying goods and services provided by water
General framework for capacity development
Some capacity assessment tools
Number of people affected by recent droughts
Percentage of urban and rural populations with access to drinking water and sanitation services

268
282
287
292
300
310
315
318
323
328
332
345
349
356
356
358
375
380
383
390
408
409
456
458
479
499

5 4 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Acronyms
ACB:
ACHR:
ACIA:
ACP-EUWF:
ADB:
ADR:
AEWA:
AEWS:
AGORA:
AIH:
APFM:
AQUASTAT:
ARC:
ASCE:
ASR:
BAT:
BCA:
BEP:
BOD:
BOO:
BOT:
CAP:
CAPNET:

CAZALAC:

CBD:
CCs:
CDI:
CDM:
CEH:
CES:
CESCR:
CGIAR:
CI:
CIC:

Autonomous Community of the Basque
Country
Asian Coalition for Housing Rights
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment
European Union Water Facility for the
African, Caribbean and Pacific Countries
Asian Development Bank
Alternative Dispute Resolution
Agreement on the conservation of African
Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds
Accident Emergency Warning System
Access to Global Online Research in
Agriculture
American Institute of Hydrology
Associated Programme for Flood
Management
Country Information on Water and
Agriculture
Agricultural Research Council
American Society of Civil Engineers
Artificial Storage and Recovery
Best Available Technology
Benefit-Cost Analysis
Best Environmental Practice
Biological Oxygen Demand
Build-Own-Operate
Build-Operate-Transfer
Common Agricultural Policy
International Network for Capacity Building
for Integrated Water Resources
Management
Regional Water centre for Arid and Semiarid Zones of Latin America and the
Caribbean (Chile)
Convention on Biological Diversity
Collaborating Centres
Capacity Development Initiative
Clean Development Mechanism
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology
Compensation for Ecosystem Services
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights
Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research
Conservation International
The Intergovernmental Coordination
Committee of the Plata Basin Countries

CRED:
CO2:
COD:
CODI:

COMEST:
CPS:
CRC:
CSA:
CSD:
CSIR:
CVI:
CWS:
DALY:
DDT:
DEFRA:
DES:
DEWA:
DFID:
DHF:
DHS:
DMCs:
DNH:
DPPC:
DPSIR:
DRB:
DRBMP:
DRI:
DWD:
EC:
EDSS:
EIA:
EMAS:
EMIS:
EMS:
EPA:
EPL:
ERR:
ESA:
ETIC:

Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of
Disaster
Carbon Dioxide
Chemical oxygen demand
Community Organizations Development
Institute (ex-UCDO: Urban Community
Development Office)
World Commission on the Ethics of
Scientific Knowledge and Technology
Cleaner Production Assessment
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Central Statistic Authority
Commission on Sustainable Development
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research
Climate Vulnerability Index
Cities Without Slums
Disability-Adjusted Life Years
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (toxic
Chemical)
Department for Environment, Food and
Rural Affairs (United Kingdom)
Dietary Energy Supply
Division of Early Warning and Assessment
Department For International Development
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever
Demographic Health Surveys
Drought Monitoring Centres
National Water Directorate (Direction
Nationale de l’Hydraulique)
Disaster Prevention and Preparedness
Commission
Driving forces, Pressure, State, Impact,
Response
The Danube River Basin
The Danube River Basin Management Plan
Disaster Risk Index
The Directorate of Water Development
European Commission
Educational Decision Support Systems
Environmental Impact Assessment
Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
Educational Management Information
Systems
Environmental Management Systems
Environmental Protection Agency
Environment Protection Licence
Economic Rate of Return
European Space Agency
The Euphrates-Tigris Initiative for Cooperation

ACRONYMS . 541

EU:
EWRI:
FAO:
FBW:
FDA:
FEMIP:

European Union
Environmental & Water Resources Institute
Food and Agriculture Organization
Free Basic Water
Food and Drug Administration
Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment
and Partnership
FEWS:
Famine Early Warning Systems Network
FFEWS:
International Workshop on Flood
Forecasting and Early Warning Systems
FRESH:
Focusing Resources on Effective School Health
FRIEND:
Flow Regimes from International
Experimental and Network Data
GAS:
Guaraní Aquifer System
GDLN:
The Global Development Learning Network
GDP:
Gross Domestic Product
GEF:
Global Environment Facility
GEMS/WATER: Global Environmental Monitoring System,
Freshwater Quality Programme
GEO:
Global Environment Outlook
GIS:
Geographic Information Systems
GIWA:
Global International Waters Assessment
GLIMS:
Global Land Ice Measurements from Space
GMFS:
Global Monitoring for Food Security
GMOs:
Genetically Modified Organisms
GNIP:
Global Network for Isotopes in Precipitation
GNP:
Gross National Product
GPA:
Global Programme of Action
GPA:
Global Plan of Action for the Protection of
the Marine Environment from Land Based
Activities
GRDC:
Global Runoff Data Centre
GRID:
Global Resource Information Database
GSLRP:
Gash Sustainable Livelihood Regeneration
Project
GTZ:
German Technical Cooperation
GWP:
Global Water Partnership
HDI:
Human Development Index
HDR:
Human Development Report
HELP:
Hydrology, Environment, Life and Policy
HIA:
Health Impact Assessment
HIPC:
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HOMS:
Hydrological Operational Multipurpose
System
HSRC:
Human Sciences Research Council
IAEA:
International Atomic Energy Agency
IAH:
International Association of
Hydrogeologists
IAHR:
International Association of Hydraulic
Engineering and Research

IAHS:
IAS:
IBNET:
ICARM:
ICESCR:
ICHARM:
ICID:
ICOLD:
ICPDR:
ICT:
ICZM:
IDA:
IDNDR:
IDRC:
IETC:
IFAD:
IFC:
IFI:
IFM:
IGRAC:
IHA:
IHE:
IHP:
IIED:
IIRR:
ILA:
ILC:
IMF:
IMT:
INBO:
IGOs:
IPCC:
IPTRID:
IRBM:

International Association of Hydrological
Sciences
Invasive Alien Species
Water and Sanitation International
Benchmarking Network
Integrated Coastal Area and River Basin
Management
International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights
International Centre for Water Hazard and
Risk Management (Japan)
International Commission on Irrigation and
Drainage
International Commission on Large Dams
International Commission for the Protection
of the Danube River
Information and Communication Technology
Integrated Coastal Zone Management
International Desalination Association
International Decade for Natural Disaster
Reduction (1990–2000)
International Development Research Centre
International Environmental Technology
Centre
International Fund for Agriculture and
Development
International Finance Corporation
International Flood Initiative
Integrated Flood Management concept
International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre
International Hydropower Association
Institute for Infrastructural, Hydraulic and
Environmental Engineering
International Hydrological Programme
International Institute for Environment and
Development
International Institute of Rural
Reconstruction
International Law Association
International Law Commission
International Monetary Fund
Irrigation Management Transfer
International Network of Basin
Organizations
Intergovernmental Organizations
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
International Programme for Technology
and Research in Irrigation and Drainage
Integrated River Basin Management

5 4 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

IRC:
IRD:
ISARM:
ISDR:
ISI:
ISO:
ITNs:
IUCN:
IVA:
IWA:
IWG-ENV:
IWMI:
IWRM:
IWT:
JMP:
JPOI:
JRC:
KenGen:
KI:
KPLC:
LA WETnet:
LIMCOM:
LINKS:
LPI:
LRS:
MAP:
MAR:
MAR:
MCK:
MDGs:
MEAs:
MER:
MICS:
MIS:
MLIT:
MOST:
MRC:
MRET:
MWRMD:
NASA:
NBCBN-RE:

International Water and Sanitation Centre
Research Institute for Development (Institut
de Recherche pour le Développement)
International Shared Aquifer Resource
Management
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
International Sediment Initiative
International Standards Organization
Insecticide-treated nets
World Conservation Union
Industrial Value Added
International Water Association
Intersecretariat Working Group on
Environment Statistics
International Water Management Institute
Integrated Water Resources Management
Inland Water Transport
Joint Monitoring Programme
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
Joint River Commission
Kenya Generating Company
Knowledge Index
Kenya Power and Lighting Company
The Latin American Network for Water
Education and Training
Limpopo Watercourse Commission
Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
Living Planet Index
Large River System
Mediterranean Action Plan
Managed Aquifer Recharge
Natural Mean Annual Runoff
Municipal Council of Kisumu (Kenya)
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Environmental Agreements
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting
Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys
Management Information System
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and
Transport (Japan)
Management of Social Transformations
Mekong River Commission
Mandatory Renewable Energy Targets
(Australian Government’s)
Ministry for Water Resource Management
and Development
The United States’ National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Nile Basin Capacity-building Network for
River Engineering

NBI:
NCSA:
NCSC:
NEHAP:
NEPAD:
NGO:
NHMSs:
NOx:
NPs:
NPP:
NSIDC:
NUFFIC/
IK-Unit:
OAS:
OBA:
ODA:
ODI:
OECD:
OFDA:
OMVS:

OPP:
OPP-RTI:
ORT:
OTCA:
PAR:
PCBAP:

PCCP:
PEAP:
PEEM:
PES:
PIM:
PMA:
PMPOA:

PPP:
PPPUE:

Nile Basin Initiative
National Capacity Self-Assessment
National Center for Small Communities
National Environment Health Action Plan
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
Non-governmental Organization
National Hydrological and Meteorological
Services
Nitrogen Oxide
National Platforms for Disaster Risk Reduction
Net Primary Productivity
National Snow and Ice Data Centre
Netherlands Organization for International
Cooperation in Higher
Education/Indigenous Knowledge
Organisation of American States
Output-Based Aid
Overseas Development Assistance
Overseas Development Institute
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development
Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance
(United States)
Organization for the Development of the
Senegal River (Organisation pour la mise
en valeur du fleuve Sénégal)
Orangi Pilot Project
Orangi Pilot Project’s Research and Training
Institute
Oral Rehydration Therapy
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (Brazil)
Pressure and Release model
Plan for the Conservation of the Upper
Paraguay River Basin, (Plano de
Conservação da Bacia do Alto Paraguai)
From Potential Conflict to Cooperation
Potential
Poverty Eradication Action Plan
Panel of Experts on Environmental
Management for Vector Control
Payment for Environmental Services
Participatory Irrigation Management
Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture
Farm pollution management programme
(Programme de Maîtrise des Pollutions
d’Origine Agricole)
Public-Private Partnership
Public-Private Partnerships for the Urban
Environment

ACRONYMS . 543

PRA:
Participatory Rapid Appraisal
PROSANEAR: Water and Sanitation Project for the Lowincome Urban Population (Brazil)
PRSP:
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
PSP:
Private Sector Participation
PUB:
Prediction in Ungauged Basins
PWRI:
Public Works Research Institute
QA/QC:
Quality Assurance/Quality Control
RBI:
River Basin Initiative
RBM:
Roll Back Malaria Initiative
RCMs:
Regional Circulation Models
RCMRD:
Regional Centre for Mapping of Resources for
Development
RCTWS:
Regional Centre for Training and Water
Studies of Arid and Semi-arid Zones
RCUWM:
Regional Centre on Urban Water Management
(Iran)
SACI:
South African Capacity Initiative
SADC:
Southern African Development Community
SAFE:
Integrated strategy involving Surgery,
Antibiotic treatment, promotion of Facial
cleanliness and the initiation of
Environmental changes
SAOPID:
Secretariat of Water, Public Works and
Infrastructure for Development (Mexico)
SAR:
Sodium Absorption Ratio
SCADA :
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
SDAGE:
Master Plan for Water Management (Schémas
directeurs d’aménagement et de gestion des
eaux)
SDC:
Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation
SHP:
Small Hydropower
SIDA:
Swedish International Development
Cooperation Agency
SIWI
Stockholm International Water Institute
SSHE:
School Sanitation and Hygiene Education
SWAP:
Sector Wide Approach to Planning
TAI:
The Access Initiative
TI:
Transparency International
TEST:
Transfer of Environmentally Sound Technology
TDPS:
Titicaca, Desaguadero, Poopó, Coipasa Salt
Lake
UCDO:
See CODI
UN:
United Nations
UNCED:
United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development
UNDESA:
United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs
UNDP:
United Nations Development Programme

UNDP/BCPR: United Nations Development Programme’s
Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery
UNECA:
United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa
UNECE:
United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe
UNECLAC:
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean
UNEP:
United Nations Environmental Programme
UNEP/GRID: United Nations Environmental Programme’s
Global Resource Information Database
UNESCAP:
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific
UNESCO:
United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
UNESCWA: United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia
UNFCCC:
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change
UN/GA:
United Nations General Assembly
UNICEF:
United Nations Children’s Fund
UNIDO:
United Nations Industrial Development
Organization
UNISDR:
United Nations International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction
UNOOSA:
United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs
UNU:
United Nations University
USAID:
US Agency for International Development
US NGWA:
US National Ground Water Association
UV:
Ultraviolet
VIP:
Ventilated Pit Latrine
VMAD:
Virgin Mean Annual Discharge
WAP:
Water Action Plan
WB:
World Bank
WBI:
World Bank Institute
WCD:
World Commission on Dams
WCDR:
World Conference on Disaster Reduction
WCMC:
World Conservation Monitoring Centre
WCP:
World Climate Programme
WEF:
Water Environment Federation
WEHAB:
Water, Energy, Health, Agriculture,
Biodiversity
WERRD:
Water and Environmental Resources in
Regional Development
WES:
Water, Environment and Sanitation
Programme
WFD:
Water Framework Directive
WGMS:
World Glacier Monitoring Service
WHO:
World Health Organization
WHYCOS:
World Hydrological Cycle Observing System

5 4 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

WHYMAP:
WMO:
WOC:
WRA:
WRC:
WRI:
WRVI:
WSI:
WSP:
WSDP:
WSSCC:

World-wide Hydrogeological Mapping and
Assessment Programme
World Meteorological Organization
Water Operating Center
Water Resources Assessment
World Research Commission
World Resource Institute
Water Resources Vulnerability Index.
Water Stress Index
Water Safety Plans
Water Sector Development Programme
Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative
Council

WSSD:
WSH:
WSS:
WTA:
WTP:
WUAs:
WWAP:
WWC:
WWDR:
WWF:
ZAMCOM:

World Summit on Sustainable Development
Water, Sanitation and Health Programme
Water Supply and Sanitation
Willingness to accept compensation
Willingness to pay
Water User Associations
World Water Assessment Programme
World Water Council
World Water Development Report
World Wilde Fund for Nature
Zambezi Watercourse Convention

Main units of measurement
€

euro

m.a.s.l

metres above sea level

G

giga

M

megamillion

ha

hectare

s

second

k

kilo

T

tera

L

litre

t

ton/tonne (metric)

m

metre

US $

United States dollar

m2

square metre

W

watt

m3

cubic metre

Wh

watt hour

Note: billion = 1,000,000,000

WWDR end matter 2

15/2/06

17:07

Page 545

G LO BAL MAPS . 5 4 5

Global Maps: Water Systems Analysis Group
University of New Hampshire, US
The global maps and related charts at the head of Sections 1 through 4 of WWDR2 are provided by the Water System
Analysis Group (WSAG) at the University of New Hampshire's Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space, located
in Durham, New Hampshire. WSAG was founded in 1999, and its mission is to serve as a research and advanced training
facility for analysing the global water system and the impacts of human activities and a changing water system on the
natural environment and society. WSAG research integrates hydrology, biogeochemistry, and human-water interactions in
analysing the full dimension of global change at local, regional and global scales. These include studies of the
biogeochemistry of coastal watersheds in the northeast US, pan-Tropical and pan-Arctic water cycle studies, global
biogeochemical modelling, and world water resource assessment. WSAG personnel actively participate in UNESCO's
International Hydrological Programme (IHP), the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), Global
Environmental System of Systems (GEOSS), International Council of Scientific Unions, International Association of
Hydrological Sciences, and the newly-formed Global Water System Project. Additional information can be found at
www.watsys.unh.edu.
Funding for the research on which the maps are based was provided mainly by the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) and the US National Science Foundation. Support from UNESCO's IHP, WWAP and the University of
New Hampshire helped to produce the maps. Charles Vörösmarty, Ellen Douglas and Stanley Glidden from WSAG designed
and assembled the compendia of indicator maps and created the website. Datasets and maps are available for
downloading at http://wwdrii.sr.unh.edu/. Graphical material for the box on population was kindly provided by Deborah
Balk, Bridget Anderson, and Marc Levy at the Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), the
Earth Institute, Columbia University, Palisades, New York. Population data are available at
http://beta.sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/index.jsp.
References and Websites:
CIESIN, 2005. Global Urban-Rural Mapping Project,
Center for International Earth Science Information
Network (CIESIN), Columbia University,
http://beta.sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw/index.jsp.
Douglas, E. M., Githui, F., Mtafya, A., Green, P.,
Glidden S. and Vörösmarty, C. J. 2006. The
application of water scarcity indicators at different
scales in Africa. Journal of Environmental
Management. (in press).
Ericson, J. P., Vörösmarty, C. J., Dingman, S. L., Ward,
L.G. and Meybeck, M. 2006. Effective sea-level rise
in deltas: Sources of change and human-dimension
implications. Global and Planetary Change. (in press).
Galloway, J. N., Dentener, F. J., Capone, D. G., Boyer,
E.W., Howarth, R. W., Seitzinger, S.P. Asner, G.,
Cleveland, C., Green, P., Holland, E., Karl, D.M.,
Michaels, A.F., Porter, J., Townsend, A. and
Vörösmarty, C. J. 2004. Global and regional
nitrogen cycles: Past, present and future.
Biogeochemistry. Vol. 70, pp. 153-226.
Green, P., Vörösmarty, C.J., Meybeck, M., Galloway, J.,
and Peterson, B.J. 2004. Pre-industrial and
contemporary fluxes of nitrogen through rivers: A

global assessment based on typology.
Biogeochemistry. Vol. 68, pp.71-105.
McCully, P., 1996. Silenced Rivers: The Ecology and
Politics of Large Dams. Zed Books, London, UK.
Postel, S. L, Daily, G.C. and Ehrlich, P.R. 1996. Human
appropriation of renewable fresh water. Science
Vol. 271 pp. 785-88.
Shiklomanov, I. (ed.). 1996. Assessment of Water
Resources and Water Availability in the World:
Scientific and Technical Report. St. Petersburg,
Russia, State Hydrological Institute.
Syvitski, J.P.M., Vörösmarty, C. J., Kettner, A. J. and
Green, P. 2005. Impact of humans on the flux of
terrestrial sediment to the global coastal ocean.
Science, Vol. 308 pp. 376-80.
UN (United Nations). 2003. World Urbanizations
Prospects: The 2003 Revision.
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wup
2003/WUP2003Report.pdf.
Vörösmarty, C. J., Douglas, E. M., Green P. A., and
Revenga, C. 2005. Geospatial indicators of
emerging water stress: An application in Africa,
Ambio, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 230-36.

Vörösmarty, C.J., Leveque, C., Revenga C., Caudill, C.,
Chilton, J., Douglas, E. M., Meybeck, M. and Prager,
D. 2005. Fresh Water. Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, Volume 1: Conditions and Trends
Working Group Report. Island Press. (in press).
Vörösmarty, C. J., Meybeck, M., Fekete, B., Sharma, K.,
Green, P. and Syvitski, J. 2003. Anthropogenic
sediment retention: Major global-scale impact
from the population of registered impoundments.
Global and Planetary Change. Vol. 39, pp. 169-90.
Vörösmarty, C. J., Green, P., Salisbury, J. and Lammers,
R. 2000. Global water resources: Vulnerability from
climate change and population growth. Science.
Vol. 289, pp. 284-88.
Walling, D.E., and Fang, D. 2003. Recent trends in the
suspended sediment loads of the World's Rivers.
Global and Planetary Change. Vol. 39, pp. 111-26.
Willmott, C.J., and Feddema, J. J. 1992. A more
rational climatic moisture index. The Professional
Geographer Vol. 44, pp. 84-7.
WRI (World Resources Institute). 1998. World
Resources: A Guide to the Global Environment
1998-99. Washington, DC.

P H OTO G RA P H I C A C KN OW L E D G EM E N TS . 5 4 7

Photography
The World Water Assessment Programme would like to thank Bastien Affeltranger, the Ankara Fotoğraf Sanatçilari Derneği (AFSAD), Yann Arthus-Bertrand,
.
the Australian Water Partnership, Robert Bos, Thomas Cluzel, Deanna Donovan, FAO, Richard Franceys, the GAP Bölge Kalkinma Idaresi Baskanliği Arsivi
.
´
´
(GAP-BKI), the Ministry of Water and Agriculture of Kenya, IFAD, Christian Lambrechts, ICHARM, Alexander Otte, José María Sanz de Galdeano Equiza,
Andras Szöllösi-Nagy, the Secretariat of Water, Public Works and Infrastructure for Development of the Government of the State of Mexico (SAOPID),
Surapol Pattanee, UNESCO, UNESCO-IHE, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR and Sajith Wijesuriya for generously providing photographs.
cover
© SAOPID Mexico
© UNESCO – Andes / CZAP / ASA
© UNESCO – I. Forbes
© Sven Torfinn / Panos
© UNESCO – J. W. Thorsell
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre vue
du Ciel
© Surapol Pattanee
© Chris Stowers / Panos
© Australian Water Partnership
Front matter
IV: © Wim Van Cappellen / Still
Pictures
VI: © Thomas Cluzel
VII: © Thoma Cluzel
SECTION 1
ii: © Thomas Cluzel
1: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre vue
du Ciel, © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures,
© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre vue
du Ciel
Chapter 01
8: © Ron Giling / Still Pictures
9: ©UN-HABITAT
10: © UNHCR/D. Shrestha
12: © UNESCO
13: © Mark Edwards / Still Pictures
16: © UNESCO – O. Brendan
17: © AFSAD / Selim Aytac
19: © Thomas Cluzel
20: © UNESCO
21: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
27: © UNESCO - Evan Schneider
29: © UNESCO – Ines Forbes
34: © UNESCO – Niamh Burke
40: © Chris Stowers / Panos
Chapter 2
42: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
44: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel © Richard Franceys, ©
Mark Edwards / Still Pictures
45: © Julio Etchart / Still Pictures

52: © Thomas Cluzel
53: © Jorgen Schytte / Still Pictures
54: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
60: © Ton Koene / Still Pictures
74: © UNESCO / O. Brendan
77: © Hartmut Schwarzbach / Still
Pictures
80: © Dirk R Frans / Still Pictures
81: © UNESCO / O. Brendan
83: © Thomas Cluzel
Chapter 3
86: © Ron Giling / Still Pictures
88: © UNESCO – Alexis Vorontzoff,
© UN-HABITAT, © UN-HABITAT
89: © John Maier, Jr / Still Pictures
93: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
94: © Andras Szöllösi-Nagy
96: © Andras Szöllösi-Nagy
97: © Mikkel Ostergaard / Panos
99: © Neil Cooper / Still Pictures
103: © UNESCO - Alexis Vorontzoff
105: © UN-HABITAT, © UN-HABITAT
107: © UNHCR/D. Shrestha
108: © UN-HABITAT
111: © Alexander Otte, © Alexander
Otte / Veolia, © UNESCO – Dominique
Roger
SECTION2
114: © Voltchev/UNEP / Still Pictures
Chapter 4
120: © Thomas Cluzel, © FAO/17287/
J. Holmes, © Mitchell Rogers/UNEP /
Still Pictures
123: © Manit Larpluechai / UNEP /
Still Pictures
125: © Thomas Cluzel
127: © UNESCO – A. de Crepy
136: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
142: © Thomas Cluzel
143: © UNESCO – G. Boccardi
146: © UNESCO – A. Wheeler
147: © Ron Giling / Still Pictures
157: © AFSAD / Serpil Yildiz

Chapter 5
158: C Johnson /WWI / Still Pictures
160: © SOAPID Mexico, © UNESCO – I.
Forbes, © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La
Terre vue du Ciel
161: © FAO/17121/M. Marzot
163: © C. Zöckler
164: © Nicolas Granier / Still Pictures
166: © SAOPID Mexico, © Sajith
Wijesuriya
167: © SAOPID Mexico
168: © UNESCO – I. Forbes
171: © UNESCO
173: © Paul Glendell / Still Pictures
175: © Sajith Wijesuriya
184: © UNESCO – E. Timpe
191: © Alexander Otte/Veolia
192: © Christopher Uglow/UNEP / Still
Pictures
197: © UNESCO – Peter Coles
SECTION 3
198: © Marcia Zoet / UNEP / Still Pictures
Chapter 6
202: © Julio Etchart / Still Pictures
204: © UN-HABITAT, © Andras
Szöllösi-Nagy, © Shehzad Noorani /
Still Pictures
205: © FAO/19526/G. Bizzarri
208: © UNESCO – O. Brendan
210: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
212: © Jorgen Schytte / Still Pictures
221: © Jorgen Schytte / Still Pictures
223: © UNESCO – Dominique Roger
225: © UNESCO - Henry Bernard
227: © UNESCO/IHE – Fred Kruis
235: © Jacob Silberberg / Panos
236: © Robert Bos
241: © Mark Edwards / Still Pictures
Chapter 7
242: © UNEP/Still Pictures
244: © FAO/17346/R. Faidutti, © Mark
Edwards / Still Pictures, © Yann
Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre vue du Ciel,
FAO/18992/R. Faidutti

245: © Glen Christian / Still Pictures
247: © SAOPID Mexico
248: © FAO/17268/ C. Sanchez
250: © FAO/15157/A. Conti
252: © FAO/17343/R. Faidutti
254: © AFSAD / Serpil Yildiz
255: © FAO/22404/ R. Faidutti,
© Jinda Uthaipanumas/UNEP / Still
Pictures
256: © FAO/22375/R. Messori
257: © FAO/19756/G. Bizzarri
259: © FAO/17086/M. Marzot
261: © Peter Frischmuth / Still Pictures
262: © Jeremy Horner/Panos
263: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
264: © Joerg Boethling / Still Pictures
265: © Julio Etchart / Still Pictures
270: ©Alexander Otte/Veolia
271: ©Alexander Otte/Veolia,
© FAO/13504/I. de Borhegyi
Chapter 8
274: © Jim Wark / Still Pictures
276: © UNESCO / I. Forbes, © MARK
EDWARDS / Still Pictures
277: © Agence de l’eau Artois Picardie
279: © Adrian Arbib / Still Pictures,
© Ron Giling / Still Pictures
284: © Agence de l’eau Artois Picardie
288: © UNESCO – Dominique Roger
290: © Jochen Tack / Still Pictures
292: © William Campbell / Still
Pictures
294: © Yu Qiu/UNEP / Still Pictures
299: © Agence de l’eau Artois Picardie
300: © Agence de l’eau Artois Picardie
Chapter 9
304: © William Campbell / Still
Pictures
306: © UNESCO, © Sean Sprague /
Panos
307: © Yann Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre
vue du Ciel
308: © Martin Bond / Still Pictures
309: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
310: © Jorgen Schytte / Still Pictures

5 4 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

312: © Ray Pfortner
/ Still Pictures
.
313: © GAP-BKI
315: © KLEIN / .Still Pictures
319: © GAP-BKI
320: © Valérie SANTINI
321: © Hartmut Schwarzbach / Still
Pictures
324: © Mike Powles / Still Pictures
325: © Kent Wood / Still Pictures
329: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
335: © Gilles POUSSARD
SECTION 4
336: © Thomas Cluzel
Chapter 10
340: © UNESCO – E. Schneider
342: © Andras Szöllösi-Nagy,
© Bastien Affeltranger, © Bastien
Affeltranger, © Bastien Affeltranger,
© AFSAD – Aydan Adsaz, © Yann
Arthus-Bertrand/La Terre vue du Ciel
343: © A.Ishokon/UNEP / Still Pictures
347: © G. Griffith / Still Pictures
348: © Peter Frischmuth / Still Pictures
349: © UNESCO – Nigel Swann,
© UNESCO – Felipe Alcoceba
353: © UNESCO - Hameed A. Hakeem
358: © UNESCO - B. Bisson
360: © Thomas Cluzel
361: © UNESCO – E. Schneider,
© Jim Wark / Still Pictures
362: © Bastien Affeltranger
365: © Ken Kerr / Still Pictures,
© UNESCO – E. Schneider
367: © UNESCO - Michel Ravassard
Chapter 11
370: © Jose Roig Vallespir / UNEP /
Still Pictures
372: © Secret Sea Visions / Still
Pictures, © Julio Etchart / Still Pictures,
© C.Garroni Parisi / Still Pictures
382: © Jim Wark / Still Pictures
388: © John Isaac / Still Pictures
392: © UNESCO - J.C. Simon
395: © UNESCO – Dominique Roger
Chapter 12
398: © Jorgen Schytte / Still Pictures
400: © Thomas Cluzel, © IFAD /
Radhika Chalasani, © Deanna Donovan
401: © IFAD / Radhika Chalasani
402: © Hartmut Schwarzbach / Still
Pictures
403: © UNESCO – André Abbe,
© UNESCO - Tang Chhin, © UNESCO
(Beijing)
404: Map 12.1: 1: © UNESCO – Alexis
N. Vorontzoff, 2: © UNESCO - Hans de

Vaal, 3: © UNESCO – Anthony
Lacoudre, 4: © UNESCO – Georges
Malempré, 5: © UNESCO – Dominique
Roger, 6: © UNESCO - Niamh Burke,
7: © UNESCO – T. Margoles
Map 12.2: 1: © UNESCO, 2: © UNESCO
- Bruno Cottacorda, 3: © UNESCO Peter Coles, 4: © UNESCO, 5: ©
Christian Lambrechts/UNEP (2004),
6: © UNESCO – Raoul Russo
405: © Thomas Cluzel, © Thomas Cluzel
407: © Thomas Cluzel
411: © UNESCO – Dominique Roger
412: © Wolfgang Schmidt / Still
Pictures
413: © Ron Giling / Still Pictures,
415: © IFAD / Giuseppe Bizzarri
417: © B.Blume/UNEP / Still Pictures
418: © Julio Etchart / Still Pictures
421: © Deanna Donovan
423: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
424: © Thomas Cluzel
426: © Acharya / UNEP/Still Pictures
427: © Wang Fu-Chun/UNEP / Still
Pictures
Chapter 13
432: © UNESCO – O. Brendan
434: © UNESCO - Yannick Jooris,
© UNESCO – O. Brendan, © UNESCO Yannick Jooris © UNESCO – O. Brendan,
© UNESCO – O. Brendan
439: © UNESCO-IHE
443: © UNESCO – N. Burke
444: © UNESCO/IHE – Fred Kruis
446: © UNESCO – Ines Forbes
448: © UNESCO – Dominique Roger
449: © UNESCO-IHE
451: © UNESCO-IHE
452: © UNESCO-IHE
454: © UNESCO-IHE
455: © UNESCO-IHE
459: © UNESCO-IHE
463:© Shouli Lin / UNEP / Still Pictures
SECTION 5
465: © Tanya Wangniwiatkul/UNEP /
Still Pictures
Chapter 14
466: © José María Sanz de Galdeano
Equiza, © UNESCO - Bruno Cottacorda,
© FAO/17067/ M. Marzot, © Gilles
POUSSARD, © ICHARM, © Ministry of
Water and Irrigation of Kenya,
© Ago Jaani, © Thomas Cluzel,
© FAO/13702/John Isaac, © SAOPID
Mexico, © UNESCO – Michel Setboun,
© UNESCO – Dominique Roger,
© UNESCO – J.W. Thorsell, © Sajith

Wijesuriya, © Surapol Pattanee,
© UNESCO
517: © UNESCO – Ariane Bailey
Chapter 15
518: © A. Appelbe/UNEP / Still
Pictures
520: © Thomas Cluzel, © Roger De La
Harpe / Still Pictures
521: © Thomas Cluzel
523: © Jusuf Jeremiah/UNEP / Still
Pictures, © Deanna Donovan
524: © Deanna Donovan
525: © Dan Porges / Still Pictures
526: © Thomas Cluzel
527: © Sean Sprague / Still Pictures
546: © Neil Cooper / Still Pictures
Back cover
© UNESCO-IHE
© AFSAD / Doganay Sevindik
© Christopher Uglow / UNEP / Still
Pictures
© AFSAD / Selim Aytac
YANN ARTHUS-BERTRAND
Yann Arthus-Bertrand’s photographs of
The Earth from Above are meant to
show that, now more than ever, levels
and modes of consumption and
exploitation of natural resources are not
sustainable in the long term. Whereas
world production of goods and services
has multiplied by 7 since 1950, 20
percent of the world population has no
access to drinking water, 25 percent
has no electricity, and 40 percent has
no sanitary installation. In other words,
a fifth of the world’s population lives in
industrialized countries, consuming and
producing in excess and generating
massive pollution. The remaining fourfifths live in developing countries and,
for the most part, in poverty. To provide
for their needs, they make heavy
demands upon the Earth’s natural
resources, causing a constant
degradation of our planet’s ecosystem
and limited supplies of fresh water,
ocean water, forests, air, arable land,
and open spaces.
At this critical stage, the alternative
offered by a sustainable development
policy should help in bringing about the
necessary changes in order to ‘meet
the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs.’*
Inseparable from the accompanying text

commentaries, Earth from Above
images invite each one of us to reflect
upon the planet’s evolution and the
future of its inhabitants.
We can and must act individually on a
daily basis for the future of our
children.
Earth from Above team
* Quoted from the Brundtland report, The
world commission on environment and
development: Our common future, Oxford
University Press 1987.

Cover and page 21
CENTRE-PIVOT IRRIGATION, Ma’an,
Jordan (N 29°43’ E 35°33’). This selfpropelled, centre-pivot irrigation
machine, invented by the American
Frank Zybach in 1948 and patented in
1952, drills for water in the deep strata
30 to 400 m below the surface. A
pivoting pipeline with sprinklers,
extending about 500 m is mounted on
tractor wheels, and irrigates 78
hectares of land. The countries of the
Middle East and North Africa
experienced the world’s most rapid
increase in grain imports in the 1990s.
Production of 1 tonne of grain requires
about 1,000 tonnes of water, and
these countries prefer to import grain
to meet their growing needs rather
than produce it domestically because
of the scarcity of water. In fact, at the
current rate of use in Jordan,
subterranean water reserves could dry
up before 2010. Underground water is
already overexploited in the United
States, India and China. Watering
technologies, however, waste less and
respond better to plant needs, saving
20 to 50 percent of the water used in
agriculture.
Page 1
REFUSE DUMP IN MEXICO CITY,
Mexico (N 19°24’ W 99°01’).
Household refuse is piling up on all
continents and poses a critical
problem for major urban centres, like
the problem of air pollution resulting
from vehicular traffic and industrial
pollutants. With some 20 million
residents, Mexico City produces nearly
20,000 tonnes of household refuse a
day. As in many countries, half of this
debris is directed to open dumping.
The volume of refuse is increasing on
our planet following population
growth and economic growth. Thus,

P H OTO G RA P H I C A C KN OW L E D G EM E N TS . 5 4 9

an American produces more than 700
kg of domestic refuse each year,
about four times more than a resident
of a developing country and twice as
much as a Mexican. The volume of
debris per capita in industrialized
nations has tripled in the past twenty
years. Recycling, reuse and reduction
of packaging offer solutions to the
pollution problems caused by dumping
and incineration, which still absorb 50
percent and 35 percent, respectively,
of the annual volume of household
refuse in France.
Pages 44 and 92
Favelas in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
(22°55’ S, 43°15’ W). Nearly onequarter of the 10 million cariocas –
residents of Rio de Janeiro – live in
the city’s 500 shantytowns, known as
favelas, which have grown rapidly
since the turn of the twentieth
century and are wracked by crime.
Primarily perched on hillsides, these
poor, under-equipped neighbourhoods
regularly experience fatal landslides
during heavy rains. Downhill from the
favelas, the comfortable middle
classes of the city (18 percent of
cariocas) occupy the residential
districts along the oceanfront. This
social contrast marks all of Brazil,
where 10 percent of the population
controls the majority of the wealth
while nearly half of the country lives
below the poverty level. As a result of
urban growth, approximately 25
million people in Brazil, and 600
million in the world, inhabit the slums
of great metropolitan areas, where
overpopulation and poor conditions
threaten their health and their lives.
Page 136 and 263
FIELDS NEAR QUITO, Sierra region,
Ecuador (N 0°17’ W 78°41’).
Between the Western and the Royal
cordilleras, or chains, of the Andes,
the plateaus of Quito benefit from the
humid, gentle climate of the sierra,
which favours the cultivation of
cereals (corn, wheat, barley) and
potatoes. Agriculture, which makes up
only 12 percent of the gross national
product, still supports nearly half of
the population of Ecuador. Cultivated
land comprises nearly one-third of the
national territory, and is crucial in the
country’s history: the agrarian reforms

of the 1960s and 1970s, which
eradicated the dominance of the great
haciendas of Spanish colonists, failed
to solve the problem of unequal
distribution of farmland. The best lots,
those in the valleys and on the
coasts, devoted to the export crops
(bananas, sugarcane, cacao), remain
in the hands of rich landholders,
whereas small farmers share the land
on upper plateaus, barely subsisting
from their produce. In a country of
growing pauperization (65 percent of
the population live in poverty and 19
percent are unemployed), such
inequalities are providing fertile
ground for a possible future crisis.
Page 160
CONFLUENCE OF THE RIO URUGUAY
AND A TRIBUTARY, Misiones,
Argentina (S 27°15’ W 54°03’).
Drastically cleared to make way for
farming, the Argentine tropical forest
is today a less effective defence
against erosion than it was in the
past. Heavy rains falling in the
province of Misiones (2,000 mm per
year) wash the soil and carry off
significant quantities of ferruginous
earth into the Río Uruguay, turning
the waters a dark reddish ochre.
Swollen by tributaries bearing vegetal
debris, the Río Uruguay (1,612 km
long) empties into the Atlantic Ocean
in the area of the Río de la Plata –
forming the Earth’s largest estuary
(200 km wide) – where the river
dumps the sediment it has carried.
The sediment accumulates in the
access channels to the port of Buenos
Aires, which must be dredged
regularly to remain navigable.
Deposits built up at the mouths of
rivers can change landscapes by
forming deltas or extending land into
the sea.
Page 210
Washing laundry in a creek, Adjamé
district in Abidjan, Côte-d’Ivoire.
(5°19’ N, 4°02’ W). In the
neighborhood of Adjamé in northern
Abidjan, hundreds of professional
launderers, fanicos, do their wash
every day in the creek located at the
entrance of the tropical forest of Le
Banco (designated a national park in
1953). They use rocks and tyres filled
with sand to rub and wring the

laundry, washing by hand thousands
of articles of clothing. Formerly a
fishing village, Adjamé has been
absorbed gradually by the metropolis
of Abidjan, and it is now a workingclass district. Abidjan is the economic
and cultural centre of the country, yet
some parts of it are without running
water or electricity. It has undergone
staggering urban growth: its
population has increased fifty-fold
since 1950 and today it has more
than 3 million residents, one-fifth of
the national population. The city has
seen a proliferation of dozens of small
trades, such as these fanicos, which
offer the only means of subsistence
for the poorest groups.
Page 244
Rendille enclosure between Lake
Turkana and Marsabit, Kenya (N
2°20’-E 37°10’). In northwestern
Kenya, the Rendilles, who are said to
descend from the Samburu (with
whom they have close kinship and
economic links) and the Somali
people, comprise some 22,000 camel
herders. Their space is organized into
large, semi-permanent camps
inhabited by married men, women and
children, and mobile encampments
entirely made up of young men
looking after flocks and searching for
new pastures. Every evening the
Rendille livestock are rounded up and
placed in enclosures of spiny plants to
prevent them from wandering and to
protect them against predators. The
tribe’s girls are responsible for the
goats and sheep, which they take out
to pasture during the day. After the
rainy season (June and July), the
young herdsmen are able to find
pastures closer to the main family
encampments and attend the
ceremony known as Almhata, a ritual
feast during which they drink large
amounts of milk. The tribe then
moves off to a new site.
Page 307
BLUE LAGOON, near Grindavík,
Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland (N
63°54’ W 22°25’). The volcanic
region of Reykjanes Peninsula,
Iceland, has numerous natural hot
springs. The Blue Lagoon (Bláa Lónid,
in the Icelandic language) is an
artificial lake fed by the surplus water

drawn from the geothermic power
station at Svartsengi. Captured at
2,000 m below ground, the water is
raised to 240°C by the molten magma
and reaches the surface at a
temperature of 70°C, at which point it
is used to heat neighbouring cities.
The milky blue colour of the lagoon
results from the mineral mixture of
silica and chalk from the basin
combined with the presence of
decomposing algae. Rich in mineral
salts and organic matter, the hot
waters (about 40°C) of the Blue
Lagoon are known for their curative
properties in the treatment of skin
ailments. The use of geothermy, a
renewable, clean, and inexpensive
energy source, is relatively recent, but
it is being used with growing
frequency. In Iceland, in 1960 less
than 25 percent of the population
benefited from this source of heat,
whereas today it meets the needs of
85 percent of Icelanders and provides
heating for pools and greenhouses.
Page 342
TORNADO DAMAGE IN OSCEOLA
COUNTY, Florida, United States (N
28°17’ W 81°24’). On February 22,
1998, a force-4 tornado (with winds
of 300 to 400 km per hour) finished
its course in Osceola County, after
having devastated three other
counties in central Florida. Several
hundred homes were destroyed in its
whirlwind, and thirty-eight people
were killed. This type of violent
tornado, rare in Florida, is generally
linked to the climatic phenomenon of
El Niño, which causes strong
meteorological disturbances all over
the world about every five years.
Major natural catastrophes are more
frequent and devastating than ever
before. Human activities have
significantly disturbed natural sites,
reducing their resistance and their
ability to withstand the effects of
extreme climatic events. People also
aggravate these consequences by
living in areas exposed to risks. The
decade of the 1990s saw four times
more natural catastrophes than
occurred in the 1950s, and the
economic losses thus caused in that
decade totalled US $608 billion, more
than the costs for the four previous
decades combined.

5 5 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Index
A
Aarhus Convention 74
abstraction (and over-abstraction)
143–4
abundancy, problems of 146
Access Initiative website 85
access to drinking water 499
access to education 434
access to electricity 306, 328–31
for domestic use as indicator 36
Uganda 514
access to finance 453
access to ICT 444
access to knowledge 435, 443–4
access to land 246, 269
access to public information 454
access to sanitation 36, 224–6, 499
Japan 481
Kenya 484
La Plata River Basin 499
access to water 8, 328–31
contested issue 373
for domestic use as indicator 36
Kenya 483–5
La Plata River Basin 499
Mali 490
Mongolia 495
accountability in government 49, 185,
324, 527
accountability in water valuation 418
acid rain
deposition process 138
impacts on water resources 138
acidification 141
acrylonitrile (ACN) contamination 281
adaptive risk reduction strategies 362–3
ADB-Water for All 453
Adour-Garonne Basin, France 480
adsorption of wastewater 297–8
aerobic treatment of wastewater 297–8
affordability, reconciliation with cost
recovery in PPPs 419,
420–21
Afghanistan
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
water availability and use 132
Africa
aquatic ecosystems in 168
cities, development in 91
energy problems in 314
fish catches in 165
hydropower capability 332
hydropower development 316
inland fishery production in 167
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
invasive species, introduction of
181
ISO 14001 certification in 287
particular problems of 8
protection of wetland habitat 188
TIGER Initiative (European Space

Agency) in 440, 441
urban population 90
vector control in 215–16
Water for African Cities Programme
(UN-HABITAT) 450
wetland values in 166
African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbird
Agreement (AEWA) 189
African Water Page website 85
Agenda 21 16, 74, 384, 438
aggregation of data 90
Agreement of Conservation of AfricanEurasian Migratory Waterbirds
(AEWA) 170
agriculture
agricultural commodity supply 253
agricultural runoff 174
agricultural services, water driven
409
allocation for industry vs domestic
and agricultural use
279
aquaculture and, competition for
water 250
biotechnology, potential for 256–7
climate change, impact on 254
competition for water 254–5
complex nature of challenge to
244, 271
cropping systems 256
crops, production of 247–8
cultivated land 250–51
in Danube River Basin (DRB) 476–7
demand for water, responding to
change in nature of
255–62
demographic patterns, change in
252–5
development policies for 244
drought resistant crops 257
efficiency in water usage 255–6
environment and water quality
263–5, 270–71
farmers, affects of factors outwith
their control on 271
farmers, change and 244
finance of irrigation schemes 261
forest land and 251
freshwater use, traditional claim to
245
governance of 270–71
groundwater-based economies,
evolution of 262–3
institutional reforms in irrigation
management 258–60
irrigated agriculture 244, 250–51,
252
irrigation for, reclaimed water in
292
irrigation improvements 258–62
irrigation institutions 244
irrigation management transfer
(IMT) 259
irrigation performance, design faults
and 258
Kenya 484
land-use change 173–5
livestock production 247–8

management of groundwater
262–3
management reform of irrigation
systems 260
market access and rural water
management 245
meat demand 253
modernization of large irrigation
systems 260–61, 270
participatory irrigation management
269
pasture land 250–51
political backing for irrigation reform
260
poultry demand 253
precision agriculture and irrigation
technology 262
private role in finance of irrigation
261
production of, drivers of change
252–5
public role in finance of irrigation
261
rainfed 250–51, 256
reclaimed water, potential for 149
recycling, wastewater use 264
relative importance of, indicators of
36
risk-related aspects 358
safe use of wastewater in, WHO
guidelines 264
salinity, hazard of 263–4
salinity resistant crops 257
sedimentation and 137
soil fertility management 256
sustainability in 262–70
trade liberalization and 245
trends in 251–2
virtual water 257–8
wastewater use, recycling and 264
water balance, relative importance
of agricultural
withdrawals in 36
water-demands of 471
water in Japan for 482
water management, governance
issues at different levels
246
water pricing in irrigation 260–61
water productivity in 255–8
water quality, decline in 255
water quality, environment and
263–5
water scarcity and 254–5
water-storage 262–3
water use efficiency 255–6
water variable in 245–52
water’s role in 245–55
wetlands, fragility of ecosystems
264–5
aid to water sector 52, 60, 94, 96, 98,
234, 236, 419, 420, 459,
523
air pollution by industry 299
Albania
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
Danube River Basin Management

Plan 476
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 132
algae
accidental introduction of 181
overgrowth of 174
Algeria
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
allocation of water
allocative efficiency 15
criteria of IWRM, clarity in 186
for industry vs domestic and
agricultural use 279
in Thailand 510–11
alpine meadows 172
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
384, 389, 395
Amazon River basin 165
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
Amazonas-Orinoco river system 177
American Institute of Hydrology (AIH)
website 462
ammonia, problem of corrosion by 293
amoebiasis 211
amphibian species 170
anaerobic treatment of wastewater
297–8
analysis
analytical methods for valuation of
water 428
simultaneous of water and energy
consumption 306
of trade in food 257–8
Angola
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
community water provision in
Luanda 100
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
animal wastes 179
Annan, Kofi 363, 365
anopheline mosquitos 216
anoxia 163
anthropogenic chemical pollution 218
anthropogenic impacts and valuation of
water 425
antibiotics, impacts of waste 179–80
anticipatory action in sharing water 376
Antigua and Barbuda, water availability
and use 132
aquaculture 167, 180, 409
agriculture and, competition for
water 250

I N D EX . 5 5 1

competition for water with
agriculture 250
development of 248, 250
food production in 247, 248
AQUASTAT 131–6
website 273
aquatic biodiversity 169
aquatic ecosystems
aquatic environment, malaria
transmission and 215
habitats
distribution of 168
maintenance of 250
importance of 160
sedimentation and 137
see also ecosystems, coastal and
freshwater
aquatic mammals 170
aquatic species 174
Aquifer ESA Project 441
aquifers
Management of Aquifer Recharge
(MAR) 146
recharging of 147
sharing water in aquifer systems
381
storage and recovery, desalination
and (DASR) 150
transboundary aquifers on agenda
of International Law
Commission 384
transferring water between 148
Yrenda-Toba-Tarijeño system 378
Aral Sea
decline of the 183
irrigation areas in basin of 183
arboviral infections 217–18
Arctic Ocean ecosystem 161
Argentina
access to drinking water 499
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
500
right to water in 64, 65
safeguarding right to safe water
supply 66
sanitation services, access to 499
transboundary aquifers 375, 378
water availability and use 132
arid systems, climate change impact on
181
Armenia
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water and sewerage services in
Yerevan 418
water availability and use 132
arsenic contamination 219, 220, 227
La Plata River Basin 499
artificial storage and recovery (ASR)

147, 148–9
Artois-Picardy Basin, France 480
Aruba, water availability and use 132
Arwari River Parliament, Rajasthan 74
ascaris helminth infection 212, 213
Asia
cities, development in 91
economic valuation of returns to
irrigation water
investments in 411
fish catches in 165
hydropower capability 333
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
invasive species, introduction of
181
tsunami disaster, future
preparedness 27
urban population 90
vector control in 215
wetland values in 166
Asian Development Bank
Water for All Initiative 453
website 239
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center
(ADPC) website 369
assessment
of capacity 435–7, 459
of knowledge 435–7
tools and challenges 457
Associated Programme of Flood
Management (APFM) 122
Atlantic comb jellyfish 181
atmospheric deposition of chemicals
281
atmospheric resources 123–4
Australia
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
aquifer recharge management in
147
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
environmental flow legislation in
147
Hydro Tasmania 320
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
ISO 14001 certification in 287
solar water heaters for domestic use
313
water availability and use 132
water reuse in 148
Austria
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
hydropower capability 334
hydropower generation in Freudenau
322
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
avian influenza virus 236
avocet 190
Azerbaijan

access to electricity 328
access to water 328
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
B
Bahamas, water availability and use 132
Bahrain
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 132
Bali, Indonesia 448
Bangladesh
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
aquaculture in 167
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
community water provision in Dhaka
and Chittagong 100
drinking water supply in 219
flood management, communitybased 352
gender-sensitive school sanitation in
231, 450
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
integration of land and water
governance 55
Joint River Commission (JRC) talks
with India 380
water availability and use 132
wetland values in 166
Barbados
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
solar water heaters for domestic use
312–13
water availability and use 132
barium 220
Basel Convention on the Control of
Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and their
Disposal (1992) 21, 284,
285
Basque Country, Autonomous Community
of the (ACB) 473, 474
European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD, 2000)
474
river basins 473
beer production 296
Beijer Institute website on environmental
economics 431
Beijing, demand-side water management
in 107

Belarus
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
basin 414, 486, 487
Strategic Action Plan for
transboundary Dnieper
River Basin 280
Viru-Peipsi water management plan
487
water availability and use 132
Belgium
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 132
Belize
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 132
Bellamy, Carol 450
benchmarking 38, 470
benefit-cost analysis (BCA) 28
need for tools for 236
valuation of water 410–11
Benin
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
benthic organisms 171
benzene, release to water in EU member
states 282
Berlin International Law Association
Conference (2004) 382
Bermuda, water availability and use 132
Best Available Technology (BAT) 285,
286, 289
Best Environmental Practices (BEPs)
284–5, 289
Bhutan
hydropower capability 333
water availability and use 132
Biennial International Waters Conference
(Brazil, 2005) 390
bilateral risk reduction initiatives 344
bilharzia see schistosomiasis
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) 296
biodiversity
conservation 160
and ecosystem degradation 191–2
‘hotspots’ 169, 505
loss 17–18
seasonal flooding benefits in Tonle
Sap 265
Sri Lanka as ‘hotspot’ 505
status of trends in 168–71
biological growth, problem of 293
biological oxygen demand (BOD) 174
indicators 36
industry shares of 281

5 5 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

biological treatment of wastewater
297–8
biomass power 315
dependence in Kenya on 484
generation of 325
biome distribution 177
biome types
fragmentation and flow regulation
by 178
surface areas and protection for
terrestrial 188
biotechnology, potential for 256–7
Birdlife International 170, 171
birds, breeding grounds 168–9
Biscay, Bay of 473
bittern 190
bivalve molluscs 170
Black Sea, fisheries collapse in 181
black-tailed godwit 182
blindness-causing diseases see
onchocersiasis; trachoma
Blue Nile Basin 479
blue water 250, 251
bogs, ecosystem threats to raised 172
Bolivia
access to drinking water 499
access to electricity 328
access to water 328
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
gender audits in 452
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
sanitation services, access to 499
Silala Aquifer groundwater sharing
agreement 380
transboundary aquifers 375, 378
water availability and use 132
‘water war’ in Cochabamba 420
Bombay see Mumbai
boreholes 224–6
boron 220
Bosnia and Herzegovina
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 132
Botswana
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
Limpopo Watercourse Commission
(LIMCOM) 380
Okavango River Project 380
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 132
bottled water, high cost of 402
bottom-up approach to global
assessment 455
bottom-up development 11
boundaries, mismatched political and
natural 373
see also transboundary waters

Brazil
access to drinking water 499
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
bottled water demand in 402
food, progress in production 246
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower capability 333
improved governance for better
water services in 72
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
IWRM developments in 56
MDG target achievement in 449
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
500
PROSANEAR in 100
protection of wetland habitat 188
right to water in 64
sanitation services, access to 499
transboundary aquifers 375
waste dam failure in 283
water availability and use 132
see also La Plata River Basin
Brunei Darussalam
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
water availability and use 132
Bulgaria
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
Danube River basin, TEST strategy in
296
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
Burbot fish 179
bureaucratic inertia 521
Burkina Faso
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
disease burden in 208–9
economic evaluation of interventions
231–2
hydropower capability 332
IWRM developments in 56
Volta River basin, agreement with
Ghana on 380
water availability and use 132
women in irrigation management
259
Burma see Myanmar
Burundi
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
water availability and use 132

C
cadmium 220
Cambodia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquaculture in 167
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
inland fishery production in 167
mobile cellular phone network in
443
seasonal flooding benefits in Tonle
Sap 265
water availability and use 132
water supply in Phnom Phenh 234
wetland values in 166
Camdessus Panel 452
Cameroon
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
biodiversity in Lake Chad 182
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 132
wetland values in 166
Canada
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
rainfall pH levels in eastern 138
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 132
Canadian International Development
Agency (CIDA) 458
Cantabrian-Mediterranean water divide
473
Cap-Net 446
capacity
access to public information 454
ADB-Water for All 453
assessment of 435–7, 459
tools and challenges 457, 458
basic education 449–50
bottom-up approach to global
assessment 455
Camdessus Panel 452
capacity-building in water sharing
388, 396
capacity development, outcomes of
455
comprehensive capacity assessments
459
demand-driven
educational programmes 453
research on water-related
issues 452
development 436, 453
framework for 456
knowledge base of 434
outcomes of 455

development and knowledge 435–6
distribution of needs 457
educational curriculum adjustment
453
employment issues and organization
performance 451–2
enabling environment, creation of
452–4
enhancement of education and
438
enhancement of local 449–54
Global Environment Facility (GEF)
457–8
higher education and training
450–51
human resources development 449
hygiene education 449
identification of needs 454–8
implementation at all levels 449
indicators of needs 454–7
initiatives in building institutional
capacity timeline 389
institutional capacity, strengthening
of 451–2
Integrated Water Resource
Management (IWRM)
457
National Capacity Self-Assessment
(NCSA) process 457–8
Output Based Aid 453
primary schooling 449
socio-economic benefits of
strengthened 436–7
statistical capacity-building,
international
commitment to 459
supply-oriented educational
programmes 453
of water management institutions
434
Water Resources Assessment Handbook for Review of
National Capabilities
(WMO/UNESCO) 457
of women, empowerment through
education 449
Capacity Development Resource Book
(UNDP) 458
Capacity Development Resource Centre
(World Bank) 458
Cape Verde, water availability and use
132
capital
capital intensiveness of
infrastructure 83
livelihood-based approach and 268
carbon intensity of electricity production
323
indicator 36
carcinogenic contamination 219
Caribbean
cities, development in 91
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
transboundary aquifers 374–5
urban population 90
see also Latin America; South
America

I N D EX . 5 5 3

carp 174
case studies
agriculture, water-demands of 471
Basque Country, Autonomous
Community of the (ACB)
473–4
benchmarking intention of 470
climatic variations 472
coordination, deficiencies in 473
Danube River Basin (DRB) 474–7
agricultural activities 476–7
climatic variations 476
ecosystems 475
energy in DRB countries 476–7
flood control 475–6
International Commission for
the Protection of
the Danube River
(ICPDR) 474–5
pollution control 475–6
transboundary and regional
aquifers 474
transportation 475
droughts 472
ecosystem preservation 471–2
energy, growing needs for 471
Ethiopia 477–9
Blue Nile Basin 479
energy production 478
gross national product (GNP)
477
malaria 478
morbidity, causes of 478
population 478
transboundary basins 477
water and sanitation
infrastructure 478
water policy implementation
478–9
water-related natural disasters,
effects of 478
water resources 477–8
Water Sector Development
Programme (WSDP)
479
wetlands 478
findings 470–73
floods 472
France
Adour-Garonne Basin 480
Artois-Picardy Basin 480
European Union Water
Framework Directive
(WFD, 2000) 479
farm pollution management
programme
(PMPOA) 480
International Commission for
the Protection of
the Rhine (ICPR)
480
Loire-Brittany Basin 480
Rhine Action Plan (RAP) 480
Rhine-Meuse Basin 480
Rhone-Mediterranean Basin
480
Seine-Normandy River basin
481

gender equality in education 471
groundwater resources 472
indicators, development of 470
industrial development 471
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
473
Japan 481–3
access to sanitation 481
agriculture, water for 482
drinking water supply 481
ecosystem protection 481–2
forecasting and warning
systems 483
hydropower energy 482
industrial water needs 482
Sediment-Related Disaster
Prevention Law
483
water-related disasters 482–3
Kenya 483–6
access to sanitation 484
access to water 483–5
aces 483–5
agriculture 484
biomass energy dependence
484
demand for water, increases in
484–5
Economic Recovery Strategy for
Wealth and
Employment
Creation (ERS) 484
Environmental Management
Coordination Act
(1999) 485
population 484
poverty, challenge of 483–5
water sector capacity,
enhancement of
485–6
water sector reform 485
La Plata River Basin 498–501
access to sanitation 499
access to water 499
arsenic content of water 499
climate trends 498
Coordinating Committee of the
Countries of the La
Plata Basin (CIC)
501
El Niño, effect of 498
energy and water 500
environment and water 498–9
erosion 499
health and water 499
hydropower 500
industry and water 500
institutional management
frameworks 501
long-term measurements of
498
Pantanal Project (1991) 499
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway
Project 498, 500
Paraguay River system 498
Paraná River system 498
poverty 498–9

rainfall trends 498
sharing water resources
500–501
soil loss 498–9
surface water sustainability
500–501
Uruguay River system 498
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
486–7
climatic context, change in 486
environmental issues 487
institutional reforms 487
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 487
reforms underway 487
socio-economic context, change
in 486
transportation agreements 487
Lake Titicaca Basin 488–9
climate change, impact on
glaciers 488
dams and reservoirs,
construction of
488
poverty and conflict 488
structural poverty 488
Mali 489–91
access to water 490
climatic groups 489
energy development, challenge
of 490–91
energy potential 490–91
environmental degradation 490
food, challenge of 490–91
health, challenge of 490–91
irrigation 490
knowledge base improvement
491
management responses and
stewardship 491
population 490
poverty 490
water resources 489
Mexico 492–4
ecosystems and water 493–4
flood risk 494
health and water 493
land resources 492
National Development Plan of
Environment and
Natural Resources
(PND, 2001-6)
493–4
risk management 494
underground water resources
493
uses of water and land 492
Water Commission of the State
(CAEM) 493
water management 493
water resources 492
water transfer 493
Mongolia 495–8
access to water 495
administrative context 495
climate change, groundwater
and 496
development, challenges to

496
drought 497
ecosystems and water 495–6
energy and water 496–7
flood prevention 497
industry and water 496
lacustrine ecosystems 495–6
lake depletion in 495
legislative framework 497
National Development Plan
495–6
nomadic livestock husbandry
496
population 495
pricing policy, decentralization
of 497
regulatory framework 497
Ulan Bator, water usage in 497
water for food 496
water-related policy 497
water resources management
497
well-being, challenges to 496
monitoring, evaluation and reporting
(MER) systems 470,
471
overview map 469
South Africa 502–5
basic water services programme
502
cholera 503
diarrhoeal diseases 503
disasters, management of 504
dysentery 503
ecosystems and water 502
energy and water 503
food and water 503
free basic water (FBW)
programme 503
health and water 503
hepatitis 503
hydropower 503
industry and water 504
knowledge base development
504
malaria 503
management of water
resources 504
mean annual runoff (MAR)
502, 503
nuclear power generation 504
poverty 503
risk mitigation 504
rural population 502
schistosomiasis 503
self-sufficiency in food 503
settlements and water 502–3
sharing water 504
thermal power generation 504
urban settlements, growth of
informal 502
water-related diseases 503
water research 504–5
Sri Lanka 505–8
‘biodiversity hotspot’ 505
coastal lagoons, threat to 505
demand management,

5 5 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

necessity for 507
drinking water supply,
investment in 507
ecosystems and water 505–6
energy and water 507
food and water 506–7
groundwater potential 505
health and water 506
industry and water 507
irrigation, investment in 507
knowledge base development
508
piped water systems 506
poverty 506
rainfall 505
risk management 507–8
water resources management
507
wetlands, threat to 505
women in agricultural workforce
507
surface water resources 472
Thailand 509–11
allocation of water 510–11
Chao Phraya River valley 509
coastal areas, diversity in 509
drought prevention 511
ecosystems and water 509
energy and water 510
flood mitigation 511
food and water 510
health and water 510
industry and water 510
marine areas, diversity in 509
Mekong River Commission
(MRC) 511
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 510
monsoon-risk 511
morbidity rates 510
natural resources management
509–10
poverty 510
transboundary water resources
511
wastewater treatment,
management
conflict over 510
water-related disasters 511
wetlands 509
Tuul River Basin, Mongolia 495–8
Uganda 512–15
access to electricity 514
cost recovery 512
Disaster Preparedness and
Management
Strategy 515
ecosystems and water 512
energy and water 514
fisheries 513
food security 513
health and water 513
hydropower 514
industry and water 514
irrigation, potential for 513
Lake Victoria, significance for
economy of 512
legal framework and reforms

514–15
livestock production 513
mining pollution 514
Plan for Modernisation of
Agriculture (PMA)
513–14
Planning, Sector Wide Approach
to (SWAP) 514–15
poverty 513–14
Poverty Eradication Action Plan
(PEAP) 513
renewable water resources
512
rural development 512
urban settlements 512
Water Action Plan (WAP) 514
water related disasters 515
water-borne diseases 471
water resources, blatant disparities
in 470–71
World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) 469–73
agriculture, water-demands of
471
benchmarking intention of 470
climatic variations 472
coordination, deficiencies in
473
droughts 472
ecosystem preservation 471–2
energy, growing needs for 471
findings 470–73
floods 472
gender equality in education
471
groundwater resources 472
indicators, development of 470
industrial development 471
Integrated Water Resources
Management
(IWRM) 473
monitoring, evaluation and
reporting (MER)
systems 470, 471
surface water resources 472
water-borne diseases 471
water resources, blatant
disparities in
470–71
catchment areas 19
Center for Environmental Systems
Research 126
Center for Research on the Epidemiology
of Disasters (CRED) 343
Central African Republic
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
Central America
invasive species, introduction of
181
ISO 14001 certification in 287
population 412
squatter settlements, upgrading
programmes in 101

transboundary aquifers 374–5
urban slums, upgrading programmes
in 101
see also Caribbean; Latin America;
South America
Central Asia
access to electricity 331
utility services, affordability of 427
Central Europe, access to electricity 331
Chacaltaya Glacier, areal and volumetric
variation 489
Chad
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
biodiversity in Lake Chad 182
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
change
agriculture, crop pattern change in
21
anticipation of and adaptation to
520, 524, 526–7
climate change, impact on
agriculture 254
defining characteristic of today’s
world 6
demand for water, responding to
change in nature of
255–62
demographic change 8–9, 49
demographic patterns, change in
252–5
dietary change in developing
countries 249
epidemiological patterns, change in
224
farmers and change 244
incremental change, reform and 60
land-use change 173–5
macroeconomic change 49
in natural systems 17–19
in settlements, urban and rural
89–92
socio-economic contexts 7–11
Chao Phraya River valley 509
charging for water services 400,
413–17
area-based charging for irrigation
water 415
connection fees 413
consensus in 400
development programmes and 424
emission taxes 416–17
financial sustainability in tariffsetting 413
form of tariff structure 413–14
as governance policy 428
industrial effluent, charging for
discharge of 416–17
irrigation, charging for 415–16
level of tariff structure 414
long-run incremental social cost as
basis for 415
municipal water services, charging

for 414–5
payments for environmental services
(PES) 423–5
periodic access fees 413
pollution taxes 416–17
predictability in tariff-setting 413
rate setting, politicized nature of
414
simplicity in tariff-setting 413
structuring user charges 413
tariff-setting criteria 413
transparency in tariff-setting 413
unit prices, complexity in
determination of 413
user pays principle in 406, 413
volumetrically based charging for
irrigation water 415
watershed-based payment schemes
424
willingness to pay (WTP) 410–11
cheese production 295
chemical contamination of water by 279
chemical hazards 285
chemical leaching from solid wastes 281
chemical oxygen demand (COD) 296
chemical pollution 283
chemical precipitation 292
child mortality 45–6, 229
as indicator 36
children
stunting in children as indicator 36
underweight children as indicator
36
water management concerns for
15–16
Chile
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
public participation rights in 77
Silala Aquifer groundwater sharing
agreement 380
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 132
China
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
acid rain in 138
aquifer recharge management in
147
bottled water demand in 402
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
demand-side water management in
Beijing 107
food, progress in production 246
glacial decline, acceleration of 145
glacier disappearance in 145
hydropower capability 333
hydropower in 313
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
inland fishery production in 167
inland water transport (IWT) in

I N D EX . 5 5 5

22–3
IWRM developments in 56
organic contaminants in rivers 180
returns on irrigation investments in
411
small hydropower (SHP)
development in 317,
318
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
solar water heaters for domestic use
312
tailing dam failure in Guangxi
Province 283
transboundary water agreement
with Mongolia 494
transboundary water management
agreement with
Kazakhstan 380
water availability and use 132
water reuse in 148
Yangtze River basin 148
Yellow River basin 148
Chittagong (Bangladesh) 100
chlorination of wastewater 297–8
cholera 211–12, 224, 503
chromium 220
cities see settlements, urban and rural
citrus fruits, water productivity of 256
civil defence 358
‘clean coal’ technologies 322–3
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
325
cleaner production, principle of 294–5
Cleaner Production Assessment (CPA)
295
climate change 181–4
arid systems, impact on 181
atmospheric pollution and 314
Bangladesh coastal areas vulnerable
to 181
consequences for risk reduction
362
dealing with increasing frequency
24
and disaster preparedness in
Uganda 363
disaster risk and 366–7
economic development and 6
and glaciers, impact on 488
global warming and 144–5
groundwater in Mongolia and 496
impact of 19, 120, 254, 488
impact on water resources 521
management of variability and 18
projected impacts in Rhine River
basin 363
rising temperatures, impact in
Uganda 513
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate
Change 314
variability and 18
see also global warming
climate groups in Mali 489
Climate Moisture Index (CMI) 36
Climate Moisture Index Coefficient of
Variation (CMI-CV) 338

climate monitoring ‘Aqua’ satellite
(NASA) 125
climate trends 472
in Danube River Basin (DRB) 476
in La Plata River Basin 498
in Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
486
Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI) 356,
357
applied to Peru at national and
subnational scales 357
indicators 36
co-management of water and energy
resources 327–8
coal-fired power stations 315, 322, 323
coastal areas
climate change impact on low-lying
181
diversity in Thailand 509
status of ecosystems 168
threats to ecosystems 172
see also ecosystems, coastal and
freshwater
coastal erosion 165
coastal estuaries 164–5
coastal fisheries 167
coastal lagoons, threat to 505
Cochabamba, Bolivia 420
coherency in government 49
collaboration
phases of 389
in sharing water 394, 395
Colombia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 132
commercial services, water driven 409
Commission on Managing Aquifer
Recharge (MAR) 147
common tern 190
Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) 427
see also Armenia; Azerbaijan;
Belarus; Georgia;
Kazakhstan; Kygryz
Republic; Moldova;
Russian Federation;
Tajikistan; Turkmenistan;
Ukraine; Uzbekistan
community-based risk management 348
community-driven assessments,
importance of 108–10
community health status 205
community organization for urban poor
95
community resources, tapping into
111–12
community services, inadequacy of
access to 522–3
community water provision 100
Comoros, water availability and use 132

comparative risk assessment (CRA)
229–31
compensation for reform losers 60
competition
access to water and 7
for water 254–5
water sharing and 24–5
complacency, danger of 529
Complex Emergencies Database website
461
component sharing model of urban
water provision 100
composting latrines/toilets 224–6
Comprehensive Assessment of the
Freshwater Resources of the
World (UN, Kjellën and
McGranahan) 376
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in agriculture,
website 273
comprehensive capacity assessments
459
computer models, refinement of 39
conceptual indicators 37
conclusions
administrative systems, exclusion
from participation in
523
awareness and advocacy 525–6
community services, inadequacy of
access to 522–3
complacency, danger of 529
cooperation, need for national and
international 527
cost-effectiveness of water
investments 525–6
cultural barriers to development
523
data deficiencies 525
economic progress 528
environment and water 524
financial provision, barriers to 529
funding deficiencies 525
governance and water 525–7
housing improvements 522
legal protections inadequacy of 523
micro-finance, growth of 528
natural capital, deterioration of 524
optimism, cautious 528–9
political systems, exclusion from
participation in 523
political systems, variation in 526
pollution 524
poverty and water 522–3
pressure on natural systems 524
private investment, barriers to 526
public infrastructure, inadequacy of
access to 522–3
reform is underway 528–9
rights, inadequate protection of
523
river basin management 525
safety nets, lack of 523
storage and flood protection
infrastructure 525
utility services payment structures
522
wastewater treatment systems 524

conferences, international conferences of
interest 390
conflict 10
avoidance, mechanisms for 372
outcomes in water sharing 385
sources in water sharing 385
conflict resolution 14, 48–50
inter-state cooperation 380
mechanisms of IWRM, detail in 186
in water sharing 385–93, 396
Congo, Democratic Republic of
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
hydropower development in 316
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 132
Congo, Republic of
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
water availability and use 132
Congo rivers system 177
connection fees 413
conservation 153
of biodiversity 160
of energy 328
measures for, implementation of
149–50
traditions of 146
Conservation International (CI) 169
constraints on promotion of 235–6
construction
applications for reclaimed water
292
sedimentation and 137
Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
389
website 273
consumers
consumer behaviour 14–15
consumption habits 248
end-use of water 308, 322
contaminants 279–80
chemical contamination 220
in high population settings 139
regional scales of contamination
139
see also pollution
Convention of the Rights of the Child
(CRC, 1989) 63
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
161
Convention on Migratory Species (CMS)
189
Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Waters and
International Lakes (UNECE
Water Convention, 1996)
185, 286
cooling towers 292, 321, 322
cooling waters, discharge of 322
cooperation
cooperation indicator 37
dynamics of cooperation 394–6

5 5 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

integration and 373–8, 394–6
macro-scale 394
mechanisms for 388–90
need for national and international
527
potential for 24–5
in water sharing 394, 395, 396
Coordinating Committee of the Countries
of the La Plata Basin (CIC)
501
coordination
deficiencies in 473
improvement in 60–61
in water sharing 394, 395
coral reefs 171
climate change impact on 181
ecosystem threats to 172
reef habitats 165
corrosion, problem of 293
corruption
abatement of 68–9
costs of 67
drain on water sector 65–9
in irrigation sector 67
in management of water resources
521
pervasive nature of 44
in water supply and sanitation
sectors in India 68
Costa Rica
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
multi-hazard risk assessment in
350
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 132
costs
and benefits of improvements in
water and sanitation
services 412
conventional water systems 99–100
cost-effective operation of water
systems 310
cost-effectiveness of water
investments 525–6
cost recovery
irrigation management transfer
(IMT) tool 416
rate as indicator 37
reconciliation with affordability
in PPPS 419,
420–21
in Uganda 512
of disease prevention 231–2
for environmental services 425
long-run incremental social cost as
basis for charging for
water services 415
and value comparisons 414
wastewater treatment 291
of water provision for urban poor
95–6
see also benefit-cost analysis
Côte d’Ivoire
access to electricity 329

access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
private sector involvement in water
supply and sanitation
70
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 132
Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We
Make Things (McDonough,
W. and Braungart, M.) 299
crisis avoidance, mechanisms for
388–90
Croatia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Danube River basin, TEST strategy in
296
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 132
crops
crop irrigation 409
crop patterns 246
cropland, evolution of 252
cropping systems 256
production of 247–8
crustaceans 170
cryptosporidium 211, 227
Cuba
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
beer production 296
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 132
culex mosquitos 217–18
cultivated land 250–51
cultural barriers to development 523
cultural roots of water governance 48
cultural valuation of water 400, 401
custom and tradition in water rights
62–3
cyanide 220
cyanobacterial toxins 220
cyclical material flows, ‘cradle to cradle’
concept 299–302
cyclones, tropical 344, 352, 353
Cyprus
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 333
water availability and use 132
Czech Republic
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300

water availability and use 132
D
dairy products 248, 295
dams 176–9, 179
alternatives to 179
coal tailing dam disaster in Kentucky
283
construction of 205, 488
decommissioning of 178–9
demand for large 177–8
malaria transmission and 215
overflow and spillway failure in the
Philippines 283
in reservoir construction 148
sediment trapping by large dams
201
tailing dam failure in Guangxi
Province, China 283
Tisza tailings dam disaster 283
waste dam failure in Brazil 283
see also hydropower; reservoirs;
World Commission on
Dams
Danube River Basin (DRB) 474–7, 475
agricultural activities 476–7
climatic variations 476
ecosystems 475
energy in DRB countries 476–7
flood control 475–6
International Commission for the
Protection of the
Danube River (ICPDR)
474–5
pollution control 475–6
TEST strategy in 296
transboundary and regional aquifers
474
transportation 475
Danube River Basin Management Plan
476
data
accessibility for risk management
348, 350
acquisition of 438
aggregation of 90
on biodiversity and water quality
192
collection and management 350
deficiencies in 525
gathering for water sharing 25,
396
inadequacies 160
reliability for WRA 151
user-based vs provider-based 226
see also information
database development 442
dataset reconciliation 40
decentralization 15, 82, 259
benefits of 74–5
in development initiatives 111–12
practice of 75–7
and valuation of water 400
of water control 74–80
of WRA 151
decision-making
about water 47–8

citizen involvement in 389–90
compatibility in 14
dealing with uncertainty 342
decentralization of 74–80
expertise in for water sharing 390
flexibility in 363
integration of water and energy
issues 327–8
public participation in 77–8
risk-related knowledge and 348,
350, 366
time-lag between implementation
and impact 373
deductive methodology 407, 409
deforestation 173
degradation 167, 168
delegation 25, 28, 81
deltas
inland, ecosystem threats to 172
Nile river delta 201
demand
matching supply with 145–51
for water, increases in Kenya 484–5
for water, responding to change in
nature of 255–62
demand-driven educational programmes
453
demand-driven research on water-related
issues 452
demand management 14, 14–15, 107,
143, 149–50, 153, 507
demands
of food production 247–8
on prevention strategies 152–3
democratization 48–50
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
226
demographic change 8–9, 49
demographic growth 244
demographic patterns, change in 252–5
dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF) 218,
224
deaths from 209
Denmark
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
water availability and use 133
Department for International
Development (DFID) 453
deposition, nitrogen source 117
desalinated water production 36, 310
desalination 150, 310–12
renewable energy and 311
desertification 161
Designated Urban River Inundation
Prevention Act (Japan, 2003)
360
developing countries
energy affordability in 314
food, progress in production 246
funding water functions 69
land and water use policies 44
local, small-scale water companies,

I N D EX . 5 5 7

untapped potential
72–3
power station development,
pressures on 307
Rapid Air Pollution in Developing
countries (RAPIDC) 138
right to water in 65
urban environments, energy costs in
307
water pollution in 137–43
development
agriculture, crop pattern change in
21
of capacity 453
challenges in Mongolia 496
corruption and consequences for
66–7
development indicator 37
energy, sustainable development in
21, 24
food, growing demand for 20–21
industry, sustainable development in
21, 24
infectious disease, reduction of 20
of knowledge 435
of knowledge base 434
and knowledge capacity 435–6
policies for 244
programmes and charging for water
services 424
trends and governance systems 48
well-being and, challenges for
20–24
development planning 358
and disaster risk reduction 344,
346
Devil’s Lake Emergency Outlet, North
Dakota 380
devolution 15
see also decentralization
Dhaka (Bangladesh) 100
diarrhoeal diseases 204, 205, 210–12,
224, 230, 231
control of 211
deaths from 209
malnutrition and 231
South Africa 503
dietary change in developing countries
249
dietary diversification 253
Dietary Energy Supply (DES) 36, 245–6
digital divide 11
dilution effect 279
dimensions of water governance 46–8
diplomacy 358
direct waste discharge 220
direct water reuse 291
Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs)
208–10, 212, 230
as indicators 36
for water-associated diseases 209
Disaster Preparedness and Management
Strategy in Uganda 515
Disaster Reduction and Climate Change
(DR+CC) Infolink 362
Disaster Risk Index (DRI) 36
methodology of 352
disasters

arsenic contamination in Thailand
283
Asian tsunami, future preparedness
27
climate change and disaster
preparedness in Uganda
363
coal tailing dam disaster in Kentucky
283
deaths in water-related disasters
346
Disaster Risk Index (DRI),
methodology of 352
disaster risk planning 367
disaster risk reduction 366
framework for 359
droughts, exposure and vulnerability
to 355
earthquakes, contamination by 281
effect on gross domestic product
(GDP) 485
effect on national incomes 485
Emergency Disasters Database
(CRED) 352
floods, exposure and vulnerability to
354
global disaster landscape 343–4
global record by type of hazard
343
hurricane ‘Katrina,’ risk management
and 26
industrial disasters 283
international disaster risk reduction
344
management in South Africa of 504
Natech disasters 281
numbers affected by water-related
disasters 346
overflow and spillway failure in the
Philippines 283
prevention-oriented strategies for
risk reduction 349
Red Rhine incident 283
response-based strategies for risk
reduction 349
stakeholder participation in risk
reduction 350
tailing dam failure in Guangxi
Province, China 283
Tisza tailings dam disaster 283
toxic acrylonitrile (ACN)
contamination 281
waste dam failure in Brazil 283
water-related disasters by region
344
discharges, untreated 277, 279
disease frequency, incidence and
prevalence of 208
disputes, long history in water sharing
385
dissolved nitrogen as indicator 36
distillation of seawater 310–11
distributed generation (DG) 327
distribution of needs 457
distribution of water 308
Division of Early warning and Assessment
(DEWA) 377
Djibouti

desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 133
Dnieper River Basin 280
Dniester-Odra Project 380
domestic hygiene 226
domestic need and economic activity,
synergy between 104
domestic services, water driven 409
domestic water use 200
as indicator 36
Dominica
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 133
Dominican Republic
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
downstream contamination of water
279
drainage channels 172
drainage of wetlands 171, 173
drinking water
contamination of 230–31
intake per day 247
monitoring of 79
provision of, diseases related to
deficiencies in 210–13
quality of 204, 227
compromised by discharges
from 280
safe drinking water, access to 36
sources of 222, 224
supply of 219
access to improvement in
224–6
investment in Sri Lanka 507
in Japan 481
quality and availability in
Ruhuna basins, Sri
Lanka 219
drip irrigation 21, 256
Driving Force-Pressure-State-ImpactResource (DPSIR) 35, 356
drought 472
exposure and vulnerability to 355
Mongolia 497
numbers affected by recent
droughts 479
prevention in Thailand 511
resistant crops 257
user-based design of warning
systems for 352–3
vulnerability to 160
Drought Monitoring Centres (DMCs) in
Kenya 353
drowning
deaths from 209
problem of 218–19, 224
drug resistance in parasitic and bacterial
pathogens 236
dryland areas, water stress in 184
Dublin Statement on Water and
Sustainable Development
401
Dushanbe International Conference on
Regional Cooperation on

Transboundary River Basins
390
dynamics of cooperation 394–6
dysentery 210–11, 211, 224
on South Africa 503
E
Earthwatch website 461
East Asia
access to electricity 331
ISO 14001 certification in 287
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
protection of wetland habitat 188
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
undernourishment in 267
Eastern Europe
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
utility services, affordability of 427
Eco-Management and Audit Scheme
(EMAS, EU) 289
ecological appreciation and water
valuation 405
ecological water management 18–19
Economic Recovery Strategy for Wealth
and Employment Creation
(ERS) in Kenya 484
economic valuation
criticism of 409
of returns to irrigation water
investments in 411
of water 400, 401, 405–6, 427–8
economics
benefits of sustainable development
153
benefits of water rights 62
context of 277–83
economic costs of tsunamis 508,
511
economic development
inland water transport (IWT)
and 22–3
limits on 152
economic dimension in water
governance 46
economic efficiency and valuation of
water 406, 411
economic instruments 14, 69
economic progress 528
economies of proximity in small
urban centres 103–4
economies of scale available in
hydropower 313
enhancement of capacity and
education 438
evaluation of interventions 231–2
incentives for better water usage
293–4
incentives for renewables
development 325–7
macroeconomic change 49
ecosystems, coastal and freshwater
African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbird

5 5 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Agreement (AEWA) 189
agricultural land-use change 173–5
agricultural runoff 174
algae, accidental introduction of
181
algae, overgrowth of 174
allocation criteria of IWRM, clarity in
186
Amazon basin 165
Amazonas-Orinoco river system 177
amphibian species 170
animal wastes 179
antibiotics, impacts of waste
179–80
aquaculture 167, 180
aquatic biodiversity 169
aquatic ecosystems, importance of
160
aquatic habitats, distribution of
168
aquatic mammals 170
aquatic species 174
Arctic Ocean ecosystem 161
arid systems, climate change impact
on 181
Atlantic comb jellyfish 181
benefits of IWRM, equity in 186
benthic organisms 171
biodiversity, status of trends in
168–71
biodiversity and ecosystem
degradation 191–2
biodiversity conservation 160
biodiversity ‘hotspots’ 169
biological oxygen demand (BOD)
174
biome distribution 177
Birdlife International 170, 171
birds, breeding grounds 168–9
bivalve molluscs 170
Black Sea, fisheries collapse in 181
Burbot fish 179
carp 174
challenges for 162, 191–2
climate change 181–4
coastal areas, climate change impact
on low-lying 181
coastal ecosystems, status of 168
coastal erosion 165
coastal estuaries 164–5
coastal fisheries 167
conflict resolution mechanisms of
IWRM, detail in 186
Congo rivers system 177
Conservation International (CI) 169
conservation of biodiversity 160
Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD) 161
Convention on Migratory Species
(CMS) 189
Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary
Waters and International
Lakes (UNECE Water
Convention, 1996) 185
coral reefs 171
coral reefs, climate change impact
on 181

crustaceans 170
dams 176–9
decommissioning of 178–9
demand for large 177–8
Danube River Basin (DRB) 475
data inadequacies concerning 160
data on biodiversity and water
quality 192
decline in condition of species
169–70
deforestation 173
degradation 167, 168
desertification 161
deterioration in 161
drainage of wetlands 171, 173
droughts, vulnerability to 160
dryland areas, water stress in 184
ecosystem approach 187, 192
to malaria control 215
ecosystem decline, Lake Victoria
163
ecosystem degradation, biodiversity
and 191–2
ecosystem impairment 136
ecosystem preservation 146–7,
471–2
ecosystem protection 14
in Japan 481–2
ecosystem restoration 189–91
ecosystem sustainability 19
eel populations in Europe 181, 184
effluents, untreated 179
environmental importance of 164–7
Euphrates-Tigris dams 178
eutrophication of aquatic
ecosystems 171
fertilizers, soluble 173–5
filter-feeding species 171
fisheries 165–7
floodplains 164–5
floods, vulnerability to 160
fragmentation and flow regulation
176–9
freshwater ecosystems, status of
168
freshwater negotiations, intricacies
of 184
future generations, water needs of
162
Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna system
148, 177
Ganges-Brahmaputra dams 178
gastropod molluscs 170
Giant Otter Shrew 171
Global Programme of Action (GPA)
for the Protection of the
Marine Environment
161, 185
global trends in key species
168–71
Global Water Partnership (GWP)
184
goods, capacity to provide 161–3
governance framework for provision
of water 162
grasslands, wet 173
habitat alteration 171–5
habitat loss 167

habitat protection 187–9
Hudson Bay catchment 177
human activities, pressures of
171–84
human settlements and 168
hydrological cycle 161–2
hydrological systems, damage to
167
impacts of human activities on
171–84
implementation of ecosystem
approach 184–91
indicators of processes and
functions 162
industrial effluents 179
inland fisheries 167
Integrated Water Resource
Management (IWRM)
161–2
barriers to implementation
185–6
ecosystem approaches of 160
implementation challenges
185–7
integrated coastal and river
basin management
(ICARM) 185,
186–7
integrated coastal zone
management (ICZM)
185
recognition by global
community 187
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) 181
invasive alien species 180–81
invertebrate communities 171
Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development
(WSSD) 161
Lake Chad basin 167
Lake Tanganyika 169
life-supporting goods and services
derived from 164
Living Planet Index (LPI) 169
Mackenzie River system, Canada
177
Malagasy Web-footed Tenrec 171
mammals, breeding grounds 168–9
management structure adaptability
in IWRM 186
manatees 170
mangrove swamps 171
climate change impact on 181
Marine Species Population Index
169–70
Mekong River basin 167
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 162
nitrate in water 175
nutrient recycling 165
nutrients from agricultural runoff
174
organochlorine pesticides 179
overexploitation of habitats 165
overfishing 167
personal care products, impacts of
waste 179–80

pesticides 179
soluble 173–5
pharmaceuticals, impacts of waste
179–80
phosphorus leaching 175
photosynthesis, reduction in 171
polar systems, climate change
impact on 181
policy and management 184–91
pollution 179–80
Pripyat River 173
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands
169
Ramsar sites 188–9
ray-finned fish species 169
Red List of Threatened Animals 170
reef habitats 165
reservoirs 176–9
restoration of habitats 187–9
Rio de la Plata dams 178
river deltas, climate change impact
on 181
river dolphins 170
salmon 174
Salween River dams 177–8
sea-bird species 171
sea fisheries 165
sea-grass beds 171
seasonal variations 164–5
sectoral interests 162
services, capacity to provide 161–3
sewage, dealing with untreated
179
silt loads in rivers 171
social importance of 164–7
soil phosphorus 175
species, invasive alien 180–81
species richness by habitat 168–71
Species Survival Commission of the
World Conservation
Union (IUCN) 170
Spot-necked Otter 171
suspended solids, concentrations of
171
temporary habitats 164–5
terrestrial biome distribution 177
trade-offs
choices and 184–5
management of 191–2
transboundary water systems 185
trends in, status of 168–71
tropical freshwater wetlands 165
turtles, freshwater 170
UN Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) 165
UN World Water Development
Report (WWDRI) 164
United Nations Environmental
Programme (UNEP) 162
wastewater, untreated 179
water buffering 165
water hyacinth, aggressive
invasiveness of 181
water stress in dryland areas 184
waterbirds 168–71
wet grasslands 173
wetland conversion 171, 173
wetlands 165

I N D EX . 5 5 9

climate change impact on 181
distribution of 168
fragility of 264–5
World Conservation Monitoring
Centre (WCMC, UNEP)
169
World Conservation Union (IUCN)
170
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
169
Yangtze River dams 178
Yukon River system 177
ecosystems and water
Mexico 493–4
Mongolia 495–6
restoration of livelihoods and 190
South Africa 502
Sri Lanka 505–6
Thailand 509
Uganda 512
Ecuador
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
housing incentive system in 102
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
Quito Catchment Conservation Fund
187
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
education 358
access to 434
basic education, provision of
449–50
educational curriculum adjustment
453
educational systems, strengthening
of 450
enhancement of, economic
proposition for 438
enhancement of education and
capacity 438
enhancement of knowledge base
438–48
enhancement of local capacity
449–54
GIS for school sanitation and
hygiene education in
Tamil Nadu, India 450
higher education and training
450–51
primary schooling 449
see also knowledge
eel populations in Europe 181, 184
efficiency
in distribution 71
effectiveness in government 49
in water usage 255–6
effluents
effluent discharge 290–98
effluent requirements, compliance
with 294
untreated 179
Egypt, Arab Republic of

access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquaculture in 167
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 300
IWRM developments in 57
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
solar water heaters for domestic use
312
undernourishment in 266
wastewater services, willingness to
pay for improvements in
Cairo 410
water availability and use 133
water savings through trade in
wheat 422
water services, willingness to pay
for improvements in
Cairo 410
El Niño rains 342, 363, 498, 513, 515
effect in Plata River Basin 498
El Salvador
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
cheese production in 295
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Salvadoran Integral Assistance
Foundation (FUSAI) 102
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
electricity
access to electricity for domestic
use
indicators 36
carbon intensity of electricity
production 36, 323
distributed generation 327
electrical power usage, water and
306
generation by fuel as indicators 36
generation in Freudenau, Austria
322
global generation by source 315
Hydro Tasmania 320
Palmiet Pumped Storage Scheme,
South Africa 319
power generation from fossil fuels
314
emergency provision of clean water 107
emission taxes 416–17
employment issues and organization
performance 451–2
employment structures in rural
settlements 90
enabling environment 14
capacity development, framework
for 456
creation of 452–4
encephalitis see Japanese encephalitis
end-of-pipe treatment technologies 294
energy
access to electricity 306

analysis, simultaneous of water and
energy consumption
306
biomass power generation 325
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
‘clean coal’ technologies 322–3
Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) 325
co-management of water and
energy resources 327–8
coal-fired power stations 322, 323
conservation 309, 328
Moulton Niguel Water District,
California 311
consumer end-use of water 308
consumptive use of water 322
cooling towers 321, 322
cooling waters, discharge of 322
cost-effective operation of water
systems 310
decision-making, integration of
water and energy issues
327–8
desalination 310–12
development, challenge for Mali
490–91
distillation of seawater 310–11
distribution of water 308
in DRB countries 476–7
economic incentives for renewables
development 325–7
economies of scale available in
hydropower 313
efficiency improvement 326–7
electrical power usage, water and
306
energy efficiency improvement
326–7
environmental impact of traditional
power generation 306
environmental problems in
hydropower
development 316
extraction, conveyance and
treatment of water 308
governance of energy and water
resources 324–35
greenhouse gas emissions 322–3
growing needs for 471
hydropower
availability of 306
capacity, adding to existing
infrastructure
320–21
in context 313–19
efficiency improvements for
schemes 321
flexibility of 317, 319
flow adjustments for maximum
efficiency 321
schemes, life extensions for
321
turbine flow efficiencies 321
vulnerability to droughts 317
identification of water/energy
efficiency opportunities
309–10

incentives for renewables
development 325–7
integrated gasification/combined
cycle (IGCC)
technologies 322–3
Joint Implementation (JI) measures
of Kyoto Protocol 325
large hydropower (LHP) 315,
324–5
links between water and energy
sectors 306–7, 308–13,
313–23
micro hydropower 313
mini hydropower 313
Naiade, solar water disinfection
system 312
nuclear power in electricity
generation 323
‘piggybacking’ alternative energy
sources 320
potential in Mali 490–91
power and water infrastructures
307
pressurized fluid bed technologies
322–3
pricing weaknesses 328
primary energy by source 315
production in Ethiopia 478
pumped storage hydropower 316,
319–20
recovery from waste 297
renewable, energy efficiency and
325–7
renewable energy certificates 325
Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS)
325
reservoir hydropower 316
reverse osmosis (membrane
desalination) 311
run-of-river hydropower 316–17
rural electrification 326
for sanitation services 308–9
small hydropower (SHP) 313, 318,
319
solar energy for water supply
312–13
solar photovoltaics power
generation 325
solar pumping 312
solar water heaters for domestic use
312–13
solar water purification 312
sources, access to 314
steam condensation 321
supercritical pulverized fuel
technologies 322–3
supply diversification 314
sustainable hydropower solutions
320–21
systems approach to water/energy
efficiency 310
thermal desalination 310–11
thermal power generation,
environmental impacts
321–3
UN World Water Development
Report (WWDRI) 313

5 6 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

urban environments, energy costs in
307
wastewater collection, treatment
and disposal 308–9
wastewater services, electrical
energy consumption and
306, 308–13
water conservation and energy
consumption 306
water diversion 321
water efficiency and energy
consumption 309–10
water/energy efficiency 309–10
water for energy generation
313–23
water pump and motor system
efficiencies 309–10
for water supply 308–13
water supply, electrical energy
consumption and 306,
308–13
wind power generation 325
World Commission on Dams (WCD,
2002) 313
energy and water
La Plata River Basin 500
Mongolia 496–7
South Africa 503
Sri Lanka 507
Thailand 510
Uganda 514
environment
Best Environmental Practices (BEPs)
284–5, 289
environmental audits 289
environmental benefits of
sustainable development
153
environmental costs of tsunamis
508, 511
environmental degradation 276
in Mali 490
environmental demands of food
production 247–8
environmental flows 146–7
environmental impact assessments
(EIAs) 285, 288
reclaimed water, potential for 149
and water
conclusions 524
La Plata River Basin 498–9
water environment, industrial
impacts on 277–81
and water quality 263–5, 270–71
Environmental and Water Resources
Institute (EWRI) website 462
environmental impact of traditional
power generation 306
environmental importance of water
164–7
environmental issues in Lake
Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
487
Environmental Management Accounting
(EMA) 295
Environmental Management Coordination
Act (1999) in Kenya 485
Environmental Management for Vector

Control, Panel of Experts on
(PEEM) 215
Environmental Management System
(EMS) 285, 289, 295
Environmental Modification Techniques,
Convention on the
Prohibition of Military or any
other Hostile use of (ENMOD
Convention) 10
environmental practices 284–9
environmental problems in hydropower
development 316
environmental refugees 9
environmental resilience, threat to
17–18
environmental security 390–92
environmental services, paying for 425
environmental sustainability dimension in
water governance 46–7
environmental valuation of water 400,
401, 405
Envisat environmental satellite 441
Epidemio ESA Project 441
epidemiological patterns, change in 224
epidemiological studies, communitybased 208
equality
in access to water 13
dignity and, in South Africa 505
and empowerment of women 30,
206, 345, 449
inequalities in urban areas 90–92
land inequality 270
in Pakistan 67
social inequality 72
Equatorial Guinea, water availability and
use 133
equity in governance 49
Eritrea
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
water availability and use 133
erosion in La Plata River Basin 499
escherichia coli 0157 212, 227
Estonia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
drinking water monitoring 79
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
basin 414, 486, 487
regional water plans in 79
Viru-Peipsi water management plan
487
water availability and use 133
see also Lake Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe
estuaries, ecosystem threats to 172
ethics in government 49
Ethics of Science and Technology
Programme website 29
Ethiopia 477–9
access to electricity 329

access to water 329
Blue Nile Basin 479
energy production 478
gross national product (GNP) 477
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
malaria 478
morbidity, causes of 478
National Water Development Report
450
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
population 478
river basins in 477
transboundary basins 477
undernourishment in 267
water and sanitation infrastructure
478
water availability and use 133
water policy implementation 478–9
water-related natural disasters,
effects of 478
water resources 477–8
Water Sector Development
Programme (WSDP) 479
wetlands 478
ethylbenzine, release to water in EU
member states 282
Euphrates-Tigris dams 178
Euphrates-Tigris Initiative for Cooperation
(ETIC) 389
Eurasia, protection of wetland habitat in
northern 188
Europe
access to electricity 331
acid rain in 138
cities, development in 91
free-flowing large river systems
177
hydropower capability 334
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
invasive species, introduction of
181
ISO 14001 certification in 287
population 412
protection of wetland habitat 188
urban population 90
European Centre for Development Policy
Management 458
European Commission on the
Environment on water policy
website 431
European Declaration for a New Water
Culture website 397
European Pollutant Emission Register
website 303
European Space Agency (ESA), TIGER
Initiative in Africa 440, 441
European Union (EU) 289
Emissions Trading Scheme 314
Large Combustion Plant Directive
314
South Africa and, inclusive water
management 13
Water Facility for the African,
Caribbean and Pacific
Countries (ACP-EUWF)

453
Water Framework Directive (WFD,
2000) 54, 58, 121–2,
139, 185, 187, 286,
472
building a community
framework, ViruPeipsi water
management 487
Danube River Basin
Management Plan
476
France 479
sharing water 377, 382, 395
water policy website 397
European Water Archive 126
eutrophication 163
of aquatic ecosystems 171
evaporation 116, 123, 126, 150, 151,
200, 250, 254, 256, 262–3,
290, 502, 521
evapotranspiration 123, 124–5
excreta disposal 230
exogenous interdependencies in water
sharing 376
extraction, conveyance and treatment of
water 308
extreme events, magnitude and
frequency of 144–5
eye infections 212–13
F
faecal-oral diseases 91, 211, 219, 230
faecal pathogens 219, 230
faecal pollution 211, 219, 225, 227, 231
fairness, water sharing and 25
FAO Water Portals website 461
FAOSTAT website 273
farm pollution management programme
(PMPOA) in France 480
farmers
affects of factors outwith their
control on 271
and change 244
and irrigation institutions 244
FarmNet 445
Faroe Islands, hydropower capability 334
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) 26
Feeding the world’s population: from
need to surplus 245–52
fen mires, ecosystem threats to 172
fertilizers
nitrogen source 117
soluble 173–5
Fiji Islands
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 133
wetland values in 166
filarial infections 213–14, 215, 216–17
see also lymphatic filariasis
filter-feeding species 171
filtration 292
of wastewater 297–8
finance

I N D EX . 5 6 1

access at sub-sovereign level 453
financial capital 268
financial provision, barriers to 529
financial resources, mobilization of
69
financial sustainability in
environmental services
425
financial sustainability in tariffsetting 413
funding deficiencies 525
funding for water developments
98–9
funding inadequacies 236
of irrigation schemes 261
micro-finance, growth of 528
micro-finance systems for
development 101
private investment, barriers to 526
structures 14
Finland
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
fisheries 165–7, 248–50, 409
sedimentation and 137
Uganda 513
flocculation of wastewater 297–8
flood control in Danube River Basin
(DRB) 475–6
flood management, community-based
352
flood mitigation in Thailand 511
flood prevention in Mongolia 497
flood risk in Mexico 494
flood risk management 358–62
floodplains 164–5
ecosystem threats to 172
floods 472
climate change, projected impacts in
alpine rivers 363
combat against 122
countermeasure effectiveness,
indicators 356
exposure and vulnerability to 354
seasonal flooding benefits in Tonle
Sap 265
user-based design of warning
systems for 352–3
vulnerability to 160
fluke infections 228
fluorosis 219, 220, 227
Focusing Resources on Effective School
Health (FRESH) 450
fodder, water productivity of 256
food
analysis of trade in 257–8
challenge for Mali 490–91
consumption habits 248
demands of production 247–8
diet diversification 253
dietary energy supply (DES) 245–6
environmental demands of
production 247–8
farmers and irrigation institutions

244
Feeding the world’s population:
from need to surplus
245–52
fisheries 248–50
food commodities 248–50
food security 513
freshwater fisheries 248
growth in demand for 244
local nature of production 245
marine capture of fish 248
nutrition, adequacy in 245–7
production, demand and diets
252–5
projections of demand for 251–2
urbanization and markets for 254
virtual water and trade in 257–8
see also agriculture
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
215, 247, 521, 524
food and water
South Africa 503
Sri Lanka 506–7
Thailand 510
food consumption
dietary change in developing
countries 249
per capita by region 247
food production
integrated resources management
(IRM) in support of 251
food security in Uganda 513
food supply sources 249
forecasting
accuracy, limits of 362
inaccuracy, dealing with 362
and warning systems in Japan 483
forest ecosystem services 425
forest land 251
forest swamps/shrubs, ecosystem threats
to 172
forestry 358
sedimentation and 137
form of tariff structure 413–14
fossil fuels
and desalination plants 150
fossil fuel vs water availability,
classification by 36
power generation from 314
fragility indicator 37
fragmentation and flow regulation
176–9
as indicator 36
France
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
Adour-Garonne Basin 480
Artois-Picardy Basin 480
bottled water demand in 402
European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD, 2000)
479
farm pollution management
programme (PMPOA)
480
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301

International Commission for the
Protection of the Rhine
(ICPR) 480
Loire-Brittany Basin 480
Rhine Action Plan (RAP) 480
Rhine-Meuse Basin 480
Rhone-Mediterranean Basin 480
river basins in 479
Seine-Normandy River basin 481
water availability and use 133
free basic water (FBW) programme in
South Africa 503
Freedom House 51
website 85
french beans, water productivity of 256
French Guiana, water availability and use
133
French Polynesia
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 133
freshwater
fisheries 248
habitat protection, trends in 36
‘in storage’ 122–3
marshes, ecosystem threats to 172
negotiations, intricacies of 184
pollution, sources, effects and
concerns 141
resources
competition for 8
variability in availability and
distribution of 120
scarcity of 428–9
species, trends in 36
springs, ecosystem threats to 172
status of ecosystems 168
threats to ecosystems 172
uneven distribution of 521
use, traditional claim to 245
see also ecosystems, coastal and
freshwater
Freshwater Action Network website 462
full cost subsidization 28
funding see finance
future generations, water needs of 162
Future Harvest centres website 240
future strategies for risk management
362–5
G
Gabon
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
Gambia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
water availability and use 133
Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna system
148, 177
Ganges-Brahmaputra dams 178
gas power 315
Gash Sustainable Livelihood
Regeneration Project

(GSLRP), Sudan 269
gastropod molluscs 170
Gaza Strip (Palestine)
cooperative programmes in 380
IWRM developments in 57
water availability and use 133
GEMS (Global Environmental Monitoring
System)/Water international
quality database 130,
142–3, 162
gender
balance, need for 452
equality in education 471
mainstreaming 15–16
poverty and, improved governance
and water in Punjab 47
see also equality; women
Gender and Water Alliance (GWA) 452
GEO-3 Data Portal website 461
geo-references data, development of 40
Geographic Information System (GIS) 40,
110–11, 347, 350, 351,
442–3, 450, 499, 511
geological characteristics and
groundwater 128–9
geopolitics
geopolitical developments, timeline
of 380
of sharing water 374–5, 379–85
Georgia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 333
water availability and use 133
geothermal energy 130, 313, 315, 424,
484
German Technical Cooperation (GTZ)
458
Germany
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquifer recharge management in
147
bottled water demand in 402
ecosystem restoration in 190
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
water reuse in 148
Ghana
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Volta River basin, agreement with
Burkina Faso on 380
water availability and use 133
Giant Otter Shrew 171
glaciers 145
decline of, acceleration of 145
Global Database on Child Growth and
Nutrition (WHO) 229
global development, equity in 19
Global Development Learning Network
(GDLN) 443

5 6 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

website 462
global disaster landscape 343–4
global distribution of 121
‘global dynamic envelope’ 123
Global Environment Facility (GEF) 280,
377, 457–8
global hydrology and water resources
121–3
Global International Waters Assessment
(GIWA) website 461
Global Monitoring for Food Security
(GMFS) 441
Global Online Research in Agriculture
(AGORA) website 461
Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
(OBA) 453
Global Perspective Studies website 273
Global Programme of Action (GPA) for
the Protection of the Marine
Environment 161, 185
Global Programme to Eliminate Lymphatic
Filariasis (GPELF) 216
Global Resource Information Database
(UNEP GRID) 352
website 461
Global Runoff Data Center (GRDC) 126
water measurement stations 128
website 461
Global Soil Moisture Data Bank 124–5
global targets
computer models, refinement of 39
conceptual indicators 37
database development, dataset
reconciliation 40
developing indicators 37
geo-references data, development
of 40
hydrometereological data 39
indicators, categories of 35–7
indicators, testing and evaluation of
39
key indicators 37
looking ahead, WWAP in medium
term 39–40
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 29–33
Millennium Research Project 32
policy-relevant indicators 37
progress on 32–3
stakeholder participation,
enablement of 39
United Nations Commission on
Sustainable Development
(CSD) 32
United Nations Millennium Taskforce
7 on Water and
Sanitation 33
water supply and sanitation,
challenge to
communities of 32
World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) 33, 35, 37–8
benchmarks, case studies as
38
case studies, crucial role of
38–9
indicator development 35–8
global trends in key species 168–71

global warming 18, 161, 181, 254, 342,
362
see also climate change
Global Water Partnership (GWP) 14, 184
website 85
global water quality and pollution 139–
globalization 10
tourism and 10
GlobWetland ESA Project 441
Goals see Millennium Development Goals
Golden Burden of Disease 208–9, 210,
230
golf courses 10, 149, 292
Good Water Neighbours (FoE, Middle
East) 380
goods
capacity to provide 161–3
and services provided by water 409
governance 231–4
allocative efficiency 15
assessment of, indicators for 51
children, water management
concerns for 15–16
compatibility in decision-making 14
consumer behaviours 14–15
criteria for effectiveness in 49
decentralization 15
demand management 14–15
devolution 15
ecosystem protection 14
of energy and water resources
324–35
focus on 520, 523, 525–7
framework for provision of water
162
gender mainstreaming 15–16
improved governance for better
water services in Brazil
72
inclusive values 12–13
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
13–15
integration of land and water
governance 55
Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development
(WSSD) 14, 21
local, in Gash watershed, Sudan
269
multiple water uses 13
obstruction to water sharing
through 12
plans and strategies, integration of
13
poverty, gender, improved
governance and water in
Punjab 47
and public utilities 96
reform and delivery reform 82
responsiveness of government 49
shared responsibility 12–16
socio-economic dimension 13–14
stakeholders, input by 13
subsidiarity 15
and water (concluding remarks on)
525–7

water harvesting, expansion of 15
water management responsibilities,
transference of 15
women, needs of 16
women, water management and
15–16
see also management of water
resources
Governance Matters data sets 51
grain yields 257
grants for housing low-income families
102
grapes, water productivity of 256
grasslands, wet 173
grassroots mechanisms, targeting poor
through 421
gravel pits, ecosystem threats to 172
Greece
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalination using renewable energy
311
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
Green Cross International 380
green water 247, 250, 251
greenhouse gas emissions 322–3
Greenland
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 133
Grenada
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 133
greywater 228
gross domestic product (GDP), disasters
and 485
gross national product (GNP) in Ethiopia
477
ground monitoring systems 439
groundwater 124, 128–30, 129, 130
abstraction and recharge 144
aquifers, ecosystem threats to 172
development as % of TARWAR 36
falling levels of 233
groundwater-based economies,
evolution of 262–3
importance in irrigation 36
over-abstraction of 143–4
pollution, primary sources 140
potential in Sri Lanka 505
quality and human activities 140
recharge, potential for reclaimed
water 149
resources 120, 152, 472
vulnerability to pollution 140
Groundwater in International Law
(UNESCO/FAO) 380
Guadeloupe, water availability and use
133
Guatemala
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water

productivity 301
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality
(WHO) 220, 226, 227, 228
Guidelines for Safe Recreational Water
Environments (WHO) 226
Guidelines for Safe Use of Wastewater,
Excreta and Greywater
(WHO) 226, 228
Guinea
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
private sector involvement in water
supply and sanitation
70
Senegal River Basin Organization
(OMVS) 380
water availability and use 133
see also Senegal River basin
Guinea-Bissau
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 133
Guinea worm infection 210, 217, 224
Guyana
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
hydropower capability 333
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
H
habitats
alteration of 171–5
loss of 167
protection of 187–9
restoration of habitats 187–9
Haiti
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
hydropower capability 333
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 133
handwashing with soap 230–31
hanging toilets 224–6
haplochromine cichlid fish 163
hazardous chemicals
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior
Informed Consent (PIC)
Procedure for Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides
in International Trade
285
health
adverse conditions in 152
amoebiasis 211
anopheline mosquitos 216
anthropogenic chemical pollution
218

I N D EX . 5 6 3

aquatic environment, malaria
transmission and 215
arboviral infections 217–18
arsenic contamination 219, 220,
227
avian influenza virus 236
barium 220
boreholes 224–6
boron 220
cadmium 220
carcinogenic contamination 219
challenge in Mali 490–91
child mortality 229
cholrea 211–12, 224
chromium 220
community health status 205
comparative risk assessment (CRA)
229–31
composting latrines/toilets 224–6
constraints on promotion of 235–6
cost-benefits analysis, need for
tools for 236
costs of disease prevention 231–2
cryptosporidium 211, 227
culex mosquitos 217–18
cyanide 220
cyanobacterial toxins 220
dam construction 205
dams, malaria transmission and 215
dengue haemorrhagic fever (DHF)
218, 224
diarrhoeal diseases 204, 205,
210–12, 224, 230
malnutrition and 231
Disability-Adjusted Life Years
(DALYs) 208–10, 212,
230
disease frequency, incidence and
prevalence of 208
domestic hygiene 226
drinking water, contamination of
230–31
drinking water provision, diseases
related to deficiencies in
210–13
drinking water quality 204, 227
Guidelines for Safe
Recreational Water
Environments
(WHO) 226
Guidelines for Safe Use of
Wastewater, Excreta
and Greywater
(WHO) 226, 228
drinking water supply 219
access to improvement in
224–6
drowning, problem of 218–19, 224
drug resistance in parasitic and
bacterial pathogens 236
dysentery 210–11, 224
economic evaluation of interventions
231–2
ecosystem approach to malaria
control 215
Environmental management for
Vector Control, Panel of
Experts on (PEEM) 215

epidemiological patterns, change in
224
epidemiological studies, communitybased 208
escherichia coli 0157 212, 227
excreta disposal 230
eye infections 212–13
filarial infections 205, 213–14,
216–17
fluke infections 228
fluorosis 219, 220, 227
Focusing Resources on Effective
School Health (FRESH)
450
Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) 215
funding inadequacies 236
Global database on Child Growth
and Nutrition (WHO)
229
Global Programme to Eliminate
Lymphatic Filariasis
(GPELF) 216
Golden Burden of Disease 208–9,
210, 230
governance 231–4
greywater 228
groundwater, falling levels of 233
Guidelines for Drinking-water
Quality (WHO) 220,
226, 227
Guinea worm infection 210
guinea worm infection 217, 224
handwashing with soap 230–31
hanging toilets 224–6
health impact assessments (HIAs)
208
hepatitis E 212
hookworm 212, 224
household water treatment 231
hygiene, diseases related to
deficiencies in 210–13
hygiene, domestic and personal
226
hygiene perspective on MDGs
206–7
impacts of industrial discharge 280
indicators 224–9
infectious diseases, global burden of
204
inorganic pollutants 220
insecticide-treated mosquito nets
210
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
204, 232–3, 236
International Agricultural Research,
Consultative Group on
(CGIAR) 215
International Network to Promote
Household Water
Treatment and Safe
Storage (WHO) 231
intervention studies, promotion of
236
intestinal helminth infections 208,
210, 212, 224, 228
inticator correlation, refinement of

236
investment growth, need for 236
iron-deficiency anemia 212
irrigation development 205
irrigation water, household use of
233
Japanese encephalitis 205, 213–14,
217–18, 224
latrines, flush/pour 224–6
legionella pneumophilia 212
lymphatic filariasis 210, 213–14,
216–17, 224
malaria 204, 205, 210, 213–14,
215–16, 224
malnutrition and diarrhoeal disease
231
manganese 220
mercury 220
methaemoglobinemia (‘blue baby
syndrome’) 220
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 206–7
targets on water, sanitation
and health 221–3
molybdenum 220
mortality rates 208
mosquito nets 210
mosquitos 214, 215–16, 217–18
multiple uses of water 233
negative trends in promotion of
235–6
neonatal deaths 229
nitrate pollution of groundwater
220
non-communicable water-associated
health issues 218–20
nutritional status 229
onchoceriasis 210, 224
oral rehydration therapy (ORT) 210,
229
‘paddy paradox’ 215
personal hygiene 226
piped water 224–6
planning development of water
resources 236
positive trends in promotion of 235
poverty and child mortality 229
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
(PRSPs) 234
protozoal infections 211
public health 358
public health issues and valuation of
water 406
rainwater 224–6
recreational water use, pollution and
220
reservoirs, malaria transmission and
215
Roll Back Malaria initiative 216
rotavirus infection 210
roundworm 212
sanitation 204
access to improvement in
224–6
diseases related to deficiencies
in 210–13
perspective on MDGs 206–7
SARS 236

schistosomiasis 205, 208, 210,
213–14, 217, 224
selenium 220
septic tanks 224–6
sewage treatment need for added
investment in 236
shigellosis 211
skin infections 212–13
springwater 224–6
standpipes 224–6
surface water, drinking water from
224–6
Systemwide Initiative on Malaria and
Agriculture (SIMA) 215
tanker-truck water delivery 224–6
toilets, flush/pour 224–6
trachoma 210, 213, 224
trematode infections 228
trophozoites 211
tubwells 224–6
typhoid fever 212, 224
UN World Water Development
Report (WWDRI) 208
United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) 215
uranium 220
vector-borne diseases
transmission risks of 205
water associated 213–14
ventilated improved pit latrine (VIP)
224–6
wastewater use in agriculture and
aquaculture 228
in water development 205–7
water management for control of
malaria 215–16
water perspective on MDGs 206–7
water quality 226–8, 233
water-related diseases, global
burden of 204, 208–21
water scarcity 232–3
water service levels, implications for
227
Water Supply and Sanitation
Collaborative Council
(WSSCC) 205
water vendors 224–6
weight-for-age indicator 229
wells, protected and unprotected
224–6
whipworm 212
World Health Organization (WHO)
210, 215
World Health Reports (WHO) 208,
210, 212, 230
Health, Nutrition and Population
Programme website 239
health and water
La Plata River Basin 499
Mexico 493
South Africa 503
Sri Lanka 506
Thailand 510
Uganda 513
health impact assessments (HIAs) 208
heavy metals 279
freshwater pollutants 141
Helsinki Rules on Uses of Waters and

5 6 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

International Rivers 382
hepatitis 496
hepatitis A 503
hepatitis E 212
in South Africa 503
Hokkaido, Japan 190
holistic approach to pollution controls
142–3
Honduras
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
IWRM developments in 56
Rio Negro border relationship with
Nicaragua 380
transboundary aquifers 375
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 133
Hong Kong, China
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hookworm 212, 212, 213, 224
households
allocation for industry vs domestic
and agricultural use
279
household income, water charges as
% of 37
household survey data 108–9, 226
household use practices 150
household water treatment 231
housing
improvements in 522
public housing programmes 102
security for urban poor 94
subsidies for low-income households
102
Housing Rights and Evictions, Centre on
(COHRE) website 85
Hudson Bay catchment 177
human activities
impacts on groundwater quality
140
impacts on surface water quality
139
impacts on water resources 136–45
pressures of 171–84
and valuation of water 423–4
human capital 268
human intervention 17
human resources development 449, 456
human right to water 63–5
human settlements see settlements,
urban and rural
Hungary
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquifer recharge management in
147
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
Danube River basin, TEST strategy in
296
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water

productivity 301
public participation rights in 77
water availability and use 133
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
hunger
chronic hunger 265
measurement of 247
hurricane ‘Katrina,’ risk management and
26
Hydro Tasmania 320
hydrological conditions, variability in 25
hydrological cycle 161–2, 251
components of 122
nature of 123–36
roles and interdependencies of
components 152
and valuation of water 423–4
World Hydrological Cycle Observing
System (WHYCOS) 440
hydrological data, water sharing and 25
hydrological interdependencies 376
hydrological networks 439
hydrological systems, damage to 167
hydrometeorological extremes 343
hydrometereological data 39
hydropower
availability of 306
capacity, adding to existing
infrastructure 320–21
in context 313–19
development in Africa 316
efficiency improvements for schemes
321
energy in Japan 482
flexibility of 317, 319
flow adjustments for maximum
efficiency 321
generation capability as indicator
36
generation in Freudenau, Austria
322
Hydro Tasmania 320
in-stream industry 409
La Plata River Basin 500
large 315
Palmiet Pumped Storage Scheme,
South Africa 319
risk management and 367
schemes, life extensions for 321
sedimentation and 137
small 315
China, stations in 318
small hydropower (SHP)
development in China 317,
318
development in Nepal 318
South Africa 503
turbine flow efficiencies 321
Uganda 514
vulnerability to droughts 317
hygiene
diseases related to deficiencies in
210–13
domestic and personal 226
education in 449
personal hygiene 226
perspective on MDGs 206–7

school sanitation and hygiene
education in Tamil Nadu,
India 450
Hygiene, Sanitation and Water in Schools
(World Bank, 2000) 450
Hyogo Framework for Action (20052015) 365–6, 366
I
ice and snow 125
Iceland
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 133
implementation
of capacity improvement at all levels
449
of ecosystem approach 184–91
of integration 55
of IWRM, progress towards as
indicator 36
of reform, monitoring of 61
incentives
incentive structures 14
for renewables development 325–7
inclusiveness 12–13
inclusive approach to PPPs 419–20
incremental change, reform and 60
index of non-sustainable water use 36
Index of Performance of Water Utilities
36
India
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
acid rain in 138
aquaculture in 167
aquifer recharge management in
147
Baglihar Dam, construction on
Chenab River of 380
bottled water demand in 402
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
Cauvery River dispute in south of
379
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
community toilet block construction
in Pune and Mumbai
100
corruption in water supply and
sanitation sectors 68
flood management, communitybased 352
food, progress in production 246
Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna system
148, 177
GIS for school sanitation and
hygiene education in
Tamil Nadu 450
hydrological networks in 439
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana
Project 205
Joint River Commission (JRC) talks
with Bangladesh 380

malaria, emergence in Thar desert
205
public participation rights in 77
right to water in 64
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
solar water heaters for domestic use
312, 313
traditional systems under threat in
76
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 133
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
wetland values in 166
Indian rhinoceros 169
indicators 191, 224–9
access to electricity for domestic
use 36
access to water for domestic use
36
agriculture, relative importance of
36
basic sanitation, access to 36
biological oxygen demand (BOD)
36
carbon intensity of electricity
production 36
categories of 35–7
challenge areas 36–7
Climate Moisture Index (CMI) 36
Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI) 36,
353, 356
cooperation/conflict in sharing water
386–7, 387–8
cooperation indicator 37
cost recovery rate 37
DALYs (Disability Adjusted Life
Years) 36
desalinated water production
volume 36
developing indicators 37
development indicator 37
development of 426–7, 470
Dietary Energy Supply (DES) 36
dietary energy supply per person
per day 246
Disaster Risk Index (DRI) 36, 353
domestic water use 36
electricity generation by fuel 36
environmental monitoring 342
flood countermeasure effectiveness
356
flood policy effectiveness 356
fossil fuel vs water availability,
classification by 36
fragility indicator 37
fragmentation and flow regulation
176–9
fragmentation and flow regulation
of rivers 36
freshwater habitat protection,
trends in 36
freshwater species, trends in 36
global assessment 455
groundwater, importance in
irrigation 36
groundwater development as % of

I N D EX . 5 6 5

TARWAR 36
household income, water charges as
% of 37
household income/expenses, water
charges as proportion of
426
hydropower generation capability
36
implementation of IWRM, progress
towards 36
index of non-sustainable water use
36
Index of Performance of Water
Utilities 36
indicator correlation, refinement of
236
industrial water productivity 36
industrial water use 36
industrial water use, trends in 36
inflow as % TARWAR 36
information, access to 36
investment levels, ratio of actual to
desired 426
ISO 14001 certification, trends in
36
justice, access to 36
Knowledge Index 37
land, extent salinized by irrigation
36
land, irrigated as proportion of
cultivated 36
mortality in children 36
need for expansion in water sharing
372
nitrogen, dissolved 36
operational/administrative
interdependencies 386
organic pollution emissions 36
outflow as % TARWAR 36
overlap % TARWAR 36
participation, access to 36
per capita TARWAR 36
poor in rural areas, percentage of
36
precipitation annually 36
primary energy supply, totals by fuel
36
of processes and functions 162
public investment in water supply,
ratio of actual to desired
levels 37
public spending, water sector share
in total 37
quantitative and qualitative
measurement 386
rate of cost recovery 426
Relative Water Stress Index 36
Risk and Policy Assessment Index
36
rural population 36
safe drinking water, access to 36
search for relevant in water sharing
386–8
Sediment Trapping Efficiency Index
36
stunting in children, prevalence of
36
surface water as % of TARWAR 36

sustainability/development 387
testing and evaluation of 39
total use as % TARWAR 36
undernourished people, percentage
of 36
underweight children, prevalence of
36
urban population 36
Urban Water and Sanitation
governance index 36
volume of TARWAR 36
vulnerability/fragility 387
vulnerability indicator 37
water balance, relative importance
of agricultural
withdrawals in 36
water charges as % of household
income 37
water interdependency indicator 37
Water Pollution Index 36
Water Reuse Index (WRI) 36
water sector share in total public
spending 37
water sector share of public
spending 426
Water Stress Index (WSI) 36
water supply, ratio of actual to
desired levels of public
investment in 37
water use by sector 36
indigenous knowledge 447–8
for sustainability in IWRM 448
Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana Project
205
indirect housing provision 102
indirect water reuse 291
Indonesia
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
aquaculture in 167
bottled water demand in 402
Capacity Building Project in Water
Resources Sector (ADB,
2005) 457
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
economic proposition for
enhancement of
capacity and education
438
food, progress in production 246
Hinduist culture in Bali 448
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
public participation rights in 77
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 133
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
wetland values in 166
inductive methodology 407, 409
industrial accidents
UNECE Convention on the
Transboundary Effects of
Industrial Accidents
(2000) 286
industrial development 471

industrial effluent 179
charging for discharge of 416–17
industrial services, water driven 409
industrial use of reclaimed water,
potential for 149
industrial water
allocation for industry vs domestic
and agricultural use
279
management strategies 293–4
needs in Japan 482
productivity as indicator 36,
300–302
trends in use by region 278
use 200
as indicator 36
trends in as indicator 36
wastewater treatment 292
industry
adsorption of wastewater 297–8
aerobic treatment of wastewater
297–8
air pollution by 299
allocation for industry vs domestic
and agricultural use
279
ammonia, problem of corrosion by
293
anaerobic treatment of wastewater
297–8
approach to sustainable
development 153
atmospheric deposition of chemicals
from 281
best environmental practice (BEP)
for 284–5
biological growth, problem of 293
biological treatment of wastewater
297–8
chemical contamination of water by
279
chemical leaching from solid wastes
281
chlorination of wastewater 297–8
cleaner production, principle of
294–5
Cleaner Production Assessment
(CPA) 295
construction applications for
reclaimed water 292
contamination of water by 279–80
corrosion, problem of 293
cost of wastewater treatment 291
cyclical material flows, ‘cradle to
cradle’ concept
299–302
discharges from, untreated 277,
279
disposal of water by 277–9
downstream contamination of water
by 279
drinking water quality, compromised
by discharges from 280
economic context 277–83
economic incentives for better water
usage 293–4
effluent discharge 290–98
effluent requirements, compliance

with 294
end-of-pipe treatment technologies
294
energy recovery from waste 297
engine of growth 276
environmental degradation and 276
environmental impact assessments
(EIAs) 285, 288
Environmental Management
Accounting (EMA) 295
Environmental Management System
(EMS) 295
environmental practices 284–9
filtration of wastewater 297–8
flocculation of wastewater 297–8
governance and 284–9
health impacts of industrial
discharge 280
heavy metal contamination of water
by 279
industrial water management
strategies 293–4
Intel Corporate Industrial Water
Management Group 291
international competitiveness
284–5
international standards for 284–9
land-based treatment of wastewater
298
Natech disasters 281
National Cleaner Production Centres,
network of 295
national water conservation policy
294
on-site use of water 290–91
particulate contamination of water
by 279
pathogenic organisms, problem of
293
policy instruments for better water
usage 293–4
polluter pays principle 284
pollution and 276, 280–81
pollution reduction strategies
294–8
raw material recovery from waste
297
reclaimed water, use by 291–3
reclamation of water by 277
recycling, waste reuse 297
regulatory instruments, production
efficiency and 276,
284–9
reverse osmosis of wastewater
297–8
self-regulation of 284–5
settlement of wastewater 297–8
solid waste disposal by 299
standards for 284–9
stream separation 297
sustainable development and
284–9
‘technological nutrients’ 299
transfer of environmentally sound
technology (TEST) 294,
295
virtual water in manufactured
products, minimization

5 6 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

of 293
waste, raw material and energy
recovery from 297
waste, reuse of 297
wastewater flows, stream separation
and 297
wastewater treatment, cost of 291
wastewater treatment technologies
297–8
water auditing 290
water consumption 276
water demand management 294
water environment, industrial
impacts on 277–81,
299–300
water productivity 290–98
water productivity improvement
290–94
water quality, matching use to
requirements 290, 291
water recycling 290–91
water saving strategies 290–94
water scaling, problem of 293
water use by 277
Zero Effluent Discharge, aim of 298
industry and water
La Plata River Basin 500
Mongolia 496
South Africa 504
Sri Lanka 507
Thailand 510
Uganda 514
infectious diseases, global burden of
204
informal settlements 502
see also squatter settlements
information
access to 78–80, 79
as indicator 36
availability for urban poor 95
base driving good governance 110,
112
and data for hazard analysis 350
development and access 77
exchange, need for improvement in
362
focus of indicator development
110–11
local for global goals 108–11
management 14
sharing, water sharing and 25
see also data
information and communication
technology (ICT) 437, 443,
444, 445
infrastructural improvements in slum
areas 102
Initiative B@bel (UNESCO) 445
inland deltas, ecosystem threats to 172
inland fisheries 167
inland water transport (IWT) 22–3
innovation and development in urban
areas 98, 99
inorganic nitrogen concentrations 175
inorganic pollutants 220
insecticide-treated mosquito nets 210
institutional arrangements
development of 83

for water delivery 69, 82
institutional capacities 14, 451–2
institutional management 501
institutional memory loss 350
institutional mobilization 388
institutional reforms 259
in irrigation management 258–60
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
487
institutional responses to sustainable
development 153
institutional structures 14
institutions
capacity development, framework
for 456
and procedures for sharing water
383–5, 396
integrated flood management 351
integrated gasification/combined cycle
(IGCC) technologies 322–3
integrated management in KomaduguYobe Integrated Management
Project 187
Integrated Pollution Prevention and
Control (IPPC) Directive 289
integrated resources management (IRM)
251
integrated risk management policy 342
Integrated River Basin Management
(IRBM) 190
EU Water Framework Directive (WFD,
2000) 286
website 397
Integrated Water Resource Management
(IWRM) 13–15, 45, 54–5,
153, 161–2, 204, 232–3,
236, 457, 473, 521, 526–7
barriers to implementation 185–6
change, identification of key areas
for 14
development options 14
ecosystem approaches of 160
implementation challenges 185–7
implementation of IWRM, progress
as indicator 36
inland water transport (IWT) and
22–3
integrated coastal and river basin
management (ICARM)
185, 186–7
integrated coastal zone
management (ICZM)
185
Johannesburg target 56–7
knowledge 438
local and indigenous knowledge for
sustainability in 448
recognition by global community
187
sharing water 372, 396
technocratic approach to 448
valuation of water 400, 401
integration
of risk-related public policies 342
in water governance 49
Intel Corporate Industrial Water
Management Group 291
interdependence

and complexity in sharing water
372, 376–7, 386–7,
394–5
indicator 37
of issues, recognition of 520,
524–5, 527
Intergovernmental Oceanographic
Commission (IOC) 27
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) 123, 144–5,
181, 182
internally displaced persons (IDPs)
access to clean water for 107
environmental impact of 107
principles of water supply for 107
International Agreements and Multilateral
Environmental Agreements
(MEAs) 285–6
International Agricultural Research,
Consultative Group on
(CGIAR) 215
International Association of Hydraulic
Engineering and Research
(IAHR) website 462
International Association of
Hydrogeologists (IAH) 147
International Association of Hydrological
Sciences (IAHS) website 462
International Association of Hydrologists
(IAH) website 462
International Bill of Human Rights 63
International Centre for Water Hazard
and Risk Management
(ICHARM) 483
International Commission for the
Protection of the Danube
River (ICPDR) 474–5, 476
International Commission for the
Protection of the Rhine
(ICPR) 480
International Commission on Irrigation
and Drainage (ICID) website
273
international competitiveness 284–5
international conferences 390
International Country Risk Guide 51
International Desalination Association
(IDA) 150
International Development, Department
for (DFID) 58
International Development Research
Centre (IDRC) 458
website 240
international disaster risk reduction 344
International Disasters Database website
461
International Finance Corporation (IFC)
453
International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI) 411
International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD, 2004)
55
website 273
International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre (IGRAC)
website 461
International Institute of Rural

Reconstruction (IIRR) 448
international law and sharing water
381–2, 396
International Law Association (ILA) 389
International Law Commission (ILC),
transboundary aquifers on
agenda of 384
International Monetary Fund (IMF) 52
International Network of Basin
Organizations (INBO) 389
website 462
International Network to Promote
Household Water Treatment
and Safe Storage (WHO)
231
international NGOs, websites of 369
international priority 81
International Programme for Technology
and Research in Irrigation
and Drainage (IPTRID) 445
international responses for improvement
in 50–53
International Rivers Network (IRN)
website 397
International Sediment Initiative (ISI)
136–7
International Shared Aquifer Resource
Management (ISARM) 130,
373, 378, 379, 380
international standards 284–9
International Standards Organization
website 303
International Water Association (IWA)
website 462
International Water Management
Institute (IWMI) website 240
International Water Resources
Association website 462
International Waters Learning Exchange
and Resource Network
(IW:LEARN) website 462
International Year of Freshwater website
461
intervention studies, promotion of 236
intestinal helminth infections 208, 210,
212, 224, 228
intestinal nematode infections, deaths
from 209
invasive alien species 180–81
introduction of 181
invertebrate communities 171
investment
cost-effectiveness of water
investments 525–6
deficiencies in management of
water resources 215–16
economic valuation of returns to
irrigation water
investments in 411
growth, need for 236
in knowledge 83
in management of water resources
434
private investment, barriers to 526
public investment in water supply,
ratio of actual to desired
levels 37
in squatter settlements 97

I N D EX . 5 6 7

in urban slums 97
INWEB website 397
Iran, Islamic Republic of
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
drinking water agreement with
Kuwait 380
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 133
Iraq
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 133
Ireland
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 133
iron-deficiency anemia 212
irrigation
areas under 253
charging for 415–16
corruption in irrigation sector 67
of crops 409
development 205
drip irrigation 21, 256
economic valuation of returns to
irrigation water
investments in 411
improvements 258–62
institutions 244
investment in Sri Lanka 507
irrigated agriculture 244, 250–51,
252
irrigated farming, women’s role in
sub-Saharan Africa 259
irrigation management transfer
(IMT) 259
cost recovery tool 416
Mali 490
modernization of large irrigation
systems 260–61, 270
performance, design faults and 258
policy reform for rice production in
Mali 260
positive impacts on rural
communities 269
potential in Uganda for 513
processes, losers and gainers in
269
productivity 19
rainfed and irrigated agriculture
250–51, 256
rehabilitation 219
volumetrically based charging for
irrigation water 415
water, domestic use of 232

water, household use of 233
ISARM-MED Project 380
ISO 9000 certification 327
ISO 14000 certification 327
ISO 14001 certification 287, 289
trends in as indicators 36
isotopic composition of precipitation
123
Israel
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
cooperative programmes in 380
hydropower capability 334
memorandum of understanding on
piping water from Red
Sea to Dead Sea 380
water availability and use 133
Israeli-Palestinian International
Conference on ‘Water for
Life’ 390
Itaipu Bi-National Intergovernmental
Coordination Committee of
Plata Basin Countries (CIC)
380
Italy
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
bottled water demand in 402
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
Ivory Coast see Côte d’Ivoire
J
Jamaica
access to electricity 329
access to water 329
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 133
Japan 481–3
access to electricity 330
access to sanitation 481
access to water 330
agriculture, water for 482
customary water rights in law of
62–3
Designated Urban River Inundation
Prevention Act (2003)
360
drinking water supply 481
ecosystem protection 481–2
ecosystem restoration in 190
forecasting and warning systems
483
hydropower capability 333
hydropower energy 482
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
industrial water needs 482
knowledge base enhancement in
483
National Water Day in 483

PWRI Risk Index in Tsukuba 357
river basins in 482
Sediment-Related Disaster
Prevention Law 483
water availability and use 133
water-related disasters 482–3
water reuse in 148
wetland values in 166
Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) 27
Japanese encephalitis 205, 213–14,
217–18, 224
deaths from 209
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
(JPol) 343, 344
Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development
(WSSD) 14, 21, 161, 284,
300
energy targets 21, 24, 313, 314
Joint Implementation (JI) measures of
Kyoto Protocol 325
Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP,
WHO/UNICEF) 90–91, 222,
224–5
Jordan
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
cooperative programmes in 380
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
IWRM developments in 57
memorandum of understanding on
piping water from Red
Sea to Dead Sea 380
water availability and use 133
justice, access to 36
K
Kazakhstan
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
IWRM developments in 56
transboundary water management
agreement with China
380
water availability and use 133
water sector reform in 54
Kenya 483–6
access to electricity 330
access to sanitation 484
access to water 330, 483–5
agriculture 484
aquifer recharge management in
147
biomass energy dependence 484
carbon intensity of electricity

production 323
demand for water, increases in
484–5
Drought Monitoring Centres (DMCs)
in 353
Economic Recovery Strategy for
Wealth and Employment
Creation (ERS) 484
ecosystem decline, Lake Victoria 163
Environmental Management
Coordination Act (1999)
485
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
population 484
poverty, challenge of 483–5
river basins in 484
secondary urban centres on Lake
Victoria, lack of 105
water availability and use 133
water sector capacity, enhancement
of 485–6
water sector reform 485
wetland values in 166
see also Lake Victoria
knowledge
access to 443–4
access to education 434
access to ICTs 444
access to knowledge 435
assessment of 435–7
bottom-up approach to global
assessment 455
capacity development, knowledge
base of 434
capacity development and 435–6
data acquisition 438
database development 442
development in sharing water 372
development of 435
distribution of needs 457
educational access 434
educational systems, strengthening
of 450
enhancement of knowledge base
438–48
Focusing Resources on Effective
School Health (FRESH)
450
gaps in, impacts of global warming
144
Geographic Information System (GIS)
442
ground monitoring systems 439
Hygiene, Sanitation and Water in
Schools (World Bank,
2000) 450
identification of needs 454–8
improvement in 520, 524, 525–6
indicators of needs 454–7
indigenous knowledge 447–8
Initiative B@bel (UNESCO) 445
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
438
International Institute of Rural

5 6 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Reconstruction (IIRR)
448
investment in 434
Knowledge Assessment Methodology
444
knowledge base content 435
knowledge base enhancement in
Japan 483
knowledge base for monitoring
resources 459
Knowledge for Development (World
Bank Institute) 444
knowledge networks 445–7
language barrier 444–5
local and indigenous knowledge for
sustainability in IWRM
448
Local and Indigenous Knowledge
Systems (LINKS) 448
local knowledge 447–8
Management of Social
Transformations (MOST)
448
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 459
modelling systems 442–3
PoWER Programme (UNESCO-IHE)
446, 447
quality assurance and control 444–5
remote sensing 440
self-assessments of 434
sharing and accessibility 443–4
socio-economic benefits,
identification of 436–7
system modelling 442–3
water development paradigm 436
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) 438
see also education
Knowledge Assessment Methodology
444
knowledge base development
Japan 483
Mali 491
for monitoring resources 459
South Africa 504
Sri Lanka 508
Knowledge for Development (World Bank
Institute) 444
Knowledge Index (KI) 444
as indicator 37
Kobe World Conference on Disaster
Reduction (WCDR, 2005)
365–6
Koeppen’s Climate Classification 127
Komadugu-Yobe Integrated Management
Project 187
Korea, Democratic People’s Republic of
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
water availability and use 133
Korea, Republic of
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
acid rain in 138
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301

undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 133
wetland values in 166
Kuwait
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
drinking water agreement with Iran
380
water availability and use 134
Kyoto Protocol 314, 325
Kyrgyz Republic
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
IWRM developments in 56
water availability and use 134
L
La Plata River Basin 380, 498, 498–501
access to sanitation 499
access to water 499
arsenic content of water 499
climate trends 498
Coordinating Committee of the
Countries of the La Plata
Basin (CIC) 501
El Niño, effect of 498
energy and water 500
environment and water 498–9
erosion 499
health and water 499
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower 500
industry and water 500
institutional management
frameworks 501
long-term measurements of 498
Pantanal Project (1991) 499
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
498, 500
Paraguay River system 498
Paraná River system 498
poverty 498–9
rainfall trends 498
sharing water resources 500–501
soil loss 498–9
surface water sustainability
500–501
Uruguay River system 498
lacustrine ecosystems 495–6
Lake Chad
biodiversity in 182
Lake Chad Basin 167
water and vegetation levels (19632001) 182
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe Basin
486, 486–7, 487
climatic context, change in 486
environmental issues 487
institutional reforms 487
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 487

reforms underway 487
socio-economic context, change in
486
transportation agreements 487
Viru-Peipsi water management plan
487
water pollution charges 414
Lake Pskovskoe (Russian Federation) see
Lake Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe
Lake Tanganyika 169
Lake Titicaca Basin 488, 488–9
climate change, impact on glaciers
488
dams and reservoirs, construction of
488
poverty and conflict 488
structural poverty 488
Lake Victoria 104, 110, 164, 180–81
ecosystem decline 163
lack of secondary urban centres on
105
significance for economy of Uganda
512
lakes 125–6
Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary
Waters and International
Lakes (UNECE Water
Convention, 1996) 286
depletion in Mongolia 495
ecosystem threats to 172
sedimentation and 137
see also ecosystems, coastal and
freshwater
land
access to 246
in Gash watershed, Sudan 269
extent salinized by irrigation as
indicator 36
irrigated as proportion of cultivated
as indicator 36
land-based treatment of wastewater
298
land-use management 18
holistic, integrated land-use
and water resource
management 106
land-use planning 246, 358
land use policy 246
pasture land 250–51
resources in Mexico 492
and water resources management in
cities and city regions
104–6
landscape modifications 152
language barrier 444–5
Lao Peoples Democratic Republic
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
inland fishery production in 167
water availability and use 134
lapwing 190
large hydropower (LHP) 315, 324–5
large river systems (LRSs) 176

large villages
provision of water and sanitation
deficient in many
103–4
small urban centres vs 103
Latin America
capacity building projects in 457
cities, development in 91
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
population 412
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
species threatened in 170–71
urban population 90
see also Caribbean; South America
Latin America and the Caribbean
access to electricity 331
undernourishment in 267
Latin American Network for Water
Education and Training (LA
WETnet) website 462
latrines, flush/pour 224–6
Latvia
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
basin 414, 486, 487
Viru-Peipsi water management plan
487
water availability and use 134
law
customary water rights in law of
Japan 62–3
international law and sharing water
381–2, 396
legal commitments to water rights
64
legal framework and reforms in
Uganda 514–15
legal protections, inadequacy of
523
legislation and policy 358
legislative framework 14
in Mongolia 497
national water law, human right to
water and 64
rule of 49
leakage from degraded pipes 150
Lebanon
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
legionella pneumophilia 212
Lesotho

I N D EX . 5 6 9

access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 134
level of tariff structure 414
Liberia
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 134
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 134
Limpopo Watercourse Commission
(LIMCOM) 380
Lithuania
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
livelihoods
adverse conditions in 152
ecosystem restoration and 190
Gash Sustainable Livelihood
Regeneration Project
(GSLRP), Sudan 269
irrigation as direct source of 268–9
livelihood-based approach in rural
areas 268
seasonal flooding benefits in Tonle
Sap 265
water as pathway out of poverty
268–70
wetlands as sources of 264–5
livestock
nitrogen source 117
production 247–8
in Uganda 513
Living Planet Index (LPI) 169, 170
lixation, nitrogen source 117
Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems
(LINKS) 448
localization
enhancement of local capacity
449–54
indigenous knowledge for
sustainability in IWRM
448
of knowledge for sustainability in
IWRM 448
local data, focus of indicator
development 110–11
local knowledge 447–8
local nature of food production 245
small-scale water companies,
untapped potential
72–3
of water governance 44
Loire-Brittany Basin, France 480

Luanda (Angola) 100
Luxembourg
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 134
lymphatic filariasis 210, 213–14,
216–17, 224
deaths from 209
M
Macedonia, Former Yugoslav Republic of
Danube River Basin Management
Plan 476
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 134
Mackenzie River system, Canada 177
macroeconomic change 49
Madagascar
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 134
Malagasy Web-footed Tenrec 171
malaria 204, 205, 210, 213–14,
215–16, 224
deaths from 209
emergence in Thar desert of India
205
Ethiopia 478
South Africa 503
stream water management for
control of 211
Malawi
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
IWRM developments in 56
urbanization in 9
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
Malaysia
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
Maldives
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
water availability and use 134
Mali 489–91
access to electricity 330
access to water 330, 490
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
climatic groups 489
energy development, challenge of
490–91
energy potential 490–91
environmental degradation 490
food, challenge of 490–91
health, challenge of 490–91
hydropower capability 332

indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
irrigation 490
knowledge base improvement 491
Mali Long Term Training and
Capacity Building Needs
Assessment (2003) 457
management responses and
stewardship 491
Niger River Agency 491
Office du Niger in 260
population 490
poverty 490
reform of irrigation policy for rice
production in 260
river basins in 489
Senegal River Basin Organization
(OMVS) 380
water availability and use 134
water resources 489
see also Senegal River basin
malnourished people see undernourished
people
malnutrition
and diarrhoeal disease 231
measurement of 247
protein-energy malnutrition, deaths
from 209
Malta
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 134
mammals, breeding grounds 168–9
managed aquifer recharge (MAR) 147
management instruments 14
management needs in different size
settlements 103–8
Management of Aquifer Recharge (MAR)
146
management of conflict in sharing water
385–93
management of groundwater 262–3
Management of Social Transformations
(MOST) 448
Management of Water Projects (OECD,
1985) 407
management of water resources 358
Aarhus Convention 74
aid to water sector 52
Arwari River Parliamant, Rajasthan
74
benefit-cost analysis (BCA) 28
bureaucratic inertia 521
capital intensiveness of
infrastructure 83
child mortality 45–6
children, water management
concerns for 15–16
climate change, dealing with
increasing frequency 24
compensation for reform losers 60
competition, water sharing and
24–5
complex process 44, 45
conflict resolution 48–50
cooperation, potential for 24–5

coordination, improvement in
60–61
corruption, abatement of 68–9
corruption, drain on water sector
65–9
corruption in 521
cultural roots of water governance
48
custom and tradition in water rights
62–3
data gathering, water sharing and
25
decentralization 82
benefits of 74–5
practice of 75–7
of water control 74–80
decision making
public participation in 77–8
decision-making
about water 47–8
decentralization of 74–80
delegation of responsibility for 25,
28, 81
democratization 48–50
demographic change 49
development trends and 48
dimensions of water governance
46–8
ecological water management
18–19
economic benefits of water rights
62
economic dimension in water
governance 46
economic instruments for water
delivery 69
efficiency in distribution 71
environmental sustainability
dimension in water
governance 46–7
fairness, water sharing and 25
financial resources, mobilization of
69
full cost subsidization 28
governance reform and delivery
reform 82
high-level support for reform,
securement of 60
human right to water 63–5
hunger, fighting in rural areas
through 265–70
hydrological conditions, variability in
25
hydrological data, water sharing and
25
impact of reform, monitoring of 61
implementation of integration 55
implementation of reform,
monitoring of 61
inclusive water management 13
incremental change, reform and 60
inefficient service delivery 45
information
access to 78–80
development and access 77
sharing of, water sharing and
25
institutional arrangements,

5 7 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

development of 83
institutional arrangements for water
delivery 69, 82, 521
institutional reforms and 259
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
13–15, 45, 54–5
Johannesburg target 56–7
International Monetary Fund (IMF)
52
international priority 81
international responses for
improvement in 50–53
investment deficiencies 215–16
investment in 83
knowledge enhancement, water
sharing and 25, 28
legal commitments to water rights
64
local, small-scale water companies,
untapped potential
72–3
localization of 44
macroeconomic change 49
malaria control through water
management 215–16
management strategies and water
rights 61–2
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 50
mismanagement 521
monopoly situations in 83
national cultures and 81
national ownership of reform
process and content 60
national water law, human right to
water and 64
national water policies, development
of 54–61
non-market valuation techniques
28
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD) 52
participation
bottom-up approaches and 74
and inclusiveness 60
and representation 82–3
policy
and governance 48
non-implementation climate 59
obstacles to reform 59–61
politics and resistance 57–9
reform programme
implementation
59–61
political and economic change
48–50
political empowerment dimension in
water governance 46
political processes and 82
politics
acknowledgement of role of
60
and resistance 57–9
poverty, fighting in rural areas
through 265–70
Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper

(PRSP) 52
power and 82
power of water 47
privatization 48–50, 69–73, 81
process orientation 54, 60
progressive realization of water
rights 64
public-private partnerships (PPPs)
28
public water services, privatization
and 69–73
reform and implementation, slow
progress of 82
reform driven by internal pressures
44, 81
reform progress, no blueprint for
83
regulatory powers, weakness in
71–2
resistance to change 57–9
right to water 63–5, 81
risk management 24
sharing arrangements, human right
to water and 65
social benefits of water rights 62
social change 48–50
social dimension in water
governance 46
societal governance of water
resources 47–8
South Africa 504
stakeholders and 82
state ownership of water rights
61–2
supply development, assumptions of
54
systems for water management 92
tariff structure determination 28
transboundary sharing of water
management 491
transference of water management
responsibilities 15
trilogue between government, civil
society and private
sector on 82
UN World Water Development
Report (WWDRI) 45
urban slums 55
valuation of water 28
war, social and political unrest 48
water as public good 83
water charges 28
water management responsibilities,
transference of 15
water-poverty link 45–6
water quality information, access to
78–80
water rights 61–3
water shortage, challenge of 49–50
women, water management and
15–16
World Bank 52
see also governance
management practice, locally defined in
environmental services 425
management reform of irrigation systems
260
management responses and stewardship

in Mali 491
management strategies and water rights
61–2
management structure adaptability in
IWRM 186
manatees 170
Mandatory Renewable Energy Targets
(MRETs), Australia 320
manganese 220
mangrove swamps 171
climate change impact on 181
ecosystem threats to 172
Manila, Philippines 421
mapping communities 110
Mar del Plata Action Plan (1977) 63
marine areas, diversity in Thailand 509
marine biomes 165
marine capture of fish 248
Marine Species Population Index 169–70
market access and rural water
management 245
Martinique, water availability and use
134
mass media see media
Mauritania
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
desalinated water production 310
ecosystem restoration in 190
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Senegal River Basin Organization
(OMVS) 380
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 134
see also Senegal River basin
Mauritius
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 134
mean annual runoff (MAR) in South
Africa 502, 503
measurement
concept in valuation of water 428
of water systems performance,
difficulty in 395
see also indicators
meat demand 253
media 26, 60, 145, 148, 284, 443, 445,
452
mediation in conflict situations 385
Mekong River Basin 167
Mekong River Commission (MRC) 58,
344, 511
membrane technology 11
mercury 220
methaemoglobinemia (‘blue baby
syndrome’) 220
Mexico 492–4
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
acid rain in 138
bottled water demand in 402
Capacity Building for the Water
Sector (2001) 457
ecosystems and water 493–4
flood risk 494

health and water 493
hydrological networks in 439
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
invasive alien species in 180
irrigation water agreement with US
380
land resources 492
National Development Plan of
Environment and Natural
Resources (PND, 20016) 493–4
public participation rights in 77
risk management 494
river basins in 492
transboundary aquifers 375
underground water resources 493
uses of water and land 492
water availability and use 134
Water Commission of the State
(CAEM) 493
water management 493
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
water resources 492
water resources development in
494
water reuse in 148
water transfer 493
Mexico City World Water Forum (2006)
382
micro hydropower 313
micro-organics, freshwater pollutants
141
microbial contaminants, freshwater
pollutants 141
Middle East
access to electricity 331
desalination in 311–12
hydropower capability 334
invasive species, introduction of
181
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
water reuse in 148
Millennium Challenge Account 51
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
29–33, 50, 88, 91, 92, 162,
206–7
child mortality reduction 30, 206,
345
disaster risk reduction 345
disease prevention 31, 207, 345
environmental sustainability 31,
207, 345
finance for irrigation schemes 261
gender equality 30, 206, 345
global partnership for development
31, 207, 345
HIV/AIDS, combat against 31, 207,
345
hunger, eradication of 30, 206,
345
knowledge 459

I N D EX . 5 7 1

Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
487
malaria, combat against 31, 207,
345
maternal health improvement 30,
206, 345
poverty, eradication of 30, 206,
345
primary education, universal 30,
206, 345
risk management 343, 344
sustainable development 284
targets 30–31
targets on water, sanitation and
health 221–3
Task Force on water and sanitation,
recommendations 34
Thailand 510
water, sanitation, hygiene and
206–7
water-related indicators 30–31
women, empowerment of 30, 206,
345
World Summit on Sustainable
Development, energy
targets 21, 24, 314
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(2005) 524
valuation of water 407
Millennium Project Task Force 64, 102
Millennium Research Project 32
mini hydropower 313
mining
pollution in Uganda 514
sedimentation and 137
mobile phones 11
modelling systems 442–3
Moldova, Republic of
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
molybdenum 220
Mongolia 495–8
access to electricity 330
access to water 330, 495
administrative context 495
climate change, groundwater and
496
development, challenges to 496
drought 497
ecosystems and water 495–6
energy and water 496–7
flood prevention 497
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
industry and water 496
lacustrine ecosystems 495–6
lake depletion in 495
legislative framework 497
National Development Plan 495–6
nomadic livestock husbandry 496
population 495

pricing policy, decentralization of
497
regulatory framework 497
river basins in 495
transboundary water resources in
494
Ulan Bator, water usage in 497
water availability and use 134
water for food 496
water-related policy 497
water resources management 497
well-being, challenges to 496
monitoring
coordinated monitoring programmes
191
economic benefits of 161
evaluation and reporting (MER)
systems 470, 471
implementation of policy reform
61, 78
information and monitoring
technologies 186
Joint Monitoring Programme
(WHO/UNICEF) 90–91,
222, 224–5
networks 126, 130
policy impacts 38, 342
progress towards MDGs 33, 108
risk assessment 350
of water licensing and permits 71
of water quality 77, 78, 79, 110,
152, 280
see also indicators
monsoon-risk in Thailand 511
morbidity
causes in Ethiopia 478
rates in Thailand 510
Morocco
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
coastal erosion 165
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 134
water users associations in 73
mortality
in children as indicator 36
rates of 208
mosquito nets 210
mosquitos 214, 215–16, 217–18
container breeding mosquito,
strategy against 218
see also filarial infections; Japanese
encephalitis; malaria;
vector-borne diseases
Moulton Niguel Water District, California
311
Mozambique
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
ecosystem restoration in 190
hydropower capability 332
hydropower development in 316

indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Limpopo Watercourse Commission
(LIMCOM) 380
MDG target achievement in 449
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
multi-hazard risk assessment 350,
351–2
multi-objective assessment of water
projects 411
Multilateral Environmental Agreements
(MEAs) 285–6
Multiple Cluster Indicator Surveys (MICS)
226
multiple water uses 13, 233
Mumbai (India) 100
Municipal Fund (World Bank/IFC) 453
municipal water services 414–5
Myanmar
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquaculture in 167
hydropower capability 333
water availability and use 134
N
Naiade, solar water disinfection system
312
Namibia
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Okavango River Project 380
solar water heaters for domestic use
313
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
Narian, Sunita 528–9
Narva River, water pollution charges
414
‘Natech’ disasters 18, 281
National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA, US)
441
National Capacity Self-Assessment
(NCSA) process 457–8
National Cleaner Production Centres,
network of 295
national cultures 81
National Development Plan in Mongolia
495–6
National Development Plan of
Environment and Natural
Resources (PND, 2001-6) in
Mexico 493–4
National Hydrological and Meteorological
Services (NHMSs) 351–2
national incomes, disasters and 485
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)
website 369
national ownership of reform process
and content 60
National Platforms for Disaster Risk

Reduction (NPs) 351–2
National Response Plan (NRP), 2004, of
Dept. for Homeland Security
26
national water conservation policy 294
national water law, human right to water
and 64
national water policies, development of
54–61
natural capital 268
deterioration of 524
natural groundwater quality 130
natural limits, understanding of 520,
522
natural resources management in
Thailand 509–10
natural systems, change in 17–19
biodiversity loss 17–18
catchment areas 19
climate change, variability and 18
ecological water management
18–19
ecosystem sustainability 19
environmental resilience, threat to
17–18
global development, equity in 19
human intervention 17
land-use management 18
‘Natech’ disasters 18
resilience 19
vulnerability 19
Navigating Peace: Forging New Water
Partnerships (Woodrow
Wilson Center) 389
navigation, sedimentation and 137
Neerkatti water managers 76
neonatal deaths 229
Nepal
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
flood management, communitybased 352
glacial decline, acceleration of 145
hydropower capability 333
small hydropower (SHP)
development in 318
water availability and use 134
Netherlands
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
ecosystem restoration in 190
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
New Caledonia
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 134
New Zealand
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 335
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
ISO 14001 certification in 287

5 7 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

water availability and use 134
Nicaragua
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Rio Negro border relationship with
Honduras 380
water availability and use 134
Niger
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
biodiversity in Lake Chad 182
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 134
Niger River 491
Nigeria
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
biodiversity in Lake Chad 182
food, progress in production 246
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
Komadugu-Yobe Integrated
Management Project
187
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
Nile Basin Capacity-Building Network for
River Engineering (NBCBNRE) website 462
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 58, 380
Nile perch 163, 180–81
Nile River delta 201
nitrate in water 175
nitrate pollution of groundwater 220
nitrogen 292
dissolved as indicator 36
sources of loading 117
nomadic livestock husbandry in Mongolia
496
non-communicable water-associated
health issues 218–20
non-market economic valuation of water
407–10
non-market valuation techniques 28
non-networked water and sanitation
systems 96
non-renewable groundwater 129
North Africa
access to electricity 331
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
undernourishment in 267
water reuse in 148
North America
acid rain in 138

cities, development in 91
hydropower capability 332–3
invasive species, introduction of
181
ISO 14001 certification in 287
population 412
protection of wetland habitat 188
transboundary aquifers 374–5
urban population 90
see also Canada; United States
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) 10
Norway
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
nuclear power electricity generation
315, 323
in South Africa 504
nutrients
from agricultural runoff 174
freshwater pollutants 141
nutrient recycling 165
nutrition
adequacy in 245–7
nutritional status 229
seasonal flooding benefits in Tonle
Sap 265
O
oases, ecosystem threats to 172
Oceania
cities, development in 91
hydropower capability 335
invasive species, introduction of 181
urban population 90
see also Australia; New Zealand
Office du Niger in Mali 260
Office National de l’Eau Potable, Morocco
73
oil power 315
olives, water productivity of 256
Oman
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer recharge management in
147
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 134
Omnibus Water Resources Act (US, 1970)
407
on-site use of water 290–91
onchoceriasis 210, 224
deaths from 209
optimism, cautious in conclusion 528–9
oral rehydration therapy (ORT) 210, 211,
229
organic pollutants
emissions as indicators 36
matter as freshwater pollutant 141
Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants (POPs)

285
Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development (OECD) 52,
314, 407, 411
website on water financing 431
Organization of American States (OAS)
380
website 397
organochlorine pesticides 179
outflow as % TARWAR 36
Output Based Aid 453
over-abstraction 143–4
overexploitation of habitats 165
overfishing 167
Overseas Development Assistance 10
ownership
institutional reforms and 259
state ownership of water rights
61–2
of water infrastructure 420
oxygen-18 in stream water 124
P
Pacific Institute website 303
Pacific Islands, soil-transmitted intestinal
helminth infection 213
Pacific Tsunami Warning Center (PTWC)
27
‘paddy paradox’ 215
Pakistan
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer recharge management in
147
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
food, progress in production 246
gender, poverty, improved
governance and water in
Punjab 47
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
irrigation water, domestic use in
Punjab 232
IWRM developments in 56
Orangi Pilot Project (OPP) in 97,
99–100, 109
wastewater use in agriculture and
aquaculture 228
water availability and use 134
Palestinian Authority
memorandum of understanding on
piping water from Red
Sea to Dead Sea 380
see also Gaza Strip (Palestine); West
Bank
Palmiet Pumped Storage Scheme, South
Africa 319
Panama
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 134

Pantanal Project (1991) 499
Papua New Guinea
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 335
indicators on industrial water
productivity 301
water availability and use 134
Paraguay
access to drinking water 499
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
500
sanitation services, access to 499
transboundary aquifers 375, 378
water availability and use 134
see also La Plata River Basin
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project 498,
500
Paraguay River system 498
Paraná River system 498
participation
access to as indicator 36
bottom-up approaches and 74
in governance 49
and inclusiveness 60
participatory approaches to risk
management 348
participatory budgeting in favour of
urban poor 95
participatory irrigation management
269
public participation in water sector
79
and representation 82–3
stakeholder participation in disaster
risk reduction 350
Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA) in
flood management 352
particles, suspended 141
particulate contamination of water 279
pasture land 250–51
pathogenic organisms
freshwater pollutants 141
problem of 293
payments for environmental services
(PES) 423–5
Paynemil Mapuche Community, Neuquen,
Argentina 66
Per Capita Equivalent of ‘Availability’
(PCA) 131
per capita TARWAR 36
periodic access fees 413
Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) 285
personal care products, impacts of waste
179–80
personal hygiene 226
Peru
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380

I N D EX . 5 7 3

Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
applied at national and
subnational scales 357
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 134
pesticides 179
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior
Informed Consent (PIC)
Procedure for Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides
in International Trade
285
soluble 173–5
pharmaceuticals, impacts of waste
179–80
Philippines
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
overflow and spillway failure 283
poor, targeting through grassroots
mechanisms in Manila
421
water availability and use 134
wetland values in 166
Phnom Phenh, Cambodia 234
phosphorus 292
leaching of 175
photosynthesis, reduction in 171
physical capital 268
‘piggybacking’ alternative energy sources
320
piped water 224–6
connections 98
systems in Sri Lanka 506
Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture
(PMA) in Uganda 513–14
planning
development of water resources
236
expansion of water facilities 96
plans and strategies, integration of
13
water needs of 88, 92
Planning, Sector Wide Approach to
(SWAP) in Uganda 514–15
Poland
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
Danube River Basin Management
Plan 476
Dniester-Odra Project 380
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 134
polar systems, climate change impact on
181

policy 14
decision-making vs implementation
in process 58
and governance 48
instruments for better water usage
293–4
integration for national risk
management
frameworks 342
and legislation 358
and management 184–91
national water policies, development
of 54–61
non-implementation climate 59
obstacles to reform 59–61
outcomes, factors shaping 58
policies for risk management
357–61
policy-relevant indicators 37
politics and resistance 57–9
reform programme implementation
59–61
reiterative policy-making process 12
scientific integrity and policy-making
29
political and economic change 9–10,
48–50
political backing for irrigation reform
260
political boundaries, mismatched with
natural 373
political determination in valuation of
water 406
political empowerment dimension in
water governance 46
political interdependencies 376
political issues, challenge areas for 347
political processes and 82
political systems
acknowledgement of role of 60
exclusion from participation in 523
politics and resistance 57–9
variation in 526
polluter pays principle 284
in valuation of water 401
pollution 137–43, 179–80
assessment and prioritization of ‘hot
spots’ 280
atmospheric transport and 142
climate change and 142
climate change and atmospheric
314
conclusions 524
control in Danube River Basin (DRB)
475–6
faecal pollution 211, 219, 225,
227, 231
geochemistry, natural, and 142
groundwater vulnerability to 140
identification of ‘hot spots’ 280
industrial development and 276,
280–81
land management and 142
natural ecology and 142
non-point sources (NPS) 139
point sources (PS) 139
population and 142

recreational water use, health and
220
reduction strategies 294–8
source water pollution in US 408
spatial and time scales of
occurrence 142
Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants
(POPs) 285
taxes 416–17
water management and 142
ponds, ecosystem threats to 172
poor
pro-poor policies for valuation of
water 401
pro-poor urban governance,
development of 94–7
in rural areas, percentage as
indicators 36
state responsiveness to urban poor
95
targeting through grassroots
mechanisms 421
water and sanitation delivery for
urban poor 94–6
population 3, 412
Ethiopia 478
growth 8–9
and supply of water 144–5
Kenya 484
Mali 490
Mongolia 495
slum population changes in
developing countries 99
Portugal
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 134
Post Conflict Assessment Unit (UNEP) 10
potable reuse of reclaimed water,
potential for 149
potable water see drinking water
potatoes, water productivity of 256
Potential Conflict to Cooperation
Potential (PCCP) 377, 395
poultry 253
poverty
challenge in Kenya 483–5
and child mortality 229
and conflict in Lake Titicaca Basin
488
eradication of 21, 261, 284, 300,
314, 448, 514
and gender, improved governance
and water in Punjab 47
La Plata River Basin 498–9
Mali 490
reduction and environmental
services 425
relief process 8
South Africa 503
Sri Lanka 506
structural poverty in Lake Titicaca
Basin 488

Thailand 510
Uganda 513–14
water and development 7–8
water as pathway out of 268–70
and water (concluding remarks on)
522–3
water-poverty link 45–6
Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) in
Uganda 513
Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
(PRSPs) 52, 53, 234, 525
power 82
capacity, grid-based and renewable
315
and influence of urban poor,
development of 94–5
of water 47
and water infrastructures 307
PoWER Programme (UNESCO-IHE) 446,
447
power supply
distributed generation, future for
327
generation from fossil fuels 314
precautionary principle on pollution 139,
142
precipitation 123–4
annual as indicator 36
distribution 124
precision agriculture and irrigation
technology 262
predictability in tariff-setting 413
Pressure and Release (PAR) model 365
in vulnerability analysis 364
pressure for sustainable development
151
pressure on natural systems 524
pressure on resources 120
pressure on water resources 121–2
pressurized fluid bed technologies
322–3
prevention of conflict in sharing water
385–93
pricing
energy pricing weaknesses 328
policy, decentralization in Mongolia
497
price controls and subsidies 96–7
unit prices, complexity in
determination of 413
water pricing in irrigation 260–61
primary energy
by source 315
supply, totals by fuel as indicators
36
primary schooling 449
Prior Informed Consent (PIC) Procedure
for Hazardous Chemicals and
Pesticides 285
Pripyat River 173
private investment, barriers to 526
private role in finance of irrigation 261
privatization 44, 48–50, 69–73, 81, 259
process of valuation of water 427
process orientation 54, 60
process water 292
progressive realization of water rights
64

5 7 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

project planning level 361
protein-energy malnutrition, deaths from
209
protozoal infections 211
provider-based data 226
public good and sharing water 382–3
public housing programmes 102
public infrastructure, inadequacy of
access to 522–3
public investment in water supply, ratio
of actual to desired levels
37
public participation rights 77
public policy evaluation in water
valuation 405
public-private partnerships (PPPs) 28
cost-effectiveness and 400
sharing resources in valuation of
water 418–19
in valuation of water 418–21
public role in finance of irrigation 261
public spending, water sector share in
total 37
public utilities, responsiveness of 96–7
public water services, privatization and
69–73
Public Works Research Institute (PWRI)
356
Puerto Rico, water availability and use
134
pumped storage hydropower 316,
319–20
Pune (India) 100
Punjab, Pakistan 232
PWRI Risk Index 357
Q
Qatar
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 134
quality assurance
and control 444–5
and quality control (QA/QC)
programmes 142–3
quality monitoring programmes 152
Quito Catchment Conservation Fund 187
R
rainfall
rainfed and irrigated agriculture
250–51, 256
rainwater 224–6, 247
harvesting of 147
in Sri Lanka 505
trends in La Plata River Basin 498
variability 485
raised bogs, ecosystem threats to 172
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands (1971)
169, 188–9, 190
Ramsar sites 188–9
area designated as 189
with water-related value 404

Rapid Air Pollution in Developing
countries (RAPIDC) 138
rate setting, politicized nature of 414
raw material recovery from waste 297
ray-finned fish species 169
reclaimed water
applications for 149
potential for recreation 149
reclaimed volumes 149
reclamation of water 277, 291
use by 291–3
recommendations
action, acceptance of responsibility
for 520, 526–7, 528–9
change, anticipation of and
adaptation to 520, 524,
526–7
contextual appreciation 520,
522–3, 528–9
governance, focus on 520, 523,
525–7
interdependence of issues,
recognition of 520,
524–5, 527
knowledge, improvement in 520,
524, 525–6
natural limits, understanding of
520, 522
solutions, acceptance of variety of
520, 526–7
systems, assessment of 520,
522–3, 524, 526
see also conclusions
Recreational Water Environments, WHO
Guidelines for Safe, website
220
recreational water use 149, 220
pollution and 220
recycling
waste reuse 297
wastewater use 264
of water 291
Red List of Threatened Animals 170
reef habitats 165
reform
driven by internal pressures 44, 81
and implementation, slow progress
of 82
progress, no blueprint for 83
underway 528–9
Lake Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe 487
refugee rights, protection and
fundamental rights 108
refugee settlements
access to clean water in 106–8
environmental impact of 106–8
principles of water supply for 107
regulation
regulatory framework in Mongolia
497
regulatory instruments 14
production efficiency and 276,
284–9
regulatory powers, weakness in
71–2
regulatory principles for sharing
water 383–5

reiterative policy-making process 12
Relative Water Stress Index (RWSI) 116
as indicator 36
remote sensing 440
technologies for 441, 442
renewable energy
desalination using 311
efficiency and 325–7
renewable energy certificates 325
renewable power 315
Renewable Obligation Certificates 326
Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS)
325
renewable water resources
renewability of groundwater 128–9
in Uganda 512
research, demand-driven research on
water-related issues 452
research centres, websites for 369
Research Institute for Development (IRD)
website 462
reservoirs 148, 176–9
construction of 488
hydropower 316
malaria transmission and 215
sediment trapping by large
reservoirs 201
sedimentation and 137
see also dams
residential water supply/sanitation 409
resilience 19
environmental resilience, threat to
17–18
in risk assessment 364
resistance to change 57–9
resource amplification 146–7
resource sustainability 136
resource value estimation 407
Reunion, water availability and use 134
reuse of water 148–9, 291
reverse osmosis (membrane desalination)
311
of wastewater 297–8
Rhine Action Plan (RAP), France 480
Rhine-Meuse Basin, France 480
Rhine River Basin, climate change,
projected impacts in 363
Rhone-Mediterranean Basin, France 480
rice production 260
right to water 44, 63, 63–5, 81
inadequate protection of 523
safeguarding right to safe water
supply 66
timeline on 383
rights for refugees 108
rights markets 10
Rio de Janeiro Conference on
Environment and
Development (1992) 284,
491
Rio de la Plata dams 178
Rio Negro border 380
riperian agriculture 380
Risk and Policy Assessment Index 36
risk assessment
community, based on vulnerability
and resilience 364
contextual aspects, community risk

assessment 364
resilience in 364
social needs, identification of 364
social vulnerability, community risk
assessment 364
vulnerability and resilience in 364
risk aversion 19
risk management 24
adaptive risk reduction strategies,
advocacy of 362–3
advances in, good practice examples
351–3
bilateral risk reduction initiatives
344
Center for Research on the
Epidemiology of
Disasters (CRED) 343
challenge areas for 346–7
climate change, consequences for
risk reduction 362
climate change, disaster risk and
366–7
community-based processes of 348
data accessibility problems 348,
350
data collection and management
350
decision-making
dealing with uncertainty 342
flexibility in 363
risk-related knowledge and
348, 350, 366
development planning and disaster
risk reduction 344, 346
Disaster Reduction and Climate
Change (DR+CC) Infolink
362
disaster risk planning 367
disaster risk reduction 366
Driving forces, Pressure, State,
Impact, Response
(DPSIR) Framework 356
droughts, user-based design of
warning systems for
352–3
flood risk management 358–62
floods, user-based design of
warning systems for
352–3
forecasting accuracy, limits of 362
forecasting inaccuracy, dealing with
362
frameworks for 348–53, 358
future strategies for 362–5
global disaster landscape 343–4
global process as and 366–7
hurricane ‘Katrina’ and 26
hydrometeorological extremes 343
hydropower, risk management and
367
Hyogo Framework for Action (20052015) 365–6
indicators 353–7
Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI)
353, 356
Disaster Risk Index (DRI) 353
environmental monitoring 342
flood policy effectiveness 356

I N D EX . 5 7 5

information and data for hazard
analysis 350
information exchange, need for
improvement in 362
institutional memory loss 350
integrated flood management 351
integrated risk management policy
342
integration of risk-related public
policies 342
international disaster risk reduction
344
interrelated dimensions of 367
Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation (JPol)
343, 344
Kobe World Conference on Disaster
Reduction (WCDR, 2005)
365–6
legislation and policy 358
methodologies, challenge areas for
346–7
Mexico 494
multi-hazard approaches 351–2
National Hydrological and
Meteorological Services
(NHMSs) 351–2
National Platforms for Disaster Risk
Reduction (NPs) 351–2
operational level 361
participatory approaches to 348
policies for 357–61
policy, integration for national risk
management
frameworks 342
policy and legislation 358
political issues, challenge areas for
347
Pressure and Release (PAR) model
365
project planning level 361
Public Works Research Institute
(PWRI) 356
risk management cycle 347
risk reduction, limitations 346–7
risk related knowledge, data loss
prevention 348, 350
risk-related knowledge,
management of 348,
350, 366
scientific observation, challenge
areas for 346–7
social dimensions 348
social issues, challenge areas for
347
Sri Lanka 507–8
strategies for 342
UN International Decade for Natural
Disaster Reduction
(IDNDR, 1990-2000)
344
UN World Water Development
Report (WWDRI) 348
uncertain change, dealing with 362
user-based design of warning
systems 352–3
vulnerability assessment 363, 365
vulnerability assessment, data and

information for 350
warning system effectiveness
352–3
water-related disasters 343–7
water-related disasters, managing
the aftermath 367
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) 346–7, 351
risk mitigation in South Africa 504
risk reduction
flood management, communitybased 352
Hyogo Framework for Action (20052015) 366
limitations of 346–7
multi-hazard assessment in Costa
Rica 350
Participatory Rapid Appraisal (PRA)
in flood management
352
stakeholder participation in disaster
risk reduction 350
risk-related knowledge
data loss prevention 348, 350
management of 348, 350, 366
River Basin Initiative (RBI) website 397
river basin management 525
drainage areas 126
river blindness see onchocersiasis
river deltas, climate change impact on
181
river dolphins 170
rivers
climate change, projected impacts in
Rhine River basin 363
ecosystem threats to 172
fragmentation and flow regulation
in large river systems
(LRSs) 176
fragmentation and flow regulation
of rivers
indicators 36
free-flowing large river systems in
Europe 177
integrated river basin management
(IRBM) 190
Nile river delta 201
river flow and water levels 126–7
sedimentation and 137
and streams 126–7
transferring water among basins
148
virgin mean annual discharge
(VMAD) 176–7
water usage index (WRI), Orange
River, South Africa 339
road building, sedimentation and 137
Roll Back Malaria initiative 216
Romania
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
Danube River basin, TEST strategy in
296
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302

Tisza tailings dam disaster 283
water availability and use 134
rotavirus infection 210
rotavirus transmission 211
Rotterdam Convention on the Prior
Informed Consent (PIC)
Procedure for Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides in
International Trade 285
roundworm 212
ruff 182
Ruhuna basins, Sri Lanka 219
run-of-river hydropower 316–17
runoff
agricultural runoff 174
continental river variations 126
surface runoff, variability in 152
variability of 126
rural areas 7
electrification in 326
hunger, water and fight against
265–70
integrated resources management
(IRM) in support of food
production in 251
positive impacts of irrigation on
rural communities 269
poverty, water and fight against
265–70
rural development in Uganda 512
rural development policies 244
rural population
indicators 36
South Africa 502
Russian Federation
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Lake Peipsi/Chudskoe-Pskovskoe
basin 414, 486, 487
organic contaminants in rivers 180
river diversion plans 380
Strategic Action Plan for
transboundary Dnieper
River Basin 280
transboundary water agreement
with Mongolia 494
Viru-Peipsi water management plan
487
water availability and use 135
Rwanda
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
water availability and use 135
S
safeguarding right to safe water supply

66
safety nets, lack of 523
St Helena, water availability and use
135
St Kitts and Nevis, water availability and
use 135
St Lucia, water availability and use 135
St Vincent and the Grenadines, water
availability and use 135
salinisation, freshwater pollutant 141
salinity
crops resistant to 257
hazard of 263–4
salmon 174
Salween River dams 177–8
Samoa
hydropower capability 335
water availability and use 135
sanitation 204
access to improvement in 224–6
basic sanitation, access to 36
indicators 36
benefits of improvement in 231
diseases related to deficiencies in
210–13
improved sanitation 223, 225
perspective on MDGs 206–7
private sector participation 419
residential 409
school sanitation and hygiene
education in Tamil Nadu,
India 450
services
access to 499
benefits and costs of
improvements in
412
unimproved sanitation 225
Sao Tome and Principe, water availability
and use 135
SARS 236
satellite imagery, information systems
and 110
satellite remote sensing 441
Saudi Arabia
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 135
schistosomiasis 205, 208, 210, 213–14,
217, 224
deaths from 209
South Africa 503
school sanitation and hygiene education
in Tamil Nadu, India 450
scientific integrity and policy-making 29
scientific observation, challenge areas for
346–7
Scottish and Southern Energy 326
sea-bird species 171
sea fisheries 165
sea-grass beds 171
ecosystem threats to 172
sectoral interests 162
Sediment-Related Disaster Prevention
Law in Japan 483

5 7 6 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Sediment Trapping Efficiency Index 36
sedimentation 136–7
sediment trapping 201
sources and impacts 137
Seine-Normandy River basin, France 481
selenium 220
self-assessment 434
self-regulation 284–5
self-sufficiency in food in South Africa
503
Senegal
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
private sector involvement in water
supply and sanitation
70
Senegal River Basin Organization
(OMVS) 380
wastewater use in agriculture and
aquaculture 228
water availability and use 135
Senegal River basin 491
see also Organization for the
Development of the
Senegal River (OMVS)
Senegal River Basin Organization (OMVS)
380
septic tanks 224–6
Serbia and Montenegro
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 135
settlement of wastewater 297–8
settlements, urban and rural
alternatives to slums for low-income
households, provision of
102
change in 89–92
community-driven assessments,
importance of 108–10
community organization for urban
poor 95
community resources, tapping into
111–12
community water provision 100
component sharing model of urban
water provision 100
connection procedures 96
context for action 88
conventional model of urban water
provision 98, 105–6
cost of conventional systems
99–100
costs of water provision for urban
poor 95–6
decentralization in development
initiatives 111–12
disconnection procedures 96
domestic need and economic
activity, synergy
between 104
economies of proximity in small

urban centres 103–4
emergency provision of clean water
107
employment structures in rural
settlements 90
funding for water developments
98–9
geographical information systems
(GIS) 110
governance and public utilities 96
grants for housing low-income
families 102
holistic, integrated land-use
management and water
resource management
106
household survey data 108–9
housing security for urban poor 94
housing subsidies for low-income
households 102
indirect housing provision 102
inequalities in urban areas 90–92
information, focus of indicator
development 110–11
information, local for global goals
108–11
information availability for urban
poor 95
information base driving good
governance 110, 112
information on, development of 88
infrastructural improvements in slum
areas 102
innovation and development in
urban areas 98, 99
internally displaced persons, access
to clean water for 107
internally displaced persons,
environmental impact of
107
internally displaced persons,
principles of water
supply for 107
investment in squatter settlements
97
investment in urban slums 97
Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP,
WHO/UNICEF) 90–91
land and water resources
management in cities
and city regions 104–6
large villages, provision of water
and sanitation deficient
in many 103–4
large villages vs small urban centres
103
local data, focus of indicator
development 110–11
location of 168
management needs in different size
settlements 103–8
mapping communities 110
micro-finance systems for
development 101
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 88, 91, 92
Millennium Project Task Force 102
non-networked water and sanitation

systems 96
participatory budgeting in favour of
urban poor 95
piped water connections 98
planning expansion of water
facilities 96
planning water needs of 88, 92
power and influence of urban poor,
development of 94–5
price controls and subsidies 96–7
pro-poor urban governance,
development of 94–7
public housing programmes 102
public utilities, responsiveness of
96–7
refugee settlements, access to clean
water in 106–8
refugee settlements, environmental
impact of 106–8
refugee settlements, principles of
water supply for 107
satellite imagery, information
systems and 110
sewage connections 98
squatter settlements, expansion of
water provision for
97–102
squatter settlements, upgrading
programmes in 101
standards (and enforcement of) 97
state responsiveness to urban poor
95
subsidies, price controls and 96–7
surveys and community enumeration
109
UN-HABITAT 109–10
urban centres, definition of 103
urban development, downstream
effects of 106
urban governance 88, 91–2, 94–7
urban population as indicator 36
urban slums 55, 91, 98, 99
expansion of water provision
for 97–102
upgrading programmes in 101
urban use of reclaimed water,
potential for 149
urbanization and population growth
9, 88
urbanization trends 89–90
US Public Technology Institute 110
wastewater connections 98
wastewater management, water
usage and 104
water and sanitation delivery for
urban poor 94–6
and water in South Africa 502–3
water management systems 92
water needs in different size
settlements 103–8
water provider responsiveness to
urban poor 95
water provision, inadequacies in
urban areas 90–92
sewage 220
connections 98
dealing with untreated 179
nitrogen source 117

treatment need for added
investment in 236
Seychelles
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
water availability and use 135
sharing knowledge 443–4
sharing water
access to water, contested issue
373
anticipatory action 376
aquifer systems 381
Berlin International Law Association
Conference (2004) 382
boundaries, mismatched political
and natural 373
capacity-building 388, 396
challenges to 377
collaboration 394, 395
collaboration, phases of 389
Comprehensive Assessment of the
Freshwater Resources of
the World (UN, Kjellën
and McGranahan) 376
conflict avoidance, mechanisms for
372
conflict outcomes 385
conflict resolution 385–93, 396
conflict sources 385
contentious issues in 390–92
contingency preparedness for
continuous change 396
cooperation 394, 395, 396
cooperation, integration and
373–8, 394–6
cooperation, macro-scale 394
cooperation, mechanisms for
388–90
coordination 394, 395
crisis avoidance, mechanisms for
388–90
data gathering for 25, 396
decision-making, citizen involvement
in 389–90
decision-making, expertise in 390
decision-making, time-lag between
implementation and
impact 373
disputes, long history of 385
Division of Early warning and
Assessment (DEWA)
377
dynamics of cooperation 394–6
environmental security 390–92
ethical imperative 403
European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD, 2000)
377, 382, 395
exogenous interdependencies 376
geopolitics 374–5, 379–85
Global Environment Facility (GEF)
377
Helsinki Rules on Uses of Waters
and International Rivers
382
hydrological interdependencies 376
indicators, cooperation/conflict
386–7, 387–8

I N D EX . 5 7 7

indicators, need for expansion of
372
indicators, operational/administrative
interdependencies 386
indicators, quantitative and
qualitative measurement
386
indicators, search for relevant
386–8
indicators,
sustainability/developme
nt 387
indicators, vulnerability/fragility
387
institutional mobilization 388
institutions and procedures 383–5,
396
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
372, 396
interdependence, complexity and
372, 376–7, 386–7,
394–5
international law and 381–2, 396
International Shared Aquifer
Resource management
(ISARM) 373, 379
issues related to 373
knowledge, development of 372
management of conflict 385–93
measurement of water systems
performance, difficulty
in 395
mediation in conflict situations 385
Mexico City World Water Forum
(2006) 382
political boundaries, mismatched
with natural 373
political interdependencies 376
Potential Conflict to Cooperation
Potential (PCCP) 377,
395
prevention of conflict 385–93
public good and 382–3
recent developments in 395
regulatory principles 383–5
sharing arrangements, human right
to water and 65
sharing water resources in La Plata
River Basin 500–501
socio-economic change, rapidity of
376
South Africa 504
stakeholder participation 376
transboundary interdependencies
376
transboundary waters 394
US National Environmental Policy Act
376
vulnerability 376
water, catalyst for cooperation 376
Water Cooperation Facility (WCF)
395
water sharing mechanisms, context
for 373–6
water use paradigm 376–7, 382,
396, 436
World Water Council 382, 395

see also transboundary waters
shigellosis 211
Sierra Leone
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
IWRM developments in 56
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 135
Silala Aquifer groundwater sharing
agreement 380
silt
freshwater pollutant 141
loads in rivers 171
simplicity in tariff-setting 413
Singapore
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
water availability and use 135
water conservation tax in 294
water reuse in 148
skills, public-private partnerships (PPPs)
sharing 418–19
skin infections 212–13
Slovak Republic
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
Slovakia
Danube River basin, TEST strategy in
296
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 135
Slovenia
access to electricity 330
access to water 330
hydropower capability 334
water availability and use 135
small hydropower (SHP) 313, 315, 318,
319
China, stations in 317, 318
snow and ice 125
social benefits of sustainable
development 153
social benefits of water rights 62
social capital 268
social change 48–50
instruments for 14
social costs
long-run incremental social cost as
basis for charging for
water services 415
of tsunamis 508, 511
social customs, water as key element in
403
social dimensions 348
in water governance 46
social importance of water 164–7
social issues, challenge areas for 347
social valuation of water 400, 401
social vulnerability, community risk
assessment and 364
socially determined principles and
valuation of water 406

societal governance of water resources
47–8
socio-cultural context of water valuation
402–5, 407
socio-economic benefits of strengthened
capacity 436–7
socio-economic change, rapidity of 376
socio-economic contexts
access to water 8
change in Lake Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe 486
competition 7
conflict 10
demographic change 8–9
digital divide 11
freshwater resources, competition
for 8
globalization 10
governance and 13–14
membrane technology 11
political and economic change
9–10
population growth 8–9
Post Conflict Assessment Unit
(UNEP) 10
poverty, water and development
7–8
poverty relief process 8
rural areas 7
technological innovation 11
urbanization and population growth
9
wastewater treatment and recycling
11
welfare 10
‘youth bulge’ 8–9
soil conservation 246
soil fertility management 256
soil loss in La Plata River Basin 498–9
soil moisture 124
soil phosphorus 175
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 212, 213
solar energy for water supply 312–13
solar photovoltaics
grid-connected 315
power generation 325
solar pumping 312
solar thermal power 315
solar water heaters for domestic use
312–13
solar water purification 312
solid waste disposal by 299
Solomon Islands
hydropower capability 335
water availability and use 135
solutions, acceptance of variety in 520,
526–7
Somalia
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 135
source water pollution in US 408
South Africa 502–5
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
acid rain in 138

basic water services programme
502
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
cholera 503
diarrhoeal diseases 503
disasters, management of 504
dysentery 503
ecosystems and water 502
energy and water 503
environmental flow legislation in
147
European Union (EU) and, inclusive
water management 13
food and water 503
free basic water (FBW) programme
503
grants for housing low-income
families 102
health and water 503
hepatitis 503
hydropower 503
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
industry and water 504
IWRM developments in 56
knowledge base development 504
Limpopo Watercourse Commission
(LIMCOM) 380
malaria 503
management of water resources
504
mean annual runoff (MAR) 502,
503
nuclear power generation 504
Okavango River Project 380
Palmiet Pumped Storage Scheme
319
political change in 49
poverty 503
public participation rights in 77
public-private partnership supplying
reclaimed water in
Durban 292
right to water in 64
risk mitigation 504
river basins in 502
rural population 502
schistosomiasis 503
self-sufficiency in food 503
settlements and water 502–3
sharing water 504
thermal power generation 504
urban settlements, growth of
informal 502
water availability and use 135
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
water-related diseases 503
water research 504–5
water reuse in 148
water sector reform in 54
water usage index (WRI), Orange
River 339
South African Capacity Initiative (SACI)
458

5 7 8 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

South America
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower capability 333
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
invasive species, introduction of
181
ISO 14001 certification in 287
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
500
population 412
protection of wetland habitat 188
transboundary aquifers 374–5
see also Latin America and
Caribbean
South Asia
access to electricity 331
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
undernourishment in 267
South East Asia
population 412
wetlands threatened in 169
Spain
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Basque Country, Autonomous
Community of the (ACB)
473
bottled water demand in 402
desalination in 311
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
species
decline in condition of 169–70
invasive alien 180–81
richness by habitat 168–71
Species Survival Commission of the
World Conservation Union
(IUCN) 170
Spot-necked Otter 171
springwater 224–6
squatter settlements
expansion of water provision for
97–102
investment in 97
upgrading programmes in 101
Sri Lanka 505–8
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
‘biodiversity hotspot’ 505
coastal lagoons, threat to 505
demand management, necessity for
507
drinking water quality and
availability in Ruhuna
basins 219
drinking water supply, investment in
507
ecosystems and water 505–6
energy and water 507
food and water 506–7
groundwater potential 505

health and water 506
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
industry and water 507
irrigation, investment in 507
IWRM developments in 56
knowledge base development 508
piped water systems 506
poverty 506
rainfall 505
risk management 507–8
river basins in 506
stream water management for
control of malaria in
211
tsunami, social, economic and
environmental costs in
508
water availability and use 135
water resources management 507
wetland values in 166
wetlands, threat to 505
women in agricultural workforce
507
stakeholder participation 350
enablement of 39
in sharing water 376
see also participation
stakeholders 82
input by 13
standards (and enforcement of) 97
standards for environmental practice
284–9
standpipes 224–6
State of Food Insecurity (SOFI) website
273
State of World Fisheries and Agriculture
(SOFIA) website 273
state ownership of water rights 61–2
state responsiveness to urban poor 95
statistical capacity-building, international
commitment to 459
steam condensation 321
Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants (POPs)
285
Stockholm International Water Institute
(SIWI) website 397
storage and flood protection
infrastructure 525
storage in reservoirs 148
stream separation 297
stream water 124
management of 211
Streams of Knowledge website 462
stunting in children, prevalence of 36
sub-Saharan Africa
access to electricity 331
population 412
private sector participation in water
supply and sanitation
419
soil-transmitted intestinal helminth
infection 213
undernourishment in 267
water diversions to agriculture in
232–3

water scarcity 232–3
women’s role in irrigated farming
259
subsidiarity 15
subsidies, price controls and 96–7
Sudan
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
desalinated water production 310
governance, local, in Gash
watershed 269
hydropower capability 332
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
undernourishment in 267
water availability and use 135
supercritical pulverized fuel technologies
322–3
supply
development of, assumptions of 54
matching demand with 145–51
provisioning practices, inefficiency
of 143
supply-oriented educational
programmes 453
surface water 124, 125–7
as % of TARWAR 36
availability, uncertainty of 120
diversion for aquifer recharging 147
drinking water from 224–6
quality and human activities,
impacts on 139
resources 472
sustainability in La Plata River Basin
500–501
Surinam
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
hydropower capability 333
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 135
surveys and community enumeration
109
suspended solids, concentrations of 171
sustainable development 151
challenge of 151–3
hydropower solutions 320–21
and industry regulation 284–9
inland water transport (IWT) and
22–3
resource management 150
sustainability in agriculture 262–70
World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) 151
swamp deer 169
Swaziland
hydropower capability 332
water availability and use 135
Sweden
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
Swedish International Development

Cooperation Agency (SIDA)
101, 380
Switzerland
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquifer recharge management in
147
Danube River Basin Management
Plan 476
hydropower capability 334
Red Rhine incident 283
water availability and use 135
Syrian Arab Republic
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
system assessment 520, 522–3, 524,
526
system modelling 442–3
systems approach to water/energy
efficiency 310
Systemwide Initiative on Malaria and
Agriculture (SIMA) 215
T
Taiwan, Province of China
hydropower capability 333
water availability and use 132
Tajikistan
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Dushanbe International Conference
on Regional Cooperation
on Transboundary River
Basins 390
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
Tamil Nadu, India 450
tanker-truck water delivery 224–6
Tanzania
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquaculture in 167
ecosystem decline, Lake Victoria
163
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
secondary urban centres on Lake
Victoria, lack of 105
water availability and use 135
tariff-setting criteria 413
tariff structure determination 28
technological innovation 11
‘technological nutrients’ 299
technologies augmenting natural
resources 152–3
temporary habitats 164–5
terrestrial biome distribution 177
TEST programme in Danube River basin
296

I N D EX . 5 7 9

Thailand 509–11
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
allocation of water 510–11
aquaculture in 167
arsenic contamination in 283
Baan Mankong (secure housing)
Programme 101
Chao Phraya River valley 509
coastal areas, diversity in 509
Community Organizations
Development Institute
101
drought prevention 511
ecosystems and water 509
energy and water 510
flood mitigation 511
food and water 510
health and water 510
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
industry and water 510
inland fishery production in 167
marine areas, diversity in 509
Mekong River Commission (MRC)
511
Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) 510
monsoon-risk 511
morbidity rates 510
natural resources management
509–10
poverty 510
public participation rights in 77
returns on irrigation investments in
411
river basins in 509
transboundary water resources 511
tsunami, impact in 511
wastewater treatment, management
conflict over 510
water availability and use 135
water quality information, access to
78–9
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
water-related disasters 511
wetland values in 166
wetlands 509
thermal desalination 310–11
thermal freshwater pollutants 141
thermal power generation
environmental impacts 321–3
in South Africa 504
Tigris-Euphrates see Euphrates-Tigris
tilapia 163
Togo
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
toilets, flush/pour 224–6
toluene, release to water in EU member

states 282
tomatoes, water productivity of 256
Tonga, water availability and use 135
Tonle Sap, Cambodia 265
total actual renewable water resources
(TARWAR) 36, 131, 132–6
total organic carbon (TOC), release to
water in EU member states
282
total use as % TARWAR 36
tourism
climate change, projected impacts in
winter 363
globalization and 10
toxic chemicals, sedimentation and 137
toxic organic compounds 141
trachoma 210, 213, 224
deaths from 209
trade liberalization 245
trade-offs
choices and 184–5
management of 191–2
traditional systems, threat in India to 76
traditional technologies 120
traditional water sharing 388
transaction costs for environmental
services 425
Transboundary Freshwater Dispute
Database website 461
transboundary waters
Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary
Waters and International
Lakes (UNECE Water
Convention, 1996) 185,
286
interdependencies 376
transboundary and regional aquifers
in Danube River Basin
(DRB) 474
transboundary aquifers 374–5
transboundary basins in Ethiopia
477
transboundary groundwater
129–30
transboundary water management
sharing 491
transboundary water resources in
Mongolia 494
transboundary water resources in
Thailand 511
transboundary water systems 185
and water sharing 394
transfer of environmentally sound
technology (TEST) 294, 295
transparency in governance 49
transparency in tariff-setting 413
Transparency International 51
website 85
transportation
agreements for Lake
Peipsi/ChudskoePskovskoe 487
Danube River Basin (DRB) 475
water driven 409
trematode infections 228
trichuris 212, 213
trilogue between government, civil

society and private sector on
82
Trinidad and Tobago
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
trophozoites 211
tropical countries, particular problems in
19
tropical freshwater wetlands 165
tsunami
impact in Thailand of 511
social, economic and environmental
costs in Sri Lanka 508
tubwells 224–6
tundra wetlands, ecosystem threats to
172
Tunisia
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
IWRM developments in 57
undernourishment in 266
water availability and use 135
Turkey
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
desalinated water production 310
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
solar water heaters for domestic use
312
water availability and use 135
Turkmenistan
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
turtles, freshwater 170
Tuul River Basin, Mongolia 495–8
typhoid fever 212, 224
U
Uganda 512–15
access to electricity 331, 514
access to water 331
aquaculture in 167
climate change and disaster
preparedness in 363
cost recovery 512
Disaster Preparedness and
Management Strategy
515

ecosystem decline, Lake Victoria
163
ecosystems and water 512
energy and water 514
fisheries 513
food security 513
health and water 513
hydropower 514
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
industry and water 514
irrigation, potential for 513
IWRM developments in 56
Lake Victoria, significance for
economy of 512
legal framework and reforms
514–15
livestock production 513
mining pollution 514
National Water Development Report
443
Nile Basin Initiative (NBI) 380
Plan for Modernisation of
Agriculture (PMA)
513–14
Planning, Sector Wide Approach to
(SWAP) 514–15
poverty 513–14
Poverty Eradication Action Plan
(PEAP) 513
public participation rights in 77
renewable water resources 512
rising temperatures, impact in 513
river basins in 512
rural development 512
secondary urban centres on Lake
Victoria, lack of 105
undernourishment in 266
urban settlements 512
Water Action Plan (WAP) 514
water availability and use 135
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
water related disasters 515
wetland values in 166
wetlands for waste treatment in
165
see also Lake Victoria
Ukraine
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Dniester-Odra Project 380
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Strategic Action Plan for
transboundary Dnieper
River Basin 280
water availability and use 135
water-related emergencies in 79
Ulan Bator, water usage in 497
UN agencies, websites 85, 239, 369,
397, 431, 461–2
UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) 221–2
UN Commission on Sustainable
Development (CSD) 32
UN Committee on Economic, Social and

5 8 0 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Cultural Rights (ICESR) 63,
65
UN Convention on the Law of the NonNavigational Uses of
International Watercourses
(1977) 65
UN Development Programme (UNDP) on
public-private partnerships
website 431
UN Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) 286, 389
UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) water
portal website 397
UN Environment Programme, Dams and
Development Project 179
UN Environment Programme (UNEP)
162, 215
website 397
UN Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) 165, 445
UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change 314
UN-HABITAT 109–10
UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) 108
UN Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) 280
UN International Decade for Natural
Disaster Reduction (IDNDR,
1990-2000) 344
UN International Law Commission 380
UN International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction (UN-ISDR) 27,
281, 358
UN Millennium Project (2005) 51, 524,
528
UN Millennium Project Task Force on
Hunger 261
UN Millennium Taskforce 7 on Water and
Sanitation 33
UN Office for Outer Space Affairs
(UNOOSA) 440–41
UN World Water Development Report
(WWDRI) 45, 164, 208,
219, 313, 348
uncertain change, dealing with 362
underground water resources in Mexico
493
undernourishment
in developing countries 266
undernourished people, percentage
of 36
undernutrition, measurement of 247
underweight children, prevalence of 36
UNECE Convention on the Transboundary
Effects of Industrial Accidents
(2000) 286
UNECE Water Convention (1996) 286
UNEP Freshwater Portal website 461
UNEP GEMS/Water Programme website
462
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education
443
website 462
UNESCO-IHE website on virtual water
431
UNESCO Water Portal website 461

Union of Concerned Scientists website
29
unit prices, complexity in determination
of 413
United Arab Emirates
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquifer systems with non-renewable
resources 130
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
desalinated water production 310
water availability and use 135
United Kingdom
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
ecosystem restoration in 190
hydropower capability 334
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Renewable Obligation Certificates
326
water availability and use 135
United States
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
aquifer recharge management in
147
coal tailing dam disaster in Kentucky
283
coastal areas vulnerable to climate
change 181
Devil’s Lake Emergency Outlet,
North Dakota 380
energy conservation in Moulton
Niguel Water District
311
environmental flow legislation in
147
hurricane ‘Katrina,’ risk management
and 26
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
inland water transport (IWT) in
22–3
irrigation water agreement with
Mexico 380
public participation rights in 77
rainfall pH levels in eastern 138
source water pollution in 408
transboundary aquifers 375
US National Academies’ Water
Information Center
website 462
US National Environmental Policy Act
376
US National Groundwater
Association (USNGWA)
147
US Public Technology Institute 110
water availability and use 135
water quality information,
accessibility of 80
water reuse in 148
Zero Effluent Discharge,
achievement in St

Petersburg, Florida 298
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UNDHR, 1948) 63
uranium 220
urban centres, definition of 103
urban development, downstream effects
of 106
urban environments, energy costs in
307
urban governance 88, 91–2, 94–7
urban irrigation, reclaimed water for
292
urban population 3
urban population as indicator 36
urban settlements
informal, in South Africa 502
in Uganda 512
see also settlements, urban and
rural
urban slums 55, 91, 98, 99
alternatives to slums for low-income
households, provision of
102
expansion of water provision for
97–102
incidence in developing countries
98
population changes in developing
countries 99
upgrading programmes in 101
urban use of reclaimed water, potential
for 149
Urban Water and Sanitation Governance
Index 36
urbanization
and markets for food 254
and population growth 9, 88
trends in 89–90
Uruguay
access to drinking water 499
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Hidrovía Waterway Project 500
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
Paraguay-Paraná Waterway Project
500
right to water in 64
sanitation services, access to 499
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 135
see also La Plata River Basin
Uruguay River system 498
user-based data 226
user-based design of warning systems
352–3
user charges, structuring of 413
user pays principle in
charging for water services 406,
413
valuation of water 406
utilities
affordability of 427
Index of Performance of Water
Utilities as indicators 36
payment structures for 522
Utstein Anti-Corruption Resource Centre

website 85
Uzbekistan
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 135
V
valuation of water 28, 400
affordability, reconciliation with cost
recovery in PPPs 419,
420–21
analytical methods for 428
anthropogenic impacts and 425
benefit-cost analysis (BCA) 410–11
challenge of 418–25
choice of public-private partnerships
421
cost recovery, reconciliation with
affordability in PPPS
419, 420–21
cultural valuation 400, 401
decentralization and 400
deductive methodology 407, 409
Dublin Statement on Water and
Sustainable Development
401
ecological appreciation and 405
economic efficiency and 406, 411
economic valuation 400, 401,
405–6, 427–8
economic valuation, criticism of
409
environmental valuation 400, 401,
405
evaluation of alternative governance
strategies 410–11
forest ecosystem services 425
freshwater scarcity 428–9
human activities and 423–4
hydrological cycle and 423–4
inclusive approach to PPPs 419–20
indicators
development of 426–7
household income/expenses,
water charges as
proportion of 426
investment levels, ratio of
actual to desired
426
rate of cost recovery 426
water sector share of public
spending 426
inductive methodology 407, 409
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
400, 401
Management of Water Projects
(OECD, 1985) 407
measurement, concept of 428
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(2005) 407
multi-faceted nature of 401
multi-objective assessment of water

I N D EX . 5 8 1

projects 411
non-market economic valuation
407–10
Omnibus Water Resources Act (US,
1970) 407
ownership of water infrastructure
420
politically determined principles and
406
polluter pays principle 401
pro-poor policies for 401
process of 427
public health issues and 406
public policy evaluation 405
public-private partnerships (PPPs) in
418–21
puplic-private partnerships, costeffectiveness and 400
resource value estimation 407
resources, public-private
partnerships sharing
418–19
role of valuation 405–12
skills, public-private partnerships
sharing 418–19
social valuation 400, 401
socially determined principles and
406
socio-cultural context 402–5, 407
special case of water 406–7
user pays principle in 406
valuation techniques 400, 410–11
value of public-private partnerships
420–21
virtual water 428
development of concept 423
global water use efficiency in
422–3
substantial nature of flow of
422
trade in 421–3
Water Resources Council 407, 411
water security 406–7
willingness to accept compensation
(WTA) 410
Vanuatu, private sector involvement in
water supply and sanitation
70
variability
combating natural variables 147–8
of water resources 123–36
vector-borne diseases 214
transmission risks of 205
water associated 213–14
Venezuela
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Amazonian Cooperation Treaty
Organization (OTCA)
380
hydrological networks in 439
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
transboundary aquifers 375
water availability and use 135
ventilated improved pit latrine (VIP)
224–6

Viet Nam
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
acid rain in 138
aquifer recharge, example of 146
hydropower capability 333
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
inland fishery production in 167
IWRM developments in 56
strategy against container breeding
mosquito in 218
water availability and use 136
virtual water 257–8
content of food products 258
development of concept 423
global water use efficiency in
422–3
imports worldwide 393
in manufactured products,
minimization of 293
substantial nature of flow of 422
trade in 421–3
and trade in food 257–8
valuation of water 428
and water footprint 392
water footprint and 392
Viru-Peipsi water management plan 487
Volta River basin 380
volume of groundwater in storage 129
volume of TARWAR as indicator 36
vulnerability 19
and resilience in risk assessment
364
sharing water 376
vulnerability analysis 364
vulnerability assessment 363, 365
data and information for 350
vulnerability indicator 37
W
war, social and political unrest 48
warning system effectiveness 352–3
washdown water 292
waste
disposal, Basel Convention on the
Control of
Transboundary
Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and
their Disposal (1992)
21, 284, 285
power 315
raw material and energy recovery
from 297
reuse of 297
wastewater
collection, treatment and disposal
308–9
connections 98
flows, stream separation and 297
management, water usage and 104
reclamation 291
safe use in agriculture, WHO
guidelines 264
services
electrical energy consumption

and 306, 308–13
willingness to pay for
improvements 410
treatment 292
cost of 291
management conflict in
Thailand 510
and recycling 11
systems for 524
technologies for 297–8
untreated 179
use
in agriculture and aquaculture
228
recycling and 264
water
abstraction (and over-abstraction)
143–4
abundancy of, problems with 146
access in Gash watershed, Sudan
269
access to water for domestic use as
indicator 36
agricultural role of 245–55
allocation for industry vs domestic
and agricultural use
279
analysis, simultaneous of water and
energy consumption
306
AQUASTAT 131–6
aquifer recharging 147
aquifer storage and recovery,
desalination and (DASR)
150
artificial storage and recovery (ASR)
147, 148–9
Associated Programme of Flood
Management (APFM)
122
atmospheric resources 123–4
auditing 290
availability, fossil fuel vs,
classification by 36
availability of 130–6
availability of water resources
123–36
balance, relative importance of
agricultural withdrawals
in 36
benefits of sustainable development
153
blue and green in hydrological cycle
250, 251
bottled, high cost of 402
buffering 165
capacity development 436
catalyst for cooperation 376
Center for Environmental Systems
Research 126
charges 28
as % of household income 37
climate change, global warming and
144–5
climate change, impact of 120
climate monitoring ‘Aqua’ satellite
(NASA) 125
co-management of water and

energy resources 327–8
Commission on Managing Aquifer
Recharge (MAR) 147
competition for resources 244
connection procedures 96
conservation 153, 328
conservation, energy intensity and
309
conservation and energy
consumption 306
conservation measures,
implementation of
149–50
conservation traditions 146
consumption 276
cost and value comparisons 414
data reliability for WRA 151
decentralization of WRA 151
decision-making, integration of
water and energy issues
327–8
demand, matching supply with
145–51
demand management 143, 149–50,
153, 294
demands on, prevention strategies
152–3
desalination 150
development 205–7
development paradigm 436
disconnection procedures 96
diversion 321
driving forces on water resources
121–2
driving sustainable development
151
World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP)
151
economic benefits of sustainable
development 153
economic development, limits on
152
ecosystem impairment 136
ecosystem preservation 146–7
efficiency and energy consumption
309–10
for energy generation 313–23
environment, industrial impacts on
277–81, 299–300
environmental benefits of
sustainable development
153
environmental flows 146–7
European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD, 2000)
121–2
European Water Archive 126
evapotranspiration 123, 124–5
extreme events, magnitude and
frequency of 144–5
flooding, combat against 122
for food in Mongolia 496
footprint, virtual water and 392
footprints 391
fossil fuels and desalination plants
150
freshwater ‘in storage’ 122–3

5 8 2 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

freshwater resources, variability in
availability and
distribution of 120
fundamental nature of 6
geological characteristics and
groundwater 128–9
global distribution of 121
‘global dynamic envelope’ 123
Global Environmental Monitoring
System (GEMS)/Water
international quality
database 130, 142–3,
162
global hydrology and water
resources 121–3
global occurrence and distribution
of 122–3
Global Runoff Data Center 126
Global Soil Moisture Data Bank
124–5
global warming and climate change
144–5
global water quality and pollution
139–
goods and services provided by
water 409
groundwater 128–30
groundwater over-abstraction
143–4
groundwater resources 120, 152
harvesting, expansion of 15
health, adverse conditions in 152
holistic approach to pollution
controls 142–3
household use practices 150
human impacts on water resources
136–45
hydrological cycle, nature of
123–36
hydrological cycle, roles and
interdependencies of
components 152
Ice and snow 125
industry, approach to sustainable
development 153
institutional responses to
sustainable development
153
inter-state conflict and cooperation
380
interdependency indicator 37
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) 123,
144–5
International Association of
Hydrogeologists (IAH)
147
International Desalination
Association (IDA) 150
International Sediment Initiative (ISI)
136–7
international virtual water flows
392
Internationally Shared Aquifer
Resources Management
(ISARM) 130
isotopic composition of precipitation
123

knowledge gaps, impacts of global
warming 144
lakes 125–6
landscape modifications 152
leakage from degraded pipes 150
leaks in distribution 309–10
links between water and energy
sectors 306–7, 308–13,
313–23
livelihoods, adverse conditions in
152
managed aquifer recharge (MAR)
147
management in Mexico 493
mobilization targeted at poor 270
natural groundwater quality 130
needs in different size settlements
103–8
non-renewable groundwater 129
occurrence of groundwater 128–9
over-abstraction 143–4
as pathway out of poverty 268–70
Per Capita Equivalent of ‘Availability’
(PCA) 131
perspective on MDGs 206–7
policy implementation in Ethiopia
478–9
pollution 137–43
poor quality of 152
population growth and supply of
144–5
poverty, gender, improved
governance and water in
Punjab 47
in Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
(PRSPs) 53
precautionary principle on pollution
139, 142
precipitation 123–4
pressure on resources 120
pressures for sustainable
development 151
pressures on water resources
121–2
pricing in irrigation 260–61
pricing weaknesses 328
primary life-giving resource 6
productivity 255–8, 290–98
of crops 256
improvement in 290–94
provision
conventional model of urban
provision 98,
105–6
inadequacies in urban areas
90–92
provider responsiveness to
urban poor 95
as public good 83
pump and motor system efficiencies
309–10
quality 226–8, 233
decline in 255
environment and 263–5
information, access to 78–80
matching use to requirements
290, 291
quality assurance/quality control

(QA/QC) programmes
142–3
quality monitoring programmes 152
rainwater 247
rainwater harvesting 147
Ramsar sites with water-related
value 404
reclaimed volumes 149
reclamation 291
recycling 290–91
regional scales of contamination
139
renewability of groundwater 128–9
research in South Africa 504–5
reservoirs 148
resource amplification 146–7
resource sustainability 136
resources
acid rain, impacts on 138
assessment of 14
assessment (WRA) 151, 153
availability, index of 131,
132–6
blatant disparities in 470–71
development in Mexico 494
Ethiopia 477–8
Mali 489
management in Mongolia 497
management in Sri Lanka 507
Mexico 492
satellite remote sensing for
441
uneven distribution of 521
reuse of 148–9
right to water 63
river and streams 126–7
river basins, drainage areas of 126
river flow and water levels 126–7
runoff variability 126
safeguarding right to safe water
supply 66
and sanitation delivery for urban
poor 94–6
and sanitation infrastructure in
Ethiopia 478
saving strategies 290–94
savings worldwide 393
scaling, problem of 293
scarcity 232–3, 254–5
sector capacity, enhancement in
Kenya 485–6
sector reform in Kenya 485
sector share in total public spending
37
security 406–7
sedimentation 136–7
service levels 227
implications for 227
service provision
benefits and costs of
improvements in
412
corruption and consequences
for 66–7
improved governance for better
water services in
Brazil 72
willingness to pay for

improvements in
Cairo 410
sharing
mechanisms, context for
373–6
traditional approaches to 388
shortage, challenge of 49–50
snow and ice 125
social benefits of sustainable
development 153
social customs, key element in 403
soil moisture 124
storage in reservoirs 148
stress in dryland areas 184
supply
electrical energy consumption
and 306, 308–13
inadequacies, weight on
women 92
in Phnom Phenh, Cambodia
234
private sector participation 419
ratio of actual to desired levels
of public investment
in 37
residential 409
safeguarding to low-income
groups 65
sedimentation and 137
supply, matching demand with
145–51
supply and sanitation
challenge to communities of
32
corruption in India 68
private sector involvement 70
supply provisioning practices,
inefficiency of 143
surface runoff, variability in 152
surface water availability,
uncertainty of 120
surface water diversion for aquifer
recharging 147
surface waters 125–7
sustainable development, challenge
of 151–3
sustainable resource management
150
technologies augmenting natural
resources 152–3
traditional technologies 120
transboundary groundwater
129–30
transfer in Mexico 493
US National Groundwater
Association (USNGWA)
147
use 36, 277
domestic and industrial 200
efficiency in 255–6
paradigm in sharing water
376–7, 382, 396,
436
users associations in Morocco 73
valuing water, valuing women 403
variability, combating natural
variables 147–8
variability of water resources

I N D EX . 5 8 3

123–36
variable in agriculture 245–52
vendors 224–6
volume of groundwater in storage
129
water-borne diseases 471
water/energy efficiency 309–10
water-poverty link 45–6
water-related disasters 343–7
in Japan 482–3
managing the aftermath 367
in Thailand 511
in Uganda 515
water-related diseases
global burden of 204, 208–21
in South Africa 503
water-related natural disasters
effects in Ethiopia 478
water-related policy in Mongolia
497
water-related risk components,
public policies with 358
water resources assessment (WRA)
151, 153
water rights 61–3
water-storage 262–3
‘water war’ in Cochabamba, Bolivia
420
weather patterns and 120
wetlands 127–8
World Heritage Sites with waterrelated value 404
Water, Sanitation and Health Programme
(WHO) 226
Water Action Plan (WAP) in Uganda 514
Water and Environmental Resources in
Regional Development
(WERRD)
Okavango River Project 380
Water and Nature Initiative (IUCN)
website 431
Water and Sanitation International
Benchmarking Network
(IBNET) website 462
Water and Sanitation Programme website
462
Water as a Source of Conflict and
Cooperation: Exploring the
Potential (Conference) 390
water birds, wintering 163
Water Commission of the State (CAEM) in
Mexico 493
Water Conflicts and Spiritual
Transformation: A Dialogue
(Conference) 390
Water Cooperation Facility (WCF) 395
Water Environment Federation (WEF)
website 462
Water for All Programme website 239
Water Hazard and Risk Management,
UNESCO Centre for, website
462
water hyacinth, aggressive invasiveness
of 181
Water Law Standards website 85
Water Pollution Index 36
Water Research Network website 462
Water Resources Assessment -

Handbook for Review of
National Capabilities
(WMO/UNESCO) 457
Water Resources Council 407, 411
Water Reuse Index (WRI) 36, 339
Water Safety Plans (WSPs) 228
Water Sector Development Programme
(WSDP) in Ethiopia 479
Water Stress Index (WSI) 36
Water Supply and Sanitation
Collaborative Council (WSSCC)
205
website 239
water use
non-sustainable 2
Water Virtual Learning Centre website
462
waterbirds 168–71
populations in AEWA regions 170
watermelons, water productivity of 256
WaterNet website 462
watersheds
biological oxygen demand (BOD) for
174
inorganic nitrogen concentrations
175
watershed-based payment schemes
424
waterways, sedimentation and 137
WCA infoNET website 462
weather patterns 120
web sites
Access Initiative 85
African Water Page 85
American Institute of Hydrology
(AIH) 462
AQUASTAT 273
Asian Development Bank 239
Asian Disaster Preparedness Center
(ADPC) 369
Beijer Institute website on
environmental
economics 431
coastal and freshwater ecosystems
193–6
Complex Emergencies Database 461
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in
agriculture 273
Consultative Group on International
Agricultural Research
273
Earthwatch 461
energy 335
Environmental and Water Resources
Institute (EWRI) 462
European Commission on the
Environment on water
policy 431
European Declaration for a New
Water Culture 397
European Pollutant Emission
Register 303
European Union water policy 397
FAO Water Portals 461
FAOSTAT 273
Freedom House 85
Freshwater Action Network 462

Future Harvest centres 240
GEO-3 Data Portal 461
Global Development Learning
Network (GLDN) 462
Global International Waters
Assessment (GIWA) 461
Global Online Research in
Agriculture (AGORA)
461
Global Perspective Studies 273
Global Resource Information
Database (UNEP GRID)
461
Global Runoff Data Centre (GRDC)
461
Global Water Partnership 85
Global Water Partnership (GWP)
397
Health, Nutrition and Population
Programme 239
Housing Rights and Evictions, Centre
on (COHRE) 85
human settlements, water and 113
industry 303
Integrated River Basin Management
(IRBM) 397
International Association of
Hydraulic Engineering
and Research (IAHR)
462
International Association of
Hydrological Sciences
(IAHS) 462
International Association of
Hydrologists (IAH) 462
International Commission on
Irrigation and Drainage
(ICID) 273
International Development Research
Centre (IDRC) 240
International Disasters Database
461
International Fund for Agricultural
Development 273
International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre
(IGRAC) 461
International Network of Basin
Organizations 462
international NGOs 369
International Rivers Network (IRN)
397
International Standards Organization
303
International Water Association 240
International Water Association
(IWA) 462
International Water Management
Institute (IWMI) 240
International Water Resources
Association 462
International Waters Learning
Exchange and Resource
Network (IW:LEARN)
462
International Year of Freshwater

461
INWEB 397
Latin American Network for Water
Education and Training
(LA WETnet) 462
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)
369
Nile Basin Capacity-Building
Network for River
Engineering (NBCBN-RE)
462
OECD website on water financing
431
Organization of American States
(OAS) 397
Pacific Institute 303
research centres 369
Research Institute for Development
(IRD) 462
River Basin Initiative (RBI) 397
State of Food Insecurity (SOFI) 273
State of World Fisheries and
Agriculture (SOFIA) 273
Stockholm International Water
Institute (SIWI) 397
Streams of Knowledge 462
Transboundary Freshwater Dispute
Database 461
Transparency International 85
UN agencies 85, 239, 369
UNEP Freshwater Portal 461
UNEP GEMS/Water Programme 462
UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water
Education 462
UNESCO-IHE website on virtual
water 431
UNESCO Water Portal 461
United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) on
public-private
partnerships 431
United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO)
water portal 397
United Nations Environmental
Programme (UNEP) 397
universities 369
US National Academies’ Water
Information Center 462
Utstein Anti-Corruption Resource
Centre 85
Water and Nature Initiative (IUCN)
431
Water and Sanitation International
Benchmarking Network
(IBNET) 462
Water and Sanitation Programme
462
Water Environment Federation (WEF)
462
Water for All Programme 239
water governance 85
Water Hazard and Risk
Management, UNESCO
Centre for 462
Water Law Standards 85

5 8 4 . WAT E R : A S H A R E D R ES P O N S I B I L I TY

Water Research Network 462
water resources, state of 154–7
Water Supply and Sanitation
Collaborative Council
239
Water Virtual Learning Centre 462
WaterNet 462
WCA infoNET 462
World Bank 239
World Bank Public-Private
Infrastructure Advisory
Facility (PPIAF) 431
World Bank Water Supply and
Sanitation programme
431
World Health Organization 239,
240
World Hydrological Cycle Observing
System (WHYCOS) 462
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) 462
World Resources Institute 303
World Water Council on virtual water
431
World Water Council (WWC) 397
World Water Resources and their
Use 303
WWF Freshwater programme 431
weight-for-age indicator 229
welfare 10
well-being, challenges in Mongolia 496
wells, protected and unprotected 224–6
West Asia
ISO 14001 certification in 287
West Bank
cooperative programmes in 380
IWRM developments in 57
water availability and use 136
wet grasslands 173
ecosystem threats to 172
wetlands 127–8, 165
climate change impact on 181
distribution of 168
Ethiopia 478
fragility of ecosystems 264–5
as livelihood sources 264–5
protection of habitats by region
188
Thailand 509
threat in Sri Lanka to 505
threat to Southeast Asian 169
wetland conversion 171, 173
whipworm 212
white-winged tern 163
willingness to accept compensation
(WTA) 410
willingness to pay (WTP) 410–11
wind power 315
generation from 325
women
in agricultural workforce in Sri Lanka
507
empowerment through education
449
gender balance, need for 452
needs of 16
role in irrigated farming in subSaharan Africa 259

status of 403
valuing water, valuing women 403
water management and 15–16
water supply inadequacies, weight
on 92
see also gender
Women’s Land and Water Rights in
Southern Africa (WLWRSA)
55
Woodrow Wilson International Center
389
World Bank 52, 173, 380, 450, 453,
458
lending in irrigation 261
website 239
World Bank Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility (PPIAF)
website 431
World Bank Water Supply and Sanitation
programme website 431
World Commission on Dams (WCD, 2002)
179, 236, 313
World Conservation Monitoring Centre
(WCMC, UNEP) 169
World Conservation Union (IUCN) 170,
190, 380
World Health Organization (WHO) 210,
215, 402, 412
guidelines for safe use of
wastewater in
agriculture 264
website 239, 240
World Health Reports (WHO) 208, 210,
212, 230
World Heritage Sites with water-related
value 404
World Hydrological Cycle Observing
System (WHYCOS) 439, 440
website 462
World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) 346–7, 351, 353,
439, 440, 457
knowledge 438
website 462
World Resources Institute 176
website 303
World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP) 33, 35, 37–8,
469–73
agriculture, water-demands of 471
benchmarking 38, 470
case studies 469–73
crucial role of 38–9
climatic variations 472
coordination, deficiencies in 473
droughts 472
ecosystem preservation 471–2
energy, growing needs for 471
findings 470–73
floods 472
gender equality in education 471
groundwater resources 472
indicator development 35–8
indicators, development of 470
industrial development 471
Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM)
473

monitoring, evaluation and reporting
(MER) systems 470,
471
surface water resources 472
water-borne diseases 471
water resources, blatant disparities
in 470–71
World Water Council (WWC)
sharing water 382, 395
website 397
website on virtual water 431
World Water Day (2002) 108
World Water Resources and their Use
website 303
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) 169,
190
WWF Freshwater programme website
431
X
xylenes, release to water in EU member
states 282
Y
Yangtze River dams 178
Yemen
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
desalinated water production 310
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
IWRM developments in 57
water availability and use 136
Yerevan, Armenia 418
‘youth bulge’ 8–9
Yugoslavia
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
Yukon River system 177
Z
Zambesi Watercourse Convention
(ZAMCOM) 380
Zambia
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
water availability and use 136
wetland values in 165, 166
Zaragoza International Conference
(2004) 390
Zero Effluent Discharge, aim of 298
Zimbabwe
access to electricity 331
access to water 331
carbon intensity of electricity
production 323
hydropower capability 332
indicators on industrial water
productivity 302
integration of land and water
governance 55
Limpopo Watercourse Commission

(LIMCOM) 380
water availability and use 136
water sector reform in 54

