2007

2007

ISSN 0081-4539

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

THE STATE
OF FOOD
AND
AGRICULTURE

PAYING FARMERS
FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICES

FAO

Cover-II.ai

29/8/07

12:00:41

C

M

Y

CM

MY

CY

CMY

K

Photos on cover and page 3: All photos are from FAO Mediabase.

Copies of FAO publications can be requested from:
SALES AND MARKETING GROUP
Communication Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome, Italy

E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
Fax: (+39) 06 57053360
Web site: http://www.fao.org/catalog/inter-e.htm

2007

FAO Agriculture Series No. 38
ISSN 0081-4539

THE STATE
OF FOOD
AND
AGRICULTURE

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Rome, 2007

Produced by the
Electronic Publishing Policy and Support Branch
Communication Division
FAO

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information
product do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations concerning the
legal or development status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities,
or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. The mention of specific
companies or products of manufacturers, whether or not these have been patented,
does not imply that these have been endorsed or recommended by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in preference to others of a similar nature
that are not mentioned.
The designations employed and the presentation of material in the maps do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of FAO concerning the legal or
constitutional status of any country, territory or sea area, or concerning the delimitation
of frontiers.

ISBN 978-92-5-105750-6

All rights reserved. Reproduction and dissemination of material in this information
product for educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorized without
any prior written permission from the copyright holders provided the source is fully
acknowledged. Reproduction of material in this information product for resale or other
commercial purposes is prohibited without written permission of the copyright holders.
Applications for such permission should be addressed to:
Chief
Electronic Publishing Policy and Support Branch
Communication Division
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00153 Rome, Italy
or by e-mail to:
copyright@fao.org

© FAO 2007

iii

Contents
Foreword
Acknowledgements
Abbreviations and acronyms
Explanatory note

vii
x
xii
xiv

PART I
Paying farmers for environmental services
1. Introduction and overview
Ecosystem services and agriculture
The role of farmers
Payments for environmental services
Current experience with payments for environmental services
Implications for poverty
Main messages from the report
2. Environmental services and agriculture
How can agricultural producers generate environmental services?
Agriculture and climate change mitigation
Water quantity and quality
Biodiversity conservation
Importance of scale, location and coordination in supplying environmental
services
Technical versus economic potential to supply environmental services
Conclusions
3. Demand for environmental services
Value and beneficiaries of environmental services
Who are the potential buyers?
Demand for three main environmental services
Farmers and landholders as buyers of services
Future developments affecting potential growth of PES programmes
in developing countries
Conclusions
4. Supplying environmental services: farmers’ decisions and policy options
The role of individual farmers’ decisions
Constraints against the provision of environmental services
Policy options to shape farmers’ incentives
Why payments?
Supply response to payments for environmental services
Conclusions
5. Designing effective payments for environmental services
What should payments be made for?
Who should be paid?
How much should be paid?
How should payments be made?
Reducing transaction costs
Establishing an enabling environment
Conclusions
6. Implications for poverty
The poor as suppliers of environmental services
Indirect impacts of PES programmes on the poor

3
4
4
7
8
9
9
12
13
14
18
23
28
29
32
33
33
36
40
45
46
48
50
50
51
58
60
62
71
73
74
80
84
87
90
92
95
97
98
107

iv

Payments for environmental services and poverty reduction: where are
the synergies?
Conclusions
7. Conclusions
The way forward

108
109
111
114

Part II
World and regional review: a longer-term perspective
Agricultural production
Food consumption
Agricultural trade
Food insecurity
Opportunities and challenges in the future


120
124
126
130
134

Part III
Statistical annex
Table A1
Table A2
Table A3
Table A4
Table A5
Table A6
Table A7
Table A8
Table A9

Total and agricultural population
Land use
Water use and irrigated land
Production of cereals and meat
Production of fish and forest products
Value of agricultural exports and share in total exports
Value of agricultural imports and share in total imports
Share of processed food products in total food trade
Per capita GDP and per capita agricultural GDP of the
agricultural population
Table A10 Dietary energy, protein and fat consumption
Table A11 Number of undernourished and proportion in total population
Table A12 Life expectancy and child mortality

Glossary of terms
References
Special chapters of The State of Food and Agriculture
Selected publications of the FAO Agricultural Development
Economics Division

139
144
149
154
159
164
169
174
179
184
189
194

201
203
215
217

tables
1. Potential carbon mitigation from land-use change, 2003–12
2. Indicators of freshwater provisioning services, 2010
3. Brief overview of hydrologic consequences associated with major classes
of land cover and use change
4. Management options and coordination requirements for three environmental
services
5. Indirect, option, and non-use values associated with environmental services
6. Environmental services and examples of buyers
7. Size of selected watershed service markets
8. Lack of information as an obstacle to adopting conservation agriculture

16
20
22
30
36
37
44
54



9. Financial performance and costs of selected agroforestry systems on
poor land: modelling results for Sumatra, Indonesia over 70 years
10. Cost-effectiveness of the PES approach under different circumstances
11. Environmental service indices in the Silvopastoral Project in Colombia,
Costa Rica and Nicaragua
12. Types of payments for biodiversity protection
13. People living on fragile land
14. Who are the poor?
15. Relative importance of different poverty reduction strategies
by resource potential
16. Global growth rates for outputs of different agricultural commodities

69
70
78
93
98
103
104
121

Boxes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

Ecosystem services, environmental services and externalities
Public goods
Landscape aesthetics
Demand for and supply of water services in Sukhomajri, India and New York,
United States of America
The United States Conservation Reserve Program
Global Environment Facility and payments for environmental services
The Biodiversity and Wine Initiative in South Africa
Payments for reduced emissions from deforestation: what is the potential?
Environmental education and the supply of environmental services
Land tenure and environmental services: insights from the Philippines
and Nepal
Can high-value agricultural exports enhance environmental services?
One example
Biodiversity offset programmes around the world
Payments for restoring riparian areas in São Paulo, Brazil
The Regional Integrated Silvopastoral Ecosystem Management Project
in Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua
Payments for environmental services and the World Trade Organization
Green Box provisions
The Payments for Environmental Services programme of Costa Rica: setting
the baseline
China’s Grain for Green programme
The political economy of targeting: the Payment for Hydrological Services
Programme in Mexico
Measurement and targeting issues: the BushTender programme of Australia
Rules and modalities for afforestation and reforestation payments under
the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol
Ecolabelling in fisheries
The Working for Water Programme in South Africa
Will the poor respond to payments for avoided carbon emissions? Evidence
from Costa Rica
Reaching the poor with cash? Lessons from conditional cash transfers
A market for carbon offsets from the poor? Evidence from the
Plan Vivo System
Can the poor benefit from payments for environmental services programmes?
Evidence from the Silvopastoral Project in Nicaragua

6
14
28
34
38
39
40
42
55
56
58
62
74
76
79
81
83
85
86
90
92
97
100
106
107
109

vi

FIGURES
1. Ecosystem services categories
2. PES programmes in the forest sector: breakdown by service
3. Above- and below-ground carbon sequestration
4. Changes in soil carbon for different cropping systems
5. Biodiversity impact of adopting silvopastoral systems in Esparza, Costa Rica
6. Share of bioenergy in total primary energy supply
7. Barriers to the adoption of improved management practices: permanent
decrease in farm income
8. Barriers to the adoption of improved management practices: information and
investment constraints
9. Dryland farming system types: a classification framework according
to opportunity costs of land and labour
10. Level of carbon payments required to provide incentives for reducing
emissions by avoided deforestation
11. Profitability and carbon sequestration in Cameroon
12. Carbon supply response in Nioro Region, Senegal
13. Key elements in PES programme design
14. Total and per capita agricultural production
15. Average growth rate in per capita agricultural value added, by region
16. Growth rate in per capita agricultural production in sub-Saharan Africa,
1990–2004
17. Meat production in developing countries
18. Per capita food consumption
19. Composition of food consumption in developing countries
20. Consumption of different food commodities in developing countries
21. Global agricultural exports
22. Agricultural imports and exports in developing countries
23. Agricultural trade balance of least-developed countries
24. Agricultural commodity prices
25. Income terms of trade for agriculture
26. Undernourishment in developing countries
27. Changes in number and proportion of undernourished people in subregions
from 1990–1992 to 2001–2003
28. Per capita GDP and undernourishment (average 2001–2003)

5
8
15
19
27
43
52
53
64
67
68
69
75
120
121
122
122
124
125
126
127
127
128
129
130
131
132
133

Maps
1
2
3
4
5
6

Potential to sequester additional carbon in soils
Potential to sequester additional carbon in soils on croplands
Croplands with high rates of human-induced erosion
Projected expansion of cropland and pasture, 2000–2010
Biodiversity hotspots in croplands poorly suited to rainfed agriculture
Projected expansion of cropland and pasture to lands poorly suited to rainfed
agriculture, 2000–2010
7 Biodiversity hotspots in areas poorly suited to rainfed agriculture with high
poverty rates
8 Highly degraded croplands with soil carbon sequestration potential and high
poverty rates

17
18
23
26
65
66
99
101

vii

Foreword
Despite unprecedented global economic
growth, 1.1 billion people continue to live
in extreme poverty and more than 850
million people suffer from chronic hunger
while ecosystems are being threatened
as never before. Poverty reduction, food
security and environmental sustainability
have all moved to the top of a crowded
international agenda, as reflected in the
Millennium Development Goals. At the
same time, the close relationships among
poverty, hunger and ecosystem degradation
are becoming ever clearer. Most of the
world’s poor people live in rural areas, many
of them in marginal environments, and
depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.
Agricultural development is therefore crucial
for alleviating poverty on a large scale. Such
development would also require that the
natural resource base on which the poor
depend for their livelihoods be preserved
and enhanced.
Services provided by ecosystems are
essential, not only for poverty reduction,
but indeed for human survival. The
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, as well
as reports arising from other more recent
studies such as Water for food, water for
life (Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007) and
Livestock’s long shadow: environmental
issues and options (FAO, 2006a), have
painted a stark picture of current ecosystem
degradation and the potential consequences
of a continuation of current trends.
Agriculture often lies at the centre of
the complex set of problems surrounding
ecosystem degradation. It contributes to
the problems and suffers from many of
the consequences, but at the same time it
offers possible solutions. Modern agriculture
has been very successful in providing the
ecosystem services for which markets exist –
crops, livestock, fish, and forest products – in
ever greater quantities. But the expansion of
these services has often been achieved at a
high cost to other ecosystem services, such as
regulation of climate, water and biodiversity,
which are necessary to sustain human life.

Enhancing these services, while producing
a further doubling of conventional output
to meet the demands of a growing global
population, is one of the great challenges
facing world agriculture in the twenty-first
century.
The State of Food and Agriculture 2007
highlights the potential of agriculture for
enhanced provision of ecosystem services
that are not usually compensated for by
the market. When we think of farmers, we
typically think of the food and fibre that
they produce and that they either consume
or sell on markets to generate an income.
But the production processes can also result
in impacts on other ecosystem services that
are not traded in markets, referred to in
this report as “environmental services”.
Some may be positive, such as groundwater
recharge and scenic landscapes; others may
be negative, such as water pollution by
plant nutrients and animal waste, and soil
erosion from poorly managed croplands
or overgrazed hillsides. As agricultural
production expands, these negative effects
can develop into increasingly serious
problems. A fundamental question concerns
how farmers can be encouraged to reduce
negative side-effects while meeting the
growing demands for food and fibre. At
the same time, changes in agricultural
practices may also contribute to addressing
environmental problems generated outside
agriculture, for example, by offsetting
greenhouse gas emissions from other
sectors. A relevant question, therefore, is
how farmers can be induced to increase their
provision of this type of service.
Farmers constitute the largest group of
natural resource managers on Earth. They
both depend on and generate a wide array
of ecosystem services. Their actions can both
enhance and degrade ecosystems. Thus,
understanding what drives their decisions
is critical in designing new strategies that
enhance ecosystem services and contribute
to sustainable growth.
Paying farmers for the environmental
services they provide is an approach that

viii

has generated growing interest worldwide
from policy-makers and non-governmental
and private decision-makers. This strategy
is akin to viewing environmental protection
as a business transaction. This perspective is
not without controversy, but it must be kept
in mind that many services are degraded
precisely because they are free to use but
costly to provide.
Payments for environmental services have
also attracted attention for their potential to
mobilize new sources of finance to support
sustainable environmental management
in developing countries and to contribute
to poverty reduction and agricultural
development.
This report examines this approach to
enhancing environmental services through
the lens of managing agriculture to meet
the agricultural and environmental demands
of the future. In addition, it examines the
potential of this mechanism to contribute
also to poverty reduction. Of the numerous
services to which agriculture can contribute,
this report highlights three: climate change
mitigation, enhanced quality and quantity
of water provision and the preservation of
biodiversity.
One of the points made in this report is
that agriculture can be an important source
of improvements in the environmental
services provided to humanity by ecosystems.
Agriculture employs more people and uses
more land and water than any other human
activity. It has the potential to degrade
the Earth’s land, water, atmosphere and
biological resources – or to enhance them
– depending on the decisions made by the
more than 2 billion people whose livelihoods
depend directly on crops, livestock, fisheries
or forests.
Ensuring appropriate incentives for
these people is essential. More and
better information can influence farmers’
decisions about their practices in ways
that lead to environmental improvements,
especially when changes in farming and
land-management practices that enhance
ecosystem services would also be profitable
for the farmers themselves. However, should
such changes imply a reduction in farmers’
incomes, they will only be implemented
through effectively enforced regulations
or, voluntarily, when some form of

compensation is provided. In the latter case,
payments to farmers from the beneficiaries
can provide an answer. The relative
merits and effectiveness of the different
approaches vary for different environmental
services. Key challenges in implementing
the payments approach lie in creating
a mechanism for valuing the relevant
service where none exists, identifying how
additional amounts of the service can be
provided most cost-effectively, and deciding
which farmers should be paid for providing
more of it and how much they should be
paid.
Payments for environmental services
can increase the incomes of farmers who
produce the services. Other poor households
may also benefit, for example from increased
productivity of the soils they cultivate or
improved quality of the water they drink.
But the distribution of benefits depends on
who produces the environmental services
and where. Environmental service payments
can contribute to alleviating poverty, but
such poverty-reducing effects are neither
automatic nor universal. In some cases,
payments may also have adverse impacts
on poverty and food security, for example
if they reduce agricultural employment
or increase food prices. Furthermore, the
administrative costs of payment schemes
that fully integrate the poorest farmers
may be large, while other barriers, such as
absence of clearly defined property rights,
may prevent the poor from participating.
A major challenge is to design payment
schemes in such a way as to avoid negative
impacts on the poor and to enable poor
farmers to participate.
In order to maximize the benefits in terms
of enhanced provision of environmental
services, minimize the costs in terms of
foregone production and income and ensure
the broadest possible participation by poor
farmers, careful analysis of the underlying
science – both natural and social sciences
– will be required, as well as innovative
institutions.
Confronting the interrelated challenges
of eradicating poverty and hunger and
preserving the world’s ecosystems will
continue to require purposeful and decisive
action on a range of fronts. Payments for
environmental services are not widely

ix

implemented in developing countries at
present, and much work remains to be done
to unlock their full potential. In conjunction
with other tools, however, they hold
significant promise as a flexible approach
to enhancing the role of farmers worldwide

in sustaining and improving the ecosystems
on which we all depend. By clarifying the
challenges that need to be addressed in
implementing such an approach, it is my
hope that this report will help illuminate the
way forward.

Jacques Diouf
FAO Director-General



Acknowledgements
The State of Food and Agriculture is
prepared by FAO’s Agricultural Development
Economics Division under the overall
supervision and guidance of Prabhu Pingali
(director), Keith Wiebe (service chief), and
Terri Raney (senior economist and editor).
The State of Food and Agriculture External
Advisory Board Chair Walter Falcon (Stanford
University) provided valuable guidance.
Slobodanka Teodosijevic provided research
assistance and Paola di Santo, Marina
Pelaghias and Paola Giondini (all of FAO)
provided secretarial and administrative
support.
Part I of The State of Food and Agriculture
2007, Paying farmers for environmental
services, was written by a team led by
Leslie Lipper (FAO) in association with
Gerald Nelson (University of Illinois), with
substantial contributions from Bernardete
Neves, Terri Raney, Jakob Skoet, Keith Wiebe
and Monika Zurek (all of FAO). Jakob Skoet
wove these contributions together in the
final draft.
Background papers were prepared by Jim
Salzman (Duke University) on environmental
services demand and programme
design, by Sara Scherr and Jeffrey Milder
(Ecoagriculture Partners) on smallholders
and payments for environmental services,
and by Randy Stringer (University of
Adelaide), Erwin Bulte (then at Tilburg
University) and David Zilberman (University
of California at Berkeley) on payments for
environmental services and poverty. The
report also draws on studies on the potential
demand for environmental services from
developing countries commissioned under
the Payments for Environmental Services
from Agricultural Landscapes (PESAL)
project funded by the FAO–Netherlands
Partnership Programme. These include
a study by Sissel Waage and colleagues
(Forest Trends) on private-sector demand for
environmental services and a study by Pablo
Gutman and Sarah Davidson (WWF) on the
Global Environment Facility and payments
for ecosystem services. Insights were also
drawn from the Roles of Agriculture

project managed by Takumi Sakuyama and
Randy Stringer (then of FAO) and funded
by the Government of Japan, and from
work conducted under the Agricultural
Development Economics Division’s natural
resource economics programme on the
potential of payments for environmental
services to reduce poverty, including working
papers and unpublished materials from
Nancy McCarthy (IFPRI), David Zilberman
(University of California at Berkeley), Leigh
Anderson (University of Washington), Oscar
Cacho (University of New England) and Leslie
Lipper (FAO).
Text boxes were prepared by the editorial
team, external contributors as noted in the
boxes, or FAO staff as follows: Box 8 was
prepared by Heiner von Lüpke, Box 21 by
William Emerson, and Box 24 by Benjamin
Davis.
Additional text and/or background
research were contributed by Astrid
Agostini, Giacomo Branca, Timothy Dalton,
Theodor Friedrich, Barbara Herren, Ingmar
Jürgens, Pascal Liu, Ellen McCullough, Katia
Medeiros, Mauricio Rosales and Heiner
von Lüpke (all of FAO), and from Stefano
Pagiola (World Bank), Brent Swallow
(World Agroforestry Center), John Antle
(University of Montana), Mauricio Bellon
(Bioversity International), Sarah Carter
(Plan Vivo), David Cooper (Convention on
Biological Diversity), Muhammad Ibrahim
(CATIE), Suzi Kerr (Motu Economic and Public
Policy Research), Nancy McCarthy (IFPRI),
Alexander Pfaff (The Earth Institute at
Columbia University), Sven Wunder (CIFOR),
David Zilberman (University of California
at Berkeley), and Helena Carrascosa, Paulo
Edgard Nascimento de Toledo and Roberto
Resende (São Paulo State Environmental
Secretariat).
The global and regional maps in Part I
were generated by Renato Cumani with
oversight from Leslie Lipper, John Latham
and Freddy Nachtergaele and assistance
from Pierre Gerber, Monica Petri, Mirella
Salvatore and Keith Wiebe (all of FAO), and
Gerald Nelson (University of Illinois). Patrizia

xi

Monteduro and Jeroen Ticheler (FAO)
assisted with publication of the maps on
GeoNetwork and links to Google Earth.
Part I benefited greatly from review
comments provided by Astrid Agostini,
Caterina Batello-Cattaneo, David Boerma,
Susan Braatz, Sumiter Broca, Jelle Bruinsma,
Sally Bunning, Linda Collette, Jean-Marc
Faures, Theodor Friedrich, Serge Garcia,
Pierre Gerber, Barbara Herren, Peter
Kenmore, Sasha Koo, Parviz Koohafkan, Eric
Kueneman, Yianna Lambrou, Dominique
Lantieri, John Latham, Pascal Liu, Paul
Mathieu, Katia Medeiros, Jamie Morrison,
Paul Munro-Faure, Freddy Nachtergaele,
CTS Nair, Shivaji Pandey, José Antonio
Prado, Mauricio Rosales, Lucilla Spini, Kostas
Stamoulis, Pasquale Steduto, Henning
Steinfeld, Alvaro Toledo, Jeff Tschirley,
Heiner von Lüpke, Adrian Whiteman and
Rolf Willmann (all of FAO), and from Hussein
Abaza (UNEP), John Antle (Montana State
University), Soledad Bastidas (UN Convention
to Combat Desertification), Joshua Bishop
(IUCN), Erwin Bulte (then at Tilburg
University), David Cooper (Convention
on Biological Diversity), Anabel Gonzalez
(World Trade Organization), Larry Gorenflo
(Conservation International), Jennifer
Guiling (World Resources Institute), Pablo
Gutman (WWF), Ulrich Hoffman (UNCTAD),
David Huberman (IUCN), Muhammad
Ibrahim (CATIE), Charles Iceland (World
Resources Institute), Alain Lambert (UNEP),
Wilfred Legg (OECD), Markus Lehmann
(Convention on Biological Diversity), Stefano
Pagiola (World Bank), Alice Ruhweza
(Katoomba Group and Forest Trends), Jim
Salzman (Duke University), Randy Stringer
(University of Adelaide), Brent Swallow
(ICRAF), Marca Weinberg (USDA), Jennifer
Wong (UNFCCC), Sven Wunder (CIFOR) and
David Zilberman (University of CaliforniaBerkeley). Their assistance and contributions
are gratefully acknowledged.
Comments and guidance provided by
The State of Food and Agriculture External
Advisory Board members Walter Falcon
(Stanford University, Chair), Bina Agarwal
(University of Delhi), Kym Anderson
(University of Adelaide), Simeon Ehui
(World Bank), Franz Heidhues (Universität
Hohenheim) and Eugenia Muchnik
(Fundación Chile) are also gratefully
acknowledged.

Part II, World and regional review: a
longer-term perspective, was prepared by
Terri Raney and Slobodanka Teodosijevic on
the basis of a background paper by Mette
Wik, Sumiter Broca and Prabhu Pingali.
Commodity price data were provided by Ali
Gürkan and Merritt Cluff of the FAO Trade
and Markets Division. Other data came from
the FAOSTAT statistical database, maintained
by the FAO Statistics Division.
Part III, Statistical annex, was extracted
from the FAO Statistical Yearbook 2005–06
by Terri Raney and Slobodanka Teodosijevic.
The FAO Statistics Division produces the FAO
Statistical Yearbook, and their collaboration
is gratefully acknowledged.
The expert contributions of the editors,
designers, layout artists and reproduction
specialists of the FAO Electronic Publishing
Policy and Support Branch are also gratefully
acknowledged.

xii

Abbreviations and acronyms
ASB

Alternatives to Slash-and-Burn

CATIE

Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education Center (Costa Rica)

CBD

Convention on Biological Diversity

CDM

Clean Development Mechanism

CER

certified emission reduction

CIFOR

Center for International Forestry Research

CRP

Conservation Reserve Program (United States of America)

EU

European Union

FSC

Forest Stewardship Council

GEF

Global Environment Facility

GDP

gross domestic product

ICRAF

World Agroforestry Centre

IFPRI

International Food Policy Research Institute

IPCC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

ISRIC

International Soil Reference and Information Centre

IUCN

World Conservation Union

LULUCF

land use, land-use change and forestry

NGO

non-governmental organization

OECD

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PES

payment for environmental services (programme)

PSA

Pago de Servicios Ambientales – Payments for Environmental Services
(Costa Rica)

PSAH

Pago por Servicios Ambientales Hidrológicos – Payment for Hydrological
Services (Mexico)

UNCTAD

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNECE

United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

xiii

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

UNFCCC

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

USDA

United States Department of Agriculture

WHO

World Health Organization

WTO

World Trade Organization

WWF

World Wide Fund for Nature (formerly World Wildlife Fund)

xiv

Explanatory note
The statistical information in this issue of
The State of Food and Agriculture has been
prepared from information available to FAO
up to July 2007.

Dates and units
The following forms are used to denote years
or groups of years:
2004/05 = a crop, marketing or fiscal year
running from one calendar year
to another
2004–05 = the average for the two calendar
years
Unless otherwise indicated, the metric system
is used in this publication.
“Billion” = 1 000 million

Maps
The State of Food and Agriculture 2007
includes a set of four global and four
regional maps produced by FAO using
geographic data layers generated internally
as well as externally. The maps are composed
of intersections of data layers representing
indicators of environmental service supply,
agricultural production and productivity
and poverty. They are intended to give
an indication of the spatial distribution
of agro-ecological and socio-economic
conditions relevant to the potential supply
of environmental services. The resolution of
the maps is 5 arc-minute. The low resolution
precludes any definitive conclusions about
the actual on-the-ground conditions in
specific sites. However, the maps can provide
a broad indication of the geographic
distribution of selected indicators. The maps
are made available for viewing on Google
Earth via the FAO GeoNetwork and can be
accessed using the URL for each map. JPEG
images of the maps can also be downloaded
from the GeoNetwork. Further technical
information on the data layers used in
constructing each map can be obtained from:
http://www.fao.org/es/esa/en/pubs_sofa.htm

Statistical annex
The statistical annex contains a selection
of data from the FAO Statistical Yearbook
2005/06. A mini-CD-ROM containing the
full Yearbook is attached to the inside back
cover of this report. A new edition of the
Yearbook will be available in early 2008 and
can be accessed at http://www.fao.org/es/ess/
yearbook. The source for the data on food
and agriculture is the FAOSTAT database
(http://faostat.fao.org). More information
on concepts, definitions, country notes, etc.,
can be found at the same address. NonFAO sources are indicated in the notes on
individual tables.

Part I
PAYING FARMERS
FOR ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICES

Part I

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

1. Introduction and overview
Ecosystems sustain human life. They supply
food and drinking water, maintain a stock
of continuously evolving genetic resources,
preserve and regenerate soils, fix nitrogen
and carbon, recycle nutrients, control floods,
filter pollutants, pollinate crops and much
more. Despite their importance to human
well-being, many of these services are under
threat throughout the world.
Agricultural ecosystems are by far the
largest managed ecosystems in the world.
Of the total land area of about 13 billion
hectares, crops and pasture occupy almost
5 billion hectares. Forests and woodlands add
another 4 billion hectares. Inland, coastal and
marine fisheries ecosystems also generate
crucial services for humans.
Today, the provision of ecosystem services
generally, and agriculture-based services
in particular, is being challenged as never
before by the combined effects of expanding
populations, rapid economic growth and
greater global integration. Agriculture is
being asked to provide an ever-growing
supply of ecosystem-based goods and
services.1 The world’s population is expected
to increase by 50 percent between 2000
and 2050, with the developing countries
home to almost all of that growth. Analyses
indicate that there is likely to be sufficient
overall food production at the global level
to meet expected increases in effective
demand, although such analyses have
not yet incorporated the recent surge in
The term “agriculture” is used to include the production
of crops, livestock, fish, and forest products, and the term
“farmer” to include all producers of agricultural products.



demand for biofuels. About 80 percent
of the increase in land-based agricultural
production is expected to derive from
increased input use and improved technology
on existing agricultural land, while area
expansion in parts of South America and
sub-Saharan Africa is expected to account
for the remaining 20 percent (FAO, 2003a).
Both sources of increased production can
exacerbate damage to land-based ecosystems.
Expansion in environmentally fragile areas
is especially harmful to biodiversity. Poorly
managed intensification can result in soil
erosion pressure on water supplies, rising
nitrate levels in ground- and surface water,
salinization, and growing air and water
pollution from livestock wastes. Coastal and
marine ecosystems are also under pressure.
In response, the search for ways to enhance
ecosystem services is gaining attention from
policy-makers as well as non-governmental
and private decision-makers. This search
provides the motivation for this report. The
chapters that follow examine the incentives
farmers face when making choices that
affect the provision of ecosystem services and
focus particularly on a mechanism that has
generated growing interest in recent years
– direct payments to farmers to enhance the
delivery of selected ecosystem services.
Agriculture’s role in the provision of
ecosystem services depends critically on
the incentives available to farmers. Such
incentives currently tend to favour the
provision of conventional outputs such as
food and fibre over that of other services
that are generally produced jointly with
them, in varying degrees, such as water





T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

filtration and climate regulation. Incentives
can be influenced by policies; it is the goal of
this report to shed light on policy measures
that can modify the incentives available to
farmers to induce them to provide a mix
of ecosystem services that better addresses
society’s changing needs.
Of the myriad of ecosystem services, this
report concentrates primarily on three that
have attracted the most interest in payment
programmes to date: climate change
mitigation, enhanced water quality and
quantity, and biodiversity preservation.

Ecosystem services and agriculture
Healthy ecosystems provide a variety of critical
goods and services that contribute, directly
or indirectly, to human well-being. Ecosystem
services are created by the interactions of
living organisms, including humans, with
their environment. These services provide the
conditions and processes that sustain human
life. A specific landscape might provide a
range of ecosystem services. A forest at the
top of a watershed not only provides timber
but also facilitates or enhances soil retention
and water quality (filtering contaminants
from the water as it flows through roots and
soil), flood control (regulating the movement
of water through the watershed), pollination
(provided by the pollinators inhabiting the
edge of the forest), carbon sequestration (in
the form of additional biomass), biodiversity
conservation (including the forest habitat and
the wide range of species it harbours) and
landscape aesthetics.
While ecosystem services can be
categorized in any number of ways,
the most common approach is the one
employed by the recent Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment. The Assessment
classified ecosystem services into four broad
categories, namely provisioning services,
regulating services, cultural services and

The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment was called for by
the United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2000
and undertaken during the period 2001–05, drawing on
the contributions of more than 1300 authors and reviewers
worldwide. Its objective was to assess the consequences of
ecosystem change for human well-being and the scientific
basis for action needed to enhance the conservation and
sustainable use of those systems and their contribution to
human well-being.



supporting services (Figure 1). Biodiversity,
while not classified under any of the four
categories, plays an important overarching
role in the provision of ecosystem services.
For example, biodiversity is directly related
to food production, the maintenance of
genetic resources and the aesthetic value of
a landscape, and changes in biodiversity have
direct implications for the production of all
ecosystem services.
Of the 24 provisioning, regulating and
cultural services examined by the Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, 15 were identified
as being degraded or used unsustainably
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
2005a). Only four services were identified
as having been enhanced over the past
50 years, and three of those (crops, livestock
and aquaculture) were related to food
production. In the report’s words (p. 1):
Over the past 50 years, humans have
changed ecosystems more rapidly and
extensively than in any comparable period
of time in human history, largely to meet
rapidly growing demands for food, fresh
water, timber, fiber and fuel.
...
The changes that have been made to
ecosystems have contributed to substantial
net gains in human well-being and economic
development, but these gains have been
achieved at growing costs in the form of the
degradation of many ecosystem services,
increased risks of nonlinear changes, and the
exacerbation of poverty for some groups of
people.
...
The degradation of ecosystem services could
grow significantly worse during the first half
of this century and is a barrier to achieving
the Millennium Development Goals.

In essence, human ingenuity applied
to the production of food and other
commodities has allowed production to
keep pace with population growth and
income-driven demand, but at the cost
of considerable degradation of other
ecosystem services.

The role of farmers
Ecosystems and ecosystem services can
be considered as nature’s equivalent to
produced capital stocks (e.g. roads, buildings,

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 1
Ecosystem services categories

PROVISIONING SERVICES

REGULATING SERVICES

CULTURAL SERVICES

Products obtained
from ecosystems

Benefits obtained from
regulation of ecosystem processes

Non-material benefits
obtained from ecosystems

Food
Freshwater
Fuelwood
Fibre
Biochemicals
Genetic resources

...

Climate regulation
Disease regulation
Water regulation
Water purification
Pollination

Spiritual and religious
Recreation and
ecotourism
Aesthetic
Inspirational
Educational
Sense of place
Cultural heritage

...

...
SUPPORTING SERVICES
Services necessary for the production
of all other ecosystem services

Soil formation

Nutrient cycling

Primary production

LIFE ON EARTH – BIODIVERSITY

Source: Adapted from Ecosystems and human well-being: a framework for assessment by the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment. Copyright © 2003 World Resources Institute. Reproduced by permission of Island Press, Washington, DC.

machinery) and the services deriving
from these stocks. In most regions of the
world, per capita income is rising, but this
trend has often been accompanied by the
drawing down of natural capital stocks,
thereby jeopardizing the future provision
of ecosystem services. Furthermore, many of
the world’s poorest people live in marginal
ecosystems and depend on ecosystem services
for their food and livelihoods. If poverty is to
be reduced, ways must be found to enable
these people to increase their productivity
and that of the natural resources they
depend on.
Degradation of ecosystems differs from
depreciation of produced capital in several
important ways. The key difference, and
the most important source of ecosystem
degradation, is the perception that many
of nature’s services are free – in the sense
that no one owns them or is rewarded for
them. Examples include carbon storage,
flood control, clean water provision, habitat
provision and biodiversity conservation.
While these services have great value to
society, individuals have little incentive to
protect them. In addition, subsidies that
explicitly encourage the production of

marketed goods at the expense of other
ecosystem services can cause ecosystem
degradation.
Farmers constitute the largest group of
natural resource managers on Earth. They
both depend on and generate a wide array
of ecosystem services. Their actions can
enhance and degrade ecosystems. Thus,
understanding what drives their decisions
is critical in designing new strategies that
enhance ecosystem services and contribute to
sustainable growth.
Farmers derive most of their agricultural
income from the food and fibre they
produce. In producing these goods, however,
they may also generate other impacts
– positive or negative – on ecosystem
services. Positive effects could include the
preservation of scenic rural landscapes or
ensuring groundwater recharge; negative
effects could include the runoff of harmful
nitrates from cropland to downstream
catchments or soil erosion from overgrazed
hillsides. Whether positive or negative,
these impacts are not typically reflected in
farmers’ incomes; therefore their provision
is not a key consideration in most farmers’
choices. Such impacts, in economists’ terms,





T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 1
Ecosystem services, environmental services and externalities
The report uses the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment (2003, p. 3) definition of
ecosystem services as “the benefits people
obtain from ecosystems”. Ecosystem
services include all outputs from
agricultural activities, including outputs
as diverse as food production and climate
regulation.
Outputs such as food are generally
produced intentionally for sale or direct
consumption, and buyers or consumers
can influence the production of these
outputs through the prices they are
willing to pay for them. Many other
ecosystem services, however, are provided
only as “externalities”, in that they are
unintended consequences of the primary
activity (e.g. food production), and the
individuals who are affected by these
consequences cannot influence their
production. Externalities typically involve
“off-site” impacts that affect others, in
contrast to “on-site” impacts felt directly
by farmers. Externalities can be either

are described as “externalities”. In this
report, the subset of ecosystem services
characterized by externalities are referred to
as “environmental services” (Box 1; see also
Swallow et al., 2007a). It is precisely because
markets typically fail to reflect their value
that this report focuses on environmental
services.
As demand for food and fibre increases,
fuelled by growing populations, rising
incomes and global integration, the
magnitude of these effects on environmental
services also increases. A key question,
therefore, concerns how society can motivate
farmers to reduce negative side-effects
while continuing to meet the increasing
demand for agricultural produce. Whether
payments are an appropriate tool in this
context depends partly on who holds the
rights to the services in question. In the
case of negative side-effects from industrial
production, it is generally accepted that
the polluter should pay; in the case of
agriculture, this has not historically been

positive or negative, according to the
perspective of those affected by
them.
This report examines the incentives
available to farmers when deciding what
mix of outputs to produce and how to
produce them. It focuses on the use of
payments to providers of ecosystem
services from beneficiaries of those
services as a way of reducing negative
externalities and enhancing the provision
of positive externalities.
The term “ecosystem services” is
sometimes used interchangeably with the
term “environmental services”. In this
report, the term environmental services
is used to refer specifically to the subset
of ecosystem services characterized by
externalities. Programmes to implement
payments for these services are variously
referred to as payment for ecosystem
services programmes, payment for
environmental services programmes, or
simply PES programmes.

the case. The difference may stem from the
relative difficulty of identifying the source
or magnitude of negative side-effects,
historical precedent or equity considerations.
Regardless, the distinction becomes blurred
where agricultural production occurs on a
large and concentrated scale, as in the case
of large concentrated livestock operations,
and in fact such operations are increasingly
treated more like industrial “point sources”
(see p. 22) of pollution (Ribaudo, 2006). The
focus in this report is on payments to smaller
farmers whom society has historically, at
least in practice, allowed to use resources in
ways that may have adverse environmental
impacts.
But the issue extends beyond reducing
negative effects from agriculture. Could it
also be effective to pay farmers to change
their agricultural practices to address
environmental problems generated in
other sectors of the economy? The growth
in effective demand and emergence of
market institutions for ecosystem services

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

such as carbon sequestration or biodiversity
conservation may create new incomegenerating opportunities for farmers
in the short term as well as longer-term
productivity benefits.
Either way, altering agricultural production
systems to enhance the provision of hitherto
uncompensated environmental services
may entail costs in terms of agricultural
productivity growth and local food security.
Understanding whether trade-offs exist
and, if so, what is at stake, is crucial in
designing effective interventions to enhance
environmental services.

Payments for environmental
services
The concept behind payments for
environmental services is straightforward.
Because producers of environmental services
are not usually compensated for providing
them, they tend to be undersupplied
or are not supplied at all. Payment for
environmental services (PES) programmes
are an effort to “get the incentives right” by
sending accurate signals to both providers
and users that reflect the real social,
environmental and economic benefits that
environmental services deliver.
It is important to emphasize that
payments are only one of the potential
tools for increasing the provision of
environmental services. Others include
information provision, policy reforms to
reduce market distortions, command-andcontrol regulations and taxation. Assessing
the potential of PES programmes to improve
the environmental and economic benefits
from agricultural ecosystems, identifying the
circumstances where these benefits are most
likely to be obtained, defining key challenges
for designing efficient programmes, and
evaluating the implications for poverty
reduction are the key issues addressed in this
report.
For the purposes of this report, PES
transactions refer to voluntary transactions
where a service provider is paid by, or
on behalf of, service beneficiaries for
agricultural land, forest, coastal or marine
management practices that are expected
to result in continued or improved service

provision beyond what would have been
provided without the payment. The
payment may be monetary or in some
other form. PES transactions can involve a
wide range of parties – including farmers,
communities, taxpayers, consumers,
corporations and governments – across
a wide range of transaction types – from
direct payments between downstream
beneficiaries and upstream providers to
consumers paying for a cup of “shadegrown” coffee beans produced on the other
side of the world.
This definition of payments for
environmental services is considerably
broader than that used by some
practitioners, who focus on direct voluntary
payments by service users to service providers
(Pagiola and Platais, 2007; Wunder, 2005).
This broader definition, in contrast, also
includes payments by governments to service
providers on behalf of society (which may
include some members who benefit from
a particular environmental service as well
as others who do not), together with other
tools. Both broader and narrower definitions
recognize the importance of financial
incentives in influencing farmers’ decisions
concerning production practices that affect
the provision of environmental services. An
important difference between the two is that
more narrowly defined PES transactions can
be sustained if, and only if, private demand
supports them, while other approaches
(such as government payment programmes)
depend in part on political criteria. The two
definitions can have significantly different
implications for sustainability, efficiency and
equity.
While the concept of payments for
environmental services is fairly simple, their
implementation can be challenging. Many of
these services arise from complex processes,
making it difficult to determine which
actions affect their provision, to identify
precisely who the providers and beneficiaries
are and to agree on who holds the rights
to enjoy those services. Beneficiaries not
used to paying for a service might show
resistance to doing so. Suppliers may need to
adopt novel practices with some degree of
uncertainty. Key challenges in implementing
a PES approach include creating a mechanism
for valuing (or at least measuring) a service





THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

where none currently exists, identifying
how additional amounts of that service can
be provided most cost-effectively, deciding
which farmers to compensate for providing
more of the service and determining how
much to pay them.
The report closely examines this policy
instrument in terms of its possible role in
managing agriculture in such a way as to
meet current agricultural and environmental
demands and its potential to contribute
to poverty alleviation. Although the PES
approach is not yet implemented widely in
developing countries, important lessons can
be learned from the experiences to date in
developed countries and some developing
countries.

Current experience with payments
for environmental services
PES initiatives currently in operation have
two main origins: agricultural policy in
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) countries, dating from
the 1980s, and forest conservation initiatives
in Latin America, which began in the 1990s
(FAO, 2007a).
PES programmes implemented in
OECD countries represent a response to
environmental degradation resulting from
intensive farming practices (Regouin, 2003).
For example, the Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP) in the United States of
America was introduced in 1985 with the

aim of preventing soil erosion in cropland
(see Box 5 on p. 38). Landowners enrolling
in the voluntary programme receive annual
rental payments in exchange for retiring
their farmland from crop production for
10 to 15 years. Similarly, in the United
Kingdom, through the Environmentally
Sensitive Areas Scheme created in 1987,
farmers in eligible areas receive direct
payments as compensation for adopting less
intensive farming practices that conserve
landscape and wildlife values. Generally, agrienvironmental payments in OECD countries
are designed to compensate farmers for
forgoing more intensive and more profitable
farming practices. Environmental crosscompliance is also an important tool used in
many OECD countries to leverage compliance
with existing environmental legislation.
The first PES programmes implemented
in developing countries formed part of
forest conservation initiatives in Latin
America, following the limited success of
the traditional regulatory approach that
emphasized protected areas (Landell-Mills
and Porras, 2002). One of the most notable
programmes, initiated in Costa Rica in 1996
(FAO, 2002a; FONAFIFO, 2005; Pagiola,
2002; Rosa et al., 2003), was designed to
enhance various forest environmental services
(carbon sequestration, hydrological services,
biodiversity conservation and provision
of scenic beauty) through compensation
payments to land and forest owners in
exchange for multiyear contracts for
reforestation, sustainable forest management

FIGURE 2
PES programmes in the forest sector: breakdown by service
Number of cases
Carbon sequestration
Biodiversity conservation
Watershed protection
Landscape beauty
Bundled services
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

Source: Landell-Mills and Porras, 2002.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

and forest protection. The main sources of
financing for this programme have been
proceeds from a fossil fuel sales tax, revenues
from hydroelectric companies, loans from
the World Bank and grants from the Global
Environment Facility (GEF). Mexico, also, has
recently initiated a national PES programme
for forest-based environmental services.
The growing role of the PES approaches
today reflects underlying changes in
environmental policy and the private sector
worldwide. “From a situation dominated
by centralized regulatory approaches to
environmental governance, there is now
a greater emphasis on decentralization,
flexible mechanisms, the private sector as
a provider of public services, corporate
self-regulation, consumer sovereignty, and
civil regulation. Greater flexibility opens
opportunities for PES mechanisms, with
both the public and the private sectors
taking advantage of this flexibility”
(B. Swallow, personal communication, 2007).
Hundreds of PES schemes are now being
implemented, in both developing and
developed countries, primarily for forestbased environmental services. A global
review conducted by Landell-Mills and Porras
(2002) examined 287 cases of market-based
initiatives in the forest sector. Figure 2 shows
the breakdown of these cases by service.
To date, relatively few PES programmes
have targeted farmers and agricultural lands
in developing countries. Of those that have,
one of the most prominent is China’s Grain
for Green programme, initiated in 1999 by
the central government to address concerns
about erosion, water retention and flooding
(see Box 17 on p. 83). The goal is to convert
14.67 million hectares of cropland to forest
by 2010. Farmers are paid to plant forests on
sloping and degraded lands (Bennett and Xu,
2005).
There have also been relatively few
examples of private payment mechanisms
for the provision of environmental services
in agriculture. One is the Scolel Té project in
Chiapas, Mexico, in which farmers and rural
communities are paid by private individuals
and firms for voluntary carbon emission
offsets, generated by the adoption of
agroforestry practices (Tipper, 2002). Other
examples include ecolabelling schemes such
as the SalvaNATURA certification for shadegrown coffee from El Salvador.

Implications for poverty
There are considerable expectations about
the potential for PES programmes to
contribute to poverty reduction as well as
improved environmental management,
based largely on the perceived links between
the two. Where poverty is associated with
environmental degradation, paying poor
producers to adopt production systems that
are more environmentally friendly is likely
to generate a “win–win” outcome, with
both poverty reduction and environmental
benefits obtained. However, such a positive
outcome is not the only potential impact
of PES programmes on the poor. Indirect
effects on agricultural wages and food prices
might adversely affect poor labourers and
consumers. Increased land values following
the implementation of PES programmes
could create greater competition for lands
to which the poor have, at best, only an
informal right of access, with a resultant loss
of control to more powerful interests. Even
among groups of the poor, PES programmes
may favour some more than others, with
implications for overall poverty reduction as
well as the welfare of certain segments of
poor populations.
The impact of a PES approach on the poor
is highly dependent on who holds the rights
to use resources; this, in turn, depends on
the distribution of land ownership. In some
countries, land ownership is highly skewed;
in others it is not. A more even distribution
is likely to result in more of the benefits
accruing to the poor.

Main messages from the report
The following chapters review the issues
introduced above in greater detail.
Chapter 2 provides an overview of the
technical relationship between agriculture
and environmental services and discusses
how agriculture can increase its supply of
environmental services. Chapter 3 discusses
the basis of the demand for environmental
services, the differences between publicand private-sector programmes and the
current market situation for the three main
services focused on in this report. Chapter 4
addresses the supply of environmental



10

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

services, starting from the farmers’ decisionmaking process; it lays out policy options
to enhance the supply of these services and
the role that payment programmes can
play. Chapter 5 reviews in detail the various
issues involved in designing PES programmes
in agriculture with an emphasis on costeffectiveness. Chapter 6 examines more
closely the implications of PES programmes
for poverty and possible synergies between
environmental service provision and poverty
alleviation. Finally, Chapter 7 pulls together
the conclusions of the report and lays out
the main issues involved in developing the
potential of PES programmes.
The main messages emerging from the
report can be summarized as follows.
• Demand for environmental services from
agriculture will increase. Two forces
are generating a growth in demand for
these services: a greater awareness of
their value; and their increasing scarcity,
arising from mounting pressures on
the Earth’s ecosystems. At the same
time, environmental policy worldwide
is increasingly characterized by greater
emphasis on decentralization, flexible
mechanisms, the private sector as a
provider of public services, consumer
sovereignty and civil regulation.
Nevertheless, the question of who will
bear the cost of providing environmental
services remains difficult to resolve.
• Agriculture can provide a better mix
of ecosystem services to meet society’s
changing needs. Farmers depend on,
and generate, a wide range of ecosystem
services. Their actions can enhance
and degrade ecosystems. Through
changes in land-use and production
systems, agricultural producers can
provide a better mix of ecosystem
services, expanding the share of those
characterized by positive externalities, to
meet society’s changing needs.
• If farmers are to provide a better
mix of ecosystem services, better
incentives will be required. Payments
for environmental services can help.
Farmers lack incentives to consider
the impacts of their decisions on
environmental services. Improved
information and regulations can
influence farmers’ decisions in ways

that enhance the environment – as
can payments to farmers from those
who benefit. The relative merits of the
different approaches vary according to
the different environmental services.
Payment programmes range from
highly competitive exchanges to publicsector programmes with strong equity
objectives. Programmes also vary in
terms of the source of payments, the
transaction costs involved and the
impacts on agricultural production
and poverty reduction. The type of
programme that is most suitable for any
one context will vary. Policy-makers need
to be clear as to what societies’ priorities
are, recognizing the synergies and tradeoffs involved in alternative programme
designs, as well as the need for careful
monitoring and evaluation to ensure
value for public expenditures.
• Cost-effective PES programmes
require careful design based on the
characteristics of the service and the
biophysical and socio-economic context.
Programme design involves four main
steps: identifying what should be paid
for, who should be paid, how much
should be paid and what payment
mechanism(s) should be used. These
are challenging in practice and have
important implications for programme
results; careful, context-specific design of
each PES programme is therefore critical,
as are monitoring and enforcement
to ensure compliance. Getting the
science right is crucial and requires a
clear understanding of the biophysical
relationships between farmers’ actions
and their environmental consequences,
as well as the economic motives
and constraints facing suppliers and
beneficiaries of environmental services.
Equally important are the institutional
innovations needed to link suppliers and
beneficiaries as well as an appropriate
enabling environment.
• Payments for environmental services
are not primarily a poverty reduction
tool, but the poor are likely to be
affected and implications for them must
be considered. Payments can increase
the incomes of farmers who produce
environmental services. Other poor

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

households may also benefit, for example
from increased productivity of the soils
they cultivate or improved quality of
the water they drink. However, the
distribution of benefits depends on who
produces the environmental services, and
where. In some cases, payments may also

have adverse impacts on poverty and
food security, for example if they reduce
demand for agricultural employment or
increase food prices. Nevertheless, PES
programmes have been shown to be
potentially accessible and beneficial to
the poor if properly designed.

11

12

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

2. Environmental services
and agriculture
The benefits that humans have realized
from agriculture have been immense.
Today, agriculture feeds over 6 billion
people, and recent decades have seen
significant increases in the productivity of
agriculture with the introduction of new
varieties and production methods (Tilman
et al., 2002). However, these benefits have
come at a cost. Of the ecosystem services
evaluated in the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, agriculture is credited with
increasing the provisioning services of food
and fibre production over the past half
century, but at the expense of degradation
of many other ecosystem services. The
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, as well
as reports arising from other more recent
studies such as Water for food: water for
life (Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007) and
Livestock’s long shadow: environmental
issues and options (FAO, 2006a) recognize
that agriculture can and should be managed
to enhance ecosystem services beyond the
provision of food and other goods.
Increased production of agricultural
goods at the expense of other ecosystem
services has resulted in global and local
environmental changes that have significant
impacts on human health and well-being
(Foley et al., 2005). Agricultural production
practices can generate greenhouse gas
emissions and lead to water depletion
and pollution, land degradation and loss
of biodiversity. Agriculture itself is one of
the main victims of degraded ecosystems,
with agricultural productivity hampered by
problems of climate variability, soil depletion,
water scarcity and quality, and pest and
disease vulnerability. Changing the balance
of ecosystem services provided by agriculture
constitutes a significant step towards
redressing the negative consequences of
certain forms of agricultural production.
A further motivation for such a change

also exists: the potential for offsetting
or compensating for environmental
degradation generated by other sectors of
the economy. Bioenergy is another newly
emerging market that may also lead to major
shifts in the ecosystem services provided by
agriculture (see also UN-Energy, 2007).
The changes in ecosystem management
that are necessary depend on location, the
existing level of economic development,
population density, agro-ecological
conditions and primary technologies
employed in agriculture. All these factors
affect the returns to land and labour in
agriculture and the potential costs and
benefits of changes in practice aimed
at generating additional environmental
services.
This chapter, and the remainder of the
report, focuses primarily on three categories
of environmental problems where agriculture
has a significant role to play: climate change,
water degradation (pollution and depletion)
and biodiversity loss. These three domains
have already seen an expansion of payment
programmes to agricultural producers to
enhance the provision of environmental
services. Farmers are being paid to sequester
carbon to mitigate climate change, to
improve watershed management (and thus
water quality and flow) and to conserve
biodiversity. These categories also appear to
have the most significant potential for future
growth in such payment programmes. There
are, of course, a number of other ecosystem
services for whose management agriculture
plays a crucial role, such as soil formation
or nutrient cycling, which are crucial for
maintaining soil fertility and reversing land
degradation.
This chapter provides a brief overview
of the technical relationship between
agriculture and environmental changes,
how this relationship shapes policy options
and the specific types of actions farmers and

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

other agricultural producers can undertake
to increase the supply of the three categories
of environmental services.

How can agricultural producers
generate environmental services?
Before discussing the specific issues
associated with each of the three categories,
some general observations are called for.
Generally, for farmers to increase their supply
of certain environmental services, some
change in the agricultural production system
is needed.
To provide enhanced levels of
environmental services, farmers can alter
their production practices in a variety of
ways, including:
• changes in production systems, where
lands remain in agriculture but
production activities are modified to
achieve environmental objectives (e.g.
reduced tillage or leaving more crop
residues on fields);
• land-diversion programmes, where lands
are diverted from crop and livestock
production to other uses;
• avoiding a change in land use (e.g.
refraining from the conversion from
forest to agriculture).
These distinctions are important in
assessing the degree to which environmental
service provision involves a trade-off with
agricultural production, which in turn
is fundamental for understanding the
motivations of producers regarding whether
or not to implement a change. The type of
change required could also have macro-level
implications, if implemented on a large scale,
through its impacts on food, land and labour
availability, and on prices (Zilberman, Lipper
and McCarthy, forthcoming).
The conditions determining the potential
to change the mix of ecosystem services
provided by agricultural production systems
have several dimensions. First, changes to
increase the output of one ecosystem service
are likely to have effects on a number of
other services. These may be positive or
negative. In many cases, changes involve a
reduction in some provisioning services –
even if only temporary – in order to enhance
the supply of other supporting, regulating

or cultural services. Trade-offs may also
arise among the various types of regulating
and supporting ecosystems services supplied.
For example, establishing a plantation of
fast-growing tree species to generate carbon
sequestration may reduce biodiversity.
Likewise, increasing habitat for one
species could have negative impacts on
another.
Second, agro-ecological conditions such as
climate, soil quality, topography and water
availability are key determinants of the mix
of ecosystem services that can be generated
from a particular system of management.
Specific agro-ecological conditions may be
highly productive for one service but not
for another; for example, steep topography
can result in highly productive watershed
protection, but be very unproductive for
agriculture.
Third, the potential for changing the mix
of services provided by agro-ecosystems
depends critically on the management
systems currently in place and on the policy
and economic factors that drive them. For
example, wheat can be produced within
a large-scale, highly capital-intensive
mechanized system, as in Australia or
Canada, or through small-scale, labourintensive systems with few or no chemical
inputs, as in Ethiopia. Both are examples of
wheat farming systems, but the productivity
of each, in terms of wheat yield and the
mix of ecosystem services, is quite different.
Changes to increase environmental services
for one system may not be relevant to the
other.
A fourth and final point to be made is that
ecosystem services take different forms, not
all of which are equal from the point of view
of the beneficiaries. A major reason for the
past emphasis on provisioning services over
other types of ecosystem service, is the fact
that most provisioning services take the form
of what, in economists’ terms, are considered
“private goods”. In contrast, regulating,
supporting and cultural ecosystem services
are often “public goods” (see Box 2).
The sections below look more closely
at the types of change that agricultural
producers can make to enhance the provision
of the specific services of climate change
mitigation, improved water management
and biodiversity conservation.

13

14

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 2
Public goods
Public goods are a special case of
externalities (see Box 1). They are goods
or services for which consumption cannot
be confined to a particular consumer or
group of consumers and whose use by
one consumer does not affect the use
by another. For example, mitigating the
impacts of climate change is a benefit to
everyone in the global community, and
it is not possible to exclude some people
from enjoying the benefit even if they do
not pay for the service. At the same time,
one person’s enjoyment of the climate
change mitigation benefit does not
detract from another person’s enjoyment
of the same benefit. Public goods can

Agriculture and climate change
mitigation
The summary for policy-makers of
the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) states unequivocally that global
warming is occurring and that it is very
likely caused by greenhouse gas emissions
arising from human activities. It warns
that:
Continued greenhouse gas emissions at or
above current rates would cause further
warming and induce many changes in
the global climate system during the 21st
century that would very likely be larger
than those observed during the 20th
century.
(IPCC, 2007a, p. 13)

Climate change will generate significant
costs to both developing and developed
countries. Such costs will include increased
frequency and intensity of severe weather
events such as floods, tornados and
hurricanes; increased drought in some
regions; loss of coastal areas and water
shortages; and changes in the incidence
of disease. Developing countries are likely
to bear a heavier burden owing to their
greater vulnerability as well as the severity
of changes they are likely to experience.

range from global (e.g. climate change
mitigation, biodiversity conservation) to
local (e.g. flood control).
It is important to note that, while
services such as climate change mitigation
are public goods, the resources that
provide them (e.g. forest lands) may well
be privately owned. Indeed, it is this
distinction that helps motivate payments
for environmental services.

Source: FAO, 2002b.

Climate change could result in large-scale
migration and conflicts, which also carry
significant costs (Stern, 2007).
The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report also
notes the importance of making immediate
and significant reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions. The report states that mitigation
efforts over the next two to three decades
will determine to a large extent the longterm global mean temperature increase
and the corresponding climate change
impacts that can be avoided (IPCC, 2007b).
Essentially, there are two ways of mitigating
climate change: reducing the source of
the emission or increasing the amount
of greenhouse gas storage in terrestrial
systems (e.g. through carbon sequestration).
Thus, agriculture’s role in mitigating
climate change is twofold: reducing its own
emissions and enhancing the absorption of
greenhouse gases.
Agriculture is a notable source of the three
major greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide,
methane and nitrous oxide. Carbon dioxide
is most significant in relation to global
warming, but methane and nitrous oxide also
make substantial contributions. Agricultural
activities and land-use changes contribute
about one-third of the total carbon dioxide
emissions and are the largest sources of
methane (from livestock and flooded rice
production) and nitrous oxide (primarily

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 3
Above- and below-ground carbon sequestration

CO2
BIOMASS AND NUTRIENT STORAGE

ABOVE
GROUND

Litter fall
Gaseous loss

Decomposition

Nutrient uptake

Soil organic matter pools

BELOW
GROUND

Mineralization

Leaching

Leaching

Source: FAO.

from application of inorganic nitrogenous
fertilizer).
Agriculture also plays an important role
as a carbon “sink” through its capacity
to sequester and store greenhouse
gases, especially as carbon in soils and in
plants and trees (see Figure 3). Carbon
sequestration involves increasing carbon
storage in terrestrial systems, either above
or below ground. Changes in land- and soiluse practices can trigger a process of soil
carbon accumulation over time. Eventually,
the system will reach a new carbon stock
equilibrium or saturation point, and no
new carbon will be absorbed. Carbon
sequestration presents both advantages
and disadvantages as a means of mitigating
climate change. The main advantage is that
it is relatively low-cost and can be readily
implemented. Moreover, it provides multiple
associated benefits as the resultant increase
in root biomass and soil organic matter
enhance water and nutrient retention,
availability and plant uptake and hence

land productivity. A major disadvantage
is that, unlike other forms of climate
change mitigation, carbon sequestration is
reversible; indeed, changes in agricultural
management practices can accelerate or
reverse the degree of sequestration in a
relatively short time frame.
The physical potential to sequester
carbon varies considerably by landuse type and region. Table 1 shows an
estimate of carbon sequestration potential
through land-use change for a total of
48 developing countries over a ten-year
period. The figures suggest that significant
technical potential exists for carbon
emissions mitigation from agriculture:
almost 2.3 billion tonnes. Realizing
this potential would require changes
in land management on an additional
50 million hectares of land (Niles et al.,
2002). In comparison, 95 million hectares
are currently farmed using conservation
agriculture systems, which provide
significant soil carbon sequestration

1

16

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 1
Potential carbon mitigation from land-use change, 2003–12
Region

Avoided
deforestation1

Sustainable
agriculture2

Forest
restoration3

TOTAL

(Million tonnes of carbon)

Africa

167.8

69.7

41.7

279.2

Asia

300.5

227.3

96.2

624.0

Latin America

1 097.3

93.1

177.9

1 368.3

TOTAL

1 565.6

390.1

315.8

2 271.5

Calculated from the most recent estimates of annual forest loss multiplied by weighted carbon stocks;
assumes deforestation rates remain constant.  
2
Includes soil carbon sequestration from reducing tillage and increasing soil cover, conversion of annual crops
to agroforests and improved grasslands management.
3
Includes reforesting degraded lands and agroforestry, not plantations. Excludes carbon sequestration in soils
undergoing reforestation.
1

Source: adapted from Niles et al., 2002.

services (Derpsch, 2005). The economic
feasibility of the required land-use changes
is not yet clear, although there is growing
evidence that changes in production
systems leading to carbon sequestration
could also provide other economic
benefits.

Potential for carbon sequestration in
above-ground biomass
Above-ground sequestration is achieved
by increasing the amount of biomass
above ground in the form of trees and
shrubs. Carbon sequestration rates vary
by tree species, soil type, regional climate,
topography and management practice. The
adoption of agroforestry, rehabilitation
of degraded forests and establishment of
forest plantation and silvopastoral systems
count among the many land-use changes
that can generate above-ground carbon
sequestration.
The carbon sequestration potential of
a land-use system is determined by the
average carbon stored in that system during
a rotation period relevant to the type of
growth in question. Carbon is sequestered
when moving from systems with lower to
higher time-averaged stocks. Palm et al.
(2005) estimated the annual average amount
of carbon stored over 20 years under various
land-use systems for three sites in the humid
tropics. They found that a change from
managed and logged forests to undisturbed
forest in Indonesia yielded a net gain of
213 tonnes of carbon per hectare over the
life of the forest. Similarly, changing from
short fallow to improved fallow in Brazil

increased carbon sequestered per hectare by
4.6 tonnes over eight years.
The highest average amount of carbon
that can be sequestered per hectare per
year is generally obtained by expanding
forest area via afforestation or reforestation.
Annual crops and pastures store a small
fraction of that amount. Amounts achieved
by logged forests, agroforests, tree crops,
timber plantations and secondary forest
fallows fall in between. Secondary forest
fallows of 20–30 years, for example, store
around 75 tonnes of carbon per hectare, with
sequestration occurring at an annual rate
of 5 tonnes per hectare during the first ten
years of regrowth (Fearnside and Guimarães,
1996).
Any intervention that prevents conversion
from a higher to a lower carbon-storing
land use, or that encourages conversion
from a lower to a higher carbon-storing land
use, will contribute to net carbon storage.
Thus, a wide range of other forestry and
agroforestry systems can make a meaningful
contribution. For example, Poffenberger et
al. (2001) estimated that, with protection
and assisted regeneration, dry forests in
central India could double per hectare
rates of carbon sequestration from 27.3 to
55.2 tonnes within ten years in secondary
forests, and increase them from 18.8 to
88.7 tonnes in old growth forest after 50
years, at a very modest cost.

Potential for carbon sequestration
below ground
All soils contain some carbon, deposited as
dead plant material or in some inorganic

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

MAP 1
Potential to sequester additional carbon in soils

Soil carbon gap

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31151&layers=potential_sequester_carbon
Source: FAO.

form such as calcium carbonate or carbon
dioxide dissolved in groundwater. The extent
of additional carbon that can be sequestered
depends both on local geophysical conditions
and the cropping system.
Map 1 presents a global view of areas with
significant potential to sequester additional
carbon in soils. This potential, referred to
as the “soil carbon gap”, indicates locations
where soil carbon levels are currently low
but medium-to-high technical potential
for sequestration exists, depending on soil
type, climate soil moisture and land cover
conditions. It must be stressed that this
map, as well as other maps presented in
this report, is based on global databases
at a coarse scale of resolution and with
variable accuracy. Consequently, the results
presented can only suggest locations that
show potential for the various indicators
considered. Country-level studies and more
sophisticated models would be required to
derive more accurate estimates.
Map 2 indicates the location of croplands
with medium-to-high technical potential
to sequester carbon. This map provides a

preliminary perspective on where cropping
systems could be changed to achieve
substantial soil carbon sequestration. It
highlights the intersection of locations with
medium-to-high soil carbon sequestration
potential (indicated in Map 1) and croplands,
as identified by the Global Land Cover 2000
Project (GLC 2000) database.
Around 30 percent (4.7 million km2) of
the land characterized by medium-to-high
potential for carbon sequestration is located
in areas where agricultural production is
practised, representing 15 percent of total
croplands as defined by GLC 2000. Onequarter of this area is located in Asia and
one-quarter in Africa.
Which types of changes to agricultural
production practices could increase soil
GLC 2000 is a collaboration of partners around the world
with the general objective to provide for the year 2000 a
harmonized land cover database over the whole globe.
Croplands are defined by GLC land classes 16 (cultivated
and managed areas), 17 (mosaic: cropland/tree cover/other
natural vegetation) and 18 (mosaic: cropland/shrub or grass
cover). Further details are available at http://www-gvm.jrc.
it/glc2000/.


17

18

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

MAP 2
Potential to sequester additional carbon in soils on croplands

Croplands with soil carbon gap

Other croplands

Other land with soil carbon gap

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31152&layers=potential_sequester_carbon_cropland
Source: FAO.

carbon sequestration? Lasse (2002) provides
a list of management techniques with this
potential, including the planting of cover
crops, mulch farming combined with zero
tillage, and agroforestry. Some of these
practices would also increase above-ground
carbon stocks. Reliable estimates on how
much carbon could be sequestered in soils
under various management practices and
farming patterns in the developing world are
still sparse. The estimates proposed by Lal et
al. (1998) for tropical areas are about twice
as high as those for drylands.
The effects on carbon sequestration of
modifications to cropping practices can
differ dramatically by practice and by
location. Studies in selected locations in
India and Nigeria simulating the impact
of land-use changes over a 50-year period
suggest that under current practices soil
carbon will continue to decline at a slow
pace, but that changes in land use could
significantly increase soil carbon in the long
term (Figure 4) (FAO, 2004a). The range of
sequestration potential for the different
practices considered is large, from negative
for continuous cultivation practices to

around 40 tonnes per hectare with the
retention of crop residues and substantial
addition of farmyard manure. For the
practices with the highest sequestration
potential, carbon sequestration continues
for the entire duration of the simulation
and even then does not reach equilibrium,
suggesting that carbon sequestration
through changes in agricultural practices
requires considerable time for the full impact
to take effect.

Water quantity and quality
Watershed protection services are physically
delimited by watershed boundaries. In
contrast with carbon sequestration and many
biodiversity conservation services, therefore,
they are primarily of interest to local and
regional users (Landell-Mills and Porras,
2002).

Water quantity
Water use has grown rapidly over the past
century, increasing more than sevenfold
between 1900 and 2000 while the human

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

FIGURE 4
Changes in soil carbon for different cropping systems

Futchimiram, NIGERIA

Lingampally village, INDIA

Total soil carbon (tonnes/ha)

Total soil carbon (tonnes/ha)

40

70
7

60
30

50
Current practice

6

40

Current practice

6
5
4

20
5

10

30

4
3

20

1
2

10

3
1
2

0

0
1950

1975

2000

2025

2050

1950

1975

YEAR

2000

2025

2050

YEAR

LAND-USE PRACTICES

LAND-USE PRACTICES

1 Current practice: extensive agropastoral
with slash and burn
2 Continuous cultivation
3 100 kg/ha urea, no grazing residues
4 Five-year fallow, five-year cultivation, two applications
farmyard manure (FYM) 3 tonnes/ha, grazing residues
5 Continuous cultivation, FYM 1.5 tonnes/ha/year,
grazing residues
6 Continuous cultivation, FYM 1.5 tonnes/ha/year,
plant residues 0.5 tonne/ha/year, no grazing

1 Current practice: rainfed cropping, FYM applied
at 3.9 tonnes/ha/year
2 FYM 3 tonnes/ha/year
3 FYM 3 tonnes/ha/year, green manure 500 kg/ha/year,
vermicompost 250 kg/ha/year
4 As current practice but incorporating crop residues
into soil
5 FYM 3 tonnes/ha/year, leave plant residues
6 FYM 3 tonnes/ha/year, plant residues, green manure,
vermicompost
7 FYM 6 tonnes/ha/year, plant residues, green manure,
vermicompost

Source: FAO, 2004a.

population grew by about a factor of four
(UNDP, 2006). Despite a decline in per capita
consumption since the 1980s, global water
use continues to increase (Shiklomanov and
Rodda, 2003).
Table 2 reports two indicators related to
the use of freshwater resources. The “water
crowding index” measures the number
of people served per million cubic metres
per year of accessible runoff. The relative
water use or “water stress index” expresses
the ratio of water withdrawals to supply.
At the global level, current water use
represents about 13 percent of annual supply
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b)
with an overall upward trend, indicating
increasing pressure on freshwater resources.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(2005b) projects an increase of 13 percent
in the global water crowding index by
2010. Projections reported in the Human
Development Report 2006 (UNDP, 2006)

suggest that, by 2025, over 3 billion people
are likely to be experiencing water stress
and 14 additional countries might be
classified as water-scarce (i.e. having less
than 1 000 cubic metres per person per
year).
Most water for human use is drawn
directly from rivers or from groundwater.
The latter may originate from renewable
or “fossil” aquifers. Each source presents
its own management issues. Renewable
groundwater is directly linked to the cycling
of freshwater through the atmosphere and
soils and is thus replenished by precipitation
and certain agricultural practices. Fossil
groundwater is found in deep underground
aquifers with little long-term net recharge.
The use of fossil groundwater is similar to
the mining of minerals: once extracted,
it, effectively, cannot be replaced as
replenishment times can reach thousands of
years (Margat, 1990).

19

20

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 2
Indicators of freshwater provisioning services, 2010
Geographic region/country grouping
Asia
Latin America
North Africa/Middle East
Sub-Saharan Africa

Water crowding index

Water stress index

(People/million m3/year)

(Percentage)

391

19

67

4

2 020

133

213

3

Former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

161

20

OECD countries

178

20

WORLD TOTAL

231

13

Note: These figures are based on mean annual conditions. The values for the relative use statistics shown rise when the
subregional spatial and temporal distributions of renewable water supply and use are considered
Source: From Ecosystems and human well-being: current state and trends by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
Copyright © 2005 by the author. Reproduced by permission of Island Press, Washington, DC.

In addition to direct extraction from rivers
and aquifers, three other technologies are
used to increase freshwater availability:
dams and other artificial impoundments,
desalinization of ocean water and localized
rainwater harvesting. Desalinized water
currently supplies less than 1 percent of
global water consumption. Water harvesting
refers to a number of technologies,
traditional and modern, that either harvest
surface runoff or increase water infiltration.
These include water channels and dams
to catch and convey water, techniques to
increase soil moisture content, and reservoirs
for irrigation and household use and to
reduce flood peaks.
Agriculture accounts for about
70 percent of all water use worldwide
and up to 95 percent in many developing
countries and thus influences both the
quantity and quality of water available for
other human uses (FAO, 2007b). Changes
in agricultural practices could contribute
to water quantity by promoting the
recharge of groundwater aquifers, but
perhaps the most important contribution
agriculture could make to improving the
quantity and quality of available water
resources is through more efficient use of
the water it requires. A further possibility
is the reuse of wastewater for agricultural
purposes; currently, about 2 million
hectares are irrigated using this method
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007), and
the potential exists to increase this area
significantly.

Pretty et al. (2006) analysed 144 projects in
developing countries where a combination
of resource-conserving management
practices, such as integrated pest and
nutrient management, conservation tillage
and agroforestry, had been introduced. It
was found that these practices also provide a
notable improvement in water productivity,
especially for rainfed agricultural systems.
Average increases in water productivity
ranged from 16 percent for irrigated rice and
29 percent for irrigated cotton to 70 percent,
102 percent and 108 percent for rainfed
cereals, legumes, and roots and tubers,
respectively.
Numerous studies have established the
positive impact of zero tillage on water
infiltration capacity, soil moisture content,
soil erosion and water-holding capacity. In
the United States of America, for example,
no-till systems were found to reduce
water runoff by 31 percent; increase water
infiltration, depending on soil type, by
between 9 percent and 100 percent; and
reduce soil erosion by up to 90 percent,
which in turn reduced sediment loads
in rivers and pollutants in water bodies
(Hebblethwaite, 1993). Also Guo, Choudhary
and Rahman (1999) reported improved
percolation owing to better soil structure in
no-till systems, which resulted in decreased
soil erosion. In various Brazilian locations,
soil losses were reduced by up to 87 percent
under conservation agriculture, while runoff
was reduced by up to 66 percent under
wheat–soybean rotations (Saturnio and
Landers, 1997).

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

The exact quantification of aquifer
recharge through improved water infiltration
requires further research. To date, there
is mainly anecdotal evidence that the
introduction of conservation agriculture and
other soil and water conservation practices
improves watershed services. In the state of
Paraná, Brazil, it was reported that, after
the introduction of a no-till system, a pond
that had been habitually dry for most parts
of the year had refilled and that the nearby
river had begun to carry water also in the
dry season (FAO, 2003b). In India, Agarwal
and Narain (2000) reported that the Avari
and Ruparel rivers began to contain water
all year round after a set of water-harvesting
practices and soil conservation measures
were implemented in the watersheds. With

respect to livestock management, rotational
grazing, improved livestock distribution
and increased tree cover on pastures have
been found to improve water recharge
(FAO, 2006a). Nevertheless, more research is
needed on the exact relationships and time
lags between the introduction of improved
agricultural management for water
conservation and improvements in water
quantity.
Table 3 summarizes in qualitative terms
the likely impacts of major changes in land
use on water availability. Unfortunately,
the hydrological relationships between
land use and the generation of more and
cleaner water are complex and site-specific,
and scientific evidence is often lacking
(Robertson and Wunder, 2005; FAO, 2004b).

TABLE 3
Brief overview of hydrologic consequences associated with major classes
of land cover and use change
TYPE OF
LAND-USE CHANGE

Natural forest
to managed forest

Forest to
pasture/agriculture

Forest to urban

Invasion by species
with higher
evapotranspiration rates

CONSEQUENCES ON FRESHWATER
PROVISIONING SERVICE

CONFIDENCE LEVEL

Slight decrease in available
freshwater flow and a decrease
in temporal reliability
(lower long-term groundwater
recharge)

Likely in most temperate and
warm humid climates, but highly
dependent on dominant tree
species

Strong increase in amount
of superficial runoff with
associated increase in sediment
and nutrient flux

Very likely at the global level;
impact will depend on percentage
of catchment area covered

Decrease in temporal reliability
(floods, lower long-term
groundwater recharge)

Adequate management practices
may reduce impacts to a minimum

Consequences are less severe if
conversion is to pasture instead of
agriculture
Most critical for areas with high
precipitation during concentrated
periods of time (e.g. monsoons)

Very strong increase in runoff
with the associated increase in
pollution loads

Very likely at the global level with
impact dependent on percent of
catchment area converted

Strong decrease in temporal
reliability (floods, lower
long-term groundwater
recharge)

Stronger effects when lower part
of catchment is transformed

Strong decrease in runoff

Very likely, although highly
dependent on the characteristics of
dominant tree species

Strong decrease in temporal
reliability (low long-term
groundwater recharge)

Most critical for areas with
recurrent strong precipitation
events

Scarcely documented except for
South Africa, Australia and the
Colorado River in the United States
of America

Source: From Ecosystems and human well-being: current state and trends by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.
Copyright © 2005 by the author. Reproduced by permission of Island Press, Washington, DC.

21

22

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Most studies in this area have focused
on the impacts of forest protection and
reforestation in the proximity of water
sources, but even in these studies the results
have often been ambiguous. Increasing
tree cover can reduce, as well as increase,
the availability of water. Because a typical
watershed is affected by the activities
of many farmers, improved agronomic
practices would need to be adopted widely
in order to have a measurable impact,
and the long-term monitoring needed to
assess the changes in large watersheds
can be costly. Nevertheless, although
scientific evidence on the influence of
improved management on water levels and
groundwater recharge is scarce, research has
clearly established the opposite – that soil
degradation and deforestation cause water
tables to decline.
Map 3 (p. 23) shows croplands in South
Asia and Southeast Asia with high levels
of sheet erosion, indicating potential offsite impacts in the form of siltation and
sedimentation in waterways. The map is
based on the findings of the Assessment
of the Status of Human-Induced Soil
Degradation in South and Southeast Asia
conducted between 1994 and 1997 by the
International Soil Reference and Information
Centre (ISRIC) and FAO (van Lynden and
Oldeman, 1997). Not all the areas shown
will necessarily have the potential to play a
strong role in providing watershed services
through land-use change, depending on
their location with respect to hydrological
functions, but those that do are still
likely to represent a significant area and
a considerable number of agricultural
producers.

Water quality
The United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe (UNECE) defined water quality
as the “physical, chemical, and biological
characteristics of water necessary to sustain
desired water uses” (UNECE, 1995, p. 5).
Most aquatic species are able to adapt
to natural changes in water quality, but
human activities have added pollutants that
threaten many species and require treatment
to supply potable water.
Most of the human impacts on water
quality globally have occurred over the last

century (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment,
2005b). While, in the past, the main sources
of contaminants comprised organic and
faecal pollution from untreated wastewater
(this continues to be the case in many
developing countries), today, the most
prevalent contaminants can be traced to
agricultural and industrial production.
Within agriculture, contamination associated
with soil erosion, nutrient runoff and
pesticides predominate. Livestock production
is a major source of pollution in many
countries, with nutrient contamination from
wastes representing a growing problem
(FAO, 2006a). A distinction should be made
between point source pollution (a specific,
confined discharge of pollutants into a water
body) and non-point source pollution (a
more diffuse discharge of pollutants). In most
cases, agriculture is a non-point source of
pollution, where the exact sources are diffuse
and difficult to detect. An exception is large,
highly concentrated livestock operations
where impacts can be traced back to an
identifiable source.
Improving water quality through changes
in agricultural production systems generally
involves reducing salinization and harmful
runoff from agricultural fields in the form of
soil erosion, pesticides and other agricultural
chemicals or livestock waste. One means is
the improvement of nutrient-use efficiency
by matching more closely the application
of fertilizers with the capacity of plants for
nutrient uptake. Soil testing and improved
timing of fertilizer application, as well as the
use of cover crops and reduced tillage, are all
useful means for this purpose (Tilman et al.,
2002). Measures to improve the management
of livestock waste can also contribute to
enhanced water quality. Such measures
include changes in the production process
(feed management) and the collection,
storage, processing and utilization of manure
(FAO, 2006a).
A successful example of measures to
reduce non-point source water pollution
from livestock production is found in France.
The Vittel bottled water company entered
into agreements with farmers, encouraging
them to modify their land-management
practices to reduce nitrates in the water
source (Perrot-Maître, 2006). The modified
farming practices included the elimination

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

MAP 3
Croplands with high rates of human-induced erosion

Croplands with high rates of human-induced
sheet erosion

Other croplands

Other lands with high rates of
human-induced sheet erosion

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31153&layers=croplands_humaninduced_erosion
Source: FAO.

of maize cultivation for animal feed and
application of agrochemicals, the use of
extensive cattle ranching with reduced
animal numbers, and the modernization
of farm buildings to minimize nutrient
runoff.
As this example illustrates, measures
to reduce pollution caused by livestock
production involve changes both to
cropping practices in feed production and
to techniques for raising livestock. The
pollutants concerned include nutrient
excretions of excess levels of nitrogen,
phosphorus and heavy metals. Livestock
waste can also include a variety of micro-

organisms that are a potential hazard to
human health.

Biodiversity conservation
The Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD) defines biological diversity as “the
variability among living organisms from all
sources including ... terrestrial, marine and
other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological
complexes of which they are part; this
includes diversity within species, among
species and of ecosystems” (CBD, 1993,
Article 2).

23

24

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Biodiversity is commonly measured at
the genetic, species and ecosystem levels,
although it is difficult to define “units of
biodiversity” for the purpose of carrying
out transactions. Within any of these three
levels, conservation of biodiversity involves
maintaining the following dimensions
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b):
• variety, reflecting the number of
different types;
• quantity and quality, reflecting how
much there is of any one type;
• distribution, reflecting where that
attribute of biodiversity is located.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
concluded that human activities have led
to a more rapid loss of biodiversity on
Earth over the past 50 years than ever
before in human history. It identified five
key drivers of biodiversity loss: habitat
change, climate change, invasive alien
species, overexploitation and pollution. The
Assessment argued that the loss of species
and the progressive homogenization of
many ecosystems continues to be one of the
main threats to the survival of our natural as
well as socio-economic systems (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b).
The biodiversity associated with
agricultural ecosystems is known as
agricultural biodiversity, and is generally
regarded as the multitude of plants, animals
and micro-organisms at genetic, species and
ecosystem levels, indispensable in sustaining
key functions for food production and food
security (CBD, 2000). It provides the basis of
the food security and livelihoods of everyone
(FAO, 1997).
Agricultural biodiversity is the outcome
of the interactions among the environment,
genetic resources and the management
systems and practices used by farmers and is
the result of careful selection and inventive
development over millennia. It includes
genetic diversity of crops and livestock as
well as crop-associated biodiversity (e.g.
pest-suppressive biodiversity pollinators, soil
biodiversity).
Concerns have been raised in recent years
over the loss of agricultural biodiversity
through homogenization of agricultural
production systems (FAO, 1997). For crop
and livestock genetic diversity, two major
concerns have been voiced: increasing

levels of genetic vulnerability and genetic
erosion (FAO, 1997). Genetic vulnerability
occurs where a widely used crop or livestock
variety is susceptible to a pest or pathogen
that threatens to create widespread crop
losses. Genetic erosion is the loss of genetic
resources through the extinction of a
livestock variety or crop. The main cause
of genetic erosion is the replacement of
indigenous varieties with improved ones.
Loss of ecosystem services useful to food
security is a further concern. Without proper
management of agricultural biodiversity,
some key functions of the agro-ecosystem
may be lost, such as maintenance of
nutrient and water cycles, pest and disease
regulation, pollination and land erosion
control.
The conservation of crop and livestock
genetic diversity may be ensured either
ex situ or in situ. Ex situ methods include
seed and gene banks, while in situ
conservation takes place in farmers’ fields,
ponds or forests. The two approaches are
complementary; the ex situ collections
preserve a static set of genetic resources,
while in situ efforts preserve a dynamic
process of evolution, as genetic resources
adapt to changing pressures from natural
and human selection.
The approaches used to conserve
agricultural biodiversity link conservation
to sustainable use by humans. Given
the specific features of agricultural
biodiversity, the mechanisms and tools used
to guarantee its sustainable management,
including conservation, are often specific
and differ from those traditionally used for
wild biodiversity (such as protected
areas).
How can agricultural producers conserve
biodiversity? The necessary measures
depend not only on the type of biodiversity
to be conserved but also on production
systems and location. The sections that
follow explore three main ways in which
agricultural producers can contribute
to biodiversity conservation: reducing
agricultural expansion into biodiversity-rich
lands; adopting agricultural production
systems that support the joint production of
biodiversity conservation and agricultural
products; and conserving agricultural
biodiversity.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

Minimizing agricultural expansion into
areas rich in wild biodiversity
Agriculture can contribute to wild
biodiversity conservation by refraining from
using land and water resources that are rich
in species diversity. This approach includes
both maintaining areas with relatively
undisturbed ecosystems and retiring land
or water areas currently in production
located near species-rich areas, especially if
they have limited suitability for agriculture.
These areas can then be incorporated into
protected areas such as national parks and
reserves, which are the cornerstones of wild
biodiversity conservation. The approach
may also involve eliminating, reducing or
improving agricultural production practices
and overall land management in areas
that have been identified as important
“corridors” for wildlife migration and
ecosystem connectivity.
Map 4 is one of several generated by a
study of land-use change in the neotropics
(Wassenaar et al., 2007) and provides an
indication of areas at risk of conversion to
agriculture in parts of South America. The
study identified the areas at highest risk of
conversion to pasture and croplands using a
model that explicitly incorporates dimensions
such as location, suitability and various factors
affecting the relative economic values of
land uses. The map identifies deforestation
hotspot areas in red (at risk of conversion to
pasture) and orange (at risk of conversion to
cropland). Many of the ecoregions that would
be affected by the projected deforestation
are part of the WWF (World Wide Fund for
Nature) Global 200 priority ecoregions (a
collection of the most biologically diverse
and representative habitats on earth) and
others fall into the Conservation International
biodiversity hotspot zones (Wassenaar et al.,
2007; WWF, 2007). These are areas where
crop and livestock producers could supply
significant biodiversity conservation services
by avoiding their conversion to agricultural
use or by facilitating conservation in
agricultural areas (e.g. by providing wildlife
corridors linking habitat areas).

Conserving wild biodiversity in
agricultural ecosystems
Agricultural producers can also conserve
biodiversity within agricultural ecosystems.

McNeely and Scherr (2002) outline a set of
possible measures:
1. enhance wildlife habitat on farms and
establish farmland corridors that link
uncultivated spaces;
2. mimic natural habitats by integrating
productive perennial plants;
3. use farming systems that reduce
pollution;
4. modify resource management practices
to enhance habitat quality in and
around farmlands.
An example of the first case is found in
Costa Rica, where windbreaks formed by
planting a mix of indigenous and exotic tree
species were established on 150 hectares
spanning 19 farming communities. The
windbreaks served as biological corridors
connecting remnant forest patches in the
area, and they also benefited farmers by
reducing wind damage (McNeely and Scherr,
2002). Other examples that could fall into
this category include the establishment of
hedgerows and agroforestry. Schroth et al.
(2004) provide a comprehensive review
of the role of agroforestry for conserving
biodiversity by providing corridors and
new habitat for wild species, among other
measures.
Shade-grown coffee is a prominent
example of the second type of strategy.
Shade-grown coffee is produced under
the shelter of a canopy of trees of varying
heights, providing an environment that
tends to be attractive to migratory birds. In
contrast, coffee grown under conventional
systems has low levels of biodiversity (Pagiola
and Ruthenberg, 2002).
Many examples exist that can illustrate the
third category, that of a change in farming
practices to reduce pollution. In Viet Nam,
rice farmers’ overuse of pesticides was
generating off-farm pollution that harmed
local habitats. An education campaign led
to reduced pesticide use, benefiting the
many species of frogs and fish that inhabit
rice paddies. In China, intensive pesticide
use to control the rice blast disease was
substantially reduced by planting a diverse
set of rice varieties. In the Philippines,
soil erosion and subsequent pollution of
waterways were avoided by introducing
natural vegetation contour strips (McNeely
and Scherr, 2002).

25

26

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

MAP 4
Projected expansion of cropland and pasture, 2000–2010

Cropland expansion
Pasture expansion
Cropland and pasture expansion

Forest
Grazed pasture

Cropland
Non-survey area

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31154&layers=cropland_pasture_expansion
Source: Wassenaar et al., 2007.

The reintroduction of short-term (over one
to two years) improved fallow systems into
smallholder agricultural systems in Kenya and
Zambia provides an example of the fourth
category. This measure not only helped
to restore soil fertility but also provided a
habitat for wild species (McNeely and Scherr,
2002).
In certain areas, silvopastoral practices
can offer an alternative to cattle production
systems based solely on pasture. Such

practices include planting high densities of
trees and shrubs in pastures, cut-and-carry
systems whereby livestock are fed with the
foliage of specifically planted trees and
shrubs in areas previously used for other
agricultural practices, and using fast-growing
trees and shrubs for fencing and wind
screens (Pagiola et al., 2007). The on-site
benefits of silvopastoral practices to land
users include additional production from
the tree component, such as fruit, fuelwood,

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 5
Biodiversity impact of adopting silvopastoral systems in Esparza, Costa Rica

Natural pasture
without trees

Silvopastoral systems

Improved pasture
without trees
Natural pasture
with low tree density
Improved pasture
with low tree density
Fodder bank
with woody species
Fruit orchards
(multiple species)
Natural pasture
with high tree density
Improved pasture
with high tree density

0

2

4

6

8

10

Number of bird species observed
Source: Pagiola, 2006.

fodder or timber; maintaining or improving
pasture productivity by increasing nutrient
recycling; and diversification of production
(Dagang and Nair, 2003).
As Figure 5 illustrates, silvopastoral
practices also have important biodiversity
benefits. They have been shown to play a
major role in the survival of wildlife species
by providing scarce resources and refuge;
to have a higher propagation rate of native
forest plants; and to provide shelter for wild
birds. They can also help connect protected
areas (Dennis, Shellard and Agnew, 1996;
Harvey and Haber, 1999). In addition,
silvopastoral practices can fix significant
amounts of carbon in the soil and in the
standing tree biomass (Fisher et al., 1994;
Pfaff et al., 2000) and have a beneficial effect
on water services (Bruijnzeel, 2004).

Conserving agricultural biodiversity
A wide range of methods exist for conserving
agricultural biodiversity, depending on the
specific component that is focused upon.
Methods differ in terms of the degree of
human intervention in the natural system,
ranging from highly managed ex situ
gene and seed banks to maintaining wild
relatives of cultivated species in wilderness
areas. Measures also include the on-farm
conservation and utilization of so-called

“landraces”, or traditional varieties of crops
and livestock, which are often highly adapted
to their local environments. Diversity can
be promoted by providing incentives to
maintain a heterogenous set of crop varieties
in production, particularly rare landrace
varieties, or by managing field margins to
encourage pest-suppressing natural enemies
and pollinators. Jarvis, Padoch and Cooper
(2007) provide an extensive overview of the
tools used by farmers to conserve and further
develop biodiversity in their fields.
Because agricultural biodiversity is directly
linked to agricultural production, working
within agricultural market channels to
provide incentives to farmers to conserve
agricultural diversity is an important
strategy. In recent years, the international
community has provided support to farmers
for conserving agricultural biodiversity in
situ. These programmes seek to increase the
availability and productivity of diversity in
production systems, or enhance the returns
to maintaining diverse systems. Increasing
the demand for diverse products through
the establishment of labelling, certification
or origin schemes and niche market
development is one strategy (Bioversity
International, 2006). Increasing the diversity
of agricultural seed supply systems is another
(FAO, 2006b). One example that involves

2

28

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

direct payments to farmers for maintaining
diverse crop varieties is the GEF-funded
project “A Dynamic Farmer-Based Approach
to the Conservation of African Plant Genetic
Resources” implemented in Ethiopia from
1992 to 2000 (GEF, 2007a).

crop diseases and invasive species. For
example, some farmers in affected areas
have received payments to cull chickens as
a measure to prevent the spread of avian
influenza.

Other environmental services
agricultural producers can supply

Importance of scale, location
and coordination in supplying
environmental services

The sections above have focused on three
different, but very important, environmental
services. However, it should be underlined
that, apart from these, agricultural producers
can and do supply many other environmental
services. Landscape aesthetics is one service
from which some farmers are already
receiving significant economic benefits in the
form of ecotourism and agrotourism (Box 3).
Other services for which some farmers are
being paid include pollination services and
reduction in the spread of animal diseases,

As the above discussion has shown,
agricultural producers can implement
numerous changes to improve the balance of
services provided by agricultural ecosystems.
The focus has been on the changes that
individual farmers can make to increase
the supply of each of three environmental
services. However, particularly in cases of
watershed management and biodiversity
conservation services, both scale and location

BOX 3
Landscape aesthetics
Managing landscape aesthetics is another
environmental service for which markets
are developing, but which is not covered
in detail in this report. Landscape
aesthetics, or “rural amenities”, involves
the pleasure people gain from seeing,
visiting or even knowing of the existence
of certain landscape features. The pleasure
can come from novelty (watching a geyser
erupt), diversity (a hillside cultivated using
a variety of practices), natural beauty
(vistas of the Himalayas), culture (visits to
a sacred place) or the continued existence
of an endangered species in a far-away
place.
Landscapes thus have distinct values
in themselves that can be of different
types. People may be interested simply
in ensuring the continuing existence of
certain landscapes, habitats or ecosystems,
even if they are not benefiting from
them directly in any other way. However,
landscapes can also have more direct use
values, exploited through activities such as
nature tourism, ecotourism or agritourism.
Nature tourism is any visit to a location
with the primary goal of appreciating
some element of nature. The term

“ecotourism”, in this context, is used to
describe visits to places with unique flora
and fauna, such as the Amazon watershed
or the Serengeti Plains. Agritourism (or
agrotourism) involves visits to landscapes
where humans have practised agriculture
in ways that result in attractive scenery
and distinctive products and cuisine.
Provision of landscape aesthetics services
often has important synergies with the
provision of other environmental services,
especially conserving biodiversity. Some
destinations are set up to allow visitors to
see unique collections of diverse species.
Many of these destinations are protected,
which increases the likelihood that they
will maintain species lost in surrounding
areas or regulate water quality and
quantity. Nature tourism can enhance
the conservation of biological diversity,
especially when local communities are
directly involved with tourism operators.
If local communities receive income
directly from a tourist enterprise, they are
more likely to provide greater protection
for, and conservation of, local resources.
Agriculture can have distinct, but
differing, roles in ensuring the provision

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

are highly relevant for the effectiveness of
the changes, which in turn has implications
for coordination requirements. Indeed,
changes on the part of one producer aimed
at improving a habitat or reducing erosion in
a watershed are unlikely to be sufficient to
provide these environmental services, unless
the producer controls a large proportion
of the land and water resources important
for the service provision. This means that
considering change at a landscape level
is as important as it is at the scale of the
individual production unit. It also means that
the effectiveness of any given change may
depend critically on coordinating the actions
of a number of producers.
Table 4 (pp. 30–31) summarizes a set of
management changes agricultural producers
can implement to increase the supply of
the three environmental services under
discussion. It presents them in the context

of landscape aesthetics services. These
roles range from bringing or maintaining
specific areas or landscapes under
agricultural production to managing lands
under agricultural production. Farmers
may not necessarily take into account that
their land may provide rural amenities
when managing and deciding how to
develop it. Indeed, in several developed
countries, the provision of rural amenities
is one of the main motivations behind
the implementation of various publicly
funded farmland protection programmes
(Nickerson and Hellerstein, 2003).
There is an increasing private market for
landscape aesthetics services. Ecotourism
is growing rapidly, driven by higher
incomes around the world, increasing ease
and falling cost of travel and expanding
information. World tourism spending is
expected to grow over 6 percent per year
(UNWTO, 1998, as referenced in Hawkins
and Lamoureux, 2001) and is increasingly
focusing on natural environments.
The overall size of the market for
the landscape aesthetics and recreation
services that agricultural landscapes
provide seems likely to remain smaller.

also of the associated landscape-level
management and the degree of coordination
among producers required for effective
supply.

Technical versus economic
potential to supply environmental
services
The preceding sections have discussed the
technical potential for agriculture to provide
environmental services. This, essentially, tells
us how much of an environmental service
farmers could provide, but it is important to
recognize that this is not the same as what
they are likely to provide in the absence
of additional incentives. The distinction
corresponds to the difference between
the technical and economic potential for
supplying environmental services.

Payments to farming communities are
likely to be limited to those living in
or adjacent to areas of high tourist
attraction. In many developed countries, a
sector of the tourism industry has formed
around pastoral, agrarian landscapes and
the aesthetics and activities they offer, but
a comparable industry has not yet formed
in developing countries.
The most important buyers of landscape
aesthetics and recreational services are
likely to be private tour operators and
related businesses, either directly or in
aggregate groups working in a particular
area of high scenic aesthetics. Private
recreational hunters and fishers and
private park visitors could also become
buyers of landscape aesthetics and
recreation services. There are many models
now for using public park visitor fees to
benefit community groups who protect
landscape and recreational values. Some
of these models could become significant
in the future.

29

TABLE 4
Management options and coordination requirements for three environmental services

Watershed protection

Carbon sequestration and greenhouse gas offsets

ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE

Wild biodiversity
conservation

30

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

FARM-LEVEL
MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

LANDSCAPE-LEVEL
MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

DEGREE OF
COORDINATION
REQUIRED1

Carbon sequestration in soils

Soil organic matter
management and
enrichment, reduced
frequency of cultivation,
adoption of conservation
agriculture, soil
conservation practices,
improved grassland
management

Low

Carbon sequestration in
perennial plants

Increased area/use of
perennial crops, farm
forest management,
agroforestry, natural
regeneration, lengthened
fallow periods,
silvopastoral systems

Afforestation,
natural
regeneration of
trees and forests

Low

Carbon emission reduction

Agricultural machinery
emission management,
avoided deforestation

Reduced forest
and fallow
burning

Low

Methane emission reduction

Improved livestock feed,
peat soil management

Protection of
peat areas from
disturbance

Low

Water flow regulation

Increased irrigation-use
efficiency, protection of
wetlands, farm drainage,
range management

Well-designed
road and path
construction,
revegetation of
bare lands

Low

Water quality maintenance

Reduced agrochemicals,
filtering of agricultural
runoff, improved
nutrient-use efficiency

Maintenance
of perennial
vegetative
filters protecting
waterways

High

Erosion and sedimentation
control

Soil conservation and
runoff management,
perennial soil cover,
adoption of conservation
agriculture, range
management

Road, path
and settlement
construction;
revegetation of
stream banks

Moderate

Salinization and water
table regulation

Tree-growing

Strategic treegrowing in the
landscape

Moderate

Aquifer recharge

Plot- and farm-level
water harvesting

Community/
subwatershed
water harvesting

Moderate

Flood control

Diversion and storage
ponds

Drainage
channels and
storage ponds,
maintenance of
natural floods

High

Protection of habitat for
wild terrestrial species

Breeding area protection,
maintenance of pure
water sources, wild food
sources in and around
farm plots, timing of
cultivation, increased
crop species/varietal
diversity

Natural area
networks in and
around farms,
public and
private protected
areas

Moderate

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

TABLE 4 (cont.)
Management options and coordination requirements for three environmental services

Wild biodiversity conservation

ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICE

FARM-LEVEL
MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

LANDSCAPE-LEVEL
MANAGEMENT OPTIONS

DEGREE OF
COORDINATION
REQUIRED1

Connectivity for
mobile species

Farm hedgerows,
windbreaks, removal of
impenetrable barriers

Natural area
networks in and
around farms

Moderate
to
high

Protection of threatened
ecological communities

Restoration or protection
of farm patches of
natural habitat

Maintenance
of corridors
connecting
natural habitat
fragments
through farm
and other lands

Moderate
to
high

Protection of wild species

Elimination of threats
from toxic chemicals,
breeding area protection,
non-lethal pest control
practices

Barriers to
exclude wildlife
from farmlands,
compensation
to farmers for
wildlife damage
to stocks and
crops

Low
to
moderate

Protection of habitat for
aquatic species

Prevention of waterway
pollution by crop and
livestock wastes and
agrichemicals, protection  
or restoration of on-farm
wetlands

Natural
revegetation
along stream
banks,
protection or
restoration of
wetlands

Low
to
moderate

1

Reasons for coordinated action may include the need for collective investments (e.g. to establish a community-wide
windbreak), the indivisibility of investment (e.g. to restore a major gully), or the need for spatial coordination to
produce the desired outcome (e.g. the re-establishment of riparian vegetation would only produce higher water quality
if all landowners along the waterway participate).
Source: adapted from FAO, 2007c.

For example, from a purely technical
perspective, improved land management
over the next 50–100 years could
theoretically make a major contribution to
global carbon sequestration. Thus, Lal (2000)
has estimated that the annual increase in
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration
could be balanced out by the restoration
of 2 billion hectares of degraded lands to
increase their average carbon content by
1.5 tonnes per hectare in soils and vegetation
through improved soil management practices
such as reduced tillage and fertilization (see
also Rasmussen, Albrecht and Smiley, 1998;
Sa et al., 2001). However, the actual amount
of carbon sequestration that farmers will
supply depends on how much they will be
paid for the soil carbon and on the costs
they would bear in supplying it. Economic
studies undertaken in the United States of
America show that, at carbon prices in the
range of US$50–100 per tonne, the economic
potential falls far below the technical

potential (Lewandrowski et al., 2004;
Paustian et al., 2006).
The economic potential for supplying
environmental services is a critical criterion
when assessing the effectiveness of
payments for environmental services in
increasing the economic and environmental
benefits available from agro-ecosystems.
As stated in the opening paragraphs of this
chapter, this potential is a function of the
conditions of the agricultural economy in
question. Population density, agro-ecological
conditions, level of market integration and
primary technology employed in agriculture
are all important determinants of the current
returns to land and labour in agriculture
and the potential costs and benefits of
introducing changes that would generate
additional environmental services. These
same factors also affect the level of economic
development and thus the demand and
willingness to pay for environmental services
at the local level.

31

32

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Conclusions
Agriculture has the potential to increase
significantly the provision of environmental
services such as climate change mitigation,
biodiversity conservation, watershed
protection and others, but this will
require changes in the way in which
agro-ecosystems are managed. How
environmental services can be generated
varies by the service, the type of production
system and the agro-ecological context.
The types of change needed to enhance the
provision of ecosystem services range from
shifts in land or water use (e.g. out of crops
or fishing and into less intensive uses such
as grasslands or forests) to changes within a
given production system (e.g. the adoption
of farming systems that provide higher
levels of environmental services).
The biophysical processes involved in
different ecosystem services have significant
implications for policy responses. For
example, there are no geographic limits for
carbon emission reductions or mitigation;
a tonne of carbon sequestered by a poor
farmer hundreds of miles from any road
has exactly the same value as a tonne
sequestered by a commercial plantation
near the capital city. In contrast, biodiversity

conservation and watershed protection
services are generally location-specific, with
the former providing global benefits and the
latter being primarily of interest to local and
regional users.
Synergies often exist between the
provision of different ecosystem services.
Production practices adopted to enhance
one ecosystem service may enhance others
at the same time. For example, increasing
soil carbon sequestration through the
adoption of conservation agriculture can
have beneficial implications not only for
climate change mitigation and water quality
but also for the provisioning services of
food production. However, there are often
trade-offs between the delivery of different
ecosystem services, which are important to
understand.
This chapter has focused on the technical
potential of agriculture to supply enhanced
levels of environmental services. Whether
the necessary changes are economically
feasible is central to determining if they can
be achieved and what level of payments
would be required to realize them. The
next chapter takes up the issue of demand
for environmental services: who would pay
for environmental services, why would they
pay for them and how much would they be
willing to pay?

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

3. Demand for environmental
services
Several forces are stimulating a growth
in demand and willingness to pay for
environmental services. Public awareness
of the value of environmental services and
the costs of their depletion is growing and
information on the issues is becoming more
widely available.
Environmental and, to some extent, health
regulations are an important outcome
of this trend and are major drivers of the
willingness to pay for environmental services.
Individuals and firms are ready to pay for
such services when they provide a lowcost way of complying with a regulation.
In the early 1990s, for example, the city of
New York in the United States of America
concluded that the least-expensive means of
meeting water quality standards for the city’s
water supply was through paying farmers
in the upper reaches of the watershed to
change their agricultural practices (Box 4).
Similarly, payments for carbon sequestration
are largely driven by regulations at the
international, national and subnational levels
limiting carbon emissions and creating a
market for offsets.
Payments for environmental services
beyond the regulatory requirements are
also emerging. When the value of wetlands
outside New Orleans in the United States
of America became clear in the aftermath
of Hurricane Katrina, the state of Louisiana
started directing funds towards coastal
wetlands restoration, reversing former
policies that had actually degraded
wetlands (Verchick, 2007). Consumers also
have shown a marked willingness to pay
for environmental services through their
purchases of ecolabelled products. Swallow
et al. (2007b) identify three important links
between flexible and regulatory approaches
to environmental governance:
• New environmental regulations that
allow flexibility in the approach to
compliance create institutional space for

public utilities, local governments and
private firms to innovate with regard
to PES activities.
• Firms or industry groups may actively
promote PES schemes as a way of
demonstrating commitment to the
environment in order to forestall
environmental regulations.
• Firms may seek to establish or illustrate
best practice in environmental
management as a way of influencing
the shape of future environmental
regulation.
Most PES programmes are funded by
the public sector. However, the private
sector is increasingly becoming involved in
purchasing environmental services. A recent
survey identified more than 100 types of
private environmental service payment
programmes – with a relatively even
distribution across the domains of carbon
sequestration, water and biodiversity – and
an estimated number of transactions
totalling more than 1 100 (FAO/Forest Trends,
2007).
This chapter examines the basis for the
demand for environmental services and the
differences between public- and privatesector programmes. It then examines the
current market situation for three major
services: carbon sequestration, watershed
management and biodiversity conservation.

Value and beneficiaries of
environmental services
To understand the basis for payments
for environmental services provided by
agriculture, it is first necessary to look at the
benefits they generate and to whom they
accrue.



The chapter draws heavily on FAO, 2007c.

33

34

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 4
Demand for and supply of water services in Sukhomajri, India and New York,
United States of America
Two well-known cases of payments for
environmental services in the area of
water quality from India and the United
States of America illustrate the importance
of assessing both demand and supply.
The small village of Sukhomajri in India
provides an early and complex example of
watershed development that has helped
inspire modern watershed development
programmes. In the 1970s, high rates
of sedimentation in Lake Sukhna in
the northern Indian state of Haryana
created problems for the drinking water
supply of the nearby town of Chandigarh
(Kerr, 2002). Recreational benefits were
threatened also. The source of the
problem was traced to a small upstream
village named Sukhomajri, where villagers
were cultivating steep lands and allowing
animals to graze freely throughout the
watershed. Around 80–90 percent of the
sedimentation in Lake Sukhna was found
to originate from Sukhomajri (Sengupta
et al., 2003). The Sukhomajri farmers’
agricultural practices were not only felt
downstream; runoff water on one side of

Valuing environmental services
For traded commodities and services, market
prices indicate the value at which buyers
and sellers agree to exchange them. For
many environmental services, however,
market prices do not exist, so quantifying
their importance or estimating their value
is difficult. Information is lacking regarding
the underlying process that results in
environmental services and their implications
for human well-being. In many cases, the
benefits may be uncertain and may occur
only in the future, if at all. A common
approach to estimating environmental values
is the “total economic value” concept, which
encapsulates the full range of economic
values. that people attach to each type of
land use.
See, for example, Pearce, 1993; Johansson, 1990; Barbier,
1989; Pearce and Turner, 1990; Munasinghe and Lutz,
1993; Ayres and Dixon, 1995; Kumari, 1995; Adger et al.,
1995; Hearne, 1996; Andersen, 1997; Markandya et al.,
2002.


the watershed also flooded and destroyed
agricultural lands in the village itself.
A central government agency, the
Central Soil and Water Conservation
Research and Training Institute (CSWCRTI)
revegetated the watersheds and installed
conservation structures such as check
dams and gully plugs to stop the flow
of silt. Villagers were asked to refrain
from allowing grazing animals into the
watersheds. Benefits to the villagers
were twofold: not only reduced damage
to agricultural lands, but also access to
irrigation water stored by the check
dams. Although no direct payments
were involved, the villagers were thus
indirectly compensated for providing the
environmental service. At the time of the
project implementation, the notion of
markets for environmental services was
little known, but in effect the project
functioned as an environmental services
payment scheme. A drawback was that
only a minority of landowners in the
village benefited from the scheme;
other villagers, particularly the landless,

• Direct use values are those derived
from marketed goods or services that
normally involve private benefits, such
as commodities, timber, fuelwood,
non-timber forest products, recreation,
education and tourism. These also
generally correspond to the Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment’s category
of provisioning services. Valuation
of these types of service is usually
straightforward.
• Indirect use values refer to benefits
that people derive indirectly from the
“ecological functions” performed, such
as watershed protection, fire prevention,
water recycling, carbon sequestration,
biodiversity conservation, and pest
and disease resistance. Environmental
services often fall into the latter
category of benefits, which relate to
the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment’s
categories of regulating and supporting
services.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

stood to lose from reduced access to
grazing lands. The problem was solved
by distributing rights to the water to
all villagers and allowing them to trade
among themselves – a system that was
later abandoned in favour of user fees for
water. The project resulted in a 95 percent
decrease in siltation into Lake Sukhna,
saving the town of Chandigarh about
US$200 000 annually (Kerr, 2002).
In the second case, which was initiated
in the early 1990s, a combination of
federal regulations and cost realities in the
United States of America drove New York
City to reconsider its water supply strategy.
Municipal and other water suppliers were
required to filter their surface water
supplies unless they could demonstrate
that they had taken other steps, including
watershed protection measures, to protect
their customers from harmful water
contamination. Ninety percent of the New
York City water supply is drawn from a
watershed that extends 200 km north and
west of the city. City authorities concluded
that managing land use in the watershed

• Option values are based on the benefit
of preserving the possibility of future
direct or indirect use. They represent the
insurance premium people are willing
to pay today to secure environmental
services in the future. Much of the
importance of biodiversity conservation
lies in option values: preserving
ecosystems, species and genes for
potential future use.
• Non-use values are benefits that are
totally unrelated to any personal use
of an ecosystem. Individuals may value
environmental services without ever
actually deriving any use value from
them. Benefits in this category include
the value of knowing that an ecosystem
exists and will be conserved for
future generations, as do securing the
survival and well-being of biodiversity,
endangered species and habitats (FAO,
2004c). They are also referred to as
existence values.

was more cost-effective than building a
filtration plant. A filtration plant would
have cost US$6–8 billion. Watershed
protection efforts, including not only the
acquisition of critical watershed lands
but also payments to farmers to change
practices so as to reduce contamination
sources in the watershed, would have
cost only about US$1.5 billion and
would have provided the same level of
water quality. New York City chose to
invest in natural rather than produced
capital. Farms that opt to participate
in the Watershed Agricultural Program
receive technical assistance in designing a
strategy for controlling potential sources
of pollution on the farm, with New York
City covering all costs associated with the
implementation, and become eligible
for other elements of the compensation
package for specific environmental
services (Rosa et al., 2003).

Source: FAO, 2007d.

Precisely because markets do not exist for
many environmental services, estimating
their value is difficult. If society has decided
that an environmental service is worth
protecting (or enhancing), even without
a precise estimate of its monetary value,
other methods – such as environmental
benefits indices – can be used to prioritize
spending in such programmes. These
methods are discussed in greater detail in
Chapter 5.

Identifying beneficiaries
Who actually benefits from these different
forms of value from environmental services?
The benefits from environmental services
occur at local, regional and global levels.
They may occur immediately, after a few
years or well into the future. Establishing
where and when the benefits from
environmental services occur is fundamental
to understanding the basis of demand
and payments for them. Table 5 provides a

35

TABLE 5
Indirect, option, and non-use values associated with environmental services
INDIRECT USE VALUE

Off-site
local benefits

n Watershed, soil and
flood protection
n Water quality

OPTION VALUE

NON-USE VALUE

n Conservation of
agricultural biodiversity
for potential future uses

n Aesthetic, cultural and
spiritual values

n Genetic material
that can be used for
agricultural, medical
other future purposes

n Biodiversity conservation
and species preservation

n Water and nutrient
recycling
n Soil fertility
n Pest and disease
resistance
n Aesthetic, cultural and
spiritual values

Global
benefits

36

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

n Climate change
mitigation

Source: adapted from FAO, 2004c.

rough categorization of the benefits from
environmental services, grouped according
to scale and type of value.

Who are the potential buyers?
Owing to their nature, environmental
services are not easily packaged and traded,
and in many cases their benefits will occur
mostly in the future. Many environmental
services take the form of public goods (see
Box 2 on p. 14). Coordination of purchasers
of public goods is required in order to
overcome problems of “free-riders” (those
who benefit from the service without paying
for it). Moreover, the actual purchaser of an
environmental service is often not the same
as the beneficiary (see Table 6). In many
cases, the purchaser is the public sector,
acting on behalf of individual beneficiaries.
However, there are also other intermediaries
who coordinate purchases for environmental
services, including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and product
certifiers.

Public-sector funding of PES
programmes
Public-sector funding for agriculture is
the most frequent source of funds for PES
programmes, whether it is the Grain for
Green programme in China (see Box 17
on p. 83), the CRP in the United States of

America (see Box 5 on p. 38), Costa Rica’s
Payments for Environmental Services
programme (see Box 16 on p. 81) or
Brazil’s Programme of Socio-environmental
Development of the Rural Family Production,
known as Proambiente (May et al., 2004).
Usually, public-sector programmes do not
have a direct link between buyers and
sellers; instead, governments use general
tax revenues or external funds such as
those provided as overseas development
assistance. In some cases, however, revenues
are generated by earmarking a share of
taxes or fees charged to some users of the
services, such as the water fee in Mexico
(Muñoz-Piña et al., 2005), or the South
African “water resource management fee”
included in the water charges, to cover part
of the costs of clearing “thirsty” invasive
alien plants (see Box 22 on p. 97) (Turpie and
Blignaut, 2005).
International public-sector funding is
also an important source of finance for PES
programmes in developing countries. One
key player is the GEF, which has co-funded
several PES projects in developing countries
(see Box 6 on p. 39). GEF payments can
reasonably be considered as payments from
service users, in that the global community
(through the Convention on Biodiversity
Conservation and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change
[UNFCCC]) has empowered the GEF to act
on its behalf in conserving global public

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

TABLE 6
Environmental services and examples of buyers
ECOSYSTEM SERVICE

BENEFICIARIES

BUYERS

n Global community

n Local, regional and national
governments
n International organizations (World
Bank – BioCarbon Fund)
n National carbon funds (Italian Carbon
Fund, The Netherlands CDM Facility)

Carbon
sequestration

n Conservation groups
n Land trusts
n Corporations
n Hedge funds and investment groups

Biodiversity

n Global community

n International and national NGOs
n Private businesses (offsets)

n Local community
(potable water)

Water quality

Erosion control

n

Municipalities

n

Private water suppliers

n Fishers (pollution)

n

Public water suppliers

n Farmers (salinity)

n

Bottled water companies

n

Farming organizations

n

Hydroelectric energy providers

n

Local community
(potable water)

n

Dam owners (sedimentation)

n

Fishers (sedimentation)

Source: adapted from FAO, 2007d.

goods (Pagiola and Platais, 2007). The
BioCarbon Fund provides an example of an
international source of payments for carbon
emission offsets from land-use change that
includes payments for activities allowable
under the Kyoto Protocol (see p. 41), such as
reforestation and afforestation, as well as a
broader menu of options for offsets, such as
soil carbon sequestration.
Overseas development assistance in
the form of loans and grants has also
been a significant source of funds for PES
programmes. Loans from the World Bank
have financed some of the most wellestablished PES programmes, such as the
Costa Rican and Mexican national PES
programmes. The critical role played by
these projects has centred on helping both
countries develop new, sustainable sources
of finance from water users, the tourism
industry and carbon buyers to improve
programme efficiency and to support the
participation of poorer landholders.

Private-sector purchasers of
environmental services
The private sector is playing an increasingly
active role in payment programmes in
developing countries. Their motivation
for paying to promote environmental
service provision includes concerns about
maximizing sales to environmentally aware
consumers and pressures from shareholders
and consumers for greater corporate social
responsibility.
Examples of private-sector programmes
include payments for voluntary carbon
sequestration and biodiversity conservation,
payments through intermediaries such as
NGOs for the adoption of conservation
practices, private purchases of water quality
services and involvement in ecolabelling
initiatives, including ecotourism. It is
estimated that around 100 megatonnes
of carbon have been sequestered through
voluntary payments to landowners, many of
whom are in developing countries (Bayon,
Hawn and Hamilton, 2007). Some companies
engaged in land development in developing

37

38

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 5
The United States Conservation Reserve Program
Created in 1985, the United States
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)
is the largest payment scheme for
environmental services in the world,
providing annual rental payments and
sharing the cost of conservation practices
on farmland. First created to address
problems of soil erosion and to support
farm incomes at a time of declining crop
prices, the programme has grown over
the years and now pays for land-use
changes that promote water quality and
wildlife habitat, as well. Annual payments
exceed US$1.4 billion for activities on over
32 million acres (approximately 13 million
hectares) (USDA, 2007).
CRP contracts extend from 10 to
15 years. To be eligible for CRP support,
farmland must have been planted in two
of the five most recent crop years and
meet a set of requirements to ensure
it can provide services. The land must
be physically and legally capable of
growing an agricultural commodity or
constitute marginal pastureland suitable
for planting as a riparian buffer. In
addition, the land must present some
sensitive environmental characteristics,
such as being highly erodible or a cropped
wetland.
Farmers wishing to enrol in the
CRP have their offers ranked by
government field officers according to an
Environmental Benefits Index (EBI) that
includes such elements as erodibility, as
well as wildlife habitat or water quality

countries are voluntarily offsetting the
negative effects of their activities on local
biodiversity by restoring and enhancing
habitat elsewhere.
Consumers of ecolabelled products
represent a further source of privatesector payments. The Forest Stewardship
Council (FSC), which sets standards for
For more detailed discussion of the potential for
biodiversity offsets see http://www.forest-trends.org/
biodiversityoffsetprogram.



benefits. Farmers who are selected
for enrolment receive annual rental
payments (averaging US$49 per acre in
2006), as well as cost-share payments
to establish approved vegetative cover.
Topsoil loss on CRP land is estimated to
have been greatly reduced, and benefits
to water quality, wildlife and recreation
have also been significant (Sullivan et al.,
2004).
Despite CRP’s achievements, critics
have raised several concerns. First, land
withdrawn from crop production in
the CRP may be partially offset by land
brought into production elsewhere,
although the precise magnitude is
difficult to determine (Roberts and
Bucholtz, 2006). Second, concerns
have been expressed about fairness,
in that participating farmers are paid
to adopt practices that other farmers
may have adopted voluntarily (without
compensation). Finally, concerns have
been raised about cost-effectiveness,
as it is possible for owners of land with
substantial environmental benefits
(as reflected in a high EBI), but low
agricultural productivity, to qualify for
CRP payments well above what they
would be willing to accept, in view of
the low returns they would have were
they to keep that land in production
(Kirwan, Lubowski and Roberts, 2005).
Considerations in programme design
to address these concerns are discussed
further in Chapter 5.

sustainable forest management, and the
Marine Stewardship Council (see Box 21
on p. 92), which provides standards for
sustainable fisheries, are two notable sources
of product certification. Both accredit
independent certification bodies to carry
out certification. In both cases, certification
requires a management system that
generates environmental services, particularly
biodiversity conservation, as well as fish
and forest products. In the case of the FSC,
the global extent of certified forest area

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 6
Global Environment Facility and payments for environmental services
Pablo Gutman1
Over the early 2000s, the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) has built a
portfolio of 22 projects that have some
elements of an environmental services
payments programme. The cumulative
budget for these programmes is
somewhat less than 3 percent of GEF
cumulative investments. Most of the
projects’ total budgets are in the range
of US$25–100 million. Almost all projects
are part of the GEF biodiversity portfolio
and are heavily concentrated in the
Latin America and the Caribbean region.
The ecosystem services they provide
include all those discussed in this report.
Thus far, GEF’s role in the payments for
environmental services arena has been
small, but important in several ways:
acting as the glue for other institutions to
participate; increasing incentives for the
recipient country; bringing in funds for

is small, accounting for only 7 percent of
total global forest area, and most is located
in developed countries. Certification has
so far focused on public and large private
forests. It can represent an additional cost
that poorer countries and smaller producers
find difficult to meet and thus they may be
disadvantaged. Nevertheless, although both
the demand for, and supply of, certified
products is concentrated primarily in
developed countries, some growth in supply
is also beginning to occur in developing
countries. For example, Argentina and China
rank second and third in the world for their
areas of certified organic land, while virtually
all Rainforest Alliance certified crops are
grown in Latin America (P. Liu, personal
communication, 2007).
Considerable diversity exists in the
certification of agricultural crop commodities
in terms of products covered and types of
environmental benefits associated with the
standard. Organic agriculture is the largest
certified product market in agriculture, with
over 31 million hectares currently certified

institutional development and capacity
building; promoting new ideas and
approaches.
The current GEF payments for
environmental services portfolio is largely
focused on protection of natural forests
and management of protected areas.
Many projects anticipate the growth
of international markets for biocarbon
sequestration and avoided deforestation
for future funding. Others hope to find
local buyers for watershed protection
services. Current payers are always the
national government or international
donors, both bilateral and GEF. With the
exception of the carbon emission offsets
projects, these projects do not rely on the
markets of wealthier countries as a source
of funding.
1

World Wildlife Fund.

as organic and a market value of 25.5 billion
euros in 2005 (IFOAM, 2007). Most types of
organic certification are not directly tied
to a specific environmental service, and
evidence on the net environmental benefits
remains mixed. They are based on criteria
linked to environmental management and
thus could be considered a form of payment
for environmental service. While many
types of certified product programmes exist,
and they are increasing in number, there is
considerable fragmentation in the range of
crops and environmental services receiving
attention. Rainforest Alliance certification
for example, encompasses coffee, cocoa,
fruits and flowers and requires ecosystem
management, wildlife protection and the
protection of waterways. The Biodiversity
and Wine Initiative in South Africa (see
Box 7) certifies vineyards that implement
practices aimed at conserving biodiversity.
Finally, examples exist of environmental
services that are provided to discrete
beneficiaries. In such cases, individual
private PES buyers may be willing to pay

39

40

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 7
The Biodiversity and Wine Initiative in South Africa
South Africa is the world’s eighth
largest producer of wine, 90 percent
of which is produced in the Cape Floral
Kingdom, a World Heritage site and
global biodiversity hotspot. Since the
late 1990s, a boom in wine exports has
raised concerns over the expansion of
vineyards. Conservation organizations,
including The World Conservation Union,
Conservation International and the South
African National Biodiversity Institute,
have teamed up with the South African
wine industry to create the Biodiversity
and Wine Initiative (BWI). Specific
biodiversity best practice guidelines have
been incorporated into the environmental
guidelines of the Integrated Production of
Wine, an industry-wide technical system
of sustainable wine production. From
the industry’s point of view, highlighting
sustainable natural resource management
and efforts to conserve South Africa’s
natural heritage creates an important
marketing opportunity.
The BWI now represents the
conservation element of the Wines
of South Africa brand. Participating
producers agree to implement biodiversity

providers to ensure continuous provision.
One such example is the French bottled
water company Vittel mentioned in
Chapter 2, which pays farmers to maintain
specific land-use practices above the
aquifers they use for bottling (PerrotMaître, 2006). In Costa Rica, La Esperanza
Hydroelectric Company pays landowners
in the watershed of its power-generating
reservoir to maintain their forests intact
in order to control erosion. Similarly,
ecotourism operators sometimes pay local
communities to ensure the conservation of
attractive biodiversity in the surrounding
areas (Teixeira, 2006).

For further details, see http://ecosystemmarketplace.com/
pages/marketwatch.transaction.other.php?component_
id=1827&component_version_id=2951&language_id=12.



best practices to reduce negative impacts
on biodiversity and enhance habitat
quality. In properties with priority
habitats, growers can benefit from
additional support from the Cape Nature
Conservation’s Conservation Stewardship
Programme – a programme for the
conservation of priority habitats in private
lands.
Benefits include assistance with on-farm
habitat management, alien plant clearing
and property rate rebates. The BWI
provides media coverage on its Web site
and in wine and tourism magazines and
also plans to establish a biodiversity wine
tour during which visitors can enjoy both
the wine and the biodiversity richness
in the property of each participating
producer.
By mid-2007, the BWI scheme already
covers half of the total vineyard footprint
in the Cape winelands – over 50 000
hectares, managed by 76 producers.

Source: adapted from BWI, 2007.

Demand for three main
environmental services
The sections that follow examine more
closely the trends in demand for the three
main environmental services that are
the focus of this report: climate change
mitigation, watershed services and
biodiversity conservation.

Climate change mitigation
The unique characteristic of carbon emission
reductions or mitigation is the absence
of geographic limitations. The location
of carbon mitigation is irrelevant for its
effectiveness. Furthermore, increasing carbon
stocks in farm soils and vegetation can
often be accomplished while simultaneously
improving farm productivity. This represents
a valuable opportunity for diversification

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

and risk-spreading, two crucial components
of smallholders’ livelihood strategies in
developing countries.
Most demand for carbon emission
reductions worldwide is driven by the Kyoto
Protocol and the national and regional
implementing policies and trading schemes
enacted to carry it out. The Kyoto Protocol
is an agreement under the UNFCCC that
involves commitments on the part of a set
of industrialized countries (referred to as
Annex I countries) to legally binding limits or
reductions to their greenhouse gas emissions
from a base of the levels prevailing in 1990.
The Kyoto Protocol became legally binding in
2005, with its first commitment period ending
in 2012. Two flexible trading mechanisms
were established to meet emission reduction
requirements under the Kyoto Protocol:
the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
and the Joint Implementation Program. The
first allows trading in emission reductions
between Annex I countries and developing
countries through the issuance of a
certified emission reduction (CER). Joint
Implementation allows trading between
two or more Annex I countries. At present,
the rules of the CDM restrict the type and
amount of carbon emission reduction
credits that can be obtained from carbon
sequestration. Only afforestation and
reforestation projects are allowed, and these
can only make up 1 percent of the total
base-year emissions. The rules for what will
be allowed after 2012 are not yet clear and
remain the subject of considerable debate.
Overall, the prospects for the market in
carbon emission reductions are extremely
promising, and the global carbon markets
are expanding rapidly. In 2005, market
volume was approximately US$10 billion,
while in the first quarter of 2006 alone
emissions-related business transactions
were valued at US$7.5 billion (World
Bank/IETA, 2006) and, by the end of 2006,
the global carbon market had tripled to
reach US$30 billion (World Bank, 2007).
In 2006, 508 megatonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalents were sold by developing
countries to Annex 1 countries, for a total
value of US$5.4 billion (including transactions
within the CDM, Joint Implementation and
voluntary markets) (World Bank, 2007).
However, only a small share of the market
is for emission reductions from carbon

sequestration, due to the CDM restrictions
mentioned above and because the EU
Emissions Trading Scheme – the largest
market, accounting for US$25 billion in
2006 – does not allow credits from forestry
carbon. Emission reductions from land use,
land-use change and forestry (LULUCF)
account for only 1 percent of volumes so far
(World Bank, 2007), with only 0.3 percent of
the CERs being issued for LULUCF projects,
and more than half of these are generated
from projects in China.
Currently, these regulated markets are
unfavourable to small farmers for a number
of reasons. First, the CDM excludes two of the
major forms of carbon emission reductions
that farmers can deliver relatively easily:
reduced emissions from deforestation in
developing countries (known by its acronym
RED-DC) and soil carbon sequestration.
Second, the process of certifying projects to
be CDM-eligible is complex and costly, as is
the process of delivering carbon credits to the
market (see Box 20 on p. 90).
A third problem relates to the limits placed
on the size of small-scale carbon projects.
The CDM allows simplified procedures for
establishing small projects; however, the
maximum size of these projects is set at
8 kilotonnes of carbon dioxide that can
be offset from sequestration per year,
which is too small for the projects to be
financially feasible at current market prices.
Most country submissions to the UNFCCC
in 2007 requested an increase in this cap
to 32 kilotonnes in order to improve their
feasibility.
Finally, for buyers who are not
interested in social co-benefits and who
are concerned about the risks associated
with the reversibility of emission credits
from agriculture-based projects, other
energy projects and projects that capture
potent industrial greenhouse gases are now
considered those with the best prospects
for the carbon-trading market. Nonetheless,
regulated markets could still involve
significant numbers of small farmers if the
rules were changed to encourage their
inclusion.
The prices that are being paid for credits
for carbon emission reduction vary widely
by source of demand and type of offset. The
Ecosystem Marketplace reported prices of
around US$7 per tonne of carbon dioxide in

41

42

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 8
Payments for reduced emissions from deforestation: what is the potential?
Heiner von Lüpke1
It is estimated that at least 18 percent
of all greenhouse gas emissions
originate from deforestation processes
worldwide, making this the second
largest emitting process, after fossil
fuel combustion. According to the 2005
FAO Global Forest Resource Assessment,
deforestation is taking place at a rate
of 13 million hectares annually and
is principally a result of conversion to
other land uses, forest degradation,
timber and fuelwood removals and
shifting cultivation, as well as forest fires.
Important underlying and proximate
causes of deforestation are economic
factors such as market growth, policy
and institutional factors, and formal and
informal policies, as well as issues related
to land tenure and property rights.
At the eleventh Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP 11),
a group of countries led by Costa Rica
and Papua New Guinea proposed
the consideration of a framework to
contribute to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions through avoiding deforestation
in developing countries. Developing
countries would identify projects to

2007, up from a range of US$3–6.5 per tonne
in 2004 (Walker, 2007).
The size of voluntary markets and public
payments is likely to be smaller than for
the regulatory carbon markets, but their
interest to farming communities is likely
to be greater, because they capture a
much higher share of carbon sequestration
projects (Bayon, Hawn and Hamilton,
2007). Voluntary buyers are often more
interested in demonstrating positive social
and economic co-benefits, and public-sector
buyers can choose to invest in low-income
areas and to utilize carbon payments to
restore degraded lands and encourage
agroforestry on a large scale.
Another potential source of payments for
emission reduction currently under much

achieve voluntary carbon emission
reductions by reducing deforestation
in return for international financial
compensation. Other policy approaches
besides payments, including capacity
and institution building, have been
included in the proposals, as well. A
possible mechanism is currently being
discussed and is to be addressed during
COP 13 (Indonesia, December 2007). A
common feature is the proposition that
the international community would bear
the costs of implementing the mechanism.
Options under discussion include a
mechanism based on existing carbon
markets and a separate global fund.
Issues include the weak database on
actual and historic trends of carbon stock
changes in forests, the development of
a baseline scenario, technical matters
related to the monitoring of carbon
stock changes in forests, strengthening
capacities of institutions and the need
to build institutional frameworks to
implement a mechanism.

1

FAO Forestry Department.

debate is payments for reducing emissions
from deforestation. Deforestation arising
from conversion of land to annual crops
or pasture is a major contributor to global
emissions of greenhouse gases, and much
of it occurs in developing countries. At its
eleventh session in 2006, the Conference of
Parties of the UNFCCC invited parties and
accredited observers to submit their views
on issues related to reducing emissions
from deforestation in developing countries,
including policy approaches and positive
incentives. Payments to land users for
reducing emissions from deforestation
are one of the most important types of
positive incentive measures being proposed,
including by FAO in its submission (UNFCCC,
2007) (see Box 8). This source of payments,

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 6
Share of bioenergy in total primary energy supply
Percentage
Africa
Asia
Latin America
China
Non-OECD Europe
OECD
Former Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics
Middle East
0

10

20

30

40

50

Source: based on data from OECD/IEA, 2007.

if it materializes, will have the potential to
augment the flow of payments for emission
reductions from the agriculture sector. In
addition, emission reductions from LULUCF
activities have been identified as having a
high potential “development dividend”,
defined as benefits to developing countries.
These benefits include economic growth,
technological improvement and poverty
reduction (Cosbey et al., 2006).
Bioenergy represents another potentially
important source of carbon emission
reductions. In 2004, bioenergy provided
about 10 percent of total primary energy
supply at the global level and approximately
35 percent in developing countries
(Figure 6).
The share of bioenergy projects in the
CDM market has been significant. In May
2007, bioenergy projects (excluding biogas)
represented the fourth largest project type
in terms of share of CERs but are expected to
drop to the fifth largest share by the end of
the first crediting period in 2012.
Full life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions
of bioenergy systems depend on a range of
aspects along the entire production chain,
including land-use changes, choice of feedstock, agricultural practices, refining or
conversion process and end-use practices.
Estimates of net emission reductions that
can be obtained with bioenergy thus vary
widely. Bioenergy can reduce emissions by
substituting for transport fuels and replacing
fossil fuels such as coal for power and heat
generation. Bioenergy development can

have impacts on water use, soil erosion and
biodiversity conservation also, depending
on the specific production system. These are
important in assessing the sustainability of
emission offsets from this source and could
affect their eligibility for CDM credits.
A major problem with current patterns
of biomass use for energy, particularly
for traditional bioenergy systems in
developing countries, is its low conversion
efficiency, frequently as low as 10 percent
(Kaltschmitt and Hartmann, 2001), and
related degradation of carbon stocks in
and outside forests.8 Improving bioenergy
efficiency is a fairly straightforward means of
reducing carbon emissions and it represents
a large potential source of carbon payments
for those countries that currently depend
on traditional bioenergy (i.e. almost all
least-developed countries). The rules and
modalities of the CDM have so far not
allowed bioenergy projects that reduce
emissions through improving efficiency or
introducing renewable energy systems. This
could be a key reason behind the very low
share of CDM projects in sub-Saharan Africa
and least-developed countries in general
(Jürgens, Schlamadinger and Gomez, 2006).

Watershed services
Demand for watershed services appears to
present a growing opportunity for farmers
Wood removal for energy use represents a large share of
total wood removals from forests, particularly in Africa and
Latin America. See FAO, 006b.

8



44

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 7
Size of selected watershed service markets
Nature and location
of market

Regulatory:
1

COSTA RICA
Regulatory:
2

MEXICO

Regulatory:
UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA

Services paid for

Size of market

Price of service

(Million US$)

(US$)

Water-based ecosystem
services markets (1996)

89.0

40–100 per hectare of
forest

Payment for hydrological
services (2003)

23.1

33 per hectare

Water pollutant trading and
offset (2003)

11.3

2.37 per pound sediment/
nutrients

US$0.5 million of the Costa Rica funding was provided through voluntary agreements with water users, which includes
public-sector water users such as the state power corporation Compañía Nacional de Fuerza y Luz (CNFL) and the public
utility of the town of Heredia.
2
Mexico is working to develop voluntary payments by water users to supplement funding from the central
government, under the World Bank/GEF-financed Environmental Services Project.
Source: FAO/Forest Trends, 2007; Pagiola, 2004.
1

located in a critical watershed. Public
watershed payment schemes, which currently
represent by far the largest market for
watershed services, are valued at US$2 billion
annually, worldwide (Ecosystem Marketplace,
2005). Monetarily, these payments are
concentrated mostly in China and the United
States of America, but numerous smaller
public watershed programmes are being
established in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Private voluntary watershed programmes
consist mainly of small, localized markets
totalling about US$5 million annually,
worldwide (Ecosystem Marketplace, 2005).
Table 7 provides some estimates of the size
of selected markets in the mid-2000s.
In contrast with carbon sequestration
and many biodiversity conservation
services, watershed protection services are
primarily of interest to local and regional
users (Landell-Mills and Porras, 2002).
This characteristic is both an asset and a
liability for the development of watershed
payment programmes. On the positive
side, it is relatively easy to identify the
users or beneficiaries of watershed services;
these include municipal water suppliers,
hydroelectric facilities, industrial users and
irrigation systems. Furthermore, the critical
day-to-day use value of these services may
make revenue streams less subject to market
fluctuations than payment programmes
driven by philanthropy, goodwill, public
relations or long-term environmental wellbeing at the global level.

On the negative side, the local
orientation of watershed service benefits
is the limited scope for attracting
payments from international beneficiaries.
However, considerable external funding
has been provided by the international
community to assist in the establishment of
watershed payment programmes. To date,
US$108 million in approved World Bank
loans and US$52 million in GEF grants have
been made available for World Bank/GEFsupported PES projects involving water
payments. Likewise, funding from The
Nature Conservancy, an international NGO,
has helped establish the FONAG (Fondo
para la Protección del Agua) water fund in
Quito, Ecuador; funding from Swiss Aid has
helped fund the PASOLAC (Programa para la
Agricultura Sostenible en Laderas de América
Central) programme that helped many rural
towns to establish local PES programmes
in Central America; and the Inter-American
Foundation has provided start-up funding
for the PES mechanism in the Ecuadorian
town of Pimampiro. Such external support
has been used to cover start-up costs and,
perhaps more importantly, technical support
for mechanism design.
The development of local watershed
PES programmes is difficult where the
water users are poor and unable to afford
payments to upstream stewards. For
example, although funds collected from
household water users in Pimampiro covered
the payments made to upstream land users,

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

outside support was needed to cover the
start-up costs of the programme and its
ongoing administrative expenses (Echavarria
et al., 2004).

Biodiversity conservation
Payment programmes for biodiversity
conservation are in various phases of
development around the world, addressing
components of biodiversity ranging from the
genetic to the ecosystem level and including
both agricultural and wild biodiversity. In the
United States of America, the conservation
banking market is a biodiversity cap-andtrade system that allows for the sale and
purchase of endangered species credits to
offset negative impacts to endangered species
and their habitat. Internationally, particularly
in developing countries, payment mechanisms
being developed include certification
of biodiversity-friendly agricultural
products, hunting concessions, ecotourism
development, markets for biodiversity offsets
and niche markets for products with high
agricultural biodiversity value.
Regulated markets for biodiversity remain
practically non-existent in the developing
world at present, but might become
significant if developing countries pass
regulations that require corporate real estate
and natural resource developers to offset
their environmental impacts. Examples of
biodiversity offsets have been documented,
and models to mainstream this concept
are being developed (ten Kate, Bishop and
Bayon, 2004). Such programmes are unlikely
to target agricultural lands in general but
could do so when there is a preference for
offsetting impacts locally and where local
agricultural landscapes contain significant
biodiversity.
Biodiversity markets aimed at protecting
the services of wild pollinators and pest
control agents are poorly developed, but
have the potential for future expansion.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
(2005b) quantified the high economic costs
associated with loss of wild pollinators,
a concern that has motivated a handful
of projects to pay for pollinator habitat
protection (McNeely and Scherr, 2002). A
recent study by the United States National
Academy of Sciences reported that more
than 90 crops in North America rely on

honeybees to transport pollen from flower to
flower. These pollination services are worth
an estimated $14 billion a year to the United
States economy (Committee on the Status of
Pollinators in North America, 2007).
Three factors currently hinder the
development of biodiversity markets. First,
many of the benefits of biodiversity will
arise in the future and are highly uncertain.
The market is therefore driven mainly
by philanthropy, consumer preference
and, to a lesser extent, by regulation.
Second, it is difficult to define “units of
biodiversity” for the purpose of carrying
out transactions. Finally, the conservation
community continues to debate the value
of conservation funds being expended
in agricultural settings, where native
biodiversity may already be significantly
degraded, or whether investment should
focus on lands that have been less disturbed.

Farmers and landholders as buyers
of services
Chapter 2 focused on the central role of
farmers as providers of services, but it is also
important not to overlook their potential as
buyers. Almost all agricultural production still
ultimately relies upon fertile soil, adequate
water and protection against biological
pests and natural disturbances. Most crops
depend upon pollinating insects, whose
recent declines have caused alarm within
the agricultural community (Biesmeijer
et al., 2006; Committee on the Status of
Pollinators in North America, 2007). In the
long term, agricultural production will also
depend on the maintenance of crop genetic
diversity and other biodiversity that supports
agriculture in numerous ways.
Thus far, individual farmers and farmer
organizations are only minor buyers of
environmental services (although the
value of climate and soil fertility services is
reflected in the price of agricultural land).
Documented cases of voluntary private
markets include mainly irrigators paying
for upstream water-flow management,
fruit-growers paying to protect pollinator
habitat and farming communities paying
neighbouring communities to protect critical
sources of drinking water (Landell-Mills and

45

46

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Porras, 2002). This approach seems likely to
grow significantly for large-scale commercial
producers, especially those who seek to
export commodities to ecosensitive markets in
Europe and elsewhere. Predicted shortages of
water for surface and groundwater irrigation
may lead smallholder farmer organizations,
especially those producing higher-value,
water-intensive crops, to establish contracts to
secure hydrological services.

Future developments affecting
potential growth of PES
programmes in developing
countries
Finally, this section touches on some of the
main issues that may affect future demand
and willingness to pay for environmental
services from developing countries. There is
little doubt that concern over, and awareness
of, the costs of environmental degradation
will continue to grow, but it is less clear
to what extent this will result in increased
funds to pay for environmental services,
particularly in developing countries. The
actual flow of funds to developing countries
for environmental services is currently very
small and primarily derived from publicsector funding in a handful of countries.
Furthermore, payments for environmental
services are only small relative to the income
that can be obtained from alternative uses
of the resources (CTS Nair, FAO Forestry
Department, personal communication,
2007). Is there likely to be an increase in
external funds to developing countries for
payments for environmental services? Are
developing countries themselves likely to
use more public-sector funds to support PES
programmes in their countries? These are the
questions addressed in this section.
The private sector is an important
source of potential increases in external
funding for PES programmes in developing
countries. One indicator is the increasing
weight given to sound environmental
management as a core business strategy
for companies. Insurance companies and
investors are increasingly noticing links
between environmental management and
returns on investment. The insurer Swiss Re,
for example, calculates that natural disasters
cost approximately US$230 billion in 2005, of

which the insurance industry bore one-third
(Vigar, 2006). Insurance industry concerns
are likely to translate into higher premiums,
and therefore greater operating costs.
In response to these issues, some insurers
are offering incentives for climate-aware
actions. According to a CERES (2006) report,
AIG and Marsh – the world’s largest insurer
and insurance broker, respectively – have
launched carbon emissions credit guarantees
and other new renewable energy-related
insurance products, in an attempt to engage
more companies in carbon offset projects
and carbon emissions trading markets (FAO/
Forest Trends, 2007). These new insurance
products, in turn, are creating incentives for
private companies to enter carbon markets.
Environmental-based challenges to
companies’ “licence to operate”, for example
in the areas of mining, water bottling and
tuna fishing, also reinforce their motivation
to pay for environmental services. Consumers
are showing stronger interest in the
environmental performance of companies,
as illustrated by the growth in demand
for certified products. Finally, regulators
– particularly in Europe – are exploring more
innovative approaches to environmental
regulation for carbon offsets, as well as other
environmental services.
The two global environmental service
markets – carbon emission reductions and
biodiversity conservation – appear to have
the greatest potential for bringing new
streams of finance into the agriculture sector
(including forestry) in developing countries.
The need to offset carbon emissions is
clearly generating the greatest expectations.
Interest among potential suppliers and
buyers in developing countries is also high
owing to the lower cost of service provision,
although at present sales of carbon offsets
are unevenly distributed – with Africa far
behind Latin America and Asia (World Bank,
2007).
The potential growth of this market in
developing countries depends on three
main factors: the extent to which the overall
market size expands (which in turn depends
on the fate of international agreements
to reduce emissions); the types of activities
allowed as emission offsets; and the
comparative attractiveness of carbon credits
from agriculture vis-à-vis other sources, such
as energy conservation projects.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

For example, an agreement on payments
for voluntary reduction in emissions from
deforestation would significantly increase
carbon payment flows to the agriculture
sector in developing countries.
Developments in the voluntary carbon
market are equally, if not more, important.
Even though the voluntary market is smaller,
the share of emission offsets from land-use
change is much higher. At the same time, less
stringent requirements are likely to mean
lower transaction costs and easier access to
this market for small farmers (A. Ruhweza,
personal communication, 2007).
The volume of compliant carbon
transactions tripled over the last year, and
the voluntary offset segment is also “building
in size and dynamism” (Point Carbon, 2007).
Some sources project the voluntary market
to become as important, by 2010, as the
CDM is today, with a volume of 400 million
tonnes a year compared with only 20 million
tonnes in 2006 (ICF International, 2006, cited
in World Bank, 2007). Reaching a generally
acceptable standard for this market segment
is the next major hurdle to overcome (World
Bank, 2007). A determining factor for the
fate of voluntary markets is how well offsets
from the agriculture sector in non-regulated
markets are perceived to be performing in
mitigating emissions. At present, concerns
over the validity of these offsets are
emerging, which could seriously impair the
growth of these markets (World Bank, 2007).
Even with rapid growth in the regulated
and voluntary markets, the potential for
developing countries to benefit depends on
their taking steps to provide the necessary
institutional structures to engage in such
projects. The Nairobi Framework, a United
Nations-led partnership linking government
action to the private sector, is one example
of an initiative to spur the development
of capacity to access carbon markets in
developing countries, particularly Africa.
Unlike carbon emission reductions,
no international regulatory framework
currently underpins payments for biodiversity
conservation. Nevertheless, several sources
of demand for biodiversity services have
emerged. National regulations governing
the biodiversity impacts of planned economic
For further information, see http://cdm.unfccc.int/
Nairobi_Framework/index.html.



development projects are stimulating growth
in demand from corporate developers for
biodiversity offsets.
Even in the absence of any regulations,
corporations might seek to enhance
their corporate image by offsetting the
biodiversity impacts of their activities. Largescale development projects by private and
public actors – road building, mining, oil
and gas extraction, and urban development
– could bring significant funding and
high visibility to this market. Appropriate
standards could encourage projects with high
social co-benefits.
Second, philanthropic buyers, especially
large conservation NGOs, are likely to
increase the use of conservation payments
and conservation easements in developing
countries because the establishment of
new nature reserves has become more
contentious in many regions, in part because
of their impacts on rural livelihoods.
Individual consumers are driving the
development of markets for agricultural
products certified against environmental
standards and represent another important
potential source of growth in demand
for biodiversity conservation services. This
market is small but shows some promise of
significant growth with increased consumer
awareness and demand for improved
environmental management. The expansion
in the market for organic agricultural
products can provide some insights into how
consumer demands for environmentally
friendly products are changing. World retail
sales of such products were estimated at
US$35 billion in 2006. Sales trebled in the
period 1997–2005 and, according to industry
sources, are expected to double between
2006 and 2012. The extent to which changing
consumer preferences will translate into
increased demand for products associated
with environmental services – particularly
biodiversity – is yet to be seen.
The global market for biodiversity
conservation will be influenced by the extent
to which it can be linked with economically
significant problems such as the transmission
of diseases or the incidence and severity of
natural disasters. Both problems generate
high social costs. To the extent that
maintaining various forms of biodiversity can
be found to reduce these costs, the value and
demand for services will increase.

47

48

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

An important constraint that developing
countries face in building their markets
for ecolabelled products is the lack of
local certification systems or, when these
exist, their lack of recognition by buyers in
international markets. This situation implies
that foreign certification bodies must be
called in to carry out the inspection and
certification work for export products,
which tends to raise costs, especially
when inspectors must be flown in from
abroad. The extent to which developing
countries will be able to benefit from the
growth of the market for environmentally
friendly products will be determined by
their capacity to develop local certification
bodies and have them fully recognized in
importing countries.
A final question to be considered is the
degree to which payment programmes
will expand for environmental services
with primarily local benefits, particularly
watershed services. A key issue here is
the degree to which users of the water
services are willing and able to pay for such
services; imposing fees on low-income urban
populations for drinking water is not likely
to be politically or economically feasible.
However, in situations where water users are
already bearing heavy costs associated with
the degradation of watershed services – be it
in the form of payments for water treatment,
desiltation or new water-supply development
– the demand and willingness to pay for
watershed services may be quite substantial.

Conclusions
While there has been significant growth in
PES programmes in recent years, the overall
size of the markets remains small, and they
are mostly confined to developed countries.
The public sector has been the major source
of payment programmes so far in both
developed and developing countries. The
international public sector has played an
important role in financing PES schemes in
developing countries through the GEF, as
well as through development loans.
Future effective demand is likely to
grow, driven by increased demand for
environmental offsets (carbon emissions
and biodiversity) that developing countries
can supply at relatively low prices. Interest

in developing countries as suppliers is high
for two reasons: in the case of carbon
offsets, because of the lower cost of service
provision found in developing countries;
for biodiversity, because much of the
world’s biodiversity is located in developing
countries.
The carbon market has seen rapid growth
in recent years, but the segment relevant
to carbon emission reductions from landuse change is still small. There are two main
sources of carbon payments: the regulated
market under the CDM and a variety of
voluntary and public-sector sources of
payments. Voluntary and public sources
allow a wider range of land-use changes
to generate carbon emission offsets. The
potential for growth in carbon markets is
promising, although the extent to which
this will increase demand for emission
offsets from land use depends on future
negotiations regarding the activities that
will be permissible. A potentially important
source of demand currently being discussed
is payments for reducing emissions from
deforestation.
Environmental services related to
biodiversity are purchased by the public
sector and NGOs through a variety of
mechanisms, by consumers expressing
demands for improved environmental
management via purchase of ecolabelled
products and by private-sector buyers
interested in improving their corporate
image. Biodiversity offset programmes
represent a further potential source of
demand, but are not yet well developed.
There is also potential for growth in publicsector-funded PES programmes in developing
countries where environmental services
meet critical policy objectives such as clean
water availability and prevention of natural
disasters.
Growth in demand and willingness to pay
for environmental services from developing
countries must be supported by a set of
policy and programmatic efforts. These
include strengthening the international
environmental regulatory framework
governing climate change and biodiversity
conservation, which are both important
sources of demand for offset services,
and allowing activities that facilitate the
participation of agricultural producers in
developing countries. This latter approach

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

could include the reduction of emissions
from deforestation in climate change
mitigation. Improving coordination among
various forms of ecolabelling schemes and
clarifying the environmental benefits that
can be obtained from certified products are
important for future growth in this form
of payments for environmental services.

Building institutions and capacity for
managing environmental service payments
in developing countries is equally important.
The potential of developing countries to
benefit from PES programmes will be greatly
diminished in the absence of such policy and
institutional efforts undertaken at the local,
national and international levels.

49

50

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

4. Supplying environmental
services: farmers’ decisions
and policy options
Given the importance of environmental
services, why are they not provided at higher
levels? Environmental services are produced
(or degraded) through the interaction
of natural processes and the actions of
individual decision-makers, including
agricultural producers. For a variety of
reasons, the full value of these impacts is not
reflected in the incentives faced by ecosystem
service providers. As a result, providers’
actions may diverge from those desired by
beneficiaries as a group.
Any approach to dealing with the
unintended effects of agricultural production,
whether negative or positive, must recognize
the central role played by farmers. Each
farmer is a natural resource manager, making
decisions about how to use resources under
his or her (or their) control to improve their
well-being. It is farmers’ collective decisions
about how to transform natural and
produced resources into desired goods that
result in unintended outputs. Understanding
their decision-making is crucial to enhancing
ecosystem service delivery.
Agricultural policies play a key role in
shaping the incentives to which farmers
respond. Indeed, such policies – for example,
through subsidizing farming activities,
providing infrastructure such as roads and
water supply, or more explicit incentives for
land-use changes such as the conversion of
wetlands or forest land to crop production
– have often encouraged farmers to expand
or intensify cultivation.
This chapter discusses the supply of
environmental services, taking as its starting
point the decision-making of the individual
farmer. It then lays out policy options to
enhance the supply of these services and
explores the role that payment programmes
can play. It also presents estimates of
possible supply responses to payments for
environmental services.

The role of individual farmers’
decisions
The provision of all agriculture-based
ecosystem services begins at the level of
the plot of land that is managed by a single
individual or group of individuals.10 For the
purpose of this discussion, this manager,
whether individual or collective, is referred
to as a farmer. Farmers’ decisions about
how to use the resources inherent in the
plot of land are driven by the goal of
improving their well-being and that of their
families. Well-being is defined across many
dimensions, including income, security of
livelihood, health, leisure and cultural values.
Each plot embodies a set of natural and
socio-economic resources. Natural resources
include inherent geophysical characteristics
(e.g. soil quality, slope and elevation, and
climate) and constructed characteristics (e.g.
bunds, irrigation systems and terraces). Socioeconomic resources include characteristics
such as the property rights under which the
plot is held and used, the cost of access to
markets and the prices at those markets.
Farmers also have capital of different kinds
– physical (e.g. equipment and animals),
financial (e.g. cash, bank accounts and
personal assets), human (e.g. education and
on-the-job skills) and social (e.g. knowledge
of the community and local community
sources of support).
Farmers combine the natural and socioeconomic resources at their disposal to
produce goods and services. Their economic
activities may include crop, livestock,
fishery and forestry production as well
The term “land” is used as the most easily understood
unit of natural resource to illustrate the argument. It could
also be substituted with other forms of natural resources
– for example trees or water. However, in many cases
decisions over these are also driven by land-use decisions.

10

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

as non-agricultural activities. Decisions
farmers make about how to manage their
resources are influenced by the relative
return or benefit each activity provides,
which, in turn, depends on available
technology and prevailing market and
environmental conditions. For example,
the amount of agricultural production or
carbon sequestration 1 hectare of land can
produce depends on the agro-ecological
characteristics of the site as well as the
technology employed in the production
process. The returns to the farmer from
either activity depend also on market prices
and on distance to market.
Agricultural, environmental and economic
development policies all contribute to
shaping farmers’ decisions. Policies can
have a significant impact on the prices of
inputs (e.g. land, labour, credit, fertilizer
and pesticides) as well as on output prices.
These factors, together with the degree of
integration into international commodity
markets, contribute to decisions about what
to produce and how. Policies on land taxes,
zoning and settlement also influence farmlevel decisions, as do the types of technology
available to farmers, their relative
accessibility, and their adoption. Policies also
determine investment in infrastructure such
as roads, irrigation facilities, markets and
communication, which, in turn, is reflected
in the balance of incentives and constraints
farmers need to consider in making decisions.
The allocation of productive resources
to economic activities generates a wide
variety of outcomes, which may include
private production benefits from land
use (e.g. agricultural products), private
benefits from wage income and positive or
negative impacts on neighbours or on the
environment (e.g. carbon sequestration or
emissions, biodiversity conservation or losses,
and watershed protection or degradation).
These indirect effects are termed
“externalities” (see Box 1 on p. 6).
In the absence of deliberate policy
intervention, the amount of these
externalities generated by farmers is
coincidental – determined by the choices
they make in managing agricultural
ecosystems to generate intended outputs,
such as agricultural products and/or wage
income. There is no guarantee that the
amount of any positive externality produced

will be optimal from society’s perspective;
in many cases, negative externalities will
be generated. If society wants farmers to
provide more positive externalities and fewer
negative ones, then mechanisms must be
found to encourage their provision.

Constraints against the provision
of environmental services
Why don’t farmers, fishers and foresters
manage natural resources in ways that
increase the provision of environmental
services? The answer to this is complex and
varies according to the influence of a range
of social, economic, political and technical
factors. In some cases, practices that generate
more environmental services may not be
adopted because they would reduce farmers’
net benefits (i.e. they involve significant
opportunity costs). In other cases, improved
practices that would be potentially profitable
for farmers may not be adopted because of
other barriers (e.g. lack of information or
credit, or insecure land tenure).

Management changes that involve
opportunity costs
In general, it is reasonable to expect that
farmers will choose the mix of production
practices that maximizes their well-being –
given the resources and opportunities
available to them. Many changes in resource
use that could benefit the environment
are not likely to be adopted by farmers in
the absence of motivating policy measures,
because they would result in lower benefits
to the producers. For example, setting land
aside from crop production and placing (or
leaving) it under natural grass or forest cover
could enhance carbon sequestration, water
quality and biodiversity, but might result
in lower returns to the farmer and his or
her household. Reducing livestock numbers
or managing manure to reduce nitrogen
runoff to surface water, infiltration to
groundwater or emissions to the atmosphere
could benefit the environment but would
probably increase costs or reduce returns to
the farmer.
Figure 7 illustrates situations where
farmers face such opportunity costs in the
form of foregone benefits. In scenario A,
high levels of environmental services can be

51

2

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 7
Barriers to the adoption of improved management practices:
permanent decrease in farm income

A

Permanent decrease in yield

B

Permanent increase in management costs

New management
practices introduced
Net loss to farmer
Net loss to farmer

New management
practices introduced

Time

Baseline net income

Time

Current net income

Yield
Source: FAO, 2007c.

provided only by significantly reducing the
intensity or extent of agriculture at the plot
or farm level. Farmers thus face a permanent
decrease in yields. They may continue to
make a profit – especially given that the cost
of inputs is likely to decline – but they would
earn less than they could otherwise. In this
case, payments would typically be needed
to compensate farmers for the opportunity
cost (i.e. foregone income) of the new
practices; these payments would need to
be maintained in perpetuity to ensure
a continuing stream of environmental
services. This scenario forms the basis for the
majority of established agri-environmental
payment schemes, including many United
States and European conservation payment
programmes. Conservation easements
represent one alternative for providing
environmental service payments indefinitely.
These are legally binding agreements, sold
by the landowner, that restrict the use of the
land for certain environmentally damaging
activities. However, permanent or long-term
conservation easements on private lands are
an established technique in only a handful
of developing countries and, where they
exist, they may be insufficiently prescriptive
to guide agricultural management practices
and may still involve significant ongoing
monitoring and compliance costs (Wiebe,
Tegene and Kuhn, 1996).
Beyond the decision of the individual
farmer, a further consideration in this

scenario is the potential impact on local
or regional food security if large areas of
agricultural land were to be taken out of
food production completely to provide
other ecosystem services (e.g. a switch
from crops to forest plantations for carbon
sequestration). Design options that maintain
strategic areas of agricultural land or that
pay for the establishment of alternative
avenues for food security may need to be
incorporated into the PES programme. These
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
In scenario B of Figure 7, land use or
production is not affected by the new
management practices, but enhanced
provision of environmental services
requires farmers or farming communities
to incur continued additional management
or investment costs over time (e.g. for
protecting and managing forest fragments
or managing wastes from production). As in
scenario A, payments to compensate farmers
for their opportunity costs would be required
in perpetuity to ensure a continuing stream
of environmental services.

other barriers to adopting beneficial
changes
An array of complicating factors, particularly
in developing countries, serves to increase
opportunity costs or raise other barriers to
the adoption of new practices. Limited access
to information, appropriate technologies
and finance, as well as insecure property

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 8
Barriers to the adoption of improved management practices:
information and investment constraints

A

B

Information barrier to adoption

New management
practices introduced

Investment barrier to adoption

New management
practices introduced
Net benefit
to farmer
Temporary
net loss to farmer
Time

Time

Baseline net income

Current net income
Source: FAO, 2007c.

rights and legal or regulatory constraints,
count among the most significant barriers
farmers face. These constraints are often
compounded by poorly functioning markets
and infrastructure, risk and difficulties in
the collective management of commonly
held resources such as pasturelands or
fisheries. Producers facing one or more of
these problems will find it difficult to change
their resource management practices in
ways that could provide a higher output of
environmental services – and in some cases
of conventional agricultural commodities
also. Sustainable land-management
practices often fall into this category. These
include cropping and livestock practices
characterized by improved soil, plant
nutrient and water management and
often lead to higher farm productivity and
income as well as increased provision of
environmental services such as soil carbon
sequestration, biodiversity conservation
and watershed protection. Conservation
agriculture, which encompasses a range
of agricultural practices involving reduced
tillage and increased ground cover, is a good
example of a practice that is often privately
profitable to farmers over time but whose
adoption is hampered through lack of
information, technology and inputs.
The following paragraphs discuss five types
of barrier to adopting beneficial changes:
lack of information, inability to afford
investments, risk aversion, insecure property

rights and poorly performing markets. The
first two are illustrated by Figure 8.
Farmers may lack information on
production technologies or practices that
could both maintain or increase their
own well-being and provide enhanced
environmental services. In scenario A of
Figure 8, the adoption of new management
practices to increase the supply of ecosystem
services is nominally a win–win situation that
simultaneously increases farmers’ net income
and improves environmental quality. The
new practices may increase net income by
increasing production output (e.g. through
enhanced soil fertility or water management),
by reducing input costs (e.g. by reducing
labour needs or the use of purchased
chemical inputs), or both. Many traditional
rural development programmes attempt
to do just this, albeit not under the title of
PES programmes and often without explicit
contractual arrangements linking payments
to provision of environmental services.11
In Brazil, the results of a survey of 70
producers in the Brazilian Cerrado region
in 1993 identified lack of information as a
barrier to adopting conservation agriculture
One initiative to improve the access of farmers and
technical advisers to information on improved technologies
is the World Overview of Conservation Agriculture
Technologies (WOCAT) project, which facilitates the
sharing of information about soil and water conservation
technologies. The project database is available at http://
www.wocat.net/.





54

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 8
Lack of information as an obstacle to adopting conservation agriculture
1

RESPONSES TO THE QUESTION “WHY DON’T FARMERS ADOPT ZERO TILLAGE?”

POSITIVE 2
RESPONSES

1. Insufficient technical knowledge.

39

2. Know nothing at all about zero tillage.

35

3. Fear of trying and getting it wrong.

29

4. Think that it is necessary to buy an expensive zero-tillage planter.

24

5. Erosion losses under conventional cultivation are not significant.

9

6. Have not seen research results validating the technology.

9

7. Zero tillage is not accepted for crop insurance.

5

8. My agronomist does not recommend it.

3

Data collected from a survey of small-scale farmers in the Cerrado region of Brazil in 1993.
n = 70.
Source: adapted from FAO, 2001.

1
2

(including zero tillage) techniques that
had been shown to be privately profitable
(Table 8) (FAO, 2001). In this instance,
demonstrations and technical information
provided by NGOs and extension services
succeeded in removing this constraint.
Thousands of Brazilian farmers have
subsequently adopted conservation
agriculture, with an estimated 23.6 million
hectares in production in 2004/05.
It has been established above that
farmers can only be expected to adopt new
management practices if they believe that
their well-being (or that of their families)
will be enhanced over a relevant time frame.
Well-being depends critically on income.
Nevertheless, even without the prospect
of increased income, increased awareness
of the external damage caused by certain
production practices may lead some farmers
to change their practices, motivated by
notions of good stewardship (Box 9).
Inability to afford investments requiring
financial expenditures in the short run in
order to obtain benefits in the long run
constitutes a second major reason why
farmers sometimes fail to adopt practices
that offer higher returns (Dasgupta and
Maler, 1995; Holden and Binswanger, 1998).
This problem is particularly acute for the
poor, who may lack access to credit as well as
reserves of wealth with which to finance such

investments (Hoff, Braverman and Stiglitz,
1993; Sunding and Zilberman, 2001). Wunder
(2006) cites the example of moving from
slash-and-burn to perennial cropping systems,
which are far more profitable for farmers and
also generate higher levels of environmental
services, but are not adopted because they
require large capital investments and involve
risks and market development costs.
In scenario B of Figure 8, the adoption of
new land uses or management practices leads
to a temporary decline in net farm income
resulting from agro-ecological disequilibria
associated with the transition. For example,
a change to organic or no-till production
may initially give rise to additional weed
competition, nutrient deficiencies and
similar problems. After a few years, however,
previous production levels will be regained
and then surpassed, eventually levelling off
at a new, higher equilibrium of net income.
The delay in benefits, combined with lack of
wealth or access to credit, may be a barrier to
adoption. Under this scenario, farmers might
require environmental service payments
during the transition period to offset their
foregone revenue; after which payments
may no longer be needed. Schemes for
converting land use from low-value annual
crops to higher-value tree plantations (for
the provision of carbon offset or watershed
conservation services) that provide payments

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 9
Environmental education and the supply of environmental services
Timothy J. Dalton1
Numerous studies have established the
linkage between education and voluntary
effort to produce environmental services.
Extension education and information
acquisition positively influence the
adoption of technologies to abate soil
and water quality damage caused by
agricultural production (Feather and
Amacher, 1994; Norton, Phipps and
Fletcher, 1994; Baidu-Forson, 1999;
Dasgupta, 1999; Lichtenberg and
Zimmerman, 1999; Price 2001; Alrusheidat
2004). For example, Kenya’s National
Soil and Water Conservation Programme
was successful in inducing as many as
a million farm families to adopt soil
conserving practices voluntarily over a
12-year period ending in 2000 (Longley
et al., 2005).  Likewise, limited attention
to environmental education has been
shown to be a factor in the low rate of
adoption of soil conservation technologies

to enable producers to afford the investment
necessary to establish tree nurseries fall into
this category.
In both scenarios, the opportunity cost
to farmers of supplying the environmental
service is negative – indeed, they are better
off with the new land-use system even in the
absence of payments. The system generates
sufficient private incentives to motivate
farmers to maintain it, which increases the
likelihood that the environmental service
provision will be permanent even if payments
for the services are discontinued. It should
be recognized, however, that opportunity
costs are dynamic and may shift with changes
in economic conditions (e.g. the prices of
agricultural inputs and products). Farmers
may then have an incentive to abandon the
practices in favour of others that are less
environmentally benign. Thus, it cannot be
assumed that temporary payments will result
in high levels of environmental services being
provided in perpetuity.
An unacceptable degree of risk (in terms
of variability of outcome) constitutes

in the Philippine uplands (Cramb et al.,
2000). Dietz and Stern (2002) argue
that environmental education is critical
to link private actions with desirable
social outcomes and remove incentive
barriers to the adoption of practices
producing environmental services.
Joint learning through environmental
education programmes can be a costeffective strategy for generating
widespread environmental service
supply by harmonizing the activities of
heterogeneous individuals (Feather and
Amacher, 1994; Glachant, 1999). Farmers
may lack information on the long-run
financial and environmental benefits of
providing environmental services, and
this may reduce their farm-level provision
(Amacher and Feather, 1997).

1

University of Maine, United States of America.

a third barrier to the adoption of
profitable innovations that also enhance
environmental services. Perception of risk
influences the way farmers manage their
resources, particularly where insurance
is not available or is ineffective. This is
particularly pertinent for poor people,
who are generally more risk-averse and
likely to lack access to formal means of
insurance, such as through financial markets
(FAO, 1999). A major risk-coping strategy
for many poor rural households is to
meet their subsistence food requirements
from their own production as a critical
means of insuring against food insecurity
(Fafchamps, 1992; Sadoulet and de Janvry,
1995). Insecurity may arise from either the
household’s lack of ability to buy food or
the lack of food availability. Consequently,
the impact of management changes on
the security of the farm household’s food
supply is a critical issue that can prevent
the adoption of changes that may be more
profitable on average, but that incur higher
risks.

55

56

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Some farmers insure against risk by
maintaining a set of assets that they
can rapidly liquidate in times of trouble
(Rosenzweig and Binswanger, 1993; Udry,
1994; FAO, 1999). A standing forest, for
example, represents a potential source of
income that can be accessed through logging
in the case of sudden need. Holding livestock
also represents a common form of insurance
against possible future shocks. Farmers may
thus be unwilling to introduce changes to
their production systems that involve a loss
of these means.
Property rights comprise a fourth key
determinant of the incentives and constraints
faced by land users in making land-use
decisions. Lacking, conflicting or poorly
defined property rights to land, water and
other natural resources are a major barrier
to introducing changes in the management
of these resources – particularly when the

changes would require up-front investment
in order to obtain a return in the future.
Producers who lack confidence in their ability
to reap the future benefits of a change
in land use will be reluctant to make such
a change. Uncertain or complex property
rights reduce the incentives of land users to
adopt practices that offer increased private
returns over the long term, even if they can
afford the initial investment. Investments
or practices that increase soil organic
matter, for example, could both increase
farm productivity and enhance carbon
sequestration for climate change mitigation
over the long term, but incentives to adopt
such measures will be weak in the absence of
secure property rights.
The need to coordinate group activities
in managing a common pool resource such
as communal pastures can also be a barrier
to land-use changes (Dasgupta and Maler,

BOX 10
Land tenure and environmental services: insights from the Philippines and Nepal
Awarding land tenure to farmers can
be an important means of generating
environmental services as well as
improving farm welfare. Case studies from
land-tenure projects in the Philippines
and Nepal provide insights into the way
different tenure instruments may affect
environmental service provision.
In the Philippines, community-based
forest management is a development
strategy for sustainable forestry and social
equity in the uplands. It was adopted
formally in 1995 in response to rapid
deforestation caused by excessive and
indiscriminate logging, shifting agriculture
and inefficient forest management. The
two primary tenurial instruments are the
Community-based Forest Management
Agreement (CBFMA) and the Certificate of
Stewardship Contract (CSC). The CBFMA is
a production-sharing agreement between
the Department of Environment and
Natural Resources and the participating
people’s organization for a period
of 25 years, renewable for another
25 years. The community commits itself to
protecting the entire forest in the CBFMA
area against illegal logging, slash-and-

burn agriculture, forest and grassland fires
and other forms of forest destruction, in
return for the right to utilize forestland
resources in a sustainable manner, using
environment-friendly, labour-intensive
harvesting methods for timber and
non-timber resources. Communities are
also allowed to harvest existing mature
plantations of fast-growing hardwoods.
CSCs are awarded to individuals or families
actually occupying or tilling portions of
forest lands within an existing CBFMA.
CSCs also cover a period of 25 years,
renewable, and cover a maximum of
5 hectares. Soil and water conservation
measures (vegetative and physical) are
mandatory on CSC land, and agroforestry
is common. CSCs are transferable to next
of kin and can be sold with the prior
consent of the people’s organization.
In Nepal, leasehold forestry was
designed to achieve the dual goals of
poverty reduction and ecorestoration
targeted specifically at degraded
forestland areas. Forest leases are
awarded for a maximum of 40 years,
renewable. Poor communities are exempt
from the leasehold fee and have so far

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

1995; Bromley, 1998). In addition, property
rights for a given land area may overlap,
such as rights to trees, water or post-harvest
residue collection (Dasgupta, 1993). In some
cases, the influence of specific land uses on
property rights may constitute a barrier. In
some areas, for example, failure to cultivate
crops may be seen as a relinquishment of
rights and result in land being allocated to
other farmers; conversely, tree planting may
be seen as an assertion of long-term property
rights and trigger conflict. Either situation
could complicate the adoption of practices
that enhance environmental services.
Inexistent or poorly defined property
rights to land and water are particularly
problematic for poor rural land users,
preventing them from making the necessary
investments to achieve a sustainable
pattern of natural resource management
(Dasgupta, 1996; Deininger, 1999; Lipper,

been the main beneficiaries of leasehold
forestry. Leaseholds may be granted for
producing raw materials for forestry
industries, selling or distributing forest
products from afforestation, operating
tourism, agroforestry and maintaining
insects, butterflies and wildlife.
In both the Philippine and Nepalese
studies, tenure programmes resulted in
increases in economic well-being and
environmental benefits, but these were
highly site-specific, depending upon the
physical and ecological context as well
as vicinity to settlements and ease of
market access. In the Philippine study,
for example, direct use values of forest
conservation ranged from 31 to 90 percent
of overall benefits. In the Nepalese study,
wide variation in the profitability of the
sites was found, also affected by their
access to markets.
The case studies indicate that the
provision of environmental services
such as biodiversity conservation and
carbon sequestration increased under
both programmes, but improved tenure
alone is not likely to be sufficient to
induce increased supply. One important

2001; FAO, 2005b). Where the poor do
hold rights over resources, they are often
held as common property. A diverse range
of programmes that address the issue of
property rights have been implemented in
developing countries, including agrarian
reform, community forestry and land-titling
programmes. Box 10 describes two examples
and their implications for environmental
service supply.
A final category of barrier that farmers
may face in adopting new production
systems is a failure of agricultural input
or output markets to transmit demand
effectively. Many consumers would be
willing to pay a premium for products that
have been produced in accordance with
environmentally friendly standards, such
as organically labelled produce. Even
though price premiums might, in theory,
compensate farmers for the costs of

reason is that barriers other than lack
of tenure inhibit the potential supply
response; indeed, farmers’ lack of capacity
to make the investments necessary
to maintain a productive forest and
enforcing the management agreements
were problematic in both cases. In the
Philippine study, the tenure to single
households was much more effective
than the community tenure instruments
in generating both private returns and
environmental services. However, that
may have been a result of allowing
a significantly greater utilization of
resources under the private tenure than
under the community-based instruments.  
Finally, both studies indicate that, as
project costs were substantial, awarding
tenure is a relatively expensive means
of generating environmental services,
although potential long-term social
benefits may justify the expense.

Source: FAO, 2006d.

57

58

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 11
Can high-value agricultural exports enhance environmental services? One example
Almost 10 000 farmers in the Highlands
of Madagascar produce vegetables,
mostly hand-picked fine French beans for
supermarkets in Europe, where they fetch
a price that is up to three times higher
than the price for the more industrially
produced French beans.
As is increasingly common in
international trade, the firm that
contracts with the farmers and exports
the produce is obliged to meet the
requirements of European buyers related
to a variety of characteristics including
the quality of the product (length of the
beans, colour, etc.) and ethical standards
(no use of child labour, for example).
The exporting company has set up an
elaborate system of contracting and
on-farm monitoring. The imposition
of the product and process standards
and requirements calls for a major
organization in terms of monitoring and
control. In this global supply chain, small
farmers’ microcontracts are combined
with extensive farm assistance and

compliance, these niche markets are
often characterized by greater price
volatility and non-price marketing
barriers (Regouin, 2003; Smit, Driessen
and Glasbergen, forthcoming). In other
instances, specific market outlets may
motivate farmers to adopt environmentally
progressive management practices.
Retailers may encourage the application of
environmentally beneficial technology in
the production of high-value products
for a number of reasons (see Box 11).
However, environmental benefits will only
be realized if farmers are able to comply
with buyers’ terms and find it worthwhile
to do so.
Poorly performing input markets can
also serve as a barrier: some inputs, such as
non-conventional seed varieties or organic
fertilizers, may not be available for farmers
to purchase because the input markets are
poorly developed (FAO, 2006c). Input prices
may also be distorted artificially by policies,

supervision programmes to fulfil complex
quality requirements and phytosanitary
standards.
One of the benefits to the Malagasy
farmers of contracting with the exporting
firm is that it teaches them how to make
compost. Its main benefit on the fields is
in maintaining the soil structure, providing
nitrogen and other minerals that promote
healthy crop growth and in enhancing
the soil’s ability to retain moisture.
The benefits spill over to other crops;
93 percent of the farmers report that they
have changed the way they cultivate their
other off-season crops. Composting may
also have beneficial impacts on carbon
sequestration and on water quality and
quantity. Small farmers who participate in
these contracts have higher welfare, more
income stability and shorter lean periods.

Source: adapted from Minten, Randrianarison and
Swinnen, 2007.

as in the case of fertilizer subsidies common
throughout Asia, which provide incentives
for overuse (Pingali et al., 1998).

Policy options to shape farmers’
incentives
Many options are open to policy-makers
for enhancing the incentives for resource
users to supply services desired by society.
In the past, non-market instruments such as
regulations or taxes predominated. Today,
market-based approaches, such as payments
for environmental services, are increasingly
being used to complement these earlier
instruments. This section briefly examines
five possible approaches to addressing the
situation in which farmers face opportunity
costs in providing the desired level of an
environmental service. This is followed
by a more detailed description of the PES
approach.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

• Command-and-control. In this approach
the government uses its regulatory
powers to mandate certain behaviours,
proscribe others, and impose penalties
for non-compliance. Command-andcontrol is the norm for pollution control
in industrial settings. It has also been
used indirectly to provide services
related to wetlands and to protect
biodiversity. The creation of a national
park is one example of this approach.
Implementation requires continuous
and effective monitoring to supervise
compliance and a functioning legal
system to punish non-compliance.
• Financial penalties and charges. This
approach modifies behaviour through the
financial signals of taxes and fees. Such
an approach does not prohibit certain
activities outright; rather, it makes them
more expensive (e.g. applying a charge
per kilogram of chlorofluorocarbon
[CFC] purchased). To be most effective,
the penalty would be applied directly
to the negative externality (e.g. the
quantity of nitrogen or methane emitted
from livestock production), but where
the administrative costs of the direct
approach are high, which is often a
defining characteristic of externalities,
the penalty can be applied to the activity
that generates the externality (e.g. the
production of livestock). Again, this
approach requires a functioning taxation
and legal system, as well as effective
monitoring and enforcement.
• Removing perverse incentives. In some
cases, policy measures generate incentives
to produce negative externalities. Some
measures to support the agriculture
sector can create incentives for
environmentally damaging responses
on the part of farmers. One example is
fertilizer subsidies that create incentives
for farmers to apply excessive amounts of
chemical fertilizers, leading to runoff and
water contamination, or energy subsidies
that increase groundwater withdrawals.
Much of the impact of support policies
depends on how they are formulated,
i.e. whether they are linked or “coupled”
to specific practices or inputs, or take

the form of direct payments. Generally,
a switch from price supports for either
inputs or outputs to direct income
payments for agricultural support policies
is considered to be less likely to cause
environmental damage. However, even
direct payments may lead to incentives
for generating negative externalities if
they are based on past production or
input levels (OECD, 1998).
• Establishing property rights to the
externality. This instrument relies on the
privatization and allocation of rights to
generate an externality. Examples are
permits to emit a defined quantity of air
pollution or carbon. In “cap-and-trade”
programmes, such as the sulphur dioxide
trading programme in the United States
of America and the flexible mechanisms
under the Kyoto Protocol, these
entitlements may be traded. In practice,
property rights instruments often work
in combination with other instruments.
Trading programmes, for example, rely
on regulations to limit the total number
of permits or quantities of emissions that
are allowable.
• Payments for environmental services.
Payments for environmental services
compensate the producer for the
benefits foregone as a result of
switching systems to generate a
different combination or higher levels of
environmental services. In many cases,
payments are made to producers who
undertake to reduce the environmental
damages they inflict on others through
their production decisions – for example
by causing erosion, which affects
local water systems. However, PES
programmes may also be used to reward
agricultural producers for generating
environmental services that offset
damages from other sectors, or they may
simply be a way of motivating farmer
behaviour to match consumer demands
for specific environmental attributes.
Each of the above policy measures
combines attributes of market and
regulatory approaches. Market-based
approaches are sometimes thought of as

59

60

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

distinct and separable from “non-market”
approaches. This is a false dichotomy. No
market exists in isolation from social, political
and legal rights and institutions (whether
or not these are formally defined). And no
social, political or legal intervention occurs
without implications for markets. Both –
together – create interests and incentives
that motivate individual (and sometimes
collective) actions that, in turn, determine
individual and collective well-being.
Payments for environmental services
can be seen in this light. On the one hand,
they can be described as a market-based
approach in that they involve direct financial
incentives to encourage actions that would
not otherwise be rewarded, generating
benefits that would not otherwise be
realized. Alternatively, they might be seen
as a political or legal intervention in which
farmers are endowed formally with rights to
use natural resources in specified ways, and
allowed to sell some or all of those rights if
they wish. Whichever way they are described
or perceived, payments for environmental
services involve both institutional
interventions and market implications.
Other approaches do likewise, to varying
degrees, and each implies a particular
distribution of property rights. For example,
command-and-control measures and
approaches involving taxes and user fees
both imply that society (in the form of the
government) holds the right to the resources
or services in question; the difference is that
in the second case society is willing to sell
or rent those rights to other users. In the
case of cap-and-trade programmes, society
may grant an initial allocation of permits
to existing producers (explicitly or implicitly
acknowledging that the producers hold
those rights initially), or society may sell
those rights to existing producers (if society
claims those rights initially).

Why payments?
When are payments the right policy
instrument to generate higher levels of
environmental services from agricultural
producers? To answer this it is necessary to
distinguish between situations where farmers
are asked (i) to enhance the provision of
certain environmental services that may

be degraded or undersupplied as a result
of current agricultural practices, and (ii) to
offset pollution generated in other sectors.
The issue of the appropriateness of payments
is different for each case. In the first case, the
basic question is whether farmers should be
paid to reduce negative externalities rather
than be required to bear the cost themselves.
In the second, the important question is how
efficient offsets are in meeting the intended
objective.

Reducing negative externalities from
agriculture
When should farmers be paid to reduce the
negative impacts of their actions on others,
rather than required to bear the cost of
changing practices? The appropriateness of
the PES approach depends fundamentally
on whether the rights to use or degrade
the environmental services in question are
held initially by the producers or by society.
If those rights are held by producers, society
must pay producers if more or different
environmental services are desired. If those
rights are held by society, the producers must
pay society if they degrade those resources
or services.
There are no simple answers to this
question of the allocation of property rights,
and the answer may well differ from one
service to the next, and from one context to
the next. In the case of negative side-effects
from industrial production, it is generally
accepted that the polluter should pay,
whereas in the case of negative side-effects
from agriculture this has not historically
been the case. The difference may have to
do with scale of production, or historical
precedent, or equity considerations, or
relative difficulty in identifying the source
or magnitude of negative side-effects.
Regardless, the distinction is blurred where
agricultural production occurs on a large
and concentrated scale, as in the case of
large concentrated livestock operations;
in fact, such operations are increasingly
treated more like industrial point sources of
pollution.
In the case of smaller farmers, whom
society has historically allowed to use
resources in ways that may have adverse
environmental impacts, changing
circumstances may raise new questions. For
example, if farmers have been using certain

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

practices for generations and the impacts of
those practices are being felt downstream for
the first time because of population growth
or changing preferences downstream, who
should pay the cost if society wishes farmers
to change their practices? Is the situation
different if downstream impacts increase
because the number of farmers upstream
increases, even if their practices do not?
What if society’s preferences change because
of new information about the consequences
of impacts that have been occurring all
along?
Equity and power relationships also enter
into the calculation. When polluters have
sufficient political power, they may influence
the government to move away from taxes or
direct control (Buchanan and Tullock, 1975).
On the other hand, if farmers do not have
the resources to invest in pollution control,
payments may be politically preferable to
the possibility of reduced income (Hochman,
Zilberman and Just, 1977) – especially if
the providers of environmental services are
poorer than the beneficiaries (Pagiola and
Platais, 2007).
Economic theory suggests that paying
farmers to change their practices or
requiring them to bear the costs should be
equally efficient in controlling pollution
problems – if markets are competitive,
property rights are enforceable and there are
no transaction costs (Coase, 1960). In reality,
these conditions rarely apply. The degree
to which these conditions do not hold has
implications for how efficient payments for
environmental services could be, as well as
for their distributional implications.
In practice, producing environmental
services by reducing agricultural pollution
often requires a cumulative effort by
producers who are spatially dispersed and
operating under a wide range of land uses
and land types. In such cases a commandand-control approach to pollution control is
difficult to implement (Pagiola, 2006; WertzKanounnikoff, 2006).
A major advantage of PES programmes is
their capacity to manage externalities. This
is particularly important where information
about the source of the problem is lacking
and there are multiple potential producers
of a benefit with different marginal costs
of provision (Weitzman, 1974; Pagiola,
2006; Wertz-Kanounnikoff, 2006). Price-

based mechanisms are more efficient
than quantity-based measures (such as
mandating behaviour) in this situation
because they “screen out the high cost
producers, encouraging them to produce
less, and encourage low cost units to produce
more” (Weitzman, 1974, cited in WertzKanounnikoff, 2006).

Agriculture as a source of offsets for
negative externalities generated in
other sectors
When payments are made to agricultural
producers to offset or mitigate negative
externalities generated in other sectors,
the non-agricultural polluter is paying the
agriculture sector to meet a compliance
requirement. This situation arises under
cap-and-trade types of environmental
regulation, such as the flexible mechanisms
of the Kyoto Protocol, whereby industries
under obligation to reduce carbon emissions
are allowed to purchase emission offsets
from agricultural producers in the form
of increased carbon sequestration in their
land use. In this case, agricultural producers
themselves do not have any legal obligation
to reduce emissions, but they do have an
opportunity to offset the emissions of others
– and to gain financially by doing so.
Similarly, under the practice of wetlands
mitigation banking in the United States of
America, developers must obtain a permit
in order to dredge or fill a wetland (see
Box 12). For issuance of the wetlands permit
the government agency requires mitigation
of destroyed wetlands to ensure no net
loss. On-site mitigation has had a poor
success record, so, in the 1990s, government
regulators began to allow the use of a
market mechanism that would, in principle,
ensure wetlands conservation at minimum
economic and political cost.
The agriculture sector may also supply
biodiversity offsets for losses generated
by mining or oil operations. The
appropriateness of payment programmes
depends on their effectiveness in generating
the desired environmental services. Here,
part of the difficulty lies in establishing
equivalent values where service provision
is location-specific (e.g. the biodiversity
conserved in one site is not the same as that
in another site). Another issue is risk. In the
negotiations leading to the establishment

61

62

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 12
Biodiversity offset programmes around the world
Biodiversity offset programmes can take
a variety of forms, and are found in both
developed and developing countries.
The general principle they are built upon
is “no net loss” of biodiversity. In some
cases, the principle is ensured through a
legal requirement, in others through a
voluntary response.  
One of the most well-known regulatory
cases is wetlands mitigation banking in
the United States of America. Under this
programme, a “bank” of wetlands habitat
is created by restoration or preservation of
wetlands. These are then made available
to developers of wetlands habitat, who
must “buy” mitigation as a condition of
government approval for development.
The ratio of destroyed wetland to
mitigated wetland can vary, but generally
the developer must restore more wetland
than the amount being destroyed (often
at ratios of more than two to one).
Another example is the European
Union’s Habitats Directive, according
to which developers can offset any
damage that projects may have caused
on designated conservation priority sites
by undertaking positive conservation
measures in other conservation priority
sites (ten Kate, Bishop and Bayon, 2004).
Australia, Brazil, Canada and Switzerland
are other examples of countries with a

of the CDM, concerns over the risk of
reversibility of emission reductions from
sequestration (e.g. the possibility that trees
could be cut or burned, thus reversing
the climate change mitigation benefits
obtained), resulted in caps on the amount
of credits allowable from this source and in
narrow definitions of the types of land-use
change that could qualify.
Potential suppliers may also have
concerns related to offset markets. Loss
of national sovereignty or increased
dependence on payments from rich
countries count among the problematic
issues surrounding the supply of globally
important environmental services such as
climate change mitigation or biodiversity

legal framework for biodiversity offsets.
An example of a voluntary offset comes
from the Chad to Cameroon oil pipeline
project, where partners of a US$3.5 billion
project (ExxonMobil, Petronas, and
Chevron), together with the World Bank,
established an environmental foundation,
two new national parks and a plan to
provide benefits to indigenous people
who may be affected by the project, as a
means of offsetting potential social and
environmental damages of the project
(ten Kate, Bishop and Bayon, 2004).
While attractive in principle, mitigation
programmes have a mixed record in two
respects. The first is the quality of the
mitigated habitat. In the early years of
the United States wetlands mitigation,
enforcement was poor and many restored
wetlands were not viable. Second, how
to assess the “success” of a mitigation
programme needs careful consideration.
One issue relates to how well any specific
ecosystem’s services can be replaced by
those of another. Ecosystems differ by
type, location and the services they deliver.
Guidelines on setting the requirements
for an offset vary by programme and in
some cases are not well defined. How well
these programmes actually do promote
conservation remains controversial (ten
Kate, Bishop and Bayon, 2004; FAO, 2007d).

conservation. Criticism of PES programmes
as “rents against development”, i.e.
compensating the poor for not developing,
has also been voiced, particularly in cases
where the environmental service requires
a strict conservationist approach (WertzKanounnikoff, 2006).

Supply response to payments for
environmental services
How will agricultural producers respond
to payments for environmental services?
Payment programmes typically seek to
increase provision of the services through
changes in farmers’ land-use practices.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

In the Silvopastoral Project in Nicaragua,
for example (see Box 26 on p. 109), over
24 percent of the project area underwent
some form of land-use change during
the project’s first two years – a level far
higher than those observed in surrounding
communities (Pagiola et al., 2007).
From a farmer’s perspective, supplying
more of a service involves costs in terms of
foregone benefits. Such benefits can include
the market value of crop production, food
security provided by producing one’s own
food, insurance against risk in the form of
liquid assets, flexibility in type and amount
of labour and leisure time, and cultural
preferences for a certain way of life. The
foregone benefits, or opportunity costs,
involved in making a change in production
system are crucial to understanding where
and when farmers will respond to payments
for environmental services.
The following section examines the
relative profitability of environmental
service production systems versus baseline
production systems. Estimates of the
opportunity costs farmers face in making
proposed changes are then developed as
a key indicator of what it would take to
provide incentives to producers inducing
them to change.

A framework for assessing the
opportunity costs of supplying
environmental services
The opportunity cost involved in changing
production systems is a function of the
change in the use of inputs, including land
and labour, and the resulting outputs,
such as agricultural products or ecosystem
services, as well as the prices of both.
Costs vary significantly by agro-ecological
conditions, agricultural technology
employed, level of economic development
and policy environment. The relative
abundance of productive resources such
as land, labour and water is a key factor
affecting their relative prices and the types
of technology most likely to be adopted
(Hayami and Ruttan, 1985). In densely
populated areas, the opportunity cost
of labour will generally be lower than in
areas where labour is scarce relative to
land. The level of economic development,
both in agriculture and other sectors,
also affects input and output prices and

is thus critical for opportunity costs. For
example, increasing economic development
in the non-agricultural sector of a country
can raise the opportunity costs of labour
by providing new opportunities for
employment and income generation. Rising
labour costs will also enhance the incentives
for farmers to seek and adopt labour-saving
technologies.
Lipper, Pingali and Zurek (forthcoming)
have developed a framework for
classifying farming systems according to
the opportunity costs of land and labour
(Figure 9). Subsistence farming systems based
on the production of traditional staple crops
on lands with poor natural productivity,
as in many sub-Saharan African countries,
exemplify systems with low opportunity
costs of both land and labour. Where labour
is abundant but land is scarce, intensive
cereal systems have developed, relying on
high-yielding varieties and fertilizers to
increase productivity while saving land.
Typical examples are the intensively managed
rice–wheat production systems in the Indian
Punjab or the intensive rice-production
systems found in Southeast Asia. Intensive
livestock production, generally associated
with stall feeding, is also common.
In areas where land is abundant but
labour is scarce, farming systems dependent
on labour-saving technology, such as the
mechanized cereal production systems of
Australia, Canada and the United States of
America, prevail. Extensive agropastoralist
and slash-and-burn systems often fall into
this category. In contrast, high opportunity
costs of both land and labour can be found
in areas with high population density and
dynamic, well-functioning manufacturing
and/or services sectors that provide off-farm
labour opportunities. Examples include the
intensively managed fruit and vegetable
production areas around the Mediterranean
(e.g. Egypt, Israel and Spain).
The four categories of farming systems
in Figure 9 provide a point of departure in
analysing the opportunity cost to a farmer
of making a shift in land use in order to
enhance environmental service provision.
At the beginning of Chapter 2, three major
types of changes were identified: changes
in production systems (where land remains
in agriculture); land diversion (where land
is converted from agriculture to other uses);

63

FIGURE 9
Dryland farming system types: a classification framework according
to opportunity costs of land and labour

HIGH

N Mechanized

large-scale cereal
production systems
N Extensive livestock systems
N Slash-and-burn systems

N High-value commercial

agriculture

N Intensive cereal
LOW

Opportunity costs of LABOUR



THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

N Low-productivity

subsistence systems

crop systems
(green-revolution type)
N Intensive livestock systems

LOW

HIGH

Opportunity costs of LAND

Marginal lands

Favourable lands

Source: adapted from Lipper, Pingali and Zurek, forthcoming.

and avoided land diversion (such as avoiding
the conversion from forest to agriculture).
Land-diversion programmes would be
most relevant where the opportunity costs
of land are low in agriculture. In landabundant areas, including areas where
rising off-farm employment opportunities
have drawn populations out of rural areas,
the potential for setting aside land for nonagricultural uses is high. In such areas, the
trade-off with food and fibre production
is limited, particularly when transport
infrastructure is a constraining factor for
competitive agricultural production. In
land-scarce environments, on the other
hand, the trade-off between agricultural
and non-agricultural services is significant,
and changes within production systems
that retain a fairly high level of agricultural
production alongside environmental
service provision will tend to have lower
opportunity costs. When considering
the labour dimension, labour-increasing
changes in production systems (e.g. a move
from pasture to agroforestry) will be most
suited in areas with low opportunity costs

of labour. Conversely, labour-saving changes
would be called for in areas of labour
scarcity.
Map 5 overlays information about areas
considered as biodiversity “hotspots”,12 with
information on suitability for agriculture
and on current land-use patterns.13 Hotspots
are often associated with high willingness
to pay for biodiversity conservation. For
example, partly because of the proximity of a
Biodiversity hotspot maps are generated by Conservation
International. They hold especially high numbers of
endemic species, yet their combined area of remaining
habitat covers only .3 percent of the Earth’s land surface.
Each hotspot faces extreme threats and has already lost
at least 70 percent of its original natural vegetation. Over
50 percent of the world’s plant species and  percent
of all terrestrial vertebrate species are endemic to the
3 biodiversity hotspots. The Biodiversity Hotspots Species
Database is available at www.biodiversityhotspots.org.
3
Because biodiversity hotspots are based on both
biodiversity of endemic species and threat, they may
conflate other variables such as land values and agricultural
suitability, as expansion of agriculture is a key source
of threat. Thus, overlaying hotspots with areas of low
agricultural suitability may generate a lower estimate of
areas that are high in biodiversity and low in agricultural
values than those generated by approaches that use other
measures of biodiversity (Wilson et al., 006).


P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

MAP 5
Biodiversity hotspots in croplands poorly suited to rainfed agriculture

Biodiversity hotspots in croplands
with low agricultural suitability
Biodiversity hotspots in other croplands

Biodiversity hotspots in other areas
with low agricultural suitability
Other biodiversity hotspots

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31155&layers=biodiversity_hotspots
Source: FAO.

large, relatively highly educated population,
there are many private and civil societybacked schemes to conserve the Atlantic
Forest hotspot in Brazil. The map indicates
areas where the opportunity costs are
potentially low for supplying biodiversity
conservation services by either avoiding
conversion of land to agriculture or changing
farming system practices on lands currently
in agricultural production. The red areas
represent croplands in biodiversity hotspot
regions with low suitability for rainfed
production.14 In these areas, the costs of
taking land out of agriculture or changing
the production system within agriculture to
supply biodiversity conservation are likely
to be low and the returns to conserving
biodiversity high. Indeed, they combine low
opportunity costs of making the change with
high productivity of environmental services
provision. In these areas, farmers would be
expected to respond to relatively low levels

The suitability for rainfed production is based on the
Global Agro-Ecological Zones model for intermediate level
of inputs. Irrigated areas are excluded.

14

of payments for biodiversity conservation,
because they are giving up relatively low
levels of potential agricultural production to
provide the service.
Gorenflo and Brandon (2006) identified
priority locations for biodiversity
conservation efforts by looking at the
potential social and financial costs of
conserving biodiversity through maintaining
a non-agricultural land use. According
to their analysis, nearly three-quarters
of the priority locations for biodiversity
conservation coincide with large tracts
of sparsely populated lands with limited
suitability for agricultural production.
Main clusters of such sites were found in
southern Africa and Madagascar, the Andes,
the coastal area of Brazil, Central America,
various locations in east and southeast China
and the western Indian coast. Their identified
locations coincide with several of the
yellow shaded areas in Map 5, which show
biodiversity hotspots of low agricultural
suitability not currently in croplands. They
also noted that in areas of high population
densities and potential for crop production, a
variety of conservation tools will be necessary

65

66

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

MAP 6
Projected expansion of cropland and pasture to lands poorly suited
to rainfed agriculture, 2000–2010

Projected expansion of cropland and pasture in areas with low agricultural suitability
Other areas with projected expansion of cropland and pasture
Other areas with low agricultural suitability
Non-study area

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31161&layers=cropland_pasture_expansion_low_def
Source: FAO.

to achieve biodiversity conservation,
including conservation incentive agreements.
Map 6 builds further upon Map 4 (p. 26)
by adding information on suitability for
rainfed production. In many areas, a
combination of economic, agro-ecological
and spatial characteristics suggest a high
probability of their conversion from forest
to agriculture. Yet many of these areas

are not likely to be very productive for
rainfed agriculture – these areas are shown
in red. Here, irrigated agriculture may be
productive but will require investment. To
the extent that these areas are important
for biodiversity conservation or other
environmental services, higher returns
to the land may be obtained by avoiding
conversion.

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 10
Level of carbon payments required to provide incentives for reducing emissions
by avoided deforestation

Land-use system vs baseline

Cameroon intensive cocoa
vs secondary forest
Cameroon extensive cocoa
vs secondary forest
Cameroon short fallow food
crop vs secondary forest
Cameroon long fallow food
crop vs secondary forest
Cameroon oil-palm
vs secondary forest
Brazil improved pasture
vs forest with nut extraction
Brazil traditional pasture
vs forest with nut extraction
Indonesia rubber agroforestry
vs community forestry
Indonesia oil-palm
vs community forestry

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Implicit cost of reducing emissions (US$/tonne of carbon)
Source: Chomitz, 2007, based on data from Tomich et al., 2005a.

Empirical evidence on the supply
response to payments for environmental
services
Several studies have examined the level of
payments needed to induce farmers to adopt
cropping systems that increase the supply of
environmental services. Most have focused
on carbon sequestration (or in some cases
avoided emissions) in response to varying
payment levels. Generally, they indicate that
the economic potential is considerably lower
than the technical potential but that it varies
considerably according to location and the
type of farming system or land-use change
considered.
Chomitz (2007) estimated the cost of
reducing deforestation using data on the
return to common alternative land-use
systems in the selected areas. Figure 10
shows that relatively low carbon prices of
around US$11 per tonne would be sufficient
to provide incentives to producers to reduce
deforestation. The changes in land use that
result in reduced deforestation at the lowest
costs are those that also generate other
sources of income from the land, such as
community forestry and nut extraction.

The trade-offs faced by farmers in
adopting potential land-use changes were
the focus of the “Alternatives to Slash
and Burn” (ASB) initiative by national,
international and non-governmental
organizations in several countries in
Africa, Asia and Latin America.15 The
ASB initiative has conducted detailed
assessments in Brazil, Cameroon and
Indonesia of the trade-offs involved in
generating biodiversity conservation and
carbon sequestration – along with their
implications for income and food security.
Figure 11 presents results from a case-study
site in Cameroon comparing the financial
returns to various agricultural production
systems with the carbon they sequester.
From a carbon sequestration perspective,
the largest gains are indisputably achieved
through leaving the forest intact; however,
this option generates essentially no financial
returns. Moving from food crop/short
fallow to food crop/long fallow significantly
increases carbon sequestration, but reduces
profitability. However, moving from food
5

For further information, see www.asb.cgiar.org.





THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 11
Profitability and carbon sequestration in Cameroon
Time-averaged carbon (tonne/ha)
240

Forest

200

160

120
Food crop/
long fallow

80

Intensive cocoa
without fruit sales
Extensive cocoa
without fruit sales

40

Food crop/
short fallow

Extensive cocoa
with fruit sales
Oil-palm after
short fallow

Intensive cocoa
with fruit sales
Oil-palm after
forest

0
0

400

800

1 200

1 600

Financial profitability (US$/ha)
Source: Tomich et al., 2005b.

crop/short fallow to intensive cocoa (with
or without fruit sales) increases yields in
both carbon sequestration and agricultural
profitability.
The International Energy Agency
Greenhouse Gas Research and Development
Programme (IEA GHG) conducted an
assessment of the potential and cost of
enhanced carbon sequestration in soils
for five countries and regions, including
southeastern Australia, India, northern
Kazakhstan, Sweden and Uruguay. Two
types of land-use change were considered,
depending on technical feasibility at the
location: the adoption of minimum or
no-tillage in cropping systems and the
conversion of cropland to permanent grass
or pasture. According to the assessment,
which also included estimates of transaction
costs, at relatively low carbon prices (less
than US$50 per tonne) only about 16 percent
of the total technical potential would be
realized over a 20-year period. However,
at a price of US$200 per tonne (equivalent
to approximately US$55 per tonne of
carbon dioxide), 61 percent of the technical
potential was supplied, with farmers
entering into contracts on 80 percent of the
available land (IEA GHG, 2005).

Lewandrowski et al. (2004) modelled
supply response for carbon sequestration in
the United States of America under varying
land-use and payment options. At low
levels of payments, additional soil carbon
sequestration would be achieved primarily
through the adoption of conservation
tillage, for which, indeed, private returns
are very similar to those of the baseline;
that is, opportunity costs are low. Only at
incentive levels of US$125 per tonne would
producers be willing to shift from cropping
to grasslands.
Diagana et al. (2007) analysed farmers’
supply response to payments for soil carbon
sequestration for the Nioro region of
Senegal’s Peanut Basin. Soil and climate
data were used to estimate crop yields and
changes in soil carbon stocks under nine
scenarios of increased fertilizer use and
increased incorporation of crop residues in a
peanut–millet rotation system. An economic
model was used to simulate a carbon
payment scheme requiring farmers to apply
higher fertilizer rates and incorporate some
crop residues into the soil. Figure 12 shows
the carbon sequestration supply curve for the
scenario that incorporates half of the peanut
residue. The vertical axis shows the price paid

PAy I nG FA RMERS Fo R En v I RonMEn TAl SERv I C ES

FIGURE 12
Carbon supply response in Nioro Region, Senegal
Carbon price (US$/tonne)
250

200

150

100

50

0
0

100 000

200 000

300 000

400 000

500 000

600 000

Carbon sequestered after 20 years (tonnes)
Source: adapted from Diagana et al., 2007.

per tonne of carbon sequestered and the
horizontal axis indicates the corresponding
average annual quantity of carbon
sequestered over the 20-year life of the
contract in the Nioro region. At a payment of
US$100 per tonne, more than 500 000 tonnes
of carbon were estimated to be supplied by
the region.
The potential supply response of small
landholders in the central highlands of
Chiapas in Mexico to payments for aboveground carbon sequestration obtained by
switching to forestry and agroforestry were
estimated by De Jong, Tipper and MontoyaGómez (2000). According to their estimates, a
positive supply response to payments would

be obtained at prices between US$5 and
US$15 tonne of carbon with the adoption
of community forestry and improved
fallow systems. Their findings indicate that
improved management of natural forests
and secondary vegetation will be the most
important elements of any large-scale carbon
sequestration programme in the area.
FAO (2003c) modelled the cost of switching
from cassava to agroforestry systems in
Indonesia and the break-even carbon price
needed to generate such shifts. Table 9
shows the net present values of four
agroforestry systems, assuming a 70-year
time frame and poor quality lands. The
results indicate that cinnamon production

TAblE 9
Financial performance and costs of selected agroforestry systems on poor land:
modelling results for Sumatra, Indonesia over 70 years
AGRoFoRESTRy SySTEM
Rubber

Net present value (US$/ha)
Average carbon stock (tonnes/ha)
Opportunity cost2 (US$/ha)
Sequestration cost (US$/tonne carbon)
1 The

–96.35

Cinnamon

Damar1

oil-palm

114.99

–36.46

–91.10

21.18

11.35

51.34

13.31

132.35

–78.99

72.46

127.10

6.25

–6.96

1.41

9.55

damar system is a complex agroforest developed by the Krui people of Lampung, south Sumatra.
The system consists of a sequence of crops building up to a “climax that mimics mature natural forest” (ASB, 2001).
The main tree species is damar (Shorea javanica), a source of resin that provides a flow of income.
2 Cost (in terms of net present value) of switching land use from cassava to agroforestry.
Source: FAO, 2003c.



70

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 10
Cost-effectiveness of the PES approach under different circumstances
HIGH environmental
service benefits

LOW environmental
service benefits

LOW
OPPORTUNITY COSTS

1.   PES approach likely to be
cost-effective

2.   PES approach may be costeffective

HIGH
OPPORTUNITY COSTS

3.   PES approach may be costeffective

4.   PES approach unlikely to be
cost-effective

Source: FAO.

would be profitable even without carbon
payments, whereas damar (an indigenous
management system) would require very low
levels of carbon payments to support.
In general, the supply response to
payments for environmental services
will depend on the opportunity costs of
changing practices, which depend, in turn,
on the degree to which the land-use or
farming-system change reduces agricultural
production and income. In cases where
high environmental service benefits can be
achieved with little reduction (or even a
gain) in agricultural production and income,
low payments can trigger significant supply
response, and thus PES programmes are
likely to be cost-effective. This situation
corresponds to case 1 shown in Table 10.
In the opposite case, where environmental
service benefits are low but opportunity
costs are high (case 4), PES programmes are
unlikely to be cost-effective.
In the intermediate cases, environmental
service benefits are proportional to
opportunity costs. For example, in many
areas the adoption of conservation
agriculture in place of conventional tillage
systems involves relatively low levels of
opportunity cost for producers, because
the change does not result in a major
decrease (and may even lead to an increase)
in agricultural output, but environmental
service benefits are correspondingly low. This
situation corresponds to case 2. In contrast,
when changes in production systems to
enhance the supply of environmental services
result in a large decrease in agricultural
production and income, producers face
significant opportunity costs. Here, for a
change to be attractive to producers, either
the quantity of the environmental service
that can potentially be supplied or its price

must be high (case 3). Cost-effectiveness in
these intermediate cases depends on the
precise magnitudes of per-hectare payment
levels and environmental service benefits
provided.
In the case of carbon sequestration, this
suggests two situations (cases 1 and 2) where
a positive supply response can be expected
from agricultural producers even at relatively
low levels of carbon prices, and a third
situation (case 3) where a positive supply
response would require a higher carbon price
but could still be cost-effective because a
higher level of carbon sequestration would
be generated. Shifting from conventional to
conservation agriculture and generating soil
carbon sequestration is an example of the
former two situations, while reforestation on
degraded pastureland could be an example
of the latter.
What has experience from PES
programmes in the field shown us about
producers’ supply response to payments?
Not surprisingly, evidence suggests that
supply response has been positive in the
case of land-use changes that have no or
only low opportunity costs. In Costa Rica, for
example, payments for forest conservation –
which essentially reward the provision of
environmental services regardless of whether
they are incremental to a baseline supply –
were very popular among landowners, and
the supply of forest conservation services
exceeded the funding capacity of the
programme (Pagiola, 2006). This outcome
was in large part attributable to the low
opportunity costs landowners faced (Pagiola,
2006; Ortiz, Sage and Borge, 2003). De Jong,
Tipper and Montoya-Gómez (2000) noted
that substantial shifts in land uses were
obtained under the Scolel Té pilot project
for above-ground carbon sequestration

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

even with only modest incentive payments,
precisely because conventional agricultural
production was only marginally profitable.
Assessments of supply response to date
have not taken into account the recent rapid
growth in the market for bioenergy, which is
likely to result in substantial changes in the
opportunity costs of supplying environmental
services. Bioenergy, defined as energy
produced from organic matter or biomass,
has recently become one of the most
dynamic and rapidly changing sectors of the
global energy economy (UN-Energy, 2007).
The use of biomass in the form of plants and
trees increases demand for land and water
resources. The extent to which the growth of
the bioenergy sector will affect the provision
of other ecosystem services, including food
production as well as climate regulation and
other environmental services, is the subject
of considerable interest and attention. While
significant impacts are possible, their nature
and magnitude remain uncertain (UN-Energy,
2007).

Conclusions
Given the importance of ecosystem services,
why are they not provided at the levels
desired by society? Ecosystem services
are produced (or degraded) through the
interaction of natural processes and the
actions of individual decision-makers,
including agricultural producers. For a variety
of reasons, the full value of all ecosystem
services is not reflected in the incentives
faced by the service providers. As a result,
providers’ actions may diverge from those
desired by beneficiaries of the ecosystem
services.
Many possible changes in resource use that
would benefit the environment are not likely
to be adopted by farmers in the absence
of motivating policy measures, because
they would result in lower benefits to the
producers themselves. For example, setting
land aside from crop production and placing
(or leaving) it under natural grass or forest
cover could enhance carbon sequestration
as well as provision of biodiversity, water
quality and, possibly, other ecosystem services.
Likewise, reducing the number of livestock or
managing manure to reduce nitrogen runoff

to surface water, infiltration to groundwater
or emissions to the atmosphere could have
beneficial impacts on the environment but
would probably increase costs or reduce
returns to the producer.
Many farmers, particularly in developing
countries, also face a wide array of
constraints that increase opportunity costs
and raise additional barriers to the adoption
of new practices: constraints on access to
information, appropriate technologies and
financing, as well as inexistent or insecure
property rights and legal or regulatory
constraints. These constraints are often
compounded by poorly functioning markets
and infrastructure, risk and difficulties in
the collective management of commonly
held resources, such as pasturelands or
fisheries. The presence of one or more of
these problems makes it more difficult
for producers to change their resource
management practices in ways that could
increase their output of environmental
services – and in some cases of conventional
agricultural commodities.
Policy-makers have several options for
providing resource users with incentives
for farmers to change their behaviour in
order to supply the services society desires.
In the past, non-market instruments such as
regulations or taxes predominated; today,
market-based approaches, such as payments
for environmental services, are increasingly
complementing these earlier instruments.
When are payments the right policy
instrument to generate higher levels of
environmental services from farmers? To
answer this question, a distinction must be
made between the two cases where farmers
are being asked (i) to enhance the provision
of certain ecosystem services that may be
degraded or undersupplied as a result of
their current agricultural practices or (ii) to
offset pollution generated in other sectors.
In the first case, the critical issue is
whether farmers should be paid to reduce
the negative externalities they generate
rather than requiring them to bear the cost
themselves. A fundamental issue is whether
the rights to the environmental services in
question are held initially by producers or
by society. If they are held by producers,
society needs to compensate the producers
if more or different environmental services

71

72

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

are desired; if they are held by society, the
cost of degrading the resources or should be
borne by the responsible producers. There
are no simple solutions to determining which
situation applies. The answer may well differ
from one service to the next, and from one
context to another.
In the second case, the appropriateness
of payments depends on the efficiency
of offsets in meeting the intended
objective. Here, the PES approach may be
conceptually straightforward with regard
to carbon sequestration, where benefits are
independent of location. For location-specific
environmental services, however, establishing
equivalent values of service provision may be
difficult (for example, biodiversity conserved
in one location may differ from that of
another location).  
Whether and where farmers will make
changes in production systems in response to
payments for environmental services depends
on the opportunity costs or foregone
benefits implied in making the change.
These vary significantly by agro-ecological
conditions, type of technology employed,
level of economic development and policy
environment. Land-diversion environmental
service programmes are most likely to be
effective where opportunity costs of land
are low in agriculture. In land-abundant
areas, including areas where rising off-farm
employment opportunities have drawn

populations out of rural areas, the potential
for setting aside land for non-agricultural
uses is high. In land-scarce environments,
on the other hand, the trade-off between
agricultural and non-agricultural services is
high, and changes to production systems that
generate returns to both agricultural and
environmental services are therefore more
relevant. The opportunity cost of labour is
also important for determining the suitability
of changes. In situations where labour is
scarce, production changes that reduce
labour use are more likely to be accepted.
In general, the supply response to
payments for environmental services will
depend on the opportunity costs of changing
practices as well as the environmental
service benefits that can be generated. In
cases where high benefits can be achieved
with little reduction (or even a gain) in
agricultural production and income, low
payments can trigger significant supply
response, and thus PES programmes are likely
to be cost-effective. Where environmental
service benefits are low but opportunity
costs are high, PES programmes are unlikely
to be cost-effective. In intermediate cases,
where opportunity costs and environmental
benefits are either both low or both high,
cost-effectiveness will depend on the precise
magnitudes of per-hectare payment levels
and the environmental service benefits
provided.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

5. Designing effective payments
for environmental services
The effectiveness of PES programmes
depends on their design and
implementation. These factors must be
addressed within the specific political,
socio-economic and environmental context
of the programme. Cost-effectiveness is a
key criterion for programme design and
constitutes the point of departure for this
chapter. The focus is on issues involved
in designing PES programmes for costeffectiveness in meeting environmental
objectives. Chapter 6 will broaden the
discussion to include design issues as they
relate to impacts on the poor and the
possibilities for participation of the poor in
PES programmes.
The preceding chapters discuss demand for
environmental services and the opportunity
costs associated with their provision. In
addition to these factors, transaction
costs associated with making an exchange
between buyers and sellers need to be taken
into account when designing cost-effective
programmes. Transaction costs include
the cost of attracting potential buyers or
finding potential providers of environmental
services, of working with project partners
(e.g. negotiations with project participants
and capacity-building) and of ensuring
that parties fulfil their obligations (e.g.
contract development and enforcement,
legal and insurance costs, and monitoring
of environmental services). These costs are
partly determined by the institutions and
rules that govern environmental service
exchanges, whether they are publicly funded
programmes or private exchanges of offsets.
The considerable uncertainties and
complexities involved in measuring,
monitoring and exchanging services mean
that transaction costs can be significant.
Moreover, the relevant institutions and
rules are still being established. Indeed,
transaction costs can easily exceed the cost of
actually providing the environmental service.

For example, one preliminary assessment
suggests that transaction costs in forest
carbon projects absorb more than 50 percent
(and in some cases more than 90 percent) of
the value of total payments made, while the
forest producer receives only the residual
(Niles et al., 2002).
Several studies have examined programme
design issues and tools in the context of
payments for environmental services. For
example, Weinberg and Claassen (2005)
and Claassen et al. (2001) discuss issues of
effective conservation programme design
in the context of United States public
environmental service payment programmes,
and van Noordwijk et al. (2007) present a
conceptual framework for characterizing
various types of compensation or reward
mechanisms for environmental services
in terms of their effectiveness, efficiency,
sustainability and equity. The Rewarding
Upland Poor for Environmental Services
(RUPES) project in Southeast Asia has
explicitly focused on the development of
simplified methodologies for cost-effective
measurement of the potential for payments
for biodiversity and watershed services.16
In this chapter, the main design issues
discussed are: what should payments be
made for, who should be paid, how much
should they be paid and in what form? It
then briefly considers several issues involved
in reducing transaction costs and, finally,
the importance of creating an enabling
environment, in the form of supporting
institutions, within which PES programmes
can operate.

For further information, see www.worldagroforestry.
org/sea/networks/rupes.

16

73

74

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 13
Payments for restoring riparian areas in São Paulo, Brazil
Paolo Toledo and Helena Carrascosa1
In the state of São Paulo, Brazil, there
are a million hectares of riparian areas
in need of rehabilitation. Restoring
vegetation along margins of water
bodies traps sediments and pollutants
before they reach the waterways, plays
an important role in flood protection
and can provide habitat for wildlife and
carbon sequestration. Although today
these areas are protected from conversion
by state law, there are no incentives for
the restoration of previously degraded
sections. Yet the cost of degradation in
riparian zones is mounting.
For example, when the water utility
serving the city of Piracicaba had to switch
its main water intake from the Piracicaba
River to its tributary Corumbataí because
of escalating water treatment costs, great
concern arose. As a consequence, in 1999
the intermunicipal consortium of the
Piracicaba–Capivari–Jundiaí watersheds
initiated a programme whereby R$0.01
per cubic metre was allocated to support
restoration of the rivers’ riparian strips.
Participation of consortium members is
voluntary.
The São Paulo State Riparian Forest
Restoration Project (PRMC) is supporting
this effort by working with farmers
currently engaged in subsistence
farming and low-productivity pasture
management to identify alternative land
uses and restore and protect riparian
strips. The PRMC is sponsored by the State

What should payments be made
for?
Careful identification of the service of
interest is a critical first step in designing
an effective PES scheme. This requires
an assessment of the potential for
environmental service payments to
contribute to environmental, social and
economic objectives. This assessment, in
turn, must be based on an understanding of
the underlying biophysical science and the

Environment Secretariat, with the support
of the Global Environment Facility, the
Nature Conservancy and the National
Water Agency, in conjunction with the
ongoing State Programme for Sustainable
Microwatershed Management.
The management committee of the
Piracicaba–Capivari–Jundiaí watersheds
has approved US$280 000 per year to
support a project for extending and
experimenting with payments for riparian
restoration. Part of these funds will be
used to make payments to farmers who
adopt land-use changes that restore the
riparian zones and provide watershed
services to downstream users. The next
big step will be to secure a regular
contribution from the water utility
serving the city of São Paulo, a city of
over 20 million people. The project is also
exploring the potential for attracting
buyers of carbon emission offsets and
purchasers of biodiversity conservation
services to support the rehabilitation
programme.
In this context, the State Environment
Secretariat, together with various
partners, is initiating a state-level PES
fund to secure a long-term, consistent,
statewide restoration programme.

São Paulo State Riparian Forest Restoration
Project.

1

economic motivations of suppliers as well
as an assessment of demand (Figure 13).
In practice, assessing demand and supply
potential are iterative processes. Box 13
gives an example of how these processes are
occurring in São Paulo, Brazil.

Payments for actual services or for
proxies?
Whether to pay for the service itself or
for some proxy is an important design
consideration. If the environmental service
can be measured easily and the cause-

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

FIGURE 13
Key elements in PES programme design

1

2

FARMING SYSTEM
LAND-USE CHANGE

OR

ENVIRONMENTAL
SERVICE
PRODUCED

EXAMPLES

EXAMPLES

EXAMPLES

Conservation
agriculture

Soil and aboveground carbon
sequestration

Climate change
mitigation

Carbon emission
offset sales

Clean water

Water-user fees

Increased
resilience

Price premiums
on agricultural
products

Reforestation

Watershed
protection

3
BENEFITS
REALIZED

Biodiversity
conservation

4
PAYMENT
MECHANISM

EXAMPLES

Payments to farmers for environmental services

Source: FAO.

and-effect linkages are straightforward,
payments will be most effective if made
directly for performance in increasing
the output of the environmental
service delivered. Payments for carbon
sequestration are relatively simple in this
regard. Payments for watershed services, on
the other hand, are complicated, because
the complex hydrological relationships make
it difficult to establish the links between
cause and effect in service provision. In
these cases, payments are more easily
linked to observable land-use changes
that are associated with changes in the
provision of the desired environmental
service. For example, FAO (2002b) describes
how perceptions of the linkages between
land use and water resources determined
the terms of a contract between the La
Esperanza Hydropower Project and the
Monteverde Conservation League in Costa
Rica. The hydropower facility pays the
upstream landowners (represented by the
Monteverde Conservation League) for
conserving and protecting existing forests in
the expectation that this will lead to a more
stable stream flow over the year and lower
sedimentation, both of which reduce the
costs of the hydropower operation. In the
New York City example described in Box 4
(see p. 34), payments were made for changes

in land use and management and not
directly for water quality improvements.
When it is difficult to measure the service
inexpensively or to monitor compliance,
payments for quantifiable changes in
agricultural practices that are likely to result
in enhanced service provision can be more
cost-effective. In the vast majority of PES
transactions to date, payments have been
associated with land-use changes rather than
with service provision directly, and the buyers
have borne the risk of inadequate service
provision. So long as the farmers manage
their property in accordance with the terms
of the contract, they are paid whether the
service is provided or not.
Whether payments are made for the actual
service or linked to a proxy has implications
for who bears the risk of an unforeseeable
or uncontrollable factor affecting supply.
For the seller, a contract for a specific landmanagement change, such as planting and
maintaining a riparian buffer, involves much
less risk than a contract based on payments
for water purification services, which might
be affected not only by land-management
changes but also by a drought or a major
rainfall that could wash nutrients and soil into
watercourses. Insurance against variability
in service supply is an important transaction
cost in PES exchanges. Self-insurance, where

75

76

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

sellers produce more services than they have
contracted (e.g. by planning extra area for
carbon offsets) or buyers contract for more
services than they need, is one approach.
In Guatemala, for example, markets for
watershed services offered payments on three
times the estimated area needed to ensure
delivery of contracted services to the investor.
In some cases, NGOs or governments assume
responsibility for absorbing the risks of both
buyers and sellers (FAO, 2007c).

The use of indices
In an effort to ensure that changes in
land-management practices generate the
intended service, indices of environmental
service provision have been developed. The
challenge in selecting indicators is that of
establishing an appropriate balance between
accuracy and cost. One example is the scoring
system used as part of the Silvopastoral
Project implemented in Colombia, Costa Rica
and Nicaragua described in Box 14.

BOX 14
The Regional Integrated Silvopastoral Ecosystem Management Project in Colombia,
Costa Rica and Nicaragua
Muhammed Ibrahim1
Tropical deforestation in the Latin America
and the Caribbean region is continuing
at a high rate with serious consequences
for the environment. In Central America,
more than 9 million hectares of primary
forest have been deforested for pasture
expansion, and more than half of this area
is degraded. Traditional pasture systems
are based on clearing the land of trees,
which has negative impacts on biodiversity
and carbon sequestration. Furthermore,
once established, such systems cause
soil fertility and water resource issues,
leading to diminishing grass cover and
lower productivity. Lower income for
producers results in continuing poverty
and in pressure to clear additional areas.
One alternative to traditional systems
is silvopastoral systems, which combine
trees with pasture. These systems can
be grouped in four major categories
(Murgueitio,1999):
• systems in which high densities of
trees and shrubs are planted in
pastures, providing shade and diet
supplements while protecting the soil
from packing and erosion;
• cut-and-carry systems, which replace
grazing in open pasturelands with
stables in which livestock are fed with
the foliage of different trees and
shrubs specifically planted in areas
formerly used for other agricultural
practices;
• systems that use fast-growing trees
and shrubs for fencing and wind

screens. These systems provide an
inexpensive alternative to fencing
and supplement livestock
diets;
• systems where livestock graze in
forest plantations. In these systems,
grazing is used to control the invasion
of native and exotic grasses, thus
reducing the management costs of
the plantations.
Adopting improved silvopastoral
practices in degraded pasture areas is
thought to provide valuable local and
global environmental benefits, including
carbon sequestration and biodiversity
conservation. However, producers face
barriers to adopting these practices, as
they involve high initial costs.
Over the past five years, a project
experimenting with the use of payments
for environmental services as an
incentive mechanism for the adoption
of silvopastoral practices has been
implemented in Colombia, Costa Rica
and Nicaragua. The Regional Integrated
Silvopastoral Ecosystem Management
Project is funded by the Global
Environment Facility and the multiinstitutional FAO Livestock, Environment
and Development initiative and
implemented by the Tropical Agricultural
Research and Higher Education Center
in Costa Rica with the collaboration of
the research and development institute
Nitlapán in Nicaragua and the Colombian
NGO Centro para la Investigación en

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

The scoring system attempts to capture the
relationships among various types of land use
and multiple environmental services (Pagiola
et al., 2004). Table 11 (p. 78) shows the index
value for a variety of agricultural systems.
The index for carbon sequestration assigns
0.1 points per tonne of carbon sequestered,
while that for biodiversity conservation
ranks land uses from most unfriendly to
biodiversity (degraded monoculture pasture,
0.0 points) to most friendly (primary forest,

1.0 points). For both carbon sequestration
and biodiversity, specific point values
were assigned by a panel of experts based
on available data. The two indices were
combined to create a single environmental
services index. Biodiversity and carbon
sequestration were monitored in all land-use
types in the three pilot areas to verify that
the land uses promoted under the project
were actually generating the expected
environmental benefits. For biodiversity,

Impact of payments on land-use change
(total project area for the three countries)
Land use

2003

2006
(ha)

Difference
(Percentage)

Degraded pasture

2 258.28

802.04

–64.48

Natural pasture without trees

1 122.53

368.85

–67.14

Pasture with low tree density

2 232.92

2 582.10

+15.64

Pasture with high tree density

1 074.15

2 488.60

+131.68

106.30

378.85

+256.40

Forest

3 054.12

3 109.82

+1.82

TOTAL AREA

9 848.30

9 730.26

Fodder bank

Sistemas Sostenibles de Producción
Agropecuaria.
The project seeks to monitor and
evaluate environmental services
generated by silvopastoral systems
so as to develop a methodology for
payments for environmental services in
agricultural landscapes dominated by
cattle production. An ecological index was
developed as a tool for such payments,
which incorporates the value of different
land uses for carbon sequestration and
conservation of biodiversity. From 2003
to 2006, cattle farmers participating in
the project received between US$2 000
and US$2 400 per farm, representing 10
to 15 percent of net income. The area of
degraded pastures was reduced by more
than 60 percent in the three countries,
and the area of silvopastoral land use
(e.g. improved pastures with high density

trees, fodder banks and live fences)
increased significantly.
The environmental benefits associated
with the project include a 71 percent
increase in carbon sequestered (from
27.7 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent
in 2003 to 47.6 million tonnes in 2006),
increases in bird, bat and butterfly species
(see Chapter 2, Figure 5) and a moderate
increase in forested area. Milk production
and farm income also increased, by more
than 10 and 115 percent respectively.
Herbicide use dropped by 60 percent,
and the practice of using fire to manage
pasture is now less frequent.

Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher
Education Center.

1

77

78

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 11
Environmental service indices in the Silvopastoral Project in Colombia, Costa Rica and
Nicaragua (points per hectare, unless otherwise specified)
Biodiversity
index

Carbon
sequestration
index

Environmental
service
index

Annual crops (annual, grains, and tubers)

0.0

0.0

0.0

Degraded pasture

0.0

0.0

0.0

Natural pasture without trees

0.1

0.1

0.2

Improved pasture without trees

0.4

0.1

0.5

Semi-permanent crops (plantain, sun coffee)

0.3

0.2

0.5

Natural pasture with low tree density (< 30/ha)

0.3

0.3

0.6

Natural pasture with recently planted trees (> 200/ha)

0.3

0.3

0.6

Improved pasture with recently planted trees (> 200/ha)

0.3

0.4

0.7

Monoculture fruit crops

0.3

0.4

0.7

Fodder bank

0.3

0.5

0.8

Improved pasture with low tree density (< 30/ha)

0.3

0.6

0.9

Fodder bank with woody species

0.4

0.5

0.9

Natural pasture with high tree density (> 30/ha)

0.5

0.5

1.0

Diversified fruit crops

0.6

0.5

1.1

Diversified fodder bank

0.6

0.6

1.2

Monoculture timber plantation

0.4

0.8

1.2

Shade-grown coffee

0.6

0.7

1.3

Improved pasture with high tree density (> 30/ha)

0.6

0.7

1.3

Bamboo (guadua) forest

0.5

0.8

1.3

Diversified timber plantation

0.7

0.7

1.4

Scrub habitats (tacotales)

0.6

0.8

1.4

Riparian forest

0.8

0.7

1.5

Intensive silvopastoral system (> 5 000 trees/ha)

0.6

1.0

1.6

Disturbed secondary forest (> 10 m basal area)

0.8

0.9

1.7

Secondary forest (> 10 m basal area)

0.9

1.0

1.9

Primary forest

1.0

1.0

2.0

New live fence or established live fence with frequent
pruning (per km)

0.3

0.3

0.6

Windbreaks (per km)

0.6

0.5

1.1

LAND USE

2

2

Note: The environmental service index attempts to assess the level of environmental services generated by different
types of land use. It combines two indices: an index for biodiversity and an index for carbon sequestration.
The biodiversity index assigns a number from 0.0 to 1.0 from most unfriendly to biodiversity to most friendly.
The carbon sequestration index assigns 0.1 points per tonne of carbon sequestered. The two indices are added to arrive
at a single environmental services index.
Source: Pagiola et al., 2004.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 15
Payments for environmental services and the World Trade Organization
Green Box provisions
Support measures that are “decoupled”
from output quantities and prices and
therefore only minimally distort trade,
fall under the Green Box and are exempt
from reduction commitments under
the current Agreement on Agriculture.
In order to fall under the Green Box,
support measures must be provided
through a publicly funded government
programme and the support in question
should not have the effect of providing
price support to producers. Examples for
Green Box subsidies are compensation
for income loss for producers located
in disadvantaged regions, or for
producers implementing environmental

programmes. Agri-environmental
programmes can be categorized into
three different types: programmes
focusing on the retirement of land
from agricultural uses for conservation
purposes; programmes focusing on
improving the environmental performance
and production practices on current
agricultural land; and programmes
focusing on maintaining specific
performances or agricultural practices.

counts of bird species were the main
indicator used, complemented by studies of
butterflies, ants and molluscs. Factors such as
endemicity and rarity in the species observed
were also taken into consideration.
Another example emerged from the
Australian BushTender programme (see
Box 19, p. 86), which used a field staff scoring
system for establishing environmental service
indicators. Agency officials visited farms
and “scored” how land-use changes would
change biodiversity service provision. The
score was then divided by the bid price in
order to determine “biodiversity per dollar”.

Colby and Milway, 2004). The standards
and procedures involved in obtaining
certification vary considerably, although
efforts are being made to consolidate and
standardize certification standards (ISEAL,
2006).

Certification
In payment programmes involving
certification, the payment is linked to
a characteristic of the product or its
production process that is associated with
the supply of an environmental service.
The number of ecolabel and certification
programmes has risen markedly in recent
years.17 By the mid-2000s, nearly 30 national
and international bodies were certifying
natural resource-based products (Searle,

For example, a United States Web site
(http://www.eco-labels.org/labelIndex.cfm), lists 146
ecolabels, each differing in the products they certify, the
type of environmental benefit associated with the product,
and the standards they use.

17

Source: excerpt from ICTSD, 2006, pp. 2–3.

International trade rules
Finally, international or regional trade
agreements may affect what can be
paid for and how PES programmes can
be designed. In particular, World Trade
Organization (WTO) rules restrict public
payment programmes that directly affect
production of marketed commodities. The
most significant WTO provisions of relevance
for payments for environmental services
from agriculture are found in the Agreement
on Agriculture. According to the Agreement,
payments to enhance environmental services
would be permitted under the Green Box
provisions (Annex 2 of the Agreement)
provided that they are decoupled from
agricultural production, from post-base
period prices and from factors of production
(see Box 15). Direct payments under
“environmental programmes” are specifically
permitted under paragraph 12 of the Green
Box, provided payments are limited to extra
costs or loss of income involved in complying
with the programme. In the current trade
round, Green Box criteria may be reviewed

79

80

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

and clarified with a view to ensuring that
Green Box measures have no, or at most
minimal, trade-distorting effects. Concerns
have been raised that some current Green
Box measures may not meet this criterion
and that some payments under Green Box
measures may indeed be trade-distorting.
(UNCTAD, 2007; FAO, 2004d).
Other provisions of the Agreement
on Agriculture could also be potentially
relevant for PES programmes, including
provisions covering structural adjustment
assistance, where land could be removed
from agricultural production, for example on
environmental grounds, or payments under
regional assistance programmes, where
payments could be made to producers in
“disadvantaged regions”.
Other multilateral trade agreements could
also be relevant for environmental service
payments in agriculture, for example the
Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing
Measures and the WTO General Agreement
on Trade in Services. For environmentally
based product certification or labelling
schemes, some provisions of the WTO
Agreements on the Application of Sanitary
and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and on
Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) could also
be of relevance.

Who should be paid?
The answer to the question of who should
be paid to supply environmental services is
highly dependent on the overall programme
objectives. Perhaps the most controversial
issue is whether environmental service
payments should be directed to those who
currently provide services or to those whose
land parcels have the greatest potential for
increased service provision.
To frame this dilemma more starkly, we
can imagine two adjacent farmers, A and
B, who raise cows for a dairy operation
on gently rolling land beside a stream
that flows into a reservoir. Five years ago,
Farmer A constructed fencing alongside her
streams, creating a 3-metre riparian buffer
on either side of the bank. This change in
land management significantly reduced the
amount of nutrients and soil washing off her
land and the eutrophication and turbidity
downstream. On the other hand, Farmer B

has continued to manage her land in such
a way that nutrient and soil runoff after
large storm events affect water quality in the
downstream reservoir. Should a downstream
water consumer make payments to Farmer A,
Farmer B, or both? Although Farmer A
provides the greatest level of current
service provision, the most efficient use of
payments to enhance services is likely to be
to Farmer B.
“Additionality” is a key concept in
PES programmes designed for efficiency.
To meet an additionality requirement,
payments should be for a service that would
not have been supplied otherwise. Farmer A
was already providing the service and thus
would not qualify under an additionality
standard.
Paying only for additional services can
potentially present risks arising from what
is known as “moral hazard”. For example,
some farmers might knowingly use a
polluting production practice because they
expect, sometime in the future, to receive
payments to stop doing so. In practice,
however, there are checks that limit the
potential seriousness of problems resulting
from moral hazard. Increasing one’s
attractiveness for potential service payments
can carry a significant cost in terms of longterm farm productivity. Such a strategy
also carries a significant risk to the farmer
if payments are granted on a competitive
basis, as some farmers may end up receiving
no funds. Both the Australian BushTender
(see Box 19 on p. 86) and the Costa Rican
(see Box 16) programmes, for example, were
oversubscribed. In the context of payments,
risks associated with moral hazard should
not present serious cause for concern unless
the expected private benefits of poor land
management exceed the costs dramatically.
The hypothetical example above
nevertheless points to a more general
problem: should farmers be paid for services
that are already being provided? Given
social and political realities, it may be very
difficult to implement programmes based
on strict efficiency and additionality criteria,
especially publicly funded programmes.
Programmes based on additionality may be
perceived as “not fair” and as “rewarding
the bad guys” (Dobbs and Pretty, 2004).
As critics of the United States CRP have
made clear, responsible land managers can

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 16
The Payments for Environmental Services programme of Costa Rica:
setting the baseline
The Costa Rica PSA (Pago de
Servicios Ambientales – Payments for
Environmental Services) programme, one
of the oldest and best known examples
of a national payments for environmental
services scheme in a developing country,
demonstrates the need for setting a good
baseline.
In 1997, the country pioneered
payments for environmental services
programmes based on a national forestry
law that explicitly recognized four
environmental services provided by forest
ecosystems: climate change mitigation,
biodiversity conservation, watershed
protection and landscape beauty. The
government contracts with landowners to
maintain forest area in order to provide
these services.
By the end of 2005, about 10 percent
of the country’s forest area was enrolled
(Pagiola, 2006). The programme was
initially untargeted, with participation
on a “first-come, first-served” basis. This
resulted in inclusion of land that was at
low risk of deforestation.
As Pfaff, Robalino and Sanchez-Azofeifa
(2006) describe in their evaluation of its
first five years, the programme annually
inhibited deforestation on only a small
portion of the enrolled forest. “…[O]ver
99 percent of the PSA funds allocated
did not change land use.” In a separate
study, Tattenbach, Obando and Rodríguez
(2006) found that an area equal to about
half the contracted area would have been

become dispirited if those who employ less
responsible land-management practices
are effectively rewarded for doing so (see
Box 4). On the other hand, international
markets such as the CDM require
additionality. If a country wishes to access
international payments for environmental
services, especially for carbon credits,
meeting an additionality criterion will be
necessary.
Costa Rica’s PSA (Pago de Servicios
Ambientales – Payments for Environmental

deforested in the absence of the PSA
programme. Differences in methodology,
study area and study period make it
hard to compare these results directly,
and a consensus on the impacts of the
programme has not been reached, but it is
clear that only a part of the enrolled area
represents actual land-use change. A more
detailed discussion of the debate is given
in Walker (2007).
The relatively low apparent
additionality of the PSA programme
should be seen in the context of an
overall trend of falling livestock prices,
which had made the conversion of
forest to pastures much less profitable
and had reversed deforestation trends
even before the introduction of the PSA
programme in 1997. The PSA programme
has also been accompanied by the
introduction of new legal restrictions
on clearing land; compliance with these
restrictions would likely have been much
less forthcoming had they not been
accompanied by payments. It also bears
mention that Costa Rica’s PSA programme
has no additionality requirement. In
principle, if the budget were sufficient,
the programme would pay every land
user with forest for the services that
that forest is providing (Pagiola, 2006).
With support from the World Bank and
the Global Environment Facility, the PSA
programme has been evolving towards
a more targeted approach that seeks to
improve its efficiency.

Services) programme is explicitly nonadditional. In principle, given a sufficient
budget, the PSA programme would pay
every forest owner for the services that the
forest provides (Pagiola, 2006). Of course,
budgets are generally limited and thus
some choices need to be made. One way
of making that choice is to identify sites
that present credible threats to the loss of
environmental services. Wünscher, Engel
and Wunder (2006) analysed the potential
efficiency gains from improved targeting

81

82

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

for the Costa Rica programme. They show
that, given a fixed budget, selecting sites
according to their service delivery potential
increases the amount of contracted services
supplied. Even greater efficiency is gained
where opportunity costs and payment levels
are differentiated. Wunder (2006) compared
the potential efficiency of payments in
Amazonian states in Brazil having low
development pressures and government
support for conservation policies to areas
experiencing high rates of land conversion
to agriculture. He noted that payments in
low-development areas are non-additional,
while in areas of high conversion rates they
may not be sufficient to achieve desired
objectives. An important strategy for
targeting suppliers of environmental services,
therefore, is the identification of areas
where threats are projected to emerge, and
where payments for environmental services
are likely to be effective in changing land use
and farming practices.

Setting baselines
Identifying what would have happened
under a “business as usual” (no payments)
scenario is necessary to assess the
effectiveness of a programme and is
linked to the question of additionality.
The establishment of a baseline requires
consideration not just of the level of services
when payments start, but also of potential
changes in external factors during the period
when the environmental service payments
are being made.18 For example, deforestation
and reforestation rates change in response
to many economic and social pressures,
and an increase in forest cover may not be
attributable to the payment at all, but rather
to other forces, as the Costa Rica example
illustrates (see Box 16).

Targeting and self-targeting
For environmental service purchasers
concerned solely with the efficient supply
of environmental services, the ideal
programme would identify and target
payments to the lowest-cost suppliers.
The key information needed for effective
targeting to the lowest-cost suppliers relates

See, for example, UNEP (2005) for a discussion of
baseline methodologies for the CDM.

18

to the spatial distribution of land ownership
and productivity. The distribution of land is
a factor in determining not only who could
benefit most from a PES scheme, but also
what kind of PES scheme (e.g. land-use vs
farming system change) is most likely to be
attractive to producers (FAO, 2006e).
In recent decades, considerable field
experience has been gained in targeting
development projects that is relevant also for
the potential targeting of PES programmes.
The optimal level of targeting depends on
the trade-offs between the cost and the
tolerable degree of errors of exclusion and
inclusion (the reduction of which is the
benefit of targeting) and is constrained by
administrative capacity. There are different
levels and degrees of targeting. Area-based
targeting criteria, for example identifying
marginal regions or communities, are
generally relatively inexpensive. Targeting
becomes more data-intensive, and therefore
expensive, when moving to a household or
individual level. In general, a trade-off exists
between the complexity of targeting strategy
and its cost.
Applying targeting criteria is particularly
challenging in developing countries with
poor data availability and low institutional
capacity, as is the case in a number of
African countries. Self-targeting, where
programmes offer benefits that appeal
only to a selected group, has been used by
some project designers to try and attract the
participants with the desired characteristics.
This approach can be problematic, however,
as it may exclude the most vulnerable and
is only appropriate in certain circumstances.
A recent global study on poverty targeting
methods (Coady, Grosh and Hoddinott,
2004) found that more-developed countries
tend to use means-testing while lessdeveloped countries use self-selection or
characteristics-targeting, which are often
easier to implement. However, given the
wide variation in results across countries and
programmes, the study concludes that the
most important determinant of targeting
success, regardless of the methodology, is the
implementation capacity specific to a given
programme.
As environmental service supply is
inherently linked to location, the use of
geographical criteria represents a lowcost means of targeting programmes. For

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 17
China’s Grain for Green programme
Pushed into action by a series of
devastating floods in 1998, the
Government of China launched the Grain
for Green programme in 1999. One of the
largest conservation set-aside programmes
in the world, its main objective is to
increase forest cover on sloped cropland
in the upper reaches of the Yangtze and
Yellow River Basins to prevent soil erosion.
When possible in their community,
households set aside all or parts of certain
types of land and plant seedlings to
grow trees. In return, the government
compensated the participants with grain,

example, because the main objective of the
China Grain for Green programme (Box 17)
is to prevent soil erosion, steepness of slope
is one of the main criteria by which plots
are selected (Uchida, Rozelle and Xu, 2007).
The programme targets lands with slopes
of 25 degrees or higher in southwest China
and 15 degrees in the northwest. As slope
is easy to measure, this is a relatively lowcost targeting tool (Uchida, Rozelle and
Xu, 2007), although several studies have
found the programme’s targeting to have
been less than optimal in certain regions,
where, indeed, a number of productive and
low-sloped plots were retired when less
productive and high-sloped plots were still
available (Xu et al., 2004; Uchida, Xu and
Rozelle, 2005).
Mapping locations with high potential
environmental service benefits and low
opportunity costs of supply (see, for
example, Maps 5 and 6) is a further means
of geographic targeting, and is becoming
progressively less expensive as increasing
amounts of geographically referenced
information become available.
One approach to self-selected targeting
is the use of a reverse auction system as
described in the Australian BushTender
programme (see Box 19). In this system,
landholders provide sealed bids for the
amount they are willing to accept for
changes in land-use management. Funding
is provided in the order of the bidders
providing the greatest service provision at

cash payments and free seedlings. By
the end of 2002, officials had expanded
the programme to some 15 million
farmers in more than 2 000 counties in
25 provinces and municipalities in China
(Xu et al., 2004). If the programme meets
its original goals, by 2010 nearly 15 million
hectares of cropland will have been set
aside, affecting the land of more than
50 million households.

Source: Uchida, Rozelle and Xu, 2007.

the lowest cost, and the process continues
until the funds run out. This approach
has two major benefits compared with
direct grants. First, communication is
more efficient: under a reverse auction,
farmers weigh the costs and benefits of
their own land-use changes and inform the
government of their willingness to accept
in order to institute these changes. The
government, for its part, decides which
of the proposed land-use changes will be
most effective for meeting its overall service
provision goal. Reverse auctions are also well
suited to situations in which there is only
one buyer and many sellers. This is often the
case with water quality services, for example,
when a utility seeks to change the behaviour
of many landowners.
Targeting is complicated by the potential
for “holdouts” – individuals who try to
exploit their location or choose not to
participate in a programme but capture
the benefits of actions of others. The
effectiveness of holdouts depends on the
degree to which environmental service
provision requires coordination among
suppliers. This is most easily illustrated in
the context of biodiversity conservation.
The functional value of a reserve design
or wildlife corridor usually depends on
contiguous land parcels. If successful, the
benefits from the sum of the connected
parcels managed for biodiversity
conservation are greater than those of its
parts. Success can be frustrated by the actions

83

84

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

of a very small number of landholders of key
parcels who hold out for prices well above
market rates. Without their participation,
it may be impossible to create effective
habitats.

Equity and efficiency
Decisions on how to set and implement
targeting criteria are, of course, strongly
related to the overall programme objectives.
Alix-Garcia, de Janvry and Sadoulet
(forthcoming) compared two hypothetical
PES schemes – one with a flat payment
and a cap on the amount of land that
could be enrolled by any one participant
and another that took deforestation risk
and land productivity into account. In
their simulations, targeted payments were
far more efficient in terms of generating
environmental services, but the flat payment
scheme was more egalitarian. Their results
indicate the importance of considering tradeoffs between efficiency and equity. These
issues are revisited in Chapter 6.
Setting programme objectives and
targeting strategies in order to balance
equity and efficiency goals is inherently
a political process, and the balance may
change over the course of programme design
and implementation (see Box 18).

How much should be paid?
The amount of an environmental service
provided will depend on the level of
payments. In general, how much should be
paid depends on the options available to
buyers and sellers of environmental services,
along with other factors that determine their
supply and demand. For a transaction to
take place, the maximum amount the buyer
would be willing to pay for the services must
be at least as much as the minimum that the
seller would be willing to accept to provide
them. The amount the buyer is willing to
pay is affected by factors such as the cost of
alternatives to the services in question and
the financial resources available. The amount
the seller is willing to accept depends on the
cost of adopting new practices to provide the
services.
Historically, some public programmes
have set a flat payment rate per hectare
for a land-management practice. These

programmes did not distinguish between
varying service supply potentials and often
set prices significantly above what farmers
would have been willing to accept,19 either
because of inadequate analysis of supply–
demand dynamics because the programmes
had income-support objectives in addition
to environmental objectives, or because it
was administratively too costly to determine
farmer-specific payment rates (or politically
infeasible to implement them).
In some cases, pressure to maintain flat
payments arise out of equity concerns. For
example, in the case of the Nairobi National
Park Ecosystem Wildlife Conservation
Lease programme, the Maasai community,
who were the intended recipients of the
payments, objected (at least initially) to
differentiated payments on social grounds,
even though environmental service values
and opportunity costs did vary by location.
In most programmes to date, prices for
environmental services have been set close
to the minimum amount that farmers would
accept, although the reasons for this outcome
differ by service (Pagiola and Platais, 2007).
In carbon markets, the supply of potentially
salable carbon credits from land-use change
and forestry projects exceeds current demand,
thus giving buyers the upper hand in setting
prices (Bayon, Hawn and Hamilton, 2007).
In markets for watershed and biodiversity
services, potential sellers are rarely able to
exclude any of the potential buyers from
benefiting from the resources, which gives
them little leverage in setting prices (LandellMills and Porras, 2002).
Publicly funded payment systems face
pressure to maximize programme costeffectiveness. This can be achieved by setting
payment levels close to the amount farmers
would accept or through a reverse auction
system.
Reverse auction approaches, while a
potentially useful means of improving
the efficiency of supply, can be expensive
and difficult to implement, especially with
the limited institutional capacity in many
developing countries and where producers
have low levels of information and formal
education. The Silvopastoral Project in Costa

An example was Costa Rica’s PSA programme, see
Ferraro, 2001.

19

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 18
The political economy of targeting: the Payment for Hydrological Services
Programme in Mexico
The design of payments for environmental
services programmes, including the areas
they target and their recipients, can be
strongly influenced by ongoing political
debates and institutional arrangements.
A payments for environmental services
programme in Mexico to conserve water
services is an example of how political
realities shape programme outcomes.
At its inception in 2003, the programme
had both environmental and anti-poverty
goals. Because of water scarcity in many
areas with high population density, and
because the potential seemed highest for
developing local markets for the service, it
developed into a programme focused on
hydrological services.
The programme faced challenges in
obtaining funding and management
changes. Instead of a 2.5 percent levy on
municipal water fees, a fixed amount per
year was applied. Initially, the programme
was implemented only in priority
watersheds, but final implementation
was nationwide. The focus on poor

communities was abandoned. The scheme
was classified as a subsidy and not as
a payment, which created a host of
additional problems. The rules had to be
publicly debated, and the money could not
be targeted in a decentralized manner.
Changes in targeting rules from the first
proposal to the final scheme can be seen
in the table. Other important changes
included the removal of the originally
planned pilot programme, the elimination
of the focus on marginalized communities,
the inclusion of commercial forests and
private properties and the decision to give
payments based on percentage of forest
rather than on forest density.
An evaluation (FAO, 2005b) of the first
two years of the programme showed that
most of the payments had gone to protect
forests outside of critical watersheds and
were too fragmented in their distribution
to provide a measurable improvement in
water services. In addition, payments were
made mainly for forests that were not at
risk of being lost.

Changes in targeting rules for Mexico’s PES scheme to protect water services
Original targeting rules

Final targeting rules

(SEMARNAT/INE)

(SEMARNAT/CONAFOR)

n

Pilot programme with an
experimental design

n

Nationwide programme:
–  Rules of operation
–  Establishment of a Trust Fund

n

Beneficiaries’, ejidos1 and indigenous
communities located in priority
watersheds:
–  Overexploited
–  Serving large populations

n

Beneficiaries augmented to include
private owners

n

Other selection criteria:
–  Forest cover
–  Clear property rights
–  Ecosystem type
–  Marginalization

n

Added selection criteria:
–  Priority mountains
–  Availability of satellite image
–  Protected areas

n

Priority given to forest with
high deforestation

n

Subtracted selection criteria:
–  Marginalization
–  Deforestation risk

Notes:
SEMARNAT = Secretaría de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (Secretariat for the Environment, Natural Resources);
INE = Instituto Nacional de Ecología (National Ecology Institute); CONAFOR = Comisión Nacional Forestal (National Forestry
Commission).
1 Ejidos are a special form of land tenure in Mexico resulting from the land reform process that started after the Mexican
revolution in 1910. Ejidos are composed of two different kinds of property rights over land: individual parcels and
common lands
Source: FAO, 2005b.

85

86

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 19
Measurement and targeting issues: the BushTender programme of Australia
In Australia, the State of Victoria’s
Department of Natural Resources and
Environment (NRE) has developed a pilot
programme to conserve native vegetation
remnants on private property. In exchange
for payments from the state government,
landholders commit to fencing off and
managing an agreed amount of native
vegetation for a set period. The first
BushTender trial was completed in 2002
in the north central and northeast regions
of the state. The programme is based
on the Conservation Reserve Program
in the United States of America. The
innovation of the BushTender programme
is its reliance on a robust assessment
methodology and reverse auction
mechanism to set the price of the contracts.
With the assistance of farmers’
associations, NRE publicized that it might
be willing to pay farmers to conserve
native vegetation. Interested landholders
contacted NRE, which sent out field
staff to inspect the sites, explaining
to landholders which of their native

Rica, Colombia and Nicaragua (Box 14, p. 76),
for example, opted to offer fixed payments
for eligible land uses because the reverse
auction approach was deemed too complex
for the setting.
The potential of auctions in a developing
country context is being explored in the
Sumberjaya subdistrict in Sumatra for the
purchase of erosion abatement services
from coffee farmers. Researchers have
found that extending the auction approach
to a developing country setting required
several adaptations in their design and
implementation, including the use of a
uniform price rule to minimize risks of social
conflict created by discriminatory pricing in
small communities. The prices achieved at
the auction allowed the purchase of
30–70 percent more conservation services
than would have been the case at the
estimated labour cost for contract
implementation, and bidding behaviour
across rounds indicated that farmers adjusted

vegetation was most significant and the
most effective conservation activities.
The field staff assessed the value of
each site’s native vegetation on two scales
of value. One was called the Biodiversity
Significance Score, which rated the
site’s conservation value according to
scarcity of remnant types. The other
was the Habitat Services Score, which
assessed the contribution of the proposed
management action, such as fencing or
weeding, to biodiversity improvement.
Landholders were informed of the
Habitat Services Score but, not of the
Biodiversity Significance Score. Interested
landholders could then choose to submit
bids, detailing in a management plan
developed with the field officer which
remnant vegetation (and how much)
they would be willing to conserve, as
well as the management regime for the
remnants. The proposed management
actions ranged from excluding livestock,
retaining large trees and controlling
rabbits to controlling weeds and

their bids in response to previous outcomes
in ways that indicated an understanding of
the mechanism (Leimona, 2007).
Direct negotiation between service users
and providers – another approach for pricesetting – results in individually crafted
agreements that reflect the different levels
of service that different landholders can
provide and the specific conditions faced
by each landholder. This was the approach
adopted by Vittel in France and in the New
York City case (Box 4, p. 34). This approach
can result in highly optimized contracts,
but can also incur high transaction costs.
A variant of this approach is used in the
Silvopastoral Project in Costa Rica, Colombia
and Nicaragua. Recognizing that different
land uses can provide different levels of the
desired services, payments are based on the
increase in services generated by the specific
mix of land uses adopted by each landholder,
measured using an index (see Table 11,
p. 78). While this approach has lower

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

revegetation. In the end, 98 landholders
submitted 148 bids for 186 sites.
Since NRE had an estimate of potential
biodiversity importance for each of these
sites, they were able to calculate the best
value for money (i.e. by identifying those
bids that offered greatest biodiversity
value for least cost per hectare). Given
a limited funding budget, only the
most cost-effective bids were funded.
In the end, NRE accepted 97 bids, with
landholders committing to conserve and
manage roughly 3 200 hectares of native
vegetation under three-year BushTender
Management Agreements for a total cost
of approximately $A400 000. Compliance
monitoring occurs through random site
inspections.
Beyond the fact that the scheme was
well received and oversubscribed, the
environmental benefits seem significant.
NRE field staff concluded that most of
the successful bids contained sites of high
or very high conservation significance,
including 24 new populations of rare or

negotiation costs, it still has relatively high
monitoring costs (Pagiola et al., 2004).

How should payments be made?
Three main issues must be addressed in
determining the form payments should take:
1. Should payments be in cash or in
another form?
2. How should payments be timed?
3. What payment mechanism should
be used?

Cash versus in-kind payments
Other types of payments than cash can be
envisaged. Wunder (2005) describes the
perceived advantages and disadvantages of
cash versus the use of beehives as payment
for watershed services in Bolivia. The in-kind
payment involved providing farmers with
beehives and technical assistance in beekeeping. This form of payment was perceived

threatened plant species. Perhaps the
most unexpected finding was that many
of the bids were for less money than the
NRE would have been willing to pay, had
they negotiated directly with landholders.
It is not clear whether the lower price was
a result of market pressures of competitive
bidding, the NRE underestimating
landholders’ willingness to accept, or the
fact that once landholders understood
the non-market value of their native
vegetation they were willing to
internalize some of the perceived costs
of conservation. It is an open question
whether persuasion instruments, such
as brochures or educational visits from
conservation staff, would have achieved
the same result. At first glance, this seems
unlikely because the landholders would
not have been forced to consider the true
value of their willingness to accept land
changes.

Source: FAO, 2007d.

as creating a lasting benefit, while cash
would more likely have been spent right
away. One way to address this concern is by
targeting payments towards women, which
has been shown to be particularly effective
in increasing spending on education,
health and nutrition (Davis, 2003; Haddad,
Hoddinott and Alderman, 1997). One
objection to in-kind payments is that they
allow less flexibility for meeting fluctuating
labour and skill requirements. Moreover,
they can also be seen as paternalistic – i.e. it
is an outsider who determines what is best
for suppliers, rather than allowing them to
choose how to invest or dispose of their cash
payments. Offering a variety of payment
modes, if the administrative costs of doing
so are not too high, could be one way to
overcome these objections (Wunder, 2005).

Timing and duration
The timing and duration of payments are
critical issues from both a buyer’s and seller’s

87

88

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

point of view. In many cases, environmental
services are only generated years after
the supplier actually makes the required
land-use changes (and bears the costs).
Obtaining investment credit is often difficult
and expensive for developing country
farmers, further strengthening the need
for payments in the short term. Whether
payments should be made in a single
instalment or periodically also needs to be
considered.
Referring back to Figures 7 and 8 in
Chapter 4 (pp. 52–3), we can see that
different arrangements for the timing of
payments may be required when considering
a farmer in scenario B in Figure 8, who faces
an investment barrier to adoption and thus
a temporary decline in income, versus those
in scenarios A and B in Figure 7, who face
a permanent decrease in income from the
land by adopting the land-use system that
generates environmental services. In the
former case, payments can allow the farmer
to overcome the investment barrier through
short-term funds to facilitate the transfer to
new production systems that will be more
profitable in the long run, even without the
payment.
This is the strategy used in the
Silvopastoral Project in Colombia, Costa
Rica and Nicaragua (Box 14), where payments
are explicitly short-term. Indeed, despite
their long-term benefits, silvopastoral
practices tend to be unattractive to farmers
primarily because of the substantial initial
investment and the time lag between the
investment and returns. The project assumed
that, given this situation, relatively small
payments provided in the early stages could
“tip the balance” between current and
silvopastoral practices by increasing the net
present value of investments in silvopastoral
practices and by reducing the initial period
in which these practices impose net costs
on farmers. The payments also alleviate
the liquidity problems faced by many
farmers and help them finance the required
investments (Pagiola et al., 2004).
When the land-use change needed to
generate environmental services results in
a permanent decrease in income, payments
for the environmental service must be
maintained indefinitely to preserve the
incentive to supply it. Farmers continue
to receive payments every season for the

agricultural products they generate from their
lands; receiving a continuing payment for
the environmental services they generate is
analogous to receiving continuous payments
for the crops they produce each year.

Payment forms
Three main types of mechanism for
environmental service payments can be
identified:
• direct payments (public and private);
• offsets (both voluntary and mandatory);
• agricultural product certification
programmes (ecolabels).
Each involves different sets of stakeholders
among the buyers and sellers, as well as
intermediaries involved in making the
transaction. In the following paragraphs,
we summarize the main features of each of
these mechanisms and identify key actors in
the transaction chain.
Direct payments. This category includes
direct payments from public programmes,
such as the China Grain for Green
programme, as well as public programmes
in Australia (Box 19), Costa Rica (Box 16),
Mexico (Box 18) and the United States of
America (Box 12). Private payments may
also fall into this category, including cases of
hydropower companies paying for watershed
services (FAO, 2002a) and payments made by
NGOs for biodiversity conservation services.
Currently, this mechanism accounts for the
largest share of payments.
Sources of funds in this category range
from general tax revenues to specific taxes
or charges on beneficiaries. International
funds (e.g. the GEF) are a further source,
and in some cases public and private funding
sources are combined. In Costa Rica, in
the Rio Segundo watershed, for example,
payments to landholders are financed in
part with payments from a private bottler,
Florida Ice & Farm, and in part by the local
town’s public service utility ESPH (Empresa
de Servicios Publicos de Heredia) (Pagiola,
2006). An important distinction in these
cases is the extent to which funds come
directly from service users or through
intermediaries. When payments are made
directly by service users, a good case can be
made that payments are likely to be efficient
and sustainable, as the financing source
has both a direct incentive to pay and the

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

power to insist on an efficient use of their
monies; where payments are made through
intermediaries, such as government agencies,
as in the case of the United States CRP,
Mexico’s Payment for Hydrological Services
Programme (PSAH) and Costa Rica’s PSA, it
can be argued that this efficiency is muted
(Pagiola and Platais, 2007).
Mandatory and voluntary offsets.
Mandatory offsets are the medium of
exchange in regulated cap-and-trade
markets, such as the Kyoto flexible trading
mechanisms and United States wetlands
mitigation banking (see Box 12 on p. 62).
Private- or public-sector entities wanting to
meet regulatory compliance through offsets
are the ultimate purchasers in this exchange,
although there are usually one or more
intermediaries involved. These include NGOs
as well as private-sector firms specializing in
carbon market exchanges. (See Box 20 for
a more detailed description of the process
of certification under the CDM.) There
also exists a significant and growing sector
concerned with voluntary carbon offset
payments. The certification standards and
procedures vary between voluntary and
mandatory offset schemes. Several actors are
present in the transaction chain between
buyer and sellers for both.
Agricultural product certification
programmes. When consumers buy certified
products, they are paying not just for the
product itself, but also for the manner in
which it was produced and brought to
the market. The source of funds is from
within the private sector and the payment
mechanism is via price premiums and/or
market access. These programmes establish
a set of standards for particular categories
of goods or services and, for a payment,
certify whether the producer has met
these requirements. If so, they may use
an identifying label on their product and
in their advertising to distinguish their
products from others in the marketplace
and, presumably, benefit from increased
prices or market share by serving the “green”
consumer niche.
Certified products involve three sets of
buyers along the supply chain. The most
obvious is the point-of-sale buyer – the
green consumer. Moving up the supply

chain, the second is the retailer – Home
Depot, Carrefour or other companies buying
wholesale before selling to the consumer.
The third buyer is, ironically, the supplier
of the green product, who must pay the
certification organization for use of the
label and sometimes separate certifiers.
The transaction costs associated with
the certification process and the need to
streamline marketing value chains to provide
producers with sufficient incentives to
participate in the certification schemes can
prove to be a formidable barrier, especially
for small and low-income producers (Searle,
Colby and Milway, 2004). Some efforts have
been made to facilitate the participation
of such groups through the introduction of
simplified procedures or promotion of group
certification schemes.
There is also a trade-off in terms of
market growth between setting highly
stringent and more flexible standards. Highly
stringent standards can result in fairly small
“luxury good” market niches that may be
inaccessible to most producers, whereas
more flexible standards could involve a much
broader market segment but may not deliver
any real environmental benefits. A hybrid
solution that involves a dynamic process
of standard setting to promote continuous
improvement is an option being used by the
Marine Stewardship Council (see Box 21).
Payments for any one service may fall
into any one of these three categories of
mechanisms. This is illustrated in Table 12,
which presents a variety of specific payment
mechanisms for biodiversity conservation
services. There is also potential to combine
payment mechanisms. One strategy being
implemented is the use of public payment
programmes to initiate PES programmes,
with the eventual intention of transitioning
to private-sector and/or offsets payments.
PES programmes with funding from the
GEF typify this strategy. Here, public funds
are being used to establish capacity and
mechanisms and to illustrate the potential
for these types of mechanisms, in the
expectation that private-sector purchasers
of services will participate once they have
been convinced of the benefits they could
reap. Establishing strong public–private
partnerships in the implementation of PES
programmes is a key part of a new strategy

89

90

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 20
Rules and modalities for afforestation and reforestation payments under the
Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol
Under the Clean Development Mechanism
(CDM) of the Kyoto Protocol, industrialized
countries can meet a part of their
greenhouse gas reduction obligations
through offset projects in developing
countries. CDM projects must also promote
sustainable development in host countries.
Emission offsets can be generated either by
reducing emissions or by removing carbon
from the atmosphere (sequestration).
Afforestation and reforestation (A&R)
projects are the only type of carbon
sequestration projects currently allowed
under the CDM. Emission offsets are
measured in metric tonnes of carbon
dioxide equivalents and are traded as
certified emission reductions (CERs).

Rules and modalities
Baseline. Baselines for A&R projects
are calculated based on the changes in
carbon stocks in above- and below-ground
biomass that would have reasonably
occurred without the project. Baselines
are calculated using an approved CDM
methodology, or a new methodology may
be proposed for approval along with the
project.

proposed by the GEF. The partnerships are
intended to encourage the development
and scaling up of voluntary PES payments,
and reduce the transaction costs of such
instruments (GEF, 2007b).

Reducing transaction costs
The need to reduce transaction costs, subject
to achieving a defined level of service
provision, is an overarching issue in all the
exchange mechanisms discussed above. In the
early stage of PES programme development,
when institutions and participants are
inexperienced and projects are small,
transaction costs per unit of service tend to
be relatively high, but they can be expected
to decline over time. However, unless

Additionality. A strict additionality
criterion is applied for projects. A project
may be additional if it overcomes barriers
related to investment or technology
constraints.
Leakage. Any increase in greenhouse gas
emissions that occurs outside the project
area and is measurable and attributable to
the project must be minimized, monitored
and subtracted from project carbon
sequestration credits.
Credits. Two types of credits have been
developed for A&R projects, based on
the possibility that forests can eventually
release carbon (i.e. sequestration may not
be permanent):
• temporary credits that expire at the
end of the commitment period for
which they were issued and must
be replaced by the buyer to ensure
continuing carbon storage. This type
of credit commands a low price,
but the producer faces no risk if the
carbon sequestration is lost as a result
of calamity (e.g. fire) or harvesting.
• long-term credits that expire at the
end of the project’s crediting period, a
time span of up to 60 years.

institutions exist to manage and coordinate
transactions among large numbers of
smallholders and unless economies of scale
in monitoring and payment systems can be
found, such costs can render PES initiatives
unworkable. Three main approaches to
reducing transaction costs in developing
country PES schemes can be identified:
• Simplify the rules. A rule of thumb is to
use the simplest rules possible and the
simplest compliance mechanisms that
will satisfy the buyers and beneficiaries
in the contract. For example, for
determining baselines and monitoring
carbon outcomes, standardized measures
can be developed and scientifically
evaluated to serve as proxies for detailed
measures. Independent bodies would
determine the reference rates, and

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

The project cycle
The first step of the CDM project cycle
is the preparation of a Project Design
Document. In the document, the project
developer must:
• identify a suitable region with areas
not covered by forests since at least
1990;
• gather land-use, social and economic
information about the project area to
develop the baseline;
• identify suitable forms of A&R and
estimate their carbon sequestration
potential;
• contact and establish relationships
with the local people;
• negotiate the terms of the project and
the schedule of payments for carbon
sequestration services; and
• analyse possible environmental and
social impacts.
After the document is prepared, it must
be approved by the Designated National
Authority of the host country, validated
by a Designated Operational Entity
accredited by the CDM Executive Board
and registered with the Executive Board.
Once the CDM Executive Board issues the

verification would only involve a third
party confirming that the activities had
been undertaken (Sandor, 2000, cited in
Landell-Mills and Porras, 2002).
• Facilitate buyer–seller linkages. Most
PES programmes involve buyers and
sellers who are geographically and
socially distant from one another. To
reduce search costs, some countries
have established “one-stop shops” for
potential buyers of carbon emission
offsets, where they can find out
all the relevant rules, identify prescreened sellers and learn about locally
knowledgeable market intermediaries.
• Exploit economies of scale. Costs
such as project design, management

appropriate number of CERs for a project,
the project developer becomes a seller in
the international carbon market.
Once the project is approved and under
way, the next part of the CDM cycle is
monitoring the carbon dioxide abatement
actually achieved by the project, including
certification and verification by the
Designated Operational Entity. Monitoring
costs are incurred every time a new batch
of carbon is submitted for CER credits.
Project management costs include the
establishment of a local project office
and the training of staff, the cost of
keeping records of project participants
and administration of payments to sellers,
as well as salaries and transportation
costs of project employees. Enforcement
and insurance costs arise from the risk
of project failure or underperformance,
which might be caused by fire, slow tree
growth or leakage.

Source: FAO Forest Resource Division Fact Sheet
(FAO, n.d.).

and certification are characterized
by economies of scale; consequently,
project size has an important effect
on unit costs. Transaction costs can
be greatly reduced by developing
projects in communities where active
local organizations and participatory
development programmes are already
in place, with representatives already
selected and authorized to negotiate
with outsiders. For example, organized
indigenous communities in El Salvador
have undertaken their own diagnostic
studies of local needs and priorities
and are actively marketing specific
ecosystem services from specific areas
that would contribute to meeting those
priorities (Rosa et al., 2003). Because
carbon can be sequestered in almost

91

92

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 21
Ecolabelling in fisheries
William Emerson1
With trade in fishery products at an
all-time high and concern over the
status of wild marine stocks growing,
ecolabelling offers a way to promote
responsible fish trade while preserving
natural resources for future generations.
In 2005, the FAO Committee on Fisheries
adopted a set of voluntary guidelines
for the ecolabelling of marine capture
fisheries products. They provide guidance
to governments and organizations that
already maintain, or are considering
establishing, labelling schemes to certify
and promote fish and fishery products
from well-managed marine capture
fisheries. The guidelines outline general
principles that should govern ecolabelling
schemes, including the need for reliable,
independent auditing, transparency of
standards-setting and accountability, and
the need for standards to be based on
good science. They also lay down minimum
requirements and criteria for assessing
whether a fishery should be certified and
whether an ecolabel should be awarded.
The FAO guidelines acknowledge the
hurdles that developing countries face
in responsibly managing their fisheries.
These result from a lack of financial
and technical resources, as well as the
particular challenges posed by the
small-scale fisheries common in many
developing nations. The guidelines,
therefore, call for financial and technical
support for developing countries to
help them implement and benefit from
ecolabelling schemes.

any site (unlike the more site-specific
biodiversity and watershed services),
area-based projects can be designed in
which an entire jurisdiction commits to a
defined increase in forest cover or area
of forest protected. This increases landuse flexibility and is especially useful for
heterogeneous landscapes (Smith and
Scherr, 2002).

Over the past 15 years, a number of
countries and private organizations
have put ecolabelling programmes into
place for a wide range of products. The
proliferation of ecolabels has created a
number of challenges, as well as confusion
among producers and consumers.
There have also been concerns that
ecolabelling schemes could result in
unfair competition. The purpose of the
FAO guidelines is to create a framework
for the development of responsible and
trustworthy ecolabelling schemes.
The main fishery certification and
ecolabelling programme is currently run
by the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC),
an independent non-profit organization
that promotes responsible fishing
practices. A number of major seafood
retailers carry MSC-certified products. For
example, Wal-Mart, a retail chain in the
United States of America, has committed
itself to sourcing all its fresh and frozen
fish products from MSC-certified fisheries
within three to five years. There are
currently more than 50 fisheries that are
certified by the MSC or under assessment.
Only three MSC-certified fisheries are,
however, from developing countries
(South African hake, Mexican Baja
California spiny lobster and Patagonian
scallop fisheries).

1

FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department.

Establishing an enabling
environment
No transactions – ranging from the informal
to the highly regulated – take place in the
absence of supporting institutions. Even the
simplest contracts between buyers and sellers
rely on legal institutions to protect property

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

TABLE 12
Types of payments for biodiversity protection
PURCHASE OF HIGH-VALUE HABITAT
n Private land acquisition (purchase by private buyers or NGOs explicitly for biodiversity conservation)
n

Public land acquisition (purchase by a government agency explicitly for biodiversity conservation)
PAYMENT FOR ACCESS TO SPECIES OR HABITAT

n

Bioprospecting rights (rights to collect, test and use genetic material from a designated area)

n

Research permits (rights to collect specimens, take measurements in an area)

n

Hunting, fishing or gathering permits for wild species

n

Ecotourism use (rights to enter an area, observe wildlife, camp or hike)
PAYMENT FOR BIODIVERSITY-CONSERVING MANAGEMENT

n

Conservation easements (owner paid to use and manage a defined piece of land only for conservation
purposes; restrictions are usually in perpetuity and transferable upon sale of the land)

n

Conservation land lease (owner paid to use and manage a defined piece of land for conservation purposes,
for defined period of time)

n

Conservation concession (public forest agency is paid to maintain a defined area under conservation uses
only – comparable to a forest logging concession)

n

Community concession in public protected areas (individuals or communities are allocated use rights to a
defined area of forest or grassland, in return for commitment to protect the area from practices that harm
biodiversity)

n

Management contracts for habitat or species conservation on private farms, forests, grazing lands
(contract that details biodiversity management activities, and payments linked to the achievement of specified
objectives)
TRADABLE RIGHTS UNDER CAP-AND-TRADE REGULATIONS

n

Tradable wetland mitigation credits (credits from wetland conservation or restoration that can be used to
offset obligations of developers to maintain a minimum area of natural wetlands in a defined region)

n

Tradable development rights (rights allocated to develop only a limited total area of natural habitat within a
defined region)

n

Tradable biodiversity credits (credits representing areas of biodiversity protection or enhancement that can be
purchased by developers to ensure they meet a minimum standard of biodiversity protection)
SUPPORT TO BIODIVERSITY-CONSERVING BUSINESSES AND PRODUCTION PROCESSES

n

Business shares in enterprises that manage for biodiversity conservation

n

Biodiversity-friendly products (ecolabelling)

n

Niche market development for products with valuable agricultural biodiversity

Source: Scherr, White and Khare, 2004.

rights and adjudicate disputes, when they
arise, and on law enforcement to ensure the
legal judgments are carried out. Property
rights, institutions to support collective
management of resources, capacity-building
needs and coherence of the overall policy
framework are key aspects of establishing an
enabling environment.
Effective ownership of resources is
often a prerequisite for entering into PES

programmes (Landell-Mills and Porras, 2002;
Grieg-Gran, Porras and Wunder, 2005), but
ownership need not be on an individual
private basis. There are already a number
of PES programmes that target community
groups (Muñoz-Piña et al., 2005; Scherr,
White and Kaimowitz, 2002; Swallow,
Meinzen-Dick and van Noordwijk, 2005;
van Noordwijk, Chandler and Tomich,
2004).

93

94

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Property rights to land- and water-based
resources in many developing countries
are often complex, incorporating multiple
layers of claims for access, use, exclusion
and management rights among both welland poorly defined groups. If individuals, a
community or its members cannot document
their ownership, structuring a PES transaction
will be difficult.
Several countries, including Brazil and
Ghana, have proposed or implemented laws
to facilitate PES programmes. To facilitate
exchange of carbon sequestration credits,
the Australian state of New South Wales has
statutorily created an alienable property
right in sequestered carbon. Thus, a forest
landowner can sell credits for carbon stored
in his or her trees, and this can then be resold
by third parties. A number of countries have
created the equivalent of a national carbon
office that keeps track of carbon emission
reduction and carbon sequestration projects,
and private certification organizations now
ensure that carbon sequestration projects
report accurately on their activities.
It is often necessary to coordinate actions
within a group in order to achieve effective
supply of the environmental service.
Examples include managing watersheds,
communal lands and fisheries. A supporting
institutional environment is needed here
also. For example, consider a payment
scheme to rehabilitate upstream areas to
reduce soil erosion and improve water
quality and flow downstream. If the land
is held in common and the environmental
service buyer is concerned that all claimants
are adequately compensated, the buyer
needs to establish certainty over the primary,
secondary and tertiary claims to various
resources – a potentially difficult task.
Both public and private groups can serve
as intermediaries or brokers to overcome
collective action problems. For example, The
Nature Conservancy has played a central role
in brokering forest carbon projects in Belize,
Bolivia and Brazil (Wunder, The and Ibarra,
2005), and small farmers in the Macquarie
River Valley in Australia have relied on their
local organization (Macquarie River Fruit and
Fibre) to negotiate with upper watershed
ranchers.
Devising enforcement schemes and
penalty mechanisms poses additional

difficulties in common property regimes.
Should the entire group be punished for
one individual’s infraction, following the
group-credit rationale? Unlike credit groups,
where members choose to work together,
communities have members with existing
rights to resources. Thus, membership
is likely to be more heterogeneous and
power relations are far more important.
It remains an open question whether and
how PES mechanisms would increase selfmonitoring and enforcement rather than
engender conflicts and hasten a breakdown
in collective management.
Empirical work by Alix-Garcia, de Janvry
and Sadoulet (2005, forthcoming) in Mexico
provides insights for the design of payment
mechanisms in areas where many resources
are held communally. They find that, in
order to generate appropriate incentives,
PES programmes should be based on an
understanding of the traditional rules and
institutions that govern land use. They argue
that payment schemes should be based on
variables that cannot be manipulated by the
recipient. They also stress the importance of
identifying both environmental outcomes
and distributional outcomes.
Participation in some types of
environmental service exchanges can
require a fairly high level of production,
marketing or information management
skills. Smallholders who are potential
environmental service suppliers need
business skills to negotiate private
deals effectively. To facilitate an equal
participation of smallholders in PES schemes,
there is a clear need for stronger investment
in building human and institutional capacity
among these groups (FAO, 2007c).
Thus far, however, PES capacity-building
efforts in developing countries have
remained fragmentary, with little practical
guidance for implementation and with
most resources being absorbed by agency
staff costs. The limited experience available
internationally suggests that existing farmer
organizations and technical assistance
programmes already effectively serving
smallholders are best placed to build PES
capacity among smallholders. In addition,
interesting success stories have resulted
from “learning by doing”, where secondary
community-based organizations developed

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

internal capacity in conjunction with pilot
projects (Waage, 2005).20 The Katoomba
Group began, in 2006, to develop resource
materials for community capacity-building,
but these have not yet addressed issues
specific to farmers.21 Experience has indicated
that local communities play a critical role
in the process of setting and adapting the
“rules of the game”, at both policy and
programme levels. For example, through
civil society engagement in the International
Tropical Timber Organization, communitybased forestry organizations have
contributed to policy dialogue on payments
for environmental services. Resources are
required, however, to enable community
groups to organize themselves, prepare for
meetings and attend them. Organizations of
smallholder farmers could play a similar role
in local, national and international policy
dialogues on payments for environmental
services (FAO, 2007c; van Noordwijk et al.,
2007).
In addition to establishing policies
and institutions directly related to PES
programmes, coherence in the overall policy
structure that may have indirect impacts
on programme effectiveness is critical. For
example, programmes to encourage farmers
to reduce water pollution from agricultural
chemical runoff will be less effective in the
presence of a policy providing pesticide
subsidies. Cross-sectoral policy coherence is
an important issue requiring coordination
between agricultural, environmental,
financial, trade and other policy sectors.

Conclusions
The process of designing an effective
payment programme involves four important
and challenging steps: identifying what
should be paid for; who should be paid; how
much should be paid; and what payments
mechanisms should be used.

Examples include ACICAFOC (Asociación Coordinadora
Indígena y Campesina de Agroforestería Comunitaria
de Centroamérica) in Central America, the Sierra Gorda
Biosphere Reserve in Mexico and EcoTrust-Uganda.
21
For further information, see the Katoomba Group Web
site at www.katoombagroup.org.
20

Cost-effectiveness is an important
overall criterion for programme design
because public budgets are generally
constrained. Minimizing the transaction
costs associated with making payments for
services, while ensuring at least a minimal
level of service provision, is a key element
of cost-effectiveness. Transaction costs
include the cost of attracting potential
buyers, identifying potential sellers of
services, working with project partners,
ensuring compliance and monitoring
of service provision. They are affected
by the availability of information and
the institutional capacity for managing
exchanges, both of which vary by country
as well as by environmental service. There
is often a direct relationship between
the transaction costs associated with a
programme design and its effectiveness
in achieving the desired environmental
outcomes. Thus, choosing the most costeffective payment design may not be
straightforward.
Payments schemes will be easier to develop
for some services, countries and locations
than for others because better information
is available. Indeed, understanding the
underlying biological science as well as the
economic motivation of farmers is critical.
The success of a PES scheme hinges on the
accuracy and cost of such assessments and, by
extension, on the creation of cost-effective
assessment methodologies for use in the
field.
A variety of payment mechanisms are
currently in use. Where environmental
services are easily measured, payments
should be linked directly to the service
itself. However, more frequently payments
are linked to some proxy associated with
changes in the provision of services, as this
may minimize transaction and measurement
costs. The most common payments are made
for changes in land use (e.g. from agriculture
to forestry), but payments are also common
for changes in farmers’ practices on land that
remains in agricultural production.
If changes in production practices are to
be adopted, payments to providers must
exceed the opportunity costs they face
in making the change. To maximize costeffectiveness, payments must be targeted
to locations where the biggest gain can be

95

96

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

obtained per unit of payment. Targeting
also involves costs, however, and the ideal
strategy must be based on the best tradeoffs between these costs and the added
efficiency achieved. Because environmental
service provision is linked to location,
strategies aimed at areas with relatively
low costs of provision offer a promising
solution. Some payment programmes may
address multiple objectives (for example
environmental service provision and poverty
reduction); this will generally involve some
degree of trade-off between the objectives
or an increase in the cost of providing the
environmental service.
Transaction costs can swamp effective
payments if a programme is ill-designed.
Although reducing transaction costs is
an overarching concern for effective
programme design, some specific additional

measures can be taken with a view to
minimizing them: simplifying the rules,
where possible, facilitating buyer–seller
linkages and looking for ways to capture
economies of scale.
An enabling environment is critical
for payment programmes. Indeed, no
transactions can take place in the absence
of supporting institutions, which can
range from informal to highly regulated in
nature. Capacity building, in particular, is an
essential component of efforts to broaden
the use of the PES approach in developing
countries. Working with local communities
can play a key role in developing PES
programmes. A final, but crucial, issue
is the need for coherence between the
objectives of PES programmes, the overall
national policy framework and multilateral
commitments.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

6. Implications for poverty

There are considerable expectations
that PES programmes can contribute to
poverty reduction as well as to improved
environmental management. These
expectations are largely based on actual
or perceived links between poverty and
environmental management. If poverty –
which may be defined as lack of income or
assets, vulnerability or powerlessness – is a
major cause of environmental degradation,
then paying poor producers to adopt
more environmentally friendly systems of
production would appear likely to generate
a “win–win” outcome resulting in both
poverty reduction and environmental
benefits. There are, indeed, many situations
in which this is likely to be the case.
However, reducing poverty and increasing
the supply of environmental services are
two distinct policy objectives. Using one
policy instrument, for example payments
for environmental services, to reach both
objectives can reduce its effectiveness in
achieving either. This is clearly undesirable
from the standpoint of either poverty
reduction or environmental services.
Blanket assumptions that PES programmes
will or should also benefit the poor are

thus problematic. This is particularly true
for PES programmes that are strongly
market-oriented. However, the reality
may be quite different for public-sector
funded projects; indeed, almost all public
investments have multiple objectives.
Public investments need to pass ethical
standards of fairness and justice as well as
environmental impact assessments and thus
some combination of policy objectives and
instruments is inevitable. The Working for
Water programme in South Africa is a good
example of a programme that combines
poverty reduction and environmental service
provision (see Box 22).
PES programmes can affect the poor,
either positively or negatively, and this
is undoubtedly a major consideration
when assessing the role of payment
programmes in developing countries. Much
of the discussion on the links between PES
programmes and poverty reduction focuses
on the role of the poor as potential suppliers
of environmental services; yet the indirect
impacts on non-suppliers may be as, if not
more, important. Iftikhar et al. (2007) suggest
three levels of criteria should be considered
in assessing the impact of PES programmes

BOX 22
The Working for Water Programme in South Africa
The Working for Water Programme is a
public-sector-funded programme that
supports rural employment programmes
that involve the removal of alien invasive
species from riparian zones, as well as
mountainous areas, in South Africa. The
programme is based on the premise that
alien vegetation uses higher quantities of
water than indigenous vegetation; this
phenomenon is even more pronounced
where alien vegetation falls within upper
catchment areas and along riparian zones

(Herling and King, 2005). The programme
has 350 sites covering approximately
1.2 million hectares of riparian areas and
11 million hectares of mountain areas. The
programme employs over 25 000 people
who were previously unemployed.
The main focus of the programme is
employment generation; however, the
programme combines the provision of
improved watershed services with its main
social objectives (Turpie and Blignaut,
2005).

97

98

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE 13
People living on fragile land
REGION

Population on fragile land
(Millions)

East Asia and the Pacific
Latin America and the Caribbean

Share of total population
(Percentage)

469

25

68

13

Middle East and North Africa

110

38

South Asia

330

24

Sub-Saharan Africa

258

39

Note: Fragile lands are defined as lands with limited ability to sustain growing populations and include arid lands,
significantly sloped land, lands with poor soils, and forest lands. See World Bank, 2003a, Table 4.1.
Source: adapted from World Bank, 2003a, Table 4.2.

on the poor. Programmes should: (i) leave
the poor at least as well off as they were
before; (ii) explicitly involve the poor in the
streams of benefits; and (iii) ensure that the
poor gain disproportionate benefits. The first
two criteria can usually be met with minimal
loss of efficiency, while the third can be met
only in certain circumstances.
This chapter takes a closer look at the
potential implications of PES programmes
for poverty, starting with an analysis of
the potential for the poor to benefit
as suppliers in PES programmes. It then
expands the discussion to consider the
possible indirect impacts of PES programmes
on the poor and the role of the poor as
consumers of environmental services.
Finally, some conclusions are drawn on how
PES programmes can be designed so as to
facilitate participation of poor producers.

The poor as suppliers of
environmental services
Three main dimensions govern the ability of
poor agricultural producers to participate
in, and benefit from, PES programmes: their
location, their access to the productive assets
needed to generate environmental services,
and the characteristics of their livelihood
systems. Each is considered in turn. The
discussion also focuses on the significance of
transaction costs for participation of the poor
and summarizes the conditions under which
the poor are most likely to benefit.

Where are the poor located?
As we have seen, location is a key factor
affecting the potential returns to the
provision of an environmental service

as well as the cost in terms of foregone
agricultural production, which agricultural
producers face when participating in PES
programmes.
The rural poor tend to live and work in
ecologically fragile, economically marginal
and environmentally degraded areas. The
World Bank estimates that more than one
billion people in developing countries
live in fragile ecosystems covering more
than 70 percent of the Earth’s land surface
(Table 13). Half a billion of these people
reside in fragile arid regions; 400 million
occupy land with soils unsuitable for
agriculture; 200 million have their homes
in slope-dominated regions; and more than
130 million live in fragile forest ecosystems
(World Bank, 2003a). Poverty maps reveal
that the poor tend to reside in areas with
one or more environmentally problematic
feature, such as degraded land, naturally
low soil fertility, air and water pollution,
and limited access to water (UNDP, 2005).
These areas generally have low agricultural
productivity, which is one of the most
important constraints against improving
incomes among the poor.
When looking at where the poor are
located, it is important to distinguish
between poverty rates and poverty density
(Chomitz, 2007). The former is a measure
of the proportion of inhabitants who are
poor, while the latter is a measure of the
number of poor people per unit of land
area. The two measures can show strikingly
different results: for example, the Brazilian
Amazon has high poverty rates but low
poverty densities, because overall population
densities are low (Chomitz, 2007). Using
poverty rate measures to locate the poor can
yield an indication of the extent to which

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

MAP 7
Biodiversity hotspots in areas poorly suited to rainfed agriculture and
with high poverty rates

Biodiversity hotspots in areas with low
agricultural suitability and high poverty rates
Other areas with biodiversity hotspots

Other areas with high poverty rates
Other areas with low agricultural
suitability

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31156&layers=biodiversity_hotspots_high_poverty_rates
Source: FAO.

people living in an area that could supply
environmental services are poor; however,
it gives no indication of the number of
people involved or the extent to which
environmental service supply could be a
major means of reducing poverty in a given
country or region (see Box 23).
Map 7 builds on Map 5 (see p. 65),
which shows biodiversity hotspots with
low suitability for rainfed agricultural
production, by adding a poverty dimension.
The map shows areas where the prevalence22
of stunting among children under the age
of five exceeds 40 percent. The stunting
indicator is based on an estimate of the
distribution of chronic undernutrition
at national and subnational levels using
stunting in growth among children under

five years of age.23 This indicator reflects the
long-term cumulative effects of inadequate
food intake and poor health conditions
resulting from lack of hygiene and recurrent
illness in poor and unhealthy environments.
This prevalence measure is used here as an
indicator of regions where the poor are likely
to be affected by land-use changes, noting
that in many cases these are areas with low
population densities where the number of
people involved may be small.
As can be seen in the map (shown in
red), relatively few areas of high poverty
prevalence overlap with biodiversity hotspots
with poor agricultural suitability. Clearly,
the scale of the map is insufficient to arrive
at any definitive assessments of the spatial
intersection of poverty, low agricultural
Stunting is defined as height-for-age below –2 standard
deviations from the National Center for Health Statistics/
WHO International Growth Reference Standard. New
standards have been issued based on regional averages;
however, actual data based on these are not yet available.
The analyses in this report are therefore based on the old
standards.

23

The 40 percent prevalence criterion is based on the
World Health Organization (WHO) classification for very
high prevalence of malnutrition (for further information,
see http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/about/introduction/
en/index5.html).

22

99

100

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 23
Will the poor respond to payments for avoided carbon emissions? Evidence from
Costa Rica
Will the poor respond to payments for
reducing deforestation (and thus carbon
emissions)? If so, more or less than others?  
These were the questions posed in a
study of the potential supply response
of the poor to carbon payments in Costa
Rica. The study used district-level data
on poverty, as well as returns to crop and
livestock production and agro-ecological
indicators, to predict the rates of
deforestation for each of various possible
levels of carbon payments.
The results indicated that landowners
would respond to payments by reducing
deforestation and thus emissions but also
that there were no significant differences
in response between poorer and less
poor districts. However, as the poorer
areas have more forest, payments could

help both forests and the poor. As the
figure indicates, those areas could receive
a larger share of carbon payments. The
results suggested neither gains nor losses
in efficiency from having poor land users
in carbon payments programmes. Because
this study used district-level estimates of
poverty incidence, caution is needed in
interpreting the results. It may be that,
in poor areas, though a large fraction of
people are poor, those who own the land
are not. If services and payments were
proportional to landholdings, payments
to poor areas would not necessarily go to
poor people.

Source: Pfaff et al., 2007.

Carbon supply in 2020 for poorest and less poor districts
Annual carbon payment per tonne of carbon
50
45
40
35

Average wealthier location

30
25
20

Average poorest quartile location

15
10
5
0
0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Cumulative carbon stored as a percentage of baseline carbon
Source: Pfaff, Robalino and Sanchez-Azofeifa, 2006 and Kerr et al., 2004.

suitability and biodiversity conservation;
however, it suggests that the overlap
between the three may be smaller than is
often assumed. Lowering the cut-off point
for prevalence of stunting in children below
five years of age to 20 percent results in only
a very modest increase in the overlap.

Map 8 uses the Soil Degradation in South
and Southeast Asia (ASSOD) database
(ISRIC, 2007) to investigate the potential
synergies between soil carbon sequestration,
improvements in soil fertility and poverty
reduction. The map identifies locations
in agricultural production that are highly

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

MAP 8
Highly degraded croplands with soil carbon sequestration potential
and high poverty rates

Croplands with soil carbon gap, soil
degradation and high poverty rates

Other areas with soil degradation and
high poverty

Other croplands with soil carbon gap

Non-study area

Note: available at
http://www.fao.org/geonetwork/srv/en/google.kml?id=31159&layers=highly_degraded_croplands
Source: FAO.

degraded as well highly degraded areas
that also have medium-to-high soil carbon
sequestration potential. In the latter areas,
adoption of soil carbon sequestration
may generate both an agricultural and
an environmental benefit in the form
of improved soil quality and carbon
sequestration. These areas are overlaid with
areas that have a high percentage of stunted
children under the age of five. The red
areas indicate where supplying soil carbon
sequestration might generate a further
benefit in the form of poverty reduction.
The map suggests that areas in central and
western China and central and eastern India
are potentially good sites for programmes

that combine environmental service and
poverty reduction objectives. However,
analysis with data at a higher degree of
resolution and more detailed information
about farming systems and access of the
poor to the land will be needed to verify this
potential.

Poverty and access to productive
resources
Poverty, by its very nature, is associated
with a lack of access to, and control over,
productive resources – including land, water,
investment capital and human capital. This
lack of access is a major barrier also for
participation of the poor in PES programmes.

101

102

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Moreover, a gender bias is often found to
exist, and rural women, who constitute a
significant share of the rural poor, encounter
particular difficulties in accessing resources
(FAO, 2006g).
Many of the obstacles impeding
participation of the poor in PES programmes
are the same ones that inhibit their adoption
of more productive and sustainable
management practices and prevent them
from rising out of poverty. Chapter 4
identifies several constraints to the adoption
of farming and forestry production systems
that would benefit the producers themselves
in addition to generating higher levels of
environmental services. Lack of information,
property rights and financing, as well as risk,
were all identified as barriers that can inhibit
desirable changes in production systems.
Even when the poor do have access to land
and other productive resources, the control
and rights they have over the resource are
often weak and poorly defined. This can also
be an important barrier to participation in
PES programmes as well as to undertaking
any type of investment for sustainable
management (Lipper, 2001; Dasgupta, 1996).
Moreover, there is a risk that the poor may
lose out from PES programmes by being
excluded from lands to which they have
only tenuous rights by wealthier or more
politically powerful groups, as land values
increase with such payments (Pagiola,
Arcenas and Platais, 2005).
In practice, “ownership” of resources
is often a prerequisite for entering into
contracts for the provision of environmental
services (Grieg-Gran, Porras and Wunder,
2005). In Costa Rica, both Thacher, Lee and
Schelhas (1996) and Zbinden and Lee (2005)
found tenure-related variables to be highly
significant in explaining participation in
the country’s current and preceding PES
programmes. In some cases, the barrier
of tenure insecurity has been overcome
by allowing holders of non-formal kinds
of tenure to enter into contracts. In Costa
Rica, for example, participants were initially
required to have land titles; this requirement
has since been eliminated but while in
force it served to exclude poorer land users
(Pagiola, Arcenas and Platais, 2005).
Where the poor do hold rights over
resources, they often take the form of
common property rights, with resultant

implications for their ability to respond
to PES programmes. Changes in natural
resource management of commonly held
resources, such as pastures or waterways,
require group coordination, which is costly
to the producers and in many cases difficult
to achieve. The experience of the Mexican
PSAH (see Box 18), which was implemented
targeting indigenous communities and ejidos
(both communally held land and individually
controlled plots), serves as an enlightening
example. For the ejidos, payments were
made to the entire community, which
could then either distribute them among
individuals or make investments for the
benefit of the community. The effectiveness
of this type of communal payment scheme
in providing incentives for changing
land use is under review (Muñoz-Piña et
al., 2005). The distribution of costs and
benefits of programme participation among
participants has also been raised as a
concern (Alix-Garcia, de Janvry and Sadoulet,
forthcoming).
Lack of access to financial resources can
be another major barrier to participation of
the poor in PES programmes (see Chapter 4).
Frequently, the land-use changes needed to
generate environmental services require an
up-front investment, with returns occurring
only later in the future. In many parts of the
developing world, rural financial markets
function poorly, resulting in lack of access to
external finance. The poor may be unable
to finance the changes from their own
assets, unlike wealthier PES programme
participants. For example, the owner of a
20-hectare farm in Nicaragua wishing to
introduce a variety of silvopastoral practices
to receive payments under the Silvopastoral
Project might have to invest, in the first
year, about US$500 (equivalent to about
70 percent of net income under current
practices), in addition to forgoing part
of the farm’s normal income in that year.
These are heavy costs for poor households.
Savings, remittances or off-farm income may
help some households make the necessary
investments, but poorer households will
tend to have fewer such alternatives
– and a greater likelihood of needing such
supplements for subsistence requirements.
Front-loading payments or credit may be
necessary in such cases (Pagiola, Rios and
Arcenas, forthcoming).

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

TABLE 14
Who are the poor?
REGION

CATEGORY

West
and
Central
Africa

East
and
southern
Africa

Asia
and
the
Pacific

Rainfed farmers
Smallholder farmers

n

n

Pastoralists

Latin
America
and the
Caribbean

Near East
and
North
Africa

n

n

n

n

n

n

n

Artisanal fishers

n

n

n

n

Wage labourers/landless

n

n

n

n

Indigenous people; scheduled castes/tribes

n

n

n

Female-headed households

n

n

n

Displaced people

n

n

n

Source: IFAD, 2001.

Where a PES project entails adopting
new practices that are complex, difficult or
unfamiliar, households may need technical
assistance from extension services. However,
poor households are less likely to have access
to extension than better-off households,
and this factor, too, may prohibit their
participation in the programme.

Livelihood systems of the poor
Even if the poor are located in areas that
are likely to be economically viable sources
of environmental service supply and have
access to the productive resources needed
for participation, their ability to participate
in, and benefit from, PES programmes will
depend on how well the changes required
by the PES programme fit into their overall
livelihood strategy. A key consideration is
the overall rural nature of poverty. Of the
world’s 1.1 billion extremely poor people,
75 percent live in rural areas and depend on
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and related
activities for survival. Increasing the return to
natural resource management, be it through
agricultural production or environmental
service supply, is thus a critical means of
reducing poverty (FAO, 2007e).
As discussed in Chapter 2, there are many
ways in which agricultural producers may
shift land-management systems towards

producing environmental services, ranging
from a complete change of land use to minor
modifications in a current system.
Table 14 gives some insight into the
primary production activities of the rural
poor by region. Smallholder farmers
constitute a major segment of the rural
poor in several regions, including Asia and
the Pacific, East and southern Africa, West
and Central Africa and Latin America and
the Caribbean. In addition, the rural poor in
Latin America and the Caribbean and in the
Near East and North Africa are often rainfed
farmers or pastoralists (IFAD, 2001).
A clearer understanding of the potential
of environmental services to fit into these
strategies can be obtained by closer
examination of the types of changes
to farming systems required within the
framework of the decision-making process
of poor farmers. The nature of the change
is of particular importance for poor farmers,
who are more likely to face market failures
for food, credit, insurance and labour.
Consequently, food-security and food-access
concerns, including through their own
production, are more likely to be determining
factors in their decisions regarding
participation in PES programmes. Naturally, if
a PES programme restricts or bars traditional
land uses, such as unsustainable grazing

103

TABLE 15
Relative importance of different poverty reduction strategies by resource potential
Agricultural resource potential
High

STRATEGY

104

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

1

Low1

Intensification

1.9

0. 9

Diversification

3.1

1.4

Increased farm size

1.2

0.9

Increased off-farm income

2.5

2.4

Exit from agriculture

1.2

4.4

Note: This table is from an FAO study prepared as a contribution to the World Bank Rural Development Strategy,
Reaching the rural poor (World Bank, 2003b). Over 20 case studies were prepared to support the analyses, which
investigated innovative approaches to small farm or pastoral development. The material in the World Bank publication
draws upon this study as well as on expertise from years of specialized work on the topic at FAO and the World Bank.
1 Scores

add to 10.

Source: Dixon and Gulliver with Gibbon, 2001.

and cropping, it must provide acceptable
alternatives; otherwise it is unlikely that
the poor will be able to participate. Userestriction rules count among the main
conditions that discourage or exclude
smallholder participation. In contrast, PES
programmes allowing mix-use activities that
provide diversified sources of income (e.g.
agroforestry and silvopastoral systems) play
a positive role in facilitating participation of
the poor (WRI in collaboration with UNDP,
UNEP and World Bank, 2005; Grieg-Gran,
Porras and Wunder, 2005).
Risk, too, is a critical dimension for poor
farmers. When PES programmes promote
a change in resource management and
perhaps input use (e.g. switching from
pesticides to an integrated pest management
strategy, or from conventional tillage to
reduced or no tillage), adopters may face
increased risks while they are learning about
these new practices. Because the poor are
generally more risk-averse than the welloff and have fewer options for managing
risk, their supply response to risk-increasing
activities is likely to be lower. Thus, poor
farmers may be less inclined to participate
in a PES programme if an enhanced supply
of environmental services is accompanied by
reduced food production, especially if food
markets are functioning poorly. However, PES
programmes can also contribute to reducing
risk when the payments represent a stable
source of reliable income.
A 2001 FAO/World Bank study on farming
systems and poverty gives some insights into

the types of changes in livelihood strategies
in general and farming system management
specifically, that may benefit the poor
(Dixon and Gulliver with Gibbon, 2001).
Table 15 shows the degree of relevance
of different strategies for poor farmers to
exit from poverty for areas of high and low
agricultural-resource potential, respectively.
In the high-potential areas, the most
important strategies are diversification of
production activities and increased off-farm
income; in the areas of low agricultural
potential, the highest benefits are obtained
by exiting from agriculture and increasing
off-farm income.
PES programmes could contribute to such
poverty reduction strategies to the extent
that they can support diversification of
agricultural production in high-potential
areas or facilitate exiting agriculture in
low-potential areas. Indeed, farmers could
conceivably diversify the output from their
agro-ecosystems to include environmental
services along with agricultural products.
Payment schemes could also represent a
de facto means of exiting from agriculture,
at least at a specific site, in cases where
environmental service provision involves
changing land use away from agriculture.
The study found increased off-farm income
and exiting from agriculture to be important
poverty reduction strategies, given that
improving agricultural productivity in the
agro-ecosystems managed by the poor is
costly and in some cases impossible. However,
increasing the returns to such ecosystems by

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

switching to environmental service provision
may offer a viable alternative.

Transaction costs and participation of
the poor in PES programmes
Transaction costs may constitute the
biggest impediment to participation of
poor households in PES programmes (FAO,
2003c; Zilberman, Lipper and McCarthy,
forthcoming; Antle and Valdivia, 2006;
Landell-Mills and Porras, 2002; Pagiola,
Arcenas and Platais, 2005; Wunder, 2005).
As discussed in Chapter 4, transaction
costs can be a determining factor for the
feasibility of PES exchanges in general.
When the potential suppliers of the service
are poor farmers, the issue of transaction
costs becomes more critical. Fixed costs, such
as developing a project proposal, setting a
baseline and identifying a buyer, account
for a large share of the transaction costs.
In the case of a very small transaction – say
for carbon sequestration at a site of less
than 1 hectare in size – transaction costs per
hectare will be prohibitively high. The larger
the transaction costs, the more attractive it
will be for PES programmes to focus on large
land holdings. As farm size tends to be highly
correlated with income, in practice this
means focusing on better-off households.
FAO (2006f) found that one of the most
important ways of improving the feasibility
of smallholder carbon sequestration projects
is to reduce the ex-ante fixed transaction
costs faced by the buyers. They identify three
broad strategies to this effect:
1. increasing project size by fostering/
building upon collective action among
suppliers;
2. reducing contracting costs by utilizing
existing management structures;
3. reducing information costs through
public provision of data, templates
and guidelines.
The three strategies are not mutually
exclusive and, in many cases, can be
complementary.
Examples of the first strategy, with
projects involving smallholder coordination
in the supply of carbon services, have been
documented by FAO (2003c), Smith and
Scherr (2002) and Orlando et al. (2002).
In these projects, the costs to buyers of
identifying, contracting and enforcing
viable carbon sequestration opportunities

among smallholders are reduced through the
presence of an intermediary representing the
suppliers. This intermediary can be an NGO,
a community group or a government agency.
However, such group schemes may lead to the
participating sellers facing greater transaction
costs; these costs, however, must not exceed
the benefits they derive from participation.
Several of the carbon smallholder projects
were built upon pre-existing community
projects, such as ongoing community-based
natural resource management projects
(particularly community forestry projects) or
farmers’ groups.
The second way of reducing transaction
costs in projects involving small- and lowincome suppliers is to utilize management
structures and lessons from existing projects.
For example, important lessons on how
to design and administer PES schemes for
poor producers can be obtained from the
experience with conditional cash transfers
(see Box 24).
Making information available on situations
where the poor could potentially become
significant providers of environmental
services – via the use of maps such as
those presented in this chapter – together
with more detailed analysis of the type of
programme design needed to facilitate
the participation of the poor is the third
strategy to reduce transaction costs facing
low-income suppliers. This strategy is being
pursued by a wide range of international
and national public agencies, and NGOs.
Finally, the possibility of marketing
environmental services that are explicitly
linked to poverty reduction merits
consideration. If buyers of environmental
services are willing to pay a premium for
environmental services provided by the poor,
higher levels of transaction costs could be
supported (FAO, 2006f). Is there any evidence
of this type of market demand? Several
examples of carbon buyers specifically
interested in livelihoods and poverty
reduction benefits are given in Box 25. The
projects referred to in the box indicate some
development of a poverty-focused market
niche for carbon offsets in the voluntary
market. Even in regulatory markets such
as the CDM, sustainable development is a
mandatory aspect of certifying the eligibility
of offsets. The definition of sustainability
is left to the implementing countries, and

105

106

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

BOX 24
Reaching the poor with cash? Lessons from conditional cash transfers
Benjamin Davis1
Cash payments are often considered the
most flexible, and thus the preferable,
mode to pay for environmental services.
However, there are concerns about both
the capacity to reach poor producers with
cash payments and the effectiveness of
these payments. Important insights into
this debate can be obtained from the
experience of conditional cash transfers.
Conditional cash transfers (CCTs) are a
form of social assistance that has come
to dominate the social protection sector
in the Latin America and the Caribbean
region over the past decade and is
increasingly being considered for use in
other parts of the world, including Africa.
CCTs are linked directly to human capital
development by making receipt of the
transfer conditional on school attendance
and a variety of health- and nutritionrelated activities. In most cases, CCTs
are provided directly to mothers on the
assumption, substantiated in the literature,
that they are more likely to use the
resources for the benefit of their children.
The experience of CCTs in Latin America
has shown this type of cash transfer to be
very effective in obtaining its objectives.
The conditional aspect of CCTs is one of
the most attractive (and controversial)
features of the programme, and also
one of the most complicated to execute.
The administrative burden of monitoring
conditionality, particularly in countries
with weaker institutional structures, leads
to the question of whether conditionality
is feasible or necessary and, if so, the type
of monitoring mechanism that is most
appropriate.
Despite this concern, countries from
Mexico to Nicaragua, at opposite ends

thus a wide range of definitions have
been proposed, some of which include a
poverty reduction dimension. Nevertheless,
only limited evidence is available, to date,
on the willingness to pay a premium for
environmental services that explicitly include
a poverty benefit.

of the spectrum of wealth, development
and administrative capacity in the region,
have successfully implemented CCT
conditionality.
One important dimension of
the CCT experience is that of the
professionalization of administrative
practices. Beginning particularly with the
Oportunidades (formerly the Education,
Health, and Nutrition Program of
Mexico [PROGRESA]) programme of the
Government of Mexico, and improving
over time in other programmes in the
region, CCTs have modernized the public
administration of social assistance. CCTs
have established modern information
and management systems for beneficiary
selection, registration and payment, as
well as the monitoring of conditionality,
assuring more transparency and efficiency
in implementation (de la Brière and
Rawlings, 2006).
Despite the complex nature of these
programmes, they have been shown
to be relatively cost efficient (Caldés,
Coady and Maluccio, 2006). While many
challenges remain, including how to
institutionalize and formalize effective
community participation, as well as the
coordination of the provision of services,
the administrative setups of CCTs have
done much to promote transparency and
counter problems in the application of
social spending. A core element in this
professionalization has been the concerted
effort to conduct independent evaluations
of CCT programmes.

FAO Economic and Social Development
Department.

1

When are the poor likely to benefit from
PES programmes?
Summarizing the discussion in the above
sections, the spatial distribution of poverty,
property rights to land, and the productivity
of the land for the provision of agriculture
and environmental services are key

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 25
A market for carbon offsets from the poor?
Evidence from the Plan Vivo System
Plan Vivo has established standards for
carbon emission offsets with explicit
poverty reduction aspects. The Plan Vivo
System is managed by BioClimate Research
and Development (BR&D), which is a nonprofit organization. BR&D is responsible
for development and maintenance of
the Plan Vivo System and “contracts”
the Edinburgh Centre for Carbon
Management (ECCM) to provide the
systems maintenance resources needed for
the continued development of Plan Vivo.
Plan Vivo has three operational projects
that are producing carbon for the sale
of Plan Vivo carbon offsets: the Scolel Té
project in Chiapas, Mexico, the Trees for
Global Benefit project in Uganda and and

determinants of where and when the poor
could benefit from supplying environmental
services, as well as the type of change
required to generate the service.
The poor are most likely to benefit from
participation in PES programmes where land
distribution is relatively equitable and where
the poor are found on lands of poor quality
for agricultural production but high quality
for environmental service supply. They are
most likely to benefit from programmes
involving a change of farming system,
rather than land use, because the small size
of the land holdings, combined with food
security concerns, will limit their ability
and inclination to take land totally out of
agricultural production.

Indirect impacts of PES
programmes on the poor
Separate from the issue of the poor as
potential participants in the programmes,
PES programmes may also have indirect
impacts on the poor via land price, wage
and food price effects (Zilberman, Lipper
and McCarthy, forthcoming). It is useful
to consider three different groups which
may be affected by PES programmes:
consumers of food products, wage labourers
and consumers of environmental services.

the N’hambita Community Carbon Project
in Mozambique.
At present, purchasers of the carbon
offsets generated by the Scolel Té
project include the FIA Foundation, to
offset carbon emissions from Formula 1
and World Rally championships, The
CarbonNeutral Company, on behalf of a
number of companies, the World Bank
International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and the United
Kingdom Department for International
Development.

Source: Plan Vivo, 2007.

For example, payment programmes that lead
to a significant reduction in food production
could have impacts on food prices. If food
markets are functioning poorly and food
supplies are largely locally procured, even
a small reduction in local food production
could have significant negative impacts
on poor food consumers. Impacts on rural
consumers are likely to be more or less
localized, depending on the degree of
integration of rural areas with urban markets.
Changes in farming systems or land use
may also involve changes in labour use. For
example, converting land from agricultural
production to forestry will release labour,
while moving to silvopastoral production
systems from conventional systems is likely to
absorb labour. This, in turn, will affect local
wage rates, either upwards or downwards,
depending on how the PES programme
affects labour demand. Effects on wage rates
could have a significant impact, for better
or worse, on the poor, who are generally
highly dependent on wage labour for their
income (Zilberman, Lipper and McCarthy
forthcoming). As with food markets, the
overall effect of a PES programme depends
not only on the magnitude and direction
of the changes in labour use, but also the
degree to which labour markets are isolated
or integrated into national or international
markets. Uchida, Rozelle and Xu (2007) find

107

108

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

that one of the most important benefits
for the poor of China’s Grain for Green
programme has been an increase in offfarm income. The programme provides cash
funds that allow participants to overcome
a liquidity constraint against entering the
labour market.
Finally, PES programmes could provide
benefits to the poor as consumers of an
environmental service. A prominent example
would be services related to water quality
and quantity, where studies have shown
that even poor consumers are willing to
pay for good water quality. In any of the
watershed protection programmes where
water quality or quantity has been improved,
poor consumers have benefited also, even
though many of them do not pay for water.
There may also be a significant gender
dimension to benefits from environmental
services. Rural women are often the
household members in charge of collecting
water, fuelwood and other natural resources
needed for household consumption and
could therefore be major beneficiaries. Other
environmental services for which there may
be demand from the poor include access to
crop genetic resources or pollinator services.
Of course, the question remains whether the
poor will be willing and able to pay for these
services.

Payments for environmental
services and poverty reduction:
where are the synergies?
As noted in Chapter 4, a wide range of landuse and farming system changes that, in the
long run, will be more profitable for farmers
are not adopted owing to problems such as
lack of credit, property rights and technical
information. Poor farmers face these types
of barriers disproportionately. Where a
privately profitable practice is not adopted
for these reasons, the solution should aim at
removing the barrier concerned. However,
in many cases, addressing these barriers is
fraught with difficulty. Assuming that the
main objective of PES programmes is to
increase the provision of environmental
services, would it be reasonable to use such
programmes to help farmers overcome the
barriers to change?

First, it is important to note that for
location-specific services, such as watershed
management and biodiversity conservation,
the poor may be located in exactly the
areas identified as having high potential
for environmental service provision, making
their participation necessary in order to meet
the environmental objective. But location
alone is not enough. Pagiola, Arcenas and
Platais (2005) noted that the requirement of
formal title for participation in the Costa Rica
PES programme reduced the efficiency of the
programme by excluding poor landowners.
Addressing barriers preventing the poor
from participating is essential when the poor
are in key locations for environmental service
supply. Evidence to date does indicate that
those who do participate as suppliers in PES
programmes are likely to become better off
(Pagiola, Rios and Arcenas, forthcoming).
The maps presented in this chapter show
several locations where a combination of high
poverty rates, low agricultural productivity
and high potential for environmental service
supply suggest a potential for poor producers
to benefit from PES programmes. This type
of mapping can be helpful as an indication of
where PES programmes could result in both
environmental service supply and poverty
reduction. However, such maps can only be
indicative, and careful investigation into
land tenure, farming systems and land-use
patterns is needed in order to confirm the
real potential.
Innovative PES programme designs may
be needed to ensure the participation of
the poor. For example, providing up-front
or early payments (e.g. large payments
within the first year of a project, rather than
spreading the total amount over several
years) may be desirable in PES projects
requiring initial investments in areas with
many poor households. Also, while full title
or private ownership of land or resources
may be preferable in some PES programmes,
it does not have to be a prerequisite. There
are other ways to increase security of tenure
for the poor, including legally sanctioned
use of key resources, the right to exclude
and the right to manage the resource
for optimum benefit. In conservancies in
Namibia, for example, the devolution of
wildlife rights on communal lands was
sufficient to allow local communities to

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

BOX 26
Can the poor benefit from payments for environmental services programmes?
Evidence from the Silvopastoral Project in Nicaragua
Can poorer households participate in
PES programmes? A recent study of the
experience of the Regional Integrated
Silvopastoral Ecosystem Management
Project (see Box 14) in Matiguás-Río
Blanco indicates that they can. Not
only did poorer households participate
quite extensively, but by some measures
they participated to a greater extent
than better-off households. Extremely
poor households do appear to have
had somewhat greater difficulty in
participating, but even in their case
the difference is solely a relative one.
Extremely poor households not only were
not shut out, but participated at high
rates in the project. Their participation
was not limited only to the simpler and
cheaper practices, but included the full
spectrum of land uses.
These results are particularly strong
in that the Silvopastoral Project imposes
much greater burdens on participants
than most PES programmes. Nevertheless,
one should not jump to the conclusion
that all poor farm households everywhere
will always be able to participate in such
programmes. Both the programmes
and local conditions differ from case to
case, and there may well be cases where
otherwise eligible poor households
may find it difficult or impossible to
participate. Indeed, the results show that
extremely poor households do appear to
have had greater difficulty in participating
as intensively as other households.
The study helps identify several factors
that tend to affect participation. Lack of
credit may be an important constraint for

earn income from managing the wildlife
even though they could not exclude others
from using the land (FAO, 2007f). Another
option is to distribute payments to larger
community associations, which can then
attempt to identify and implement an
appropriate solution. Box 26 describes the
participation of the poor in one innovative
programme in Nicaragua.

poorer households. This constraint will
not always be critical in PES programmes,
for example in programmes that maintain
an existing land use. However, financing
constraints are likely to be important
when land-use changes are required
for participation, as in Costa Rica’s
reforestation or agroforestry contracts.
Providing some initial financing (such
as the baseline payment made by the
Silvopastoral Project) may be desirable
for PES programmes that involve initial
investments in areas with many poor
households. The importance of technical
assistance emerges far less clearly from
the study results. The practices being
promoted by the project were relatively
complex, but were also relatively well
known in the area.
The availability of multiple options in
the Silvopastoral Project may well have
contributed to high participation by the
poor, as they were able to choose the
options that worked best for them in the
light of their particular requirements.
When a given service can be provided
in different ways (or at different levels),
it makes sense to offer multiple ways
in which households can participate, as
long as transaction costs do not increase
unduly. It is worth noting, however,
that at Matiguás-Río Blanco the poorer
households did not predominantly choose
the cheaper and easier land uses – in fact,
the better-off households were more
likely to do so.

Source: Pagiola, Rios and Arcenas, forthcoming.

Conclusions
Reducing poverty and increasing the supply
of environmental services are two separate
and distinct policy objectives that would
normally need to be addressed by separate
policy instruments. Blanket assumptions that
PES programmes will, or should, also benefit

109

110

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

the poor are thus problematic. However,
public-sector-funded projects and many
voluntary sources of payments are interested
in both environmental and socio-economic
objectives, thus leading to multi-objective
PES programmes. PES programmes can affect
the poor – either positively or negatively. The
poor may be affected directly, as potential
suppliers or consumers of environmental
services, but there may also be an indirect
impact on non-participants through effects
on local wages, food prices or land values.
PES programmes could hurt the poor,
particularly the landless, by driving down
wages or increasing food prices. Likewise,
they may result in pressures to exclude the
poor from lands to which they have only
informal rights if the value of the land
increases.
The discussion above has identified
situations where there may be strong
potential for poor farmers to supply
environmental services. For location-specific
services, such as watershed management
and biodiversity conservation, the presence
of the poor in areas of importance for
environmental service provision makes their
participation necessary. In these situations,
addressing the barriers preventing the poor
from participating is indispensable.
Environmentally beneficial land-use and
farming-system changes that will be more
profitable for the farmer in the long run
are not always adopted owing to problems
such as lack of credit, property rights or
technical information. Often, it is the poor
producers who face these types of barriers, in
which case PES programmes may offer some
opportunities.
The maps in this chapter suggest that the
poor could benefit from PES programmes,
particularly in areas characterized by a
combination of high poverty rates, low
agricultural productivity and high potential
for environmental service supply. However,
such maps are only indicative. Further
research on land tenure, farming systems
and land-use patterns is needed to identify
the actual potential. Evidence from PES
programmes to date has shown that the
poor can participate and benefit from PES
programmes.
A critical problem is that of the transaction
costs of PES programmes, which may be

prohibitive in the case of poor producers,
unless strategies are adopted to minimize
them as far as possible.
Innovative PES programme designs are
needed to ensure the ability of the poor to
participate as suppliers of environmental
services. Two important examples are the
timing of the payment to help address credit
and investment constraints farmers may
have, and making provisions to work with
producers who have only informal title to
lands.

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

7. Conclusions

This issue of The State of Food and
Agriculture has examined the role of
agriculture in the provision of ecosystem
services. These include all outputs from
agricultural activities, ranging from food
production to climate regulation. Many
of these services are provided only as
externalities; that is, they are unintended
consequences of the production of food or
fibre. These services, which we refer to as
environmental services, are normally not
compensated for. Therefore farmers lack
incentives to supply them in the desired
quantity.
In exploring the potential of agriculture
to provide enhanced levels of environmental
services and how these can be achieved,
the discussion has focused on one relatively
novel approach that aims to provide positive
incentives to farmers for their provision:
payments for environmental services. The
three types of environmental services that
have seen the most significant growth in PES
programmes have been emphasized: climate
change mitigation, improved water supply
and quality, and biodiversity conservation.
Five main messages emerge from the report.
Demand for environmental services from
agriculture will increase.

Two forces are generating a growing
demand for environmental services: greater
awareness of their value and their increasing
scarcity, arising from mounting pressures on
the Earth’s ecosystems. The growing demand
for these services has led to a significant
increase in the number of PES programmes
in recent years. The overall magnitude of
these programmes is still small, however,
and they remain mostly, but not exclusively,
confined to developed countries. The public
sector has been the major source of payment
programmes so far, in both developed and
developing countries, but privately funded
programmes are also emerging.
Future demand for environmental services
is likely to increase, driven by population

and income growth, and globalization. The
demand may come from disparate sources,
such as local water users, international offset
programmes for carbon sequestration and
biodiversity, and private-sector purchasers
interested in meeting consumer demand
for improved environmental management
(certified, for example, via ecolabels) or in
improving their corporate image. There
is also potential for additional growth in
national public-sector programmes, even
in low-income developing countries where
environmental services can meet critical
policy objectives, such as the availability
of clean water and prevention of natural
disasters.
Although this report has focused on the
three environmental services that have
seen the most significant expansion in PES
programmes to date, demand for other
services – for example, disaster prevention,
pollination and disease control – is likely to
rise in the future. In addition, bioenergy has
recently become one of the most dynamic
and rapidly changing sectors in the global
energy economy. While significant impacts
on agriculture and environmental services
are possible, their nature and magnitude
remain uncertain. Bioenergy will be
examined in greater detail in next year’s
State of Food and Agriculture report.
Agriculture can provide a better mix
of ecosystem services to meet society’s
changing needs.

Farmers both depend on and generate a
wide range of ecosystem services, and their
actions can enhance or degrade ecosystems.
As population and income growth puts
increased pressure on farmers and the
ecosystems they manage to provide ever
greater volumes of conventional agricultural
outputs, threats to other services – such
as the three referred to above – are
intensifying. There are very significant costs
involved in the inadequate provision of
these services, and these costs are receiving

111

112

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

increased attention from the media and
policy-makers as well as the private sector.
Through changes in land use and production
systems, agricultural producers can
provide a better mix of ecosystem services,
expanding the share of those characterized
as externalities, to meet society’s changing
needs.
The way in which environmental services
can be generated varies by service, type
of production system and agro-ecological
context. The changes needed range from
shifts in land or water use (e.g. away from
crops or livestock production to grasslands
or forest) to modifications within a
given production system (e.g. adopting
farming practices that provide higher
levels of environmental services alongside
conventional agricultural outputs).
Often there are synergies in the provision
of different ecosystem services. Production
practices adopted to enhance one type of
service may enhance others at the same
time. For example, enhancing soil carbon
sequestration through the adoption of
conservation agriculture can have beneficial
implications not only for climate change
mitigation and water quality but also for
the provisioning services of food production.
However, in many cases there are trade-offs
among the provision of different ecosystem
services. Although agriculture has the
technical potential to supply enhanced
levels of environmental services, the
costs and, hence, the economic feasibility
of the changes required, are central to
understanding whether they can be achieved
and what level of payments would be
required to realize them.
If farmers are to provide a better mix of
ecosystem services, better incentives will
be required. Payments for environmental
services can help.

For a variety of reasons, the full value
of all ecosystem services is not normally
reflected in the incentives faced by the
service providers. As a consequence, many
environmental services are underprovided,
because adopting the necessary changes in
land use or management practices would
result in lower benefits to the producers.
In addition, many farmers, particularly
in developing countries, face barriers

to the adoption of new practices, such
as constraints on access to information,
appropriate technologies and financing, as
well as non-existent or insecure property
rights and legal or regulatory constraints.
The effect of these barriers is often
compounded by poorly functioning markets
and infrastructure, risk and difficulties in
collective management of commonly held
resources.
There are several options for policymakers to change farmers’ incentives. In
the past, non-market instruments, such as
regulations or taxes, were most common,
but today flexible, decentralized marketbased approaches are receiving increasing
attention. Payments for environmental
services are among these options.
Farmers may be compensated either
to enhance the provision of certain
environmental services that may be
degraded or undersupplied as a result of
current agricultural practices or to offset
pollution generated in other sectors. In
the first case, a critical decision is whether
farmers should be paid to reduce the
negative externalities they generate rather
than requiring them to bear the cost
themselves. Who holds the initial rights to
the environmental services: the producers
or society? The answer to this question
is complex and may differ according to
service and context. In the second case, the
appropriateness of payments to farmers
hinges on the more technical consideration
of the efficiency of the offset in meeting the
intended objective.
Cost-effective PES programmes require
careful design based on the characteristics
of the service and the biophysical and
socio-economic context.

Different types of PES programmes are
appropriate to different socio-economic
and agro-ecological contexts. The process of
designing an effective payment programme
involves four important and challenging
steps: identifying what should be paid for;
who should be paid; how much should
be paid; and what payment mechanism(s)
should be used. Ideally, payments should
be linked directly to the level of service
provided. More frequently, however, they
are linked to some proxy associated with

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

changes in the provision of environmental
services, as this may reduce transaction
and measurement costs. The most common
payments are those made for changes in land
use, but farmers are also frequently paid
to change their management practices on
agricultural land.
To maximize cost-effectiveness, payments
must be targeted to farmers and locations
where the largest gain in environmental
service provision can be obtained for a
given level of payment, or where a given
increase in environmental service can be
achieved for the lowest cost. Some PES
programmes address multiple objectives
(e.g. environmental service provision and
poverty reduction); in many cases this will
lead to some degree of trade-off between
the objectives or to an increase in the cost of
providing the environmental service.
The level of payments required to motivate
farmers depends on the opportunity costs,
or foregone benefits, they face in making a
change in land use or management. These
vary according to agro-ecological conditions,
technology employed, level of economic
development and policy environment.
Land diversion programmes (away from
agriculture) are most likely to be effective
where the returns to land in agriculture are
low. In land-scarce environments, changes
that generate environmental services within
agricultural production systems are more
likely to be favoured. The opportunity cost
of labour also plays a role in determining the
feasibility of changes. Where labour is scarce,
production changes that reduce labour use
are more likely to be adopted.
Minimizing the transaction costs involved
in programme implementation, including
monitoring and enforcement, can play
a pivotal role in designing programmes
that will be cost-effective. These costs are
influenced by the availability of information
and the institutional capacity for managing
exchanges, both of which vary by country
as well as by environmental service. Choices
may need to be made between programme
designs that may be effective in service
provision but entail high transaction
costs and others with lower levels of both
effectiveness and transaction costs.
An enabling environment is critical for PES
programmes. No transactions can take place

in the absence of supporting institutions,
which can range from informal to highly
regulated in nature. Capacity building
will therefore be an essential component
of efforts to support the use of the PES
approach in developing countries.
Payments for environmental services are
not primarily a poverty reduction tool,
but the poor are likely to be affected,
and implications for the poor must be
considered.

Reducing poverty and increasing the supply
of environmental services are two distinct
policy objectives. Using one policy instrument
to achieve both may reduce its effectiveness
in reaching either. However, most publicsector-funded payment programmes require
that socio-economic impacts be taken into
account, and even some private-sectorfunded schemes include poverty reduction
criteria. PES programmes can affect the poor,
either positively or negatively. The poor may
be affected directly, as potential suppliers of
environmental services, or indirectly, through
effects on wages, food prices or land values,
particularly in large-scale programmes or
in areas with limited links to external food
and labour markets. If appropriate measures
are not incorporated into the programme
design, PES programmes could hurt the poor,
especially the landless, by driving down
wages or increasing food prices. They could
also result in the poor being excluded from
lands to which they have only informal
rights. Given these possibilities, universal
assumptions that PES programmes will
benefit the poor should be avoided.
Nevertheless, PES programmes have been
shown to be potentially accessible and
beneficial to the poor. Where poor producers
considering adopting improved agricultural
practices are faced with barriers such as
lack of credit, property rights or technical
information, PES programmes can sometimes
offer opportunities for overcoming them. For
location-specific services such as watershed
management and biodiversity conservation,
the presence of the poor in specific areas
of importance for environmental service
provision makes their participation
indispensable.
The transaction costs involved in
contracting with numerous small-scale

113

114

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

producers, many of whom have limited
access to resources, can be a critical
constraint on the participation of the
poor in PES programmes. These costs may
remain prohibitive in the case of poor
producers – who are generally small-scale
suppliers – unless strategies are adopted to
reduce them.

The way forward
Payments for environmental services
represent a broad and flexible array of
measures aimed at improving farmers’
incentives to provide services such as carbon
sequestration and water purification that
are increasingly valued by society. These
measures range from narrowly defined
voluntary private transactions to more
broadly applied public programmes.
Although payments for environmental
services are not a panacea for solving all
environmental problems, they nevertheless
have significant potential for further
application in both developing and
developed countries. However, much work
remains to be done before they can play
their role in full. Three key challenges
confront public and private stakeholders at
the local, national and international levels.

society may decide that farmers should bear
the cost of reducing those impacts. Naturally,
the question is open to debate and must be
resolved on a case-by-case basis. The answer
will vary according to the nature of the
threat involved and the specific biophysical
and social context it occurs in.
Resolving the question at the practical
level requires a political process of
negotiation, which may range from the
international level for issues such as
climate change mitigation and biodiversity
conservation, to the local level involving
community-based farmer associations and
representatives of urban consumers in the
case of watershed management. Equity as
well as efficiency concerns are important
in making these decisions, and in some
cases it will be necessary to balance tradeoffs between the two criteria. However,
growing pressure on the Earth’s natural
resource base, together with the increasing
scarcity of environmental services and their
associated costs, calls for serious political
commitment to clarify the issue of rights to
environmental services to allow the problem
of environmental management to be
addressed effectively, be it through payments
for environmental services or through other
instruments.

The rights to environmental services
must be clarified

More information is needed through
research in both natural and social
sciences

First, the establishment of PES programmes
involves inherently difficult and potentially
controversial decisions about who should
bear the cost of providing the services. Any
environmental policy is based on an, at
least implicit, assumption about who holds
the rights to a service and who should bear
the costs of providing it. These rights are
related to, but not the same as, rights to the
resources that contribute to the provision
of environmental services. If society decides
that farmers hold the right to use the land,
water and other resources at their disposal in
ways that may have adverse environmental
consequences (as has historically been
the case), then those who wish to reduce
those adverse consequences will have to
compensate farmers for any necessary
changes. On the other hand, if changes in
production practices or impacts warrant,

A second area of pressing need is further
research in both the natural and social
sciences of environmental service provision
and use. Better information on the causal
links between land-use and farming-system
practices and their environmental outcomes
is critical not only as an aid to clarifying
rights to environmental services, but also for
identifying the locations and activities that
will generate the highest environmental
service benefits and for designing effective
PES programmes.
Social science research is equally important
in order to identify the socio-economic
contexts in which payments will be most
effective. More work is also needed on the
development of guidelines and frameworks
for assessing potential, institutional
requirements and ways of meeting them,
as well as for designing programmes. Such

P a y i n g farmers f o r e n v ir o n me n ta l ser v ices

research outputs will constitute an important
means of reducing the high transaction
costs that PES programme participants, both
buyers and sellers, currently face. Highquality data on both natural and social
science indicators are needed to support
the analysis required for effective targeting
of priority services, areas and programme
participants. Geographic information
systems can be used to understand and
illustrate the interactions among agriculture,
environmental services and poverty. Rich,
spatially referenced databases are already
being generated and offer strong potential
for improvement in this area.
In addition, it should be recognized that
agricultural production is just part of a long
and complex chain that begins with input
supply and continues with post-harvest
processing, transportation, marketing,
consumption and disposal. Each of these
stages has impacts on environmental services,
and a more complete understanding of the
provision and use of environmental services
would require analysis of these processes also.

Institutions and capacity building must
be strengthened
A third and final challenge relates to
institutional support and capacity building.
Improved coordination between the public
and private sectors through partnerships
can enhance the demand for environmental
services as well as the sustainability of
funding. The public sector also has an
important role to play in establishing
frameworks for private-sector PES
programmes. For instance, improving the
coordination among the various ecolabelling
schemes and clarifying the environmental
benefits that can be obtained from
certified products will help to increase the
effectiveness of this form of payments for
environmental services.
Designing rules that facilitate the access of
developing country suppliers to international
PES programmes is a further important
aspect of the institutional requirements.
Rules for certification are indispensable,
but can represent serious barriers to entry
into global markets for developing country
suppliers of environmental services, and
there is a need to work across the public
and private sectors to develop strategies to

overcome these barriers. A relevant issue in
this domain concerns the types of activities
allowed under flexible trading mechanisms
such as the CDM. Restrictions on the type
of land-use activities allowable under this
mechanism greatly limit the potential
demand for environmental services supplied
by farmers.
Institutions and capacity building are also
needed at the national level to establish the
enabling environment required for effective
PES programmes and to facilitate the
transfer of internationally sourced payments
for environmental services. Aligning national
environmental, agricultural and financial
regulations to support PES projects is another
important area where national governments
can provide institutional support. In some
cases, national government support in
clarifying property rights to the natural
resources on which PES programmes are
based (particularly land) can be critical for
their success. Close cooperation among
various national ministries and other
bodies is a necessary condition for effective
coordinated national efforts.
Finally, local institutions and capacity
building are required to facilitate the
technical and institutional changes needed
for enhanced provision of environmental
services. Building upon and strengthening
the capacity of existing community groups is
essential. Working with local organizations
to facilitate the transfer of payments,
monitoring and certification also serves to
reduce transaction costs, particularly where
smallholders are involved. Non-governmental
organizations can play a fundamental role
as mediators between buyers and sellers, as
neutral brokers or by helping to facilitate
farmers’ collective action.
Current policies and incentives favour the
production of conventional agricultural
outputs at the expense of non-marketed
environmental services such as climate
change mitigation, improved water quality
and quantity, and biodiversity. The costs to
society of degrading environmental services
are increasingly being recognized. However,
it is also essential to recognize that providing
enhanced levels of these services entails
costs. Potential providers must be offered
appropriate incentives.

115

116

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

Developing mechanisms to provide these
incentives is challenging. This is a new
area – the science is not always clear, the
policy context is complex and budgetary
resources are a constraint, especially in
poorer countries. Nevertheless, payments
for environmental services can trigger
creativity in finding innovative solutions to
improve the management of agricultural
and environmental resources, even in

countries that are poor in budgetary
resources but rich in potential supply of
environmental services. When effectively
designed, PES programmes can give both
providers and users of environmental
services more accurate indications of the
consequences of their actions, so that
the mix of ecosystem services provided
matches more closely the true preferences
of society.

Part II
World and 
regional review 

a longer-term perspective

Part II

W o r l d a n d regi o n a l re v iew : a l o n ger - term perspecti v e

World and regional review
A longer-term perspective



World agriculture has achieved notable success over the past half century but
faces serious challenges now and in the coming decades. The proportion of
people suffering from hunger has fallen by half since 1969–71, the earliest
period for which estimates are available. In developing countries, where most
of the world’s undernourished people live, progress is still being made on
reducing the proportion of undernourished people, but the absolute number
appears to be rising.
Steady growth in agricultural output and a long-term decline in real
agricultural commodity prices attest to the success of the global agricultural
system in meeting the increase in effective global demand for food and other
products. Recent rises in commodity prices have been driven by weather-related
production shortfalls and other factors such as the emergence of liquid biofuels
as a large source of demand for agricultural commodities. It remains unclear
whether this signals a new paradigm for agricultural prices and, if so, what
that might mean for agricultural development, poverty reduction and food
security.
Agricultural growth contributes directly to food security, but it also supports
poverty reduction and acts as an engine of overall economic growth in much
of the developing world. The success of the agriculture sector has not been
uniform across regions and countries, however, and seems to have waned since
the early 1990s. The challenge is to revive it and extend it to those left behind.
Many of the least-developed countries, particularly those located in marginal
production environments, continue to experience low or stagnant agricultural
productivity, increasing food deficits and rising levels of hunger and poverty.

1
This report is based on Wik, Pingali and Broca, 2007, and several previously published FAO reports
cited in the text.

119

120

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

AGRICUlTURAl PRoDUCTIon
The value of total agricultural output (all
food and non-food crop and livestock
commodities) has almost trebled in real
terms since 1961 (Figure 14), representing
an average increase of 2.3 percent per year,
well ahead of global population growth
(1.7 percent per year). Much of this growth
has originated in developing countries, but
it also reflects the rising share of high-value
commodities such as livestock products and
horticulture in the total value of production
(FAO, 2006i).

Regional differences in performance
Global agricultural value added per capita
has grown at an average rate of 0.4 percent
per year in real terms since 1961 (World
Bank, 2006), but not all regions have
followed the same trend (Figure 15). Latin
America and the Caribbean and South Asia
have had a small increase, while the East Asia
and Pacific region has more than doubled
agricultural value added per capita over the
last four decades. Sub-Saharan Africa is the

only region in which per capita agricultural
value added has not seen a sustained
increase, with an overall declining trend and
a considerable variation over time and across
countries (Figure 16).

Changing composition of
agricultural production
The composition of agricultural production
has changed considerably over the last
40 years. The global output of cereals, oil
crops, sugar, vegetables, eggs and meat has
increased more than population growth
rates, while the production of pulses and
roots and tubers has declined relative to total
population growth (Table 16).
Since 1990, cereal production growth
has slowed compared to that of earlier
decades. On the other hand, production of
oil crops has accelerated, fuelled by growth
of demand in developing countries for these
crops’ feed and food uses (FAO, 2006i).
In developing countries, egg and
meat production has grown even more
rapidly than that of oil crops. Given the
diversification of diets driven by rising

FIGURE 14
Total and per capita agricultural production
Billion international dollars

International dollars per capita

1 600

240

1 400

210

1 200

180

1 000

150

800

120

600

90

400

60

200

30

0

Developing
countries
World
Production
per capita

0
61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05

Note: International dollars are an international commodity prices unit, average 1999–2001.
For more information on international dollars, see http://faostat.fao.org.

Source: FAO, 2006h.

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

121

FIGURE 15
Average growth rate in per capita agricultural value added, by region
Annual percentage change
3.5

1961–1975

3.0

1976–1990

2.5

1991–2005

2.0

Whole period

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

East Asia
and the Pacific

Latin America
and the
Caribbean

Near East and
North
Africa

South Asia

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Note: Agricultural value added includes fish and forestry products. No data are available
for the Near East and North Africa until 1974. Data for sub-Saharan Africa are available
from 1967 and for Latin America and the Caribbean from 1965.

Source: World Bank, 2006.

TAblE 16
Global growth rates for outputs of different agricultural commodities
1961–76

1977–91

1992–2005

1961–2005

Annual percentage change
CEREAlS

WORLD
Developing countries

3.5
3.9

1.8
2.8

1.3
1.5

2.2
2.8

oIl CRoPS

WORLD
Developing countries

2.9
3.1

4.8
5.0

4.2
4.9

4.0
4.4

SUGAR

WORLD
Developing countries

3.4
3.1

2.3
3.5

0.8
1.2

2.2
2.6

PUlSES

WORLD
Developing countries

0.8
0.5

1.5
1.0

0.9
1.4

1.1
1.0

RooTS AnD TUbERS

WORLD
Developing countries

1.3
3.0

0.5
1.6

1.5
2.2

1.1
2.3

vEGETAblES

WORLD
Developing countries

1.8
1.9

3.2
4.4

4.7
6.1

3.2
4.1

EGGS

WORLD
Developing countries

3.0
4.6

3.4
7.0

3.6
6.0

3.4
5.9

MEAT

WORLD
Developing countries

3.5
4.3

3.0
5.3

2.6
4.8

3.0
4.8

MIlK

WORLD
Developing countries

1.6
2.7

1.4
3.3

1.2
3.8

1.4
3.2

Source: FAO, 2006h.

122

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 16
Growth rate in per capita agricultural production in sub-Saharan Africa, 1990–2004

Ghana
Angola
Benin
Malawi
Sudan
Burkina Faso
Mozambique
Guinea
Ethiopia
Côte d'Ivoire
Chad
Cameroon
Nigeria
Niger
South Africa
Mali
Uganda
Kenya
Zimbabwe
Zambia
United Republic of Tanzania
Rwanda
Senegal
Burundi
Madagascar
Democratic Republic of the Congo
-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

Percentage
Source: FAO, 2006h.

FIGURE 17
Meat production in developing countries
Million of tonnes
Beef and buffalo meat

80

Pig meat

70

Poultry

60

Mutton and lamb

50
40
30
20
10
0

61 63 65 67 69 71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05
Source: FAO, 2006h.

W o r l d a n d regi o n a l re v iew : a l o n ger - term perspecti v e

incomes and urbanization, it will probably
continue to grow at a faster rate than will
the population. Growth in the milk sector is
expected to accelerate, mainly because of
increased demand in developing countries.
Sugar production growth has accelerated
recently. It is expected that this sector will
see continued growth in the future because
of both increased demand from developing
countries (including China, which has very
low sugar consumption per capita) and
the potential for using sugar cane for the
production of biofuels (FAO, 2006i).

Spotlight on livestock production
Total meat production in developing
countries more than quintupled from
27 million tonnes to 147 million tonnes
between 1970 and 2005 (Figure 17).
Although the pace of growth is slowing
down, global demand for meat is expected
to increase by more than 50 percent by
2030 (FAO, 2006i). Satisfying the increasing
demand for animal food products, while
at the same time sustaining the natural
resource base and coping with climate
change and vulnerability, is one of the major
challenges facing world agriculture today.
Globally, livestock production is the largest
user of agricultural land and accounts
for almost 40 percent of the total value
of agricultural production. In developed
countries, this share is more than 50 percent.
In developing countries, where livestock
production accounts for one-third of the
value of agricultural production, its share is
rising rapidly as a result of growth in income
and changes in lifestyle and dietary habits.
Until recently, a large proportion of
livestock in developing countries were not
raised for food, but for providing draught
power and manure and as capital assets
that were only disposed of in times of
emergency. Livestock were an integral
part of agricultural systems, distributed
among many owners and raised close to
their feed supplies. This pattern is changing
rapidly. Almost all of the growth in livestock
production is now occurring in industrial
systems, where meat production is no longer
tied to a local land base for feed inputs or to
supplying animal power or manure for crop
production (Naylor et al., 2005).
The world has been getting more meat,
milk and eggs per kg of cereals used as feed.

A rising share of poultry production in total
meat production has contributed to this gain
(poultry requires much smaller quantities of
cereal feed per kg of meat than beef), but
the growing use of high-protein oilmeals
in livestock feeding is another important
factor. World production of soybean, which
is mainly processed into oil for human
consumption and oilmeal for animal feed,
grew at 5 percent per year in the last decade.

123

12

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FooD ConSUMPTIon
The world has made significant progress
in raising food consumption per capita,
from an average of 2 280 kcal/person/day
in the early 1960s to 2 800 kcal/person/day
(Figure 18). The gains in world average food
consumption predominantly reflect those of
developing countries, given that developed
countries already had fairly high levels of
per capita food consumption in the mid1960s. The overall progress of developing
countries has been decisively influenced by
the significant gains made in East Asia.

Diversification of food consumption
Both reflecting and driving the changes in
agricultural production described above,
global dietary patterns have changed
significantly over the past four decades
(Figure 19). Diets have shifted away from
staples, such as cereals, roots and tubers and
pulses, towards more livestock (meat and
dairy) products, vegetable oils and fruits and
vegetables.
Income growth, relative price changes and
urbanization have altered dietary patterns
in both developed and developing countries.
When people have more money to spend,
they normally add more variety and more
expensive and high-value foods to their

diets, although responses differ between
developing and developed countries. In the
latter, most consumers can already afford
the foods they prefer. Therefore, when their
incomes rise, changes in their diets and food
purchases are relatively small.
In developing countries, on the other
hand, rising incomes have an immediate and
pronounced impact on diets, as people adjust
their budgets to include higher-value food
items (Figure 20). As wages increase, people
are also willing to pay for convenience,
freeing up their time for income-earning
activities or leisure. They demand more
processed foods with shorter preparation
times. This is typically the case when more
women participate in the labour market
(Pingali, 2007). Also, declining real food
prices have allowed poor consumers to access
improved diets at existing income levels.
Urbanization is another important
factor influencing consumers’ preferences.
Urbanization is taking place at a high
pace, and urban dwellers were expected to
outnumber rural populations by around 2007
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b).
Large urban markets create opportunities
for the establishment of large supermarket
chains, and they attract foreign investment
and advertising from global corporations.
Non-traditional foods are also becoming

FIGURE 18
Per capita food consumption
kcal/person/day
3 500

1961–63

3 000

1971–73

2 500

1981–83

2 000

1991–93

1 500

2001–03

1 000
500
0
World

Developed
countries

Developing Sub-Saharan
countries
Africa

Near East Latin America
and
and the
North Africa Caribbean

Asia
and the
Pacific
Source: FAO, 2006h.

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

more accessible to urban populations as a
result of trade liberalization and declining
transportation costs (Pingali, 2007).

Emerging obesity concerns in
developing countries
The progress in raising and diversifying per
capita food consumption has had positive
and negative effects in several developing
countries. In raising dietary energy supplies

to 3 000 kcal/person/day, the related diet
transition often includes a large increase in
the consumption of refined carbohydrates
and processed fats and oils. In developing
countries, this diet transition, combined with
a more sedentary lifestyle, generally results
in rapidly growing rates of overweight,
obesity and a number of diet-related noncommunicable diseases such as Type 2
diabetes and heart disease (Boutayeb and

FIGURE 19
Composition of food consumption in developing countries (percentage)
Other 13
Milk 2

kcal consumption 1961–1963

Meat 3
Vegetables 3
Sugar 4
Roots and tubers 9
Pulses 6
Cereals 60

Other 19
Milk 3

kcal consumption 2001–2003

Meat 7
Vegetables 5

Sugar 6
Roots and tubers 6
Pulses 2
Cereals 52

Source: FAO, 2006h.

12

12

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 20
Consumption of different food commodities in developing countries
Cereals kcal/person/day

Other commodities kcal/person/day

1 600
1 400
1 200

350

Cereals

300

Roots
Sugar

250

Pulses

1 000
200
800
150

Oil crops
Horticulture

600

Meat
100

400

Milk

50

200

0

0
61

64

67

70

73

76

79

82

85

88

91

94

97

00

03
Source: FAO, 2006h.

Boutayeb, 2005; Popkin, 2004). It is now
common to find overweight/obesity and
malnutrition side by side in developing
countries, even within the same household,
with obese parents and malnourished
children under the same roof (Doak et
al., 2000).
Globally, 1.6 billion adults are overweight,
and at least 400 million are obese. Two out
of three overweight and obese people now
live in low- and middle-income countries,
with the vast majority in emerging markets
and transition economies (WHO, 2006).
Health problems resulting from obesityrelated non-communicable diseases tend to
appear side by side with health problems
related to undernutrition, making these
countries confront a “double burden of
malnutrition”, resulting in novel challenges
to, and strains on their health systems.

AGRICUlTURAl TRADE2
Trade
Since the early 1960s, the nominal value of
agricultural exports has increased tenfold,
while the share of agricultural trade in total
merchandise trade has followed a longterm downward trend, falling from almost
25 percent to less than 10 percent in recent
years (Figure 21).
Over this period, the net flow of
agricultural commodities between
developed and developing countries
has reversed direction (Figure 22). In the
early 1960s, developing countries had an
overall agricultural trade surplus of almost
US$7 billion per year. By the end of the
1980s, however, this surplus had disappeared.
During most of the 1990s and early 2000s,
developing countries were net importers of
agricultural products. Without Brazil, the
deficit of the rest of the developing world
would have been considerably bigger; it


This section is based on FAO, 00d and FAO, 006j.

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

12

FIGURE 21
Global agricultural exports
Billion $

Percentage

700

35

600

30

Agricultural
exports as
share of total
merchandise
exports (%)

500

25

Agricultural
exports, value

400

20

300

15

200

10

100

5

0

0
62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04
Source: FAO, 2006h.

FIGURE 22
Agricultural imports and exports in developing countries
Billion $

Percentage

200

70

Agricultural
exports, value

180

63

Agricultural
imports, value

160

56

140

49

120

42

Agricultural
exports as
share of total
merchandise
exports (%)

100

35

80

28

60

21

40

14

20

7

0

Agricultural
imports as
share of total
merchandise
imports (%)

0
62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04
Source: FAO, 2006h.

12

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

would have grown from US$20 billion in
2000 to US$27 billion in 2004 (FAO, 2006i).
The change has been even more
pronounced for the least-developed
countries, which over the same period
have changed from being net exporters
to significant net importers of agricultural
commodities (Figure 23). By the end of the
1990s, imports by these countries were more
than double their exports.
Cereal foodstuffs once dominated
international agricultural trade. Now,
however, the share of cereals in total
agricultural imports has fallen below
50 percent in developing countries and
below one-third in developed countries.
While the share of cereal imports has
declined, both developed and developing
countries are importing greater quantities
of higher-value and processed foods,
particularly edible oils, livestock products
and fruits and vegetables.

Prices
An analysis of agricultural commodity prices
over the past 40 years reveals some striking
features (Figure 24):
• Real prices of agricultural commodities,
that is, prices relative to those of all
manufactured goods, have declined
significantly – almost 2 percent per year.
• Real prices have fluctuated considerably
around the long-term downward trend.

• Both the fluctuations and the long-term
decline have been less pronounced since
the mid-1980s.
• Cereal and oilseed prices have increased
recently, driven partly by rising demand
for biofuels and by weather-related
production shortfalls.
A number of factors have contributed
to these trends. Trade policy reforms
and improvements in transportation and
logistics have helped to hold down prices
of traded goods, including agricultural
products. Technological advances have
reduced costs and made it possible, at
given prices, to expand production at a
rate that has outstripped demand growth,
despite rising population and income. Trade
liberalization has permitted a wider range of
countries to participate in world commodity
markets, reducing the relative importance
of the supply situation in any one country.
Technological advances have reduced the
vulnerability of some crops to climatic
influences.
Production and export subsidies in some
developed countries have also contributed
to the downward trend of world prices
for many agricultural products grown in
temperate zones, reducing the export
earnings of developing countries that export
commodities such as cotton, sugar and rice.
Even though real prices for all agricultural
commodities have declined over the past

FIGURE 23
Agricultural trade balance of least-developed countries

Billion $
14

Agricultural
imports

12

Agricultural
exports

10
8
6
4
2
0
62 64 66

68 70 72

74

76 78 80 82 84

86

88 90

92 94 96 98

00 02

04
Source: FAO, 2006h.

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

12

FIGURE 24
Agricultural commodity prices

Index 1990–1992 = 100
Nominal prices

200

Real prices*
150

MUV**

100

50

0
62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04
* Real prices are deflated by export unit values of all merchandise exports.
** MUV is the manufactures export unit value (World Bank).

40 years, the rate of decline has varied
from one commodity to another. Prices
of traditional commodities such as raw
materials, tropical beverages, oil crops
and cereals have experienced the largest
variation and the steepest decline.

Trade diversification
Some developing countries have managed
to take advantage of changing price and
demand trends by shifting production
and trade into the non-traditional highervalue sectors. It has mainly been the more
advanced and prosperous developing
countries that have managed to do this.
Developing countries other than the leastdeveloped countries have more than doubled
the share of horticultural, meat and dairy
products in their agricultural exports, while
reducing the share of tropical beverages and
raw materials in their agricultural exports
from 55 percent in the early 1960s to around
30 percent in 1999–2001.
An analysis of FAOSTAT data (FAO, 2004e)
found that trade in some non-traditional
agricultural exports, including fruits,
vegetables and selected speciality and
processed products (excluding trade in
bananas and citrus) was worth more than
US$30 billion annually. Developing countries
held a 56 percent share of world trade in
non-traditional fruit and vegetables in 2001

and also accounted for two-thirds of trade in
selected speciality products, such as chillies,
ginger and garlic.
Across a broad range of these products,
developing countries have been gaining
market share at the expense of developed
countries. This is especially the case of trade
in vegetables and speciality products, in
which developing countries have taken the
lion’s share of the substantial growth in
global trade during the last decade.
The non-traditional agricultural export
market is, however, dominated by just a
handful of countries. Some of these, such
as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and
Mexico are leading exporters of more than
one product. Other countries are dominant
in the market for only one product – for
example, Kenya for green beans, Malaysia
for minor tropical fruits, Thailand for minor
fresh fruits and Zimbabwe for green peas.
A large number of countries have only a
very limited participation in the market for
non-traditional products. Least-developed
countries account for only 0.5 percent
of world fruit trade and 0.8 percent of
world vegetable trade. On the other hand,
they have increased their dependence on
traditional export products such as raw
materials and tropical beverages for their
agricultural export earnings from 59 percent
to 72 percent during the last 40 years.

Source: FAO, 2004d.

10

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 25
Income terms of trade for agriculture

Index 2000 = 1
Other developing
countries

2.5
2.0

Developed
countries

1.5

Least-developed
countries

1.0
0.5

0
62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 00 02 04
Source: FAO.

For these countries, export earnings have
failed to increase, and rising import prices
have further eroded their purchasing power.
Real agricultural export earnings of leastdeveloped countries have fallen by more
than 30 percent over the last two decades,
and by half over the last 40 years (Figure 25).

FooD InSECURITy
The World Food Summit (WFS) established
the target of reducing by half the number of
undernourished people in the world by 2015,
from a 1990–92 base period. The Millennium
Development Goal target is to reduce by
half the proportion of people who suffer
from hunger, during the same time period
(1990–2015).
The historical trend of increased per capita
food production and consumption at the
global level resulted in a reduction of the
proportion of undernourished people in
developing countries from 37 percent in
1969–71 to 17 percent in 2002–04 (Figure 26)
(FAO, 2006k). Most of the reduction occurred
in the first two decades of this period;
indeed, from the 1990–92 base period,
the proportion of undernourished fell by
only 3 percentage points. The number of
undernourished people in the developing
world declined from 960 million in 1969–71
to 830 million in 2002–04, but almost all of
the decline occurred before 1990–92, and,
in fact, the number rose from 1995–97 to
2002–04 (FAO, 2006k).
In the period 1990–92 to 2001–03, the
only significant progress towards reducing
the number of undernourished people was
concentrated in very few, but populous,
countries and subregions: China, Southeast
Asia and South America (Figure 27). In

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

11

FIGURE 26
Undernourishment in developing countries
Millions

Percentage

1 000

40

Number

950

35

Proportion

900

30

850

25

800

20

750

15

700

10

650

5

600

1969–1971

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

2002–2004

0
Source: FAO, 2006h.

India, the prevalence of hunger declined
by 5 percentage points, but the progress
in terms of reducing the number of
undernourished people was small because
of population growth. At the same time, the
number of undernourished increased in the
rest of East Asia (excluding China) and even
more in the rest of South Asia (excluding
India) (FAO, 2006l).
The Near East, Central America, East
Asia (excluding China) and Central Africa
subregions experienced an increase in
both the number and proportion of
undernourished between 1990–92 and
2001–03 (FAO, 2006l).
In sub-Saharan Africa, recent
progress in reducing the prevalence of
undernourishment is noteworthy. For the
first time in several decades, the share of
undernourished people in the region’s
population declined significantly – from
35 percent in 1990–92 to 32 percent in
2001–03, after having reached 36 percent in
1995–97. While Central Africa experienced
a dramatic increase in both the number
and prevalence of undernourishment,
Southern Africa, West Africa, East Africa and
Nigeria saw a decline in the prevalence of
undernourishment (FAO, 2006l).
In addition to Ghana, which has already
reached the WFS goal of halving the number
of undernourished people, Angola, Benin,
Chad, the Congo, Ethiopia, Guinea, Lesotho,
Malawi, Mauritania, Mozambique and

Namibia have also reduced the number
of undernourished people. Although the
explanations for success have varied among
these countries, most seem to have combined
good economic growth performances
with a significant expansion of per capita
agricultural and food production (FAO,
2006l).
The decline in the prevalence of
undernourishment in the region is an
encouraging development. Still, the task
facing sub-Saharan Africa remains daunting.
Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for 25 percent
of the undernourished people in the
developing world, and it has the highest
proportion (one-third) of people suffering
from chronic hunger. In 14 countries in the
region, 35 percent or more of the population
were chronically undernourished in 2001–03.
The number of undernourished people
increased from 169 million to 206 million
from 1990–92 to 2001–03, and only 15 of
the 39 countries for which data are reported
reduced the number of undernourished
(FAO, 2006l).
Efforts to reduce hunger in the region
have been hampered by natural and
human-induced disasters, including conflicts
occurring during the 1990s and the spread
of HIV/AIDS. Indeed, the increase in the
number of undernourished people from
the WFS baseline period was driven mainly
by five war-torn countries: Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Eritrea,

12

THE STATE oF FooD AnD AGRICUlTURE 2007

FIGURE 27
Changes in number and proportion of undernourished people in subregions
from 1990–1992 to 2001–2003
Southern Africa
West Africa, excl. Nigeria

Changes in proportion
of undernourished

East Africa
The Caribbean
Southeast Asia
India
South America
Nigeria
China
South Asia, excl. India
North Africa
Mexico
Near East
Central America
East Asia, excl. China
Central Africa

-20

-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

15

20

Percentage points

China
Southeast Asia

Changes in number
of undernourished

South America
India
The Caribbean
West Africa, excl. Nigeria
Nigeria
Mexico
North Africa
Southern Africa
Central America
East Asia, excl. China
South Asia, excl. India
East Africa
Near East
Central Africa

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

Millions
Source: FAO, 2006l.

Liberia and Sierra Leone. Particularly
dramatic is the worsening of food insecurity
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where the number of undernourished
people tripled from 12 to 36 million, and the
prevalence rose from 31 to 72 percent of the
population (FAO, 2006l).
There is a clear negative correlation
between countries’ income per capita and
prevalence of undernourishment in the
population (Figure 28). Empirical evidence
confirms that sustained economic growth
leading to increased productivity and

prosperity at the national level results in
reduced hunger. But cross-country studies of
developing countries suggest that economic
growth alone, in the absence of specific
measures to combat hunger, may leave large
numbers of hungry people behind for a long
time, particularly in rural areas (FAO, 2005c).
Numerous studies have provided evidence
that the impact of economic growth on
reducing hunger and poverty depends
as much on the nature and distribution
of the growth as on its scale and speed.
Some 70 percent of the poor in developing

WoRlD AnD REGIonAl REvIEW: A lonGER-TERM PERSPECTIvE

1

FIGURE 28
Per capita GDP and undernourishment (average 2001–2003)

Undernourishment prevalence
(percentage)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

5 000

10 000

15 000

20 000

25 000

Per capita GDP (PPP)
Note: PPP is purchasing power parity dollars. Each data point represents a developing country.

countries live in rural areas and depend
on agriculture for their livelihoods, either
directly or indirectly. In the poorest countries,
agricultural growth is the driving force of
the rural economy. Particularly in the most
food-insecure countries, agriculture is crucial
for income and employment generation.
Agricultural growth is, therefore, a critical
factor in hunger reduction.

Future trends for food security3
Historical trends towards increased food
consumption per capita globally and
particularly in developing countries will,
according to FAO scenarios, continue in the
near future. However, they will continue
at a slower rate than in the past as more
and more countries approach mediumhigh levels. The average of the developing
countries may rise from the current
2 650 kcal per person per day to 3 070 kcal
by 2050. By the middle of the twenty-first
century, more than 90 percent of the world‘s
population may be living in countries with
3

Based on FAO, 006i.

Source: FAO; World Bank, 2006.

per capita food consumption of more than
2 700 kcal per day, compared to 51 percent
at present and only 4 percent three decades
ago. As in the past, great improvements in
China and a few other populous countries
will continue to play a significant role in
these developments.
However, not all countries are likely
to achieve adequate food consumption
levels. This is especially the case for
countries that currently have high rates
of undernourishment, high population
growth rates, poor prospects for rapid
economic growth and often meagre
agricultural resources. Today, 32 countries
are in this category, with an average
undernourishment rate of 42 percent.
The population of these poor countries
is expected to increase from the current
580 million to 1.39 billion by 2050, and
food consumption could, under fairly
optimistic assumptions, increase from the
current 2 000 kcal/person/day to 2 450
kcal in the next 30 years. This will not be
sufficient for good nutrition in several of
these countries, hence the conclusion that

134

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

reducing undernourishment may be a very
slow process in these countries.
Despite the slow pace of progress
in reducing the occurrence of
undernourishment, FAO’s projections do
imply considerable overall improvements.
In the developing countries the number of
the well fed could increase from 3.9 billion
in 1999–2001 (83 percent of the population)
to 6.2 billion (93 percent) in 2030 and
to 7.2 billion (96 percent) by 2050. The
problem of undernourishment will tend to
become smaller both in terms of absolute
numbers affected and, even more, in terms
of the proportion of the population that is
undernourished.

Opportunities and challenges
in the future
Population growth in the poorest
countries
Global population growth has been the
major driving force for growth in food
demand and production. The population
will continue to grow, but longer-term
projections suggest that population growth
may slow by the middle of this century.
World population is expected to increase
from the current 6.7 billion to 9.2 billion
by 2050 (UN, 2007). From 2050, world
population will be increasing by 30 million
per year.
Almost all of this increase is expected
to take place in developing countries, and
especially in the group of the 50 leastdeveloped countries. These countries may
still have inadequate food consumption
levels in 2050, and, therefore, there is
significant scope for further increases in
demand for food even when population
growth slows down.

Slowing agricultural production
growth
Annual growth of world agricultural output
is expected to fall to 1.5 percent over the
next decades and further to 0.9 percent in
the succeeding 20 years to 2050 (FAO, 2006i),
compared with 2.3 percent per year since
1961.
All the major commodity sectors (except
for the milk sector) are expected to take part
in the deceleration of agricultural growth.
The cereals sector has already been in such
a downward trend for some time now, and
is expected to continue to have the lowest
growth rate of the major commodity sectors
during the next 50 years.

Water
Agriculture accounts for 70 percent of all
water use in the world and as much as
95 percent in many developing countries,
almost all for irrigating crops (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b). Per capita
use of water has decreased from about 700
to 600 cubic metres per year since 1980
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005b),


Based on FAO, 2006i.

W o r l d a n d regi o n a l re v iew : a l o n ger - term perspecti v e

and water productivity in agriculture
increased by at least 100 percent between
1961 and 2001 (FAO, 2003d). But total water
use is still increasing and is expected to
continue to increase because of population
growth, urban expansion and increasing
industrialization.
Today, more than 1.2 billion people
live in areas of physical water scarcity
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007), and
by 2025 over 3 billion people are likely to
experience water stress (UNDP, 2006). The
gap between available water supply and
water demand is increasing in many parts
of the world, limiting future expansion of
irrigation. In areas where water supply is
already limited, water scarcity is likely to be
the most serious constraint on agricultural
growth and development, especially in
drought-prone areas (Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, 2005b).

Bioenergy
Recent high petroleum prices are creating
new markets for agricultural products that
can be used as feedstock for the production
of biofuels. The competitiveness of biofuels
may be further enhanced if the savings of
greenhouse gas emissions resulting from
substituting ethanol for gasoline are to be
monetized in the form of tradable carbon
credits (Certified Emission Reductions of
greenhouse gases) through the Clean
Development Mechanism under the
provisions of the Kyoto Protocol. If world
agriculture were to become a major source
of feedstock for the biofuel industry, this
would have as yet unknown implications
for food security and for the environment.
Bioenergy is a new area that deserves
increased attention and further analysis so
that the implications of its development for
food security and poverty alleviation can be
understood.

Climate change
There are still large uncertainties as to
when, how and where climate change will
have an impact on agricultural production
and food security, but it is generally
agreed that agricultural impacts will be
more adverse in tropical areas than in
temperate areas (Stern, 2007; IPCC, 2007b,
Parry et al., 2004, 2005; Fischer et al., 2005).

Model-based scenarios predict slight to
moderate reductions of potential crop
yields (Stern, 2007). While the adverse
impacts of climate change will affect the
poor disproportionately, actual impacts will
depend at least as much on socio-economic
conditions as on the biophysical processes
involved. Policies and investments supporting
trade, sustainable agricultural practices and
technological progress can help mitigate the
effects of climate change on agriculture and
food security while increasing the capacity of
people and societies to adapt (FAO, 2006i).

135

Part III
STATISTICAL ANNEX

Part III

S tatistica l a n n e x

139

TABLE A1
Total and agricultural population (including forestry and fisheries)

Countries

Total population

Agricultural population

(Thousands)

(Thousands)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

15 069

13 913

10 939

9 778

Albania

2 671

3 280

3 116

3 166

3 194

1 534

1 787

1 502

1 465

1 457

Algeria

18 747

25 014

30 252

31 800

32 339

6 684

6 514

7 260

7 375

7 406

33

47

58

62

63

16

20

20

20

20

7 056

9 352

12 399

13 625

14 078

5 392

6 969

8 912

9 680

9 962

Afghanistan

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

63

63

72

73

73

21

18

17

16

16

28 098

32 527

37 073

38 428

38 871

3 790

4 075

3 753

3 629

3 585

3 115

3 061

3 052

400

359

348
853

Armenia
Australia
Austria

14 580

16 886

19 151

19 731

19 913

949

931

877

859

7 551

7 733

8 103

8 116

8 120

755

598

415

367

352

8 158

8 370

8 447

2 180

2 133

2 118

303

314

317

11

10

10

Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados

210

255

Belize

13

347

490

677

724

739

14

10

7

7

6

85 034

109 422

137 952

146 736

149 664

61 751

71 290

76 810

77 387

77 454

249

257

267

270

271

25

17

11

10

10

10 034

9 895

9 852

1 327

1 162

1 113

9 858

9 968

10 251

10 318

10 340

296

261

187

169

164

144

186

240

256

261

55

63

74

76

77

Belarus
Belgium

12

Benin

3 461

4 654

6 225

6 736

6 918

2 340

2 948

3 360

3 438

3 463

Bhutan

1 318

1 694

2 064

2 257

2 325

1 245

1 594

1 935

2 114

2 176

Bolivia

5 355

6 670

8 316

8 808

8 973

2 757

3 051

3 574

3 716

3 762

3 963

4 161

4 186

205

168

156

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria

988

1 354

1 724

1 785

1 795

628

635

767

783

783

121 624

148 787

171 795

178 470

180 654

44 009

34 496

28 285

26 471

25 869

193

257

334

358

366

10

5

3

2

2

8 863

8 718

8 098

7 897

7 829

1 922

1 247

615

493

458

Burkina Faso

6 823

8 923

11 909

13 002

13 393

6 291

8 247

10 987

11 988

12 345

Burundi

4 134

5 604

6 283

6 825

7 068

3 838

5 136

5 677

6 135

6 341

Cambodia

6 656

9 748

13 147

14 144

14 482

5 041

7 193

9 215

9 747

9 922

Cameroon

8 754

11 663

15 113

16 018

16 296

5 928

7 387

7 958

7 867

7 807

24 512

27 695

30 766

31 510

31 744

1 743

1 032

786

728

710

Canada

289

349

436

463

473

107

107

100

97

96

Central African
Republic

Cape Verde

2 308

2 946

3 713

3 865

3 912

1 954

2 360

2 698

2 708

2 705

Chad

4 507

5 822

7 862

8 598

8 854

3 961

4 842

5 914

6 222

6 319

Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros

11 148

13 101

15 223

15 805

15 996

2 349

2 472

2 417

2 375

2 359

1 004 204

1 160 914

1 282 320

1 311 709

1 320 892

742 341

833 139

853 602

851 028

849 417

28 448

34 975

42 119

44 222

44 914

11 590

9 549

8 763

8 486

8 386

387

527

705

768

790

312

408

519

555

568

Congo

1 805

2 495

3 446

3 724

3 818

1 043

1 210

1 398

1 420

1 425

Costa Rica

2 348

3 076

3 927

4 173

4 250

851

835

824

810

803

Côte d’Ivoire

8 433

12 503

15 826

16 631

16 897

5 474

7 449

7 786

7 635

7 571

140

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A1 (cont.)

Countries

Total population

Agricultural population

(Thousands)

(Thousands)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus

2003

2004

4 443

4 428

4 416

2003

2004

377

308

287
1 679

9 711

10 624

11 201

11 300

11 328

2 604

2 216

1 832

1 717

612

682

783

802

808

159

94

67

60

58

10 270

10 236

10 226

842

766

742

Czech Republic
former Czechoslovakia

15 253

15 563

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

17 201

19 958

22 266

22 664

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

27 907

37 419

48 651

Denmark

5 122

5 141

Dominica

74

72

5 698

Dominican Republic

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2 034

1 780

22 776

7 695

7 569

6 705

6 334

6 206

52 771

54 417

19 990

25 366

30 751

32 602

33 355

5 322

5 364

5 375

362

285

201

180

174

78

79

79

25

20

18

18

17

7 059

8 353

8 745

8 872

1 953

1 841

1 479

1 372

1 337

7 962

10 264

12 420

13 003

13 192

3 347

3 605

3 418

3 309

3 270

43 935

55 762

67 799

71 931

73 390

26 541

24 760

25 013

24 977

24 954

4 580

5 114

6 209

6 515

6 614

2 216

2 083

2 048

2 014

1 999

221

354

456

494

507

173

265

321

341

348

Eritrea

3 714

4 141

4 297

2 881

3 173

3 278

Estonia

1 367

1 323

1 308

154

139

134

Ethiopia

65 597

70 678

72 420

54 039

57 319

58 408

Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia
Fiji

38 136

51 971

33 895

44 601

634

725

814

839

847

301

328

325

323

322

Finland

4 781

4 988

5 177

5 207

5 215

627

453

308

273

262

France

1 659

53 888

56 736

59 304

60 144

60 434

4 496

3 118

1 989

1 736

French Polynesia

151

195

233

244

248

74

83

80

79

78

Gabon

696

953

1 257

1 329

1 351

455

491

475

452

444

Gambia

653

936

551

767

1 137

Georgia

1 312

1 426

1 462

5 258

5 126

5 074

1 037

1 113

1 048

940

905

Germany

78 276

79 439

82 284

82 476

82 526

5 405

3 196

2 069

1 804

1 724

Ghana

11 066

15 283

19 597

20 922

21 377

6 719

8 958

11 009

11 601

11 801

Greece

9 635

10 161

10 895

10 976

10 977

2 510

1 906

1 465

1 331

1 285

Guatemala

6 822

8 752

11 424

12 347

12 661

3 946

4 909

5 706

5 935

6 006

Guinea

4 686

6 131

8 114

8 480

8 620

4 256

5 346

6 804

7 014

7 095

Guinea-Bissau

792

1 017

1 368

1 493

1 538

693

868

1 133

1 225

1 257

Guyana

760

732

759

765

767

203

158

134

127

125

5 455

6 910

8 006

8 326

8 437

3 867

4 674

4 986

5 050

5 070

Haiti
Honduras

3 568

4 869

6 456

6 941

7 099

2 150

2 186

2 239

2 216

2 204

Hungary

10 702

10 367

10 012

9 877

9 831

2 206

1 756

1 205

1 070

1 028

228

255

282

290

292

24

28

23

22

22

India

688 973

846 443

1 016 831

1 065 462

1 081 229

441 263

493 279

545 599

556 592

559 656

Indonesia

150 133

182 106

211 552

219 883

222 611

80 775

92 439

93 305

92 596

92 276

Iran (Islamic
Republic of)

39 403

56 664

66 450

68 920

69 788

15 342

18 219

17 589

17 253

17 157

Iraq

12 969

17 357

3 737

2 822

Iceland

S tatistica l a n n e x

141

TABLE A1 (cont.)

Countries
Ireland

Total population

Agricultural population

(Thousands)

(Thousands)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

3 400

3 517

3 819

2003

2004

3 956

3 999

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

635

504

388

2003

2004

362

354

Israel

3 763

4 523

6 042

6 433

6 560

232

187

163

153

150

Italy

56 420

56 729

57 529

57 423

57 346

7 153

4 880

3 061

2 635

2 505

2 135

2 370

2 580

2 651

2 676

663

585

532

517

512

116 797

123 527

127 024

127 654

127 800

12 452

8 596

4 925

4 132

3 895

2 229

3 264

5 036

5 473

5 614

407

490

573

570

567

15 655

15 433

15 403

3 077

2 839

2 773
23 873

Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya

16 377

23 585

30 535

31 987

32 420

13 473

18 756

23 048

23 706

Kuwait

1 373

2 120

2 239

2 521

2 595

25

25

25

27

27

4 920

5 138

5 208

1 263

1 231

1 220

5 279

5 657

5 787

4 037

4 297

4 385

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s
Democratic Republic

3 211

4 133

2 372

2 307

2 286

Lebanon

2 673

2 721

3 478

3 653

Lesotho

1 277

1 570

1 783

1 802

Latvia

2 554

3 229

283

254

245

3 708

380

200

129

110

105

1 800

531

648

699

696

691

Liberia

1 871

2 134

2 937

3 367

3 487

1 433

1 546

1 986

2 224

2 284

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

3 047

4 305

5 238

5 551

5 659

754

481

313

275

263

3 499

3 444

3 422

517

451

430

Lithuania
Luxembourg

364

378

435

453

459

20

14

10

9

8

Madagascar

9 051

11 960

15 973

17 404

17 901

7 379

9 342

11 857

12 693

12 974

Malawi

6 178

9 414

11 363

12 105

12 337

5 136

7 725

8 821

9 215

9 327

13 771

17 851

22 995

24 425

24 876

5 390

4 667

4 067

3 825

3 739

7 047

9 049

11 909

13 007

13 409

6 270

7 759

9 644

10 312

10 549

324

360

389

394

396

26

10

6

6

5

1 609

2 031

2 646

2 893

2 980

1 148

1 132

1 400

1 508

1 546

966

1 057

1 186

1 221

1 233

257

175

137

127

124

67 559

83 229

98 928

103 457

104 931

26 411

25 271

23 218

22 442

22 164

4 284

4 267

4 263

977

868

835

Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova
Mongolia

1 663

2 213

2 501

2 594

2 630

662

707

607

576

567

Morocco

19 393

24 559

29 111

30 566

31 064

10 932

11 096

10 630

10 465

10 408

Mozambique

12 082

13 519

17 861

18 863

19 182

9 736

10 727

13 737

14 350

14 538

Myanmar

33 703

40 511

47 541

49 485

50 101

25 553

29 670

33 381

34 278

34 543

1 018

1 407

1 892

1 987

2 011

652

802

927

926

921

Nepal

14 883

18 628

23 520

25 164

25 725

13 956

17 424

21 878

23 366

23 872

Netherlands

14 147

14 952

15 898

16 149

16 227

788

680

536

497

485

143

171

215

228

233

70

74

79

79

79

3 117

3 364

3 784

3 875

3 904

341

339

332

327

325

Namibia

New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua

2 921

3 828

5 073

5 466

5 597

1 192

1 135

1 057

1 018

1 003

Niger

5 588

7 654

10 748

11 972

12 415

5 101

6 871

9 430

10 425

10 782

Nigeria

64 311

86 038

114 750

124 009

127 117

34 787

36 999

38 207

37 977

37 827

Norway

4 086

4 242

4 473

4 533

4 552

376

296

227

210

205

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

1 478

2 156

3 192

3 557

3 685

272

327

374

381

384

142

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A1 (cont.)

Countries
Oman

Total population

Agricultural population

(Thousands)

(Thousands)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1 189

1 847

2 610

2 851

2 935

596

830

964

979

983

Pakistan

80 846

110 852

142 650

153 578

157 315

53 664

61 987

72 655

75 883

76 917

Panama

1 949

2 411

2 950

3 120

3 177

639

709

683

670

665

Papua New Guinea

3 241

4 116

5 334

5 711

5 836

2 748

3 361

4 119

4 324

4 387

Paraguay

3 114

4 218

5 471

5 878

6 018

1 596

1 909

2 208

2 288

2 314

Peru

17 324

21 750

25 950

27 167

27 567

6 949

7 691

7 817

7 785

7 767

Philippines

48 085

61 110

75 708

79 999

81 408

25 068

27 856

29 786

30 034

30 078

Poland

35 578

38 107

38 668

38 587

38 551

9 466

9 193

7 333

6 785

6 609

9 758

9 902

10 015

10 062

10 072

2 782

1 978

1 435

1 304

1 262

Portugal
Qatar

231

466

581

610

619

7

12

8

6

6

Republic of Korea

38 126

42 875

46 830

47 700

47 951

12 848

7 033

4 113

3 455

3 255

Romania

22 192

23 184

22 476

22 334

22 280

7 239

5 139

3 120

2 671

2 534

145 586

143 246

142 397

15 277

13 890

13 453

6 959

7 574

7 644

Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis

265 422

289 546

5 155

6 702

7 666

8 387

8 481

60 653

56 957

4 782

6 147

44

41

42

42

42

15

12

10

9

9

Saint Lucia

113

131

146

149

150

38

37

34

33

33

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

100

110

118

120

121

34

31

28

27

27

Samoa

155

160

173

178

180

76

68

60

57

56

Sao Tome and Principe

94

116

149

161

165

70

81

96

100

102

Saudi Arabia

9 618

16 524

22 148

24 217

24 919

4 161

3 218

2 180

1 925

1 844

Senegal

5 539

7 345

9 395

10 095

10 339

4 468

5 642

6 929

7 345

7 488

10 556

10 527

10 519

2 107

1 847

1 768

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles

21 431

23 089

64

71

79

81

6 995

4 809

82

54

58

62

63

63
3 103

Sierra Leone

3 239

4 044

4 427

4 971

5 168

2 263

2 724

2 753

3 011

Singapore

2 417

3 019

4 013

4 253

4 315

38

12

6

5

5

5 391

5 402

5 407

0

0

487

450

438

1 990

1 984

1 982

0

0

38

27

25

437

477

491

182

244

320

344

352

5 036

5 381
5 621

Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands

229

319

6 430

7 147

South Africa

29 151

36 857

43 976

45 026

45 214

7 310

7 227

6 251

5 789

Spain

37 521

39 297

40 744

41 060

41 128

6 933

4 650

2 982

2 593

2 472

Sri Lanka

14 543

16 824

18 595

19 065

19 218

7 628

8 274

8 607

8 656

8 668

Sudan

19 400

24 946

31 443

33 610

34 333

14 029

17 287

19 194

19 605

19 708

Suriname

356

401

425

436

439

84

85

81

80

80

Swaziland

597

846

1 043

1 077

1 083

302

336

355

347

343

Sweden

8 308

8 560

8 857

8 876

8 886

573

424

313

284

275

Switzerland

6 324

6 835

7 173

7 169

7 164

603

579

469

434

422

Syrian Arab Republic

8 965

12 715

16 562

17 800

18 223

3 536

4 252

4 632

4 737

4 771

6 087

6 245

6 298

2 055

1 985

1 961

Somalia

Tajikistan

S tatistica l a n n e x

143

TABLE A1 (cont.)

Countries
Thailand

Total population

Agricultural population

(Thousands)

(Thousands)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

46 328

54 385

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

2003

2004

60 929

62 833

63 465

2 024

2 056

2 066

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

29 839

30 926

2003

2004

29 833

29 269

29 060

260

224

213
2 873

2 523

3 453

4 558

4 909

5 017

1 736

2 260

2 721

2 842

97

99

101

104

105

47

42

35

33

33

Trinidad and Tobago

1 082

1 216

1 289

1 303

1 307

121

134

112

106

103

Tunisia

6 470

8 205

9 518

9 832

9 937

2 513

2 334

2 344

2 311

2 299

Turkey

46 144

57 589

68 279

71 325

72 320

20 392

21 490

21 008

20 630

20 484

4 642

4 867

4 940

1 548

1 567

1 572

23 500

25 827

26 699

18 567

20 003

20 533

Togo
Tonga

Turkmenistan
12 468

17 358

10 757

14 502

49 692

48 523

48 151

1 015

2 035

2 820

2 995

7 914

7 019

6 748

3 051

49

155

137

126

United Kingdom

55 732

56 974

58 906

122

59 470

59 648

1 453

1 232

1 049

1 001

986

United Republic of
Tanzania

18 849

26 087

34 832

36 977

37 671

15 854

21 502

27 240

28 384

28 729

231 440

255 750

285 001

294 043

297 043

8 556

7 662

6 305

5 944

5 828

2 914

3 106

3 342

3 415

3 439

431

392

374

369

368

24 909

26 093

26 479

6 888

6 697

6 626

117

150

197

212

217

58

65

72

74

74

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

15 082

19 500

24 276

25 699

26 170

2 592

2 713

2 310

2 174

2 129

Viet Nam

Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates

United States of
America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu

53 023

66 073

78 147

81 377

82 481

38 798

47 029

52 617

53 797

54 185

Yemen

8 146

11 967

18 029

20 010

20 733

5 776

7 189

9 087

9 482

9 610

Zambia

5 980

8 200

10 411

10 812

10 924

4 543

6 094

7 211

7 302

7 313

Zimbabwe

7 234

10 459

12 639

12 891

12 932

5 236

7 124

7 925

7 844

7 787

4 435 172

5 263 049

6 070 378

6 301 463

6 377 646

World

2 219 655 2 442 413

2 573 143 2 594 704 2 600 301

144

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A2
Land use

Countries
Afghanistan

Land area

Arable land

Permanent crops

Pastures

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

30 000

30 000

2000

65 209

7 910

7 910

139

130

Albania

2 740

585

579

578

117

125

121

416

417

445

Algeria

238 174

6 875

7 081

7 662

634

554

530

36 321

31 041

31 829

20

2

2

2

2

2

3

0

0

0

124 670

2 900

2 900

3 000

500

500

300

54 000

54 004

54 000

44

8

8

8

1

2

2

3

4

4

273 669

26 000

26 400

27 800

981

1 020

1 000

101 040

99 968

99 867

296

438 740

416 400

404 900

71

2 040

1 995

1 920

American
Samoa
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia

2 820

495

65

Australia

768 230

44 031

47 900

50 304

155

181

1 536

1 426

1 399

99

79

835

Austria

8 245

Azerbaijan

8 260

Bahamas

1 001

7

8

7

2

2

4

2

2

2

71

2

2

2

4

2

4

4

4

4

13 017

8 892

9 137

8 084

266

300

400

600

600

600

43

16

16

16

1

1

1

2

2

Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados

1 760

240

6 133

2 562

2
2 995

Belarus

20 748

124

Belgium

3 023

Belize

2 281

45

52

64

7

25

35

44

49

50

Benin

11 062

1 500

1 615

2 380

85

105

265

442

550

550

862

21

507

Bhutan

4 700

104

113

140

18

19

20

265

300

415

Bolivia

108 438

1 943

2 100

2 928

119

155

203

31 500

33 200

33 831

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana

5 120

1 000

1 030

100

56 673

402

418

377

2

3

3

25 600

25 600

25 600

845 942

45 000

50 681

57 640

7 864

6 727

7 560

171 414

184 200

196 206

527

3

3

9

5

4

4

6

6

6

Bulgaria

11 063

3 827

3 856

3 526

350

300

252

2 004

2 003

1 804

Burkina Faso

27 360

2 745

3 520

4 040

40

55

60

6 000

6 000

6 000

Brazil
Brunei
Darussalam

Burundi
Cambodia

2 568

930

930

960

320

360

360

900

835

950

17 652

2 000

3 695

3 700

70

100

107

580

1 554

1 500

46 540

5 910

5 940

5 960

1 020

1 230

1 200

2 000

2 000

2 000

909 351

44 723

45 504

45 810

5 752

6 361

6 368

15 921

15 903

15 435

403

38

41

44

2

2

3

25

25

25

62 298

1 870

1 920

1 930

75

86

94

3 000

3 000

3 125

Chad

125 920

3 137

3 273

3 520

13

27

30

45 000

45 000

45 000

Chile

74 880

3 836

2 802

1 979

214

247

318

12 800

12 850

12 935

China

932 742

96 924

123 678

137 124

3 295

7 719

11 533

334 001

400 001

400 001

Colombia

103 870

3 712

3 305

2 818

1 480

1 695

1 727

40 100

40 083

40 920

Comoros

223

75

78

80

20

35

50

15

15

15

226 705

488

479

490

37

42

50

10 000

10 000

10 000

5 106

283

260

225

223

250

300

2 010

2 330

2 340

Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African
Republic

Congo
Costa Rica

S tatistica l a n n e x

145

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Countries
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic

Land area

Arable land

Permanent crops

Pastures

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

2000

31 800

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1 955

2 430

3 100

2 300

3 500

3 700

13 000

13 000

13 000

5 592

1 458

1 570

128

10 982

2 630

3 031

3 224

700

810

780

2 607

2 900

2 550

924

103

106

98

65

51

42

5

5

4

7 727

former
Czechoslovakia

3 082
5 035

4 964

236
134

131

961
1 682

1 641

Democratic
People’s
Republic of
Korea

12 041

2 285

2 288

2 600

180

180

200

50

50

50

Democratic
Republic of the
Congo

34 150

6 620

6 670

6 700

980

1 190

1 100

15 000

15 000

15 000

Denmark

4 243

2 639

2 561

2 281

14

10

8

252

217

358

Dominica

75

7

5

5

10

11

14

2

2

2

4 838

1 070

1 050

1 096

350

450

500

2 092

2 090

2 100

Ecuador

27 684

1 542

1 604

1 616

920

1 321

1 363

4 016

4 921

5 087

Egypt

99 545

2 286

2 284

2 801

159

364

490

0

0

0

El Salvador

2 072

558

550

640

242

260

250

610

640

794

Equatorial
Guinea

2 805

130

130

130

100

100

100

104

104

104

Dominican
Republic

Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia

10 100

3

6 967

4 239

843

12

131

100 000

10 000

695

20 000

former People’s
Democratic
Republic of
Ethiopia
Fiji

560

1 827

13 000

10 750

90

160

200

715

662

80

80

85

45 400

44 900

120

170

175

Finland

30 459

2 369

2 269

2 183

3

6

9

164

122

26

France

55 010

17 472

17 999

18 440

1 400

1 191

1 142

12 850

11 380

10 124

366

2

2

3

22

21

20

20

20

20
4 665

French
Polynesia
Gabon

25 767

290

295

325

162

162

170

4 700

4 700

Gambia

1 000

155

182

285

4

5

5

400

450

Georgia

6 949

793

269

459
1 938

Germany

34 895

12 030

11 971

11 804

500

443

216

5 989

5 618

5 048

Ghana

22 754

1 900

2 700

3 950

1 700

1 500

2 150

8 400

8 405

8 350

Greece

12 890

2 903

2 899

2 741

1 022

1 068

1 113

5 255

5 255

4 675

Guatemala

10 843

1 270

1 300

1 395

480

485

570

1 300

2 500

2 602

Guinea

24 572

702

728

975

440

500

625

10 700

10 788

10 700

2 812

255

300

300

48

117

248

1 080

1 080

1 080

19 685

480

480

480

15

22

30

1 220

1 230

1 230

2 756

780

780

780

320

320

320

500

497

490

Honduras

11 189

1 484

1 462

1 068

273

358

359

1 500

1 500

1 508

Hungary

9 211

5 027

5 054

4 602

306

234

201

1 294

1 186

1 051

Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti

146

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Countries
Iceland

Land area

Arable land

Permanent crops

Pastures

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

10 025

8

7

7

2 274

2 274

2 274

India

297 319

162 955

162 788

160 555

5 300

6 650

9 200

12 100

11 602

11 040

Indonesia

181 157

18 000

20 253

20 500

8 000

11 720

13 100

12 000

13 110

11 177

Iran (Islamic
Republic of)

163 620

12 981

15 190

14 324

732

1 310

2 002

44 000

44 000

44 000

43 737

5 250

5 300

189

290

4 000

4 000

Iraq
Ireland

6 889

1 108

1 041

1 077

2

3

2

4 617

4 605

Israel

2 171

325

343

338

88

88

86

120

148

142

Italy

29 411

9 483

9 012

8 479

2 953

2 960

2 805

5 126

4 868

4 353

1 083

135

119

174

105

100

110

257

257

229

Japan

36 450

4 874

4 768

4 474

587

475

356

600

450

428

Jordan

8 824

299

290

242

38

90

157

790

791

Jamaica

Kazakhstan

269 970

21 535

136

Kenya

56 914

3 800

4 200

4 500

480

500

560

21 300

21 300

1 782

1

4

10

0

1

2

134

136

19 180

Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic

23 080

1 335
780

799

210

183

877

55
26

61

81

91

122

142

791
185 098

Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan

3 333

21 300
136
9 291

800

800

878

10

12

16

Latvia

6 205

Lebanon

1 023

Lesotho

3 035

292

317

330

4

4

4

2 000

2 000

2 000

Liberia

9 632

371

400

380

205

215

215

2 000

1 993

2 000

175 954

1 753

1 805

1 815

327

350

335

13 000

13 300

13 300

Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
Lithuania

1 845
190

29

611

6 268

2 933

59

Luxembourg

259

62

1

Madagascar

58 154

2 540

2 720

2 900

500

605

600

24 000

24 000

24 000

9 408

1 518

1 815

2 100

82

115

140

1 840

1 840

1 850

Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Moldova

497
65

32 855

1 000

1 700

1 820

3 800

5 248

5 785

259

276

285

122 019

2 010

2 053

4 634

40

40

40

30 000

30 000

30 000

32

12

12

8

1

1

1
39 250

102 522

210

400

488

4

6

12

39 250

39 250

203

100

100

100

7

6

6

7

7

7

190 869

23 000

24 000

24 800

1 530

1 900

2 500

74 499

77 500

80 000

3 288

1 821

Mongolia

156 650

1 182

1 370

1 174

Morocco

44 630

7 530

8 707

8 767

Mozambique

78 409

2 870

3 450

Myanmar

65 755

9 573

9 567

Namibia

82 329

655

Nepal

335

388

1

2

123 405

124 285

129 294

500

736

885

20 900

20 900

21 000

3 900

230

230

235

44 000

44 000

44 000

9 909

449

502

589

363

359

314

660

816

2

2

4

38 000

38 000

38 000

14 300

2 270

2 287

2 324

29

66

105

1 890

1 800

1 757

Netherlands

3 388

790

879

910

32

30

34

1 198

1 097

1 012

New Caledonia

1 828

7

9

6

8

6

4

250

217

234

26 799

2 616

2 511

1 500

914

1 354

1 841

14 156

13 490

13 863

New Zealand

S tatistica l a n n e x

147

TABLE A2 (cont.)

Countries
Nicaragua

Land area

Arable land

Permanent crops

Pastures

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

1980

1990

2000

12 140

1 070

1 300

1 917

175

195

234

4 815

4 815

4 815

126 670

10 212

11 036

14 483

8

11

17

20 500

22 000

23 000

Nigeria

91 077

27 850

29 539

28 200

2 535

2 535

2 650

40 000

40 000

39 200

Norway

30 625

817

864

883

119

112

157

602

104

111

111

158

151

150

Niger

Occupied
Palestinian
Territory

113

115

120

Oman

30 950

23

35

38

28

45

42

1 000

1 000

1 000

Pakistan

77 088

19 994

20 484

21 302

306

456

658

5 000

5 000

5 000

Panama

7 443

435

499

540

120

155

148

1 300

1 470

1 500

Papua New
Guinea

45 286

167

192

205

495

580

650

110

135

175

Paraguay

39 730

1 620

2 110

2 850

115

89

88

15 800

21 100

21 700

128 000

3 220

3 500

3 700

330

420

585

15 129

17 916

16 900

Philippines

29 817

5 228

5 480

5 650

4 400

4 400

5 000

997

1 260

1 500

Poland

30 436

14 621

14 388

13 993

340

345

337

4 046

4 060

4 083

Peru

Portugal

9 150

2 423

2 344

1 800

718

781

715

838

838

1 437

Qatar

1 100

4

10

18

1

1

3

50

50

50

Republic of
Korea

9 873

2 060

1 953

1 718

136

156

200

51

70

55

22 971

9 834

9 450

9 381

663

591

527

4 467

4 728

4 949

Romania
Russian
Federation

1 638 134

former Union
of Soviet
Socialist
Republics

124 374

226 417

224 400

1 864

5 100

4 520

90 924

321 800

327 300

2 467

760

880

900

255

305

250

700

694

520

Saint Kitts and
Nevis

36

8

8

7

6

2

1

1

2

2

Saint Lucia

61

5

5

4

12

13

14

3

3

2

Saint Vincent
and the
Grenadines

39

5

5

7

5

7

7

2

2

2

283

55

55

59

67

67

68

1

1

2

96

1

2

6

35

39

45

1

1

1

214 969

1 890

3 390

3 592

72

91

193

85 000

120 000

170 000

Senegal

19 253

2 341

2 325

2 355

9

25

45

5 700

5 744

5 650

Serbia and
Montenegro

10 200

Rwanda

Samoa
Sao Tome and
Principe
Saudi Arabia

former Socialist
Federal
Republic of
Yugoslavia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore

3 406

7 153

7 020

1 851

330

731

718

46

1

1

1

4

5

6

7 162

450

486

490

49

54

60

67

2

1

1

6

1

1

6 401

6 346

2 204

2 204

2 200

Slovakia

4 808

1 450

126

865

Slovenia

2 014

173

31

314

148

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A2 (cont.)
Land area

Arable land

Permanent crops

Pastures

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

(Thousand ha)

Countries

2000

Solomon
Islands

2 799

12

17

Somalia

62 734

984

1 022

121 447

12 440

13 440

14 753

814

860

49 900

15 558

15 335

13 400

4 941

4 837

6 463

850

875

895

1 030

1 025

South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka

1980

1990

2000

18

1980

1990

42

52

16

20

2000

56

1980

1990

2000

39

39

40

43 000

43 000

959

81 420

82 500

83 928

4 904

10 739

10 300

11 462

1 015

439

439

440
117 180

237 600

12 360

13 000

16 233

100

235

420

98 000

110 000

Suriname

15 600

40

57

57

9

11

10

20

20

21

Swaziland

1 720

183

180

178

6

12

13

1 102

1 076

1 200

Sudan

41 033

2 979

2 845

2 706

4

4

3

725

568

447

Switzerland

4 000

391

391

413

20

21

24

1 609

1 609

1 095

Syrian Arab
Republic

18 378

5 230

4 885

4 542

454

741

810

8 378

7 869

8 359

Tajikistan

13 996

Thailand

51 089

Sweden

930
16 515

17 494

15 865

128
1 783

3 109

3 380

3 254
640

780

800

The former
Yugoslav
Republic of
Macedonia

2 543

Togo

5 439

1 950

2 100

2 510

85

90

120

1 000

1 000

1 000

72

16

16

15

14

12

11

4

4

4

513

70

74

75

46

46

47

11

11

11

Tunisia

15 536

3 191

2 909

2 864

1 510

1 942

2 126

3 999

3 793

4 561

Turkey

76 963

25 354

24 647

23 826

3 125

3 030

2 553

10 100

12 000

12 378

Turkmenistan

46 993

Uganda

19 710

5 000

5 112

Ukraine

57 935

Tonga
Trinidad and
Tobago

United Arab
Emirates

555

44

1 850
4 080

5 000

5 060

636

65
1 600

1 850

32 564

2 100

30 700

932

5 112
7 910

8 360

16

35

60

7

20

187

200

230

305

United
Kingdom

24 193

6 918

6 620

5 876

78

66

52

11 473

11 517

11 036

United
Republic of
Tanzania

88 359

3 100

3 500

4 000

900

900

1 000

43 000

43 000

43 000

915 896

188 755

185 742

176 018

1 869

2 034

2 050

237 539

239 172

234 000

Uruguay

17 502

1 403

1 260

1 373

46

45

42

13 632

13 520

13 543

Uzbekistan

42 540

United States
of America

Vanuatu

4 475

350

22 800

1 219

18

20

20

85

85

85

25

35

42

Venezuela
(Bolivarian
Republic of)

88 205

2 957

2 832

2 595

713

778

810

17 350

18 250

18 240

Viet Nam

32 549

5 940

5 339

6 200

630

1 045

1 938

288

342

642

Yemen

52 797

1 366

1 523

1 545

97

103

124

16 065

16 065

16 065

Zambia

74 339

5 094

5 249

5 260

14

19

27

30 000

30 000

30 000

Zimbabwe

38 685

2 505

2 890

3 220

100

120

130

17 100

17 163

17 200

13 004 202

1 345 989

1 395 973

1 397 656

102 020

119 883

135 821

3 244 404

3 368 403

3 442 078

World

S tatistica l a n n e x

149

TABLE A3
Water use and irrigated land
Share in total water use

Irrigated land

(Percentage)

(Thousand ha)

Agricultural

Industrial

Domestic

2000

2000

2000

Albania

62.0

11.1

26.9

Algeria

64.9

13.2

60.0

Argentina

73.7

Armenia
Australia

Countries

1979–1981

1989–1991

2002

2003

2 505

2 720

372

415

21.9

258

444

340

346

353

568

569

569

17.1

22.9

80

80

80

80

80

9.5

16.8

1 550

1 550

1 550

1 550

1 550

65.8

4.4

29.8

75.3

10.0

286

286

286

14.7

1 548

1 892

2 367

2 545

2 545

0.9

64.0

35.1

4

4

4

4

4

67.5

27.7

4.8

1 455

1 455

1 455

1

1

1

1

1

40.0

1

2

4

4

4
4 725

Afghanistan

1999–2001

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda

Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain

56.7

3.3

Bangladesh

96.2

0.7

3.2

1 512

2 851

4 198

4 597

Barbados

22.2

44.4

33.3

1

5

5

5

5

Belarus

30.1

46.6

23.3

131

131

131

40

40

40

Belize

20.0

73.3

6.7

1

2

3

3

3

Benin

45.4

23.1

31.5

9

10

12

12

12

Bhutan

94.1

1.2

4.7

27

39

40

40

40

Bolivia

80.6

6.9

12.5

137

123

130

132

132

3

3

3

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana

41.2

18.0

40.7

2

1

1

1

1

Brazil

61.8

18.0

20.3

1 600

2 650

2 903

2 920

2 920

1

1

1

1

1

1 189

1 251

624

592

588
25

Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria

18.8

78.2

3.0

Burkina Faso

86.3

0.8

13.0

10

19

25

25

Burundi

77.1

5.9

17.0

14

15

21

21

21

Cambodia

98.0

0.5

1.5

120

240

270

270

270

Cameroon

73.7

8.1

18.2

15

23

26

26

26

Canada

11.8

68.7

19.6

595

721

773

785

785

2

3

3

3

3

0

1

2

2

13

16

26

30

30

Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad

4.0

16.0

82.6

80.0
17.4

Chile

63.5

25.2

11.3

1 255

1 600

1 900

1 900

1 900

China

67.7

25.7

6.6

45 304

47 234

54 324

54 937

54 596

Colombia

45.9

3.7

50.3

400

650

900

900

900

Comoros

47.0

5.0

48.0

8.7

21.7

69.6

1

1

2

2

2

Costa Rica

53.4

17.2

29.5

61

77

108

108

108

Côte d’Ivoire

64.5

11.8

23.7

44

66

73

73

73

3

5

11

Congo

Croatia

150

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share in total water use

Irrigated land

(Percentage)

(Thousand ha)

Agricultural

Industrial

Domestic

Countries

2000

2000

2000

Cuba

68.8

12.2

19.0

765

892

Cyprus

70.8

0.0

29.2

30

36

2.3

57.0

40.7

Czech Republic
former Czechoslovakia

1979–1981

1989–1991

137

244

1999–2001

870

2002

2003

870

870

40

40

40

24

24

24

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

55.0

25.2

19.8

1 120

1 420

1 460

1 460

1 460

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

30.6

16.7

52.8

6

10

11

11

11

Denmark

42.5

25.2

32.3

384

432

447

448

449

Dominican Republic

66.1

1.8

32.2

165

225

273

275

275

Ecuador

82.2

5.3

12.5

620

817

865

865

865

Egypt

86.4

5.9

7.8

2 453

2 621

3 310

3 422

3 422

El Salvador

59.4

15.6

25.0

36

40

45

45

45

0.9

15.7

83.3

94.5

0.2

5.3

21

21

21

Estonia

5.1

38.0

57.0

4

4

4

Ethiopia

93.6

0.4

6.0

290

290

290

Dominica

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia
Fiji

160

162

71.4

14.3

14.3

1

1

3

3

3

Finland

2.7

83.6

13.7

60

63

64

64

64

France

9.8

74.5

15.7

1 369

1 980

2 628

2 600

2 600

1

1

1

1

Gabon

41.7

8.3

50.0

4

5

7

7

7

Gambia

65.4

11.8

22.9

1

1

2

2

2

Georgia

59.0

21.1

19.9

469

469

469

Germany

19.8

67.9

12.3

460

481

485

485

485

Ghana

66.4

9.7

23.9

20

28

31

31

31

Greece

80.4

3.2

16.3

950

1 200

1 441

1 431

1 453

Guatemala

80.1

13.4

6.5

87

117

130

130

130

Guinea

90.1

2.0

7.9

90

90

95

95

95

Guinea-Bissau

82.3

4.6

13.1

17

17

24

25

25

Guyana

97.6

0.6

1.8

124

143

150

150

150

Haiti

93.9

1.0

5.1

70

84

92

92

92

Honduras

80.2

11.6

8.1

66

70

79

80

80

Hungary

32.1

58.6

9.3

190

201

223

230

230

0.1

66.6

33.3

India

86.5

5.5

8.1

38 448

46 760

55 983

55 983

55 808

Indonesia

91.3

0.7

8.0

4 080

4 402

4 477

4 500

4 500

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

90.9

2.3

6.8

5 181

7 000

7 576

7 600

7 650

1 743

3 200

French Polynesia

Iceland

Iraq

S tatistica l a n n e x

151

TABLE A3 (cont.)

Countries
Ireland
Israel

Share in total water use

Irrigated land

(Percentage)

(Thousand ha)

Agricultural

Industrial

Domestic

2000

2000

2000

0.0

77.0

23.0

62.4

6.8

30.7

204

202

1979–1981

1989–1991

1999–2001

2002

2003

194

194

194
2 750

Italy

45.1

36.7

18.2

2 400

2 615

2 699

2 750

Jamaica

48.8

17.1

34.1

24

25

25

25

25

Japan

62.5

17.9

19.7

3 056

2 846

2 641

2 607

2 592

37

63

Jordan

65.0

4.0

31.0

Kazakhstan

81.8

16.5

1.7

Kenya

63.9

6.3

29.7

40

Kuwait

52.3

2.3

45.5

1

Kyrgyzstan

93.8

3.1

3.2

Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

90.0

5.7

4.3

Latvia

13.3

33.3

53.3

Lebanon

66.7

0.7

32.6

86

Lesotho

20.0

40.0

40.0

1

Liberia

54.5

18.2

27.3

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

83.0

2.9

14.1

7.4

14.8

77.8

Lithuania

75

75

75

3 556

3 556

3 556

55

85

90

103

3

10

13

13

1 072

1 072

1 072

174

175

175

20

20

20

86

104

104

104

2

3

3

3

2

3

3

3

3

223

435

470

470

470

7

7

7

1 086

107

135

Luxembourg
Madagascar

95.7

1.5

2.8

646

1 000

1 086

1 086

Malawi

80.2

5.0

14.9

18

20

52

56

56

Malaysia

62.1

21.1

16.9

322

343

365

365

365

Mali

90.1

0.9

9.0

60

78

224

236

236

Malta

19.8

1.0

79.2

1

1

2

2

2

Mauritania

88.2

2.9

8.8

49

49

49

49

49

Mauritius

67.7

2.8

29.5

16

17

20

21

22

4 980

5 600

6 300

6 320

6 320

303

300

300

Mexico

77.1

5.5

17.4

Moldova

32.9

57.6

9.5

Mongolia

52.3

27.3

20.5

36

78

84

84

84
1 445

Morocco

87.4

2.9

9.8

1 208

1 258

1 397

1 445

Mozambique

87.3

1.6

11.1

65

103

115

118

118

Myanmar

98.2

0.5

1.2

1 041

1 026

1 814

1 985

1 870

Namibia

71.0

4.7

24.3

4

4

7

8

8

Nepal

96.5

0.6

2.9

521

984

1 146

1 170

1 170

Netherlands

33.9

59.9

6.2

480

554

565

565

565

2

4

9

10

10

New Zealand

42.2

9.5

48.3

183

281

285

285

285

Nicaragua

83.1

2.3

14.6

60

60

61

61

61

Niger

95.4

0.5

4.1

23

66

72

73

73

Nigeria

68.8

10.1

21.1

200

221

245

270

282

Norway

10.5

66.7

22.8

74

97

127

127

127

19

18

16

16

15

New Caledonia

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

152

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share in total water use

Irrigated land

(Percentage)

(Thousand ha)

Agricultural

Industrial

Domestic

Countries

2000

2000

2000

Oman

90.4

2.2

7.4

38

57

69

72

72

Pakistan

96.0

2.0

1.9

14 753

16 107

17 953

17 990

18 230

Panama

28.0

4.9

67.1

28

31

42

43

43

Papua New Guinea

1979–1981

1989–1991

1999–2001

2002

2003

1.4

42.3

56.3

Paraguay

71.4

8.2

20.4

58

65

67

67

67

Peru

81.6

10.1

8.3

1 143

1 188

1 199

1 200

1 200

Philippines

74.0

9.4

16.6

1 218

1 547

1 550

1 550

1 550

8.3

78.7

13.0

105

100

100

100

100

78.2

12.2

9.6

630

631

650

650

650

Poland
Portugal
Qatar

72.4

3.4

24.1

3

6

13

13

13

Republic of Korea

48.0

16.4

35.6

889

987

880

880

878

Romania

57.0

34.4

8.6

2 301

3 124

3 082

3 077

3 077

Russian Federation

17.8

63.5

18.8

4 600

4 600

4 600

former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

17 410

20 800

4

4

9

9

9

Saint Lucia

1

2

3

3

3

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

1

1

1

1

1

Rwanda

68.0

8.0

24.0

Saint Kitts and Nevis

Samoa
Sao Tome and Principe

10

10

10

10

10

Saudi Arabia

89.0

1.2

9.8

567

1 583

1 620

1 620

1 620

Senegal

93.0

2.6

4.4

62

85

104

120

120

23

32

32

30

30

30

Slovakia

181

183

183

Slovenia

3

3

3

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone

7.4

27.6

65.0

92.1

2.6

5.3

150

161

20

28

Singapore

Solomon Islands
Somalia

133

200

South Africa

62.7

6.0

31.2

1 119

1 200

1 498

1 498

1 498

Spain

68.0

18.5

13.4

3 028

3 387

3 719

3 780

3 780

Sri Lanka

95.2

2.5

2.4

462

522

641

638

743

Sudan

96.7

0.7

2.7

1 700

1 817

1 865

1 863

1 863

Suriname

92.5

3.0

4.5

42

46

51

51

51

Swaziland

96.5

1.2

2.3

40

45

50

50

50

8.8

54.4

36.8

70

114

115

115

115

1.9

73.9

24.1

25

25

25

25

25

94.9

1.8

3.3

548

717

1 221

1 333

1 333

Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic

S tatistica l a n n e x

153

TABLE A3 (cont.)
Share in total water use

Irrigated land

(Percentage)

(Thousand ha)

Agricultural

Industrial

Domestic

Countries

2000

2000

2000

Tajikistan

91.6

4.7

3.7

Thailand

95.0

2.5

2.5

1979–1981

1989–1991

1999–2001

719

721

722

3 007

4 248

4 973

4 986

4 986

55

55

55

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Togo

2002

2003

45.0

2.4

52.6

1

7

7

7

7

6.5

25.8

67.7

3

4

4

4

4

Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia

82.0

4.2

13.8

232

328

393

394

394

Turkey

74.2

11.0

14.8

2 712

4 024

4 743

5 215

5 215

Turkmenistan

97.5

0.8

1.7

1 800

1 800

1 800

Uganda

40.0

16.7

43.3

Ukraine

52.5

35.4

12.2

United Arab Emirates

68.3

8.7

23.0

United Kingdom

6

9

9

9

9

2 393

2 262

2 208

2.9

75.4

21.7

140

162

170

170

170

United Republic of
Tanzania

89.4

0.5

10.1

117

144

163

184

184

United States of America

41.3

46.0

12.7

20 582

20 800

22 543

22 384

22 385

77

125

Uruguay

96.2

1.3

2.5

Uzbekistan

93.2

2.1

4.7

188

202

210

4 281

4 281

4 281

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

47.4

7.0

45.5

367

472

575

575

575

Viet Nam

68.1

24.1

7.8

Yemen

95.3

0.6

4.1

1 685

2 867

3 000

3 000

3 000

291

354

497

500

Zambia

75.9

7.5

550

16.7

19

30

133

156

156

Zimbabwe

78.9

7.1

14.0

80

106

174

174

174

World

70.0

20.0

10.0

209 657

244 196

275 090

Vanuatu

277 247

277 098

154

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A4
Production of cereals and meat

Countries
Afghanistan

1979–1981

Cereals

Meat

(Thousand tonnes)

(Thousand tonnes)

1989–1991

1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

4 060

2 754

240

238

Albania

916

792

522

489

499

42

51

66

75

76

Algeria

1 958

2 481

1 872

4 266

3 998

185

436

546

564

581

0

0

0

0

0

81

99

139

139

139

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

371

298

Austria

725

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1

19 988

36 569

33 961

34 212

3 703

3 539

4 001

3 762

4 175

294

305

443

49

53

54

21 150

21 390

36 232

41 652

31 520

2 752

3 009

3 743

3 852

3 769

4 388

5 115

4 711

3 996

5 009

720

842

971

998

987

1 507

1 993

2 087

109

134

144

0

0

0

Azerbaijan
Bahamas

721

24 579

Armenia
Australia

546

1

1

Bahrain

7

6

8

8

8

7

10

14

13

13

20 983

27 987

37 960

40 876

41 044

241

305

428

449

449

2

2

0

0

0

12

15

15

14

16

Belarus

4 283

5 116

6 589

625

605

629

Belgium

2 436

2 561

2 932

1 754

1 740

1 821

Bangladesh
Barbados

Belize

27

33

56

56

49

4

7

11

17

18

Benin

366

566

970

1 043

1 109

41

43

46

49

54

Bhutan

159

102

126

108

127

5

7

7

7

7

Bolivia

663

845

1 221

1 486

1 341

209

263

405

440

446

1 146

792

1 439

35

32

35

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam

37

61

23

38

45

50

59

58

53

54

30 805

37 702

50 148

67 453

63 812

5 224

8 228

15 332

18 388

19 919

3

1

0

1

1

5

6

16

18

19

Bulgaria

8 129

8 872

5 231

3 831

7 463

659

740

482

401

414

Burkina Faso

1 166

1 975

2 698

3 564

2 902

53

111

176

202

212

Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde

219

296

261

287

280

21

29

23

23

23

1 334

2 591

4 201

5 026

4 427

27

120

193

210

214

866

890

1 272

1 584

1 684

115

175

214

219

219

42 727

52 917

49 502

50 174

52 684

2 514

2 799

4 006

4 217

4 592

6

10

27

12

4

2

5

8

8

9

Central African
Republic

103

101

170

201

192

46

74

110

124

127

Chad

508

677

1 161

1 618

1 213

61

98

117

122

125

Chile
China
Colombia

1 742

2 997

2 624

3 693

3 956

356

507

955

1 041

1 126

286 488

390 171

420 308

376 123

413 166

14 526

30 644

62 833

71 155

74 306

3 339

4 090

3 668

4 062

4 409

829

1 186

1 377

1 494

1 587

Comoros

18

19

21

21

21

2

2

2

2

2

Congo

15

11

8

9

9

18

21

27

28

31

Costa Rica

337

266

292

229

234

100

148

187

182

190

Côte d’Ivoire

866

1 225

2 019

1 808

2 205

118

125

3 017

2 355

3 268

Croatia

162

170

171

130

147

149

S tatistica l a n n e x

155

TABLE A4 (cont.)

Countries

1979–1981

Cereals

Meat

(Thousand tonnes)

(Thousand tonnes)

1989–1991

1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

551

547

841

1 076

888

272

316

230

194

200

87

107

101

142

107

35

65

102

108

109

6 914

5 762

8 783

800

771

750

former Czechoslovakia

9 762

12 228

1 413

1 562

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

6 004

7 201

3 554

4 324

4 461

236

320

203

242

246

900

1 471

1 624

1 569

1 570

173

204

217

212

211

Denmark

7 346

9 211

9 203

9 051

8 963

1 303

1 559

2 027

2 114

2 158

Dominica

0

0

0

0

0

1

1

1

1

1
328

Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Dominican Republic

450

531

662

656

620

124

221

329

298

Ecuador

686

1 422

1 800

1 967

2 128

168

255

491

579

591

8 134

12 672

19 356

20 682

21 315

440

754

1 315

1 371

1 437

719

785

798

791

822

57

72

111

117

127

0

0

1

1

1

Eritrea

207

99

83

30

32

32

Estonia

552

506

608

57

68

71

8 654

8 720

9 280

529

597

593

22

26

27

Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea

Ethiopia
former People’s
Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia
Fiji

5 739

5 894

19

30

16

17

16

528

599

13

20

Finland

2 993

3 845

3 548

3 788

3 616

305

340

339

376

382

France

46 078

57 683

63 426

54 940

70 534

5 423

5 767

6 538

6 408

6 255

2

2

2

2

2
32

French Polynesia
Gabon

11

23

27

32

32

24

27

31

31

Gambia

69

99

176

204

213

6

6

6

7

7

631

742

663

104

109

109
6 798

Georgia
32 044

37 910

46 473

39 426

51 097

6 925

6 987

6 377

6 602

Ghana

726

1 155

1 674

2 041

1 943

111

143

160

172

177

Greece

4 951

5 491

4 828

4 535

5 040

525

528

496

463

478

Guatemala

1 122

1 413

1 165

1 147

1 172

108

147

231

248

248

Germany

Guinea

678

632

1 015

1 161

1 142

22

26

49

53

56

Guinea-Bissau

102

165

162

121

171

11

14

18

19

19

Guyana

267

214

505

506

506

14

6

15

27

27

Haiti

419

405

423

398

367

65

59

90

101

100

Honduras

492

664

591

587

108

81

86

136

187

202

13 001

14 603

12 158

8 770

16 737

1 425

1 547

1 125

1 200

1 047

26

19

24

27

26

138 182

195 478

238 012

233 406

232 360

2 620

3 881

5 272

5 941

6 032

33 605

51 258

60 484

63 024

65 314

676

1 446

1 722

2 223

2 392

Iran (Islamic Republic
of)

8 855

12 973

14 002

20 930

21 810

647

986

1 558

1 621

1 646

Iraq

1 803

2 541

149

233

Ireland

2 009

1 950

2 117

2 147

2 501

629

831

1 056

976

979

Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia

156

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A4 (cont.)

Countries
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan

1979–1981

Cereals

Meat

(Thousand tonnes)

(Thousand tonnes)

1989–1991

Kuwait

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

239

331

182

324

294

186

236

460

560

576

17 921

20 588

17 864

23 267

3 514

3 924

4 127

4 020

4 079

7

3

2

1

1

52

71

100

103

103

14 318

13 946

12 444

10 826

11 990

3 002

3 499

2 983

3 019

3 028

88

105

44

80

53

34

65

126

125

132

13 885

14 739

12 334

637

693

737

2 279

2 958

2 921

3 351

2 730

280

370

448

483

497

0

1

3

3

3

40

42

74

71

75

1 654

1 633

1 709

197

194

188

2 518

2 733

94

87

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s
Democratic Republic

2003

18 025

Kazakhstan
Kenya

1999–2001

1 056

1 443

2 321
882

932

1 059

Lebanon

41

80

123

146

145

Lesotho

198

170

198

180

248

23

25

Liberia

254

191

175

100

110

15

17

Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya

225

284

216

213

213

142

132

2 350

2 623

149

164

Latvia

Lithuania
Luxembourg

30

45

78
62

71

73

69

80

172

198

201

22

22

22

19

21

21

150

142

142

2 856

177

196

214

179

41

46

46

280

266

297

Madagascar

2 178

2 541

2 756

3 129

3 391

Malawi

1 341

1 560

2 336

2 142

1 843

32

42

57

59

59

Malaysia

2 061

1 886

2 154

2 331

2 268

289

634

923

1 070

1 158

Mali

1 082

2 114

2 596

2 858

2 845

124

161

204

257

247

Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico

Morocco

250

8

8

11

12

12

8

15

19

20

19

48

131

166

153

125

50

62

78

89

89

1

2

0

0

0

9

16

27

33

32

20 391

23 553

28 822

30 315

32 751

2 535

2 839

4 468

4 870

5 040

2 199

1 583

2 944

91

84

86

Moldova
Mongolia

210

320

718

151

165

139

234

257

275

157

200

3 583

7 456

3 485

8 473

8 604

248

447

592

604

600

649

629

1 591

1 813

2 007

66

81

90

90

90

12 986

14 111

21 818

24 163

24 822

252

259

444

550

639

73

103

101

107

107

64

65

77

110

109

Nepal

3 640

5 680

7 055

7 684

7 581

128

186

237

251

257

Netherlands

1 280

1 327

1 590

1 740

1 754

1 926

2 685

2 823

2 223

2 350

3

1

4

6

4

4

4

6

6

6

New Zealand

789

783

888

899

866

1 143

1 204

1 294

1 426

1 433

Nicaragua

392

453

693

972

773

83

72

105

136

150

Niger

1 702

2 120

2 714

3 102

2 672

98

97

134

133

133

Nigeria

7 427

18 100

21 288

22 616

22 783

669

753

968

1 042

1 067

Norway

1 129

1 410

1 246

1 287

1 426

195

215

268

275

290

40

68

62

96

85

99

6

6

6

33

38

41

Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia

New Caledonia

Occupied Palestinian
Territory
Oman

2

5

12

25

S tatistica l a n n e x

157

TABLE A4 (cont.)

Countries

Cereals

Meat

(Thousand tonnes)

(Thousand tonnes)

1979–1981

1989–1991

1999–2001

2003

2004

Pakistan

17 200

21 038

28 422

28 964

30 311

Panama

253

336

303

403

403

69

101

170

164

168

4

4

11

10

11

215

272

350

387

393

472

818

1 205

1 643

1 979

210

337

387

351

414

Papua New Guinea
Paraguay

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

714

1 327

1 697

2003

2004

1 848

1 917

1 430

1 983

3 566

3 927

3 389

357

497

816

939

958

Philippines

10 942

14 350

16 917

18 116

19 910

785

1 091

1 882

2 309

2 364

Poland

18 466

27 594

25 017

23 391

29 635

2 745

2 960

2 927

3 472

3 271

1 210

1 683

1 528

1 186

1 363

437

556

730

679

697

1

3

6

7

7

7

14

12

14

13

8 452

8 412

7 606

6 355

7 325

471

930

1 673

1 776

1 747

18 109

18 286

15 479

12 962

24 314

1 646

1 562

1 014

1 147

779

67 190

65 562

76 231

4 399

4 945

4 981

38

47

50

Peru

Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Romania
Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda

159 029

184 357

271

289

234

298

319

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

3

5

5

5

5

3

3

0

0

1

1

1

2 404

2 949

2 792

126

411

629

631

643

1 040

1 452

1 085

69

111

165

162

167

7 682

5 541

9 873

913

843

808

1

2

1

1

0

3

2

Saudi Arabia

303

4 214

Senegal

850

996

Samoa

15 521

16 512

542

566

1 463

Seychelles
Sierra Leone

254

309

309

2 814

2 490

3 793

490

402

586

5

5

6

Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia

13

31

2

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

former Socialist
Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia

26
0

0

Serbia and
Montenegro

19 531

2

Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia

Sao Tome and Principe

15 255

1 448

1

2

2

2

2

16

19

21

23

23

155

167

119

111

93

354

332

312

183

184

180

3

3

3

2

3

119

163

305

497

South Africa

14 195

12 744

11 775

11 825

12 352

1 084

1 375

1 658

1 848

1 887

Spain

14 709

19 306

20 198

21 412

24 747

2 601

3 459

4 955

5 479

5 531

Sri Lanka

2 130

2 370

2 839

3 106

2 668

52

56

101

124

130

Sudan

715

2 931

2 771

3 888

6 380

3 643

445

419

668

715

Suriname

258

229

178

194

195

11

15

8

9

9

Swaziland

92

91

97

70

71

20

17

22

21

21

5 407

5 677

5 309

5 352

5 508

544

507

558

551

554

843

1 331

1 118

878

1 130

467

480

425

433

432

3 069

2 598

4 577

6 223

5 249

172

219

343

391

391

496

866

860

30

45

49

Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan

158

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A4 (cont.)

Countries
Thailand

Cereals

Meat

(Thousand tonnes)

(Thousand tonnes)

1979–1981

1989–1991

1999–2001

2003

2004

20 316

23 624

30 132

31 420

28 277

559

472

684

737

816

787

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Togo

301

505

Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago

13

17

7

6

6

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1 399

1 987

2 211

1 817

25

28

28
34

932

16

29

31

33

2

2

2

2

2

24

28

41

61

62

Tunisia

1 146

1 626

1 449

2 312

2 155

97

147

244

243

245

Turkey

25 232

28 283

30 235

30 807

34 050

714

1 148

1 352

1 494

1 583

1 717

2 667

2 785

153

210

224

Turkmenistan
Uganda

1 171

1 597

Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of
America
Uruguay

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Viet Nam

2 413

2 625

19 662

40 997

149

200

267

263

259

1 625

1 725

1 595

1

2

0

0

0

22

55

81

91

88

18 840

22 644

21 691

21 511

22 030

3 009

3 340

3 476

3 271

3 270

3 010

4 201

4 226

4 261

5 020

185

275

332

363

362

301 133

292 217

334 614

348 897

389 066

24 325

28 827

37 567

38 911

38 891

1 012

1 230

1 923

2 171

2 523

415

456

550

530

602

4 094

6 106

5 855

497

560

592

1

1

1

1

1

4

6

7

6

7

1 550

2 037

2 775

3 116

3 714

672

777

1 280

1 238

1 170

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu

2 200
28 878

12 218

20 008

33 984

37 705

39 341

529

1 065

1 982

2 482

2 664

Yemen

897

693

689

418

497

71

123

171

206

207

Zambia

990

1 467

934

1 365

1 364

81

95

127

127

127

2 275

2 393

2 144

1 259

837

114

137

188

205

207

1 573 227

1 903 961

2 084 615

2 085 774

2 270 360

136 219

179 648

234 671

253 688

260 098

Zimbabwe

World

S tatistica l a n n e x

159

TABLE A5
Production of fish and forest products (2004)
Capture fisheries and
aquaculture
(Thousand tonnes)

Countries

Freshwater
and
diadromous
fish

Marine
fish

Other
aquatic
animals

Woodfuel

Forest products

Forest products

(Thousand m3)

(Thousand tonnes)

Industrial
roundwood

Sawnwood

Woodbased
panels

Wood
pulp

Paper
and
paperboard

Afghanistan
Albania

2

2

1

221

75

97

37

3

Algeria

1

136

4

7 545

119

13

48

41

6

3 487

1 096

5

11

15

3 972

9 706

1 388

1 112

782

62

6

2

2

3 092

25 685

4 038

2 083

1 107

3 097

3 539

12 943

11 133

3 419

1 934

4 852

6

7

0

0

17

1

282

388

American Samoa
Angola

4
10

224
2

1

37

761

155

Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia

1

Australia

21

Austria

3

Azerbaijan

9

Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh

156

90

0

0

1

10

0

8

6

1 756

234

112

Barbados

27 694

2

9

1 511
2

148

19

46

5

Belarus

5

1 097

6 446

2 304

815

61

279

Belgium

2

23

3

550

4 215

1 215

2 698

531

2 131

Belize

0

0

14

126

62

35

Benin

19

14

7

31

Bhutan

0

Bolivia

6

1

Bosnia and Herzegovina

8

0

Botswana

0

Brazil

0

420

436

160

162

332

4 479

133

31

32

2 228

650

347

12

1 316

2 677

888

27

655

105

136 637

110 470

21 200

6 283

9 580

8 221

533

92

171

26 424

20 578

Brunei Darussalam

0

2

1

12

217

90

Bulgaria

5

3

3

2 187

2 646

332

Burkina Faso

9

11 727

1 183

2

14

8 390

333

83

Burundi
Cambodia

270

34

23

9 386

125

4

5

Cameroon

55

52

1

9 407

1 800

702

88

176

614

529

2 901

196 667

60 655

16 575

8

0

2

Canada
Cape Verde

2

Central African Republic

15

2 000

832

69

Chad

70

6 362

761

2

569

4 615

426

13 111

29 432

8 015

1 927

3 338

1 170

19 124

11 542

18 242

191 044

95 061

12 211

44 914

4 080

53 463

93

97

22

8 469

1 993

622

225

209

899

15

0

Congo

26

17

1

1 219

896

157

36

Costa Rica

21

17

8

3 445

1 687

812

65

3

20

6

48

1

8 655

1 678

512

340

Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros

Côte d’Ivoire

9

160

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A5 (cont.)
Capture fisheries and
aquaculture
(Thousand tonnes)

Countries
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic

Freshwater
and
diadromous
fish

Marine
fish

Other
aquatic
animals

Woodfuel

Forest products

Forest products

(Thousand m3)

(Thousand tonnes)

Industrial
roundwood

Sawnwood

Woodbased
panels

3

33

4

954

2 887

582

103

28

23

14

2 767

808

181

149

0

4

0

24

Wood
pulp

109

Paper
and
paperboard

464
18

3

7

5

2

1 190

14 411

3 940

1 390

5 737

1 500

280

69 777

3 653

40

3

3

817

810

196

373

402

732

934

56

80

former Czechoslovakia
Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
Democratic Republic of
the Congo
Denmark

9

174

218

5

44

966

123

1

0

Dominica

86

66

Dominican Republic

3

10

3

556

6

Ecuador

8

333

59

5 427

1 211

755

261

574

270

21

16 792

268

2

56

El Salvador

4

27

14

4 173

682

16

Equatorial Guinea

1

2

0

447

364

4

15

Eritrea

0

7

0

2 406

2

Estonia

4

70

14

2 200

8 100

2 000

388

Ethiopia

10

93 029

2 928

18

93

Egypt

130
2

100
460
56

70

66
16

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia
Fiji

0

42

Finland

60

89

France

49

503

289

0

12

0

French Polynesia

5

37

346

84

16

4 519

49 281

13 544

2 029

12 619

14 036

2 500

32 450

9 860

6 046

2 503

10 249

222

2 244

20 392

Gabon

9

34

4

1 070

3 500

133

Gambia

3

28

0

638

113

1

Georgia

0

3

0

Germany

68

218

33

5 847

Ghana

81

314

5

20 678

Greece

7

142

42

1 057

Guatemala

8

3

7

Guinea

4

89

Guinea-Bissau

0

6

0

50

10

48 657

19 850

14 108

1 350

480

435

469

191

842

266

15 905

419

366

43

31

11 635

651

26

422

170

16

Guyana

1

37

19

866

481

36

Haiti

0

6

2

1 993

239

14

Honduras

5

11

22

8 699

920

437

9

Hungary

20

2 672

2 988

205

638

8

1 696

33

India

3 029

2 345

714

303 839

19 146

17 500

2 341

1 827

4 145

Indonesia

1 152

3 852

852

76 564

32 497

4 330

5 393

5 482

7 223

Iceland

54

7

95
579

S tatistica l a n n e x

161

TABLE A5 (cont.)
Capture fisheries and
aquaculture
(Thousand tonnes)

Countries
Iran (Islamic Republic of)

Other
aquatic
animals

Woodfuel

Forest products

Forest products

(Thousand m3)

(Thousand tonnes)

Industrial
roundwood

Sawnwood

Freshwater
and
diadromous
fish

Marine
fish

150

307

18

77

743

68

939

Woodbased
panels

665

Wood
pulp

240

Paper
and
paperboard

415

Iraq
Ireland

16

244

79

20

2 542

Israel

18

8

0

2

25

Italy

39

182

184

5 814

2 883

1 580

4

9

5

570

282

66

369

3 346

1 463

114

15 615

13 603

1

0

253

4

Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya

34

492

9 667

5 288

10 586

29 253
25

130

265

10

1 792

78

83

0

18

9

22

95

5 928

392

182

13

970

11 784

3 988

394

38

82

7

9

46

42

337

20

30

2

Kuwait

0

3

2

Kyrgyzstan

Latvia

1

121

3

3

0

Lebanon

1

Lesotho

0

Liberia

4

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

0

46

Lithuania

5

149

Madagascar

33

Malawi

57
82

6

5 576
536

116

31

7

1 260

4 860

1 450

393

13

264

133

400

83

10 770

183

893

5

5 102

520

45

18

1 136

3 119

22 000

5 598

4 965

413

13

22

289

2

0

Mauritania

5

177

17

1 581

6

Mauritius

0

10

0

6

8

3

115

1 080

344

6

9

6 963

123

978

338

4 391

177

129

1

43

38 269

6 913

2 962

430

5

30

27

5

10

Mongolia

0

186

445

300

2

Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia

2

854

40

298

563

83

35

19

12

14

16 724

1 319

28

3

825

1 092

71

37 560

4 196

1 056

118

2

565

4
12 702

1 260

630

30

89

290

736

273

8

119

3 459

1 596

920

Nepal

40

Netherlands

11

501
3

3

5

3

New Zealand

6

444

182

19 722

4 369

2 219

Nicaragua

1

10

16

5 906

93

45

8

8 596

411

4

New Caledonia

Niger

99

1

Moldova

Mexico

165

2

0

101

Malta

58
98

2 047

Luxembourg

Malaysia

5 596

171
6

Mali

45
275

20 370

120

Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

841
181

52

13

162

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A5 (cont.)
Capture fisheries and
aquaculture
(Thousand tonnes)

Countries

Freshwater
and
diadromous
fish

Marine
fish

Other
aquatic
animals

Woodfuel

Forest products

Forest products

(Thousand m3)

(Thousand tonnes)

Industrial
roundwood

Sawnwood

Woodbased
panels

Wood
pulp

Paper
and
paperboard

Nigeria

226

251

32

60 852

9 418

2 000

95

23

19

Norway

630

2 461

69

1 229

7 551

2 230

493

2 528

2 294

3

0

28

700

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

153

13

Pakistan

184

348

38

25 599

2 679

1 180

354

Panama

1

184

14

1 219

93

30

7

Papua New Guinea

12

219

3

5 533

1 708

60

45

Paraguay

24

5 944

4 044

550

161

13

Peru

44

9 239

352

7 300

1 635

671

97

91

516

1 929

279

13 070

2 975

339

777

175

1 056

60

157

10

3 396

29 337

3 743

6 491

1 027

2 635

1

202

25

600

10 953

1 100

1 316

1 949

1 674

11

0

Republic of Korea

30

1 132

819

10 511

Romania

11

2

416

2 505

131

0

0

1

0

Oman

Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar

Russian Federation

2 463

2 089

4 366

3 860

545

3 015

12 762

4 588

951

262

462

48 000

134 000

21 500

7 159

6 885

6 789

5 000

495

79

70

61

21

9

5

77

21

159

former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda

8

Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia

0

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Samoa

9
0

3
4

0

2

45

19

52

374

19

5 243

794

23

5

0

0

2 097

1 423

575

94

1
5 403

124

Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro

2

former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles
17

112

5

Singapore

3

2

3

Slovakia

3

Slovenia

2

Sierra Leone

Solomon Islands

5
25

355

87

304

6 936

1 837

508

520

798

474

153

558

1

0

725

1 826

461

36

0

138

554

12

867

16

12 000

21 159

2 171

1 022

2 076

3 774

Somalia
South Africa

2

Spain

38

769

360

2 055

14 235

3 730

4 754

1 905

5 490

Sri Lanka

31

237

19

5 646

694

61

22

3

25

Sudan

56

5

17 482

2 173

51

2

3

S tatistica l a n n e x

163

TABLE A5 (cont.)
Capture fisheries and
aquaculture
(Thousand tonnes)

Countries

Freshwater
and
diadromous
fish

Suriname

0

Swaziland

0

Sweden

9

Switzerland

3

Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Thailand

14

Marine
fish

Other
aquatic
animals

Woodfuel

Forest products

Forest products

(Thousand m3)

(Thousand tonnes)

Industrial
roundwood

161

Sawnwood

59

Woodbased
panels

Wood
pulp

Paper
and
paperboard

19

14

44

1

560

330

102

8

191

262

5

5 900

61 400

16 900

681

12 106

11 589

1 000

3 700

1 505

897

271

1 777

3

0

18

40

9

27

2 270

1 202

19 985

8 700

288

685

699

132

28

4 424

254

13

1

0
546

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

1

Togo

9

21

0

Tonga

1

0

Trinidad and Tobago

9

1

35

2

2

51

33

916

3 420
16

Tunisia

2

91

20

2 138

214

20

104

Turkey

70

519

55

5 278

11 225

6 215

3 833

Turkmenistan

15

0

94
225

1 643

3

Uganda

377

0

36 235

3 175

264

5

Ukraine

38

158

33

8 396

6 466

2 019

1 308

27

702

0

90

1

United Arab Emirates

3

United Kingdom

175

523

162

231

8 042

2 782

3 533

344

6 240

United Republic of
Tanzania

299

46

3

21 505

2 314

24

4

54

25

United States of
America

708

3 523

1 336

43 608

414 702

87 436

44 262

54 301

83 612

110

11

4 267

2 132

230

6

41

96

18

8

Uruguay

2

Uzbekistan

4

Vanuatu

0

65

30

91

28

28

55

356

101

3 793

1 526

947

233

142

723

896

1 334

849

21 250

5 237

2 900

117

278

888

240

16

353

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Viet Nam
Yemen

11

Zambia

70

7 219

834

157

18

Zimbabwe

16

8 115

992

397

77

World

36 080

71 821

31 112

1 771 978

1 645 682

415 553

224 929

4
42

174 635

80

354 490

164

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A6
Value of agricultural exports and share in total exports
Agricultural exports

Share of agricultural exports
(Percentage)

(US$ million)

Countries

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2004

4.18

Afghanistan

300

147

Albania

111

106

19

28

25

29.19

6.71

6.16

Algeria

119

46

29

55

55

0.92

0.38

0.16

0.22

0.17

4

11

5

0

0

2.91

3.59

1.59

0.09

0.09

157

9

3

2

2

9.63

0.26

0.04

0.02

0.01

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

Austria

66.84

1

2

0

1

1

2.22

4.83

0.16

0.25

0.29

5 816

6 414

10 873

13 867

15 839

69.86

56.74

42.72

46.90

45.84

33

77

79

11.15

11.19

10.97

Armenia
Australia

51.58

2003

8 475

11 460

15 271

15 173

20 871

42.74

30.05

26.34

20.16

26.02

726

1 350

3 531

5 637

7 475

4.46

3.53

5.18

5.80

6.37

67

154

189

4.02

5.94

5.24

Azerbaijan
Bahamas

14

34

46

43

46

0.28

1.51

1.52

0.72

0.77

Bahrain

13

6

29

54

43

0.38

0.17

0.54

0.81

0.57

184

157

107

103

114

26.91

10.44

1.89

1.78

1.73

54

51

27.35

25.54

Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium

70

66

72

26.46

26.43

25.96

528

817

1 076

7.66

8.20

7.83

17 176

22 595

26 304

9.07

8.84

8.59

Belize

57

88

133

123

121

54.35

69.37

69.66

59.95

59.10

Benin

38

83

187

257

228

80.43

29.86

54.87

94.74

75.11

Bhutan

4

11

14

14

10

21.85

14.69

12.10

11.70

8.59

Bolivia

82

159

402

494

616

8.51

17.88

33.68

30.94

28.71

44

77

113

6.84

7.74

9.14

84

82

116

62

52

18.85

4.49

4.54

2.05

1.50

8 665

8 750

14 215

20 914

27 215

44.31

26.95

26.44

28.62

28.21

Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil

2

9

1

2

1

0.06

0.41

0.04

0.04

0.03

1 851

1 443

555

799

1 066

18.51

13.24

11.94

10.74

10.75

Burkina Faso

70

92

130

291

314

86.40

68.72

54.02

77.51

61.03

Burundi

48.43

Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria

80

77

38

30

23

97.03

94.09

78.11

79.04

Cambodia

5

41

34

40

55

41.03

32.68

2.74

1.94

2.16

Cameroon

593

512

293

587

654

49.77

30.00

16.27

25.54

25.16

6 800

8 887

15 878

17 598

20 574

10.68

7.16

6.14

6.46

6.50

1

2

0

0

0

35.33

29.56

2.44

2.10

3.00

51

53

27

17

1

48.55

41.96

18.08

12.98

0.56

Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad

115

128

125

115

123

80.55

70.61

66.62

60.37

64.75

Chile

362

1 188

2 942

3 655

4 268

8.56

13.80

16.12

17.19

13.33

China

5 041

14 527

16 648

20 460

20 827

8.89

6.65

2.98

2.53

2.02

Colombia

2 546

2 413

2 917

2 818

3 390

74.86

36.65

23.64

21.55

20.63
65.61

Comoros

12

15

6

20

26

83.13

75.52

28.66

50.04

Congo

15

12

20

33

40

2.01

1.21

0.93

1.43

1.76

672

890

1 681

1 782

2 014

68.50

59.87

29.63

29.37

31.98

1 812

1 650

2 130

3 216

3 093

66.38

57.12

51.13

58.55

49.54

394

673

659

8.82

10.87

8.21

858

610

620

53.25

35.87

36.50

Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba

4 560

3 897

87.20

84.86

S tatistica l a n n e x

165

TABLE A6 (cont.)

Countries
Cyprus

Agricultural exports

Share of agricultural exports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

429

262

227

1 242

1 737

2 546

180

283

former Czechoslovakia

626

689

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

135

58

26

21

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

205

135

38

Denmark

5 006

7 929

Dominica

7

34

Dominican Republic

635

396

556

Ecuador

635

837

1 476

Egypt

675

450

575

El Salvador

715

298

18

7

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

43.87

28.43

23.98

4.20

3.56

3.71

34.88

31.39

4.37

5.53

22

11.96

3.65

2.70

2.23

2.33

22

39

16.83

13.19

11.01

5.47

9.71

9 023

11 398

13 185

31.05

23.71

17.65

17.14

17.17

22

14

15

56.92

65.94

42.31

35.28

37.10

588

646

62.71

51.18

65.03

55.25

48.45

1 974

1 958

28.20

31.69

31.56

32.68

25.65

938

1 314

24.92

15.19

9.63

11.43

12.57

503

397

427

73.89

49.04

18.13

12.68

12.63

8

4

7

79.86

11.83

0.85

0.39

0.73

2

1

3

5.58

2.56

9.38

Estonia

274

475

302

7.59

8.45

5.08

Ethiopia

290

450

380

61.85

74.76

49.59

28.42

29.42

31.36

Czech Republic

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia

377

279

Fiji

200

196

Finland
France
French Polynesia

163

198

213

92.82

89.39

63.40

42.24

706

717

1 022

1 312

1 516

5.38

2.95

2.33

2.47

2.47

17 250

31 549

33 844

42 127

46 642

16.66

14.88

10.44

10.75

10.40

8

6

8

18

25

25.79

5.10

2.71

11.28

12.70

Gabon

12

6

12

9

17

0.57

0.26

0.44

0.26

0.41

Gambia

26

12

12

19

22

63.19

37.01

49.22

64.79

74.39

123

169

184

41.58

34.98

28.36

Georgia
10 531

20 101

23 836

32 847

39 240

5.32

5.06

4.29

4.37

4.30

Ghana

641

403

521

1 037

1 212

64.40

41.39

31.75

52.13

52.07

Greece

1 289

2 565

2 669

2 973

3 122

28.82

31.58

24.89

21.78

20.55

918

793

1 449

1 307

1 417

72.53

68.53

56.77

52.51

48.22

31

27

31

41

51

7.94

3.56

4.65

4.94

5.39

8

13

51

48

62

57.46

74.26

84.79

69.40

90.43

155

116

218

183

190

45.11

42.63

43.09

35.71

32.23

Germany

Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland

71

38

26

21

20

40.22

22.12

8.50

6.04

5.10

588

627

575

560

824

74.52

75.50

44.60

41.66

53.71

2 115

2 376

2 276

3 231

3 585

23.32

24.26

8.17

7.61

6.54

28

36

31

43

51

3.19

2.34

1.55

1.79

1.76

India

2 452

2 843

4 942

6 504

7 058

29.90

16.13

11.71

11.39

9.83

Indonesia

2 314

2 962

4 815

6 992

9 401

10.73

11.55

8.64

10.91

13.19

188

526

1 031

1 600

1 427

57

63

2 817

5 233

Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy

6 425

7 519

1.22

3.09

4.21

4.71

3.51

0.29

0.81

0.09

0.42

0.92

9 246

35.91

22.89

8.33

8.11

8.87

871

1 186

1 051

1 181

1 430

16.58

10.15

3.69

3.72

3.71

5 783

10 786

15 737

20 645

24 424

7.66

6.73

6.58

6.90

7.00

166

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A6 (cont.)

Countries

Agricultural exports

Share of agricultural exports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

16.78

Jamaica

133

217

287

292

266

14.45

19.71

19.08

21.36

Japan

908

1 174

1 898

1 695

1 873

0.71

0.40

0.44

0.36

0.33

Jordan

197

137

303

440

563

34.39

12.36

15.10

14.29

14.51

577

733

693

7.42

5.67

3.45

Kenya

668

666

1 033

1 291

1 296

53.99

61.13

57.30

53.49

48.29

Kuwait

109

37

55

28

16

0.60

0.57

92

102

113

Kazakhstan

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

1

35

31

15

20

160

351

308

206

136

149

239

Lesotho

15

15

7

Liberia

136

62

64

0

38

33

Lithuania
Luxembourg

135

Latvia
Lebanon

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali

303

179

0.34

0.13

0.06

19.28

17.52

15.76
5.57

6.47

27.57

9.63

3.86

8.57

12.12

7.80

252

21.32

26.28

19.62

15.66

14.44

6

6

28.72

23.96

3.00

1.23

1.21

83

96

24.41

16.36

12.86

16.60

19.21

14

12

0.00

0.34

0.38

0.17

0.14

455

757

997

11.98

10.58

10.76

495

709

732

5.46

5.33

4.51

192

118

57.87

31.27

48.04

29.54
81.06

82.89

232

362

433

469

392

89.40

93.61

94.92

99.83

3 740

4 519

6 153

9 581

10 917

31.35

15.26

6.82

9.13

8.63

182

252

268

333

336

90.62

78.31

43.87

35.69

36.07

Malta

30

35

50

100

76

6.68

3.21

2.36

4.43

3.05

Mauritania

40

41

25

18

18

19.76

9.44

6.92

4.40

4.53

Mauritius

257

363

308

355

407

67.00

32.40

19.66

18.01

19.20

1 860

2 874

7 385

8 725

9 879

12.82

11.26

9.19

9.96

9.76

323

498

592

64.39

63.03

60.12

Mongolia

170

145

137

79

63

42.74

24.26

29.44

12.84

10.18

Morocco

516

612

759

981

964

22.95

15.49

10.39

11.19

9.97

Mexico
Moldova

Mozambique

155

44

52

104

124

57.13

33.32

10.79

10.38

12.38

Myanmar

237

171

380

419

379

54.24

37.60

19.28

16.89

14.99

Namibia

194

166

136

291

237

14.01

14.47

11.50

23.10

12.95

Nepal
Netherlands
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger

51

56

74

155

95

39.45

28.71

11.11

23.64

13.25

15 405

29 465

30 034

41 914

47 818

22.40

22.88

13.20

14.16

13.36

2

2

3

3

3

0.58

0.32

0.34

0.27

0.34

3 296

4 941

5 979

7 954

10 031

65.60

53.62

48.11

46.66

50.58

442

215

364

392

512

83.74

70.00

61.42

64.77

84.62

78

60

74

63

27

15.76

21.52

26.27

30.71

13.19

Nigeria

525

233

415

612

487

2.55

2.01

2.39

3.08

1.56

Norway

340

352

427

545

611

2.02

1.11

0.78

0.81

0.75

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

80

53

67

54

54

23.72

26.73

18.89

18.14

18.02

Oman

35

69

418

481

402

1.00

1.44

4.21

4.12

3.01

Pakistan

916

1 170

1 093

1 234

1 254

39.17

21.90

12.50

10.34

9.37

Panama

217

286

315

271

320

56.74

65.39

38.11

31.33

33.91

Papua New Guinea

332

250

319

359

401

35.04

19.03

16.36

16.25

15.70

S tatistica l a n n e x

167

TABLE A6 (cont.)

Countries

Agricultural exports

Share of agricultural exports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

67.98

Paraguay

240

742

671

1 020

1 350

77.36

82.27

67.53

61.11

Peru

337

319

682

863

1 137

9.32

9.51

10.11

9.49

9.01

1 849

1 240

1 447

1 953

2 051

34.43

14.97

3.98

5.27

5.17

Poland

999

1 577

2 558

4 160

6 679

6.45

11.48

8.06

7.76

8.93

Portugal

429

909

1 443

2 091

2 439

10.37

6.02

5.79

6.58

6.82

10

10

17

20

0.30

0.10

0.13

0.11

591

1 125

1 609

1 901

2 135

3.29

1.69

1.04

0.98

0.84

1 306

299

433

603

765

12.13

4.34

935

2 339

2 197

Philippines

Qatar
Republic of Korea
Romania
Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

2 824

2 463

3.85

2.85

4.29

3.43

3.26

1.01

1.72

1.20

34.86

Rwanda

82

97

40

29

34

92.93

89.74

55.28

46.33

Saint Kitts and Nevis

14

12

9

9

11

65.84

41.81

19.40

16.03

19.56

Saint Lucia

22

76

33

29

35

60.76

65.88

65.66

64.55

42.78

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

15

56

31

28

20

85.61

74.23

65.19

73.24

60.12

Samoa

14

8

5

7

6

91.06

89.24

29.26

47.93

37.82

Sao Tome and Principe

15

4

4

6

4

63.93

78.06

29.75

43.09

28.17

91

413

389

385

372

0.09

1.03

0.59

0.40

0.39

140

186

135

175

182

26.73

26.66

17.68

15.47

14.31

286

511

688

16.77

30.00

32.24

3.21

Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore

1 037

11.64

1 177

8.48

3

1

1

2

6

16.50

1.39

0.61

0.74

58

21

8

12

14

30.80

13.54

23.09

8.91

7.69

1 498

2 668

2 780

2 563

3 004

8.24

5.12

2.22

1.78

1.67
3.67

Slovakia

410

691

1 010

3.55

3.23

Slovenia

298

471

531

3.36

3.69

3.36

34

41

42

30.52

35.40

35.99

Solomon Islands
Somalia

25

21

35.57

27.23

90.48

52.51

129

63

South Africa

2 125

1 863

2 151

2 937

3 421

9.85

8.07

7.53

8.09

7.48

Spain

3 504

7 749

14 179

21 442

24 294

17.77

14.52

12.65

13.73

13.61

Sri Lanka

663

684

968

1 012

1 143

64.43

37.71

19.58

19.74

19.85

Sudan

533

531

358

438

395

92.81

97.64

25.15

16.79

15.15

Suriname

48

38

56

31

18

10.27

8.36

10.43

4.81

2.15

Swaziland

179

311

307

150

269

53.78

56.90

31.99

15.67

28.03

Sweden

753

1 180

1 861

2 813

3 351

2.61

2.15

2.25

2.76

2.74

1 021

1 826

2 140

2 751

3 269

3.69

3.10

2.64

2.73

2.75

274

612

672

851

983

14.06

17.26

15.03

12.16

14.05

103

217

204

14.59

27.15

22.31

7 285

10 284

11 926

11.52

13.17

12.41

209

235

260

17.11

17.24

15.65

Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Thailand

3 410

5 760

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

54.32

24.13

Togo

72

104

103

132

131

28.22

40.64

27.87

21.45

35.69

Tonga

7

9

7

15

14

87.40

68.40

39.47

46.42

44.88

168

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A6 (cont.)
Agricultural exports

Share of agricultural exports
(Percentage)

(US$ million)

Countries
Trinidad and Tobago

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

78

109

229

222

116

2.24

5.80

6.07

4.29

1.82

Tunisia

191

322

493

470

974

8.76

9.52

8.09

5.85

10.06

Turkey

1 949

3 238

3 975

4 831

5 958

59.22

25.45

13.91

10.22

9.44

256

55

86

12.17

1.53

2.42

272

115

359

56.52

20.53

40.53
10.45

Turkmenistan
Uganda

341

206

99.26

90.52

1 810

2 722

3 415

225

636

893

1 177

12.80

11.79

1 404

1.26

3.18

1.19

1.34

7 699

12 431

15 256

1.60

17 192

21 185

7.70

7.21

5.51

5.63

6.11

419

269

472

385

481

73.29

68.03

70.92

34.13

36.19

41 418
497

44 668

55 293

62 305

63 893

19.91

11.36

7.49

8.60

7.81

727

981

1 220

1 624

48.65

44.77

44.64

55.49

55.05

Vanuatu

18

12

972

852

835

30.16

22.86

16.65

13

11

22

48.17

58.45

54.06

75.63

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

91.44

82

247

352

204

210

0.48

1.64

1.37

0.85

0.62

Viet Nam
Yemen

95

667

2 260

2 488

3 312

22.29

31.09

16.51

12.33

16.42

29

64

66

117

103

4.13

10.53

1.99

3.13

Zambia

2.76

9

24

105

115

201

0.73

1.82

9.96

11.52

16.79

487

670

921

740

846

37.65

41.10

43.70

25.61

22.94

224 117

319 336

414 279

523 885

604 329

12.00

10.00

7.00

7.00

7.00

Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan

Zimbabwe

World

statistica l a n n e x

169

TABLE A7
Value of agricultural imports and share in total imports

Countries
Afghanistan

Agricultural imports

Share of agricultural imports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

147

174

Albania

38

119

268

359

289

Algeria

2 098

2 693

2 582

3 062

4 050

17

34

20

13

15

374

471

405

825

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina

Austria

18.32

2003

2004

22.02
17.24

22.48

19.25

12.72

20.81

30.18

27.41

24.69

22.25

9.04

9.23

4.17

4.28

4.77

983

27.10

33.14

13.04

24.22

27.50
5.33

20

37

30

31

29

20.67

16.82

4.29

5.73

586

301

1 292

735

886

6.59

5.45

5.55

5.31

3.95

204

218

272

23.78

17.06

20.15

4.74

4.48

4.63

Armenia
Australia

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

918

1 751

2 975

3 886

4 470

4.94

4.52

1 683

2 727

4 550

6 367

7 426

7.68

5.89

219

314

419

350

232

247

Azerbaijan

6.31
11.94

18.45

10.53

11.21

119

222

Bahrain

216

279

391

525

545

6.75

7.63

9.38

9.28

8.41

Bangladesh

483

735

1 726

1 833

1 984

25.46

23.41

21.32

21.05

17.56

89

118

157

191

140

17.46

17.14

14.17

15.95

9.89

Belarus
Belgium

8.95

6.40
11.95

Bahamas

Barbados

1.95

6.25
18.03

903

1 058

1 450

11.48

9.15

8.87

14 538

20 241

23 042

8.16

8.62

8.08

Belize

37

43

67

63

78

25.26

18.96

15.70

11.43

14.19

Benin

44.51

95

105

181

214

381

28.90

43.93

27.46

24.19

Bhutan

5

15

23

23

28

7.85

14.88

10.55

12.69

15.82

Bolivia

120

103

233

254

231

14.55

13.45

13.19

15.73

12.54

515

670

993

21.52

20.37

25.01
5.44

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam

102

210

375

358

155

15.18

11.66

21.45

16.76

2 340

2 420

3 865

3 600

3 598

10.20

11.12

6.87

7.11

5.46

81

165

197

244

193

15.50

16.49

15.21

18.22

11.69

700

678

403

642

849

7.25

6.64

6.27

5.98

5.89

Burkina Faso

73

106

173

138

152

21.93

19.60

28.23

15.00

13.67

Burundi

29

22

19

30

42

18.16

9.50

14.23

19.34

24.09

Bulgaria

Cambodia

66

14

231

143

162

33.08

7.13

16.10

4.96

4.61

Cameroon

125

209

240

346

401

8.70

15.03

15.90

15.71

16.70

4 551

6 979

11 443

14 206

15 194

7.62

5.99

5.07

5.92

5.55

Cape Verde

26

41

79

102

113

40.65

31.12

31.83

37.79

41.77

Central African
Republic

25

39

26

25

29

30.71

24.57

21.71

20.98

24.44

9

27

42

73

74

10.39

7.66

9.81

7.25

7.40

Canada

Chad

731

402

1 200

1 482

1 655

14.14

5.56

6.92

7.67

6.65

10 612

17 254

23 544

31 886

41 688

17.86

8.55

4.44

4.12

4.15

Colombia

451

348

1 431

1 668

1 859

10.32

6.72

12.26

11.96

11.12

Comoros

13

18

15

30

34

43.01

37.36

23.73

34.76

40.42

Congo

61

86

146

220

261

16.28

15.69

23.89

36.59

43.48

Costa Rica

123

174

451

572

691

8.91

9.37

7.33

7.47

8.35

Côte d’Ivoire

449

428

437

637

711

17.31

20.27

11.87

18.12

19.82

701

1 190

1 403

8.47

8.37

8.45

Chile
China

Croatia

170

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A7 (cont.)

Countries
Cuba
Cyprus

Agricultural imports

Share of agricultural imports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

797

901

927

17.66

16.78

17.17

18.01

18.54

679

513

638

15.11

9.65

17.81

11.51

11.60

1 856

2 759

3 921

5.75

5.38

5.64

247

300

384

292

Democratic Republic
of the Congo

186

223

217

Denmark

2 310

3 071

Dominica

11

28

207

302

El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea

2004

248

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

Egypt

2003

1 038

1 302

Ecuador

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

170

2 009

Dominican Republic

2004

1 059

Czech Republic
former
Czechoslovakia

2003

13.53

10.42

455

16.73

11.10

29.54

22.47

34.99

287

317

25.47

27.29

46.30

47.77

52.85

4 424

6 072

7 108

12.32

9.95

9.71

10.57

10.43

30

29

31

28.48

24.93

23.70

22.96

25.76

556

745

837

15.37

16.86

9.49

14.63

15.59

167

185

392

625

735

7.94

9.06

9.72

9.56

9.34

2 551

2 925

3 510

2 741

3 014

43.64

35.80

20.52

18.49

16.77

163

206

644

793

884

15.72

14.76

13.73

13.76

14.76

7

14

22.32

23.08

12

48

57

2.67

9.65

11.30

Eritrea

59

105

130

12.15

24.37

30.30

Estonia

574

898

732

11.97

11.28

8.40

Ethiopia

266

591

423

17.27

22.16

12.82

former People’s
Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia
Fiji

93

208

13.79

24.96

80

87

113

158

187

14.42

13.12

13.40

13.50

14.69

Finland

1 062

1 341

1 911

2 546

2 954

7.73

5.49

5.78

5.99

5.82

France

13 991

21 943

23 896

30 657

34 638

11.54

9.49

7.35

7.69

7.45

98

157

186

253

286

18.60

17.83

14.50

15.77

18.96

Gabon

108

117

170

127

226

15.21

14.47

17.65

12.25

16.52

Gambia

37

70

26.50

37.70

31.89

33.38

71.07

35.87

22.93

21.79

7.12

7.54

7.09

French Polynesia

Georgia
Germany

26 041

37 707

73

67

163

232

262

403

34 623

45 588

50 822

13.78

10.90

Ghana

114

180

404

629

1 038

10.46

14.18

13.52

16.16

19.90

Greece

1 158

2 893

3 311

4 744

5 754

11.88

15.07

11.26

10.57

10.95

149

191

657

843

962

9.66

11.14

13.34

13.00

12.32

Guinea

57

126

155

209

216

18.60

18.46

17.34

21.75

19.78

Guinea-Bissau

17

24

37

46

41

29.47

31.41

66.47

66.10

58.73

Guatemala

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland

53

36

100

90

89

13.85

11.58

17.42

15.71

13.71

113

201

351

397

470

31.79

57.53

34.21

33.42

35.95
16.58

146

111

445

533

650

15.78

11.59

15.75

16.29

1 108

709

1 028

1 681

2 284

11.43

7.36

3.29

3.56

3.85

101

143

186

247

292

10.49

8.85

7.57

8.87

8.50

India

1 356

964

3 590

4 904

5 108

10.20

4.44

7.02

6.88

5.43

Indonesia

1 517

1 755

4 292

4 406

5 181

14.53

8.22

14.55

10.43

9.95

Iran, (Islamic
Republic of)

2 266

2 842

2 963

2 771

3 055

19.94

14.97

19.05

9.37

8.09

Iraq

1 869

1 733

20.53

37.43

statistica l a n n e x

171

TABLE A7 (cont.)

Countries
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan

Agricultural imports

Share of agricultural imports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1 385

2 193

3 409

4 446

4 960

13.12

11.18

6.89

8.25

8.18

936

1 204

1 842

2 009

2 425

11.93

7.95

5.52

5.87

5.91

13 944

23 400

21 512

26 831

31 694

15.52

13.56

9.32

9.02

9.03

210

264

432

432

438

17.30

14.11

12.68

11.34

10.77

17 519

29 114

35 334

36 989

41 478

13.28

12.79

10.21

9.65

9.11

535

621

834

1 020

1 379

21.23

25.61

19.09

17.75

16.86

437

621

934

8.64

7.38

7.30

11.85

10.61

Kazakhstan
Kenya

153

194

467

440

483

7.29

9.20

14.12

Kuwait

921

717

1 237

976

1 093

14.75

14.38

16.07

8.88

9.11

75

96

102

13.95

13.41

10.89

75

93

120

13.88

17.71

23.70

678

1 101

792

21.09

20.99

11.32
14.33

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s
Democratic Republic

32

13

Latvia

34.80

6.36

Lebanon

587

779

1 161

1 285

1 346

19.01

25.57

17.66

17.93

Lesotho

107

139

140

79

65

23.49

19.33

19.06

7.72

6.35

Liberia

97

83

78

93

118

19.23

31.06

19.52

23.21

29.44

1 224

1 236

1 206

784

1 148

17.93

23.73

26.09

17.42

25.50

Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico

557

789

1 013

10.05

8.05

8.25

1 001

1 474

1 723

8.47

9.12

8.70

103

59

96

165

90

17.87

13.27

15.02

19.51

10.62

32

78

50

159

58

8.20

13.08

8.48

23.25

6.19

1 339

2 211

3 851

4 333

5 842

13.32

7.50

5.23

5.18

5.55

60

110

144

162

148

15.04

18.50

18.27

14.34

13.05

161

190

259

362

400

18.99

10.24

8.67

11.20

10.91

89

150

202

291

345

32.96

66.55

55.79

60.59

71.85

152

201

282

353

408

26.21

13.36

13.66

14.16

15.38

2 664

4 578

9 691

12 179

13 439

13.98

14.14

9.23

10.88

10.44

91

233

283

12.08

16.60

16.01

16.62

14.90

21.67

Moldova
Mongolia

62

63

93

119

174

Morocco

10.49

7.66

932

820

1 618

1 671

2 058

22.71

12.74

14.54

11.75

11.74

Mozambique

98

219

220

303

342

13.57

25.40

17.34

17.87

20.17

Myanmar

40

96

329

345

421

8.33

12.91

15.43

16.52

18.90

Namibia

71

100

226

206

280

4.39

8.40

16.86

11.53

12.86

Nepal

37

122

225

369

187

11.75

19.46

15.29

22.58

9.90

10 815

17 005

17 780

25 100

28 707

15.43

13.24

8.42

9.48

8.99
9.97

Netherlands

81

112

132

174

209

19.62

13.36

8.67

8.27

New Zealand

317

648

1 115

1 536

1 790

6.44

7.41

8.46

8.21

8.07

Nicaragua

121

120

288

296

301

16.17

17.94

15.85

15.74

16.03

New Caledonia

89

117

130

133

136

16.84

31.74

34.78

32.50

26.14

Nigeria

2 148

567

1 410

2 172

2 264

14.07

10.01

14.63

20.02

15.99

Norway

1 186

1 440

1 871

2 662

3 051

7.66

5.65

5.55

6.74

6.37

32

29

549

522

528

4.89

3.12

22.17

29.03

29.35

Niger

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

172

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A7 (cont.)

Countries

Agricultural imports

Share of agricultural imports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

Oman

263

506

1 139

1 147

1 169

14.98

18.38

21.76

16.86

13.29

Pakistan

791

1 326

1 893

1 779

2 208

17.17

18.28

18.38

13.65

12.30

Panama

130

163

396

444

642

9.31

11.67

12.05

14.38

17.87

Papua New Guinea

174

209

198

194

215

17.97

15.41

19.71

16.28

14.71

Paraguay

76

114

345

238

275

15.66

10.99

12.18

10.20

9.15

Peru

539

589

1 007

1 109

1 359

22.43

16.97

14.10

13.45

13.85

Philippines

623

1 191

2 550

2 891

3 132

7.99

9.65

7.32

7.32

7.40

Poland

2 908

1 216

3 166

3 922

5 494

16.72

11.05

6.54

5.77

6.16

Portugal

1 595

2 753

4 013

4 935

5 800

18.38

11.81

10.08

10.45

10.57

202

271

360

501

448

13.81

17.14

12.60

11.50

9.29

Republic of Korea

3 457

6 572

7 963

9 661

10 616

15.08

9.26

5.67

5.40

4.73

Romania

1 402

980

1 005

1 759

2 145

11.98

12.11

7.70

7.33

6.57

7 952

10 994

12 363

22.63

14.58

12.84

Qatar

Russian Federation
former Union of
Soviet Socialist
Republics
Rwanda

17 473

18 481

26.32

19.87

36

46

64

35

60

14.46

14.77

22.07

13.44

21.22

8

19

30

33

58

20.44

16.48

18.65

18.83

35.23

Saint Lucia

25

58

78

86

51

21.04

20.68

23.36

26.88

13.24

Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines

18

28

30

42

34

33.40

20.98

18.45

21.13

17.24

Samoa

14

18

21

32

41

21.94

22.69

18.28

22.94

26.54

5

9

11

19

20

21.00

29.75

22.93

31.01

33.36

4 107

3 651

4 908

6 025

6 203

13.71

14.74

16.45

16.33

13.94

268

385

468

749

847

26.35

31.89

29.32

31.79

29.60

446

755

868

11.30

12.93

12.12

Saint Kitts and Nevis

Sao Tome and
Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and
Montenegro
former Socialist
Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia

1 546

1 944

10.34

12.04

Seychelles

19

29

45

63

49

20.43

16.81

10.68

15.24

9.85

Sierra Leone

85

104

130

175

153

24.48

61.98

37.35

31.52

25.15

1 922

3 547

8.33

6.03

4 014

3 961

4 366

3.46

3.10

2.66

Slovakia

831

1 164

1 606

6.43

5.32

5.45

Slovenia

783

891

1 114

7.74

6.44

6.48

19

23

10

13.57

19.42

8.29

4.69

4.57

5.49

Singapore

Solomon Islands

10

18

Somalia

148

82

South Africa

708

930

1 278

1 861

2 650

14.68

16.61

40.05

25.42

4.41

5.41

4 110

8 002

11 208

16 319

19 798

13.41

9.50

7.53

7.82

7.95

Sri Lanka

373

514

753

831

926

20.93

19.67

11.82

12.46

11.61

Sudan

297

284

420

396

638

18.96

24.76

27.70

14.60

23.53

49

51

106

97

107

9.79

11.03

21.65

13.79

14.59

Spain

Suriname
Swaziland

40

96

197

92

71

7.35

14.64

16.96

7.70

5.90

Sweden

2 191

3 208

4 067

5 792

6 648

7.24

6.25

5.96

6.93

6.70

Switzerland

2 962

4 513

4 827

6 194

6 725

9.21

6.95

5.87

6.42

6.02

statistica l a n n e x

173

TABLE A7 (cont.)

Countries
Syrian Arab Republic

Agricultural imports

Share of agricultural imports

(US$ million)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

614

677

Tajikistan
Thailand

557

1 576

The former Yugoslav
Republic of
Macedonia
Togo
Tonga

86

104

2003

2004

791

1 050

1 193

112

106

111

2 644

3 528

3 830

238

325

404

56

92

98

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

14.77

6.26

17.12

27.97

4.90

20.91

2003

2004

18.77

19.81

22.52

16.54

12.07

8.04

4.57

4.75

4.06

12.85

14.13

14.05

9.79

10.95

17.59

10

16

20

19

22

31.10

27.96

26.19

18.97

22.57

Trinidad and Tobago

333

249

324

363

419

11.87

18.03

10.13

9.31

8.63

Tunisia

518

608

784

976

1 181

15.28

12.09

8.86

8.94

9.27

Turkey

267

1 827

2 769

4 179

4 659

3.66

9.27

6.08

6.03

4.78

132

142

99

7.05

5.65

3.07

146

223

281

9.83

17.84

13.94

965

2 110

1 691

6.97

9.17

5.83

Turkmenistan
Uganda

36

31

Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of
America
Uruguay

5.10

1 035

1 734

2 830

3 902

4 825

12.14

14.60

5.80

6.73

8.32

15 757

21 802

27 054

35 054

41 406

14.81

10.37

8.10

8.94

8.94

114

82

332

296

406

9.62

5.90

20.17

13.94

16.21

18 204

26 384

44 380

53 480

59 874

7.70

5.21

3.81

4.10

3.92

153

121

389

323

322

10.13

8.63

11.80

14.66

11.05

350

152

166

11.41

5.12

4.36

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu

11.19

13

14

18

19

20

20.07

16.72

18.50

24.73

15.39

1 679

936

1 684

1 762

2 206

15.70

11.86

11.25

19.04

13.21

Viet Nam

374

226

1 312

1 512

1 968

27.03

8.86

9.03

5.99

7.80

Yemen

714

699

769

1 004

1 050

23.79

40.32

33.94

27.33

28.58

Zambia

102

47

89

109

97

10.50

5.13

11.28

7.81

5.75

40

56

131

219

465

3.39

2.98

6.93

11.59

21.92

244 702

345 084

439 286

550 135

634 508

12.00

10.00

7.00

7.00

7.00

Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic
of)

Zimbabwe

World

174

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A8
Share of processed food products in total food trade

Countries

Share in total food imports

Share in total food exports

(Percentage)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

71.06

Afghanistan

80.90

66.05

70.48

77.17

Albania

64.60

62.34

65.75

57.25

53.21

16.48

24.47

66.70

40.58

Algeria

62.34

62.58

50.73

50.79

54.03

90.83

67.82

39.57

54.53

59.57

American Samoa

64.38

60.26

59.34

71.78

71.10

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

100.00

Angola

69.97

82.75

78.25

81.94

83.78

16.47

73.99

70.25

Antigua and Barbuda

77.08

70.62

68.61

72.88

68.53

94.40

27.62

89.49

63.18

62.72

Argentina

58.72

58.49

62.94

54.04

48.81

35.44

60.64

60.62

62.01

64.54

54.13

59.72

57.00

96.75

97.89

97.54

Australia

80.72

84.94

88.96

86.85

88.48

52.70

55.95

56.92

61.94

56.37

Austria

59.32

63.42

66.47

67.70

67.72

61.26

63.00

69.68

72.14

75.86

41.25

47.74

40.71

78.59

68.14

64.20

Bahamas

69.40

67.11

75.27

79.73

77.94

92.79

93.50

73.71

73.61

69.19

Bahrain

55.34

54.73

59.71

67.59

70.23

87.68

92.84

94.64

78.26

75.88

Bangladesh

52.54

51.95

61.69

55.55

58.81

31.38

9.24

10.94

14.01

41.30

Barbados

64.71

68.80

72.21

72.41

67.07

98.22

96.19

98.19

98.03

98.16

62.61

72.62

70.32

74.99

78.18

78.77

64.81

69.27

70.50

70.41

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Belarus

66.17

64.77

Belize

84.53

84.56

80.98

83.03

83.92

93.48

79.25

70.44

53.25

48.33

Benin

60.70

78.67

62.44

63.43

78.20

58.35

20.58

33.11

54.69

30.62

Bhutan

94.96

81.59

74.98

88.18

86.04

23.27

50.74

74.13

63.94

Bolivia

61.92

62.07

58.32

53.06

58.86

50.38

88.42

90.71

90.05

66.97

71.13

69.34

48.81

90.41

87.79

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

69.06

Botswana

81.44

74.58

74.49

76.64

68.49

93.51

90.82

97.39

96.90

87.74

Brazil

21.12

46.92

48.56

41.61

52.36

80.42

75.74

63.76

56.64

54.74

Brunei Darussalam

74.00

66.98

74.85

74.05

76.49

62.95

36.49

85.17

75.76

59.22

Bulgaria

53.46

57.04

72.57

70.27

65.32

60.67

54.49

56.67

57.24

52.48

Burkina Faso

79.02

72.44

83.06

90.96

88.27

12.48

9.78

14.78

46.12

34.82

Burundi

93.89

94.04

85.44

53.32

40.19

100.00

100.00

98.70

96.07

93.76

Cambodia

96.07

99.88

85.88

76.00

87.72

72.34

60.56

36.44

Cameroon

72.60

91.46

72.75

73.69

72.49

32.17

31.10

27.22

32.62

20.11

Canada

59.78

62.37

67.37

66.84

67.06

24.03

29.00

45.74

51.89

52.39

Cape Verde

63.09

75.23

75.99

74.21

80.50

11.07

0.79

87.96

100.00

100.00

Central African Republic

61.71

70.52

81.66

89.60

95.16

7.87

3.49

1.37

0.05

Chad

74.50

98.82

96.70

97.15

93.28

0.55

1.35

2.27

1.36

0.08

Chile

54.26

75.94

72.29

75.57

77.01

29.06

32.67

51.03

44.78

48.61

China

28.68

49.26

47.81

46.45

46.06

61.40

56.89

60.42

57.32

65.83

Colombia

49.85

34.55

48.73

45.35

44.06

41.84

32.72

50.50

59.40

55.10

Comoros

76.20

76.01

82.08

69.48

74.21

5.63

0.20

0.07

0.02

0.01

Congo

75.00

77.49

79.76

69.25

73.46

31.67

96.70

97.91

94.48

98.19

Costa Rica

55.78

44.70

51.24

52.36

49.05

23.68

17.16

34.11

36.60

38.31

Côte d’Ivoire

61.92

62.87

64.78

67.86

73.43

26.77

22.25

26.22

30.28

27.40

65.16

67.36

66.55

80.64

83.76

87.02

63.19

62.57

55.86

96.60

90.96

91.49

Croatia
Cuba

60.24

60.30

98.05

96.12

statistica l a n n e x

175

TABLE A8 (cont.)

Countries
Cyprus

Share in total food imports

Share in total food exports

(Percentage)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

56.46

64.22

Czech Republic

2003

2004

71.23

73.27

76.02

68.24

68.81

67.39

former Czechoslovakia

45.09

63.85

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

34.92

38.61

54.81

63.94

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

36.26

58.25

66.84

Denmark

74.57

76.42

Dominica

72.00

Dominican Republic

61.18

Ecuador

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

36.82

38.48

2003

2004

46.62

51.14

42.95

70.40

76.25

76.05

69.85

60.05

52.44

86.96

34.37

0.78

0.80

0.89

75.72

65.39

69.95

46.10

42.44

67.79

63.16

75.24

75.54

75.54

63.46

58.74

60.11

61.59

61.11

75.63

79.11

82.98

81.61

10.46

5.41

10.38

14.42

11.12

60.97

74.41

64.94

68.72

83.38

69.54

60.11

55.32

61.04

47.89

46.27

57.60

64.58

64.85

47.23

12.16

18.11

17.97

19.74

Egypt

46.92

45.29

41.53

36.79

43.76

43.97

38.35

65.22

64.85

60.79

El Salvador

59.56

65.19

66.39

64.00

63.86

62.34

65.76

88.64

92.00

92.26

Equatorial Guinea

78.38

89.71

67.00

86.54

84.06

1.28

0.39

0.69

0.33

Eritrea

50.18

37.26

32.30

43.46

15.44

3.65

Estonia

60.83

64.09

74.30

56.55

61.02

84.34

Ethiopia

39.10

32.74

44.61

12.65

16.14

9.78

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia

40.38

51.00

Fiji

58.79

54.06

57.83

54.43

Finland

50.01

59.40

71.52

74.67

France

51.51

56.69

67.06

French Polynesia

67.85

74.62

Gabon

63.47

71.65

Gambia

92.41

94.88

Germany

49.34

55.80

Ghana

59.58

Greece
Guatemala
Guinea

25.88

29.83

55.44

98.53

96.46

93.15

91.94

90.26

74.71

83.93

81.45

82.24

78.50

76.54

67.83

68.63

56.92

57.68

66.25

67.28

67.85

75.94

78.46

78.16

96.76

78.42

91.95

78.54

88.30

71.42

69.26

68.37

9.40

57.40

87.96

93.39

98.36

90.00

95.36

94.59

98.33

89.54

88.45

99.27

90.19

41.25

53.71

67.30

90.41

88.65

85.46

61.31

61.37

62.95

73.15

70.04

75.53

76.75

76.57

70.17

64.14

76.01

77.63

9.96

9.43

12.31

21.95

20.89

41.05

57.30

58.44

59.76

61.02

71.39

63.04

71.79

74.49

72.22

45.60

69.14

72.95

69.63

67.45

57.01

55.87

52.96

55.97

55.37

96.83

94.97

87.00

81.78

88.59

1.05

8.62

35.49

8.38

Georgia

Guinea-Bissau

92.34

96.35

97.54

95.57

94.42

53.32

4.42

0.73

0.37

0.27

Guyana

64.09

59.03

70.12

75.22

75.92

99.77

99.63

99.01

98.50

97.69

Haiti

67.53

84.29

83.16

78.62

78.42

37.23

45.39

24.87

22.03

22.97

Honduras

41.68

65.66

73.19

73.74

69.78

28.85

12.06

32.79

41.89

30.72

Hungary

71.71

63.73

76.66

74.70

68.93

35.57

38.53

45.30

47.22

44.98

Iceland

80.99

79.70

81.03

78.13

75.96

19.48

64.31

38.98

28.78

25.62

India

80.80

50.07

71.15

71.50

72.34

68.32

71.97

67.00

60.65

65.28

Indonesia

74.44

51.85

61.32

56.38

53.22

78.37

70.94

76.56

82.38

87.48

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

58.03

50.23

45.78

59.09

62.67

48.55

8.13

41.16

32.98

31.06

Iraq

48.99

53.98

1.82

2.95

Ireland

62.10

74.59

73.34

72.57

73.92

59.01

77.99

81.87

84.55

85.51

Israel

31.99

46.43

61.14

60.62

58.84

38.47

57.21

48.54

50.75

46.91

176

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A8 (cont.)

Countries

Share in total food imports

Share in total food exports

(Percentage)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

Italy

35.50

43.18

51.35

53.61

55.98

67.75

72.90

78.95

80.05

82.98

Jamaica

56.18

63.52

71.86

71.06

68.05

76.55

69.05

74.35

78.84

81.54

Japan

34.10

43.93

50.27

48.78

48.23

93.76

89.34

93.91

88.70

90.86

Jordan

45.37

46.68

53.22

60.27

57.68

17.24

27.18

47.50

52.54

55.42

89.10

85.44

91.21

11.86

18.13

14.97

Kazakhstan
Kenya

65.78

73.16

62.24

73.85

61.34

71.40

54.03

54.10

51.38

48.39

Kuwait

42.54

45.75

55.46

57.20

55.83

53.03

77.44

87.82

97.19

95.31

53.36

82.43

86.22

60.05

59.90

64.90

2.58

14.14

6.56

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

100.00

98.84

98.22

97.83

98.09

69.85

69.33

69.58

87.75

80.06

87.23

Lebanon

38.93

59.90

57.52

54.80

60.31

8.74

18.44

58.85

72.04

45.74

Lesotho

63.91

57.55

47.31

45.73

38.34

15.92

89.88

82.57

73.04

99.54

Liberia

84.55

90.32

67.21

77.12

78.85

29.17

40.25

51.10

12.99

18.70

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

55.40

65.86

63.99

78.98

72.08

31.60

88.09

50.35

36.32

Lithuania

70.26

66.69

67.86

73.63

68.66

74.14

Luxembourg

73.25

75.00

73.74

66.62

72.20

71.02

Latvia

Madagascar

99.65

82.36

91.63

95.97

88.59

12.84

19.74

12.95

7.87

15.16

Malawi

70.04

44.09

70.62

73.26

80.40

94.08

86.50

82.30

73.82

71.11

Malaysia

62.10

60.02

61.55

58.57

62.17

90.35

84.91

91.27

94.73

95.53

Mali

82.63

85.04

88.77

89.57

89.33

7.45

6.95

9.33

13.04

10.58

Malta

59.23

69.58

79.21

78.15

79.89

72.18

84.21

95.79

95.27

94.53

Mauritania

76.52

77.62

82.10

76.49

75.31

0.28

0.41

0.81

0.95

Mauritius

81.92

72.96

71.19

69.11

71.52

99.90

98.91

96.20

98.54

99.06

Mexico

33.38

49.40

48.43

52.55

52.44

29.20

34.33

47.20

47.93

47.90

60.69

60.67

70.66

80.24

83.50

82.22

Moldova
Mongolia

76.43

94.13

73.75

74.98

82.14

0.56

2.08

6.98

1.32

28.29

Morocco

46.31

54.22

37.84

44.80

40.52

27.13

46.12

34.07

32.94

42.90

Mozambique

52.31

60.07

70.03

60.50

57.95

95.61

88.30

96.28

46.72

36.99

Myanmar

99.33

97.67

90.71

89.51

90.32

88.25

33.48

17.40

16.67

9.71

Namibia

28.64

24.73

69.96

71.67

83.71

13.31

39.14

63.59

75.63

67.53

Nepal

37.12

54.42

59.69

63.09

49.36

11.69

16.41

63.61

75.62

72.07

Netherlands

58.48

61.35

60.63

60.71

62.37

60.14

61.13

66.87

68.02

68.46

New Caledonia

75.98

69.59

80.45

80.74

81.70

68.44

53.69

34.79

38.94

New Zealand

69.24

73.93

79.39

80.92

80.77

61.22

62.61

68.32

66.74

64.96

Nicaragua

47.23

69.81

73.23

74.16

81.13

61.74

68.66

65.72

65.27

67.75

Niger

73.96

67.43

91.84

94.90

90.10

1.42

1.32

5.40

7.43

20.95

Nigeria

73.15

62.73

63.88

69.68

67.16

27.66

11.29

15.04

13.12

16.17

Norway

50.78

65.90

69.02

69.04

70.60

95.92

94.70

95.49

97.30

95.48

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

47.31

67.39

63.89

65.39

64.53

42.70

17.04

33.00

34.53

35.08

Oman

59.65

52.61

59.84

62.95

63.94

44.08

35.85

70.26

84.02

85.77

Pakistan

64.31

60.60

63.79

64.18

68.20

90.69

82.45

83.87

70.23

80.95

Panama

71.71

73.87

74.73

74.84

83.43

34.80

17.88

22.46

22.73

22.32

statistica l a n n e x

177

TABLE A8 (cont.)

Countries

Share in total food imports

Share in total food exports

(Percentage)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

Papua New Guinea

77.33

77.45

71.02

64.24

67.84

55.15

63.10

82.27

59.12

65.02

Paraguay

75.24

94.49

83.20

67.36

82.18

33.90

18.86

34.45

33.50

42.22

Peru

48.22

57.74

57.92

56.09

58.84

77.00

81.21

63.00

54.75

52.15

Philippines

57.80

66.48

67.45

69.47

76.09

91.80

79.76

71.54

73.62

74.39

Poland

35.77

57.08

64.27

66.73

65.81

55.38

50.09

73.81

68.65

69.98

Portugal

32.26

48.54

56.82

56.77

57.78

92.75

88.94

84.95

83.39

82.47

Qatar

51.21

46.19

51.13

57.27

56.71

37.32

22.82

47.48

59.69

Republic of Korea

50.72

41.01

49.99

51.05

52.19

79.16

63.95

69.10

83.43

85.99

Romania

30.45

47.27

60.65

48.40

49.09

34.29

42.09

35.01

37.39

42.09

61.63

61.20

57.54

63.86

39.89

58.42

Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

46.52

54.12

54.53

65.93

Rwanda

82.58

80.97

73.67

76.93

87.20

0.98

81.12

88.49

38.36

33.81

Saint Kitts and Nevis

77.80

74.40

77.73

77.95

84.52

98.49

99.83

99.42

99.37

99.18

Saint Lucia

75.28

71.18

75.80

78.19

68.17

36.05

13.24

26.97

41.65

6.44

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

53.38

60.35

62.15

67.30

61.95

21.66

19.93

30.12

39.28

7.40

Samoa

72.72

60.75

51.73

66.74

70.80

64.45

64.20

91.04

89.64

87.55

Sao Tome and Principe

82.42

93.22

94.20

90.87

90.16

9.24

3.85

1.25

0.79

3.76

Saudi Arabia

48.92

52.64

54.09

51.35

59.76

59.05

27.33

72.38

84.30

77.37

Senegal

74.24

65.75

74.38

74.74

72.93

95.58

96.35

90.41

91.55

82.95

63.53

75.52

76.93

79.56

69.53

82.19

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia

33.77

46.87

Seychelles

83.21

77.32

78.76

72.68

Sierra Leone

78.16

77.98

77.35

79.31

Singapore

64.83

62.60

54.84

53.65

81.46

88.24

70.85

68.20

61.18

93.90

79.65

14.03

13.21

25.92

13.23

11.12

74.65

76.87

64.48

66.63

69.85

76.92

87.80

90.37

Slovakia

70.38

70.56

69.07

72.73

74.47

72.67

Slovenia

62.78

66.62

64.63

76.95

83.47

83.26

85.55

92.81

80.69

73.13

80.23

76.76

76.65

53.72

58.19

55.88

53.02

Solomon Islands

89.25

84.15

Somalia

81.36

82.84

South Africa

58.93

63.79

88.79
0.91

73.06

69.37

70.18

45.23

Spain

24.25

54.10

60.99

62.43

63.86

51.70

47.99

49.90

49.24

50.67

Sri Lanka

78.50

65.94

58.53

58.91

60.13

59.55

62.40

53.89

56.35

59.62

Sudan

77.15

52.85

46.31

46.03

36.27

31.85

25.45

20.58

18.95

19.90

Suriname

65.40

64.22

62.98

77.54

78.46

85.85

70.42

58.51

21.94

46.05

Swaziland

60.12

59.43

65.18

62.45

56.74

87.91

91.49

94.82

84.06

90.68

Sweden

69.66

67.86

70.86

71.01

71.70

53.04

78.03

82.36

83.34

85.86

Switzerland

54.69

62.78

68.97

68.51

69.58

95.38

97.13

98.34

98.25

98.31

Syrian Arab Republic

62.59

57.99

64.40

65.60

62.03

28.51

21.75

13.45

15.91

25.98

45.21

68.74

82.31

66.71

55.40

49.09

69.08

66.71

65.44

86.47

86.48

92.57

64.03

65.30

60.86

70.18

68.00

64.71

Tajikistan
Thailand
The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

81.96

79.50

79.20

85.84

178

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A8 (cont.)

Countries

Share in total food imports

Share in total food exports

(Percentage)

(Percentage)

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

57.61

Togo

79.84

72.69

57.62

56.98

56.69

1.33

53.92

61.44

70.60

Tonga

75.62

72.60

62.70

62.85

64.95

75.58

7.10

9.87

3.26

6.84

Trinidad and Tobago

62.69

55.37

72.86

73.61

71.69

85.61

93.87

94.66

94.18

90.65

Tunisia

46.00

46.91

47.14

50.90

53.28

70.39

70.97

81.19

72.39

85.31

Turkey

86.65

54.12

54.31

46.20

54.23

52.68

59.85

71.93

72.44

76.76

87.52

87.83

87.50

10.00

29.82

23.31

81.67

61.34

58.49

37.74

35.48

45.71

61.95

56.86

65.81

50.90

68.01

64.34

Turkmenistan
Uganda

84.51

87.55

Ukraine

0.95

United Arab Emirates

54.50

52.05

55.13

54.40

61.65

64.96

55.59

71.03

64.05

58.83

United Kingdom

61.57

68.54

69.64

69.11

69.64

70.54

72.02

83.85

82.05

85.10

United Republic of
Tanzania

60.86

95.94

74.86

64.72

57.78

24.83

26.74

20.00

20.00

20.90

United States of America

78.41

69.44

67.23

70.10

71.87

26.63

36.61

45.81

44.08

42.57

Uruguay

35.80

43.84

71.11

56.01

67.35

54.61

69.26

75.77

74.49

75.81

56.95

82.46

59.23

52.98

35.97

17.75

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu

89.71

89.28

90.01

89.97

89.05

90.27

80.20

91.61

73.22

92.70

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

55.83

59.88

68.61

76.95

70.51

21.07

46.98

70.93

82.20

68.61

Viet Nam

63.06

92.52

84.63

76.78

75.33

81.94

79.00

79.69

84.14

86.29

Yemen

53.41

57.31

64.76

56.89

49.47

73.07

37.95

26.74

46.06

48.92

Zambia

35.30

51.52

71.19

58.78

83.42

81.71

33.80

85.02

66.49

30.44

Zimbabwe

56.51

63.06

65.15

33.70

45.07

58.20

56.46

63.64

55.99

65.43

World

51.85

57.17

61.50

62.13

63.01

53.57

58.38

63.11

63.60

64.93

statistica l a n n e x

179

TABLE A9
Per capita GDP and per capita agricultural GDP of the agricultural population
Per capita agricultural GDP
of the agricultural population

Per capita GDP
(US$ constant 2000 prices)

Countries

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

(US$ constant 2000 prices)
2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

Afghanistan
Albania

1 094

927

1 189

1 393

1 467

371

367

634

709

795

Algeria

1 847

1 793

1 768

1 917

1 984

340

513

645

782

825

American Samoa
Angola

926

902

737

818

880

116

98

60

80

88

Antigua and Barbuda

4 238

7 746

9 375

10 110

10 534

1 000

1 056

1 294

2 313

2 375

Argentina

7 306

5 884

7 574

6 856

7 387

2 326

2 362

3 577

3 868

4 189

622

882

974

1 163

1 496

1 641

Armenia
Australia

13 995

16 271

20 444

21 853

22 303

7 921

10 223

15 166

20 079

20 826

Austria

15 631

19 381

23 299

24 139

24 658

3 469

5 120

10 149

11 567

13 082

646

851

938

389

491

524

Azerbaijan
Bahamas

13 738

15 682

15 743

16 210

16 372

7 250

9 231

13 000

15 300

15 600

Bahrain

11 173

9 704

11 756

12 943

14 930

8 286

14 300

34 143

40 143

55 167

235

258

330

359

371

108

116

149

160

164

7 707

8 673

6 640

7 941

11 727

11 300

15 700

1 017

1 340

1 447

Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium

9 513

9 274

9 668

1 135

1 357

1 513

15 093

18 420

22 043

22 671

23 279

Belize

1 931

2 532

3 396

3 887

Benin

317

305

362

387

Bhutan

102

154

236

Bolivia

1 077

872

Bosnia and Herzegovina

5 861

8 395

15 278

18 089

19 079

3 973

873

1 063

1 635

2 947

3 026

387

131

163

243

278

295

263

268

63

77

89

90

129

1 007

1 021

1 038

258

272

1 145

1 219

1 269

304

323

312

2 566

4 286

4 833

Botswana

1 137

2 352

3 027

3 408

3 544

212

244

184

184

192

Brazil

3 116

3 162

3 469

3 499

3 636

441

736

1 223

1 512

1 589

Brunei Darussalam
1 367

1 733

1 551

1 821

1 939

880

1 159

2 629

3 296

3 635

Burkina Faso

187

203

222

236

238

66

70

78

77

88

Burundi

131

145

110

106

108

65

64

54

53

52

Cambodia

526

256

272

298

309

347

174

148

150

148

Cameroon

679

670

590

636

655

330

319

477

576

621
24 428

Bulgaria

16 681

19 168

22 960

24 315

24 835

6 466

13 489

19 108

23 152

Cape Verde

633

868

1 209

1 309

1 351

206

411

630

691

708

Central African Republic

320

276

256

235

234

153

142

176

198

197

Canada

Chad

155

203

183

217

276

72

77

93

117

202

Chile

2 471

3 117

4 937

5 185

5 434

1 120

1 805

2 305

2 635

2 814

238

487

1 066

1 321

1 441

93

145

209

227

241

Colombia

1 607

1 848

1 980

2 038

2 086

796

1 288

1 224

1 210

1 109

Comoros

357

332

289

284

281

138

147

156

168

167

Congo

965

1 113

922

952

965

112

133

123

141

149

3 192

3 111

4 051

4 235

4 333

811

1 119

1 670

1 800

1 867

967

668

295

239

China

Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba

2 418

2 934

675

615

591

4 171

4 769

4 958

2 469

2 573

2 681

496

773

315

330

338

3 613

4 351

4 784

830

931

995

180

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A9 (cont.)
Per capita agricultural GDP
of the agricultural population

Per capita GDP
(US$ constant 2000 prices)

Countries
Cyprus

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

5 387

8 755

Czech Republic

(US$ constant 2000 prices)

2003

2004

11 656

12 353

12 714

5 404

5 880

6 123

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

786

2 415

2003

2004

5 179

6 267

6 724

2 293

2 477

2 623

former Czechoslovakia
Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

301

423

691

475

490

148

335

688

510

539

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

252

204

90

87

90

97

98

87

78

81

Denmark

20 900

24 467

29 612

30 393

31 059

6 083

10 463

18 985

19 828

21 109

Dominica

1 824

3 097

3 423

3 139

3 203

1 360

2 300

2 278

2 056

2 647

Dominican Republic

1 498

1 602

2 333

2 434

2 447

811

848

1 486

1 727

2 263

Ecuador

1 363

1 310

1 294

1 368

1 438

469

655

497

561

582

854

1 150

1 460

1 524

1 558

328

463

620

682

710

El Salvador

1 919

1 632

2 113

2 134

2 138

583

535

629

632

674

Equatorial Guinea

1 448

692

2 941

3 715

3 982

289

200

290

270

290

184

173

170

42

28

30

3 983

4 951

5 317

1 792

1 878

2 000

101

99

109

55

48

56

Egypt

Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
former People’s
Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia
1 916

1 777

2 069

2 174

2 235

664

723

745

759

975

Finland

15 284

19 559

22 867

24 249

25 107

6 646

7 658

12 526

14 549

15 492

France

15 788

19 068

21 948

22 579

22 987

5 426

8 825

16 365

17 562

20 934

French Polynesia

10 636

14 159

14 511

15 656

15 766

649

1 000

1 263

1 456

1 500

4 731

4 113

3 931

3 910

3 924

705

699

672

810

874

325

325

322

323

341

149

117

127

111

125

585

729

799

631

772

717

22 583

22 886

23 238

10 047

11 188

12 236

Fiji

Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany

15 672

19 439

2 691

5 478

Ghana

235

215

255

273

281

183

148

164

175

179

Greece

8 558

8 845

10 281

11 508

11 990

2 817

3 836

5 051

5 015

6 350

Guatemala

1 715

1 476

1 682

1 669

1 672

743

678

768

775

804
118

Guinea

426

341

386

402

405

108

86

105

114

Guinea-Bissau

163

183

154

135

137

84

92

98

99

102

Guyana

820

622

950

956

969

611

759

1 433

2 118

2 184

Haiti

830

659

491

469

445

391

340

201

201

192

Honduras

957

895

914

936

958

232

303

360

429

451

3 645

4 054

4 645

5 235

5 470

638

922

1 507

1 693

2 040

21 601

25 318

29 596

30 845

32 226

24 958

24 857

28 696

48 000

50 455

India

222

312

452

510

538

126

159

192

200

201

Indonesia

392

601

778

853

886

182

227

278

312

325

1 318

1 150

1 441

1 652

1 738

413

537

774

932

983

9 734

13 152

24 566

28 200

29 264

6 150

10 829

28 531

36 365

39 008

12 591

15 092

18 640

17 984

18 395

5 720

10 219

19 344

21 170

22 527

Hungary
Iceland

Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel

statistica l a n n e x

181

TABLE A9 (cont.)
Per capita agricultural GDP
of the agricultural population

Per capita GDP
(US$ constant 2000 prices)

Countries
Italy

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

(US$ constant 2000 prices)

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

12 889

16 144

18 609

19 164

19 420

3 409

4 898

9 060

9 421

9 336

2 458

2 808

2 881

2 931

2 962

640

904

996

992

1 021

Japan

23 909

33 078

37 073

38 198

39 184

6 847

10 385

13 143

15 341

16 714

Jordan

1 824

1 580

1 683

1 765

1 849

221

369

283

339

347

1 186

1 614

1 770

515

640

662

78

78

79

377

434

456

232

235

Jamaica

Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kuwait

361

372

344

341

343

21 601

14 359

16 275

15 911

15 719

278

301

317

359

372

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

222

225

327
3 277

4 141

4 535

10 239

3 280

4 820

5 110

Lesotho

307

389

485

Liberia

755

266

177

4 517

5 656

6 660
3 281

4 117

4 420

Luxembourg

19 365

30 735

44 023

45 558

Madagascar

330

265

244

Malawi

159

134

150

1 847

2 558

218

182

4 870

6 506

Latvia
Lebanon

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania

Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mauritania

88

87

176

173

223
1 085

1 374

1 478

5 353

5 026

5 355

7 992

9 964

11 095

526

543

205

191

205

197

198

120

118

758

282

201

140

139

7 319

7 503

1 387

3 119

8 470

11 229

12 270

1 493

1 874

2 023

46 987

4 900

7 286

12 900

12 000

27 000

226

232

91

91

86

83

83

147

149

51

41

68

70

72

3 825

4 069

4 277

999

1 577

1 915

2 242

2 359

210

234

232

96

101

105

115

107

9 537

9 541

9 629

1 808

7 000

18 500

18 833

22 800

326

308

353

373

386

88

111

133

121

122

Mauritius

1 600

2 524

3 766

4 161

4 294

829

1 543

1 978

2 173

2 282

Mexico

5 088

4 959

5 753

5 737

5 903

639

751

957

1 050

1 106

305

367

394

338

368

395

Mongolia

497

566

378

405

442

429

463

451

368

444

Morocco

924

1 099

1 165

1 259

1 282

332

582

501

700

725

Mozambique

179

161

214

254

269

75

63

70

80

85

1 975

1 639

1 798

1 871

1 926

273

279

343

346

363

Moldova

Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua

148

182

233

236

240

80

94

96

99

98

15 651

18 518

23 148

23 077

23 288

6 405

10 787

17 343

15 746

16 363

9 692

13 386

12 349

13 171

13 176

986

1 541

1 684

1 899

1 949

10 592

11 678

13 820

15 041

15 586

6 686

9 802

13 084

8 376

8 800
783

1 113

738

776

769

779

465

404

673

769

Niger

275

199

172

175

170

92

82

78

80

76

Nigeria

427

373

366

393

397

187

228

308

348

364

21 633

27 445

37 310

38 505

39 457

6 019

8 615

14 044

14 462

19 273

1 381

871

730

824

593

630

Norway
Occupied Palestinian
Territory
Oman
Pakistan

4 696

6 896

7 718

7 807

7 848

178

292

397

432

446

334

451

510

527

547

144

188

239

240

242

182

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A9 (cont.)
Per capita agricultural GDP
of the agricultural population

Per capita GDP
(US$ constant 2000 prices)

Countries
Panama
Papua New Guinea

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

3 263

2 960

3 912

(US$ constant 2000 prices)

2003

2004

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

3 995

4 168

698

797

2003

2004

1 148

1 340

1 418

587

542

639

596

599

185

181

212

195

197

Paraguay

1 530

1 504

1 425

1 351

1 358

565

688

729

826

834

Peru

2 283

1 697

2 028

2 130

2 205

373

412

628

693

708
466

985

909

994

1 055

1 100

355

360

401

445

Poland

3 371

2 947

4 267

4 587

4 835

298

342

740

839

870

Portugal

5 971

8 194

10 574

10 674

10 770

1 091

1 662

2 337

4 283

4 470

Republic of Korea

3 305

6 639

10 786

12 290

12 793

1 218

2 724

5 382

5 807

6 973

Romania

1 880

1 881

1 674

1 911

2 075

588

1 031

1 522

1 905

2 403

1 760

2 141

2 309

978

1 266

1 222

Philippines

Qatar

Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda

280

266

237

254

261

112

93

108

119

117

Saint Kitts and Nevis

2 841

5 220

7 738

8 000

8 310

667

667

800

889

1 333

Saint Lucia

2 389

3 802

4 610

4 537

4 667

868

1 595

1 147

788

1 485

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

1 540

2 455

2 822

2 933

3 025

588

1 161

1 036

1 111

1 370

Samoa

1 174

1 138

1 335

1 382

1 411

329

368

617

596

643

Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal

585

336

315

329

333

71

86

104

100

108

15 907

8 763

8 392

8 434

8 625

636

2 362

4 233

4 975

5 469

420

421

466

492

509

126

119

122

119

126

0

817

919

986

680

869

973

4 500

5 493

7 646

7 012

6 793

352

276

274

270

254

287

252

150

210

217

201

183

118

170

177

8 942

14 461

6 368

12 583

21 400

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone

21 982

22 223

23 746

18 167

19 400

Slovakia

3 773

4 245

4 474

1 747

2 018

1 566

Slovenia

9 547

10 454

10 942

13 500

17 000

20 440

Singapore

Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa

3 267

3 003

3 009

3 228

3 334

416

531

616

662

690

Spain

8 549

10 944

13 732

14 706

15 137

1 830

3 559

6 114

7 034

8 563

Sri Lanka

448

581

857

929

976

244

287

332

338

335

Sudan

288

293

388

432

449

114

116

224

57

60
1 725

2 573

2 097

2 129

2 319

2 410

869

906

1 099

1 163

894

1 188

1 330

1 381

1 403

407

443

414

409

423

Sweden

18 952

22 835

26 758

28 250

29 235

5 890

9 833

13 022

15 306

17 004

Switzerland

28 354

31 964

34 043

34 618

35 231

4 461

5 660

7 810

8 578

8 972

978

862

1 100

1 109

1 122

662

575

889

934

1 000

164

210

231

130

189

178

1 998

2 246

2 359

367

431

413

Suriname
Swaziland

Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Thailand

807

1 452

221

317

statistica l a n n e x

183

TABLE A9 (cont.)
Per capita agricultural GDP
of the agricultural population

Per capita GDP
(US$ constant 2000 prices)

Countries

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Togo

(US$ constant 2000 prices)

2003

2004

1 720

1 734

1 769

1979–1981 1989–1991 1999–2001

2003

2004

1 331

1 438

1 540

362

310

292

289

291

121

150

171

172

176
1 152

Tonga

1 021

1 202

1 505

1 577

1 590

617

714

1 057

1 152

Trinidad and Tobago

6 811

4 929

6 208

7 576

8 021

545

627

1 027

991

806

Tunisia

1 328

1 476

2 048

2 229

2 332

480

744

1 023

1 103

1 209

Turkey

1 873

2 373

2 779

2 951

3 171

1 009

1 059

1 221

1 265

1 329

624

989

1 140

435

618

964

271

277

112

115

Turkmenistan
Uganda

241

177

251

163

96

108

637

810

915

United Arab Emirates

44 881

22 213

24 293

22 871

573

658

807

22 832

62 286

19 542

33 504

36 429

38 254

United Kingdom

15 743

19 795

24 312

25 681

26 399

6 900

10 700

12 452

13 249

17 567

355

257

262

300

313

165

131

140

153

160

22 361
5 064

27 400

33 915

35 175

36 352

8 329

12 375

22 323

25 338

27 651

4 854

5 972

5 165

5 759

2 267

2 628

3 289

3 772

4 122

Vanuatu

553

595

632

602

722

751

1 145

1 147

1 218

1 094

1 101

414

446

472

811

838

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

5 907

4 945

4 823

3 964

4 567

1 389

1 606

2 076

2 155

2 582

Viet Nam

201

228

400

470

499

110

108

145

157

159

Yemen

491

465

524

529

524

180

109

147

164

169

Zambia

461

370

312

341

353

84

81

88

89

92

Zimbabwe

553

587

564

604

613

120

117

141

178

182

3 973

4 531

5 189

5 352

5 505

328

384

436

453

472

Ukraine

United Republic of
Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan

World

184

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A10
Dietary energy, protein and fat consumption

Countries

Energy

Protein

Fat

(kcal/person/day)

(g/person/day)

(g/person/day)

1979–1981 1989–1991 2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

64

55

2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

40

40

2001–2003

Afghanistan

2 280

1 960

Albania

2 690

2 560

2 860

79

79

96

62

66

86

Algeria

2 640

2 880

3 040

67

78

82

62

71

68

American Samoa
Angola

2 110

1 770

2 070

51

42

45

50

46

43

Antigua and Barbuda

2 120

2 450

2 320

66

81

73

76

100

83

Argentina

3 210

2 960

2 980

107

94

94

116

103

100

Australia

3 070

3 210

3 120

105

109

107

115

132

134

Austria

3 330

3 490

3 740

96

101

111

146

156

162

2 470

2 720

2 710

71

81

92

79

91

96

Bangladesh

1 980

2 060

2 200

44

44

48

15

19

25

Barbados

3 040

3 130

3 110

85

96

92

94

108

99

2 260

Armenia

2 620

Azerbaijan
Bahamas

68

47

77

41

Bahrain

Belarus

2 960

87

99

Belgium

3 640

92

162

Belize

2 770

2 580

2 840

69

64

76

74

64

69

Benin

2 040

2 320

2 530

49

55

62

48

43

48

2 130

2 120

2 220

55

54

57

52

49

Bhutan
Bolivia

2 710

Bosnia and Herzegovina

72

58
58

Botswana

2 030

2 240

2 180

65

69

68

44

57

51

Brazil

2 680

2 780

3 060

64

68

83

65

82

93

Brunei Darussalam

2 590

2 790

2 850

72

82

82

55

72

73

Bulgaria

3 620

3 460

2 850

104

107

89

107

116

95

Burkina Faso

1 720

2 290

2 460

51

67

71

33

46

56

Burundi

2 030

1 860

1 640

68

57

45

16

14

10

Cambodia

1 710

1 810

2 060

39

43

51

13

21

32

Cameroon

2 280

2 090

2 270

57

50

59

48

44

46

Canada

2 930

3 030

3 590

93

96

106

120

129

147

Cape Verde

2 540

2 930

3 220

68

71

76

54

68

99

Central African Republic

2 300

1 870

1 940

36

40

46

64

61

64

Chad

1 640

1 740

2 160

50

51

66

39

44

67

Chile

2 670

2 540

2 860

71

70

80

60

63

85

China

2 330

2 680

2 940

54

65

82

33

53

90

Colombia

2 290

2 410

2 580

49

54

60

47

56

65

Comoros

1 800

1 900

1 750

39

44

42

35

43

42

Congo

2 040

1 890

2 150

38

40

43

41

44

54

Costa Rica

2 510

2 730

2 850

62

68

71

60

70

78

Côte d’Ivoire

2 830

2 470

2 630

59

52

54

50

50

Croatia

2 770

74

59
87

statistica l a n n e x

185

TABLE A10 (cont.)

Countries

Energy

Protein

Fat

(kcal/person/day)

(g/person/day)

(g/person/day)

1979–1981 1989–1991 2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

Cuba

2 880

2 880

3 190

70

68

78

78

80

53

Cyprus

2 790

3 050

3 240

77

95

105

104

123

132

3 240

Czech Republic
former Czechoslovakia

3 360

3 520

Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

2 300

2 450

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

2 110

93
99

102

2 160

74

80

2 190

1 610

33

115
123

131

63

37

48

35

33

25

34

35

26

Denmark

3 100

3 190

3 450

87

102

110

135

132

140

Dominica

2 240

2 970

2 770

58

76

83

59

83

76

Dominican Republic

2 270

2 270

2 290

50

50

49

57

65

78

Ecuador

2 360

2 490

2 710

50

50

57

60

87

99

Egypt

2 900

3 180

3 350

72

84

93

65

58

58

El Salvador

2 300

2 450

2 560

56

60

67

50

54

61

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea

1 520

47

29

Estonia

3 160

90

96

Ethiopia

1 860

54

20

former People’s
Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia

1 860

1 640

Fiji

2 500

2 600

Finland

3 040

3 160

59

48

25

24

2 960

62

68

74

88

97

97

3 150

94

99

102

129

127

127

France

3 390

3 540

3 640

112

117

118

148

163

170

French Polynesia

2 760

2 850

2 900

76

87

99

91

102

124

Gabon

2 420

2 450

2 670

71

69

73

44

49

55

Gambia

1 770

2 380

2 280

43

52

52

40

52

2 520

Georgia

71

77
52

Germany

3 330

3 390

3 490

96

98

100

136

142

141

Ghana

1 700

2 010

2 650

40

44

55

35

36

38

Greece

3 310

3 570

3 680

105

112

117

124

141

145

Guatemala

2 290

2 340

2 210

58

59

56

44

44

49

Guinea

2 230

2 040

2 420

50

47

51

50

42

58

Guinea-Bissau

2 010

2 260

2 070

42

45

39

54

55

51

Guyana

2 500

2 360

2 730

63

58

76

52

31

56

Haiti

2 040

1 770

2 090

48

44

47

34

29

38

Honduras

2 120

2 310

2 360

53

55

57

42

57

65

Hungary

3 450

3 670

3 500

97

102

95

131

151

149

Iceland

3 300

3 110

3 240

132

114

124

143

123

130

India

2 080

2 370

2 440

51

57

57

33

41

52

Indonesia

2 220

2 650

2 880

47

59

64

35

51

61

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

2 730

2 930

3 090

72

77

83

61

63

61

Iraq

2 840

3 050

75

78

58

63

Ireland

3 570

3 610

3 690

112

114

117

137

137

136

Israel

3 150

3 390

3 680

106

111

124

108

120

149

186

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A10 (cont.)

Countries

Energy

Protein

Fat

(kcal/person/day)

(g/person/day)

(g/person/day)

1979–1981 1989–1991 2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

Italy

3 560

3 600

3 670

106

111

113

129

151

157

Jamaica

2 610

2 530

2 680

66

63

68

64

64

75

Japan

2 710

2 820

2 770

87

95

92

69

80

86

Jordan

2 610

2 800

2 680

67

74

69

62

70

2 710

Kazakhstan

85

Kenya

2 250

2 020

2 150

62

56

Kuwait

2 980

2 410

3 060

92

73

3 050

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

2 070

2 110

2 320

51

3 020

Latvia

59

42

45

49

84

88

82

113

101
51

80
80

61

54
22

23

83

29
109

Lebanon

2 710

3 140

3 170

75

79

89

82

102

113

Lesotho

2 360

2 420

2 630

69

68

73

33

37

37

Liberia

2 550

2 320

1 940

50

42

32

48

47

52

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

3 450

3 270

3 330

90

82

79

109

105

107

Lithuania

3 370

110

100

Luxembourg

3 710

118

161

Madagascar

2 370

2 110

2 040

57

50

47

35

31

29

Malawi

2 270

1 930

2 140

66

53

55

40

27

33

Malaysia

2 760

2 770

2 870

59

65

75

78

97

84

Mali

1 700

2 240

2 230

51

62

63

42

49

46

Malta

3 280

3 260

3 530

102

101

118

112

114

110

Mauritania

2 050

2 540

2 780

71

79

81

55

61

71

Mauritius

2 670

2 840

2 960

61

69

80

67

72

80

Mexico

3 120

3 090

3 180

85

81

91

79

81

2 730

Moldova

66

89
54

Mongolia

2 380

2 210

2 250

80

75

79

85

80

84

Morocco

2 750

3 060

3 070

72

85

84

52

59

59

Mozambique

1 860

1 780

2 070

32

32

39

32

38

33

Myanmar

2 330

2 620

2 900

60

65

79

35

42

49
52

Namibia

2 230

2 070

2 260

68

59

65

42

34

Nepal

1 850

2 390

2 450

49

62

62

26

32

38

Netherlands

3 050

3 260

3 440

93

96

108

130

138

144

New Caledonia

2 910

2 830

2 780

78

78

82

99

103

113

New Zealand

3 080

3 170

3 200

98

95

92

124

128

118

Nicaragua

2 270

2 230

2 290

62

55

62

44

45

47
39

Niger

2 140

2 060

2 160

64

55

57

35

31

Nigeria

2 050

2 430

2 700

48

56

61

55

59

63

Norway

3 320

3 170

3 480

102

98

107

144

130

144

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

2 240

61

63

Oman
Pakistan

2 210

2 320

2 340

55

59

59

46

56

69

statistica l a n n e x

187

TABLE A10 (cont.)

Countries
Panama

Energy

Protein

Fat

(kcal/person/day)

(g/person/day)

(g/person/day)

1979–1981 1989–1991 2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

2 270

2 270

2 260

57

59

64

67

65

65

Paraguay

2 580

2 470

2 530

75

70

69

70

69

87

Peru

2 130

2 010

2 570

54

50

67

38

41

48

Philippines

2 220

2 320

2 450

51

55

58

36

41

48

Poland

3 530

3 380

3 370

111

103

99

117

113

112

Portugal

2 780

3 410

3 750

76

101

119

87

120

141

Republic of Korea

2 990

3 020

3 040

83

82

89

37

57

78

Romania

3 210

3 020

3 520

98

91

109

95

92

101

Papua New Guinea

Qatar

3 080

Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

3 360

3 240

Rwanda

2 270

1 960

91
103

104

2 070

54

47

83
94

100

49

15

16

15

Saint Kitts and Nevis

2 270

2 630

2 700

62

71

81

67

86

87

Saint Lucia

2 360

2 690

2 960

61

83

95

64

64

81

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

2 420

2 290

2 580

55

58

71

59

68

68

Samoa

2 460

2 650

2 910

60

71

84

96

116

133

Sao Tome and Principe

2 090

2 280

2 440

46

51

48

68

83

73

Saudi Arabia

2 900

2 770

2 820

77

77

76

76

81

82

Senegal

2 280

2 260

2 310

67

68

58

54

53

69

2 670

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia

3 650

3 540

Seychelles

2 260

2 310

Sierra Leone

2 110

1 980

75
106

101

2 460

66

68

1 930

45

42

118
104

110

84

44

53

73

44

58

56

45

Singapore
2 830

Slovakia

77

2 970

Slovenia

102

2 220

2 060

Somalia

1 650

1 760

South Africa

2 780

2 830

2 940

73

73

77

63

66

76

Spain

3 050

3 270

3 410

96

104

113

113

140

154

Sri Lanka

2 360

2 250

2 390

47

48

54

47

45

44

Sudan

2 180

2 160

2 260

63

67

71

75

59

69

Suriname

2 400

2 490

2 660

61

63

60

52

47

71

Swaziland

2 400

2 450

2 360

63

59

60

41

46

45

Sweden

2 980

2 970

3 160

97

95

107

124

123

125

Switzerland

3 460

3 310

3 500

96

95

96

158

151

157

Syrian Arab Republic

2 950

2 800

3 060

80

72

78

83

81

52

55

58

101

1 840

Tajikistan

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

56

2 280

2 190

2 410
2 800

51

108

Solomon Islands

Thailand

2 250

107

53

45

64

62

48
50

51

57
72

41

40
32

45

52
91

188

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A10 (cont.)

Countries
Togo

Energy

Protein

Fat

(kcal/person/day)

(g/person/day)

(g/person/day)

1979–1981 1989–1991 2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

1979–1981

1989–1991

2001–2003

2 190

2 180

2 320

50

52

53

33

44

48

Trinidad and Tobago

2 960

2 670

2 770

78

63

65

73

72

76

Tunisia

2 820

3 120

3 250

77

84

89

70

84

94

Turkey

3 230

3 510

3 340

96

101

96

77

89

Tonga

2 750

Turkmenistan
2 110

2 310

2 380

United Arab Emirates

3 300

2 950

United Kingdom

3 170

United Republic of
Tanzania

85
51

55

57

3 220

104

94

3 250

3 440

89

2 190

2 120

1 960

United States of America

3 180

3 460

Uruguay

2 850

2 570

Vanuatu

2 560

2 530

Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

2 760

2 390

Uganda

23

29

32

106

130

105

92

94

104

137

137

138

54

53

47

31

31

31

3 770

99

107

114

128

138

156

2 850

86

79

86

103

90

86

2 590

65

58

60

98

101

87

2 350

70

58

62

78

69

68

3 030

Ukraine

84

2 270

Uzbekistan

90
70

79

67

64

Viet Nam

2 030

2 140

2 580

47

50

63

19

27

46

Yemen

1 970

2 060

2 020

59

57

57

37

40

41

Zambia

2 220

1 960

1 930

59

49

48

35

30

29

Zimbabwe

2 260

2 050

2 010

60

52

45

54

51

55

World

2 550

2 700

2 800

67

72

75

59

68

78

189

statistica l a n n e x

TABLE A11
Number of undernourished and proportion in total population

Countries

1979–1981

Number of people
undernourished

Proportion of undernourished
in total population

(Millions)

(Percentage)

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria

0.2*

0.2

5*

6

1.7

1.3

1.7

1.5

9

5

6

5

2.6

5.6

5.4

5.0

37

58

49

38

0.3

0.7

0.4

0.9

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

1.8*

0.9

American Samoa
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan

2.6*

52*

29

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

0.8

34*

10

9

14

7

26.0

22.7

39.2

21.3

Bangladesh

33.3

39.2

50.4

43.1

39

35

40

30

Barbados**

4.4

4.9

8.7

0.5

<2.5

<2.5

3

<2.5

0.1*

0.3

Bahamas**

12

Bahrain

Belarus

<2.5*

3

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Belize**

6.4

12.7

12.1

11.4

4

7

6

5

Benin

1.3

1.0

0.9

0.9

37

20

17

14

1.4

1.9

1.8

2.0

26

28

24

23

0.3*

0.4

Belgium

<2.5

Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana

9*

9

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.5

35

23

27

Brazil

18.1

18.5

16.5

14.4

15

12

10

8

Brunei Darussalam**

13.3

9.8

9.3

11.7

7

4

3

3

0.7*

0.7

Burkina Faso

4.2

1.9

2.0

2.1

62

21

19

17

Burundi

1.6

2.7

3.8

4.5

38

48

63

67

Cambodia

4.0

4.4

5.4

4.6

60

43

46

33

Cameroon

2.0

4.0

4.7

4.0

Bulgaria

Canada

8*

30

9

23

33

34

25

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Cape Verde
Central African Republic

0.5

1.5

1.8

1.7

23

50

52

45

Chad

3.1

3.5

3.4

2.7

69

58

49

33

Chile

0.7

1.1

0.7

0.6

7

8

5

4

China

304.0

193.6

145.6

150.0

30

16

12

12

Colombia

6.1

6.1

5.1

5.9

22

17

13

14

Comoros

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.5

54

47

55

62

Congo

0.7

1.4

1.8

1.2

41

54

59

34

Costa Rica

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.2

11

6

5

4

Côte d’Ivoire

0.7

2.3

2.3

2.2

8

18

16

14

190

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A11 (cont.)

Countries

1979–1981

Number of people
undernourished

Proportion of undernourished
in total population

(Millions)

(Percentage)

1990–1992

Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus**

1995–1997

2001–2003

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

0.7*

0.3

0.3

0.7

1.8

0.2

3

7

17

<2.5

29.5

9.6

7.9

7.1

5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

0.1

0.1

<2.5

<2.5

Czech Republic

16*

2001–2003

7

former Czechoslovakia
Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea
Democratic Republic of
the Congo

4.3

3.6

7.3

7.9

25

18

34

35

10.0

12.2

27.2

37.0

36

31

60

72

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

20.3

2.9

4.9

0.6

27

4

7

8

1.4

1.9

2.0

2.3

25

27

26

27
5

Denmark
Dominica**
Dominican Republic
Ecuador

0.9

0.9

0.6

0.6

11

8

5

Egypt

3.6

2.5

2.2

2.4

8

4

3

3

El Salvador

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.7

17

12

14

11

Eritrea

2.2

2.9

68

73

Estonia

0.1*

Equatorial Guinea

Ethiopia

35.8

9*
31.5

3

61

46

former People’s
Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia
Fiji

14

10

7

4

Finland

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

France

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

5

4

4

4

French Polynesia**

0.1

7.5

0.1

7.6

0.1

8.8

9.4

Gabon

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

12

10

8

5

Gambia

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.4

60

22

31

27

2.4*

0.7
<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Georgia
Germany
Ghana

7.2

5.8

3.2

2.4

Greece

44*

13
<2.5

65

37

18

12

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Guatemala

1.2

1.4

2.2

2.8

18

16

21

23

Guinea

1.5

2.5

2.3

2.0

32

39

31

24

Guinea-Bissau

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.5

41

24

31

37

Guyana

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.1

13

21

12

9

Haiti

2.6

4.6

4.5

3.8

48

65

59

47

Honduras

1.1

1.1

1.2

1.5

31

23

21

Hungary

0.1

Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)

22

<2.5*

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

261.3

214.8

201.8

212.0

38

25

21

20

36.5

16.4

11.8

13.8

24

9

6

6

2.6

2.1

2.2

2.7

7

4

3

4

191

statistica l a n n e x

TABLE A11 (cont.)

Countries

1979–1981

Number of people
undernourished

Proportion of undernourished
in total population

(Millions)

(Percentage)

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

Iraq
Ireland

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Israel

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Italy

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

10

14

11

10

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

6

4

7

7

Jamaica

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.3

0.1

0.1

0.3

0.4

0.3*

1.2

Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya

3.3

9.5

10.0

Kuwait

0.1

0.5

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

9.7

20

39

0.1

0.1

4

24

1.0*

0.2

1.0

1.2

1.3

1.2

0.1*

0.1

Lebanon

0.2

0.1

0.1

Lesotho

0.3

0.3

Liberia

0.4

0.7

Latvia

8

36

31

5

5

21*

4

33

29

28

0.1

9

<2.5

3

3

0.2

0.2

20

17

14

12

1.0

1.6

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania

<2.5*

3*

21
3

21

34

42

49

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

0.2*

4*

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Madagascar

1.8

4.3

5.7

6.5

20

35

40

38

Malawi

1.6

4.8

4.1

4.0

26

50

40

34

Malaysia

0.4

0.5

0.4

0.6

3

3

<2.5

3

Mali

4.5

2.7

3.4

3.5

64

29

32

28

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Mauritania

0.6

0.3

0.3

0.3

40

15

11

10

Mauritius

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

10

6

6

6

Mexico

3.1

4.6

5.0

5.1

5

5

5

0.2*

0.5

Luxembourg

Malta

Moldova

5*

5
11

Mongolia

0.3

0.8

1.1

0.7

16

34

45

Morocco

1.9

1.5

1.7

1.9

10

6

6

28
6

Mozambique

7.1

9.2

9.5

8.3

59

66

58

45

Myanmar

6.2

4.0

3.1

2.7

18

10

7

5

Namibia

0.2

0.5

0.6

0.4

23

34

35

23

Nepal

7.7

3.9

5.6

4.1

52

20

26

17

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

9.4

17.0

19.4

23.0

7

10

10

10

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Netherlands
New Caledonia**
New Zealand
Nicaragua

0.8

1.2

1.5

1.5

26

30

33

27

Niger

1.9

3.2

3.9

3.7

33

41

42

32

23.9

11.8

8.9

11.5

37

13

9

9

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Nigeria
Norway

192

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A11 (cont.)

Countries

1979–1981

Number of people
undernourished

Proportion of undernourished
in total population

(Millions)

(Percentage)

1990–1992

Occupied Palestinian
Territory

1995–1997

2001–2003

0.3

0.6

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

12

16

Oman
Pakistan

23.6

27.8

24.8

35.2

29

24

19

23

Panama

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.8

21

21

24

25

0.4

0.8

0.7

0.8

12

18

13

15
12

Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines

4.9

9.3

4.6

3.3

28

42

19

12.9

16.2

15.4

15.2

27

26

22

Poland

0.4*

0.3

Portugal

19

<2.5*

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Qatar
Republic of Korea

0.5

0.8

0.8

0.8

Romania

0.3*

0.1

<2.5*

<2.5

Russian Federation

6.4*

4.1

4*

3

former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda

1.3

2.8

2.8

3.0

24

43

51

36

Saint Kitts and Nevis**

11.7

5.5

8.2

4.5

26

13

19

11

Saint Lucia**

21.2

10.5

9.9

7.5

19

8

7

5

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines**

14.1

24.3

30.7

14.2

14

22

27

12

Samoa**

22.3

17.7

18.2

7.1

14

11

11

4

Sao Tome and Principe**

24.7

21.1

26.7

18.3

26

18

20

12

Saudi Arabia

0.2

0.7

0.8

0.9

<2.5

4

4

4

Senegal

1.3

1.8

2.2

2.2

23

23

25

23

0.5*

1.1

Serbia and Montenegro

5*

10

former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
Seychelles**

10.5

10.1

8.7

7.2

17

14

11

9

Sierra Leone

1.3

1.9

1.8

2.4

40

46

44

50

Slovakia

0.2*

0.3

4*

Slovenia

0.1*

0.1

3*

0.1

0.1

0.1

2.1

2.6

1.9

Singapore

Solomon Islands

19

33

21

6
3
20

Somalia
South Africa

1.7

Spain

6

6

6

4

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Sri Lanka

3.0

4.8

4.6

4.1

20

28

26

22

Sudan

5.7

7.9

6.5

8.8

29

31

23

27

Suriname

0.1

0.1

18

13

10

10

Swaziland

0.1

0.1

15

14

23

19

0.2

0.2

193

statistica l a n n e x

TABLE A11 (cont.)

Countries

1979–1981

Number of people
undernourished

Proportion of undernourished
in total population

(Millions)

(Percentage)

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

1979–1981

1990–1992

1995–1997

2001–2003

Sweden

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Switzerland

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

3

5

Syrian Arab Republic

0.3

0.7

Tajikistan
Thailand

10.7

16.8

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Togo

0.6

0.6

1.2*

3.8

13.7

13.4

0.3*

0.1

23

30

4

4

22*

61

23

21

15*

7

0.8

1.2

1.0

1.2

30

33

25

25

Trinidad and Tobago

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.1

6

13

15

11

Tunisia

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.1

3

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

Turkey

1.4

1.0

1.5

2.0

3

<2.5

<2.5

3

0.5*

0.4

Tonga

Turkmenistan
Uganda

4.1

4.2

Ukraine
United Arab Emirates

0.1

5.4

4.6

2.4*

1.2

0.1

0.1

United Kingdom
United Republic of
Tanzania

5.2

9.9

15.7

16.1

United States of America
Uruguay

0.1

0.2

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu**
Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)
Viet Nam

0.1

0.1

1.7*

6.7

33

24

12*

8

26

19

<2.5*

3

<2.5

4

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

28

37

50

44

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

<2.5

3

7

4

3

8*

26

13.4

19.0

21.9

24.0

11

12

12

12

0.6

2.3

3.4

4.5

4

11

15

18

19.7

20.6

16.7

13.8

37

31

23

17

Yemen

3.2

4.2

5.6

7.1

39

34

36

37

Zambia

1.7

4.0

4.6

5.1

29

48

48

47

Zimbabwe

2.0

4.8

5.6

5.7

28

45

47

45

944.8

855.1

833.9

856.4

21

16

15

14

World

* Data refer to 1993–95
** Number of undernourished is expressed in thousands

194

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A12
Life expectancy and child mortality

Countries

Life expectancy at birth

Child mortality rate

(Years)

(Per thousand live births)

1980

1990

1995

2000

Afghanistan

40

42

Albania

69

72

71

74

Algeria

59

67

70

71

2003

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

280

260

257

74

72

45

71

134

69

34

25

21

55

45

41

265

260

260

260

260

21

15

12

25

20

20

49

37

33
6

American Samoa
Angola

41

46

47

47

47

Antigua and Barbuda

71

74

75

75

75

Argentina

70

72

73

74

75

72

74

75

Armenia

38

28

Australia

74

77

78

79

80

13

10

6

6

Austria

72

76

77

78

79

17

9

7

6

5

69

65

98

93

91

Azerbaijan
Bahamas

68

69

69

69

70

35

29

23

17

14

Bahrain

68

71

72

73

73

30

19

18

16

15

Bangladesh

49

55

58

61

62

205

144

116

82

69

Barbados

72

75

29

16

Belarus
Belgium

73

76

76

75

75

69

68

68

77

78

78

15

9

16

14

13

18

17

17

9

6

5

Belize

69

73

73

74

71

70

49

44

41

39

Benin

48

52

53

53

53

214

185

170

160

154

60

62

64

227

166

133

100

85

170

120

Bhutan
Bolivia

52

58

Bosnia and Herzegovina

61

63

64

73

73

74

92

75

66

19

18

17

Botswana

58

57

50

39

38

84

58

66

101

112

Brazil

63

66

67

68

69

86

60

48

39

35

Brunei Darussalam

71

74

75

76

77

22

11

9

7

6

Bulgaria

71

72

71

72

72

24

16

18

16

15

Burkina Faso

44

45

45

44

43

247

210

207

207

207

Burundi

47

44

42

42

42

195

190

190

190

190

Cambodia

40

50

53

54

54

190

115

120

135

140

Cameroon

50

54

54

50

48

173

139

156

166

166

Canada

75

77

78

79

79

13

9

7

6

6

Cape Verde

61

65

68

69

69

80

60

50

40

35

Central African Republic

46

48

46

43

42

189

180

180

180

180

Chad

42

46

48

48

48

225

203

200

200

200

Chile

69

74

75

76

76

39

19

14

12

9

China

67

69

69

70

71

64

49

46

40

37

Colombia

66

68

70

71

72

56

36

29

24

21

Comoros

50

56

59

61

62

165

120

100

82

73

Congo

50

51

51

51

52

125

110

108

108

108

Costa Rica

73

77

77

78

79

26

17

16

12

10

Côte d’Ivoire

49

50

48

46

45

172

157

175

188

192

72

73

74

11

8

7

Croatia

statistica l a n n e x

195

TABLE A12 (cont.)

Countries

Life expectancy at birth

Child mortality rate

(Years)

(Per thousand live births)

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

Cuba

74

75

76

77

77

22

13

Cyprus

75

77

77

78

78

20

12

73

75

75

Czech Republic

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

10

9

8

10

7

5

8

5

4

former Czechoslovakia
Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

67

66

61

61

63

43

55

55

55

55

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

49

52

49

46

45

210

205

205

205

205

Denmark

74

75

75

77

77

10

9

7

5

4

Dominica

73

75

76

77

23

20

16

14

Dominican Republic

63

66

67

67

67

92

65

53

40

35

Ecuador

63

68

68

70

71

98

57

43

32

27

Egypt

56

63

65

68

69

173

104

71

49

39

El Salvador

57

66

69

70

70

118

60

47

40

36

Equatorial Guinea

43

47

49

51

52

243

206

175

156

146

Eritrea

50

51

51

122

97

85

Estonia

68

71

71

20

11

9

Ethiopia

44

42

42

192

176

169

former People’s Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia
Fiji

64

67

68

69

70

42

31

25

22

20

Finland

73

75

76

78

78

9

7

4

5

5

France

74

77

78

79

79

13

9

7

5

5

70

71

73

74

French Polynesia
Gabon

48

52

52

53

53

115

92

91

91

91

Gambia

40

49

52

53

53

231

154

137

128

123

73

73

74

45

45

45

Germany

73

75

76

78

78

16

9

7

6

5

Ghana

53

57

59

57

54

157

125

110

100

95

Georgia

Greece

74

77

78

78

78

23

11

9

6

5

Guatemala

57

61

64

65

66

139

82

64

53

47

Guinea

40

44

46

46

46

300

240

208

175

160
204

Guinea-Bissau

39

42

44

45

46

290

253

235

215

Guyana

61

64

64

63

62

90

90

84

74

69

Haiti

51

53

54

53

52

195

150

137

125

118

Honduras

60

65

66

66

66

103

59

49

43

41

Hungary

69

69

70

71

73

26

16

12

9

8

Iceland

77

78

79

80

80

8

5

5

4

4

India

54

59

61

63

63

173

123

104

94

87

Indonesia

55

62

64

66

67

125

91

66

48

41

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

58

65

67

69

69

130

72

55

44

39

Iraq

62

61

83

50

Ireland

73

75

76

76

78

14

9

7

6

6

Israel

73

76

77

78

79

19

12

7

6

6

196

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A12 (cont.)

Countries

1980

Life expectancy at birth

Child mortality rate

(Years)

(Per thousand live births)

1990

1995

2000

2003

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

Italy

74

77

78

80

80

17

10

7

5

4

Jamaica

71

73

74

75

76

34

20

20

20

20

Japan

76

79

80

81

82

11

6

6

5

4

69

70

72

72

65

40

35

30

28

65

64

61

67

73

73

Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya

55

57

53

47

45

115

97

111

120

123

Kuwait

71

75

76

77

77

35

16

14

10

9

66

66

65

74

70

68

52

54

55

134

105

91

66

70

71

20

13

12
31

Kyrgyzstan
Lao People’s Democratic
Republic

45

50

Latvia

200

163

Lebanon

65

68

69

70

71

44

37

34

32

Lesotho

53

58

51

41

37

155

120

103

91

84

Liberia

51

45

44

47

47

235

235

235

235

235

Libyan Arab Jamahiriya

61

69

70

72

73

70

42

69

72

72

Lithuania

29

20

16

16

12

11

Luxembourg

73

75

76

78

78

16

9

6

6

5

Madagascar

51

53

53

55

56

175

168

156

137

126

Malawi

44

45

42

39

38

265

241

216

188

178

Malaysia

67

71

72

73

73

42

21

12

9

7

Mali

42

45

44

42

41

300

250

233

224

220

Malta

73

76

77

78

79

17

14

11

8

6

Mauritania

47

49

50

51

51

175

183

183

183

183

Mauritius

66

69

70

72

72

40

25

23

20

18

Mexico

67

71

72

73

74

74

46

36

30

28

66

68

67

36

33

32

89

75

68

Moldova
Mongolia

58

63

64

65

66

140

104

Morocco

58

64

66

68

69

144

85

61

46

39

Mozambique

44

43

45

42

41

220

235

212

178

158

Myanmar

52

55

56

57

57

134

130

117

110

107

Namibia

53

58

57

47

40

108

86

77

69

65

Nepal

48

54

56

59

60

195

145

120

95

82

Netherlands

76

77

77

78

79

11

8

6

6

5

74

New Caledonia

68

71

72

73

New Zealand

73

75

77

79

79

16

11

7

6

6

Nicaragua

59

65

67

69

69

120

68

52

43

38

Niger

40

42

44

45

46

320

320

295

270

262

Nigeria

46

49

50

47

45

216

235

238

205

198

Norway

76

77

78

79

79

11

9

6

4

4

65

40

33

27

24

Occupied Palestinian
Territory
Oman

60

69

72

74

74

95

30

18

14

12

Pakistan

55

59

61

63

64

153

130

118

108

103

Panama

70

72

74

75

75

46

34

30

26

24

statistica l a n n e x

197

TABLE A12 (cont.)

Countries

Life expectancy at birth

Child mortality rate

(Years)

(Per thousand live births)

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

Papua New Guinea

51

55

57

57

57

108

101

98

95

93

Paraguay

67

68

69

70

71

61

37

34

31

29

Peru

60

66

68

69

70

126

80

60

42

34

Philippines

61

66

68

69

70

81

63

50

40

36

Poland

70

71

72

74

75

24

19

15

9

7

Portugal

71

74

75

76

76

31

15

9

6

5

Qatar

67

72

74

75

75

32

25

18

16

15

Republic of Korea

67

70

72

73

74

18

9

6

5

5

Romania

69

70

70

70

70

36

32

25

22

20

65

65

66

22

21

21

40

38

40

40

173

209

203

203

67

69

71

72

36

30

25

22

Russian Federation
former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics
Rwanda

46

Saint Kitts and Nevis

219

Saint Lucia

68

71

71

72

74

24

21

19

18

Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines

67

71

72

73

73

26

21

25

27

Samoa

63

66

68

69

70

62

64

65

66

Sao Tome and Principe

98

42

29

26

24

118

118

118

118

Saudi Arabia

61

69

71

73

73

85

44

34

29

26

Senegal

45

50

52

52

52

218

148

143

139

137

72

73

73

19

16

14

Serbia and Montenegro
former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia
70

71

72

73

Sierra Leone

35

35

36

37

37

Singapore

72

74

Seychelles

21

20

17

15

336

302

293

286

284

13

8

76

78

5

4

3

Slovakia

72

73

73

12

9

8

Slovenia

73

75

76

7

5

4

67

69

70

30

25

22

Solomon Islands

60

65

Somalia

43

42

South Africa

57

62

58

48

46

Spain

75

77

78

79

80

Sri Lanka

68

70

71

73

74

48

Sudan

48

52

55

58

59

142

Suriname

66

69

70

70

70

56

Swaziland

52

57

58

45

43

Sweden

76

78

79

80

80

Switzerland

76

77

78

80

Syrian Arab Republic

62

66

68
68

Tajikistan
Thailand

64

69

The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia
Togo

49

51

56

36

225

225

91

60

59

63

66

16

9

7

5

4

32

25

20

15

120

106

97

93

48

44

41

39

143

110

110

142

153

9

6

4

4

3

81

11

8

6

6

5

70

71

74

44

67

66

69

69

69

72

73

74

49

49

50

58

175

40

152

31

22

18

123

120

118

34

29

26

25

14

11

146

142

140

198

T H E S T A T E O F F OO D A N D A G R I C U L T U R E 2 0 0 7

TABLE A12 (cont.)

Countries

Life expectancy at birth

Child mortality rate

(Years)

(Per thousand live births)

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

69

70

71

72

Trinidad and Tobago

68

71

72

73

72

40

Tunisia

62

70

71

73

73

Turkey

61

66

67

68

69

66

65

65

48

47

44

43

43

67

68

68

Tonga

Turkmenistan
Uganda
Ukraine

1980

1990

1995

2000

2003

27

24

21

19

24

18

20

20

100

52

37

28

24

133

78

60

45

39

89

99

102

185

160

156

145

140

24

21

20
8

United Arab Emirates

68

74

75

75

75

27

14

11

9

United Kingdom

74

76

77

77

78

14

10

7

7

6

United Republic of Tanzania

50

50

49

44

43

175

163

164

165

165

United States of America

74

75

76

77

77

15

10

9

9

8

Uruguay

70

73

73

74

75

42

24

23

17

14

69

68

67

75

71

69

65

67

68

69

110

70

56

44

38

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of)

68

71

72

73

74

42

27

26

23

21

Viet Nam

60

65

67

69

70

66

53

44

30

23

Yemen

52

54

57

58

142

126

117

113

Zambia

51

49

45

38

37

155

180

182

182

182

Zimbabwe

55

56

49

40

39

108

80

90

117

126

63

65

66

66

67

118

95

89

World

83

80

• Glossary of terms
• References
• Special chapters of

The State of Food and Agriculture

• Selected publications

201
Glossary of terms
Agricultural biodiversity
Agricultural biodiversity is a broad term that includes all components of biological
diversity of relevance to food and agriculture and all components of biological diversity
that constitute the agro-ecosystem: the variety and variability of animals, plants and
micro-organisms, at the genetic, species and ecosystem levels, that are necessary to
sustain key functions of the agro-ecosystem, its structure and processes.
Biological diversity
The variability among living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial,
marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are
part; this includes diversity within species, among species and of ecosystems.
Buyer (of an environmental service)
An individual or group who would be positively affected by more of the service and
therefore willing to provide some financial incentive for its provision.
Carbon sequestration
Storage of carbon for an extended period in a chemical form that does not contribute
to global warming. The most common methods of carbon sequestration are above- and
below-ground additions to biomass, additions to soil organic carbon and additions
to stocks of inorganic carbon compounds that do not break down easily (e.g. calcium
carbonate).
Direct use value
The value derived from marketed goods and services, normally involving private
benefits.
Ecosystem
A dynamic complex of plant, animal, and micro-organism communities and the nonliving environment interacting as a functional unit.
Ecosystem services
The benefits people obtain from ecosystems.
Ecosystem externality
An uncompensated provision of an ecosystem service (positive externality) or an
unpenalized negative effect on the delivery of ecosystem services (negative externality).
See also environmental services.
Environmental services
The subset of ecosystem services characterized by externalities.
Existence value
The benefits people obtain from knowing that an ecosystem service exists, even if they
will never actually use the service themselves. Also referred to as non-use value.
Farmer
All producers of agricultural products, including crops, livestock, fish, and forest
products.

202
Indirect use value
The benefit that people derive indirectly from services such as watershed protection,
carbon sequestration, and biodiversity conservation.
Non-use value
The benefits people obtain from knowing that an ecosystem service exists, even if they
will never actually use the service themselves. Also referred to as existence value.
Opportunity cost
The benefits that producers would have to forgo in order to change their practices, for
example in order to provide an environmental service.
Option value
The value associated with preserving a future possibility for using an ecosystem service.
Payments for environmental services
Voluntary cash transfers between buyers and sellers for the provision of an
environmental service.
Public good
A good whose use by one person does not affect its use by another person and for
which it is not possible to exclude users.
Seller (of an environmental service)
An individual or group who could modify their practices to provide more of the
environmental service. This report focuses on farmers.
Use value
The sum of direct use value and indirect use value.

203
References
Adger, W.N., Brown, K., Cervigni, R. & Moran, D.
1995. Total economic value of forests in Mexico.
Ambio, 24(5): 286–296.
Agarwal, A. & Narain, S. 2000. Redressing
ecological poverty through participatory
democracy: case studies from India. Working
Paper Series No. 36. Amherst, MA, USA, Political
Economy Research Institute (PERI), University of
Massachusetts.
Alix-Garcia, J., de Janvry, A. & Sadoulet, E.
2005. A tale of two communities: explaining
deforestation in Mexico. World Development,
33(2): 219–235.
Alix-Garcia, J., de Janvry, A. & Sadoulet, E.
Forthcoming. The role of deforestation risk and
calibrated compensation in designing payments
for environmental services. Environment and
Development Economics.
Alrusheidat, J. 2004. Preventing environmental
problems in the arid and semi-arid zones –
environmental education is what we need. New
Medit, 3(3): 50–54.
Amacher, G.S. & Feather, P.M. 1997. Testing
producer perceptions of jointly beneficial best
management practices for improved water
quality. Applied Economics, 29(2): 153–159.
Andersen, L.E. 1997. A cost-benefit analysis
of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon.
Discussion Paper 455. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
Research Institute for Applied Economics (IPEA).
Antle, J.M. & Valdivia, R.O. 2006. Modelling the
supply of ecosystem services from agriculture:
a minimum-data approach. The Australian
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics,
50(1): 1–15.
ASB (Alternatives to Slash and Burn Programme).
2001. The Krui agroforests: a model of
sustainable community-based management.
Policy Brief No. 2. Nairobi.
Ayres, W.S. & Dixon, J.A. 1995. Economic and
ecological benefits of reducing emissions of
sulfur oxides in the Sostanj region of Slovenia.
Environment Department Paper No. 009.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Baidu-Forson, J. 1999. Factors influencing
adoption of land-enhancing technology in
the Sahel: lessons from a case study in Niger.
Agricultural Economics, 20(3): 231–239.
Barbier, E.B. 1989. Economics, natural-resource
scarcity and development: conventional and
alternative views. London, Earthscan.

Baumert, K.A., Herzog, T. & Pershing, J. 2005.
Navigating the numbers: greenhouse gas data
and international climate policy. Washington,
DC, World Resources Institute.
Bayon, R., Hawn, A. & Hamilton, K. 2007.
Voluntary carbon markets: an international
business guide to what they are and how they
work. London, Earthscan.
Bennett, M.T. & Xu, J. 2005. China’s Sloping Land
Conversion Program: institutional innovation
or business as usual? Paper presented at
the ZEF/CIFOR Workshop on Payments for
Environmental Services (PES): Methods and
Design in Developing and Developed Countries,
15–18 June 2005, Titisee, Germany.
Biesmeijer, J.C., Roberts, S.P.M., Reemer, M.,
Ohlemüller, R., Edwards, M., Peeters, T.,
Schaffers, A.P., Potts, S.G., Kleukers, R., Thomas,
C.D., Settele J. & Kunin, W.E. 2006. Parallel
declines in pollinators and insect-pollinated
plants in Britain and the Netherlands. Science,
313: 351–354.
Bioversity International. 2006. Developing
a global approach to study markets for
agricultural biodiversity products. Paper
presented at the World Congress on
Communications for Development, 25–27
October 2006. Rome (Unpublished)
Boutayeb, A. & Boutayeb, S. 2005. The burden
of non communicable diseases in developing
countries. International Journal for Equity in
Health, 4:2.
Bromley, D. 1998. Property regimes in economic
development: lessons and policy implications.
In E. Lutz, ed. Agriculture and the environment:
perspectives on sustainable rural development,
pp. 83–91. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Bruijnzeel, L.A. 2004. Hydrological functions
of tropical forests: not seeing the soil for
the trees? Agriculture, Ecosystems and
Environment, 104(1): 185–228.
Buchanan, J.M. & Tullock, G. 1975. Polluters’
profits and political response: direct controls
versus taxes. American Economic Review,
65(March): 139–147.
BWI (Biodiversity and Wine Initiative). 2007. Web
site (available at http://www.bwi.co.za/).
Caldés, N., Coady, D. & Maluccio, J.A. 2006. The
cost of poverty alleviation transfer programs: a
comparative analysis of three programs in Latin
America. World Development, 34(5): 818–837.

204
CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). 1993.
Convention on Biological Diversity. Text
concluded at Rio de Janeiro on 5 June 1992.
United Nations Treaty Series. New York, USA,
United Nations.
CBD. 2000. Agricultural biological diversity:
review of phase I of the programme of work
and adoption of a multi-year work programme.
Fifth Ordinary Meeting of the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity – COP V/5. 15–26 May 2000, Nairobi.
CERES. 2006. Press Release. Dozens of new
insurance products emerging to tackle climate
change and rising weather losses. Online press
release (available at http://www.ceres.org/news/
news_item.php?nid=221).
Chomitz, K.M. 2007. At loggerheads? Agricultural
expansion, poverty reduction, and environment
in the tropical forests. World Bank Policy
Research Report. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Claassen, R., Hansen, L., Peters, M., Breneman,
V., Weinberg, M., Cattaneo, A., Feather, P.,
Gadsby, D., Hellerstein, D., Hopkins, J.,
Johnston, P., Morehart, M. & Smith, M. 2001.
Agri-environmental policy at the crossroads:
guideposts on a changing landscape.
Agricultural Economic Report No. 794.
Washington, DC, Economic Research Service,
United States Department of Agriculture.
Coady, D., Grosh, M. & Hoddinott, J. 2004.
Targeting outcomes redux. World Bank
Research Observer, 19(1): 61–85.
Coase, R. 1960. The problem of social cost. Journal
of Law and Economics, 3(October): 1–44.
Committee on the Status of Pollinators in North
America. 2007. Status of pollinators in North
America: executive summary. Washington, DC,
National Research Council.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. 2007. Water
for food, water for life: a comprehensive
assessment of water management in
agriculture. London, Earthscan and Colombo,
International Water Management Institute.
Cosbey, A., Murphy, D., Drexhage, J. & Balint, J.
2006. Making development work in the CDM:
Phase II of the Development Dividend Project.
Winnipeg, Canada, International Institute for
Sustainable Development.
Cramb, R.A., Garcia, J.N.M., Gerrits, R.V., &
Saguiguit, G.C. 2000. Conservation farming
projects in the Philippine uplands: rhetoric and
reality. World Development, 28(5): 911–927.
Dagang, A.B.K. & Nair, P.K.R. 2003. Silvopastoral
research and adoption in Central America:

recent findings and recommendations for
future directions. Agroforestry Systems, 59(2):
149–155.
Dasgupta, P. 1993. An inquiry into well-being and
destitution. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
Dasgupta, P. 1996. The economics of the
environment. Environment and Development
Economics, 1(4): 387–421.
Dasgupta, S. 1999. Opportunities for improving
environmental compliance in Mexico. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series No.
2245. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Dasgupta, P. & Maler, K.G. 1995. Poverty,
institutions and the environmental resource
base. In J. Behrman & T.N. Srinivisan, eds.
Handbook of development economics, Volume
IIIB, Chapter 39. Part 8: Resources, technology,
and institutions, pp. 2371–2463. Amsterdam,
North-Holland Publishing.
Davis, B. 2003. Innovative policy instruments
and evaluation in rural and agricultural
development in Latin America and the
Caribbean. In FAO. Current and emerging
issues for economic analysis and policy research
(CUREMIS II). Volume I: Latin America and
the Caribbean, edited by B. Davis, Chapter 3,
pp. 67–104. Rome.
De Jong, B.H.J., Tipper, R. & Montoya-Gómez, G.
2000. An economic analysis of the potential for
carbon sequestration by forests: evidence from
southern Mexico. Ecological Economics, 33(2):
313–327.
de la Brière, B. & Rawlings, L.B. 2006. Examining
conditional cash transfer programs: a role for
increased social inclusion? Social Protection
Discussion Paper No. 0603. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Deininger, K. 1999. Making negotiated land
reform work: initial experience from Colombia,
Brazil, and South Africa. World Development,
27(4): 651–672.
Dennis, P., Shellard, L.D.F. & Agnew, R.D.M. 1996.
Shifts in arthropod species assemblages in
relation to silvopastoral establishment in upland
pastures. Agroforestry Forum, 7(3): 14–21.
Derpsch, R. 2005. The extent of conservation
agriculture adoption worldwide: implications
and impact. In Proceedings of the Third World
Congress on Conservation Agriculture: Linking
Production, Livelihoods and Conservation,
Nairobi, Kenya, 3–7 October 2005 [CD-Rom].
Harare, African Conservation Tillage Network
Productions.
Diagana, B., Antle, J., Stoorvogel, J. & Gray, K.
2007. Economic potential for soil carbon

205
sequestration in the Nioro Region of Senegal’s
Peanut Basin. Agricultural Systems,
94(1): 26–37.
Dietz, T. & Stern, P.C., eds. 2002. New tools
for environmental protection: education,
information and voluntary measures.
Washington, DC, The National Academies Press.
Dixon, J. & Gulliver, A. with Gibbon, D. 2001.
Farming systems and poverty: improving
farmers’ livelihoods in a changing world, edited
by M. Hall. Rome, FAO and Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Doak, C.M., Adair, L.S., Monteiro, C. & Popkin,
B.M. 2000. Overweight and underweight coexist
within households in Brazil, China and Russia.
The Journal of Nutrition, 130: 2965–2971.
Dobbs, T.L. & Pretty, J.N. 2004. Agri-environmental
stewardship schemes and “Multifunctionality”.
Review of Agricultural Economics,
26(2): 220–237.
Echavarria, M., Vogel, J., Albán, M. & Meneses, F.
2004. The impacts of payments for watershed
services in Ecuador: emerging lessons
from Pimampiro and Cuenca. Markets for
Environmental Services Series No. 4. London,
International Institute for Environment and
Development.
Ecosystem Marketplace. 2005. Matrix of
ecosystem service payments: today and
in the future. Supplement 1 – ecosystem
market matrix. Report to UNDP/GEF on
institutionalizing payments for ecosystem
services. Washington, DC, Forest Trends (cited in
FAO, 2007c).
Ecosystem Marketplace. 2007. Web site (available
at http://ecosystemmarketplace.com/index.php).
Fafchamps, M. 1992. Cash crop production, food
price volatility and rural market integration
in the Third World. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 74(1): 90–99.
FAO. N.d. Afforestation and reforestation projects
under the Clean Development Mechanism of
the Kyoto Protocol. Forest Resources Division
fact sheet. Rome.
FAO. 1997. The state of the world’s plant genetic
resources for food and agriculture. Rome.
FAO. 1999. Rural poverty, risk and development,
by M. Fafchamps. FAO Economic and Social
Development Paper No. 144. Rome.
FAO. 2001. Zero tillage development in tropical
Brazil – The story of a successful NGO activity,
by J.N. Landers. FAO Agricultural Services
Bulletin No. 147. Rome.
FAO. 2002a. Cooperation between a small private
hydropower producer and a conservation NGO

for forest protection: the case of La Esperanza,
Costa Rica, by M. Rojas & B. Aylward. LandWater Linkages in Rural Watersheds Case Study
Series. Rome.
FAO. 2002b. The State of Food and Agriculture
2002. FAO Agriculture Series No. 34. Rome.
FAO. 2003a. World agriculture: towards
2015/2030. An FAO perspective, edited by J.
Bruinsma. Rome, FAO and London, Earthscan.
FAO. 2003b. Optimizing soil moisture for plant
production – the significance for soil porosity,
by F. Shaxson & R. Barber. FAO Soils Bulletin 79.
Rome.
FAO. 2003c. Smallholder agroforestry projects:
potential for carbon sequestration and poverty
alleviation, by O.J. Cacho, G.R. Marshall &
M. Milne. ESA Working Paper No. 03-06. Rome.
FAO. 2003d. Unlocking the water potential of
agriculture. Rome.
FAO. 2004a. Carbon sequestration in dryland
soils. World Soil Resources Report No. 102.
Rome.
FAO. 2004b. Payment schemes for environmental
services in watersheds. Regional Forum,
Arequipa, Peru, 9–12 June 2003. Land and
Water Discussion Paper 3. Rome.
FAO. 2004c. Valuation methods for environmental
benefits in forestry and watershed investment
projects, by R. Cavatassi. ESA Working Paper No.
04-01. Rome.
FAO. 2004d. The State of Agricultural Commodity
Markets 2004. Rome.
FAO. 2004e. The market for non-traditional
agricultural exports. FAO Commodities and
Trade Technical Paper No. 3. Rome.
FAO. 2005a. The State of Food and Agriculture
2005: agricultural trade and poverty: can trade
work for the poor? FAO Agriculture Series No.
36. Rome.
FAO. 2005b. An assessment of Mexico’s Payment
for Environmental Services Program – Mexico
Country Case Study Report, by J. Alix-Garcia,
A. de Janvry, E. Sadoulet, J.M. Torres, J. Braña &
M.Z. Ramos. Roles of Agriculture Project (ROA),
Environment Services. Rome.
FAO. 2005c. The State of Food Insecurity in the
World 2005. Rome.
FAO. 2006a. Livestock’s long shadow:
environmental issues and options, by
H. Steinfield, P. Gerber, T. Wassenaar, V. Castel,
M. Rosales & C. de Haan. Livestock, Environment
and Development Initiative. Rome.
FAO. 2006b. Global Forest Resources Assessment
2005 – progress towards sustainable forest
management. FAO Forestry Paper No. 147. Rome.

206
FAO 2006c. Using markets to promote the
sustainable utilization of crop genetic resources.
Project funded by the FAO–Netherlands
Partnership Programme. Draft project
methodology. Unpublished. Rome.
FAO. 2006d. Land tenure as an incentive for
environmental service provision: lessons from
Nepal and the Philippines, by A. Agostini &
L. Lipper. Unpublished research draft. Rome.
FAO. 2006e. Putting payments for environmental
services in the context of economic
development, by D. Zilberman, L. Lipper & N.
McCarthy. ESA Working Paper No. 06-15. Rome.
FAO. 2006f. Abatement and transaction costs of
carbon-sink projects involving smallholders, by
O.J. Cacho & L. Lipper, ESA Working Paper No.
06-13. Rome.
FAO. 2006g. Gender, the missing component of
the response to climate change. by Y. Lambrou
& G. Piana. Rome.
FAO. 2006h. FAOSTAT statistical database. Rome
(available at http://faostat.fao.org).
FAO. 2006i. World agriculture: towards 2030/2050.
Interim report. Rome.
FAO. 2006j. The State of Agricultural Commodity
Markets 2006. Rome.
FAO. 2006k. Food Security Statistics. FAOSTAT
domain. Rome (available at http://www.fao.
org/es/ess/faostat/foodsecurity/index_en.htm).
FAO. 2006l. The State of Food Insecurity in the
World 2006. Rome.
FAO. 2007a. The roles of agriculture in
development: policy implications and guidance.
Research programme summary report 2007.
Socio-economic analysis and policy implications
of the roles of agriculture in developing
countries, Roles of Agriculture Project Phase II.
Rome.
FAO. 2007b. Agriculture and water scarcity: a
programmatic approach to water use efficiency
and agricultural productivity. Twentieth Session,
Committee on Agriculture, COAG/2007/7.
Rome.
FAO. 2007c. Payments for ecosystem services:
potential contributions to smallholder
agriculture in developing countries, by S. Scherr
& J. Milder. SOFA 2007 background paper.
Unpublished. Rome.
FAO. 2007d. Who is buying ecosystem services?
by J. Salzman. SOFA 2007 background paper,
Unpublished. Rome.
FAO. 2007e. Agriculture and poverty reduction. Is
agriculture still the key to rural development?,
by G. Anriquez & K. Stamoulis. ESA Working
Paper No. 07-02.

FAO. 2007f. Managing environmental services in
agricultural landscapes and to reduce poverty:
can PES programmes deliver environmental and
poverty objectives?, by E. Bulte, D. Zilberman,
L. Lipper and R. Stringer. SOFA 2007 background
paper. Unpublished. Rome.
FAO/Forest Trends. 2007. Investing in the future:
an assessment of private sector demand for
engaging in markets & payments for ecosystem
services, by S. Waage, with contributions
from I. Mulder, K. ten Kate, S. Sherr, J.P.
Roberts, A. Hawn, K. Hamilton, R. Bayon and
N. Carroll. Forthcoming in PESAL (Payments
for Environmental Services from Agricultural
Landscapes) Papers series. Rome, FAO and
Washington, DC, Forest Trends.
Fearnside, P.M. & Guimarães, W.M. 1996. Carbon
uptake by secondary forests in Brazilian
Amazonia. Forest Ecology and Management,
80(1): 35–46.
Feather, P. & Amacher, G. 1994. Role of
information in the adoption of best
management practices for water quality
improvement. Agricultural Economics, 11(2–3):
159–170.
Ferraro, P.J. 2001. Global habitat protection:
limitations of development interventions and
the role for conservation performance payments.
Conservation Biology, 15(4): 990–1000.
Fisher, M.J., Rao, I.M., Ayarza, M.A., Lascano,
C.E., Sanz, J.I., Thomas, R.J. & Vera, R.R. 1994.
Carbon storage by introduced deep-rooted
grasses in the South American savannas. Nature,
371(6494): 236–238.
Fischer, G., Shah, M., Tubiello, F.N. & van Velhuizen,
H. 2005. Socio-economic and climate change
impacts on agriculture: an integrated assessment,
1990–2080. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 360: 2067–2083.
Foley, J.A., DeFries, R., Asner, G.P., Barford, C.,
Bonan, G., Carpenter, S.R., Chapin, F.S., Coe,
M.T., Daily, G.C., Gibbs, H.K., Helkowski,
J.H., Holloway, T., Howard, E.A., Kucharik,
C.J., Monfreda, C., Patz, J.A., Prentice, I.C.,
Ramankutty, N. & Snyder, P.K. 2005. Global
consequences of land use. Science, 309(5734):
570–574.
FONAFIFO (Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento
Forestal). 2005. The Environmental Services
Program: a success story of sustainable
development implementation in Costa Rica.
FONAFIFO, over a decade of action, edited by
J.M. Rodríguez. San José.
GEF (Global Environment Facility). 2007a. Ethiopia
– a dynamic farmer-based approach to the

207
conservation of African plant genetic resources.
Project Web page (available at http://www.
gefonline.org/projectDetails.cfm?projID=351).
GEF. 2007b. The Public–Private Partnership
Initiative: furthering the GEF strategy to
enhance management with the private sector.
Project Executive Summary. Washington, DC.
Glachant, M. 1999. The cost efficiency of
voluntary agreements for regulating industrial
pollution: a Coasen approach. In C. Carraro
& F. Leveque, eds. Voluntary approaches in
environmental policy, pp. 75–91. Dordrecht,
Netherlands, Kluwer Academic
Publishing.
Gorenflo, L.J. & Brandon, K. 2006. Key human
dimensions of gaps in global biodiversity
conservation. BioScience, 56(9): 723–731.
Grieg-Gran, M., Porras, I.T. & Wunder, S. 2005.
How can market mechanisms for forest
environmental services help the poor?
Preliminary lessons from Latin America. World
Development, 33(9): 1511–1527.
Guo, P., Choudhary M.A. & Rahman, A. 1999.
Tillage-induced changes in a silt loam
under continuous cropping. II. Soil erosion
and infiltrability under simulated rainfall.
International Agricultural Engineering Journal,
8: 161–174.
Haddad, L., Hoddinott, J. & Alderman, H., eds.
1997. Intrahousehold resource allocation in
developing countries. Models, methods and
policy. Washington, DC, International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and Baltimore,
MD, USA, The Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Harvey, C. & Haber, W. 1999. Remnant trees and
the conservation of biodiversity in Costa Rican
pastures. Agroforestry Systems, 44(1): 37–68.
Hawkins, D.E. & Lamoureux, K. 2001. Global
growth and magnitude of ecotourism. In
D.B. Weaver, ed. The encyclopedia of
ecotourism, pp. 63–83. New York, USA, CABI
Publishing.
Hayami, Y. & Ruttan, V.W. 1985. Agricultural
development: an international perspective.
Revised edition. Baltimore, MD, USA, The Johns
Hopkins University Press.
Hearne, R.R. 1996. A review of economic appraisal
of environmental goods and services with a
focus on developing countries. Environmental
Economics Programme Discussion Paper No.
DP96-03. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Hebblethwaite, J.F. 1993. Conservation tillage as
a tool to conserve soil, moisture, energy, and
equipment in large and small crop production

systems. In J.P. Srivastava & H. Alderman, eds.
Agriculture and environmental challenges.
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Agricultural
Sector Symposium, pp. 59–66. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Herling, M. & King, N. 2005. National review of
payments for catchment protection services
in South Africa. South Africa Working Paper
Series No. 6. Pretoria, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research.
Hochman, E., Zilberman, D. & Just, R.E. 1977.
Two-goal regional environmental policy: the
case of the Santa Ana River Basin. Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management,
4(1): 25–39.
Hoff, K., Braverman, A. & Stiglitz, J. 1993. The
economics of rural organization: theory,
practice and policy. New York, USA, Oxford
University Press.
Holden, S.T. & Binswanger, H.P. 1998. Small farmer
decision-making, market imperfections, and
natural resource management in developing
countries. In E. Lutz, ed. Agriculture and the
environment: perspectives on sustainable rural
development, pp. 50–71. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
ICF (Inter City Fund International). 2006.
Voluntary carbon offsets market: outlook 2007.
London, ICF International.
ICTSD (International Centre for Trade and
Sustainable Development). 2006. Incentive
measures and WTO rules. COP-8 Biodiversity
and Trade Briefings No. 1. Geneva, Switzerland.
IEA GHG (International Energy Agency
Greenhouse Gas Research and Development
Programme. 2005. Assessment of the costs and
enhanced potential for carbon sequestration in
soils. Technical Report 2005/04. Cheltenham, UK.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural
Development). 2001. Rural poverty report 2001:
the challenge of ending rural poverty. New
York, USA, Oxford University Press.
IFOAM (International Federation of Organic
Agriculture Movements). 2007. Organics
booming: 75 million acres of farmland are now
organically certified worldwide. Press release
(available at http://www.organicconsumers.org/
articles/article_4127.cfm, accessed 14 February
2007).
Iftikhar, U.A., Kallesoe, M., Duraiappah, A.,
Sriskanthan, G., Poats, S.V. & Swallow, B.
2007. Exploring the inter-linkages among
and between Compensation and Rewards for
Ecosystem Services (CRES) and human wellbeing. CES Scoping Study Issue Paper No. 1.

208
ICRAF Working Paper No, 36. Nairobi, World
Forestry Centre.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change). 1996. Climate change 1995: the
science of climate change. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Second Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, edited by J.T. Houghton,
L.G. Meiro Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris,
A. Kattenburg & K. Maskell. Cambridge, UK,
Cambridge University Press.
IPCC. 2007a. Summary for policymakers. In
Climate change 2007: the physical science basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK, and
New York, USA, Cambridge University Press.
IPPC. 2007b. Climate change 2007: mitigation.
Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fourth Assessment Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, UK, and New York, USA, Cambridge
University Press.
IPCC. 2007c. Summary for policymakers. In
Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation
and vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge, UK, and New York, USA, Cambridge
University Press.
ISEAL (International Social and Environmental
Accreditation and Labelling Alliance). 2006.
ISEAL code of good practice for setting social
and environmental standards (available at
http://www.isealalliance.org/).
ISRIC (International Soil Reference and
Information Centre). 2007. Soil Degradation
in South and Southeast Asia (ASSOD)
database (available at http://www.isric.org/UK/
About+ISRIC/Projects/Track+Record/ASSOD.htm).
Jarvis, D.I., Padoch, C. & Cooper, D., eds. 2007.
Managing biodiversity in agricultural ecosystems.
New York, USA, Columbia University Press.
Johansson, P. 1990. Valuing environmental
damage. Oxford Review on Economic Policy,
6(1): 34–50.
Jürgens, I., Schlamadinger, B. & Gomez, P. 2006.
Bioenergy and the CDM in the emerging market
for carbon credits. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change 6, 11(5–6): 1051–
1081.
Kaltschmitt, M. & Hartmann, H., eds. 2001.
Energie aus Biomasse. Grundlagen, Techniken
und Verfahren. Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany,
Springer.

Kerr, J. 2002. Sharing the benefits of watershed
management in Sukhomajri, India. In
S. Pagiola, J. Bishop & N. Landell-Mills. Selling
forest environmental services: market-based
mechanisms for conservation and development.
London, Earthscan.
Kerr, S., Hendy, J., Liu, S. & Pfaff, A.S.P. 2004.
Uncertainty and carbon policy integrity. Motu
Working Paper 04-03. Wellington, Motu
Economic and Public Policy Research.
Kirwan, B., Lubowski, R.N. & Roberts, M. 2005.
How cost-effective are land retirement
auctions? Estimating the difference between
payments and willingness to accept in the
Conservation Reserve Program. American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 87(5): 1239–
1247.
Kumari, K. 1995. An environmental and economic
assessment of forest management options:
A case study in Malaysia. Environment
Department Paper No. 026. Washington, DC,
World Bank.
Lal, R. 2000. World cropland soils as a source or
sink for atmospheric carbon. In D. Sparks, ed.
Advances in agronomy, Vol. 71, pp. 145–191.
San Diego, CA, USA, Academic Press.
Lal, R., Kimble, J.M., Follett, R.F. & Cole, C.V. 1998.
The potential of U.S. cropland to sequester
carbon and mitigate the greenhouse effect.
Boca Raton, FL, USA, CRC Press.
Landell-Mills, N. & Porras, I.T. 2002. Silver bullet
or fools’ gold? A global review of markets for
forest environmental services and their impact
on the poor. Instruments for Sustainable Private
Sector Forestry Series. London, International
Institute for Environment and Development.
Lasse, R. 2002. Soil carbon sequestration and the
CDM: opportunities and challenges for Africa.
Climatic Change, 54(4): 471–495.
LEAD (Livestock, Environment and Development).
2007. Virtual Centre and Development Web site
(available at http://www.virtualcentre.org/en/
frame.htm).
Leimona, B. 2007. Conservation auctions for
capturing willingness to accept of farmers in
joining conservation programs in Sumberjaya
(Lampung, Indonesia). Presentation given at
the Scientific Conference of the Global Event on
Payments/Rewards for Environmental Services.
Lombok, Indonesia, 22–27 January 2007.
Lewandrowski, J., Peters, M., Jones, C.,
House, R., Sperow, M., Eve, M. & Paustian,
K. 2004. Economics of sequestering carbon
in the U.S. agricultural sector. ERS Technical
Bulletin No. 1909. Washington, DC, Economic

209
Research Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
Lichtenberg, E. & Zimmerman, R. 1999.
Information and farmers’ attitudes about
pesticides, water quality, and related
environmental effects. Agriculture, Ecosystems
& Environment, 73(3): 227–236.
Lipper, L. 2001. Dirt poor: poverty, farmers and
soil resource investment. In FAO. Two essays on
socio-economic aspects of soil degradation, by
L. Lipper and D. Osgood. FAO Economic and
Social Development Paper No. 149. Rome.
Lipper, L., Pingali, P. & Zurek, M. Forthcoming.
Less-favoured areas: looking beyond agriculture
towards ecosystem services. In R. Ruben,
J. Pender & A. Kuyvenhoven, eds. Sustainable
poverty reduction in less-favoured areas.
Wallingford, UK, CABI.
Longley, C., Mango, N., Nindo, W. & Mango, C.
2005. Conservation by committee: social impacts
of the catchment approach in Western Kenya.
In R. Tripp, ed. Self-sufficient agriculture: labour
and knowledge in small-scale farming, Chapter
6, pp. 125–160. London, Earthscan.
Margat, J. 1990. Les eaux souterraines dans le
monde. Orléans, France, Départment eau,
Bureau de recherches géologiques et minières
(BRGM).
Markandya, A., Harou, P., Bellù, L.G. & Cistulli, V.
2002. Environmental economics for sustainable
growth. A handbook for practitioners.
Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar Publishing.
May, P.H., Boyd, E., Veiga, F. & Chang, M. 2004.
Local sustainable development effects of forest
carbon projects in Brazil and Bolivia: a view
from the field. London, International Institute
for Environment and Development.
McNeely, J. & Scherr, S. 2002. Ecoagriculture:
strategies to feed the world and save wild
biodiversity. Washington, DC, Island Press.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2003.
Ecosystems and human well-being: a framework
for assessment. Washington, DC, Island Press.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005a.
Ecosystems and human well-being: synthesis.
Washington, DC, Island Press.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005b.
Ecosystems and human well-being: current state
and trends. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
Series Vol. 1, edited by R. Hassan, R. Scholes &
N. Ash. Washington, DC, Island Press.
Minten, B., Randrianarison, L. & Swinnen, J.F.M.
2007. Global supply chains, poverty and the
environment: evidence from Madagascar.
In J.F.M. Swinnen, ed. Global supply chains,

standards and the poor: how the globalization
of food systems and standards affects rural
development and poverty, pp. 147–158.
Wallingford, UK, CABI.
Munasinghe, M. & Lutz, E. 1993. Environmental
economics and valuation in development
decision-making. In M. Munasinghe, ed.
Environmental economics and natural resource
management in developing countries,
pp. 17–71. Washington DC, World Bank for
the Committee of International Development
Institutions on the Environment (CIDIE).
Muñoz-Piña, C., Guevara, A., Torres, J.M. &
Braña, J. 2005. Paying for the hydrological
services of Mexico’s forests: analysis,
negotiations and results. INE Working Papers.
Mexico City, Instituto Nacional de Ecología
(INE).
Murgueitio, R.E. 1999. Sistemas Agroforestales
para la Producción Ganadera en Colombia.
Paper presented at the Seminario Intensificación
de la Ganadería en Centroamérica: Beneficios
Económicos y Ambientales, 24–26 May 1999,
Turrialba, Costa Rica.
Naylor, R., Steinfeld, H., Falcon, W., Galloway, J.,
Smil, V., Bradford, E., Alder, J. & Mooney, H.
2005. Losing the links between livestock and
land. Science, 310: 1621–1622.
Nickerson, C.J. & Hellerstein, D. 2003. Rural
amenities: a key reason for farmland
protection. Amber Waves, 1(1): 8. Washington,
DC, Economic Research Service, United States
Department of Agriculture.
Niles, J.O., Brown, S., Pretty, J., Ball, A.S. & Fay, J.
2002. Potential carbon mitigation and income in
developing countries from changes in use and
management of agricultural and forest lands.
Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society
Series A, 360(1797): 1621–1639.
Norton, N., Phipps, T. & Fletcher, J. 1994. Role of
voluntary programs in agricultural nonpoint
pollution policy. Contemporary Economic Policy,
12: 113–121.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development). 1998. Improving the
environment through reducing subsidies. Part I:
summary and conclusions. Paris.
OECD/IEA (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development/International
Energy Agency). 2007. Renewables in global
energy supply. An IEA Fact Sheet. Paris.
Orlando, B., Baldock, D., Canger, S., Mackensen,
J., Maginnis, S., Socorro, M., Rietbergen, S.,
Robledo, C. & Schneider, N. 2002. Carbon,
forests and people: towards the integrated

210
management of carbon sequestration, the
environment and sustainable livelihoods. Gland,
Switzerland and Cambridge, UK, The World
Conservation Union (IUCN).
Ortiz, E., Sage, L. & Borge, C. 2003. Impacto del
Programa de Pago de Servicios Ambientales
en Costa Rica como medio de reducción de la
pobreza en los medios rurales. San José, Unidad
Regional de Asistencia Tecnica (RUTA).
Pagiola, S. 2002. Paying for water services in
Central America: learning from Costa Rica. In
S. Pagiola, J. Bishop & N. Landell-Mills, eds.
Selling forest environmental services: marketbased mechanisms for conservation and
development, pp. 37–62. London, Earthscan.
Pagiola, S. 2006. Payments for environmental
services in Costa Rica. Revised version of a
paper presented at the ZEF/CIFOR Workshop on
Payments for Environmental Services: Methods
and Design in Developing and Developed
Countries, Titisee, Germany, 15–18 June
2005.
Pagiola, S. & Platais, G. 2007. Payments for
environmental services: from theory to practice.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Pagiola, S. & Ruthenberg, I.M. 2002. Selling
biodiversity in a coffee cup: shade-grown coffee
and conservation in Mesoamerica. In S. Pagiola,
J. Bishop & N. Landell-Mills, eds. Selling
forest environmental services: market-based
mechanisms for conservation and development,
pp. 103–126. London, Earthscan.
Pagiola, S., Arcenas, A. & Platais, G. 2005. Can
payments for environmental services help
reduce poverty? An exploration of the issues
and the evidence to date from Latin America.
World Development, 33(2): 237–253.
Pagiola, S., Bishop, J. & Landell-Mills, N., eds.
2002. Selling forest environmental services:
market-based mechanisms for conservation and
development. London, Earthscan.
Pagiola, S., Rios, A.R. & Arcenas, A. Forthcoming.
Can the poor participate in payments for
environmental services? Lessons from the
silvopastoral project in Nicaragua. Paper
prepared for submission to Special Issue of
Environment and Development Economics
on “Payment for Environmental Services and
Poverty”, edited by D. Zilberman & E. Bulte.
Pagiola, S., Agostini, P., Gobbi, J., de Haan,
C., Ibrahim, M., Murgueitio, E., Ramírez,
E., Rosales, M. & Ruíz, J.P. 2004. Paying for
biodiversity conservation services in agricultural
landscapes. Environment Department Paper
No. 96, Environmental Economics Series.
Washington, DC, World Bank.

Pagiola, S., Ramírez, E., Gobbi, J., Haan, C.D.,
Ibrahim, M., Murgueitio, E. & Ruíz, J.P. 2007.
Paying for the environmental services of
silvopastoral practices in Nicaragua. Ecological
Economics. (in press)
Palm, C.A., van Noordwijk, M., Woomer, P.L.,
Arevalo, L., Castilla, C., Cordeiro, D.G., Hairiah,
K., Kotto-Same, J., Moukam, A., Parton, W.J.,
Riese, A., Rodrigues, V. & Sitompul, S.M. 2005.
Carbon losses and sequestration following land
use change in the humid tropics. In C.A. Palm,
S.A. Vosti, P.A. Sanchez & P.J. Ericksen, eds.
Slash and burn: the search for alternatives,
pp. 41–63. New York, USA, Columbia University
Press.
Parry, M.L., Rosenzweig, C. & Livermore, M. 2005.
Climate change, global food supply and risk of
hunger. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B, 360: 2125–2138.
Parry, M.L., Rosenzweig, C., Iglesias, A., Livermore,
M. & Fischer, G. 2004. Effects of climate
change on global food production under SRES
emissions and socio-economic scenarios. Global
Environmental Change, 14(1): 53–67.
Pattanayak, S.K., Mercer, D.E., Sills, E. & Yang,
J.-C. 2003. Taking stock of agroforestry
adoption studies. Agroforestry Systems, 57(3):
173–186.
Paustian, K., Antle, J.M., Sheehan, J. & Paul,
E.A. 2006. Agriculture’s role in greenhouse
gas mitigation. Pew Center Solutions Report.
Arlington, VA, USA, Pew Center on Global
Climate Change.
Pearce, D.W. 1993. Economic values and the
natural world. Cambridge, MA, USA, The MIT
Press.
Pearce, D.W. & Turner, R.K. 1990. Economics
of natural resources and the environment.
Baltimore, MD, USA, The Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Perrot-Maître, D. 2006. The Vittel payments
for ecosystem services: a “perfect” PES case?
London, International Institute for Environment
and Development.
Perrot-Maître, D. & Davis, P. 2001. Case studies of
markets and innovative financial mechanisms
for water services from forests. Washington, DC,
Forest Trends.
Pfaff, A., Robalino, J.A. & Sanchez-Azofeifa, G.A.
2006. Payments for environmental services:
empirical analysis for Costa Rica. New York,
USA, Columbia University.
Pfaff, A., Kerr, S., Hughes, F., Liu, S., SanchezAzofeifa, G.A., Schimel, D., Tosi, J. & Watson, V.
2000. The Kyoto Protocol and payments for
tropical forest: an interdisciplinary method for

211
estimating carbon-offset supply and increasing
the feasibility of a carbon market under the
CDM. Ecological Economics, 35(3): 203–221.
Pfaff, A., Kerr, S., Lipper, L., Cavatassi, R., Davis,
B., Hendy, J. & Sanchez-Azofeifa, G.A. 2007. Will
buying tropical forest carbon benefit the poor?
Evidence from Costa Rica. Land Use Policy, 24(3):
600–610.
Pingali, P. 2007. Westernization of Asian diets and
the transformation of food systems: implications
for research and policy. Food Policy, 32(3):
281–298.
Pingali, P., Hossain, M., Pandey, S. & Leimar
Price, L. 1998. Economics of nutrient
management in Asian rice systems: towards
increasing knowledge intensity. Field Crops
Research, 56(1–2): 157–176.
Plan Vivo. 2007. Web site (available at http://www.
planvivo.org/).
Poffenberger, M., Ravindranath, N.H., Pandey,
D.N., Murthy, I.K., Bist, R. & Jain, D. 2001.
Communities & climate change: the Clean
Development Mechanism and village-based
forest restoration in Central India. A case study
from Harda Forest Division, Madhya Pradesh,
India. Santa Barbara, CA, USA, Community
Forestry International.
Point Carbon. 2007. Carbon 2007 – A new
climate for carbon trading, edited by K. Røine
& H. Hasselknippe. Report published at Point
Carbon’s 4th annual conference, Carbon Market
Insights 2007, 13–15 March 2007, Copenhagen
(available at http://www.pointcarbon.com/
getfile.php/fileelement_105366/Carbon_2007_
final.pdf).
Popkin, B.M. 2004. The nutrition transition: an
overview of world patterns of change. Nutrition
Reviews, 62(Suppl. 1): 140–143.
Pretty, J.N., Noble, A.D., Bossio, D., Dixon, J., Hine,
R.E., Penning de Vries, F.W.T. & Morison, J.T.L. 2006.

Resource-conserving agriculture increases yields
in developing countries. Environmental Science
and Technology, 40(4): 1114–1119.
Price, L. 2001. Demystifying farmers’ entomological
and pest management knowledge: a
methodology for assessing the impacts on
knowledge from IPM-FFS and NES interventions.
Agriculture and Human Values, 18(2): 153–176.
Rasmussen, P.E., Albrecht, S.L. & Smiley, R.W.
1998. Soil C and N changes under tillage and
cropping systems in semi-arid Pacific Northwest
agriculture. Soil & Tillage Research, 47(3–4):
197–205.
Regouin, E. 2003. To convert or not to convert
to organic farming. In Organic agriculture –
Sustainability, markets and policies. Proceedings

of an OECD workshop, September 2002,
Washington, DC, pp. 227–235. Paris, OECD and
Wallingford, UK, CABI.
Ribaudo, M. 2006. Federal laws protecting
environmental quality. In K. Wiebe &
N. Gollehon, eds. Agricultural resources and
environmental indicators, 2006 edition. Chapter
5.7, pp. 222–227. Economic Information Bulletin
No. (EIB-16). Washington, DC, Economic
Research Service, United States Department of
Agriculture (also available at http://www.ers.
usda.gov/publications/arei/eib16/eib16_5-7.pdf).
Roberts, M. & Bucholtz, S. 2006. Slippage in the
Conservation Reserve Program or spurious
correlation? A rejoinder. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics, 88(2): 512–514.
Robertson, N. & Wunder, S. 2005. Fresh tracks
in the forest: assessing incipient payments for
environmental services initiatives in Bolivia.
Bogor, Indonesia, Center for International
Forestry Research.
Rosa, R., Kandel, S., Dimas, L., Cuéllar, N.
& Méndez, E. 2003. Compensation for
environmental services and rural communities.
Lessons from the Americas and key issues
for strengthening community strategies.
San Salvador, Programa Salvadoreño de
Investigación sobre Desarrollo y Medio
Ambiente (PRISMA).
Rosenzweig, M.R. & Binswanger, H.P. 1993.
Wealth, weather risk and the composition and
profitability of agricultural investments. The
Economic Journal, 103(416): 56–78.
Sa, J.C., Cerri, C.C., Dick, W.A., Lal, R., Venske
Filho, S.P., Piccolo, M.C. & Feigl, B.E. 2001.
Organic matter dynamics and carbon
sequestration rates for a tillage chronosequence
in a Brazilian oxisol. Soil Science Society of
America Journal, 65: 1486–1499.
Sadoulet, E. & de Janvry, A. 1995. Household
behavior under risk with subsistence food
production, Berkeley, CA, USA, University of
California (mimeo).
Sandor, R. 2000. CDM – simplicity is key.
Environmental Finance, 1(2): 11.
Saturnio, H.M. & Landers, J.N., eds. 1997. O meio
ambiente e o plantio direto. Goiânia, Brazil,
Associação de Plantio Direto do Cerrado
(APDC).
Scherr, S., White, A. & Kaimowitz, D. 2002.
Making markets work for forest communities.
Policy brief. Washington, DC, Forest Trends
and Bogor, Indonesia, Center for International
Forestry Research.
Scherr, S., White, A. & Khare, A. (with
contributions from M. Inbar and A. Molar).

212
2004. For services rendered – The current
status and future potential of markets for the
ecosystem services provided by tropical forests.
ITTO Technical Series No. 21. Yokohama, Japan,
International Tropical Timber Organization.
Schroth, G., Da Fonseca, G.A.B., Harvey, C.A.,
Gascon, C., Vasconcelos, H.L. & Izac, AM.N. 2004. Agroforestry and biodiversity
conservation in tropical landscapes.
Washington, DC, Island Press.
Searle, R., Colby, S. & Milway, K.S. 2004. Moving
eco-certification mainstream. Boston, MA, USA
and San Francisco, CA, USA, The Bridgespan
Group.
Sengupta, S., Mitra, K., Saigal, S., Gupta, R.,
Tiwari, S. & Peters, N. 2003. Developing markets
for watershed protection services and improved
livelihoods in India. New Delhi, Winrock
International and London, International
Institute for Environment and Development.
(unpublished  draft)
Shiklomanov, I.A. & Rodda, J.A., eds. 2003.
World water resources at the beginning of the
twenty-first century. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
Smit, A., Driessen, P. & Glasbergen, P. Forthcoming.
Constraints on the conversion to sustainable
production: the case of the Dutch potato chain.
Business Strategy and the Environment.
Smith, J. & Scherr, S. 2002. Forest carbon and
local livelihoods: assessment of opportunities
and policy recommendations. CIFOR Occasional
Paper 37. Bogor, Indonesia, Center for
International Forestry Research.
Stern, N. 2007. The economics of climate change:
The Stern Review. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
Sullivan, P., Hellerstein, D., Hansen, L., Johansson,
R., Koenig, S., Lubowski, R., McBride, W.,
McGranahan, D., Roberts, M., Vogel, S. &
Bucholtz, S. 2004. The Conservation Reserve
Program: economic implications for rural
America. Agricultural Economic Report No.
AER834. Washington, DC, Economic Research
Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
Sunding, D. & Zilberman, D. 2001. The agricultural
innovation process: research and technology
adoption in a changing agricultural sector. In
B.L. Gardner & G.C. Rausser, eds. Handbook of
agricultural economics. Part 1A. Agricultural
production, Chapter 4, pp. 207–261.
Amsterdam, North-Holland Publishing.
Swallow, B., Meinzen-Dick, R. & van Noordwijk,
M. 2005. Localizing demand and supply of
environmental services: interactions with
property rights, collective action and the

welfare of the poor. CGIAR Systemwide
Program on Collective Action and Property
Rights (CAPRi) Working Paper No. 42.
Washington, DC, International Food Policy
Research Institute and World Agroforestry
Centre.
Swallow, B.M., Kallesoe, M., Iftikhar, U., van
Noordwijk, M., Bracer, C., Scherr, S., Raju, K.,
Poats, S., Duraiappah, A., Ochieng, B., Mallee,
H. & Rumley, R. 2007a. Compensation and
rewards for environmental services in the
developing world: framing pan-tropical analysis
and comparison. ICRAF Working Paper No. 32.
Nairobi, World Agroforestry Centre.
Swallow, B.M., Leimona, B., Yatich, T., Velarde,
S.J. & Puttaswamaiah, S. 2007b. The conditions
for effective mechanisms of compensation
and rewards for environmental services. CES
Scoping Study Issue Paper No. 3. ICRAF Working
Paper No. 38. Nairobi, World Agroforestry
Centre.
Tattenbach, F., Obando, G. & Rodríguez, J. 2006.
Mejora del excedente nacional del Pago de
Servicios Ambientales. San José, Fondo Nacional
de Financiamiento Forestal (FONAFIFO).
Teixeira, G. 2006. Many paths, no destination
for Brazil’s tourist industry. News
article, Ecosystem Marketplace Web
site, 29 September (available at http://
ecosystemmarketplace.com/pages/article.news.
php?component_id=4572&component_version_
id=6793&language_id=12).
ten Kate, K., Bishop, J. & Bayon, R. 2004.
Biodiversity offsets: views, experience, and the
business case. Glad, Switzerland and Cambridge,
UK, The World Conservation Union and London,
Insight Investment.
Thacher, T.A., Lee, D.R. & Schelhas, J. 1996.
Farmer participation in government sponsored
reforestation incentive programs in Costa Rica.
Agroforestry Systems, 35(3): 269–289.
Tilman, D., Cassman, K.G., Matson, P.A., Naylor, R.
& Polasky, S. 2002. Agricultural sustainability
and intensive production practices. Nature,
418: 671–677.
Tipper, R. 2002. Helping indigenous farmers
participate in the international market for
carbon services: the case of Scolel Té. In
S. Pagiola, J. Bishop & N. Landell-Mills, eds.
Selling forest environmental services: marketbased mechanisms for conservation and
development, pp. 223–234. London,
Earthscan.
Tomich, T.P., Cattaneo, A., Chater, S., Geist, H.J.,
Gockowski, J., Kaimowitz, D., Lambin, E., Lewis,
J., Ndoye, O., Palm, C., Stolle, F., Sunderlin,

213
W.D., Valentim, J.F., van Noordwijk, M. & Vosti,
S.A. 2005a. Balancing agricultural development
and environmental objectives: assessing
tradeoffs in the humid tropics In C. Palm, S.A.
Vosti, P. Sanchez & P.J. Ericksen, eds. Slash-andburn agriculture: the search for alternatives,
pp. 415–440. New York, USA, Columbia
University Press.
Tomich, T.P., Palm, C.A., Velarde, S.J., Geist, H.,
Gillison, A.N., Lebel, L., Locatelli, M., Mala, W.,
van Noordwijk, M., Sebastian, K., Timmer, D.
& White, D. 2005b. Forest and agroecosystem
tradeoffs in the humid tropics. a crosscutting
assessment by the Alternatives to Slash-andBurn Consortium conducted as a sub-global
component of the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment. Nairobi, ASB.
Turpie, J. & Blignaut, J. 2005. Payments for
ecosystem services: towards improved
biodiversity conservation and water security
in South Africa, a semi-arid, developing
country. Presentation given at the ZEF/CIFOR
Workshop on Payments for Environmental
Services: Methods and Design in Developing
and Developed Countries. 15–18 June 2005,
Titisee, Germany (available at http://www.cifor.
cgiar.org/pes/publications/pdf_files/PES_SA_
Presentation.pdf).
Uchida, E., Rozelle, S. & Xu, J. 2007. Conservation
payments, liquidity constraints and off-farm
labor: impact of the Grain for Green program
on rural households in China. Palo Alto, CA,
USA, Freeman Spogli Institute of International
Studies, Stanford University.
Uchida, E., Xu, J. & Rozelle, S. 2005. Grain for
green: cost-effectiveness and sustainability of
China’s Conservation Set-aside Program. Land
Economics, 81(2): 247–264.
Udry, C. 1994. Risk and insurance in a rural credit
market: an empirical investigation in northern
Nigeria. Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):
495–526.
UN. 2007. World Population Prospects: the 2006
revision. Highlights. New York, USA, United
Nations.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development). 2007. Green Box subsidies: a
theoretical and empirical assessment. New Delhi.
UN-Energy. 2007. Sustainable bioenergy: a
framework for decision-makers. New York, USA.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme).
2005. Investing in environmental wealth for
poverty reduction. Environment for the MDGs.
Prepared on behalf of the Poverty-Environment
Partnership by UNDP, UNEP, IIED, IUCN and WRI.
New York, USA.

UNDP. 2006. Human Development Report 2006:
beyond scarcity: power, poverty and the
global water crisis. New York, USA, Palgrave
Macmillan.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe). 1995. State of the art on monitoring
and assessment: rivers. UNECE Task Force on
Monitoring and Assessment, Draft Report.
Lelystad, Netherlands, Institute for Inland Water
Management and Waste Water Treatment
(RIZA).
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme).
2005. Baseline methodologies for Clean
Development Mechanism projects – a
guidebook, by R.M. Shrestha, S. Sharma, G.R.
Timilsina & S. Kumar, edited by M-K. Lee. The
UNEP project CD4CDM. Roskilde, Denmark,
UNEP Risø Centre on Energy, Climate and
Sustainable Development, Risø National
Laboratory.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change). 2007. Views
on the range of topics and other relevant
information relating to reducing emissions
from deforestation in developing countries:
submissions from intergovernmental
organizations. Twenty-sixth session of the
Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological
Advice, 7–18 May 2007. Bonn, Germany.
UNWTO (World Tourism Organization). 1998.
Ecotourism. WTO News I.
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture).
2007. Conservation Reserve Program enrolment
statistics and program summary 2006 fiscal year.
Washington, DC, USDA Farm Service Agency.
van Lynden, G.W.J. & Oldeman, L.R. 1997. The
assessment of the status of human-induced
soil degradation in South and Southeast Asia.
Wageningen, Netherlands, International Soil
Reference and Information Centre.
van Noordwijk, M., Chandler, F.J. & Tomich, T.P.
2004. An introduction to the conceptual basis
of RUPES: rewarding upland poor for the
environmental services they provide. Bogor,
Indonesia, ICRAF-Southeast Asia.
van Noordwijk, M., Leimona, B., Emerton,
L., Tomich, T.P., Velarde, S.J., Kallesoe, M.,
Sekher, M. & Swallow, B. 2007. Criteria
and indicators for environmental service
compensation and reward mechanisms: realistic,
voluntary, conditional and pro-poor. CES
Scoping Study Issue Paper No. 2. ICRAF Working
Paper No. 37. Nairobi, World Agroforestry.
Verchick, R.M. 2007. Risk, fairness, and the
geography of disaster. Issues in Legal
Scholarship, Catastrophic Risks: Prevention,

214
Compensation, and Recovery: Article 6. The
Berkeley Electronic Press.
Vigar, D. 2006. Climate change: the role of global
companies. London, Tomorrow’s Company.
Waage, S. 2005. Building capacity for
institutionalizing ecosystem services in
developing countries. Supplement III – Building
national capacity for payments for ecosystem
Services. Report to the UNDP/GEF. Washington,
DC, Forest Trends.
Walker, C. 2007. Taking stock: assessing ecosystem
services conservation in Costa Rica. News article,
Ecosystem Marketplace Web site, 21 May.
Wassenaar, T., Gerber, P., Verburg, P.H., Rosales,
M., Ibrahim, M. & Steinfeld, H. 2007. Projecting
land use changes in the Neotropics: the
geography of pasture expansion into forest.
Global Environmental Change, 17(1): 86–104.
Weinberg, M. & Claassen, R. 2005. A multitude
of design decisions influence Conservation
Program performance, Amber Waves, 3(5): 8.
Washington, DC, Economic Research Service,
United States Department of Agriculture.
Weitzman, M.L. 1974. Prices vs. quantities.
The Review of Economic Studies, 41(4):
477–791.
Wertz-Kanounnikoff, S. 2006. Payments for
environmental services – a solution for
biodiversity conservation? Idées pour le débat
No 12. Paris, Institut du développement durable
et des relations internationales (IDDRI).
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006.
Implementing the global strategy on diet,
physical activity and health. Diet and physical
activity: global programming note 2006–2007.
Geneva, Switzerland.
Wiebe, K., Tegene, A. & Kuhn, B. 1996. Partial
interests in land: policy tools for resource
use and conservation. Agricultural Economic
Report No. AER744. Washington, DC, Economic
Research Service, United States Department of
Agriculture.
Wik, M., Pingali, P. & Broca, S. 2007. Global
agricultural performance: past trends and
future prospects. Background paper for the
World Bank’s World Development Report 2008.
Wilson, K.A., McBride, M.F., Bode, M. &
Possingham, H.P. 2006. Prioritizing global
conservation efforts. Nature, 440(7082): 337–340.
World Bank. 2003a. World Development Report
2003. Sustainable development in a dynamic
world: transforming institutions, growth, and
quality of life. Washington, DC, World Bank and
New York, USA, Oxford University Press.

World Bank. 2003b. Reaching the rural poor: a
renewed strategy for rural development, by
Csaba Csaki. Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2006. WDI Online. World
Development Indicators database (available at
http://publications.worldbank.org/WDI/).
World Bank. 2007. State and Trends of the Carbon
Market 2007. Washington, DC, World Bank in
cooperation with the International Emissions
Trading Association.
World Bank/IETA. 2006. State and Trends of the
Carbon Market 2006. Washington, DC, World
Bank and the International Emissions Trading
Association.
WRI in collaboration with UNDP, UNEP & World
Bank. 2005. World Resources 2005: the wealth
of the poor – managing ecosystems to fight
poverty. Washington, DC, World Resources
Institute.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2007.
Ecoregions. Web site (available at
http://www.worldwildlife.org/science/
ecoregions.cfm).
Wunder, S. 2005. Payments for environmental
services: some nuts and bolts. Occasional
Paper No. 42. Bogor, Indonesia, Center for
International Forestry Research.
Wunder, S. 2006. Are direct payments for
environmental services spelling doom for
sustainable forest management in the tropics?
Ecology and Society, 11(2): 23.
Wunder, S., The, B.D. & Ibarra, E. 2005. Payment is
good, control is better. Why payments for forest
environmental services in Vietnam have so far
remained incipient. Bogor, Indonesia, Center for
International Forestry Research.
Wünscher, T., Engel, S. & Wunder, S. 2006.
Payments for environmental services in
Costa Rica: increasing efficiency through
spatial differentiation. Quarterly Journal of
International Agriculture, 45(4): 317–335.
Xu, Z., Bennett, M.T., Tao, R. & Xu, J. 2004.
China’s Sloping Land Conversion Programme
four years on: current situation, pending
issues. International Forestry Review, 6(3–4):
317–326.
Zbinden, S. & Lee, D.R. 2005. Paying for
environmental services: an analysis of
participation in Costa Rica’s PSA Program. World
Development, 33(2): 255–272.
Zilberman, D., Lipper, L. & McCarthy, N.
Forthcoming. When could payments for
environmental services benefit the poor.
Environment and Development Economics.

215
Special chapters of
The State of Food and Agriculture
In addition to the usual review of the recent world food and agricultural situation, each
issue of this report since 1957 has included one or more special studies on problems
of longer-term interest. Special chapters in earlier issues have covered the following
subjects:
1957
1958
1959

1960
1961

1962
1963
1964
1966
1967
1968

1969

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

Factors influencing the trend of food consumption
Postwar changes in some institutional factors affecting agriculture
Food and agricultural developments in Africa south of the Sahara
The growth of forest industries and their impact on the world’s forests
Agricultural incomes and levels of living in countries at different stages of
economic development
Some general problems of agricultural development in less-developed
countries in the light of postwar experience
Programming for agricultural development
Land reform and institutional change
Agricultural extension, education and research in Africa, Asia and Latin
America
The role of forest industries in the attack on economic underdevelopment
The livestock industry in less-developed countries
Basic factors affecting the growth of productivity in agriculture
Fertilizer use: spearhead of agricultural development
Protein nutrition: needs and prospects
Synthetics and their effects on agricultural trade
Agriculture and industrialization
Rice in the world food economy
Incentives and disincentives for farmers in developing countries
The management of fishery resources
Raising agricultural productivity in developing countries through
technological improvement
Improved storage and its contribution to world food supplies
Agricultural marketing improvement programmes:
some lessons from recent experience
Modernizing institutions to promote forestry development
Agriculture at the threshold of the Second Development Decade
Water pollution and its effects on living aquatic resources and fisheries
Education and training for development
Accelerating agricultural research in the developing countries
Agricultural employment in developing countries
Population, food supply and agricultural development
The Second United Nations Development Decade:
mid-term review and appraisal
Energy and agriculture
The state of natural resources and the human environment for food and
agriculture
Problems and strategies in developing regions
Forestry and rural development
Marine fisheries in the new era of national jurisdiction
Rural poverty in developing countries and means of poverty alleviation

216
1982
1983
1984
1985

Livestock production: a world perspective
Women in developing agriculture
Urbanization, agriculture and food systems
Energy use in agricultural production
Environmental trends in food and agriculture
Agricultural marketing and development
1986
Financing agricultural development
1987–88 Changing priorities for agricultural science and technology in developing
countries
1989
Sustainable development and natural resource management
Structural adjustment and agriculture
1990
1991
Agricultural policies and issues: lessons from the 1980s and prospects for the
1990s
1992
Marine fisheries and the law of the sea: a decade of change
Water policies and agriculture
1993
1994
Forest development and policy dilemmas
1995
Agricultural trade: entering a new era?
1996
Food security: some macroeconomic dimensions
1997
The agroprocessing industry and economic development
1998
Rural non-farm income in developing countries
2000
World food and agriculture: lessons from the past 50 years
2001
Economic impacts of transboundary plant pests and animal diseases
2002
Agriculture and global public goods ten years after the Earth Summit
2003–04 Agricultural biotechnology: meeting the needs of the poor?
Agriculture trade and poverty: can trade work for the poor?
2005
2006
Food aid for food security?

217
Selected publications of the
FAO Agricultural Development
Economics Division
(More information is available at www.fao.org/es/esa. Staff members are shown in
bold font.)

BOOKS, MONOGRAPHS AND BOOK CHAPTERS
Anderson, C.L. & Stamoulis, K. 2007. Applying behavioural economics to international
development policy. In G. Mavrotas & A. Shorrocks, eds. Advancing development: core
themes in global economics. Basingstoke, UK, Palgrave McMillan and UNU-WIDER.
Anríquez, G. 2006. Corrupción y gasto público rural en América Latina: el impacto en
el desarrollo rural. In FAO. Políticas públicas y desarrollo rural en América Latina y el
Caribe: el papel del gasto público, edited by F. Soto Vaquero, J. Santos Rocha & J. Ortega.
Santiago.
Evenson, R. & Pingali, P., eds. 2007. Handbook of agricultural economics, Vol. IIIA.
Amsterdam, Elsevier Press.
Evenson, R. & Raney, T., eds. 2007. The political economy of GM foods, Critical Writings
in Agricultural Economics. Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA, Edward Elgar.
Flores, M. 2007. Responding to food insecurity: could we have done it better? In Pain &
Sutton, 2007, pp. 283–295.
Guha-Khasnobis, B., Acharya, S. & Davis, B., eds. 2007a. Food security indicators,
measurement, and the impact of trade openness. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
(in press)
Guha-Khasnobis, B., Acharya, S. & Davis, B., eds. 2007b. Food insecurity, vulnerability and
human rights failure. Basingstoke, UK, Palgrave MacMillan. (in press)
Lovendal, C. & Knowles, M. 2007. Tomorrow’s hunger: a framework for understanding
tomorrow’s hunger. In Guha-Khasnobis, Acharya & Davis, 2007a.
Mechlem, K. & Raney, T. 2007. Agricultural biotechnology and the right to food. In F.
Francioni, ed. Biotechnologies and international human rights. Studies in International
Law. Oxford, UK, Hart Publishing.
Migotto, M., Davis, B., Carletto, C. & Beegle, K. 2007. Measuring food security using
respondents’ perception of food consumption adequacy. In Guha-Khasnobis, Acharya
& Davis, 2007a.
Pain, A. & Sutton, J., eds. 2007. Reconstructing agriculture in Afghanistan, with
Foreword by P. Pingali. Rugby, UK, FAO and Practical Action Publishing.

218
Pingali, P., Kwaja, Y. & Meijer, M. 2007. The role of the public and private sectors in
commercializing small farms and reducing transaction costs. In J.F.M. Swinnen, ed.
Global supply chains, standards and the poor: how the globalization of systems and
standards affects rural development and poverty. Wallingford, UK, CAB International.
Pingali, P. & Raney, T. 2007. Asian agricultural development: from the green revolution
to the gene revolution. In A. Baliscan, and N. Fuwa, eds. Reasserting the rural
development agenda: lessons learned and emerging challenges in Asia. Singapore,
Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and Los Baños, Philippines, Southeast Asian Regional
Center for Graduate Study and Research in Agriculture.
Tefft, J., McGuire, M. & Maunder, N. 2006. Planning for the future: an assessment of
food security early warning systems in sub-Saharan Africa. Synthesis report. Rome, FAO.
Zezza, A. & Migotto, M. 2007. Towards a framework for agricultural development and
food security in Afghanistan. In Pain & Sutton, 2007, pp. 251–281.

JOURNAL ARTICLES
Anríquez, G. & Valdés, A. 2006. Determinants of farm revenue in Pakistan. The Pakistan
Development Review, 45(2): 281–301.
Anríquez, G. & López, R. 2007. The effect of agricultural growth on poverty in an
archetypical middle income country: Chile in the 1990s. Agricultural Economics,
36(2): 191–202.
Azzarri, C., Carletto, G., Davis, B., Stampini, M. & Zezza, A. 2006. Monitoring poverty
without consumption data: an application using the Albania Panel Survey. Eastern
European Economics, 44(1): 59–82.
Carletto, G., & Zezza, A. 2006. Being poor, feeling poorer: combining objective and
subjective measures of welfare in Albania. Journal of Development Studies,
42(5): 739–760.
Carletto, G., Davis, B., Stampini, M. & Zezza, A. 2006. Internal mobility and international
migration in Albania. International Migration Review, 40(4): 767–785.
Croppenstedt, A. 2006. Household income structure and determinants in rural Egypt.
Egyptian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 16(3): 1–18.
Lopriore, C., Dop, M.-C., Solal-Céligny, A. & Lagnado, G. 2007. Excluding infants under 6
months of age from surveys: impact on prevalence of pre-school undernutrition. Public
Health Nutrition, 10(1): 79–87.
López, R., Anríquez, G. & Gulati, S. 2007. Structural change and sustainable
development. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 53(3): 307–322.
McGregor, J., McKay, A. & Velazco, J. 2007. Needs and resources in the investigation of
well-being in developing countries: illustrative evidence from Bangladesh and Peru.
Journal of Economic Methodology, 14(1): 107–131.

219
Pfaff, A., Kerr, S., Lipper, L., Cavatassi, R., Davis, B., Hendy, J. & Sanchez, A. 2007. Will
buying tropical forest carbon benefit the poor? Evidence from Costa Rica. Land Use
Policy, 24(3): 600–610.
Pingali, P. 2007. Westernization of Asian diets and the transformation of food systems:
Implications for research and policy. Food Policy, 32(3): 281–298.
Raney, T. & Pingali, P. 2007. Sowing a gene revolution. Scientific American,
29(3): 104–111.
Schipull, P., Dawe, D., Villate, E., De Sagun, M., Valencia, S. & Lopez, O. Forthcoming.
Iron supplementation compliance among pregnant women in Bicol, Philippines.
Public Health Nutrition. doi:10.1017/S1368980007000237.
Schmidhuber, J. & Tubiello, F. Forthcoming. Global food security under climate change.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Stampini, M., Davis, B. & Carletto, G. Forthcoming. International migration from
Albania: the role of family networks and previous experience. Eastern European
Economics.
Timmer, C.P. & Dawe, D. 2007. Managing food price instability in Asia: a macro food
security perspective. Asian Economic Journal, 21(1): 1–18.
Velazco, J., Young, T. & Colman, D. 2006. Non-farm rural activities in a peasant economy:
the case of North Peruvian Sierra. Journal of International Development, 18(2): 207–221.

JOURNAL
e-JADE: The Electronic Journal of Agricultural and Development Economics
Vol. 3 (2006), Issue 2 (available at www.fao.org/es/esa/en/ejade.htm)
Food security analysis and policies for transition countries
(P. Wehrheim & D. Wiesmann)
Institutional changes for agricultural and rural development in the CEEC and CIS
region
(U. Koester & B. Brümmer)
Rural non-farm livelihoods in transition economies: emerging issues and policies
(J. Davis)
Property rights, land fragmentation and the emerging structure of agriculture in
Central and Eastern European countries
(J. Thomas)
Farm output, non-farm income, and commercialization in rural Georgia
(I. Kan, A. Kimhi & Z. Lerman)

220
ESA WORKING PAPERS
07-22

07-21

07-20
07-19
07-18

07-17

07-16

07-15

07-13

07-12

07-10

07-04
07-03

07-02
07-01

06-17

06-16

06-15

Understanding the dynamics of food insecurity and vulnerability in
Himachal Pradesh
(Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service [ESAF])
Addressing food insecurity in fragile states: case studies from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Sudan
(L. Alinovi, G. Hemrich & L. Russo)
Long-term farming trends: an inquiry using agricultural censuses
(G. Anríquez & G. Bonomi)
Long-term rural demographic trends
(G. Anríquez)
An assessment of the impact of rice tariff policy in Indonesia: a multi-market
model approach
(Bambang Sayaka, Sumaryanto, A. Croppenstedt & S. DiGiuseppe)
Rural household access to assets and agrarian institutions: a cross country
comparison
(A. Zezza, P.Winters, B. Davis, G. Carletto, K. Covarrubias, E. Quinones,
K. Stamoulis, T. Karfakis, L. Tasciotti, S. DiGiuseppe & G. Bonomi)
Rural income generating activities: a cross country comparison
(B. Davis, P.Winters, G. Carletto, K.Covarrubias, E. Quinones, A. Zezza,
K.Stamoulis, G. Bonomi & S. DiGiuseppe)
An assessment of the impact of wheat market liberalization in Egypt:
a multi-market model approach
(G.M. Siam & A. Croppenstedt)
Impacts of international migration and remittances on source country
household incomes in small island states: Fiji and Tonga
(R.P.C. Brown & G. Leeves)
Action, function, & structure: interpreting network effects on behavior
in rural Malawi
(G. Stecklov & A. Weinreb)
Does migration make rural households more productive? Evidence from
Mexico
(J.E. Taylor & A. López-Feldman)
Seasonal migration and agriculture in Viet Nam
(A. de Brauw)
Non-traditional exports, traditional constraints: the adoption and
diffusion of cash crops among smallholders in Guatemala
(C. Carletto, A. Kirk, P. Winters & B. Davis)
Rural development and poverty reduction: is agriculture still the key?
(G. Anríquez & K. Stamoulis)
Governance and rural public expenditures in Latin America: the impact on
rural development
(G. Anríquez)
The role of crop genetic diversity in coping with agricultural production
shocks: insights from Eastern Ethiopia
(R. Cavatassi, J. Hopkins & L. Lipper)
Sowing the seeds of social relations: the role of social capital in crop
diversity
(P. Winters, R. Cavatassi & L. Lipper)
Putting payments for environmental services in the context of economic
development
(D. Zilberman, L. Lipper & N. McCarthy)

221
06-14
06-13

06-12
06-11
06-10
06-09

06-08

06-07

06-06

06-05
06-04
06-03

06-02
06-01

05-06
05-05
05-04

05-03

05-02

05-01

04-22

Assessing the impact of massive out-migration on agriculture
(N. McCarthy, G. Carletto, B. Davis & I. Maltsoglou)
Abatement and transaction costs of carbon-sink projects involving
smallholders
(O. Cacho & L. Lipper)
Measuring vulnerability to food insecurity
(P. Scaramozzino)
Assessing the impact of food aid on recipient countries: a survey
(T.O. Awokuse)
Food aid in response to acute food insecurity
(C.B. Barrett)
Food aid as part of a coherent strategy to advance food security
objectives
(C.B. Barrett)
Less-favoured areas: looking beyond agriculture towards ecosystem
services
(L. Lipper, P. Pingali & M. Zurek)
The experience of conditional cash transfers in Latin America and the
Caribbean
(S. Handa & B. Davis)
Choosing to migrate or migrating to choose: migration and labour choice
in Albania
(C. Azzarri, G. Carletto, B. Davis & A. Zezza)
Food aid’s intended and unintended consequences
(C.B. Barrett)
When are payments for environmental services beneficial to the poor?
(D. Zilberman, L. Lipper & N. McCarthy)  
An assessment of the impact of increasing wheat self-sufficiency and
promoting cash-transfer subsidies for consumers in Egypt: a multi-market
model (G.M. Siam)
Household income structure and determinants in rural Egypt
(A. Croppenstedt)  
Eradicating extreme poverty and hunger: towards a coherent
policy agenda
(P. Pingali, K. Stamoulis & R. Stringer)
Measuring technical efficiency of wheat farmers in Egypt
(A. Croppenstedt)
Food aid: a primer
(S. Lowder & T. Raney)
Transaction costs, institutions and smallholder market integration: potato
producers in Peru
(I. Maltsoglou & A. Tanyeri-Abur)
Familiar faces, familiar places: the role of family networks and previous
experience for Albanian migrants
(G. Carletto, B. Davis & M. Stampini)
Moving away from poverty: a spatial analysis of poverty and migration
in Albania
(A. Zezza, G. Carletto & B. Davis)
Monitoring poverty without consumption data: an application using the
Albania panel survey
(C. Azzarri, G. Carletto, B. Davis & A. Zezza)
Investing in agriculture for growth and food security
in the ACP countries
(J. Skoet, K. Stamoulis & A. Deuss)

222
04-21

04-20

04-19
04-18

04-17

04-16

04-15
04-14

04-13
04-12

04-11

04-10

04-09
04-08
04-07

04-06

04-05

04-04
04-03
04-02
04-01

Estimating poverty over time and space: construction
of a time-variant poverty index for Costa Rica
(R. Cavatassi, B. Davis & L. Lipper)
Will buying tropical forest carbon benefit the poor? Evidence from
Costa Rica
(S. Kerr, A. Pfaff, R. Cavatassi, B. Davis, L. Lipper, A. Sanchez & J. Hendy)
Effects of poverty on deforestation: distinguishing behaviour from location
(S. Kerr, A. Pfaff, R. Cavatassi, B. Davis, L. Lipper, A. Sanchez & J. Timmins)
Understanding vulnerability to food insecurity:
lessons from vulnerable livelihood profiling
(C. Løvendal, M. Knowles & N. Horii)
Westernization of Asian diets and the transformation
of food systems: implications for research and policy
(P. Pingali)  
Identifying the factors that influence small-scale farmers’ transaction
costs in relation to seed acquisition
(L.B. Badstue)
Poverty, livestock and household typologies in Nepal
(I. Maltsoglou & K. Taniguchi)  
National agricultural biotechnology research capacity in developing
countries
(J. Cohen, J. Komen & J. Falck Zepeda)  
Internal mobility and international migration in Albania
(G. Carletto, B. Davis, M. Stampini, S. Trento & A. Zezza)
Being poor, feeling poorer: combining objective and subjective
measures of welfare in Albania
(G. Carletto & A. Zezza)
Food insecurity and vulnerability in Viet Nam:
profiles of four vulnerable groups
(FAO Food Security & Agricultural Projects Analysis Service)
Food insecurity and vulnerability in Nepal:
profiles of seven vulnerable groups
(FAO Food Security and Agricultural Projects Analysis Service)
Public attitudes towards agricultural biotechnology
(T. J. Hoban)
The economic impacts of biotechnology-based technological innovations
(G. Traxler)
Private research and public goods: implications of biotechnology for
biodiversity
(T. Raney & P. Pingali)
Interactions between the agricultural sector and the
HIV/AIDS pandemic: implications for agricultural policy
(T. S. Jayne, M. Villarreal, P. Pingali & G. Hemrich)
Globalization of Indian diets and the transformation
of food supply systems
(P. Pingali & Y. Khwaja)
Agricultural policy indicators
(T. Josling & A. Valdés)
Resource abundance, poverty and development
(E.H. Bulte, R. Damania & R.T. Deacon)
Conflicts, rural development and food security in West Africa
(M. Flores)
Valuation methods for environmental benefits
in forestry and watershed investment projects
(R. Cavatassi)

The State of Food and Agriculture 2007 explores the potential for agriculture to provide enhanced levels of environmental services alongside the production of food and fibre.
The report concludes that demand for environmental
services from agriculture – including climate change mitigation, improved watershed management and biodiversity
preservation – will increase in the future, but better
incentives to farmers are needed if agriculture is to meet
tools, payments to farmers for environmental services hold
promise as a flexible approach to enhancing farmer
incentives to sustain and improve the ecosystems on which
we all depend. Nevertheless, challenges must be overcome
if the potential of this approach is to be realized, especially
in developing countries. Policy efforts at international and
national levels are necessary to establish the basis for such
payments. The design of cost-effective programmes
requires careful analysis of the specific biophysical and
socio-economic contexts and consideration of the poverty
impacts programmes may have. By clarifying the challenges
that need to be addressed in implementing such an
approach, this report is intended to contribute to the
realization of its potential.

THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE

this demand. As one among several other possible policy

Included in this issue is a mini CD-ROM of the FAO Statistical Yearbook
2005–2006 Vol. 2/1, containing time series data for 200 countries in Arabic,
Chinese, English, French and Spanish.

ISBN 978-92-5-105750-6

7 8 9 2 5 1

0 5 7 5 0 6

TC/P/A1200E/1/9.07/0000

FAO

9

ISSN 0081-4539

2007

2007

THE STATE
OF FOOD
AND
AGRICULTURE

