2011 | World Intellectual Property Report | The Changing Face of Innovation

World Intellectual Property Organization
34, chemin des Colombettes
P.O. Box 18
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Telephone :
+4122 338 91 11
Fax :
+4122 733 54 28

WIPO Publication No. 944E/2011 			

ISBN 978-92-805-2160-3

WIPO Economics & Statistics Series

For more information contact
WIPO at www.wipo.int

WIPO Economics & Statistics Series

2011
World Intellectual Property Report

The Changing Face of Innovation

WIPO Economics & Statistics Series

2011
World Intellectual Property Report
The Changing Face of Innovation

Foreword



Foreword
Innovation is a central driver of economic growth, de-

Understanding these innovation trends and the asso-

velopment and better jobs. It is the key that enables

ciated role of IP is important in order for public policy

firms to compete in the global marketplace, and the

to support new growth opportunities. The essential

process by which solutions are found to social and

questions to ask are whether the design of the current

economic challenges.

IP system is fit for this new innovation landscape, and
how best to cope with the growing demand to protect

The face of innovation has evolved significantly over the

and trade ideas. To move beyond polarized debates on

last decades.

IP, more fact-based economic analysis is needed. In addition, it is crucial to translate economic research in the

First, firms are investing historically unprecedented

field of IP into accessible policy analysis and messages.

amounts in the creation of intangible assets – new ideas,
technologies, designs, brands, organizational know-how

I am pleased therefore that WIPO’s first World IP Report

and business models.

explores the changing face of innovation. Through this
new series, we aim to explain, clarify and contribute to

Second, innovation-driven growth is no longer the

policy analysis relating to IP, with a view to facilitating

prerogative of high-income countries alone; the techno-

evidence-based policymaking.

logical gap between richer and poorer countries is narrowing. Incremental and more local forms of innovation

Clearly, this Report leaves many questions open. Where

contribute to economic and social development, on a

the available evidence is insufficient for making informed

par with world-class technological inventions.

policy choices, the World IP Report formulates suggestions for further research. This first edition does not ad-

Third, the act of inventing new products or processes

dress all the important IP themes – notably, trademarks

is increasingly international in nature and seen as more

and branding, copyright and the cultural and creative

collaborative and open.

industries, or the protection of traditional knowledge.
We intend to focus on these and other areas in future

Fourth, knowledge markets are central within this more

editions of this series.

fluid innovation process. Policymakers increasingly seek
to ensure that knowledge is transferred from science to
firms, thereby reinforcing the impact of public research.
Moreover, ideas are being co-developed, exchanged and
traded via new platforms and intermediaries.
In this new setting, the role of intellectual property (IP)
has fundamentally changed. The increased focus on
knowledge, the rise of new innovating countries and
the desire to protect inventions abroad have prompted
a growing demand for IP protection. IP has moved from
being a technical topic within small, specialized communities to playing a central role in firm strategies and
innovation policies.

Francis GURRY
Director General

3

Acknowledgements
This Report was developed under the general direction

Thanks also go to the Association of University

of Francis Gurry (Director General). It was prepared and

Technology Managers (AUTM), Bronwyn Hall, Derek

coordinated by a core team led by Carsten Fink (Chief

Hill, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and

Economist) and comprising Intan Hamdan-Livramento

Development, Maxim Pinkovskiy, Melissa Schilling, and

(Economist) and Sacha Wunsch-Vincent (Senior

the UNESCO Institute for Statistics for kindly providing

Economist), all from the Economics and Statistics Division.

data used in this report.

Chapter 3 draws heavily on a contribution from Josh

Samiah Do Carmo Figueiredo provided valuable admin-

Lerner and Eric Lin from Harvard Business School.

istrative support.

The IP Statistics and Data Development Sections sup-

Finally, gratitude is due to Heidi Hawkings and Stephen

plied many of the data used in this Report and made

Mettler from the Communications Division for editing and

written contributions to Chapters 1 and 4. Special thanks

designing the Report and the Printing and Publication

go to Mosahid Khan and Hao Zhou. Ignat Stepanok and

Production Section for their printing services. All worked

Maria-Pluvia Zuñiga contributed to the development of the

hard to meet tight deadlines.

data methodology and to several sections of Chapter 4.
Background reports were prepared by Suma Athreye,
José Miguel Benavente, Daniel Goya, Ove Granstand,
Keun Lee, Sadao Nagaoka, Jerry Thursby, Marie Thursby,
Yong Yang, and María Pluvia Zuñiga.
Nuno Pires de Carvalho and Giovanni Napolitano from
the Intellectual Property and Competition Policy Division
provided helpful input for Chapter 3. Ilaria Cameli, Yumiko
Hamano, Ali Jazairy and Olga Spasic from the Innovation
and Technology Transfer Section contributed to and offered helpful suggestions on Chapter 4.
The Report team benefitted greatly from comments
on draft chapters from Alfonso Gambardella, Richard
Gilbert, Christian Helmers, Derek Hill, Martin Schaaper,
Mark Schankerman, Pedro Roffe, and Jayashree Watal.
In addition, several WIPO colleagues also offered helpful
suggestions, namely Philippe Baechthold, Juneho Jang,
Ryan Lamb, Bruno Le Feuvre, Tomoko Miyamoto, Julio
Raffo, Yoshiyuki Takagi and Takashi Yamashita.

4



Disclaimer

TECHNICAL NOTES

This Report and any opinions reflected therein are the

COUNTRY INCOME GROUPS

sole responsibility of the WIPO Secretariat. They do not

This Report relies on the World Bank income classifica-

purport to reflect the opinions or views of WIPO Member

tion based on gross national income per capita to refer

States. The main authors of this Report also wish to

to particular country groups. The groups are: low-income

exonerate those who have contributed and commented

(USD 1,005 or less); lower middle-income (USD 1,006 to

upon it from responsibility for any outstanding errors

USD 3,975)-; upper middle-income (USD 3,976 to USD

or omissions.

12,275); and high-income (USD 12,276 or more).

Readers are welcome to use the information provided in

More information on this classification is available at

this report, but are requested to cite WIPO as the source.

http://data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications.
IP DATA
The majority of the IP data published in this Report are
taken from the WIPO Statistics Database, which is primarily based on WIPO’s annual IP statistics survey and data
compiled by WIPO in processing international applications/registrations filed through the Patent Cooperation
Treaty (PCT), the Madrid System and the Hague System.
Data are available for download from WIPO’s webpage: www.wipo.int/ipstats/en. WIPO’s annual World
Intellectual Property Indicators, freely available on the
same webpage, provides additional information on the
WIPO Statistics Database.
The patent family and technology data presented in
this Report come from the WIPO Statistics Database,
the most recent Worldwide Patent Statistical Database
(PATSTAT) of the EPO, and from selected national data
sources, as indicated in the Report.
Every effort has been made to compile IP statistics based
on the same definitions and to ensure international comparability. The data are collected from IP offices using WIPO’s
harmonized annual IP statistics questionnaires. However,
it must be kept in mind that national laws and regulations
for filing IP applications or for issuing IP rights, as well as
statistical reporting practices, differ across jurisdictions.
Please note that, due to the continual updating of missing data and the revision of historical statistics, data provided in this Report may differ from previously published
figures and the data available on WIPO’s webpage.
5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Throughout human history, innovation has been a powerful force for transformation. This arguably holds true now

How is the face of
innovation changing?

more than ever. However, the face of innovation – the
“who”, the “how”, and the “what for” – has continu-

Claims about new innovation models and practices

ously changed.

abound. Assessing the significance of those claims
requires a dispassionate look at the available data – a

Understanding these changes is important. In modern
market economies, innovation is a key ingredient of
sustained economic growth. In high-income countries,
studies have estimated that innovation accounts for as
much as 80 percent of economy-wide growth in produc-

task performed in Chapter 1.

The geography of innovation has shifted,
although high-income countries still
dominate global R&D spending

tivity. Research at the firm level has shown that firms that

A natural first step is to look at trends in research and

innovate outperform their non-innovating peers. Less is

development (R&D). Global R&D expenditure almost

known about innovation and its economic impact in low-

doubled in real terms from 1993 to 2009. Since this period

and middle-income economies. However, the available

also saw marked growth of the global economy, the share

evidence similarly suggests that innovating firms in those

of global gross domestic product (GDP) devoted to R&D

economies are more productive – especially if applying

increased at a more modest rate – from 1.7 percent in

a broad view of innovation that includes incremental

1993 to 1.9 percent in 2009. Two other important insights

product and process improvements. Indeed, the experi-

emerge from the available R&D data (see Figure 1):

ence of several East Asian economies has demonstrated
how innovation can spur economic catch-up – even

• Most R&D spending still takes place in high-income

if innovation may be only part of the success story of

countries – around 70 percent of the world total. They

those economies.

spend around 2.5 percent of their GDP on R&D – more
than double the rate of middle-income economies.

For policymakers in particular, it is important to monitor
and assess how innovation changes. Governments are

• Low- and middle-income economies increased their

key stakeholders in national innovation systems. They

share of global R&D expenditure by 13 percent be-

directly fund research and provide incentives for firms

tween 1993 and 2009. China accounts for most of this

to invest in innovation – including through the protection

increase – more than 10 percentage points – propel-

of intellectual property (IP). As innovation practices shift,

ling China to the world’s second largest R&D spender

governments need to assess the effectiveness of existing

in 2009.

policies and, where necessary, adapt them.
This Report seeks to make an analytical contribution in
this respect. It does so in two ways. First, it sheds light
on global innovation trends – especially those concerning
IP – and assesses the ways in which innovation has really
changed. Second, it reviews the available evidence on
how IP protection affects innovative behavior and what
this evidence implies for the design of IP and innovation policies.

6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The innovation process is increasingly
international in nature

Figure 1: R&D expenditure still comes
mainly from high-income countries
Worldwide R&D expenditure, by income group,
in 2005 PPP Dollars, 1993 and 2009
1993
1000

Clear evidence exists that innovation is increasingly

2009

international in nature. Greater mobility of students,

854

highly-skilled workers and scientists has spurred the in-

800
600

ternational exchange of knowledge. There also has been

523

a sharp increase in the share of peer-reviewed science

400

245

200
0

56
High-income

Middleand low-income

105
44
Middle- and low-income,
excluding China

See Figure 1.5.

and engineering articles with international co-authorship,
and a rising share of patents that list inventors from more
than one country. More and more, multinational firms are
locating their R&D facilities in a variety of countries – with
certain middle-income economies seeing particularly
fast growth. The rising share of middle-income countries

R&D statistics paint only a partial picture of innovation

in the global economy is, in turn, reorienting innovation

landscapes. The innovation performance of economies

towards the demands of those countries.

depends on broader investment in knowledge beyond
formal R&D spending. This includes, above all, investment in education. The introduction of new machinery
and equipment is another important component of

Innovation is seen to have become more
collaborative and open…
but is this perception correct?

innovation expenditure, especially in low- and middle-

One much-discussed element of the new innovation

income countries.

paradigm is the increasingly collaborative nature of the
innovation process. Indeed, the available data confirm

Studies have also pointed to the importance of non-tech-

that there is greater collaboration in some respects. The

nological innovation – including organizational, marketing,

above-mentioned trend of more frequent international

design and logistical innovation – as an important driver

co-patenting points to greater collaboration at the in-

of firm and economy-wide productivity enhancements.

ternational level. In addition, the available data on R&D

Indeed, data show that firms’ investment in all types

alliances have shown upward trends in some sectors,

of intangible assets has grown more rapidly than their

although not necessarily in recent years, and the reliability

investment in tangible assets; in selected countries,

of those data is weak.

firms even invest more in intangible than in tangible assets. However, few hard data exist to rigorously assess

Heightening perceptions of greater collaboration, scholars

whether non-technological innovation has risen in relative

and business strategists have emphasized that innova-

importance – not least because such innovation often

tion is becoming increasingly “open”. In particular, firms

complements technological breakthroughs.

practicing open innovation strategically manage inflows
and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal innovation and to expand the markets for external uses of their
intangible assets. “Horizontal” collaboration with similar
firms is one important element of open innovation, but
it also includes “vertical” cooperation with customers,
suppliers, universities, research institutes and others.

7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Assessing the true scale and importance of open innova-

• Comparing growth in the number of first filings to

tion is challenging. For one, it is difficult to draw a clear

growth in real R&D expenditure shows that, for the

distinction between open innovation strategies and long-

world as a whole, the latter has grown somewhat faster

standing collaborative practices, such as joint R&D, joint

than the former. This suggests that growth in patent-

marketing or strategic partnerships. In addition, certain

ing is rooted in underlying knowledge investment. As

elements of open innovation strategies – such as new

discussed further below, however, patenting and R&D

policies internal to firms or informal knowledge exchanges

trends vary markedly across countries and industries,

– cannot easily be traced. Anecdotally, examples of truly

with important implications for how firms innovate.

new approaches abound – notably, so-called crowdsourcing initiatives, prizes and competitions, and Internet

Figure 2: Patenting abroad is the main

platforms on which firms can post challenges. Modern

driver of worldwide patenting growth

information and communications technologies (ICTs) have

Patent applications by type of application, indexed 1995=1

facilitated many of these approaches.

First ling

Subsequent ling
3.0

IP ownership has become more central to
business strategies

2.5

Turning to the IP system, there is every indication that IP

2.0

ownership has become more central to the strategies of
innovating firms. IP policy has, therefore, moved to the

1.5

forefront of innovation policy.
1.0

Demand for patents has risen from 800,000 applications

0.5

worldwide in the early 1980s to 1.8 million in 2009. This
increase has occurred in different waves, with Japan
States (US), Europe and the Republic of Korea in the
1990s and, more recently, by China.

ing, including some which are specific to countries and
51.7%

industries. However, two key forces stand out:
• Dividing the growth in patenting worldwide into so-

48.3%

called first filings – approximating new inventions
– and subsequent filings – primarily filings of the
First ling
Subsequent ling

same invention in additional countries – shows that
growth over the last 15 years (see Figure 2). Patent
applicants increasingly seek to protect their patents
abroad and, indeed, in a larger number of countries,
reflecting greater economic integration.

8

See Figure 1.20.

07

05

20

20

01
03
20

99

20

97

Contribution of first and subsequent applications
to total growth, in percent, 1995-2007

There are many causes of this rapid increase in patent-

the latter explains slightly more than one-half of that

19

95

19

19

91
93
19

89

19

87

19

85

19

19

81
83
19

79

19

77

19

19

75

0.0
19

driving filing growth in the 1980s, joined by the United

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 3: International royalty and licensing payments and receipts are growing
RLF payments and receipts, in USD millions (left) and as a percentage share of GDP (right), 1960-2009
Payments

Receipts

Payments (percentage share of GDP)

Receipts (percentage share of GDP)
0.0035

250'000

0.003
200'000
0.0025
150'000

0.002
0.0015

100'000

0.001
50'000
0.0005
0
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

0

See Figure 1.26.

Demand for other IP rights – which firms often use as a

Figure 3 depicts the growth of cross-border licensing

complement to patents – has also seen marked growth.

trade in the world economy, showing an acceleration of

Trademark applications worldwide increased from 1

such trade since the 1990s. In nominal terms, interna-

million per year in the mid-1980s to 3.3 million in 2009.

tional royalty and licensing fee (RLF) receipts increased

Similarly, industrial design applications worldwide more

from USD 2.8 billion in 1970 to USD 27 billion in 1990,

than doubled from about 290,000 in 2000 to 640,000

and to approximately USD 180 billion in 2009 – outpac-

in 2009. Greater internationalization is also an important

ing growth in global GDP. There are far fewer data on

factor behind the rising demand for protection of these

domestic IP transactions, but selected company informa-

forms of IP. However, little is known about what precisely

tion confirms this trend.

has driven their filing growth and to what extent their role
in business strategies has shifted.

Knowledge markets based on IP rights are
on the rise, though still nascent

Technology market intermediaries have existed for a long
time. However, new “market makers” have emerged, such
as IP clearinghouses, exchanges, auctions and brokerages. Many of them use modern ICTs for valuing IP rights

A final important trend concerns the rise of IP-based

and matching buyers and sellers. As further discussed

knowledge markets. Evidence suggests that the trad-

below, another rapidly growing form of intermediation

ability of IP has increased over the last few decades. This

over the last decades has been the establishment of

is reflected in more frequent licensing of IP rights and the

technology transfer offices (TTOs) at universities and

emergence of new technology market intermediaries.

public research organizations (PROs).

9

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

While only limited analysis is available on the size and

Difficult trade-offs exist in designing IP rights, not least be-

scope of actual IP transactions, the available evidence

cause IP protection has multifaceted effects on innovative

on patent licensing, auctions and other IP-based transac-

behavior and market competition. As technologies ad-

tions suggests that trading activity remains at incipient

vance and business models shift, optimally balancing these

levels. For example, firms typically license less than 10

trade-offs represents a continuing high-stakes challenge.

percent of their patents. Certainly, technology markets
are still small relative to the revenue of firms’ or the overall

In more recent history, economists have refined their

output of economies. However, they increasingly shape

view of the IP system – partly as a result of new research

how innovation takes place and therefore deserve care-

and partly due to real world developments. The patent

ful attention.

system has received particular attention.

Many of the above-outlined changes in the innovation

Patent portfolio races complicate
cumulative innovation processes

landscape are challenging long-standing business practices. Firms need to adapt in order to remain competitive.

Economists have long recognized that innovation seldom

But do these changes also require a rethinking of the

happens in isolation; one firm’s solution to a problem

policy framework for innovation? This question is at the

typically relies on insights gained from previous innova-

heart of the remainder of the Report. The Report first of-

tion. Similarly, in competitive markets, firms innovate

fers a general introduction to the economic literature on

simultaneously and develop technologies that may

how IP protection affects innovation; it asks, in particular,

complement each other. The rapid increase in the number

how the views of economists have changed in the last

of patent filings has, in turn, raised concerns about pat-

few decades (Chapter 2). It then returns to the theme

ents hindering cumulative innovation. Indeed, patenting

of collaboration, first looking at collaborative practices

activity has grown especially fast for so-called complex

between firms (Chapter 3) and then at collaboration be-

technologies. Economists define complex technologies

tween public research institutions and firms (Chapter 4).

as those that consist of numerous separately patentable
inventions with possibly widespread patent ownership;

How have economists’ views
on IP protection evolved?

discrete technologies, by contrast, describe products or

Understanding how IP protection affects innovative be-

faster growth in patent applications worldwide.

havior has long been a fertile field in economic research.
Important insights from the past still shape how economists view the IP system today. Above all, compared to
other innovation policies, IP protection stands out in that
it mobilizes decentralized market forces to guide R&D
investment. This works especially well where private
motivation to innovate aligns with society’s technological
needs, where solutions to technological problems are
within sight, and where firms can finance upfront R&D
investment. In addition, the effectiveness of different IP
instruments depends on the absorptive and innovative
capacity of firms, which varies considerably across
countries at different levels of economic development.

10

processes made up of only a few patentable inventions.
Figure 4 shows that complex technologies have seen

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 4: Complex technologies

Research which originally focused on the semiconductor

see faster patenting growth

industry has shown that firms proactively build up large

Patent filings for complex versus discrete
technologies, 1972=100, 1972-2007

patent portfolios. One motivation for such portfolios is to

First filings
First lings: complex technologies
First lings: discrete technologies

ensure a firm’s freedom to operate in its innovation space
and to preempt litigation. A second motivation for firms to
create these portfolios is to strengthen their bargaining
position vis-à-vis competitors. In particular, firms own-

400

ing many patents in a crowded technology space can
preempt litigation by credibly threatening to countersue

300

competitors. In addition, they are in a better position to
negotiate favorable cross-licensing arrangements which

200

are often needed to commercialize new technologies.
100

In addition to semiconductors, patent portfolio races have
been documented for other complex technologies – ICTs

19

72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
8
19 0
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
9
19 0
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
0
20 0
02
20
04
20
06

0

Subsequent filings
Subsequent lings: complex technologies
Subsequent lings: discrete technologies
400

in general and, in particular, telecommunications, software, audiovisual technology, optics and, more recently,
smartphones and tablet computers. Even though these
portfolio races often take place in industries making fast
technological progress, there is concern that they may
slow or even forestall cumulative innovation processes.
In particular, entrepreneurs facing dense webs of over-

300

lapping patent rights – or patent thickets – may forgo
research activity or shelve plans for commercializing

200

100

19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
8
19 0
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
9
19 0
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06

0

See Figure 2.1.

promising technologies.

Patents facilitate specialization
and learning
A second area of refined thinking concerns the role of
patents in modern technology markets. Research has
shown that patents enable firms to specialize, allowing
them to be more innovative and efficient at the same
time. In addition, they allow firms to flexibly control which
knowledge to guard and which to share so as to maximize

What accounts for the difference in growth rates? It

learning – a key element of open innovation strategies.

partly reflects the nature of technological change. For
example, complex technologies include most ICTs which
have experienced rapid advances over the last three
decades. However, economic research suggests that
faster growth in complex technologies is also due to a
shift in patenting strategies.

11

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Such learning can also take place when patents are
disclosed to the public. Little evidence is available on the
value of patent disclosure, although some surveys have
revealed that published patents are indeed an important

Do markets forces
optimally balance
collaboration
and competition?

knowledge source for firms conducting R&D – more
so in Japan than in the US and Europe. Yet, the patent

Firms increasingly look beyond their own boundaries to

literature represents a valuable source of knowledge

maximize their investment in innovation. They collaborate

for creative minds anywhere in the world. In addition,

with other firms – either in the production of IP or on the

the easy availability of millions of patent documents to

basis of IP ownership in commercializing innovation.

anyone connected to the Internet has arguably created
new catch-up opportunities for technologically less
developed economies.

Well-functioning patent institutions
are crucial

Collaboration can benefit firms and society
Joint IP production occurs through R&D alliances, in
particular contractual partnerships and equity-based
joint ventures. Data on such alliances are limited and
sometimes difficult to interpret, but they suggest that

Finally, economic research has come to recognize the

firms in the ICT, biotechnology and chemical industries

crucial role played by patent institutions in shaping in-

most frequently enter into such alliances.

novation incentives. Patent institutions perform the essential tasks of ensuring the quality of patents granted

Joining forces with competitors offers several benefits.

and providing balanced dispute resolution.

A firm can learn from the experience of others, reduce
costs by dividing efforts, share risk and coordinate with

Unprecedented levels of patenting have put these institu-

producers of complementary goods. Society usually

tions under considerable pressure. Many patent offices

benefits from such collaboration as it enhances the ef-

have seen growing backlogs of pending applications. In

ficiency and effectiveness of the innovation process.

2010, the number of unprocessed applications worldwide stood at 5.17 million. In absolute terms, the patent

Collaboration between firms extends beyond the joint

offices of Japan and the US as well as the European

production of IP. In many cases, firms only join forces

Patent Office account for the largest office backlogs.

when, or even after, they commercialize their technolo-

However, relative to annual application flows, several

gies. As explained above, the fast growth of patenting in

offices in middle-income countries face the most sub-

complex technologies has given rise to patent thickets,

stantial backlogs. The increasing size and complexity

whereby patent rights are distributed over a fragmented

of patent applications have added to the “examination

base of patent holders. Those seeking to introduce

burden” of offices.

products that use such technologies face the high cost
of negotiating with multiple parties. If each technology

The choices patent offices face can have far-reaching

is essential, a negotiation failure with any of the patent

consequences on incentives to innovate. These include

holders amounts to a failure with all.

the amount of fees to charge, how to involve third parties in the patenting process, how best to make use of
ICTs and the level and type of international cooperation
to pursue. In making these choices, a key challenge is to
reconcile incentives for efficient office operations with a
patenting process that promotes society’s best interest.

12

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

One solution is for firms to pool their patents, sharing

Notwithstanding their benefits, leaving the formation of

them with other patent holders and sometimes licensing

collaborative ventures to private market forces may not

them to third parties as a package. Patent pools are not

always lead to socially optimal outcomes; firms may either

a new collaborative practice; they have existed for more

collaborate below desirable levels or they may do so in

than a century. The available data point to their wide-

an anticompetitive manner.

spread use in the first half of the 20 century (see Figure
th

5). In the period after the Second World War, the more
skeptical attitudes of competition authorities drastically

Market forces may not always lead to
desirable levels of collaboration…

reduced the formation of new pools. However, this has

Insufficient levels of collaboration – whether in the produc-

again changed in the last two decades, with a new wave

tion or commercialization of IP – may arise from conflicts

of pools emerging, especially in the ICT industry where

of interest between potential collaborators. Fears of

patent thickets have proliferated.

free riding, risk shifting and other forms of opportunistic
behavior may lead firms to forgo mutually beneficial

Figure 5: The ICT industry dominates

cooperation. Differences in business strategies between

the recent wave of patent pools

specialized R&D firms and “vertically” integrated R&D

Number of patent pools by industry

and production firms can add to negotiation gridlock.

Other
Transportation equipment
Scienti c instruments
Chemicals

Communications
Packaged software
Metal products
Petroleum re ning

In principle, the failure of private markets to attract optimal

Electrical
Machinery

35

levels of collaboration provides a rationale for government

30

intervention. Unfortunately, the available evidence offers
little guidance to policymakers on how such market fail-

25

ures are best resolved. This is partly because the benefits

20

of and incentives for collaboration are highly specific to

15

particular technologies and business models, and also
because it is difficult to evaluate how often potentially

10

fruitful collaboration opportunities go unexplored in dif-

5

ferent industries.
s

s

00
20

s

90
19

s

80
19

s

70

60

19

s
50

19

s

s

40

19

19

s

30
19

20
19

19

10

s

0

See Figure 3.4.

Some governments promote collaboration among firms
through fiscal incentives and related innovation policy instruments. In addition, there are incentive mechanisms for
sharing patent rights – for example, discounts on renewal

As in the case of R&D alliances, there is a compelling

fees if patent holders make available their patents for

case that patent pools are not only beneficial to partici-

licensing. However, as greater technological complexity

pating patent holders, but also to society. They enable

and more fragmented patent landscapes have increased

the introduction of new technologies and promote the

the need for collaboration, there arguably is scope for

interoperability of different technologies. The latter as-

creative policy thinking on how best to incentivize the

pect is especially important where technology adoption

licensing or sharing of patent rights.

requires standard setting. Indeed, patent pools are often
formed as a result of standard-setting efforts.

13

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

… and they may sometimes result in
anticompetitive practices

Public policies have encouraged
the commercialization of
scientific knowledge…

The problem of anticompetitive collaborative practices
seems to be easier to address from a policymaker’s

The last three decades have seen the emergence of

viewpoint. Such practices are generally more observable,

targeted policy initiatives to incentivize university and PRO

and authorities can assess the competitive effects of

patenting, and subsequent commercial development.

collaborative agreements on a case-by-case basis.

Almost all high-income countries now have institutional

In addition, some consensus exists about the type of

frameworks to this effect. One general trend has been

collaborative practices that should not be allowed or

for universities and PROs to take institutional ownership

that, at the least, trigger warning signs. Nonetheless,

of the inventions researchers generate, and to pursue

evaluating the competitive effects of specific collaborative

their commercialization through TTOs. More recently, a

agreements remains challenging. Technologies move fast,

number of middle- and low-income countries have also

and their market impact is uncertain. In addition, many

explored how technology transfer and the development

low- and middle-income countries have less developed

of industry-university collaboration are best promoted.

institutional frameworks for enforcing competition law
in this area – although they are likely to benefit from
the enforcement actions of high-income countries,

… leading to rapid growth in patenting by
universities and PROs

where most collaborative agreements with global reach

Accordingly, there has been a marked increase in patent

are concluded.

applications by universities and PROs – both in absolute
terms and as a share of total patents filed. Figure 6 depicts

How to harness public
research for innovation

this trend for international patent filings under the Patent

Universities and PROs play a key role in national inno-

High-income countries have been responsible for most

vation systems. Beyond their mission to educate, they

of the university and PRO filings under the PCT. However,

account for substantial shares of total R&D spending.

such filings have also grown rapidly in certain middle-

They also perform most of the basic research carried

income countries. Among them, China leads in terms

out in their countries. This is especially so in middle-

of university applications, followed by Brazil, India and

income countries; for example, the share of universities

South Africa. Compared to university patenting, the dis-

and PROs in total basic research is close to 100 percent

tribution of middle-income country PRO filings is more

for China, 90 percent for Mexico and 80 percent for the

concentrated. Chinese and Indian PROs alone account

Russian Federation.

for 78 percent of the total. They are followed by PROs

Cooperation Treaty (PCT) system.

from Malaysia, South Africa and Brazil.
Close interaction with public research helps firms to
monitor scientific advances that are likely to transform

National patent statistics confirm the prominence of uni-

technologies. It also facilitates joint problem solving and

versity patenting in China; they also reveal a high share

opens up new avenues for research.

of PRO patenting for India (see Figure 7).

Public-private knowledge exchanges occur through a
number of channels. One is the creation of IP in the public
sector that is licensed to firms for commercial development.

14

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 6: University and PRO patenting is on the rise
World PRO and university PCT applications, absolute numbers (left) and as a percentage of total PCT applications (right), 1980-2010

PRO

University share

PRO share

6
5

6'000

4
3

4'000

2
2'000

1

0
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10

19

19

19

19

81
82

0

Share in total PCT applications (%)

7

University

8'000

80

Number of PCT applications

10'000

See Figure 4.3

Figure 7: University and PRO patenting is prominent in China and India
University and PRO patent applications as a share of total national applications for selected countries, in percent, for different time spans

University share

PRO share

16%
Indian PROs stand at 22 percent. Capped for better readability
of the gure

14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%

e
nc

Af
ut
h

Fr
a

a
ric

an
y
m
So

pa

n

er
G

Ja

ly
Ita

ea
of

Ko
r

US
Re

p.

In
di
a

az
il
Br

UK

l
ae
Isr

co
oc
or
M

M

ex

ico

ain
Sp

Ch

in
a

0%

See Figure 4.10

15

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Universities and PROs have also experienced growth in

• Studies have pointed to several successful elements of

licensing revenue. This growth has occurred from low

institutional design. Well-defined university regulations

initial levels and is still fairly concentrated; only selected

on IP ownership and on the participation of research-

institutions, few scientific fields and a small number

ers in technology transfer matter. Performance incen-

of patents account for the bulk of licensing revenue.

tives for researchers need to appropriately balance

Compared to overall public research budgets, licensing

entrepreneurial activity and scientific achievement.

income remains small. In low- and middle-income coun-

Finally, TTOs operating at a sufficient scale and helping

tries, university and PRO patents are used even less for

to standardize relationships with licensees can lower

technology transfer. However, recent trends suggest that

the transaction costs of technology transfer.

revenue flows are diversifying, in terms of both the number
of beneficiary institutions and the number of countries.

Policy reforms have multifaceted effects
on research institutions, firms, the science
system and the economy – yet important
lessons are emerging

• The evidence is more ambiguous as to the best ownership model for public research. While the general
trend has been towards institutional ownership, it is
not clear whether this model is necessarily superior
to others.

Reforms aimed at incentivizing university and PRO

• Setting up successful frameworks for technology

patenting and licensing have multifaceted effects on

transfer that deliver tangible benefits takes time and

research institutions and firms but also, more broadly,

resources. In particular, it not only requires legal

on the science system and on economic growth. The

reforms, but also cultural change and the creation of

evidence – mostly focusing on high-income countries –

new institutions.

yields the following broad conclusions:
Legitimate concerns exist about the potentially negative
• Patenting can make an important difference in widening opportunities for commercializing university

effects that patenting and other entrepreneurial activity
by researchers may have on scientific performance.

inventions. Turning academic ideas into innovation
often requires substantial private investment in development.

• Reduced knowledge sharing among scientists and
crowding-out of scientific research are often-cited
downsides. The evidence on these effects is ambigu-

• There are important synergies between scientists’ aca-

ous, although it does not suggest radically negative

demic activity and their interactions with private firms.

effects. Much depends on researchers’ performance

Such interactions not only take place through the licens-

incentives. Moreover, interactions with the private

ing of patents, but also through R&D collaboration, con-

sector can lead to improved scientific performance.

ference participation and scientific publishing. Indeed,
the evidence suggests that the various channels of

• Another source of concern is that university and

technology transfer complement each other. For ex-

PRO patenting may reduce the diversity of follow-on

ample, researchers may find that their patenting activity

research and access to essential research tools. A

usefully informs their scientific activity, and vice-versa.

few studies confirm this concern. However, most of
the evidence to this effect is case-specific and limited
to the life sciences.

16

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Many of these conclusions are likely to apply to low- and
middle-income economies as they do to high-income
economies. However, the different environment in which
innovation takes place in these economies raises additional questions.
One is the extent to which greater university and PRO
patenting in richer countries may reduce poorer countries’
access to key technologies and international scientific
cooperation. Another is whether the weaker absorptive
capacity of firms and more limited science-industry linkages would favor channels of technology transfer other
than IP-based licensing. Different stages of development
and different innovation systems require tailor-made
approaches to IP-based incentives for commercializing
public research.
Only limited guidance is available to policymakers on
these questions. At the same time, high-income countries
still struggle with many of the same challenges. There is
no perfect blueprint that lends itself to universal adoption.
This caveat also extends to the development of safeguards against the potentially negative consequences
of university and PRO patenting. Selected institutions
have pioneered such safeguards; however, it is too early
to fully assess their effectiveness.

Conclusion
The evidence presented in this Report is intended to inform policymakers. While some innovation trends are well
understood, others are not. The Report points to a number of areas where more statistical data and new investigations could offer fresh insights relevant to policymaking.
Surely, the face of innovation will further evolve in the
coming years and decades. Some trends are bound to
continue – above all the shifting geography of innovation.
Others will come as a surprise. An unvarnished look at
today’s evidence and policy challenges – as attempted
in this Report – will hopefully stimulate thought on how
best to manage the future.

17

Table of contents

Chapter 1

The changing nature of innovation and
intellectual property
1.1

Innovation as the driving force behind economic growth
and development

1.2

The shifting nature of innovation
Globalization of production and demand for innovation

29

1.2.2

Increased investment in innovation

33

1.2.3

Internationalization of science and innovation

36

1.2.4

The importance of non-R&D-based innovation

42

1.2.5

Greater collaboration in the process of innovation

43

Shifting importance of IP

52

1.3.1

Demand and the changing geography of the IP system

52

1.3.2

Increased tradability of IP

60

1.3.3

New collaborative mechanisms and IP intermediaries

66

1.3.4

Emergence of new IP policies and practices

67

Conclusions and directions for future research
References

18

27

1.2.1

1.3

1.4

23

68
70



Table of contents

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property
– old insights and new evidence
2.1

Understanding IP rights and their role in the innovation process
2.1.1

How IP protection shapes innovation incentives

77

2.1.2

Trade-offs in designing IP rights

80

2.1.3

How IP protection compares to other innovation policies

82

2.2

Taking a closer look at the patent system

86

2.2.1

How patent protection affects firm performance

86

2.2.2

How patent strategies shift where innovation is cumulative

89

2.2.3

How patent rights shape the interplay between competition and innovation

92

2.2.4

The role patents play in technology markets and open innovation strategies

94

2.3

Appreciating the role of patent institutions
2.3.1

What makes for sound patent institutions

2.3.2 How patenting trends have challenged patent offices
2.3.3

2.4

75

The choices patent institutions face

Conclusions and directions for future research
References

97
97
98
100

103
105

19

Table of contents

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition
3.1
Collaborating to generate new IP
3.1.1

What the available data says about formal R&D collaboration

3.1.2

Why firms collaborate for strategic reasons

114

3.1.3

How collaboration can improve efficiency

115

3.1.4

The complications that arise in joint R&D undertakings

116

3.1.5

How collaboration differs in the case of open source software

118

3.2

Collaborating to commercialize existing IP
3.2.1

Why complementarities require coordination

120
120
121

3.2.3 Why patent pools are emerging in the life sciences

125

3.2.4

126

How firms cooperate to set standards

Safeguarding competition
3.3.1

The type of collaborative R&D alliances that may be considered anticompetitive

3.3.2 How competition rules treat patent pools and standard-setting agreements

Conclusions and directions for future research
References
Data Annex

20

110

3.2.2 How firms collaborate in patent pools

3.3

3.4

109

129
130
131

132
134
136



Table of contents

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation
– the role of intellectual property
4.1
The evolving role of universities
and PROs in national innovation systems

140

4.1.1

Public R&D is key, in particular for basic research

4.1.2

Public R&D stimulates private R&D and innovation

141

4.1.3

Fostering the impact of publicly-funded research on innovation

143

4.2

Public research institutions’ IP comes of age

140

144

4.2.1

Developing policy frameworks for technology transfer

4.2.2

Measuring the increase in university and PRO patenting

146

4.2.3

University and PRO licensing growing but from low levels

153

4.3

Assessment of impacts and challenges in high-income countries
4.3.1

Direction of impacts

4.3.2 Impacts and experiences in high-income countries

144

156
156
159

4.4

IP-based technology transfer
and the case of low- and middle-income countries

168

4.4.1

Impacts of high-income technology transfer legislation on low- and middle-income countries

169

4.4.2

Challenges to home-grown technology transfer in low- and middle-income countries

170

4.5

New university policies act as safeguards

4.6

172

Conclusions and directions for future research
References
Data annex
Methodological annex

174
176
179
181

Acronyms

183
21

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Chapter 1
The changing face of innovation
and intellectual property
Innovation is a central driver of economic growth and 1.1
development. Firms rely on innovation and related investments to improve their competitive edge in a globalizing
world with shorter product life cycles. Innovation also has
the potential to mitigate some of the emerging problems

Innovation as the driving
force behind economic
growth and development

related to health, energy and the environment faced by
both richer and poorer countries. Overcoming barriers to

Although there is not one uniquely accepted definition,

innovation is hence a recurring and increasingly promi-

innovation is often defined as the conversion of knowl-

nent business and policy challenge.

edge into new commercialized technologies, products
and processes, and how these are brought to market.1

At the same time, our understanding of innovative activity,

Innovation often makes existing products and processes

the process of innovation itself and the role of IP within

obsolete, leading to firms’ entry, exit and associated en-

that process are in flux. Among the factors that have influ-

trepreneurship.

enced innovation over the last two decades are structural
shifts in the world economy, the steady globalization of

In recent decades, economists and policymakers have

innovative activity, the rise in new innovation actors and

increasingly focused on innovation and its diffusion as

new ways of innovating.

critical contributors to economic growth and development.2 Investments meant to foster innovation, such

This chapter assesses the changing face of innovation

as spending on research and development (R&D), are

and the corresponding new demands on the intellectual

found to generate positive local and cross-border im-

property (IP) system. The first section sets out the central

pacts, which play an important role in the accumulation

role of innovation, while the second describes what has

of knowledge. In other words, thanks to these so-called

been labeled a new “innovation paradigm”. The third

“spillovers” the benefits of innovative activity are not only

section discusses the implications of this for IP.

restricted to firms or countries that invest in innovation.
While the importance of “creative destruction” was highlighted in the early 20th century, more recent economic
work stresses the role that various factors play in driving

1

2

The Oslo Manual defines four types of innovation:
product innovation (new goods or services or
significant improvements to existing ones), process
innovation (changes in production or delivery
methods), organizational innovation (changes in
business practices, workplace organization or in a
firm’s external relations) and marketing innovation
(changes in product design, packaging, placement,
promotion or pricing) (OECD & Eurostat, 2005).
For some examples of the classic literature in
this field, see Edquist (1997); Freeman (1987);
Lundvall (1992); and Fagerberg et al. (2006).

long-run growth and productivity.3 These include not
only formal investment in innovation such as R&D, but
also learning-by-doing, human capital and institutions.

3

See Schumpeter (1943). The endogenous growth
models and quality ladder models theorize that
innovation drives long-run aggregate productivity
and economic growth. See Grossman and Helpman
(1994); Romer (1986); Romer (2010); Grossman and
Helpman (1991); and Aghion and Howitt (1992).

23

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

A voluminous empirical literature has examined the re-

At the firm-level, there is emerging but increasingly solid

lationship between innovative activity and productivity

evidence that demonstrates the positive links between

growth at the firm-, industry- and country-level. However,

R&D, innovation and productivity in high-income coun-

due to data limitations, earlier empirical work in this area

tries.6 Specifically, these studies imply a positive relation-

mostly relied on two imperfect measures of innovation,

ship between innovative activity by firms and their sales,

namely R&D spending and patent counts. In recent years,

employment and productivity.7 Innovative firms are able to

innovation surveys and accounting exercises relating to

increase efficiency and overtake less efficient firms. Firms

the measurement of intangible assets have emerged as

that invest in knowledge are also more likely to introduce

new sources of data (see Boxes 1.1 and 1.2).

new technological advances or processes, yielding increased labor productivity. In addition, a new stream of

Most empirical studies on the relationship between in-

research stresses the role of investing in intangible assets

novation and productivity have focused solely on high-

for increased output and multifactor productivity growth

income economies and the manufacturing sector. As

(see Box 1.1).8 While it is assumed that process innovation

early as the mid-1990s, the economic literature suggested

has a direct effect on a firm’s labor productivity, this is

that innovation accounted for 80 percent of productivity

harder to measure.9

growth in high-income economies; whereas productivity
growth, in turn, accounted for some 80 percent of gross

Clearly, the causal factors determining the success

domestic product (GDP) growth. More recent studies

and impact of innovation at the firm-level are still under

at the country-level demonstrate that innovation – as

investigation. An increase in a firm’s R&D expenditure

measured by an increase in R&D expenditure – has a

or the introduction of process innovation alone will not

significant positive effect on output and productivity.5

automatically generate greater productivity or sales.

4

Many often connected factors inherent in the firm or its
environment contribute to and interact in improving a
firm’s performance.

4
5

6

7

8
9

24

See Freeman (1994).
For an overview, see Khan and Luintel
(2006) and newer studies at the firm level,
such as Criscuolo et al. (2010).
See, for instance, Crepon et al. (1998);
Griffith et al. (2006); Mairesse and
Mohnen (2010); and OECD (2010a).
See Evangelista (2010); OECD (2010a); OECD
(2009c); Guellec and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie
(2007); and Benavente and Lauterbach (2008).
See OECD (2010b).
See Hall (2011).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Box 1.1: Intangible assets play an important role in firm
performance
Firms spend considerable amounts on intangible assets other than
R&D, such as corporate reputation and advertising, organizational
competence, training and know-how, new business models, software
and IP (copyright, patents, trademarks and other IP forms).
Business investment in intangible assets is growing in most highincome economies and, in a number of countries, it matches or
exceeds investment in tangible assets such as buildings, equipment
and machinery.10 As a result, intangible assets now account for a
significant fraction of labor productivity growth in countries such as
Austria, Finland, Sweden, the United Kingdom (UK) and the United
States of America (US). Data for Europe show that investment in
intangibles ranges from 9.1 percent of GDP in Sweden and the UK,
to around 2 percent of GDP in Greece.11 This is considerably higher
than the scientific R&D investment which, for example, stands at
2.5 percent of GDP in Sweden and 0.1 percent of GDP in Greece.
For the US, Corrado, Hulten & Sichel (2007) estimate investment in
intangible assets at United States Dollars (USD) 1.2 trillion per year
for the period 2000-2003. This represents a level of investment
roughly equal to gross investment in corporate tangible assets.
Depending on the depreciation rate, the stock of intangible assets
may be five to ten times this level of investment. In comparison,
scientific R&D makes up for only USD 230 billion.
Finally, complementary research based on market valuations of
firms in Standard & Poor’s 500 Index indicates that intangible assets account for about 80 percent of the average firm’s value.12 The
physical and financial accountable assets reflected in a company's
balance sheet account, in turn, for less than 20 percent.

Furthermore, innovation-driven growth is no longer the
prerogative of high-income countries.13 The technology
gap between middle-income and high-income countries
has narrowed (see Section 1.2).14 In recent years, it has
been shown that catch-up growth – and more generally
the spread of technology across countries – can now happen faster than ever before. This has been exemplified by
countries such as the Republic of Korea and later China.15

Differences in innovative activity and related technological gaps between countries are a significant factor
in explaining cross-country variation in income and productivity levels.16 According to several studies, roughly
half of cross-country differences in per capita income
and growth can be explained by differences in total factor productivity, a measure of an economy’s long-term
technological change or dynamism.17 In addition, the
variation in the growth rate of GDP per capita is shown
to increase with the distance from the technology frontier.
Countries with fewer technological and inventive capabilities generally see lower and more diverse economic
growth than do richer countries.
As a result, reducing income gaps between economies
is directly linked to improved innovation performance,18
which is in part driven by spillovers from high-income to
other economies. In other words, total factor productivity depends to a large degree on the ability of countries,
industries or firms to adopt technologies and production
techniques of countries and firms with higher levels of
technological development.

10 See Gil and Haskell (2008); OECD (2010d);
and van Ark and Hulten (2007).
11 See European Commission (2011).
12 See Ocean Tomo (2010). The S&P 500 is a freefloating, capitalization-weighted index, published
since 1957, of the prices of 500 large-cap
common stocks actively traded in the US. The
stocks included in the S&P 500 are those of large
publicly-held companies that trade on either of the
two largest American stock market exchanges:
the New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ.
13 See Soete and Arundel in UNESCO (2010)
and Bogliacino and Perani (2009).
14 See World Bank (2008).
15 See Romer (1986); Long (1988); and
Jones and Romer (2010).
16 See Fagerberg (1994); Hall and Jones (1999);
Fagerberg et al. (2009); Klenow Rodríguez-Clare
(1997); Griliches (1998); and Parisi et al. (2006).
17 See Jones and Romer (2010); Guinet et al. (2009);
and Bresnahan and Trajtenberg (1995).
18 See Hulten and Isaksson (2007).

25

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

These spillovers are frequently driven by knowledge

ing), telecommunications, medical technologies and others.

acquired through channels such as foreign direct invest-

In conclusion, the relationship between innovation and

ment (FDI), trade, licensing, joint ventures, the presence

productivity in less developed economies is not clear-cut.

of multinationals, migration and/or collaboration with firms

Studies do not always find that technological innovation

from higher-income countries.19 Strategies for acquiring,

impacts on productivity, in particular where a narrow defi-

adapting, imitating and improving technologies and exist-

nition of product-based technological innovation is used.24

ing techniques in relation to local conditions are key for

A few studies on China and certain Asian countries con-

innovation. Developing innovative capacity requires com-

ducted at the aggregate country-level even conclude that

plementary in-house innovation activity (see Box 2.2).20

factor accumulation, rather than productivity increases,

In addition, certain framework conditions, adequate hu-

explains the majority of the recent growth.25

man capital and absorptive capacity are necessary at the
country- and firm-level in order to benefit from innovation

Firm-level studies conducted in lower- and middle-income

spillovers. The literature refers to the necessary presence

economies – mainly done for Asia and Latin America – do

of functioning “national innovation systems” with linkages

in turn provide evidence for the strong positive relationship

between innovation actors and a government policy that

between innovation and productivity, or innovation and

underpins innovation activity.

exports, as long as innovation is viewed more broadly

21

than technological product innovation. The literature also
On the whole, however, too little is known about how

concludes that firms in less developed economies that

innovation takes place in lesser developed economies,

invest in knowledge are better able to introduce new

how it diffuses and what its impacts are.

technological advances, and that firms which innovate
have higher labor productivity than those that do not.

That does not mean that no evidence in this area exists. Surveys confirm that innovation – understood
broadly – occurs frequently in low- and middle-income
economies.22 The literature concludes that the impacts
of innovation can be proportionately much greater in
these economies than in high-income economies. In
particular, cumulative innovation – incremental innovation where one builds on existing products, processes and knowledge (see Subsection 2.2.2) – is shown
to have a significant social and economic impact.23
As firms in less developed economies are, at times, far from
the technology frontier, they have dissimilar technological
requirements and innovate differently. Process innovation
and incremental product innovation play a more important
role in firm performance than does product innovation.
Improvements in maintenance, engineering or quality control, rather than fresh R&D investment, are often the drivers
of innovation. Recent examples in Africa or other lowincome economies such as Bangladesh or Rwanda show
that local firms or other organizations introduce novel product or process innovation in fields such as finance (e-bank26

19 In the context of developing countries, particularly for
those in the early stages of development, technology
transfer from foreign high-income economies and
the spillover effects from foreign investment have
been considered the most important sources of
innovation, since most such countries lack the capital
and the skills to conduct state-of-the-art research.
20 See Cohen and Levinthal (1990).
21 See Jones and Romer (2010).
22 For full references and a discussion,
see Crespi and Zuñiga (2010).
23 See Fagerberg et al. (2010).
24 See the many country-specific studies of
Micheline Goedhuys and her co-authors at
http://ideas.repec.org/f/pgo205.html.
25 See Anton et al. (2006); Young (1993);
and Young (1995). This might, however,
have to do with measurement issues
related to embodied technologies.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.2
The shifting nature
of innovation

Today, innovation capability has been seen less in terms
of the ability to discover new technological, state-ofthe-art inventions. The literature now emphasizes the
ability to exploit new technological combinations, the
notion of incremental innovation and “innovation without

While there is consensus on the importance of innovation,

research”.27 Furthermore, non-R&D-innovative expen-

our understanding of innovative activity and the process

diture, often part of later phases of development and

of innovation itself continue to change.

testing, is an important and necessary component of
reaping the rewards of technological innovation. Such

First, the way innovation is perceived and understood

non-technological innovation activity is often related

has evolved over the last two decades. Previously,

to process, organizational, marketing, brand or design

economists and policymakers focused on R&D-based

innovation, technical specifications, employee training,

technological product innovation, largely produced

or logistics and distribution (see Figure 1.1, left column,

in-house and mostly in manufacturing industries. This

and Subsection 1.2.4).

type of innovation is performed by a highly educated
labor force in R&D-intensive companies with strong ties

There is also greater interest in understanding how inno-

to leading centers of excellence in the scientific world.26

vation takes place in low- and middle-income countries,
noting that incremental forms of innovation can impact

The process leading to such innovation was conceptu-

on development. This evolution in thought also recog-

alized as closed, internal and localized. Technological

nizes that existing notions of innovation are too focused

breakthroughs were necessarily “radical” and took place

on frontier technologies and original innovation. While

at the “global knowledge frontier”, without allowing for

innovation can take place at the global frontier, local in-

the possibility of local variations or adaptations of existing

novation that is new to a firm or a country can be equally

technologies. This also implied the existence of leading

important (see Figure 1.1, right column).

and lagging countries – i.e., the “periphery” versus the
“core” – with low- or middle-income economies naturally

Second, the process of innovation has undergone sig-

catching up to more advanced ones. According to this

nificant change. As part of a new innovation paradigm,

view, firms from poorer countries were passive adopters

investment in innovation-related activity has consistently

of foreign technologies.

intensified at the firm, country and global level, both in
terms of levels and shares of other investment, adding
new innovation actors from outside high-income economies. This shift has also led to a much more complex
structure of knowledge production activity, with innovative
activity more dispersed geographically and collaboration
on the rise, often in response to technological complexity.

26 See Fagerberg et al. (2010).
27 See David and Foray (2002).

27

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.1: Innovation takes different forms and

The next subsections show that changes in the innovation

has different geographical dimensions

landscape have happened more gradually and subtly

Types of Innovation

over time than is often claimed. Trends that are often

Different forms of innovation

Different geographical dimensions

discussed, such as the increasing internationalization of
innovation or wider “open” collaboration, are compared

Product innovation (often but
not necessarily R&D-based)

with official statistics, which time and again paint a more

Process innovation
enhancing efficiency/productivity

Innovation at the global
frontier – New to the world

Organizational innovation
enhancing product and process

Local innovation – New to
the firm or to the country

nuanced view. For instance, over the past two decades
innovative activity has become more and more internationalized. Still, despite the shift in geographical composition of global science and technology production, R&D
activity remains concentrated in only a few economies.28

Marketing innovation and brands
for new and improved products

Some of the numerous drivers for this gradually shifting
innovation landscape are well-known:
• economies have become more knowledge-based
as more countries enter the innovation-driven stage
of development;
• globalization has led to new markets for innovative
products as well as new production locations for
them – Asia being the prime example of both;

For reasons of data availability (see Box 1.2), the next
sections focus on innovation measured by quantifying
knowledge and R&D inputs. However, innovation and
related processes vary widely depending on the industry
sector in question (see Chapter 2). The development of
new drugs in the pharmaceutical sector, for instance,
involves other levels and types of R&D investment and
innovation activity than is the case in other sectors. This
sectoral heterogeneity has to be kept in mind when studying the various degrees of collaboration, globalization and
the use of IP at the aggregate level.

• information and communication technologies (ICTs)
have become diffused across industries and countries
and have led to a fall in the cost of codifying, managing
and sharing data and knowledge;
• the falling cost of travel has encouraged greater
mobility; and
• the rise of common technology standards and
platforms tied to de facto or industry standards –
creating new innovation ecosystems on the one
hand, and technological convergence on the other
hand – has increased the ability to fragment innovation
processes as well as the complexity of innovation.

28 See Tether and Tajar (2008) and UNESCO (2010).

28

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Box 1.2: Measuring innovation remains challenging
Direct official measures that quantify innovation output are extremely
scarce. For example, there are no official statistics on the amount
of innovative activity – as defined as the number of new products,
processes, or other innovations (see Section 1.1) – for any given innovation actor or, let alone, any given country. This is particularly true
when broadening the notion of innovation to include non-technological
or local types of innovation. Most existing measures also struggle
to appropriately capture the innovation output of a wider spectrum
of innovation actors as mentioned above, for example the services
sector, public entities, etc.
In the absence of such innovation metrics, science and technology
(S&T) indicators or IP statistics have been used in the past as an
approximate measure of innovation. These most commonly include
data on R&D expenditure, R&D personnel, scientific and technical
journal articles, patent-related data, and data on high-technology
exports. Even these data are available for many but not all countries.29
Moreover, these S&T indicators provide, at best, information on
innovation input and throughput such as R&D expenditure, number
of scientists, intermediate innovation output such as scientific
publications or patents, or certain forms of technology-related
commercial activity such as data on high-technology exports, or
data on royalty and license fees.
In recent years the generation of data from so-called firm-level
innovation surveys has improved the situation. Innovation surveys
started with the European Community Innovation Survey (CIS) in
the early 1990s, and are now being conducted in about 50-60
countries – mostly in Europe but also in a number of Latin American,
Asian, African and other countries including, more recently, the US.30
These surveys are a rich data source for analytical work. However,
a number of problems exist: (i) innovation outside the business
sector is not captured in these enterprise surveys; (ii) the quality of
responses varies greatly and respondents have a tendency to overrate their innovative activity; (iii) country coverage is still limited; and
(iv) survey results can only be compared to a limited extent across
years and countries.

29 In terms of availability, even seemingly straightforward
indicators are scarcely available for more than a third
of WIPO Member States. As an example, of the 214
territories/countries covered by the UNESCO Institute
for Statistics, data for Gross Domestic Expenditure
on Research and Development (GERD) in 2007 were
only available for about 64 countries (mostly OECD
or other high-income countries). For lower-income
countries, these data are either unavailable or
outdated (for example, for Algeria from 2005). No data
are available for least developed countries (LDCs).
There are typically even fewer data available for the
other above-mentioned indicators. For instance, about
56 countries reported total R&D personnel for 2006.

1.2.1
Globalization of production and
demand for innovation
The way research and production activities are organized has changed over the last two decades. This can
be partly attributed to greater integration and structural
changes in the global economy; the emergence of new
actors; and the ability of global firms to source scientific
capabilities in different locations. The demand for innovative products and processes has also become internationalized.
Structural changes in the global economy:
greater integration
Increasingly, multinational enterprises (MNEs) source
input and technology from suppliers worldwide. This
reflects a fragmentation of the production process in the
manufacturing and services industries, with increases
in task-based manufacturing, intermediate trade and
outsourcing of services. As a result, a greater number of
countries participate in global production and innovation
networks.31 Innovation networks have created a potential
for technological and organizational learning by manufacturers and exporters, leading to industrial upgrading.32

30 Firm-level innovation surveys seek to identify the
characteristics of innovative enterprise activity.
After inviting firms to answer certain basic questions
(on industry affiliation, turnover, R&D spending),
firms were asked to identify whether they are an
“innovator” and, if so, firms are asked to respond
to questions regarding specific aspects of their
innovation, as well as the factors that hamper their
innovation. Finally, these surveys aim to assess
the effect of innovation on sales, productivity,
employment and other related factors.
31 For a recent overview and study, see
Ivarsson and Alvstam (2010).
32 See UNIDO (2009).

29

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

The extent of economic integration is best exemplified in

Figure 1.2: Economic integration

Figure 1.2 (top) which shows that world trade as percent-

and the fragmentation of value chains

age of GDP increased from about 40 percent in 1980 to

have been on the increase

about 50 percent in 2009; and world FDI outward stocks

World trade and outward FDI stocks,
as a percentage of world GDP, 1980-2009

rose from 5.4 percent of world GDP in 1980 to about 33

World trade as percent of world GDP (left scale)
World outward FDI stocks as a percent of world GDP (right scale)

percent in 2009. FDI inflows alone are expected to reach
more than USD 1.5 trillion in 2011, with developing and

35

60

transition countries, as defined by the United Nations
(UN), now attracting more than half of FDI flows.33 The
foreign affiliates’ share of global GDP has now reached
a high point of about ten percent. However, FDI flows
34

30

50

25
40
20

to the poorest regions continue to fall.35

30

In parallel, a shift in manufacturing capacity from high-

20

15
10

income to lower-income economies, in particular to
Asia, has taken place. This shift is primarily linked to the

10

5

fact that products are increasingly assembled outside
share of high-technology exports of the US and Japan
has constantly decreased – from 21 percent in 1995 to
14 percent in 2008 for the US, and from 18 percent in

Growth of high- and medium-high-technology exports,
average annual growth rate, in percent, 1998-2008

1995 to eight percent in 2008 in the case of Japan – with

35

the share of Europe remaining constant. In contrast,

30

China’s share increased from six percent in 1995 to 20
percent in 2008, with other economies such as Mexico
and the Republic of Korea also constantly increasing their

25
20

shares. In terms of the growth of high- and medium-high-

15

technology exports, China, India, Brazil and Indonesia

10

are in the lead (see Figure 1.2, bottom).

0

0
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

of high-income economies.36 Mirroring this trend, the

5

U
Ja K
pa
n

Ch
in
a
In
di
Br a
In a
do zil
ne
Tu sia
rk
e
So C y
ut hi
h le
Ru
Af
ss
ian M rica
Fe ex
de ico
r
De atio
nm n
a
Fi rk
nl
an
Ire d
lan
Fr d
a
Ca nce
n
Sw ada
ed
en
US

0

Note: In the bottom figure, data refer to 2000-08 for Brazil, Indonesia, India,
China and South Africa. The underlying data for China include exports to
China, Hong Kong.
Source: WIPO, based on data from the World Bank, UN Comtrade and
UNCTADstat, September 2011.

33
34
35
36

30

See UNCTAD (2011).
Idem.
Idem.
For a discussion on the ICT industry value
chain, see Wunsch-Vincent (2006).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Furthermore, the output of knowledge- and technology-

For the first time since the 1970s, the last decade saw a

intensive industries (KTI) is also increasing and becoming

trend towards convergence in per capita income.38 The

more geographically diffuse. In particular, the global

number of converging economies increased rapidly, with

output of knowledge- and technology-intensive indus-

growth being strongest in a few large middle-income

tries as a share of global GDP increased to close to 30

economies but with growth also increasing more gener-

percent of global GDP in 2007, with knowledge-intensive

ally in, for example, Africa – averaging 4.4 percent growth

services accounting for the greatest share at 26 percent,

between 2000 and 2007. Whereas in 1980, about 70

and high-technology manufacturing industries accounting

percent of world GDP (measured in purchasing power

for 4 percent. ICT industries, composed of several KTI as

parities, PPP) was concentrated in high-income coun-

defined above service and high-technology manufactur-

tries, that share fell to 56 percent in 2009, with the share

ing industries, accounted for seven percent of global GDP

of upper middle-income economies making up for the

in 2007. The share is greatest in countries such as the

biggest increase – from about 22 percent to about 31

US (38 percent), the European Union (EU) (30 percent)

percent – and the low-income country group increas-

and Japan (28 percent). Other countries, such as China

ing only marginally (see Figure 1.3, at top). This partial

(23 percent) or regions in Africa (19 percent), have also

convergence has been spurred further by the economic

increased their knowledge- and technology-intensive

crisis, with GDP growth holding up more strongly outside

industry output as a share of GDP.

of high-income economies.

37

Structural changes in the global economy: more
balanced world income and demand for innovation
Firms and citizens in particular middle-income economies
have not only emerged as substantial contributors to
technology production, but have also created significant
demand for products and innovation themselves.

37 National Science Board (2010). These data are based
on calculations by the National Science Foundation
following the OECD’s classification of knowledgeintensive service and high-technology manufacturing
industries and data provided by IHS Global Insight.
The OECD has identified 10 categories of service and
manufacturing industries—collectively referred to as
KTI industries—that have a particularly strong link
to science and technology. Five knowledge-intensive
service industries incorporate high technologies either
in their services or in the delivery of their services.
They include financial, business, and communications
services (including computer software development
and R&D), which are generally commercially traded.
They also include education and health services, which
are primarily government provided and location bound.
The five high-technology manufacturing industries
include aerospace, pharmaceuticals, computers and
office machinery, communications equipment, and
scientific (medical, precision, and optical) instruments.
38 OECD (2010e).

31

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Combined with greater population growth in lower-in-

Figure 1.3: World income distribution

come countries, world distribution of income has progres-

is becoming more equalized

sively shifted. Figure 1.3 (at bottom) shows that between

Distribution of world GDP by income group,
as a percentage of total GDP, current PPP – dollar

1.
3
11
.4

2000

average per capita income in high-income economies
was roughly 14 times that of a middle-income economy

31
.3

1.
2
10
.2

1995

27
.1

1.1
9.
3
23
.8
65
.9

1990

1.1
9.
2
22
.7
67
.1

1985

1.1
9.
1
22
.4
67
.4

80%

1.1
8.
7
22
.9
67
.2

1.
2

substantially during the last decades and contributing to
greater demand for innovation. Specifically, in 2009 the

1980

3

100%

8.

income has risen, increasing household final expenditure

22
.4

lions of people benefiting from higher incomes. Per capita

Lower middle-income
High-income

.1

Low-income
Upper middle-income

world income have progressively increase, with more mil-

68

1970 and 2006, the absolute level and the distribution of

60%

– compared to roughly 20 times in 1990 and 2000.

will constitute a new source of demand for goods and

.0
56

enter the middle class in the coming decades. This

61
.5

40%

Moreover, two to three billion people are projected to
20%

services tailored to the specific needs of this middle
class emerging in less developed economies. Adapting
products to emerging markets will henceforth be a core
activity of MNEs, including for households with fewer

0%

1970

1980

1990

2000

2006

0

Density, millions of people
25
50
75
100

125

with basic functionality.

2009

Distribution of world income by density (millions of
people per income group), current PPP – dollar

resources that will demand low prices for robust products
39

2005

50

500

5000

50000

500000

Income in PPP-adjusted Dollars

Note: In the top graph the GDP comparisons are made using PPPs.
Source: WIPO, based on data from the World Bank (top),
October 2011 and Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2009) (bottom).

At the same time, the gap between high-income and
low-income economies has increased. In particular, the
income in the richest countries equaled 84 times the
low-income average GDP per capita in 1990, 81 times
in 2009, but only 55 times in 1974. How innovation occurs and is diffused to these countries despite this rising
39 See Prahalad and Lieberthal (1998) and the
literature building on this contribution.

32

income gap is a matter of concern.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.2.2

For all reported countries, education accounted for the

Increased investment in innovation

largest share of total investment in knowledge – more than
half in all cases. It accounted for more than 80 percent

Investment in knowledge now makes up a significant

of total investment in knowledge for a large number of

share of GDP for most high-income and rapidly growing

middle-income economies, including Argentina, Bolivia,

economies. Such investment concerns expenditure on

Chile, Colombia, Peru, Mexico, Morocco, Thailand,

R&D, private and public education and software.40 These

and Tunisia.

data are not yet available for low-income economies.
With regard to R&D expenditure, however, outside, China,
Israel, the Republic of Korea, the US, and the Nordic

only high-income economies devote to investments in

countries have the highest levels of investment in knowl-

R&D a share larger than 20 percent of total investment

edge per GDP in 2008 (see Figure 1.4). In terms of

in knowledge. The share of R&D in total investment in

growth, Argentina, Brazil, Romania and Uruguay record-

knowledge is more than a third for Japan, Israel, Finland,

ed double-digit growth from 2003 to 2008 with values for

Sweden, Germany and Austria in 2008, with high-income

China unavailable for 2003. The following high-income

countries investing anywhere between 1 percent of GDP

economies have increased investment in knowledge

to R&D (Hungary) to 4.7 percent (Israel). For the major-

most rapidly in the same time period: Ireland, the Czech

ity of countries, the share of R&D in total knowledge

Republic and the Republic of Korea. Investment in knowl-

investment increased, albeit only marginally, between

edge as a percentage of GDP declined in a number of

2003 and 2008.

41

countries – Malaysia, India, Hungary and Chile – in part
due to faster GDP growth rates.

40 Investment in knowledge is defined and calculated
as the sum of expenditure on R&D, total education
(public and private for all levels of education) and
software. Simple summation of the three components
would lead to an overestimation of investment in
knowledge owing to overlaps (R&D and software,
R&D and education, software and education). Data
reported here have been adjusted to exclude these
overlaps between components. See Khan (2005).
41 When making comparisons with regard to
R&D or other knowledge-investment intensity,
it makes sense to avoid direct comparisons
between smaller and larger economies.

33

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.4: Countries are investing in knowledge
Investment in knowledge, as a percentage of GDP, 2008 or latest available year, selected countries
Education

R&D

Software

15

10

5

Education

R&D

N

ay

nd

or
w

la
Ire

N

et

N

UK

nd
s

a

he
rla

an
ad

an
y

G

C

er
m

C

hi
le

an
d
Au
st
ra
lia

a

al

ew

Ze

a

Tu
ni
si

Au
st
ri

n
pa

Fr
an
ce

Ja

iu
m
lg

nd

Be

Sw

itz

er
la

nd

en

Fi
nl
a

ed

ar
k

De

Sw

nm

US

Ko
re
a

Re

p.

of

Is
ra
e

l

0

Software

15

10

5

n
Pa

kis

ta

a
m
na

an

d
Pa

ru

Ch

in

a

Th

ail

00
(2

Pe

7)

ia
ys
ala

Ri
a

lg

Co

st

Bu

de
Fe

ian

M

ar

ca

ia

n
ra

oc
or

M
ss

Br

tio

co

il

ico
M

ex

ly
Ita

y
ar
ng

az

Ru

bi

Co

lo

m

Hu

a

h

(2

Af

00

ric

7)

a

d
lan
So

ut

Po

rtu
Po

Ar

ge

nt

in

ga

l

a

ain
Sp

Cz

ec

h

Re

pu

bl

ic

0

Note: For China, education expenditure refers to public expenditure only. When making comparisons to R&D-intensity it makes sense to divide countries into
smaller and larger economies. R&D -intensity for small economies is often determined by one or a few companies.
Source: WIPO, based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Eurostat, OECD, World Bank and
the World Information Technology and Services Alliances, September 2011.

In 2009, about USD 1.2 trillion (constant PPP 2005 USD)

Figure 1.5: R&D expenditure still comes

was spent on global R&D. This is roughly the double

mainly from high-income countries

spent in 1993 at USD 623 billion. However, worldwide

Worldwide R&D expenditure, by income group,
in 2005 PPP Dollars, 1993 and 2009

R&D spending is skewed towards high-income countries
(see Figure 1.5), which still account for around 70 percent
of the world total. This holds true despite the fact that
their share dropped by 13 percentage points between
1993 and 2009. The share of middle- and low-income
countries more than doubled between 1993 and 2008;
however, almost all the increase in the world GDP share
is due to China, which is now the second largest R&D
spender in the world.

1993
1000

2009
854

800
600

523

400

245

200
0

56
High-income

Middleand low-income

105
44
Middle- and low-income,
excluding China

Note: R&D data refer to gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD).
The high-income group includes 39 countries, and the middleand low-income group includes 40 countries.
Source: WIPO estimates, based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics,
Eurostat and OECD, September 2011.

34

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Between 1993 and 2009, the share of major spend-

In countries with the largest R&D expenditure, the busi-

ers from the US, Canada, and all European countries

ness sector has persistently increased its share. Firms

declined, while the share of Brazil, China, the Republic

now account for the bulk of total R&D performance in

of Korea, and countries such as the Russian Federation

these economies. In high-income countries, the share

increased (see Figure 1.6). China is still the only middle-

of business R&D in total R&D is around 70 percent

income country, however, that has emerged as a major

while shares in Israel reach 80 percent, and around 75

R&D spender.

percent in Japan and the Republic of Korea (see Figure
4.1 in Chapter 4).42 Due to rapid growth in China, the lo-

Figure 1.6: China has emerged

cal share of business R&D in total R&D is now similar to

as major R&D spender

the US level, at around 73 percent. In a large number of

Country shares in world R&D, in percent, 1993

Asian, Latin American and other middle- and low-income

France
5.9%

Germany
8.6%

Japan
16.5%
China
2.2%

countries R&D is, however, still mainly conducted by the

Rep. of Korea
2.2%
UK
4.8%

public sector (see Chapter 4).
Russian Federation
1.8%
Canada 2.2%
Italy 2.6%
Brazil 1.4%
Australia 1.1%
Others 14.0%

Other
23.1%
US
36.8%

France
3.8%

China
12.8%

Other
24.7%
US
33.4%

level and organization of R&D and innovation is a more
recent phenomenon.

devoted to R&D across the world, referred to as R&D-

Rep. of Korea
3.8%

intensity, increased at a modest rate – from 1.7 percent

UK
3.3%

Japan
11.5%

the increase in contributions of philanthropic funds to the

Despite rapid growth in R&D spending, the share of GDP

Country shares in world R&D, in percent, 2009
Germany
6.7%

New innovation actors have also emerged. For instance,

in 1993 to 1.9 percent in 2009 (see Figure 1.7, top).
Russian Federation
2.2%

However, there is considerable variation across income

Canada 2.0%
Italy 1.8%
Brazil 1.8%
Australia 1.6%
Others 15.2%

groups and countries. High-income economies spend

Note: R&D data refer to gross domestic expenditure on R&D (GERD).
Source: WIPO estimates, based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics,
Eurostat and OECD, September 2011.

around 2.5 percent of GDP on R&D activity, which is
more about double the rate of the upper-middle-income
groups. The sharp growth in R&D-intensity for the uppermiddle-income group is mostly due to China.
R&D-intensity was highest for Israel, Finland and Sweden
(see Figure 1.7, bottom). Australia, China, Finland, and
the Republic of Korea are among the countries that have
strongly increased R&D-intensity.

42 OECD, Main Science and Technology
Indicators database (MSTI), May 2010.

35

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.2.3

Figure 1.7: R&D-intensity has increased,
sometimes at a modest rate

Internationalization of science
and innovation

R&D-Intensity, by income group, in percent, 1993-2009
World
High-income

Lower middle-income
Upper middle-income

Increasing internationalization of science

3.0

Scientific research is becoming increasingly intercon2.5

nected, with international collaboration on the rise. The
increased importance attached to innovative activity is
reflected in the growing number of researchers. In terms

2.0

of worldwide distribution, the proportion of researchers
in China increased from 12.3 percent in 1997 to 22.7

1.5

percent in 2008. For other major countries – the US,
Japan and the Russian Federation – the share in the total

1.0

has followed a downward trend.

0.5
1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

R&D-Intensity, in percent, selected countries, 1993 and 2009
2009

1993

5

In 2008, the average number of researchers per thousand
labor force across the world was around 3.2, a considerable increase from 2.6 in 1999. In terms of researchers
per labor force, the Scandinavian countries rank first,
followed by Japan and the Republic of Korea (see Figure
1.8). In absolute terms, China has the largest pool of

4

researchers but, relative to its labor force, the numbers
3

are still small in comparison to high-income countries
and the world average. Between 1999 and 2009, most

2

countries increased the number of their researchers. The
Russian Federation and Chile however experienced a

1

drop in researcher intensity.

Re

p.

of

Is
r
Fi ael
nl
Ko Sw and
re ed
a e
Sw
(2 n
itz
00
er
la Ja 8)
nd p
( a
US 200 n
8
(
Au G 20 )
st e 08
ra rm )
lia a
(2 ny
00
Fr 8)
a
C nce
an
ad
N
a
et
he UK
rla
nd
C s
hi
Ru
n
ss
Sp a
ia
ai
n
n
F
ed Ita
So
ut Bra era ly
h zi ti
Af l ( on
ric 20
a 0
In (2 8)
di 00
a
(2 8)
00
7)

0

Note: R&D data refers to gross domestic expenditure on research and
development. World total is based on 79 countries. High-income, upper
middle-income and lower middle-income group consists of 39, 27 and
ten countries respectively. R&D intensity is defined as R&D expenditure
over GDP.
Source: WIPO estimates, based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics,
Eurostat, OECD and World Bank, September 2011.

Finally, the share of software in total investment in knowledge is less than ten percent in the majority of countries
(see Figure 1.4). Middle-income economies, many of
which are located in Latin America, invest disproportionally in software, in order to catch up to levels similar to
those in high-income economies.
36

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.8: The number of researchers is

Figure 1.9: Science is becoming internationalized

growing in a larger number of countries

Share of the world total of scientific and technical journal
articles, by income group, in percent of total, 1998 and 2008

Researchers per 1,000 labor force, 1999 and 2009, or latest available
2009 (or latest available year)

1999 (or closest available year)

16

100
90
80

85.7
76.0
1998

70

2008

60

12

50
40

8

30
20

4

8.0 10.2

10
0

Fi
De nlan
nm d
N ark
Re
or
pu
w
bl J ay
ic a
of pa
Ko n
Sw rea
ed
en
US
Fr UK
a
C nce
an
Ru
Au ad
s a
ss
ia Ge tral
n rm ia
Fe a
de ny
ra
tio
W n
M or
or ld
oc
c
C o
hi
n
Br a
M az
al il
ay
s
M
ad C ia
ag hil
as e
ca
r

0

Note: Researchers data refer to full time equivalents. The world total is based
on figures from 78 countries.

5.9 13.3
0.4 0.5

High-income

Upper middleincome

Lower middleincome

Low-income

Source: WIPO, based on data by Thomson in National Science Board (2010).46

As a result, the sources of global scientific publications are
changing (see Figure 1.10). The decreasing proportion of
publications from the US, Japan, Germany, France and

Source: WIPO based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Eurostat
and OECD, September 2011.

other leading high-income economies is most noteworthy.

This internationalization of skills is also mirrored in data

with, respectively, ten and two percent of publications in

showing the growing number of science and engineer-

the period 2004-2008. Brazil, Malaysia, Singapore, The

ing graduates from countries such as China and India.43

Republic of Korea, Thailand and Turkey also account for

The increase in number of researchers and the S&T

rising world shares of scientific publications.

At the same time, China and India have risen to the fore,

workforce has been accompanied by an increased mobility of students, highly-skilled workers and scientists in

Nonetheless, despite growth in journal contributions

particular, positively influencing the international transfer

from other countries, scientific articles from high-income

of knowledge.

countries continue to attract the majority of citations.47

44

In terms of internationalization of science, the last decades have seen a significant increase in worldwide
scientific publications, to about 1.5 million peer-reviewed
science and engineering articles in 2008 produced by
218 countries – up from less than one million publications
in 2000.45 Although scientific production is still far from
the level in high-income economies, publication activity
is increasing in middle-income economies (see Figure
1.9). This is again largely driven by a few economies such
as India and China.

43 Based on data from UNESCO.
44 See Edler et al. (2011); and Filatotchev et al.
(2011) on the positive effects of labor mobility
on international knowledge spillovers.
45 See Royal Society (March 2011). Data
based on Elsevier’s Scopus database.
46 At www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind10/
append/c5/at05-25.xls.
47 See Royal Society (March 2011).

37

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.10: Sources of global scientific

Attracted by rapidly expanding markets and the availability

publications are changing

of lower-cost researchers and facilities, leading multina-

Proportion of global publications, by country,
in percent of total, 1993-2003

tionals have nonetheless increased their R&D beyond
high-income countries, in particular in large middle-

US

income economies. The share of foreign affiliates in local

Japan

Germany

R&D is higher in large middle-income countries such as

26%

UK

China and Brazil than in high-income economies.49

30%

France

The available evidence points to an increase in overseas

China
Italy
Canada
Russian Federation

8%

3%
3%
3%

Spain

4%

Other

rapidly from almost USD 600 million in 1966 to around

7%

5%

USD 28.5 billion in 2006.50 High-income countries are by
far the dominant location of R&D activity by US MNEs,

Proportion of global publications, by country,
in percent of total, 2004-2008

accounting for about 80 percent of total overseas R&D
expenditure (see Figure 1.11). Increases in R&D shares

US

have occurred primarily in some high-performing East

China

Asian economies, in particular China, Malaysia, the

21%

UK
Japan

Republic of Korea, and Singapore. Nonetheless, they still

34%

Germany

stand at relatively modest levels, with China at about three

France

10%

Canada

percent and India about one percent of total overseas
R&D by US MNEs.

Italy
Spain

focus on a few centers of excellence. Annual overseas
R&D expenditure by US MNEs, for instance, increased

7%
4%

R&D out of total R&D expenditure by MNEs, with a

2%

India
Other

7%
3%

3%

6%
4%

4%

6%

The internationalization of business R&D is also concentrated in a few sectors. The following industries account
for the bulk in US affiliates’ overseas R&D: transportation

Source: WIPO, based on data from Elsevier Scopus provided in Royal
Society (2011).

Business R&D is becoming internationalized

equipment, including the car industry, at 29 percent of
overseas R&D; chemicals, including pharmaceuticals,
at 22 percent; and computer and electronic products,
including software publishers, at 17 percent.51

Most international R&D investment is still confined to
high-income economies, both in terms of investing and
receiving economies. Furthermore, the largest crossborder flows of R&D continue to occur among the US, the
EU and Japan. In the US, France and Germany, foreign
affiliates of MNEs account for between 15 and 26 percent
of total business manufacturing R&D. This figure reaches
35 percent in the UK, and more than 60-70 percent in
Austria and Ireland.48

38

48 OECD MSTI, June 2011.
49 See OECD (2010e) and Nolan (2009). In 2003,
the share of foreign affiliates in total R&D was 24
percent in China, 48 percent in Brazil, 47 percent
in the Czech Republic and 63 percent in Hungary.
50 At www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind10/c4/c4s6.
htm and www.bea.gov/scb/pdf/2010/08
percent20August/0810_mncs.pdf.
51 See National Science Board (2010).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.11: High-income countries are by far the dominant location of R&D activity
Regional shares of R&D conducted abroad by foreign
affiliates of US MNEs, in percent of total, 1994
Europe
Canada
Japan
Asia/Pacific
excluding Japan
Latin America
& Other Western
Hemisphere

Regional shares of R&D conducted abroad by foreign
affiliates of US MNEs, in percent of total, 2006
Europe

0.1%
0.8%

Canada

0.2%
3.0%
13.5%

4.0%

Japan

5.4%

Asia/Pacific
excluding Japan

9.5%

73.1%

Latin America
& Other Western
Hemisphere

7.0%
Middle East

Middle East

Africa

Africa

65.4%

3.0%

6.1%
8.8%

Note: Regions as defined by the US National Science Foundation.
Source: WIPO, based on data from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis and the US National Science Foundation.

The role of multinationals of middle-income

Data on the top 1,000 global R&D spenders confirm that a

economies in local innovation

number of multinationals from middle-income economies
now conduct substantial R&D on a par with R&D-intensive

MNEs from fast-growing middle-income economies

multinationals of high-income countries (see Table 1.1).

have emerged as their revenues and innovation capacity

These MNEs come from a handful of countries only,

become more similar to firms in high-income countries.

notably China, with five firms in 2005 compared to 15
in 2009; and India, with two firms in 2005 compared to

There were around 23,000 MNEs in middle- and low-

four in 2009. R&D-intensity is, however, still low. Whereas

income countries in 2009. This represents 28 percent

R&D expenditure over sales by US firms in the top 1,000

of the total number of MNEs, compared to less than ten

R&D spenders is about 4.5 percent, the average R&D-

percent of firms in the early 1990s. The number of firms

intensity of top Chinese R&D spenders included in this

from middle- and low-income economies that appear

ranking is lower, also reflecting the sectoral affiliation of

in company rankings by revenue, such as the Financial

Chinese top R&D spenders.

52

Times (FT) 500, has risen markedly.53 Specifically, China
has gone from zero firms in 2006 to 27 firms in 2011;
Brazil from six to eleven; the Russian Federation from
six to eleven; and India from eight to 14 firms in the 2011
FT500 ranking. In 2011, there were a total of 83 firms in the
FT500 from middle-income countries, representing about
17.5 percent of total market capitalization, compared to
32 firms with 4.5 percent market capitalization in 2006.

52 See UNCTAD (2010).
53 The FT500 rankings can be gleaned from
www.ft.com/reports/ft-500-2011.

39

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

FDI outflows from firms other than those in high-income

In relation to the growing innovation capacity of MNEs

economies are also growing, and stand at about 29

of less developed countries, discussions have recently

percent of total FDI in 2010. This is mainly driven by

focused on new concepts such as “frugal”, “reverse” or

Chile, China, Egypt, Malaysia, Mexico, the Russian

“trickle-up” innovation. These types of innovation focus

Federation, South Africa, Thailand and Turkey.54 In 2010,

on needs and requirements for low-cost products in

six developing and transition economies – as defined

lower-income countries. At times, these new products

by the UN – were among the top 20 investors. Flows of

or processes can also succeed in penetrating markets in

outward FDI from lower- or middle-income economies

high-income economies.58 Local firms reinvent systems

rose from about USD 6 billion in 1990 to USD 388 billion

of production and distribution in the process, and also

in 2010, about 29 percent of total outward flows. These

experiment with new business models while leveraging

outward investments guarantee proximity to high-income

their familiarity with local customer needs.59 Examples

markets and advanced innovation systems which can be

cited in this context include: the activities of Indian ICT

exploited by cooperating with local suppliers, customers,

providers in the software outsourcing market; the de-

universities and other actors.

velopment by Indian firm Tata Motors of a car costing

55

USD 2,000; and the sale by GE on the US market of an
Once more, this FDI outflow and related knowledge

ultra-portable electrocardiograph machine originally built

flows are still limited to a small group of economies with

by GE Healthcare for doctors in India and China.

a relatively well-developed knowledge infrastructure.
Apart from the rise in outward investment by China and

Analysis of this potential new development must move

the Russian Federation, no other low- or middle-income

beyond anecdotal examples to better enable economists

country has recently emerged as a significant outward

and policymakers to gauge its true economic ramifications.

FDI investor. Brazil, South Africa, India and fast-growing
South-Asian economies were already outward investors
by the 1980s.56 If one eliminates a number of fast-growing
middle-income countries, the percentage of outward
FDI from lower- or middle-income countries as a share
of global outward FDI declines to around 2.4 percent for
the period 1993-2007.57

54
55
56
57
58
59

40

See UNCTAD (2011).
See Athreye and Kapur (2009).
See Narula (2010).
Idem.
See Prahalad and Lieberthal (1998).
See, for instance, Ray and Ray (2010).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Table 1.1: Top R&D spenders from fast-growing middle-income
countries, rank out of top 1,000 global R&D spenders, 2009
Rank

Name

Country

Industry Group

2009 R&D
expenditure
(USD, constant
exchange rate)

Average R&Dintensity
(2004-2009)

R&D-intensity
(2009)

77

PetroChina Co Ltd

China

Oil & Gas

1,447

0.7%

1.0%

102

Vale SA

Brazil

Mining

996

2.5%

4.0%

123

ZTE Corp

China

Telecommunications

846

9.8%

9.6%

139

China Railway Construction Corp Ltd

China

Engineering & Construction

756

0.8%

1.5%

150

Petroleo Brasileiro SA

Brazil

Oil & Gas

690

0.8%

0.7%

186

China Petroleum & Chemical Corp

China

Oil & Gas

559

0.3%

0.3%

244

A-Power Energy Generation Systems Ltd

China

Electrical Components & Equipment

381

104.4%

122.3%

280

Dongfeng Motor Group Co Ltd

China

Auto Manufacturers

305

2.0%

2.3%

324

China Communications Construction

China

Engineering & Construction

254

0.4%

0.8%

330

China South Locomotive and Rolling
Stock Corp

China

Machinery-Diversified

246

2.4%

3.7%

355

Lenovo Group Ltd

China

Computers

214

1.4%

1.3%

357

Metallurgical Corp of China Ltd

China

Engineering & Construction

212

0.6%

0.9%

401

Byd Co Ltd

China

Auto Manufacturers

188

3.1%

3.3%

426

Tencent Holdings Ltd

China

Internet

174

8.9%

9.6%

445

Shanghai Electric Group Co Ltd

China

Machinery-Diversified

162

1.2%

1.9%

446

Semiconductor Manufacturing
International Corp

China

Semiconductors

161

7.7%

15.0%

517

Shanghai Zhenhua Heavy Industry

China

Machinery-Diversified

137

1.5%

3.4%

523

China CNR Corp Ltd

China

Machinery-Diversified

136

1.9%

2.3%

627

Tata Motors Ltd

India

Auto Manufacturers

105

0.4%

0.5%

683

China Railway Group Ltd

China

Engineering & Construction

95

0.2%

0.2%

696

Dongfang Electric Corp Ltd

China

Electrical Components & Equipment

93

1.8%

1.9%

699

Infosys Technologies Ltd

India

Computers

92

1.4%

1.9%

788

CPFL Energia SA

Brazil

Electric

79

0.8%

1.5%

799

Dr Reddys Laboratories Ltd

India

Pharmaceuticals

78

6.3%

5.3%

819

Lupin Ltd

India

Pharmaceuticals

75

6.6%

7.5%

846

Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica

Brazil

Aerospace & Defense

73

1.7%

1.3%

848

Reliance Industries Ltd

India

Oil & Gas

73

0.2%

0.2%

849

Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd

India

Pharmaceuticals

73

8.7%

7.8%

906

Harbin Power Equipment Co Ltd

China

Electrical Components & Equipment

68

1.6%

1.6%

921

China National Materials Co Ltd

China

Machinery & Construction & Mining

67

0.7%

1.5%

925

Weichai Power Co Ltd

China

Auto Parts & Equipment

66

1.3%

1.3%

968

Baidu Inc/China

China

Internet

62

9.0%

9.5%

976

Shanda Interactive Entertainment Ltd

China

Internet

61

7.8%

8.0%

992

Totvs SA

Brazil

Software

60

10.7%

12.0%

Note: R&D intensity as defined by R&D over revenues. The database only contains publicly-listed companies.
Large R&D spenders such as Huawei (China telecommunications) which have similarly large R&D budgets are thus not included.
Source: WIPO, based on Booz & Company Global Innovation 1,000 database.

41

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.2.4

ing and the service industries. Sectors with low R&D-

The importance of non-R&Dbased innovation

likely to innovate as high-tech industries.61 Surveys also

intensity, such as textiles, clothing and paper, can be as
find that it is small and medium-sized firms in particular

As described at the outset, the rise and globalization of

which innovate without conducting formal R&D.

R&D is not the only characteristic of the new innovation
landscape. Innovation not based on R&D, including non-

In the case of middle- or low-income economies, in-

technological innovation, is increasingly perceived as an

novation expenditure by firms from the manufacturing

important contributor to economic growth and develop-

sector often concerns machinery and equipment or

ment. The service sector in particular has increased its

related expenditure, rather than R&D (see Figure 1.12).

efficiency by reorganizing business processes, in part

Innovation is much more incremental. Whereas in the

facilitated by ICTs.

European Union (EU)-15, firms claim that new machinery
and equipment is only responsible for about 22 percent

Specifically, innovation surveys find that a large share

of their innovation expenditure, in economies such as

of innovative firms do not conduct any formal R&D.

Bulgaria, Colombia, Paraguay, South Africa and Uruguay

Specifically, almost half of innovative firms in Europe

this figure can exceed 60 percent of total innovation

do not carry out R&D in-house.60 Moreover, data from

expenditures. In these countries, investment in physical

innovation surveys show that non-R&D innovators are

assets can increase productivity and lead to valuable

relatively more prevalent in low-technology manufactur-

organizational innovation.

Figure 1.12: Firms in middle- and lower-income countries
invest in machinery and equipment to innovate
Distribution of innovation expenditure by firms in manufacturing industries, in percent of total, 2008 or last available year, selected countries
Other innovation expenditures

31

52

55

59

54

68

66

86

87

84

93

85

81
66

a
bi

ua
y

1

Co
lo
m

ia

4

ug

ar

ia
ak

Br
a

5

8

9

Ur

9

Bu
lg

10

ov

12

lan
d

16

Sl

16

ec

h

17

Cz

So
ut

22

zil
Hu
ng
ar
y
Ar
ge
nt
in
a
Pa
na
m
a
Pa
ra
gu
ay
Ro
m
an
ia
Es
to
ni
a

Re

Af

pu
bl

ric

a

ic

23

Po

27

ia

d
an

28

th
ua
n
Li

Th
ail

or

ea

io
n

50

52

fK

Un

.o

n
ea

R&D

71

66

51

33

Re
p

op
Eu
r

22

Machinery, equipment and software

h

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Note: Indicators refer to the manufacturing industry except for South Africa and Thailand whose indicators reported refer to manufacturing and services
industries. The indicator for the European Union-15 is the average share across countries.62
Source: Zuñiga (2011) based on innovation Surveys.63

60 See the Third Community Innovation Survey.
61 See, for instance, Mendonça (2009) and the other
papers in this special issue of Research Policy on
Innovation in Low- and Medium-technology Industries.

42

62 The EU-15 figures include Belgium, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and
the United Kingdom. Data for Austria and Italy
which are normally EU-15 is not available.
63 Argentina: 1998-2001; Brazil: 2005; Colombia:
2003-2004; 2008; Uruguay: 2005-2006; Paraguay:
2004-2006; Thailand: 2003 and South Africa:
2002-04. Data for EU-15 countries are from
Eurostat Chronos (Innovation surveys 2006).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Beyond the non-R&D innovation expenditure discussed
above, research suggests that process and organizational
innovation can be a prominent driver of improved firm
performance. In fact, this is perhaps the most important

1.2.5
Greater collaboration in the
process of innovation

form of non-technological innovation, particularly in the

Innovation has always taken place in the context of

service sector. Furthermore, the introduction of innova-

institutional and other linkages between various innova-

tive and new technologies frequently requires enhanced

tion actors.

64

skills as well as complementary organizational changes
in administration and structure. Technological and or-

Yet another transformation in the much discussed new

ganizational innovation are thus often complementary.

innovation paradigm is the increasingly collaborative nature of innovative processes. According to this view, firms

Nevertheless, the existing economic literature acknowl-

increasingly seek valuable knowledge and skills beyond

edges that measuring the positive contribution of process

their own boundaries, in order to enlarge their capabilities

and organizational innovation to productivity is much

and enhance their assets (see Chapter 3). Joint innova-

harder (see Section 1.1).65 One reason for the lack of

tion activity involves formal cooperation modes such

evidence in this area is that the interactions between and

as R&D consortia, research ventures, IP-based forms

complementary nature of technological and non-techno-

of collaboration, co-production, co-marketing or more

logical innovation are hard to measure and fully assess.

informal modes of cooperation. Lastly, collaboration also
occurs between universities, public research organizations and firms (see Chapter 4).
Such collaboration has been facilitated as innovation processes and activity have become more easily fragmented.
Moreover, the expansion of markets for technologies that
allow for knowledge exchange via patent licenses and
other IP-based forms of exchange have been a driver
of collaboration.
Collaboration is at the heart of innovation,
but measurement remains difficult
The statistics available for assessing frequency, type
and impact of collaboration are limited. They are mostly
based on data relating to R&D, publications, patents or
innovation surveys, all of which have their limitations. A
significant share of collaborative activity also remains
unmeasured and/or is kept secret. Importantly, existing
data say little about the quality dimension and impact of
cooperation. As highlighted above, collaboration covers
a wide field and involves different degrees of involvement,
from sharing information through to conducting joint R&D

64 See, for instance, Evangelista and Vezzani (2010).
65 See Hall (2011).

and product development. Related impacts of cooperation might also materialize over time.
43

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Despite these caveats, existing measures suggest that

• Increased R&D outsourcing and contract re-

cooperation between firms and between firms and the

search: Outsourcing of R&D – either to other private

public sector is increasing over time:

or to public organizations such as universities – has
also become an integral, albeit usually small, comple-

• Increased cooperation on scientific publications:

ment to in-house R&D. R&D contracted out by US

About 22 percent of all peer-reviewed science and

manufacturing companies has, for instance, increased

engineering articles in 2007 were published with

from 3.3 percent of total R&D in 1993 to 8.5 percent

international co-authorship, which is about three

in 2007.67 Data on companies that spend the most

times higher than in 1988 (see Figure 1.13). About 42

on R&D reveal that, on average, nine out of ten firms

percent of articles are co-authored domestically, up

outsource 15 percent of their R&D.68 Two-thirds of this

from about 32 percent in 1988.

outsourced R&D is conducted by other companies
and one-third by public research organizations.69

Figure 1.13: International and domestic
co-authorship are on the rise

• Increased number of patent co-inventors: An increasing number of inventors from diverse countries

Share of co-authored science and engineering articles, as
a percentage of total global publications, 1988-2008
Domestic co-authorship only

apply together for one and the same patent (see Figure

International co-authorship

1.14 and Box 1.3).

45
40
35

Figure 1.14: International collaboration

30

is increasing among inventors

25

Patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation
Treaty (PCT) with at least one foreign inventor, as a
percentage of total PCT filings, 1990-2009

20
15

R&D partnerships is particularly important in a number of industries, such as ICTs and biotechnology

25.5

25.3

24.3

22.1

20.4

19.3

18.4

17.9

16.8

16.3

16.2

15.5

14.4

10

5

0
19

9
19 0
9
19 1
9
19 2
93
19
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
03
20
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
09

(see Chapter 3).66

9.2

sectors: Empirical studies show that the number of

10.1

15

• Prevalence of R&D partnerships in certain key

13.0

20

11.8

Source: WIPO, based on Thomson Reuters data in National Science
Board (2010).

25

10.5

19
8
19 8
8
19 9
9
19 0
9
19 1
92
19
9
19 3
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
0
20 3
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
08

0

24.3

30

5

25.3

10

66 See, for instance, the relevant work of John
Hagedoorn on this issue at www.merit.unu.
edu/about/profile.php?id=26&stage=2.
67 See National Science Board (2010).
These figures include company-funded
and company-performed R&D.
68 See OECD (2009).
69 Note that this study was only based on a nonrepresentative sample of 59 companies.

44

Note: The data reported above are based on published PCT applications.
Source: WIPO Statistical Database, July 2011.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Box 1.3: Caveats in the use of data on co-patenting as an
indicator of international collaboration
Patent data showing the frequency of co-inventions, i.e., patents
with several inventors listed as applicants, are frequently used to
demonstrate that international collaboration among inventors is
increasing.70
One of the advantages of patent data is their wide availability for
many countries. One can use national patent data or data generated
by the PCT System to showcase joint patent applicants with different
national backgrounds.
To identify forms of “international” collaboration one assesses
the nationality and/or residence of multiple inventors assigned to
a particular patent. With increased global mobility and inventors
with multiple or changed nationalities and residences, applying
this procedure to identify true cross-border collaboration is not
straightforward. If based solely on an inventor’s nationality as shown
in patent databases, the following circumstances, for instance, could
lead to the erroneous conclusion that cross-border cooperation had
occurred where it actually had not: intra-organizational collaboration between two inventors of different nationalities who are in the
same location for the duration of the project; collaboration between
two inventors who reside in two different countries but work in the
same country; an inventor who moves to a different country after a
project has ended with the new residence appearing on the patent
due to formal administrative delays.

• Increased national and international collaboration
in innovation: Innovation surveys show that more
R&D-intensive firms collaborate more than those that
conduct less R&D. In Chile, for instance, 74 percent
of the most R&D-intensive innovative firms collaborate – defined as firms that innovate and have the
highest ratio of R&D expenditure over sales – while
only 60 percent of other R&D performers and only
35 percent of innovative firms that do not conduct
R&D collaborate (see Figure 1.15). Collaboration in
les developed economies tends to proceed on a different basis in such R&D constrained environments,
such as the need to simply adapt products for local
consumption. Surveys also show that the propensity
to collaborate on innovation with partners abroad
varies widely between countries (see Figure 1.16).

In a recent paper by Bergek and Bruzelius (2010), the relevance of
considering patents with multiple inventors from different countries
as an indicator of international R&D collaboration has thus been
questioned. Focusing on Swiss energy and automation firm ABB,
the study shows that half of this firm’s patents which, according
to existing methods, would be treated as if they were the result
of international collaboration, are truly not. The other half would
erroneously be qualified as “international collaboration” for the
reasons listed above.

70 See, for instance, OECD (2010c) and WIPO (2010).

45

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.15: Increasing R&D expenditure and collaboration go hand in hand
Collaboration on innovation, by R&D-intensity of firms and as a percentage of innovative firms, 2004-2006, selected countries
Collaboration of rms with high R&D

Collaboration of rms with low R&D

Collaboration of rms without R&D

80

60

40

20

y

Au
st
ria
lia
(2
(2
00
00
2604
07
,m
)
an C
uf a n
ac ad
tu a
rin
g)
Sp
ai
n

Au
st
ra

Ita
l

UK

Ire
la
nd
Lu
(2
x
00
em
5b
07 Re
ou
,m p
rg
an . of
uf Ko
ac re
tu a
rin
g)

N
or
w
ay
920
Af
ric
01
)
a
(2
00
204
)
Po
rtu
ga
l
(19
9

So
ut
h

Ja
pa
n

Es
to
ni
a
(2
00
204
)
De
nm
ar
k
Sw
ed
en
Be
l
C
gi
ze
um
ch
Re
pu
bl
N
ic
et
he
rla
nd
s
Ic
e

la
nd

C
hi
le

0

Note: The definitions and years underlying these data vary.71
Source: OECD, Working Party of National Experts in Science and Technology (NESTI) innovation microdata project based on CIS-2006,
June 2009 and national data sources.

Figure 1.16: The degree and form of collaboration vary widely between countries
National and international collaboration on innovation by firms, as a percentage of innovative firms, 2006-2008, selected countries
International collaboration

National collaboration only

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Fr
an
c
ra Hun e
lia
ga
(2
00 ry
607
)
I
N
et srae
he
l
rla
nd
s
Sw
ed
en
Po
la
nd
Au
st
ri
N Ir a
ew el
an
Z
(2 ea d
00 lan
8 d
N -09
or )
w
ay
C
F
ze
ch inla
Re nd
C
hi
le pub
(
2
S
0 lic
Ru lov 07
-0
ss ak
8)
ia R
(m n F epu
e
an d bl
uf er ic
a a
Lu ctu tio
xe rin n
So
m g)
bo
ut
h
ur
Af
g
ric Por
t
a
(2 uga
0
l
(2
0
00
Sw 5-0
57
)
07 R itz
, m ep er
la
C anu. of nd
hi fa K
na c or
(2 tur ea
00 ing
4- )
G 06)
er
m
an
y
Sp
ai
n
Ita
ly
Tu
rk
ey
Br
az
il

ia

Au

st

Es
t

on

m
iu

Be

lg

UK

0

Note: The definitions and years underlying the data vary.72
Source: OECD (2011), based on the Eurostat Community Innovation Survey-2008 and national data sources, June 2011.

71 For Australia, data refer to 2006-07 and innovative
firms include technological and non-technological
innovators; for Brazil only the following activities are
included in the services sector: International Standard
Industrial Classification (ISIC) Rev.4 Divisions 58, 61,
62 and 72; for Chile, data refer to 2007-08 and firms
with ongoing or abandoned innovative activities are
not identified. Data are based on ISIC Rev.3.1 and
include a wider range of activities such as agriculture,
forestry, fishing, construction, and some services;
for China, data refer to 2004-06 and exclude all
services. In addition, large firms are defined as firms
with over 2,000 employees, over Chinese Yuan 300
million turnover and over Chinese Yuan 400 million
capital. SMEs are the remaining firms with at least

46

Yuan 5M turnover; for Korea, data refer to 2005-07
and cover only firms with more than 10 employees in
the manufacturing sector. International collaboration
may be underestimated; for New Zealand, data refer to
2008-09 and include firms with six or more employees.
Innovative firms include technological and nontechnological innovators; for the Russian Federation,
data refer to manufacturing firms with 15 or more
employees; for South Africa, data refer to 2005-07 and
include the retail trade sector; for Switzerland, data
only include R&D collaboration; for Turkey, data are
based on the Classification of Economic Activities in the
European Community (NACE) Rev.1.1 and exclude some
activities within NACE Rev.2 Divisions J58 and J63.
72 Idem.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

To sum up, the above and other similar statistics show

Table 1.2 describes four forms of open innovation, some

that collaboration of various forms is indeed at the heart

of which involve pecuniary compensation for ideas and

of innovation. Yet, these and other data also demonstrate

others that do not. Two of these forms are associated

that collaboration, in particular formalized forms such as

with inbound and two with outbound open innovation.

R&D joint ventures or other technology alliances, are far
from the norm.73 To the contrary, there are good reasons

• Inbound open innovation is the practice of leveraging

why the extent of formal collaboration remains limited

the technologies and discoveries of others. It requires

(see Chapter 3) and why other innovation strategies, for

the opening up to, and establishment of interorgani-

example the acquisition of other firms and their technolo-

zational relationships with, external entities. It aims to

gies, are important in practice.

access others’ technical and scientific competencies.
Proprietary technologies are transferred to the initiating

Importantly, geographical proximity still matters when

entity for commercial exploitation.

forming innovation-related partnerships as, despite
increased internationalization, innovative activity is often
conducted in clusters.

• Outbound open innovation is the practice of establishing relationships with external organizations
to which proprietary technologies are transferred for

What is “open innovation” and how important

commercial exploitation.

is it really?
Complementing the above trend towards increased collaboration, recent contributions in the innovation literature
discuss the emerging phenomenon of “open innovation”.74
Chesbrough et al. (2006) defines open innovation as “the
use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to
accelerate internal innovation and to expand the markets
for external use of innovation, respectively”. Increasingly,
companies are said to “openly” innovate by enlarging the
process to include customers, suppliers, competitors,
universities and research institutes, and others, as they
rely on outside ideas for new products and processes.
The business literature also refers to “crowd-sourcing”,
which allows firms and other organizations to find solutions to business and other challenges by seeking the
expertise of a large number of potential “solvers”, customers, suppliers and the like.

73 See Tether (2002).
74 OECD (2009); Chesbrough (2003);
and Dahlander and Gann (2010).

47

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Table 1.2 Open innovation and related practices

Outbound innovation (nonpecuniary)

Description

Opportunities

Internal resources are revealed to the
external environment, without offering
immediate financial reward, seeking
indirect benefits for the focal firm.

Fosters a steady stream of incremental Difficulty in capturing benefits
innovation across the community
that accrue.
of firms.
Risk of leakages.
Enables a marshalling of resources
and a gaining of legitimacy with other
innovators and firms.

Activity: Disclose in formal & informal
ways, inform and publish.
Outbound innovation (pecuniary) Firms commercialize their inventions
and technologies by selling or
licensing out resources developed in
other organizations.
Activity: Sell, license out, contract out.

Inbound innovation (nonpecuniary)

Inbound innovation (pecuniary)

Commercializes inventions that
might otherwise have been
ignored, with greater leveraging of
innovative investment.

Challenges

Significant transaction costs
involved in transferring technologies
between organizations.

Difficulty in anticipating the potential and
Externalizes internal knowledge and
accurate value of one’s own inventions.
inventions by communicating them to
the marketplace where others might be
better equipped to exploit them.

Firms use external sources of innovation Allows the discoveries of others to
such as competitors, suppliers,
be leveraged where complementary
universities, etc.
resources permit.

Danger that organizations over-search
by spending too much time looking
for external sources of innovation and
relying on them.

Activity: Learning formally and
informally, crowd-sourcing, Internet
solver platforms.

Enables the discovery of new ways of
solving problems.

Firms license-in and acquire expertise
from outside.

Ability to gain access to resources and Risk of outsourcing critical
knowledge partners.
aspects of the firm’s strategically
important business.
Possibility to leverage
complementarities with partners.
Effectiveness of openness hinges
on resource endowments of the
partnering organization.

Activity: Buy, contract in, license in.

Cultural resistance within firms.
Source: WIPO adapted from Dahlander & Gann (2010) and Huizingh (2011).

All modes of collaboration shown in Table 1.2 can occur
with varying degrees of openness.75 Importantly, open
innovation is almost always managed either formally,
for example via contracts or firm policies, or informally,
such as via community norms, trust or the implicit corporate culture.76
In formal settings, open innovation relies on traditional
models such as licensing of various forms of IP, subcontracting, acquisitions, non-equity alliances, R&D
contracts, spin-offs, joint ventures for technology commercialization, the supply of technical and scientific
services, and corporate venturing investment.77 Many of
these partnership models resemble standard practices
used in innovation collaboration (see Box 1.4 for examples
from the biopharmaceutical industry).

75 See Gassmann and Enkel (2004).
76 See Lee et al. (2010).
77 See Bianchi et al. (2011).

48

Box 1.4: Open Innovation in the biopharmaceutical industry
Biopharmaceutical firms have used different organizational modes –
i.e., licensing agreements, non-equity alliances, purchase and supply
of technical and scientific services – to enter into relationships with
different types of partners, with the aim of acquiring or commercially
exploiting technologies and knowledge. These relationships can include large pharmaceutical companies, biotechnology product firms,
biotechnology platform firms and universities.
A recent analysis shows at least two changes in these firms’ approach to
inter-organizational exchange of technologies and knowledge consistent
with the open innovation paradigm: (i) biopharmaceutical firms have gradually modified their innovation network to include more and more external
partners operating outside of their core areas; and (ii) alliances play an increasing role among the organizational modes implemented by these firms.
Three phases in drug development are particularly prone to the use
of these innovation models:
1) Alliances, taking place in the target identification and validation
phases: Biopharmaceutical companies establish partnerships without
equity involvement in other biotech firms, pharmaceutical companies,
universities or public research centers), with the aim of pursuing a
common innovative objective, for example, the validation of a genetic
target. Biopharmaceutical firms partner with other companies to assess
certain complementary assets, for example the production capacity
or distribution channels required to commercially exploit a new drug.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

2) Purchase of scientific services, related to lead identification
and optimization: Through this organizational mode, biopharmaceutical firms involve specialized players – usually biotech
platform firms and, although less frequently, universities and
research centers – in a specific phase of the innovation process,
for example lead optimization activity, under a well-defined
contractual agreement. Biopharmaceutical firms also provide
technical and scientific services to third parties, which leverage
the outcome of their discovery efforts.

Table 1.3: Open innovation
platforms, selected examples
Tools or platforms to
capture ideas from
consumers or other
contributors

• Apple’s adoption of ideation software like
Spigit to capture audience ideas
• Portals of Starbucks, Procter & Gamble and
Dell to allow customer feedback
• IBM online brainstorming sessions (Jams)
for employees, clients, business partners
and academics

Among open innovation models, new forms of inbound

Prizes and competitions • Tata Group Innovista competition to spur
innovation among subsidiaries
• Bombardier open innovation contest “You
Rail”, calling on designers to submit ideas for
modern transportation
• Peugeot Concours Design for aspiring
car designers
• DuPont international competition to develop
surface technologies
• Japanese retail chain MUJI’s open
innovation contests
• James Dyson Award for design innovation
• Seoul Cycle Design Competition 2010 for new
bicycle designs
• The Center for Integration of Medicine
& Innovative Technology competition to
improve the delivery of medical care

innovation seem particularly original. Most are Internet-

Co-creation platforms

• Lego Mindstorms allowing customers to create
Lego designs and robots
• DesignCrowd connecting clients and solvers to
supply designs

Platforms connecting
problems and solvers/
exchange of IP

• Various platforms for companies to post
challenges: InnoCentive, Grainger, Yet2, Tynax,
UTEK, NineSigma, YourEncore, Innovation
Exchange, Activelinks, SparkIP
• Open IDEO, a platform putting forward
social challenges related to health, nutrition
and education

3) Preclinical tests and post-approval activities: Biopharmaceutical firms acquire the rights to use a specific preclinical candidate
typically from another biotech firm, a pharmaceutical company
or, although less frequently, from a university.
Source: Bianchi et al. (2011).

enabled processes that foster customer-driven innovation such as “crowd-sourcing” and “competitions for
solutions”. These have taken various forms, all with the
goal to generate new ideas:
• Firms or other organizations provide potential partners
the possibility to submit new research projects or apply

Formal mechanisms also play a role in new Internet-

for new partnership opportunities;

based competitions and problem-solving platforms.
Competitions, prizes or problem-solving platforms set

• Firms solicit user feedback on new or existing products
and their design;

up specific rules for the ideas submitted and the IP they
subsequently generate (see Box 1.5). All platforms offer different IP- and other related terms of service. Yet,

• Firms and others host competitions and award prizes

most if not all contain similar rules on the assignment

– either targeted at their own subsidiaries or suppliers,

of IP and of ownership of the ideas generated. The IP

at outside professionals or the public at large.

is either taken over by the initiating firm as part of the
prize money, or is subject to a future licensing or other

Table 1.3 provides examples of these inbound open

contractual arrangement.

innovation models. While firms have already sought
customer or supplier feedback in the past, the number

IP and open innovation are thus often complementary.

and diversity of activity in this area is noteworthy.

Often, the firms that file the most patent applications are
– at least by their own account – the most ardent practitioners of open innovation, for example, IBM, Microsoft,
Philips, Procter & Gamble.78

78 See Hall (2009).

49

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Box 1.5: The attribution of ideas in open innovation contests,
competitions and platforms

In the same spirit, collaborative efforts between the
public, the non-profit and private sectors are under way
which aim at inventions and innovation that the market

A review of the terms of service of InnoCentive yields the following
IP-related rules:

alone might not be able to generate. New R&D funding

• Individual solvers who opt to work on a specific problem featured
on the platform must often sign a non-disclosure agreement before
receiving the relevant information allowing them to begin searching
for a solution.

challenges have attracted increasing interest.80

• Firms already aware of a particular solver’s existing IP are not
obligated to pay for a solution proposing that IP. Firms should specify
that “novel” solutions are required.

whether such innovative methods could be a new source

• Once a solver accepts the challenge award, the IP is transferred
to the seeker. If the solver already holds a patent on the solution
selected, the right to use that patent is transferred to the seeking
entity. The solver is responsible for determining his/her ability to
transfer the IP and is obligated to cooperate to ensure that the seeker
obtains all rights, titles and interests in the solution and any work
product related to the challenge.

As in the case of more traditional collaboration models,

• The solver must, on request, obtain a signed and notarized
document from his or her employer waiving any and all rights to IP
contained in the solution.

the identification of research partners in foreign markets,

• Solutions not acquired by seekers are guaranteed not to show
up in a seeker’s IP portfolio at a later stage.
Source: Terms of Use, InnoCentive.79

mechanisms for solutions to rare diseases or other social

These activities have piqued the interest of scholars and
practitioners alike, including in the quest to determine
of innovation.

assessing the true scale and importance of open innovation is hindered by definitional and measurement
challenges. Drawing a clear distinction between longstanding collaborative practices and truly new practices is
difficult. Indeed, long-time existing practices, for example
are now often relabeled by firms as part of their “open
innovation” strategies.
The available data (in part discussed in the previous
subsection) confirm an increased interest in leveraging
external sources of knowledge to complement firms’

Various phenomena have emerged in recent years based

internal activities.81 When asked how much open innova-

on Internet-enabled collaboration, sometimes without a

tion they are conducting, large MNEs – in particular in

market context, according to which individuals develop

the IT, consumer product and, more recently, pharma-

innovative solutions for the public domain. In this context,

ceutical sectors – claim substantial involvement in these

open source software, where individual software pro-

new areas.82 To some extent, the increased journalistic

grammers invest time and resources in solving particular

and academic attention devoted to open innovation

problems without apparent direct remuneration, has

contributes to this perceived increase. Firms are eager

captured the most attention (see Chapter 3).

to portray themselves as active participants in and to
show their willingness to be a part of new innovation

New inbound innovation models are also increasingly

management processes.

used for other not-for-profit objectives or to solve challenges that lie between purely commercial and noncommercial interests. Firms, universities, new entrepreneurial platforms and governments have used such
contests and platforms to generate solutions to societal
challenges ranging from education, access to health,
access to water and other issues.

50

79 See www.innocentive.com/ar/contract/view.
80 Finally, the rise of Internet platforms is important,
with attention focusing on phenomena such
as user-created content on platforms such as
Wikipedia and YouTube and new institutional forms
such as Creative Commons, mostly relating to the
production of creative works and journalism.
81 See Chesbrough and Crowther (2006).
82 See OECD (2009).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Yet, data on the actual uptake of new forms of collabora-

Funds allocated to prizes over USD 100,000, in USD millions, 1970-2009

tive innovation, their qualitative dimensions and effectiveness are missing. It is primarily the business management

350

literature which has assessed the phenomenon, mostly

300

on the basis of case studies focusing on a few sectors

250

and firms in high-income economies. These case studies
center mostly on high-technology industries, mainly the IT

200

and to some extent the pharmaceutical sector. Follow-up

150

studies on a more diverse set of industries, including more

100

mature ones, are currently being undertaken to assess

50

The same is true for empirical assessments of the role
of prizes in the new innovation environment (see also
Chapter 2 on prizes). Undeniably, their importance to

0
19
7
19 0
72
19
7
19 4
7
19 6
7
19 8
8
19 0
82
19
8
19 4
8
19 6
8
19 8
9
19 0
92
19
9
19 4
9
19 6
9
20 8
0
20 0
02
20
0
20 4
0
20 6
08

how fundamental this shift is across different industries.83

Note: Based on database of 223 prizes worth USD 100,000 or more.
Source: Data obtained from Social Sector Office, McKinsey & Company,
updated from McKinsey & Company (2009).

innovation and policy discussions seems to be growing,
albeit from a low baseline. More than 60 prizes worth

Obtaining a clear picture of the number of problems

at least USD 100,000 were introduced between 2000

solved via competitions offering prizes or through new

and 2007, representing almost USD 250 million in new

innovation platforms is challenging. Furthermore, as-

84

prize money over those seven years (see Figure 1.17).

sessing their contribution relative to other existing in-

The aggregate value of such large awards has more

novation channels is even harder. The related firm- or

than tripled over the past decade, to USD 375 million. In

economy-wide impacts – including from the perspective

comparison to total spending on business R&D in the US,

of middle- or low-income countries – have not yet been

however – namely USD 365 billion in 2008 alone – this

seriously studied and will have to be explored further in

figure is still exceedingly small. The source of funding for

order to demonstrate the transformative nature of these

prizes has diversified (see Figure 1.17).

new practices.85

Figure 1.17: The sources of prizes are

On the whole, the lack of quantitative evidence on the

diversifying while the size of allocated funds

scope and impact of this phenomenon does mean the

is increasing from low original levels

phenomenon should be discarded as meaningless. This

Sources of philanthropic prizes, as a percent of total, 2000-2008

holds true in particular if one accepts that most forms of
innovative activity – in the present and past – have relied

Foundation and
non-profit

52%

of openness.
27%

Corporation

Government

Other

on some form of collaboration with varying degrees

17%

5%

83 See Bianchi et al. (2011).
84 See McKinsey & Company (2009).
85 An ongoing WIPO project on open innovation seeks to
close this gap and to provide more analytical evidence.
See document CDIP/6/6 on the Committee on
Development and Intellectual Property’s (CDIP) Open
Collaborative Projects and IP-based Models at www.
wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/mdocs/en/cdip_6/cdip_6_6.pdf.

51

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.3

1.3.1

Shifting importance of IP

Demand and the changing
geography of the IP system

IP not only drives change in the field of innovation but

A few years ago, patenting and other forms of IP activity

is itself also impacted by the changing innovation sys-

were mostly seen as belonging to the domain of corporate

tem. In the new innovation landscape, IP is a vehicle for

legal departments, with patents used mainly in-house.

knowledge transfer and protection, facilitating vertical
disintegration of knowledge-based industries. New types

Today, an increasing number of companies treat IP as

of firms – and in particular new types of intermediaries –

a central business asset that is managed strategically

thrive as a result of their intangible IP assets. Invariably,

and valued and leveraged with a view to generating

the nature of innovation also impacts the demands on

returns through active licensing.86 Patents in particular

the IP system.

are increasingly used as collateral for bank loans by
patent holders, and as investment assets by financial
institutions.87 Small enterprises, newly-established or
research-oriented firms depend on IP to generate revenue and use IP to obtain financing, including venture
capital investments (see Chapter 2).88 Beyond patents,
business models and firm strategies tend to rely on
complementary protection of trademarks, designs and
copyright, although this trend and the complementarity
to patent use are harder to quantify.
At the same time, there has been a shift in the IP landscape with new countries emerging as important players
and greater emphasis placed on international protection
of inventions. This has also invariably led to a growing
demand for IP.

Growing demand for IP rights
Over the last two decades, the use of the IP system has
intensified to unprecedented levels.
Demand for patents increased across the world from
around 800,000 patent applications in the early 1980s to
1.8 million by 2009, with the greatest increase in demand
occurring as of the mid-1990s. Growth in patent applications was stable until the 1970s, followed by acceleration,
first in Japan and then in the US. Growth in fast-growing
middle-income countries such as China and India picked
86 See Arora et al. (2001); Gambardella
et al. (2007); and Lichtenthaler (2009).
87 See Kamiyama (2005) and Otsuyama (2003).
88 See WIPO (2011d).

52

up from the mid-1990s onwards (see Figure 1.18, at top).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Trademark applications show a similar trend. However,

Other kinds of IP, such as utility models and industrial

accelerated activity began in the mid-1980s at the United

designs, have seen similar albeit smaller growth over the

States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), with trade-

past decade.90 Whereas growth in patent and trademark

mark activity at other IP offices following during the 1990s

activity is more broad-based, increases in utility model

(see Figure 1.18, at bottom). Trademark demand increased

and industrial design applications at the global level

from just below one million registrations per year in the

are mainly driven by China. Nonetheless, utility models

mid-1980s to 3.2 million trademark registrations by 2009.

have experienced substantial growth in selected countries, particularly in middle- and lower-income econo-

Figure 1.18: Demand for patents and trademarks

mies.91 This also applies to design applications, including

has intensified to unprecedented levels

their international registration via the Hague System

Patent applications at selected offices, 1900-2010

(see Box 1.6).

US
US
Rep. of Korea
Rep.
India of Korea
India

600'000
600'000

China
China
European
Patent Of ce
European Patent Of ce
Japan
Japan

600'000
600'000
500'000
500'000

400'000
400'000

400'000
400'000

300'000
300'000

300'000
300'000

200'000
200'000

200'000
200'000

100'000
100'000

100'000
100'000

19 19
00 00
19 19
10 10
19 19
20 20
19 19
30 30
19 19
40 40
19 19
50 50
19 19
60 60
19 19
70 70
19 19
80 80
19 19
90 90
20 20
00 00
20 20
10 10

500'000
500'000

0
0

Trademark applications at selected offices, 1900-2010
US
US
India
India
Mexico
Mexico

400'000
400'000

Rep. of Korea
Rep. of Korea
Brazil
Brazil (right axis)
China
China (right axis)

800'000
800'000

20 20
10 10

20 20
00 00

19 19
90 90

19 19
80 80

19 19
70 70

19 19
00 00

0
0

19 19
60 60

200'000
200'000

19 19
50 50

100'000
100'000

19 19
40 40

400'000
400'000

19 19
30 30

200'000
200'000

19 19
20 20

600'000
600'000

19 19
10 10

300'000
300'000

0
0

Note: The figures show applications data for the six top offices. Data for
other large offices exhibit a similar trend. One or more classes may be
specified on each trademark application, depending on whether an IP office
has a single or multiclass filing system, thus complicating the comparison
between countries.89
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, October 2011.

89 In the international trademark system and in certain IP
offices, an applicant can file a trademark application
specifying one or more of the 45 goods and services
classes defined by the International Classification
of Goods and Services under the Nice Agreement.
IP offices have either a single-class or multiclass
application filing system. For better international
comparison of trademark application activity
across offices, the multiclass system used by many
national offices must be taken into consideration.
For example, the offices of Japan, the Republic of
Korea, the US as well as many European offices all
use multiclass filing systems. The offices of Brazil,
China and Mexico follow a single-class filing system,
requiring a separate application for each class in
which applicants seek trademark protection. This
can result in much higher numbers of applications
at these offices than at those that allow multiclass
applications. For instance, the number of applications
received by the trademark office of China is over 8.2
times that received by Germany’s IP office. However,
class count-based trademark application data reduce
this gap to about 2.8 times. See WIPO (2010).
90 The number of worldwide utility model applications
increased from around 160,000 in 2000 to
approximately 310,000 in 2008, and the number
of worldwide industrial design applications grew
from around 225,000 in the mid-1980s to around
655,000 by 2008. The growth in utility model and
industrial design applications is mostly due to the
substantial increase in the level of activity in China.
91 See WIPO (2010).

53

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Box 1.6: Design is important for product innovation
Design seems to be increasingly important in helping turn technological
inventions into innovative new commercial products, i.e., facilitating
the journey of technology or an invention from development through
to the marketplace.92 The latest estimates for the UK put spending
on new engineering and architectural design at Great Britain Pounds
(GBP) 44 billion, or 30 percent of all intangible investments.93 This
represents one and a half times the estimated expenditure by firms
on training and five times the spending on R&D. A new study for
the UK also shows that the majority of IP investment is on assets
protected by copyright and design rights.94

Figure 1.19: Positive trend in industrial design
applications after a decade of stagnation
Number of and year-on-year growth in industrial design applications,
1985-2009
700'000
Year-on-year growth (in
percent)

600'000

Industrial design
applications
500'000
400'000
300'000

Industrial design rights can be applied to a wide variety of industrial
and handicraft products, emphasizing the importance of design in
innovation. The most popular industrial design classes are packages
for the transport of goods and food products; clocks and watches;
furniture, housewares and electrical appliances; vehicles and
architectural structures; fashion and textile designs; and leisure
goods. New classes for graphic logos are also increasingly filed in
design registrations.
The number of industrial design applications filed worldwide in
2009 stood at approximately 640,000 (see Figure 1.19). This is the
sixteenth consecutive year of growth, following a decade of stagnation. This rise in global applications can primarily be attributed to the
exponential increase in industrial design applications in China. WIPO
recorded 2,216 international registrations (+31.8 percent) via the
Hague System in 2010, for a total of 11,238 designs (+26.7 percent).95
Despite these parallel increases in the importance of product design
and in applications for design rights, the interaction between the two,
i.e., whether the existence of design rights fosters better design,
is ill-understood. Information on the share of designs covered by
design rights is also not available.

200'000
7.0%

100'000

17.5%

11.4%
6.7%

16.1%
10.3%

6.8%

3.6%

4.0%

0.0%
0

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

Note: The world total is a WIPO estimate covering around 120 IP offices.
Source: Forthcoming World Intellectual Property Indicators Report,
WIPO (2011d).

The economic literature has largely focused on understanding the surge in patent applications, which
is due to a number of factors. These include a greater
reliance on intangible assets and the internationalization of innovation activity. Among the factors identified
as causing this surge are the following, which partly
describe the same trends:
1) Increased investment in R&D and changes in the
propensity to patent: The significant growth in worldwide R&D expenditure and the shift towards more applied
R&D worldwide have led to more patentable inventions.96
Furthermore, increasing levels of R&D activity in new
technology fields drove increased patenting activity.
Growth in R&D expenditure and demand for patents both
show an upward trend, but the growth rate of world R&D
outstripped that of patent applications between 1977
and 2007. The number of patents per business R&D

92
93
94
95
96
97

54

See HM Treasury (2005).
See Gil and Haskell (2008).
See UK Intellectual Property Office (2011).
See WIPO (2011a).
See Kortum and Lerner (1999).
See WIPO (2011b).

expenditure has thus decreased.97 There are exceptions
at the country-level, most notably in the US which has
filed more patents over time per dollar spent on R&D.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

2) Growth in the number of subsequent filings: Since

3) Expanded technological opportunities: Computer

the mid-1990s, patenting has become increasingly inter-

and telecommunications technologies are some of the

nationalized. Subsequent filings reflect applicants’ need

most important technological fields contributing to pat-

to protect inventions in more than one jurisdiction. Figure

enting growth.98 Others are pharmaceuticals, medical

1.20 shows that subsequent filings have seen a higher

technology, electrical machinery and, to a significantly

growth rate compared to first filings since the mid-1990s.

lesser extent, bio- and nanotechnologies. Between 2000

Patent applications grew by 83.7 percent between 1995

and 2007, patent applications by field of technology gen-

and 2007, and more than half of the total growth was due

erating the most growth were related to micro-structural

to subsequent filings.

and nanotechnology; digital communication and other
ICT products; food chemistry; and medical technology.99

Figure 1.20: Patenting in foreign jurisdictions is
the main driver of growth in demand for patents

4) Legal and institutional changes: There have been a

Patent applications by type of application, indexed 1995=1

number of national and international legal and institutional

First ling

changes to the patent system which, according to stud-

Subsequent ling
3.0

ies, have contributed to an increase in patenting activity;
for example national patent reforms or the implementation

2.5

2.0

07

05

20

20

01
03
20

99

20

97

19

95

19

19

91
93
19

89

19

87

19

85

19

19

81
83
19

79

19

77

19

75

19

systems and the European Patent Convention have
facilitated cross-border patent applications.

1.0

5) Strategic patenting: Several researchers have attrib-

0.0
19

Property Rights (TRIPS).100 Moreover, the PCT and Madrid

1.5

0.5

Contribution of first and subsequent applications
to total growth, in percent, 1995-2007

of the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual

uted growth in patenting to so-called strategic patenting
behaviors. These are practices aimed at blocking other
firms from patenting, creating a thicket of defensive patents around a valuable invention to prevent competitive
encroachment and litigation, and to enhance patent
portfolios for cross-licensing negotiations (see Chapter 2).
Some firms also use patents to block fellow competitors
or to extract rents from other firms; non-practicing entities in particular have emerged which are said to litigate

51.7%

against other firms based on their patent portfolios.
48.3%

The causes of growth in trademarks, utility models,
industrial designs or other forms of IP remain relatively

First ling
Subsequent ling
Source: WIPO (2011b).

unexplored. In the case of copyright, it is difficult to document any baseline time trends due to the lack of data.

98

See WIPO (2011b). The growth in applications
for new technologies has contributed to
the surge in applications in the US.
99 See WIPO (2010).
100 See Hu and Jefferson (2009); and
Rafiquzzaman and Whewell (1998).

55

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

As indicated above, more anecdotal evidence and docu-

Asia and in particular China and the Republic of Korea.

mented use of the other forms of IP point to the fact

As a result, the share of global patent applications from

that firms increasingly use bundles of IP rights to ap-

Europe, Japan and the US dropped from 77 percent in

propriate and market the products of their innovation.

1995 to 59 percent in 2009. At the same time, China’s share

Popular products in areas such as technology, textiles,

rose by more than 15 percentage points (see Figure 1.21).

food and consumer products rely on the protection of
technology, designs, trademarks and brands and often

PCT international application data show a similar trend.

also on copyright, either for software or brand-related

For the first time in 2010, Asia was the largest regional

creative input. Again, the way the use of different forms

bloc in terms of number of PCT applications, with the

of IP is incorporated within firms’ strategies and how this

strongest showing by Japan, China and the Republic of

determines filing behavior remain unexplored.

Korea (see Figure 1.22).101

The demand for IP is expanding geographically

Trademark demand has always been less geographically concentrated. Europe, Japan and the US make up

The growing demand for IP rights is also underscored by

for around one-fifth of global trademark applications,

the increasing number of countries seeking IP protection.

in comparison to three-fifths for patents. However, the
change in origin of trademark applications has followed

While the demand for IP rights has come mainly from

a similar trend to that of patents, with China doubling its

Europe, Japan and the US, over the past two decades

share while Europe and Japan see falling shares (see

there has been a shift to other economies, most notably

Figure 1.23).

Figure 1.21: Patent applications shift towards Asian countries
Share of IP offices in world patent applications, in percent, 1995

Share of IP offices in world patent applications, in percent, 2009

Rep. of Korea
7.5%
Others
8.6%

China
1.8%

Others
9%

US
21.8%

Rep. of Korea
9%

Canada
2.5%

India
0.6%
India
2%

China
17%

Europe
19.7%
Japan
35.2%

Japan
19%
Canada
2%

Europe
15%

Russian
Federation
2.3%

Russian
Federation
2%

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2011.

101 See WIPO (2011b).

56

US
25%

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.22: Japan, China and the Republic of Korea become major PCT filers
Shares of PCT applications, in percent, 1995

Shares of PCT applications, in percent, 2010
France
4.4%

France
4.7%
Others
14.8%

Others
14.8%

Rep. of
Korea
0.5%

US
42.8%
UK
7.5%

US
27.4%

Rep. of
Korea
5.9%
UK
3.0%

China
0.3%

Sweden
2.0%

China
7.5%

Netherlands
3.5%

Germany
12.8%
Japan
6.9%
Sweden
3.9%

Switzerland
2.2%

Japan
19.6%

Germany
10.7%

Netherlands
2.5%

Switzerland
2.3%

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2011.

Figure 1.23: Trademark applications have followed a similar
internationalization trend to that of patents
Share of trademark applications worldwide,
by office, in percent, 1995

Share of trademark applications worldwide,
by office, in percent, 2009

Turkey
0.9%

Mexico
1.7%

Turkey
2.2%

China
9.5%
China
25.2%

Others
31.5%

Others
29.4%

Europe
25.7%
Mexico
2.6%
Europe
16.7%
Japan
9.9%

India
2.3%

US
10.4%

Brazil
4.2%

Republic of
Korea
Brazil 4.2%

Rep. of Korea
4.0%

Note: Depending on whether an IP office has a single or multiclass filing
system, one or more classes may be specified in each trademark application,
thus complicating the comparison between countries.102
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2011.

3.5%

Japan
3.4%

India
4.4%

United States
8.3%

102 See footnote 89.

57

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Table 1.4 shows the difference in patent and trademark

Specifically, IP rights are now also more intensively used

use among income groups. Patent activity remains

by inventors and firms to protect their technologies,

skewed towards high-income countries, while trademark

products, brands and processes abroad. Increasingly

activity is relatively more pronounced in less developed

patents for one and the same invention are filed in multiple

economies. Despite the drop in shares, the high-income

jurisdictions. In fact, such patent applications for one and

group continues to account for the majority of patent

the same invention filed in several countries accounted

applications. With about 57 percent of applications,

for more than half of all growth in patent applications

middle-income economies account for most trademark

worldwide between 1995 and 2007.103

applications. Low-income countries’ share of trademark
applications remains small and in line with their share of

Figures 1.24 and 1.25 provide evidence of increasing

world GDP. Furthermore, that share has declined over

levels of internationalization for both patents and trade-

time. The role of China in driving applications of all sorts in

marks. Patent applications filed abroad, including PCT

the middle-income and BRICS group is very pronounced

applications, show an upward trend. A similar pattern

(see Table 1.4).

is observed for trademark applications filed abroad
and Madrid System registrations.104 Non-resident pat-

Table 1.4: Patent, trademark and GDP share

ent applications account for around 43 percent of all

by income group (percent), 1995 and 2009

patent applications, compared to around 30 percent
for trademarks.105

Patent
Applications

Trademark
Applications

1995

2009

1995

2009

1995

2009

89.2

72.8

57.6

38.3

67.6

56.8

Upper-middle-income

8.4

23.8

31.9

48.6

23.4

31.4

to total resident applications has increased over time for

…Upper middle-income excluding China

6.6

6.7

21.9

20.9

17.6

18.0

both patents and trademarks.106 Nonetheless, the degree

Lower middle-income

2.3

3.3

9.1

12.3

8.4

11.0

Low-income

0.1

0.1

1.3

0.8

0.6

0.8

of internationalization varies across countries and among

BRICS

6.1

22.7

19.2

38.9

16.4

25.9

…BRICS excluding China

4.3

5.5

9.2

11.3

10.6

12.5

High-income

GPD

Note: Patents: High-income countries (43), upper-middle-income countries
(35), lower-middle-income countries (25) and low-income countries (12).
Trademarks: High-income countries (44), upper-middle-income countries
(35), lower-middle-income countries (25) and low-income countries (10).
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, October 2011.

Protection of IP in
international markets
The IP system is also becoming more internationalized
due to reasons other than the rise in new countries making significant use of IP.

58

For most countries, the ratio of filings abroad compared

IP rights. Patent filings from European countries show a
high level of internationalization (see Figure 1.24, right).
Among BRICS (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India,
China and South Africa) countries, only India stands out
as having a level of internationalization comparable to that
seen in high-income economies. In relative terms, patent
applications filed by residents in China or the Russian
Federation are still rarely filed in other countries.107 The
situation is similar for trademarks (see Figure 1.25, right).
103 See WIPO (2011c).
104 The PCT facilitates the acquisition of patent
rights in a large number of jurisdictions. Filing
a trademark application through the Madrid
System makes it possible for an applicant to
apply for a trademark in a large number of
countries by filing a single application.
105 See WIPO (2010).
106 However, there are a few exceptions,
namely Turkey for patents, and Germany,
Sweden and the UK for trademarks.
107 In absolute terms, the number of patent
applications originating in China is non-trivial.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.24: Internationalization

Figure 1.25: Internationalization

of patent applications

of trademark applications

Growth of patent applications abroad and PCT
applications, 1995=1, 1985-2010

Growth of trademark applications abroad and
Madrid registrations,1995=1, 1985-2010

Patents led abroad

Trademarks led abroad

PCT Applications

5

Madrid Registrations

3

4
2

3

2
1

1

2009

1995

10

09

20

07

20

05

20

20

01

03

20

99

20

97

19

95

19

93

19

91

19

89

19

87

19

19

19

10

09

20

07

20

05

20

03

20

01

20

99

20

97

19

95

19

19

91

93

19

89

19

87

19

85

19

19

Filings abroad as a percentage of resident patent
applications, selected countries, 1995, 2000 and 2009

85

0

0

Filings abroad as a percentage of resident trademark
applications, selected countries, 1995, 2000 and 2009
2009

2000

1995

2000

500

100
80

400

60
300
40
200

20

Switzerland
Belgium
Netherlands
Sweden
Israel
Finland
Denmark
Singapore
Canada
Australia
Ireland
Austria
France
Norway
Germany
UK
Italy
Spain
New Zealand
US
India
Japan
Rep. of Korea
Turkey
Poland
Ukraine
Russian Federation
China
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2011.

Protection of utility models and industrial designs is mostly

0

Switzerland
Australia
Denmark
Singapore
Germany
United Kingdom
Hungary
Norway
Czech Republic
Italy
France
Sweden
Unted States
Canada
Bulgaria
Russian Federation
Japan
Poland
Austria
Spain
Turkey
Rep. Korea
China
India

100

0

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2011.

sought for the domestic market. Compared to patents
and trademarks, the non-resident share out of total ap-

As technological capabilities are now more widely dif-

plications in both these forms of IP is low and declining

fused and production more globalized, concerns relat-

over time – around 3 percent for utility models and 16

ing to inadequate enforcement of IP rights, in particular

percent for industrial designs in the latest available year.

patents and trademarks, have increased.

59

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.3.2
Increased tradability of IP
The last decades have seen an increase in licensing
and other IP-based collaborative mechanisms such as
patent pools. New intermediaries and IP marketplaces
have also emerged.108
Following Arora et al. (2001), the literature increasingly
refers to the rise in “technology markets”, “knowledge
markets” or “secondary markets for IP” to describe
this trend. These IP-based markets are said to allow
for trade in ideas and to facilitate vertical disintegration
of knowledge-based industries (see Subsection 1.2.1).
Firms are putting better systems in place to capture and

Box 1.7: The limitations of royalty and license fee data
Madeuf (1984) presents the limitations of using RLF data to infer
the occurrence of technology transfer. One key problem is how to
isolate technology revenue from transfer pricing. For some countries
where detailed data are available, payments mostly consist of intrafirm payments, i.e., payments between subsidiaries and company
headquarters – for example, 66 percent of all US receipts in 2009
and 73 percent of all US payments in 2009.110 Given the intangible
and fungible nature of IP assets between a company’s headquarters
and various subsidiaries, these data are subject to transfer pricing
problems and related tax considerations that might be unrelated to
international technology transfer between countries. Data on affiliate
trade for Germany and several other European countries suggest,
however, that intra-firm RLF payments made up for a lesser share,
namely about 45 percent of all technology services trade from
2006-2008. Hence, for other countries this measurement problem
might be a lesser one.

analyze ideas both from within and without. This also enables them to capture value from IP not utilized internally.
Moreover, a new type of firm has emerged which thrives
solely on the creation and management of IP assets.
Increased international trade in knowledge
Existing data suggest that high-income countries make
up for a large share of the international trade in knowledge and ideas, but that middle-income economies are
catching up.
The most widely reported form of disembodied technology trade occurs through international receipts and payments for the use of intangible assets as measured by the
payment of royalties and license fees (RLF).109 The use of
RLF data as an approximate measure of the international
trade in knowledge is not without its problems. One key
issue is how to isolate disembodied technology trade
from transfer pricing issues (see Box 1.7). Nonetheless,
RLF data are the most pertinent proxy for assessing the
international trade in disembodied knowledge.

60

108 See Guellec et al. (2010); Howells et al.
(2004); and Jarosz et al. (2010).
109 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) defines RLF
as including “international payments and receipts
for the authorized use of intangible, non-produced,
non-financial assets and proprietary rights…
and with the use, through licensing agreements,
of produced originals or prototypes…”.
110 See Koncz-Bruner and Flatness
(2010); and Robbins (2009).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Figure 1.26 depicts the growth of cross-border licens-

a high rate of growth – about 8.8 percent per annum in

ing trade in the world economy and also shows the

nominal terms and about 7.7 percent per annum in real

acceleration of this trade since the 1990s. In nominal

terms.113 For countries where detailed data are available,

terms, international RLF receipts for IP increased from

it is important to note that these payments mostly con-

USD 2.8 billion in 1970 to USD 27 billion in 1990, and to

sist of intra-firm payments (see Box 1.7). Although many

approximately USD 180 billion in 2009. Over the period

types of activities can earn royalties, in the US, the only

1990-2009, RLF receipts and payments in the world

country with available data, industrial processes and

economy grew at a fast rate – 9.9 percent per annum.

computer software account for over 70 percent of all

Even when focusing on the period since 1999, one finds

royalty receipts and payments.

111

112

Figure 1.26: International royalty and licensing payments
and receipts are growing in absolute and relative terms
RLF payments and receipts, in USD millions (left) and as a percentage share of GDP (right), 1960-2009
Payments

Receipts

Payments (percentage share of GDP)

Receipts (percentage share of GDP)
0.0035

250'000

0.003
200'000
0.0025
150'000

0.002
0.0015

100'000

0.001
50'000
0.0005
0
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

0

Note: GDP data are from the World Bank.
Source: WIPO based on data in Athreye and Yang (2011).

111 This section relies heavily on a background
report commissioned by WIPO. See
Athreye and Yang (2011).
112 Some of this rise may be attributed to
under-reporting or measurement issues
related to the pre-1996 period.
113 The GDP deflator provided in The World Bank’s
World Development Indicators was used to compute
the deflated values. There are numerous problems
associated with finding the appropriate deflator
for licensing revenue. The most commonly used
deflators, GDP and consumer price index (CPI),
are thought not to contain the right price indices
to take into account inflation in licensing prices. A
thoughtful review of the issues involved is contained
in Robbins (2009), who also proposes using a
deflator based on capital rentals in each country.

61

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

In 1990, 62 countries made RLF payments and, by 2007,

Still today, high-income countries make up for close to

this number had increased to 147 countries. Similarly, in

99 percent of RLF receipts – almost unchanged from ten

1990 only 43 countries received RLF payments but, by

years earlier – and for 83 percent of royalty payments – a

2007, this number had increased to 143 countries. From

decline from 91 percent in 1999 (see Table 1.5). Looking

2000-2009, the BRICS economies, Ireland, the Republic

at US receipts one also notes little change between 2006

of Korea, and former Eastern European nations gained in

and 2009 in relation to their geographical composition (see

economic importance. Between 2005 and 2009, Ireland

Figure 1.27). The most notable transformation in the last

and China increased their shares of international licensing

ten years is an increased share in global payments by mid-

payments by 4.9 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively,

dle-income economies, from 9 percent in 1999 to 17 per-

while the US and UK decreased their shares by 4.1

cent in 2009. Middle-income economies saw their share of

percent and 1.9 percent.

receipts grow from 1 percent in 1999 to 2 percent in 2009.

Table 1.5: Royalty and license fee receipts and payments, by income groups
Income groups

1999

2009

1999

RLF receipts and payments,
in million USD
Nominal

Deflated

2009

Share of total RLF,
in percent
Nominal

Growth, 1999 to
2009, in percent

Deflated

Nominal

Deflated

High-income economies
RLF receipt values

70,587

71,959

176,716

151,119

99

98

9.6

7.7

RLF payment values

67,965

70,371

155,881

135,163

91

83

8.7

6.7

Middle-income economies
RLF receipt values

759.883

736.771

3,765

2,055

1

2

17.4

10.8

RLF payment values

6,705

6,931

3,2428

17,942

9

17

17.1

10

Low-income economies
RLF receipt values

16

14

34

16

0.02

0.02

7.7

1.

RLF payment values

84

72

67

34

0.1

0.04

-2.3

-7

Note: The GDP deflator provided in The World Bank’s World Development Indicators is used to compute the deflated values.
Source: WIPO based on data in Athreye & Yang (2011).

Figure 1.27: The geographical composition of US RLF receipts remains relatively unchanged
US royalty and license fee receipts, by emitting
country as a percentage of total receipts, 2006

US royalty and license fee receipts, by emitting
country as a percentage of total receipts, 2009

1%
1% 0%

1%
1% 0%

6%

9%
8%
9%
Europe

Europe

Asia and Pacific

Asia and Pacific

Latin America and Other
Western Hemisphere
Canada

51%
29%

Latin America and Other
Western Hemisphere
Canada

Middle East

Middle East

Africa

Africa

International Organizations
and unallocated

International Organizations
and unallocated

Note: Regions as defined by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Source: WIPO, based on data from the US Bureau of Economic Analysis.

62

27%

57%

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Manufacturing accounted for a large percentage of RLF

Figure 1.28: The preferred form of disembodied

payments in the six high-income countries with avail-

technology trade differs across countries

able data. The manufacturing sectors that dominate

RLF payments in various high-income countries, as a
percentage of the total, 2007 or last available year

technology trade vary from country to country, although
technology trade in chemical products, computer and
office machinery and nonelectrical machinery appears
to be fairly globalized.

R&D carried out abroad
Technology-related services
100%

Royalties and license fees

90%
80%

Based on data available for high-income countries only,

70%

one can distinguish between the outright sale and pur-

60%

chase of patents; RLF receipts and payments for the use

50%

of intangible assets; trade in technology-related services;

40%

and receipts and payments for conducting R&D services.

30%

In the case of technology and R&D service exports, the

20%

the client or buyer. This is more efficient in situations
where technology transfer is likely to encounter a large
tacit component requiring frequent communication
or monitoring.114
The preferred form of disembodied technology trade differs across countries. Receipts in the UK, France and the
US are mainly linked to RLFs. Ireland, Australia, France
and Greece make the majority of their payments for RLF
(see Figure 1.28). For other EU countries – Germany,
Portugal, Norway and others – payments for technologyrelated services dominate. Outsourcing of R&D, captured
by technology payments made for R&D services rendered
abroad, accounts for only a small fraction of payments,
except for Sweden and Finland, followed by Belgium,
the UK and the US.

10%
0%

Ire
Au land
st
ra
Fr lia
an
G ce
re
H ece
un
ga
ry
U
K
U
Po S
C
la
ze
ch Au nd
Re str
pu ia
Po blic
rtu
ga
l
G Ita
er ly
m
a
Fi ny
n
Be land
lg
N ium
or
w
Sw ay
ed
en

IP rights to technology purchased usually reside with

Note: Purchase and sale of patents have been left out since data on theme
are not consistently available. Data for France pertain to 2003; for others the
reference year is 2007.
Source: WIPO based on data in Athreye and Yang (2011).

IP licensing growing from a low baseline
More disaggregated or non-trade-related data on licensing payments are harder to obtain, and complete
statistics on licensing between firms do not exist. While
a few private or academic sources provide aggregate
figures on licensing income at the country-level, in particular for the US, these are unofficial and, most likely,
imperfect estimates.115

114 See Athreye and Yang (2011).
115 The consulting firm IBISWorld estimates the 2010
US domestic IP licensing and franchising market to
be worth around USD 25 billion, with 20.3 percent of
that total attributed to patent and trademark licensing
royalty income. Franchise leasing and licensing
makes up more than 40 percent of that amount, and
copyright licensing and leasing income more than
30 percent of total royalty income according to this
source. US licensing revenue was estimated at USD
10 billion in 1990 and 110 billion in 1999, according
to a different source (Rivette and Kline, 1999).

63

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Data based on companies’ annual reports as well as

Since 1994, in the US – for which data is reported – RLF

patenting and innovation surveys show that measurable

revenues have increased in nominal terms from USD

IP-related transactions are growing but from mostly low

35 billion to USD 153 billion in 2007 (see Figure 1.29).

initial levels. Better data are required to measure this

The share in total company revenue remains small at

phenomenon in a more timely and accurate fashion. It is

0.6 percentage points of total private sector revenue in

also important to note that when firms enter into cross-

the US. This small share can be explained by the fact

licensing arrangements for patents, the resulting income

that only a few US firms generate the bulk of licensing

is recorded only to the extent that cash is received. These

revenue. Importantly, this share has doubled since 1994.

ever-increasing transactions hence go unmeasured.
Figure 1.29: The share of RLF
• Annual company reports and tax filings: In their

receipts in company revenue remains

annual reports, a minority of publicly-traded com-

small despite a strong increase in

panies provide royalty revenue data (see Table 1.6

revenue generated by US firms

for examples). Only a few companies in the sample

Royalties and licensing revenue, US corporations,
in USD billions, 1994-2007

saw an increase in royalty revenue between 2005
and 2010. For most firms in the table, the share of
RLF receipts remains between less than one to three

180
160

percent of total revenue. Some firms also report other

140

forms of IP and custom development income from

120

technology partners. If these are taken into account,

100

total revenue for IBM, for instance, rises to more

80

than USD 1.1 billion in 2010, making RLF revenue 11

60

percent of total revenues.

40
20

Table 1.6: Shares and rates of nominal growth,

Royalty revenue,
Royalty revenue, share of
USD millions
total revenue
Country

Sector

2005

2010

2005

Qualcomm

US

Technology hardware
& equipment
1370

Philips

Netherlands

Leisure goods

Ericsson

Sweden

Technology hardware
& equipment

DuPont

US

2010

0.7
0.6

4010

24.14%

36%

665

651

1.76 %

1.86%

NA

638

NA

2.26%

Chemicals

877

629

3.29%

1.99%

UK

Pharmaceuticals
& biotechnology

165

522

0.68%

1.61%

Merck

US

Pharmaceuticals
& biotechnology

113

347

0.51%

0.75%

IBM

US

Software &
computer services

367

312

0.40%

0.31%

Dow Chemical US

Chemicals

195

191

0.42%

0.35%

0.1

Biogen Idec

Pharmaceuticals
& biotechnology

93

137

3.84%

2.90%

0.0

0.3

07

06

20

05

20

04

20

03

20

02

20

01

20

00

20

99

20

98

19

19

97

19

19

19

96

0.2

Source: WIPO, based on filings at the US Security and Exchange
Commission. See Gu and Lev (2004) for a more detailed but more
dated analysis.

64

96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07

0.4

19

US

0.5

94

Astra Zeneca

19

Royalty and licensing revenue, in percent of
US corporate revenue, 1994-2007

95

Company

19

19

94

selected companies, 2005 and 2010

95

0

Source: WIPO, based on data from the Internal Revenue Services (IRS)
supplied by the US National Science Foundation.

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

• Innovation and patenting surveys: In Europe,

Despite the general growth in licensing activity, only a

around one patenting firm in five licenses patents to

limited share of patents is licensed out. In most countries

non-affiliated companies, whereas more than one in

less than ten percent of patents are subject to licensing

four does so in Japan. Cross-licensing is the second

outside the company (see Figure 1.30).118 About 24 per-

most frequent motive for licensing out, both in Europe

cent of firms in Europe declare having patents that they

and in Japan. According to the RIETI Georgia-Tech

would be willing to license but could not. In Japan, this

inventor survey – conducted with US and Japanese

figure reaches 53 percent. Nonetheless, the number of

inventors on patents with priority claims between

firms licensing out has steadily increased over time in

1995 and 2003 – licensing of patented inventions in

most countries.

116

Japan was carried out by 21 percent of firms and by
Figure 1.30: The potential to license

14 percent in the US.117

out patents is far from exhausted
ing. Via a survey instrument, Giuri and Torrisi (2011)
identify knowledge-intensive business services as
the most active in licensing their technologies (see
Table 1.7), followed by pharmaceuticals and electrical
and electronic equipment. The majority of licensing
contracts in the sample related to ICTs (in particular

Companies that license out their patents, as a percentage of total
patents owned, selected high-income countries, 2003-2005
100%

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%

Intra-industry licensing comprises a large share of total

20%

within the same technological sectors.
Table 1.7: Technology flows within and

Computers

Electrical/electronic
equipment

Transport

Instruments

KIBS

0.4

0.2

0.1

4.6

11.7

1.9

3.3

2.5

4.4

9.4

27.1

22.4

3.1

5.6

27.7

1

4.9

20.5

27.5

5.9

24.5

Pharmaceuticals

Chemicals

• Universities: Licensing out of patents by universities to

Pharmaceuticals

64.8

3.7

Chemicals

16.9

42.8

Computers

0.2

1.6

Electrical equipment

0.8

2.1

17

46.4

2

6.7

7.84

12.8

19

2.8

6.4

10.6

1.7

29.9

14

10.6

2.4

9.8

10.4

1.2

2.7

45.6

KIBS

0%

Source: Giuri and Torrisi (2011).

of total technology flows

Instruments

10%

Note: Based on preliminary findings.

between sectors, as a percentage

Transport

Yes

80%

ticals/biotech and engineering technological classes.

largest flows of technology through licensing occur

No, but licensing planned

90%

semiconductors/electronics), chemicals/pharmaceu-

recorded licensing transactions. In other words, the

No

Ireland
Hungary
UK
Netherlands
US
Finland
Isreal
Poland
Czech Republic
Spain
Norway
Italy
Switzerland
Total
Belgium
Sweden
Austria
Luxembourg
Germany
France
Denmark
Greece
Slovenia
Japan

Obtaining licensing data at the sector level is challeng-

firms is becoming more frequent, although the volume
remains small on average and payments are mostly
limited to high-income economies (see Chapter 4).

Note: KIBS stands for Knowledge-intensive business services.
Source: Gambardella et al. (2007).

116 See Guellec and Zuñiga (2009).
117 See Michel and Bettels (2001).
118 See the PATVAL-European Union Survey.

65

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.3.3
New collaborative mechanisms and
IP intermediaries

Intermediaries are more numerous today and are
equipped with novel technologies. They provide services ranging from IP management support, IP trading

In Subsection 1.2.5, traditional forms of IP transactions

mechanisms, IP portfolio building to licensing, defensive

were identified as tools for open innovation.

patent aggregation and others. Table 1.8 describes the
various actors involved and their functions.

Technology market intermediaries have existed for a
long time.119 Already in the 1800s and early 1900s,

Nonetheless, limited analysis is available on the size and

patent agents and lawyers played an important role

scope of the actual transactions taking place. Some exist-

in matching capital-seeking inventors with investors,

ing evaluations show that for some newer marketplaces,

and in linking sellers of inventions with potential buy-

activity linked to patent auctions is only just beginning,

ers.120 Yet, beyond more traditional forms, new “col-

starting from low initial levels.121 Again, more analysis is

laborative mechanisms” are emerging, such as IP

required to determine the magnitudes and impacts of

clearinghouses, exchanges, auctions and brokerages;

these trends.

model agreements; and frameworks for IP sharing.
Table 1.8: New IP intermediaries, their functions and business models
Business models

Examples of IP intermediaries

IP management support

• IP strategy advice
• Patent evaluation
• Portfolio analysis
• Licensing strategy advice
• Patent infringement analysis, etc.

ipCapital Group; Consor; Perception partners; First Principals Inc.; Anaqua;
IP strategy group; IP investments group; IPVALUE; IP Bewertungs; Analytic
Capital; Blueprint Ventures; Inflexion Point; PCT Capital; Pluritas; 1790
Analytics; Intellectual Assets; IP Checkups; TAEUS; The IP exchange house;
Chipworks; ThinkFire; Patent Solutions; Lambert & Lambert

IP trading mechanism

• Patent license/transfer brokerage

Fairfield Resources; Fluid Innovation General Patent; ipCapital Group;
IPVALUE; TPL; Iceberg; Inflexion Point; IPotential; Ocean Tomo; PCT
Capital; Pluritas; Semi. Insights; ThinkFire; Tynax; Patent Solutions; Global
Technology Transfer Group; Lambert & Lambert; TAEUS

• Online IP marketplace

InnoCentive; NineSigma; Novience; Open‐IP.org; Tynax; Yet2.com; UTEK;
YourEncore; Activelinks; TAEUS; Techquisition LLC; Flintbox; First Principals
Inc.; MVS Solutions; Patents.com; SparkIP; Concepts community; Mayo
Clinic technology; Idea trade network; Innovation Exchange

• IP live auction/Online IP auction
• IP license-right trading market

Ocean Tomo (Live auction, Patent Bid/Ask); FreePatentAuction.com;
IPAuctions.com; TIPA; Intellectual Property Exchange International

• University technology transfer

Flintbox; Stanford Office of Technology Licensing; MIT Technology Licensing
Office; Caltech Office of Technology Transfer

• Patent pool administration

MPEG LA; Via Licensing Corporation; SISVEL; the Open Patent Alliance; 3G
Licensing; ULDAGE

• IP/Technology development
and licensing

Qualcomm; Rambus; InterDigital; MOSAID; AmberWave; Tessera; Walker
Digital; InterTrust; Wi‐LAN; ARM; Intellectual Ventures; Acacia Research;
NTP; Patriot Scientific RAKL TLC; TPL Group

• IP aggregation and licensing

Intellectual Ventures; Acacia Technologies; Fergason Patent Prop.; Lemelson
Foundation; Rembrandt IP Mgmt.

Defensive patent aggregation/
Framework for patent sharing

• Defensive patent aggregation funds
and alliances
• Initiative for free sharing of pledged
patents

Open Invention Network; Allied Security Trust; RPX; Eco-Patent
Commons Project; Patent Commons Project for open source software,
Intellectual Discovery

IP-based financing

• IP-backed lending
• Innovation investment fund
• IP-structured finance
• Investment in IP-intensive
companies, etc.

IPEG Consultancy BV; Innovation Network Corporation of Japan; Intellectual
Ventures; Royalty Pharma; DRI Capital; Cowen Healthcare Royalty Partners;
Paul Capital Partners; alseT IP; Patent Finance Consulting; Analytic Capital;
Blueprint Ventures; Inflexion Point; IgniteIP; New Venture Partners; Coller
IP Capital; Altitude Capital; IP Finance; Rembrandt IP Mgmt.; NW Patent
Funding; Oasis Legal Finance

IP portfolio building
and licensing

Source: WIPO, adapted from Yanagisawa and Guellec (2009).

119 See Lamoreaux and Sokoloff (2002).
120 See Kamiyama (2005).
121 See Jarosz et al. (2010).

66

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

1.3.4

• Different forms of IP donations: Companies can

Emergence of new IP policies
and practices

decide to release parts of their IP to the public, to fellow
companies or innovators. Firms seem to have started
this practice during the mid-1990s. More recently, firms

To conclude, beyond the increased use of knowledge

have released business method patents to the public

markets and new IP intermediaries, firms and other orga-

or donated IP to smaller companies. Still other firms

nizations are also trialing new IP policies and practices.

provide royalty-free licenses for patents in the areas of
food or health products. Reasons for this can be that

For instance, firms increasingly say that they organize

the IP is not economically valuable to them, or that the

licensing activity and strategic alliances around an IP

invention requires further development efforts that the

strategy that seeks to share technologies rather than to

patenting firm is not willing to undertake. The extent to

use IP solely as a defense mechanism. For a number of

which these practices might be designed to preserve

firms this represents a true change in business mentality

market share, establish or maintain standards or to

and implies that new IP strategies are at work – moving

crowd out competitors deserves further study.

away from the secrecy and inward-looking processes
considered to be essential steps prior to applying for IP.

• Collaboration with universities: When dealing with
universities, companies are also increasingly inventive

Companies, universities and governments are also in-

with regard to their IP policies, fostering cooperation on

novating in the area of IP policy. A few select categories

the one hand while ensuring control on the other (see

are listed here:

Chapter 4). For instance, contracts often specify that
the firm retains the right to require a royalty-free license

• Publication without patenting: Some firms opt to

on any university patent emerging from the research it

publish details on inventions that they do not plan to

has funded. University researchers are granted access

patent, often also called technical disclosures (see for

to the company’s internal IP, for example antibody

example IBM’s Technical Disclosure Bulletin or the

libraries and research tools, and, in certain cases,

IP.com Prior Art Database). On the one hand, this lifts

are allowed to publish in addition to obtaining external

the veil of secrecy on potentially important technologies.

funding (see Pfizer’s new model for drug development,

On the other hand, it also serves the strategic aim to

Philips’ university partnerships, etc.). Researchers

prevent other companies and individuals from seeking

may receive extra payments if gains from develop-

patents on the ideas, so-called defensive publishing.

ing the technology exceed original expectations.

122

122 www.redbooks.ibm.com

67

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

• Contributions to patent pools: In the last few years, a
number of patent pools have been created to address
health, environmental and other social challenges
(see Chapter 3). The Pool for Open Innovation against

1.4
Conclusions and directions
for future research

Neglected Tropical Diseases, for instance, facilitates
access to IP and technologies for researchers in

Innovation is a driver of economic growth and develop-

this area.123 Willing pharmaceutical companies or

ment. Importantly, innovative capability is no longer seen

universities contribute relevant patents to the pool.

only in terms of the ability to develop new inventions.

The Medicines Patent Pool for AIDS medications,

Recombining existing inventions and non-technological

established with the support of UNITAID in 2010, was

innovation also counts.

created to share IP through a patent pool designed to
make treatments more widely affordable to the poor.124

With increased internationalization, the way innovation

The Eco-Patent Commons allows ICT-related firms to

activity is organized has changed. Lower- and middle-

make environmentally-related patents available to the

income economies contribute increasingly to technology

public (see Box 2.4).125 Participating firms must sign

production and innovation. Another transformation is

a non-assertion pledge which allows third parties

the more collaborative nature of innovative processes.

royalty-free access to the protected technologies.

Firms are trialing different forms of “open innovation”

While these patent pools are all fairly recent, so called-

models to leverage external sources of knowledge. That

patent commons which support the development of

said, Chapter 1 shows that drawing a clear distinction

open source software developers have existed for

between long-standing collaborative practices and new

quite some time.126

models – and their respective impacts – remains difficult.

These new IP practices can be read as a testament to

In this changing context, IP both drives the changing

firms’ and other organizations’ increased experimentation

nature of innovation and is – at the same time – impacted

with new IP practices. Yet, often, firms may have recourse

by these changes. Increasingly IP is treated as a central

to these IP releases for reasons related to tax relief (as

asset which is managed strategically and leveraged to

in the case of donations), overall company strategy and

generate returns. In parallel, there has been a shift in the

public relations efforts.

IP landscape, with new countries emerging and greater

127

All in all, the mechanics and

impacts of these IP practices require further study.

emphasis placed on the international protection of inventions – all leading to a growing demand for the different IP
forms, although patent activity remains skewed towards
high-income countries, while trademark activity is relatively more pronounced in less developed economies.

123 http://ntdpool.org/.
124 www.medicinespatentpool.org/.
125 www.wbcsd.org/web/projects/ecopatent/
Eco_patent_UpdatedJune2010.pdf.
126 www.patentcommons.org.
127 See Layton and Bloch (2004);
and Hall and Helmers (2011).

68

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

The last decades have also seen the emergence of IP-

• Too little is known about how innovation takes place

based knowledge markets, which place greater emphasis

in low- and middle-income countries, how it diffuses

on licensing and other IP-based collaborative mecha-

and what its impacts are. Concepts such as “frugal”

nisms such as patent pools and new IP intermediaries.

and “local” innovation and associated impacts deserve

High-income countries still make up for a large share of

further study.

the international trade in knowledge, but middle-income
economies are catching up. Measurable IP-related trans-

• Whereas the demand for patents has become in-

actions are growing, but from mostly low initial levels,

creasingly internationalized, only a few countries are

pointing to further growth potential. Beyond traditional

responsible for the great majority of patent filings.

forms of IP licensing, new “collaborative mechanisms”

Understanding the causes and impacts of this frag-

have emerged. Finally, firms and other organizations are

mented patenting activity deserves study. Similarly,

also trialing new IP policies and practices, often aimed

the different propensities and motivations of firms

at sharing technologies but also sometimes with a view

to use different forms of IP remain ill-understood,

to blocking competitors.

in particular with regard to specific country income
brackets. Aside from patents, other forms of IP and

Areas for future research

their role within the innovation process deserve further
study. Finally, new metrics are needed for assessing

In the light of this chapter, the following areas emerge as

the depth and range of knowledge markets, of new IP

promising fields of research:

intermediaries but also to assess which barriers exist
to their further development.

• Research leading to a better understanding of the
role of intangible assets in firm performance and
economic growth is warranted. In this context, the
positive contribution of process and organizational
innovation to productivity requires further study as
currently the interactions between technological and
non-technological innovation are ill-understood.
• The data for assessing the frequency, type, the quality
dimension and impacts of collaboration for innovation remain too limited. In this context, assessing the
true importance of open innovation is hindered by
definitional and measurement issues. In particular,
the contribution of new innovation platforms and
monetary prizes – relative to other existing innovation channels – requires further research. Also this
chapter points to new inbound innovation models,
new IP policies and practices – for example donations
to patent pools – and other public-private efforts for
not-for-profit objectives which require closer scrutiny
as to their scale and effectiveness.

69

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

References
Aghion, P. & Howitt, P. (1992). A Model of Growth Through Creative
Destruction. Econometrica, 60, 323-351.

Fagerberg, J. (1994). Technology and International Differences in Growth
Rates. Journal of Economic Literature, 32(3), 1147-1175.

Anton, J., Greene, H. & Yao, D. (2006). Policy Implications of Weak Patent
Rights. In A. B. Jaffe, J. Lerner & S. Stern (Eds.), Innovation Policy and the
Economy (Vol. 6). National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., 1-26.

Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D.C. & Nelson, R.R. (2006). The Oxford Handbook
of Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. & Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for Technology:
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Athreye, S. & Kapur, S. (2009). Introduction: The Internationalization of
Chinese and Indian Firms – Trends, Motivations and Strategy. Industrial and
Corporate Change, 18(2), 209-221.
Athreye S., & Yang, Y. (2011). Disembodied knowledge flows in the world
economy. WIPO Economics Research Working Papers, Geneva: World
Intellectual Property Organization.
Benavente, J.M. & Lauterbach, R. (2008). Technological Innovation
and Employment: Complements or Substitutes? European Journal of
Development Research, 20(2), 318-329.
Bergek, A. & Bruzelius, M. (2010). Are Patents with Multiple Inventors from
Different Countries a Good Indicator of International R&D Collaboration? The
Case of ABB. Research Policy, 39(10), 1321-1334.
Bianchi, M., Cavaliere, A., Chiaroni, D., Frattini, F. & Chiesa, V. (2011).
Organisational Modes for Open Innovation in the Bio-pharmaceutical
Industry: An Exploratory Analysis. Technovation, 31(1), 22-33.
Bogliacino, F. & Perani, G. (2009). Innovation in Developing Countries. The
Evidence from Innovation Surveys. Paper presented at the FIRB conference on
Research and Entrepreneurship in the Knowledge-based Economy. Retrieved
from http://portale.unibocconi.it/wps/allegatiCTP/Bogliacino_final.pdf
Bresnahan, T.F. & Trajtenberg, M. (1995). General Purpose Technologies
"Engines of Growth?". National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series, No. 4148.
Chesbrough, H. (2003). Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating
and Profiting from Technology. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1990). Absorptive Capacity: A New
Perspective on Learning and Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly,
35(1), 128-152.

Fagerberg, J., Srholec, M. & Verspagen, B. (2009). Innovation and
Economic Development. UNU Merit Working Paper Series, No. 2009-032.
Fagerberg, J., Scrholec, M., & Verspagen, B. (2010). Innovation and
Economic Development. In B. H. Hall & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Innovation (Vol. 2). Amsterdam: North Holland, 833-872.
Filatotchev, I., Liu, X., Lu, J. & Wright, M. (2011). Knowledge Spillovers
Through Human Mobility Across National Borders: Evidence from
Zhongguancun Science Park in China. Research Policy, 40(3), 453-462.
Freeman, C. (1987). Technology Policy and Economic Performance: Lessons
from Japan. London: Pinter.
Freeman, C. (1994). Innovation and Growth. In M. Dodgson & R. Rothwell
(Eds.), The Handbook of Industrial Innovation. Cheltenham, U.K.: Elgar, 78-93.
Gambardella, A., Giuri, P. & Luzzi, A. (2007). The Market for Patents in
Europe. Research Policy, 36(8), 1163-1183.
Gil, V. & Haskell, J. (2008). Industry-Level Expenditure on Intangible Assets in
the UK. London: Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform.
Giuri, P. & Torrisi, S. (2011). The Economic Uses of Patents. Paper presented
at the Final Conference of the InnoS&T project “Innovative S&T Indicators for
Empirical Models and Policies: Combining Patent Data and Surveys".
Griffith, R., Huergo, E., Mairesse, J. & Peters, B. (2006). Innovation and
Productivity Across Four European Countries. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 22(4), 483-498.
Griliches, Z. (1998). R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, G.M. & Helpman, E. (1994). Endogenous Innovation in the
Theory of Growth. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(1), 23-44.
Gu, F. & Lev, B. (2004). The Information Content of Royalty Income.
Accounting Horizons, 18(1), 1-12.

Corrado, C.A., Hulten, C.R. & Sichel, D.E. (2007). Intangible Capital and
Economic Growth. Research Technology Management.

Guellec, D., Madies, T. & Prager, J.-C. (2010). Les marchés de brevets dans
l'économie de la connaissance. Paris.

Crepon, B., Duguet, E. & Mairesse, J. (1998). Research, Innovation and
Productivity: An Econometric Analysis at the Firm Level. Economics of
Innovation and New Technoolgy, 7(2), 115-158.

Guellec, D. & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2007). The Economics
of the European Patent System: IP Policy for Innovation and Competition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Crespi, G. & Zuñiga, P. (2010). Innovation and Productivity: Evidence from
Six Latin American Countries. IDB Working Paper Series, No. IDB-WP-218.

Guellec, D. & Zuñiga, M.P. (2009). Who Licenses Out Patents and Why?:
Lessons from a Business Survey. Paris: OECD.

Criscuolo, C., Haskel, J.E. & Slaughter, M.J. (2010). Global Engagement
and the Innovation Activities of Firms. International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 28(2), 191-202.

Guinet, J., Hutschenreiter, G. & Keenan, M. (2009). Innovation Strategies
for Growth: Insights from OECD Countries. In C.A.P. Braga, V. Chandra, D.
Erocal and P.C. Padoan (Eds.), Innovation and Growth: Chasing a Moving
Frontier. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.

Dahlander, L. & Gann, D.M. (2010). How Open is Innovation? Research
Policy, 39(6), 699-709.
David, P. A., & Foray, D. (2002). Economic Fundamentals of the Knowledge
Society. SIEPR discussion paper, 01-14.
Edler, J., Fier, H. & Grimpe, C. (2011). International Scientist Mobility
and the Locus of Knowledge and Technology Transfer. Research Policy,
40(6), 791-805.
Edquist, C. (1997). Systems of Innovation: Technologies, Institutions and
Organizations. London: Pinter.
European Commission. (2011). Business Sector Investment in
R&D. Innovation Union Competitiveness Report 2011. Brussels:
European Commission.
Evangelista, R. & Vezzani, A. (2010). The Economic Impact of Technological
and Organizational Innovations. A Firm-level Analysis. Research Policy,
39(10), 1253-1263.

70

Hall, B.H. (2009). Open Innovation and Intellectual Property Rights – The Twoedged Sword. Japan.
Hall, B. H. (2011). Innovation and Productivity. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series, w17178.
Hall, B.H. & Helmers, C. (2011). Innovation and Diffusion of Clean/Green
Technology: Can Patent Commons Help? National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series, w16920.
Hall, R.E. & Jones, C.I. (1999). Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
More Output Per Worker than Others? The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114(1), 83-116.
HM Treasury (2005). The Cox Review of Creativity in Business. London:
Design Council.
Howells, J., James, A.D. & Malik, K. (2004). Sourcing External
Technological Knowledge. International Journal of Technology
Management, 27(2/3).

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

Hu, A.G. & Jefferson, G.H. (2009). A Great Wall of Patents: What is Behind
China's Recent Patent Explosion? Journal of Development Economics,
90(1), 57-68.
Huizingh, E.K.R.E. (2011). Open Innovation: State of the Art and Future
Perspectives. Technovation, 31(1), 2-9.
Hulten, C.R. & Isaksson, A. (2007). Why Development Levels Differ: The
Sources of Differential Economic Growth in a Panel of High and Low Income
Countries. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series,
No. 13469.
Ivarsson, I. & Alvstam, C.G. (2010). Supplier Upgrading in the Homefurnishing Value Chain: An Empirical Study of IKEA’s Sourcing in China and
South East Asia. World Development, 38(11), 1575-1587.
Jarosz, J., Heider, R., Bazelon, C., Bieri, C., & Hess, P. (March 2010).
Patent Auctions: How Far Have We Come? les Nouvelles, 11-30.
Jones, C.I. & Romer, P.M. (2010). The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas,
Institutions, Population, and Human Capital. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 2(1), 224-245.
Kamiyama, S. (2005). Intellectual Property as an Economic Asset: Key Issues
in Valuation and Exploitation. Paper presented at Intellectual Property as an
Economic Asset: Key Issues in Valuation and Exploitation, Berlin.
Khan, M. (2005). Estimating the Level of Investment in Knowledge Across
the OECD countries. In A. Bounfour & L. Edvinsson (Eds.), Intellectual
Captial for Communities: Nations, Regions, and Cities. London: ButterworthHeinemann.
Khan, M., & Luintel, K. B. (2006). Sources of Knowledge and Productivity:
How Robust is the Relationship? OECD STI Working Papers, 2006/06.
Klenow, P.J. & Rodríguez-Clare, A. (1997). Economic Growth: A Review
Essay. Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(3), 597-617.
Koncz-Bruner, J. & Flatness, A. (2010). U.S. International Services CrossBorder Trade in 2009 and Services Supplied Through Affiliates in 2008.
Washington, D.C.: US Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Kortum, S. & Lerner, J. (1999). What is Behind the Recent Surge in
Patenting? Research Policy, 28(1), 1-22.
Lamoreaux, N.R. & Sokoloff, K.L. (2002). Intermediaries in the U.S. Market
for Technology, 1870-1920. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series, No. 9017.
Layton, R. & Bloch, P. (2004). IP Donations: A Policy Review. Washington,
D.C.: International Intellectual Property Institute.
Lee, N., Nystén-Haarala, S. & Huhtilainen, L. (2010). Interfacing Intellectual
Property Rights and Open Innovation. Lappeenranta University of Technology,
Department of Industrial Management.
Lichtenthaler, U. (2009). The Role of Corporate Technology Strategy and
Patent Portfolios in Low-, Medium- and High-technology Firms. Research
Policy, 38(3), 559-569.
Long, J.B.D. (1988). Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare:
Comment. The American Economic Review, 78(5), 1138-1154.

Narula, R. (2010). Much Ado about Nothing, or Sirens of a Brave New World?
MNE Activity from Developing Countries and Its Significance for Development.
Maastricht: United Nations University, Maastricht Economic and Social
Research and Training Centre on Innovation and Technology.
National Science Board (2010). Science and Engineering Indicators 2010.
Arlington, VA: National Science Foundation.
Ocean Tomo (2010). Ocean Tomo's Intangible Asset Market Value Study.
Chicago: Ocean Tomo.
OECD (2009). Open Innovation in Global Networks. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2010a). Innovation in Firms. Paris: Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
OECD (2010b). Measuring Innovation – A New Perspective. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2010c). The OECD Innovation Strategy: Getting a Head Start on
Tomorrow. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2010d). OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2010. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2010e). Perspectives on Global Development 2010. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2011). OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2011.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD & Eurostat (2005). Oslo Manual: Guidelines for Using and
Interpreting Innovation Data. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
Otsuyama, H. (2003). Patent Valuation and Intellectual Assets Management.
In M. Samejima (Ed.), Patent Strategy Handbook. Tokyo: Chuokeizai-sha.
Parisi, M.L., Schiantarelli, F. & Sembenelli, A. (2006). Productivity,
Innovation and R&D: Micro Evidence for Italy. European Economic Review,
50(8), 2037-2061.
Pinkovskiy, M., & Sala-i-Martin, X. (2009). Parametric Estimations of the
World Distribution of Income. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper Series, 15433.
Prahalad, C.K. & Lieberthal, K. (1998). The End of Corporate Imperialism.
Harvard Business Review, 76(1), 69-79.
Rafiquzzaman, M., & Whewell, L. (1998). Recent Jumps in Patenting
Activities: Comparative Innovative Performance of Major Industrial Countries,
Patterns and Explanations. Industry Canada Research Working Paper, 27.
Ray, P.K. & Ray, S. (2010). Resource Constrained Innovation for Emerging
Economies: The Case of the Indian Telecommunications Industry. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 57(1), 144-156.
Rivette, K.G. & Kline, D. (1999). Rembrandts in the Attic: Unlocking the
Hidden Value of Patents. Harvard Business Press.

Lundvall, B.A. (1992). National Systems of Innovation: Towards a Theory of
Innovation and Interactive Learning. London: Pinter.

Robbins, C.A. (2009). Measuring Payments for the Supply and Use of
Intellectual Property. In M. Reinsdorf & M.J. Slaughter (Eds.), International
Trade in Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Mairesse, J. & Mohnen, P. (2010). Innovation Surveys for Econometric
Analysis. Handbook of the Economics of Innovation. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Romer, P. (1986). Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth. Journal of
Political Economy, 94(5), 1002-1037.

Mairesse, J. & Mohnen, P. (2010). Using Innovation Surveys for
Econometric Analysis. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series, 15857.

Romer, P. (2010). Which Parts of Globalization Matter for Catch-up Growth?
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, 15755.

McKinsey & Company. (2009). “And the Winner is…”: Capturing the Promise
of Philanthropic Prizes. McKinsey & Company.
Mendonça, S. (2009). Brave Old World: Accounting for “High-tech”
Knowledge in “Low-tech” Industries. Research Policy, 38(3), 470-482.
Michel, J. & Bettels, B. (2001). Patent Citation Analysis – A Closer Look at
the Basic Input Data from Patent Search Reports. Scientometrics, 21(1), 185201.

Royal Society (March 2011). Knowledge, Networks and Nations: Global
Scientific Collaboration in the 21st Century. London.
Schumpeter, J.A. (1943). Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy: Harper
Perennial.
Tether, B.S. (2002). Who Co-operates for Innovation, and Why: An Empirical
Analysis. Research Policy, 31(6), 947-967.
Tether, B.S. & Tajar, A. (2008). The Organisational-Cooperation Mode of
Innovation and Its Prominence Amongst European Service Firms. Research
Policy, 37(4), 720-739.

71

Chapter 1The changing face of innovation and intellectual property

UK Intellectual Property Office (2011). The Role of IP Rights in the UK
Market Sector. London: UK Intellectual Property Office.
UNCTAD (2011). World Investment Report 2011. Geneva: United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development.
UNESCO (2010). UNESCO Science Report 2010. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
UNIDO (2009). Industrial Development Report – Breaking in and Moving
Up: New Industrial Challenges for the Bottom Billion and the Middle-Income
Countries. Vienna: United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
van Ark, B. & Hulten, C.R. (2007). Innovation, Intangibles and Economic
Growth: Towards A Comprehensive Accounting of the Knowledge Economy:
The Conference Board.
WIPO (2010). World Intellectual Property Indicators. Geneva: World
Intellectual Property Organization.
WIPO (2011a). Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial
Designs – Report for 2010. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
WIPO (2011b). PCT – The International Patent System – Yearly Review
– Developments and Performance in 2010. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
WIPO (2011c). The Surge in Worldwide Patent Applications, PCT/WG/4/4.
Study prepared for the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) Working Group.
Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
WIPO (2011d). Patenting and the Crisis, WIPO Survey on
Patenting Strategies in 2009 and 2010. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
WIPO (2011e, forthcoming). World Intellectual Property Indicators. Geneva:
World Intellectual Property Organization.
World Bank (2008). Global Economic Prospects 2008. Washington, D.C.:
World Bank.
Wunsch-Vincent, S. (2006). China, Information Technologies and the
Internet. In OECD (Ed.), OECD Information Technology Outlook. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 139-182.
Yanagisawa, T. & Guellec, D. (2009). The Emerging Patent Marketplace.
Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry Working Paper 2009/9.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Young, A. (1993). Lessons from the East Asian NICs: A Contrarian View.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 4482.
Young, A. (1995). The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical
Realities of the East Asian Growth Experience. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(3), 641-680.
Zuñiga, P. (2011). The state of patenting at research institutions in developing
countries: Policy approaches and practices. WIPO Economics Research
Working Papers, Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.

72

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Chapter 2
The economics of intellectual
property – old insights and
new evidence
Innovation holds the potential to improve human well- 2.1
being and generate economic prosperity. Understanding

why individuals and organizations innovate and how government policies affect innovative behavior are therefore
important. Throughout history, economists have studied

Understanding IP rights
and their role in the
innovation process

these questions and devised different theories to explain
incentives for innovation.

The importance of innovation in economic thinking can
be traced as far back as 1776. In his famous treatise on

This chapter focuses on the role of the intellectual prop-

the Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith notes that “the inven-

erty (IP) system in the innovation process and has two

tion of all those machines by which labour is so much

main objectives. It first seeks to convey, from the stand-

facilitated and abridged seems to have been originally

point of economists, the key ideas behind the IP system,

owing to the division of labour.” He further observes that

including the main rationales for protecting IP rights as

“[a] great part of the machines […] were originally the

well as their pros and cons compared to other innovation

inventions of common workmen, who, being each of

policy instruments (Section 2.1).

them employed in some very simple operation, naturally
turned their thoughts towards finding out easier and

The second objective is to explore how economists’

readier methods of performing it.”1

understanding of the IP system has changed, by taking
a closer look at the patent system which has received, by
far, the most scrutiny by researchers (Section 2.2). While
many old insights still apply, economists have gained new
empirical perspectives which have led to a more refined
view of how patent protection affects innovation. These
new perspectives partly reflect real world developments
– as reviewed in Chapter 1 – and also better data, which
enable richer investigations.
One important theme that emerges from the recent
literature is the key role patent institutions play in determining innovation outcomes. Since this theme is of special
relevance for IP policymaking, the chapter elaborates on
some of the challenges facing these institutions (Section
2.3). The concluding remarks summarize some of the key
messages emanating from the economic literature and
point to areas where more research could usefully guide
policymakers (Section 2.4).
1

See Smith (1776).

75

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

But it was not until the second half of the 20th century

There are also mechanisms for reducing risks and ap-

that scholars started to scrutinize the circumstances of

propriating inventive efforts in private markets. The pool-

inventive activity more closely, rather than simply view-

ing of inventive activity within larger firms diminishes the

ing it as a “natural turn of thought”. In 1962, Nobel-prize

uncertainty of inventive outcomes, as successes make

winning economist Kenneth J. Arrow helped galvanize

up for failures. Pooling can also be achieved through

economic thinking in this area by arguing that the inventive

financial markets, notably through venture capital funds.

process – viewed as the production of problem-solving

In addition, firms can often overcome appropriability

information – faces two fundamental difficulties. First, it

problems by being first to introduce a new good or

is a risky process: when embarking on a problem-solving

service on the market; even a short lead time may be

exercise, it is uncertain whether a solution can really be

sufficient to generate enough profits to make inventive

found. Second, information related to problem-solving

investment worthwhile. Creating consumer goodwill

possesses characteristics of what economists call a

through extensive marketing of new products can also

public good: many people can simultaneously use it, and

give firms a competitive edge, allowing them to finance

the problem solver often cannot prevent reproduction of

inventive activity. Indeed, surveys of firms over the past

the information. The latter characteristic is also known as

decades have shown that, in many sectors, lead time

the appropriability dilemma of inventive activity.

and marketing are some of the most important ways of

2

appropriating returns on inventive activity.3
In view of these two fundamental difficulties, Arrow
concluded that, left alone, markets would underinvest

However, problems of appropriability and risk in inno-

in inventive activity relative to what would be socially

vative activity persist even where private markets offer

desirable. To avoid wasting resources should a problem-

certain innovation incentives. To begin with, although

solving effort fail, firms operating in competitive markets

individuals may invent purely out of curiosity, they also

may forgo inventive opportunities; and, if competitors

need to earn a living. Pushing the limits of the world’s

can immediately free ride on a successful solution, the

knowledge frontier requires talent, but often it also de-

inventing firm may reap little financial reward.

mands years of experience, collaboration within larger
research teams and expensive equipment. In addition,

In view of the innovative behavior observed in markets,

successful innovation in modern economies not only

these conclusions may seem overly pessimistic. Much

requires smart inventions, but also substantial investment

invention occurs due to innate curiosity. Some inven-

in the subsequent development and commercialization

tors thrive on inventive challenges that carry a high risk

of new products. In many cases, market mechanisms

of failure. Recognition from peers or society at large for

are bound to be insufficient for inducing innovation that

solving a complex problem is another important factor

is in society’s best interest, thus providing a rationale for

driving creativity and inventiveness. In some cases, such

government intervention.

recognition may ultimately lead to a tangible reward in
the form of future job offers or access to the venture
capital market. Lerner and Tirole (2005), for example,

2

find that reputational benefits are a key factor motivating software programmers to participate in open source
software projects.

3

76

See Arrow (1962). In the 1930s, Joseph Schumpeter
(1937, 1943) had already recognized that firms
with market power were in a better position
to innovate. However, his analysis focused
primarily on how firm size affects innovative
behavior and entrepreneurship; he had not yet
explored the special economic attributes of
information goods as was later done by Arrow.
Subsection 2.3.1 summarizes the
results of these surveys.

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Against this background, this section looks at the IP system as one form of government intervention to promote
innovation. It explores how the IP system shapes innovation incentives (Subsection 2.1.1), which considerations

2.1.1
How IP protection shapes
innovation incentives

go into designing IP rights (Subsection 2.1.2) and how

IP protection is a policy initiative that provides incentive

those rights compare to other innovation policy instru-

for undertaking creative and innovative activity. IP laws

ments (Subsection 2.1.3).

enable individuals and organizations to obtain exclusive
rights to their inventive and creative output. Ownership of

Before proceeding, one caveat is in order. Most economic

intellectual assets limits the extent to which competitors

research on IP protection has focused on patents, but

can free ride on problem-solving and related information,

many insights also apply to other forms of IP. For that

enabling owners to profit from their efforts and addressing

reason, this section refers to “IP rights” generically. Where

the appropriability dilemma at its heart.

relevant, the discussion points to important differences
between the various forms of IP. Trademark rights are,

Table 2.1 describes the five forms of IP most relevant to

however, excluded from the discussion. While their en-

innovation – patents and utility models, industrial designs,

abling of firms to appropriate innovative efforts through

copyright, plant variety rights and trade secrets. These IP

marketing makes them indirectly relevant to innovation,

forms have emerged historically to accommodate differ-

the economics of trademark protection involves fun-

ent forms of innovative and creative output.

damentally different considerations which, for space
constraints, are not discussed here.4

Table 2.1: Main forms of IP rights
available to innovators
IP right

Subject matter

Acquisition of right

Nature of right:
prevent others from…

Patents and utility Inventions that are
Granted by government … making, using,
models
new, non-obvious and authority, typically
selling, offering for sale
industrially applicable following substantive or importing
examination
Industrial designs Industrial designs that Granted by government … making, selling or
are new and/or original authority upon
importing
registration, with or
without substantive
examination
Copyright

Creative expressions

Automatically, upon
creation

… reproducing and
related acts

Plant variety rights Plant varieties that are Granted by government … using and multiplying
new, distinct, uniform authority following
propagating materials
and stable
substantive examination
Trade secrets

Any valuable
confidential business
information

Automatically, upon
creation

… unlawfully disclosing

Note: This table offers an intuitive overview of the main forms of IP and, only
incompletely, describes the legal character of these rights, as established
through national laws and international treaties. For a detailed legal
introduction, see Abbott et al. (2007). Trademarks are not included here, as
explained in the text.

4

The main economic rationale for protecting trademark
rights is to resolve problems of asymmetric
information between buyers and sellers. There is a
similar rationale behind the protection of geographical
indications. See, for example, Fink et al. (2005).

77

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

IP rights are an elegant means for governments to mobi-

Patent applicants must disclose the problem-solving

lize market forces to guide innovative and creative activity.

information underlying an invention in return for being

They allow decisions on which innovative opportunities to

granted exclusive rights. This promotes timely disclosure

pursue to be taken in a decentralized way. To the extent

of new technological knowledge, and allows follow-on

that individuals and firms operating at the knowledge

inventors to build on that knowledge. In some cases,

frontier are best-informed about the likely success of

problem-solving information can easily be discerned from

innovative projects, the IP system promotes an efficient

a new product on the market – as is naturally the case

allocation of resources for inventive and creative activity.

for new designs and most creative expressions.7 In other
cases, however, reverse engineering may take substantial

This has traditionally been the key economic rationale

time and effort, or it may be altogether impossible. In the

for protecting IP rights. However, there are a number of

absence of patent rights, inventors would have every

additional considerations, some of which strengthen the

incentive to keep their inventions secret. At the extreme,

case for exclusive rights, while others weaken it.

valuable inventions would die with their inventors.

First, while IP rights do not directly solve the problem

Even though patent laws provide for express exceptions

of risk associated with inventive activity, they can im-

on using patented technologies for research purposes,

prove the functioning of financial markets in mobilizing

patents may nonetheless create a barrier for follow-on

resources for risky innovation. In particular, the grant of

innovators. Notably, certain technology fields are char-

a patent at an early stage in the innovation process can

acterized by complex patent landscapes, generating

serve to reassure investors that a start-up firm is in a

uncertainty about whether potential new inventive output

position to generate profits if the invention is successfully

could clash with existing proprietary rights. A related

commercialized. In addition, it provides an independent

problem arises where the commercialization of an inven-

certification that an invention pushes the limits of the

tion requires use of third-party proprietary technology.

knowledge frontier – something that investors may not

Other right holders may refuse to license their technolo-

be able to assess on their own.5

gies or may demand royalties that render the innovation
unprofitable – leading to the so-called holdup problem.

Second, inventing sometimes means finding solutions

Even where they are willing to license, coordinating the

to stand-alone problems. More often, however, it is a

participation of a large number of right holders may be

cumulative process, whereby researchers build on exist-

too costly.8

ing knowledge to develop new technologies or products.
The IP system plays an important role in the process of
cumulative innovation.6

5
6
7

8

78

See, for example, Greenberg (2010) and
Dushnitski and Klueter (2011).
See, for example, Scotchmer (1991).
Computer software is an important exception.
The source code for a particular software can
be technologically protected from disclosure.
Copyright protection does not oblige the
owner to disclose the source code.
See, for example, Eisenberg (1996)
and Shapiro (2001).

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Third, the IP system facilitates firm specialization in

Fourth, the grant of exclusive IP rights affords firms

different stages of the innovation process. As argued

market power, viewed by economists as the ability to set

in Chapter 1, the traditional view of research, develop-

prices above marginal production costs. In many cases,

ment and commercialization undertaken by a single

market power emanating from an IP right is limited, as

firm does not reflect innovation processes in modern

companies face competition from similar products or

economies. For example, while a given firm may find it

technologies. However, for radical innovation – say, a

is particularly good at figuring out how to extend the life

pharmaceutical product treating a disease for which

of batteries, other companies might be better at turning

no alternative treatment exists – market power can be

the underlying inventions into components for different

substantial. The ability of companies to generate profits

consumer electronics. Similarly, a firm may know how

above competitive levels – also called economic rents – is

best to market a new kitchen utensil in its home market,

part of the economic logic of the IP system. Economic

but prefer to partner with another firm in an unfamiliar

rents allow companies to recoup their initial investment

foreign market. Specialization allows firms to maximize an

in research and development (R&D). In other words,

inherent advantage, ultimately enhancing the economy-

economic rents are at the core of the solution to the

wide productivity of the innovation process.

appropriability problem.

Economic theory holds that specialization occurs wher-

However, market power also implies a non-optimal al-

ever the transaction cost of providing specific goods or

location of resources, moving markets away from the

services through the market is lower than the costs of

economic ideal of perfect competition. Above-marginal

coordination within a single organization. Specialization in

cost pricing can raise social concerns, as witnessed by

the innovation process relies on markets for technology.

the debate on patents and access to medicines. It can

Compared to markets for standardized commodities,

also slow the adoption of new technologies, with follow-

technology markets face especially high transaction

on effects on economic productivity. Finally, scholars

costs – in the form of information, search, bargaining,

have long recognized that the existence of economic

enforcement and related costs.10

rents may promote rent-seeking behavior with wasteful

9

or outright harmful consequences.12
To some extent, IP rights can reduce these costs. In the
absence of patent rights, for instance, firms would be reluctant to disclose secret but easy-to-copy technologies
to other firms when negotiating licensing contracts.11 As a
result, licensing agreements from which all parties stand
to benefit might never materialize. In addition, while inventive and creative assets can, in principle, be transferred
through private contracts independent of any IP right, IP
titles offer a delineation of these assets combined with
an assurance of market exclusivity. IP rights thus convey
important information that can facilitate the drawing up
of contracts and reduce the uncertainty of contracting
parties as to the commercial value of the licensed assets.

9

See, for example, Coase (1937)
and Alchian and Demsetz (1972).
10 See Arora et al. (2001b)
and Arora and Gambardella (2010).
11 See Williamson (1981) and Arrow (1971).
12 See Tullock (1987) for a discussion
of the economics of rent-seeking.

79

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

The foregoing discussion reveals that IP rights have
multiple effects on innovative behavior. Understanding
their net effect ultimately requires empirical insight.

2.1.2
Trade-offs in designing IP rights

Generating credible empirical evidence is a difficult task,

IP rights are not discrete policy instruments. National

however. Unlike in the natural sciences, economists

policymakers face far-reaching choices on what can be

usually cannot conduct experiments, say, by randomly

protected by different IP instruments, which rights are

assigning IP rights to companies or IP laws to countries.

conferred and the exceptions that may apply.13

Historical experience sometimes offers quasinatural experiments, allowing for important insights – as illustrated

As a first consideration, the effectiveness of different IP

by research on innovation in the 19 century (see Box

instruments depends on firms’ absorptive and innovative

2.1). However, it is not clear whether these insights still

capacity (see Box 2.2). Economic research has further

apply to today’s more evolved innovation systems and

shown that a firm’s ability to profit from its innovation

economic structures.

depends on access to complementary assets – such as

th

manufacturing capability, organizational know-how and
Box 2.1: How did patent laws affect innovation in the 19th century?
In the mid-19th century, countries in northern Europe protected patents
to varying degrees. A few – such as Denmark, the Netherlands and
Switzerland – did not provide for patent protection during certain
periods. Where protection was available, it varied from 3 to 15
years. Countries adopted patent laws in a relatively ad hoc manner,
influenced more by legal traditions than economic considerations.
Economic historian Petra Moser (2005) analyzed whether this variation
in national patent laws influenced innovation outcomes. In particular,
she collected data on close to 15,000 inventions presented at the
Crystal Palace World’s Fair in 1851 and the Centennial Exhibition
in 1876; her dataset covered inventions from 13 northern European
countries across 7 industries. She then asked whether patterns of
innovation in countries that provided for patent protection differed
from those that did not.
Her findings suggest that innovators in countries without patent
laws focused on a small set of industries where innovation could
be appropriated through secrecy or other means – most notably,
scientific instruments. By contrast, innovation in countries with
patent laws appeared to be more diversified. These findings suggest
that innovation takes place even in the absence of patent protection;
however, the existence of patent laws affects the direction of technical change and thus determines countries’ industrial specialization.

marketing skills.14 These factors vary considerably across
countries at different levels of economic development.
The design of IP rights needs to respond to the innovative
potential of local firms. For firms in countries at an early
stage of development, utility models may be more relevant
than patents for protecting inventive output.15 Several East
Asian countries relied heavily on utility models in their
early development stages – often protecting incremental,
non-patentable modifications of imported products.16
One study on the historical experience of the Republic of
Korea found that the experience firms gained by using the
utility model system prepared them for effectively using
the patent system, both nationally and internationally.17
However, other low- and middle-income countries with
utility model systems in place have not seen a similar
reliance on this form of IP. No systematic evidence is
available to guide policymakers on the circumstances
under which utility models work best.

Notwithstanding these difficulties, economic research
has generated useful empirical evidence for evaluating
the impact of IP rights on innovation. Section 2.2 – as well
as Chapters 3 and 4 – will further review this evidence.
However, before doing so, it is instructive to explore the
implications of the above considerations for the design of
IP rights and how these rights compare with other public
policies aimed at promoting innovation.
80

13 As will be further discussed in Section
2.3, policymakers also face important
choices in the design of institutions that
administer and enforce patent rights.
14 See Teece (1986).
15 Utility models are sometimes also
known as petty patents.
16 See Suthersanen (2006).
17 See Lee (2010).

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Box 2.2: Absorptive and innovative capacity
The terms absorptive and innovative capacity refer to the set of
conditions that enable firms to learn about existing innovation from
external sources and to generate innovation themselves. The factors
that determine a firm’s capacity to absorb external information and
to produce new ideas are related, but the concepts explain the different capabilities that firms require in order to successfully innovate.
Absorptive capacity was first used by economists Wesley Cohen and
Daniel Levinthal in their seminal articles in 1989 and 1990 on the
importance of firms undertaking R&D. They argue that conducting
R&D generates two useful outcomes: new information and enhanced
ability to assimilate and exploit existing information. When firms
conduct R&D, they learn from the process and build technical skills.
This, in turn, enables them to identify and assimilate R&D outcomes
developed elsewhere, improve their technical knowledge and, later,
their innovative capability, the ability to create new innovation.18
The ability to assimilate and learn from new knowledge is also
relevant at the economy-wide level. Economies that are able to
build sufficient absorptive capacity are more likely to benefit from
exposure to foreign technologies and may, eventually, develop the
ability to generate new technologies on their own.19

Nonetheless, economic theory offers some useful guidance for policymakers. First is that IP protection standards
should be differentiated according to the specific environment in which innovation takes place. This is partly
reflected in actual IP policy by the fact that different IP
instruments exist for different subject matters (see Table
2.1). For example, while a new tablet computer may be
protected by patents, industrial designs and copyright,
each IP right protects a distinct innovative element –
whether it is the technology for operating a touch screen,
the aesthetic feature of the tablet’s design or the software
running on it.
There is also important scope for fine-tuning the breadth
of IP rights across different technology fields – partly
through laws and partly through the actions of IP offices
and courts. Economists have argued, for example, for
differentiated patent breadth depending on the extent to
which patented inventions in particular industries build
on each other.22 While some differentiation does indeed

In economic theory, the design of IP rights has been

occur in practice, it is not clear whether it always follows

treated as an optimization problem: governments ad-

economic considerations.23

just IP policy in order to maximize the net benefit that
accrues to society from new inventions, taking into account the possibly adverse effects exclusive rights have
on competition and follow-on innovation. Economist
William Nordhaus first applied the optimization approach
to setting the term of patent protection.20 It can also be
applied to the breadth of IP protection – as determined
by the claims set out in IP titles and their interpretation
by courts.21
In the actual design of IP rights, economic optimization
arguably has played little direct role. This partly reflects
the difficulty of empirically implementing an optimization
model. The societal value of inventions is typically unknown before policies are set. In addition, fully capturing
all the benefits and costs, as outlined in Subsection 2.1.1,
seems elusive, even for the best-equipped economists.

18 See Cohen and Levinthal (1989, 1990).
19 See the works of Nelson (1993), Kim (1997), Yu
(1998), the World Bank (2001) and Lall (2003).
20 See Nordhaus (1969).
21 See Scotchmer (2004) and Gilbert and Shapiro (1990).
22 For example, Jaffe (2000) argues that broader
patent protection should be afforded to the initial
invention in a line of cumulative inventions. See
also Green and Scotchmer (1995), Scotchmer
(1996) and O’Donoghue et al. (1998).
23 Lemley and Burk (2003) discuss how US
patenting standards differ across industries
and what motivates these differences.

81

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

The changing nature of innovation has challenged established norms on what subject matters can be protected by different IP instruments, especially in the area
of patents. Historically, patents have been associated

2.1.3
How IP protection compares to
other innovation policies

with technological inventions; the Agreement on Trade-

IP rights are a useful incentive mechanism when private

Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS

motivation to innovate aligns with society’s preferences

Agreement), for example, refers to inventions “in all fields

with regard to new technologies. But such an alignment

of technology”. However, the rise of non-technological

does not always exist. In addition, it is unclear whether

inventions has raised questions about whether patents

the IP system can incentivize invention that is far from

should also be granted for software, business methods

market application, for example basic science research.

or financial trading strategies, to name a few examples.

So, what other means do governments have to promote

From an economic perspective, arguably it matters less

innovation, and how do they compare with the IP system?

whether an invention is of a technological nature; what
is more important is whether patent rights make a differ-

In general, one can broadly distinguish three mechanisms

ence in resolving appropriability problems and contribute

for promoting innovation. First, there is publicly-funded

to the disclosure of knowledge that would otherwise

innovation carried out by academic institutions and public

remain secret.

research organizations. Second, governments can fund
research undertaken by private firms – notably through

Finally, in designing differentiated IP standards, certain

public procurement, research subsidies, soft loans, R&D

trade-offs exist. Policymakers may not be sufficiently

tax credits and innovation prizes. Third, the IP system is

informed about innovation conditions to optimally dif-

the one mechanism that promotes privately executed

ferentiate IP policies. In addition, uniform IP standards

R&D which is financed through the marketplace rather

are easier to operate, and political economy pressures

than government revenues.26

to favor certain sectors are less likely to arise.
Moreover, policymakers need to be aware of how certain
forms of IP may be chosen over others. In particular,
firms face the choice of protecting inventions by patent
rights or through trade secrecy. Surveys suggest that
weak patent rights may prompt firms to rely more often
on secrecy.24 This enlarges opportunities for legitimate
imitation and technology diffusion; however, where imitation is not possible, it may forestall the disclosure of
valuable knowledge.25

82

24 See Mansfield (1986), Levin et al. (1987) and Graham
and Sichelman (2008). These surveys show that
firms – across many industrial sectors, except for the
chemical and pharmaceutical sectors – relied more
heavily on trade secrets than on patents to protect
their innovation from rivals. They also show that firms
producing process – rather than product – innovation
rank trade secrets as more effective than patents
in protecting innovation. This preference is also
expressed where the likelihood of imitation is higher,
such as where patent protection is perceived to be
weak or the perceived value of innovation is high.
25 Lerner and Zhu (2007) show that a weakening of
copyright protection in the US has prompted software
developers increasingly to rely on patent rights.
However, it is not clear from their study how this
substitution of IP forms has affected innovation.
26 See, for example, David (1993).

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

It is important to recognize that the various instruments
of innovation policy can be complementary. For instance,
academic research sometimes results in patents and subsequent licensing for commercial development. Similarly,
government support of privately undertaken research
may result in IP ownership. However, it is useful to independently analyze and compare each policy instrument.
Table 2.2 offers an overview of the different mechanisms
and compares them along several dimensions. It shows
that the choice of policy instrument depends on the circumstances in which R&D is conducted. To begin with, basic
research that does not immediately lead to commercial application is largely undertaken by academia and public research organizations. These institutions also invest in more
generic research aimed at advancing specific societal interests – for example in the area of health. Other policy instruments can also spur such generic research, although they
typically place a stronger emphasis on applied research.

Box 2.3: Barriers to innovation in Chile
Chile is a small open economy that mainly exports raw materials
and agricultural commodities – such as copper, wine, fruits and
fish. Nonetheless, the country has incipient technological capabilities in certain industries, notably those linked to the processing of
natural resources. Indeed, responses to Chile’s national innovation
survey reveal that 24.8 percent of firms had introduced some kind
of innovation in the 2007-2008 period.
What barriers do Chilean firms encounter when they innovate?
According to the same survey, high costs of innovative activity and
difficulties in obtaining financing rank among the most important
barriers. Firms also indicate “ease of copying by other firms” as a
problem, but it only ranks 11th on the list of barriers. Accordingly,
only 4.8 percent of innovating firms indicated that they had applied
for patents – a figure far below similar shares for the United States
(US) and European countries.
In response to these key barriers to innovation, one central element
of Chile’s innovation policy has been the provision of innovation
subsidies. Two innovation funds – the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo
Científico y Tecnológico and the Fondo de Fomento al Desarrollo
Científico y Tecnológico – offer support to basic scientific research
and early stage R&D activity.
Source: Benavente (2011).

Important differences exist in how R&D is financed.
Certain policy instruments – notably, prizes, R&D tax
credits and IP rights – require firms to initially fund R&D

A closely related consideration is whether a policy instru-

activity on their own or through financial markets. These

ment functions mainly as a “push” or a “pull” mechanism.

instruments may therefore be less effective for large

The key difference is that, in the case of a “push” mecha-

and highly risky R&D projects and in economies with

nism innovators are rewarded at the outset, whereas in

underdeveloped financial markets (see Box 2.3). The

the latter case, the reward depends on the innovation’s

other instruments provide upfront public financing of

success. “Pull” mechanisms such as IP rights and prizes

R&D, reducing ex-ante risk and avoiding the problems

may thus entail stronger performance incentives, as in-

of imperfect credit markets.

novators face the pressure – or lure – of success when

27

engaging in R&D.

27 For a literature survey, see Hall and Lerner (2010).

83

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

As mentioned earlier, one attraction of the IP system is

One drawback of the IP system is that it leads to exclu-

that companies likely to be well-informed about techno-

sive rights over research outcomes; this may reduce

logical opportunities select R&D projects themselves.

competition and slow cumulative innovation. Innovation

This is also the case for tax credits. In order to obtain

prizes that result in public ownership of research results

subsidies and soft loans, companies may initiate an R&D

are superior in this respect, and they preserve the “pull”

project, but it is a government agency that ultimately

property of the IP system. However, they can suffer

decides whether to support the project. In the case

from information failures, notably the difficulty of writing

of procurement and innovation prizes, governments

complete contracts. This may explain why innovation

initiate and select R&D projects. This may give rise to

prizes have mainly been used for relatively small-scale

so-called information failures. First, governments may

problems for which solutions are within reach, and

be imperfectly informed about the success potential of

mainly by firms rather than governments (see subsection

competing R&D projects, possibly leading to less than

1.2.5). Nonetheless, prizes may be especially suitable for

ideal choices. Second, problems related to incomplete

incentivizing socially desirable innovation for which no or

contracting may arise; in particular, it may be difficult at

only small markets exist, precisely because of the lack of

the outset to fully enumerate the conditions that deter-

market signals that may otherwise guide R&D decisions.28

mine whether a procurement contract or prize objective
has been fulfilled.

A second drawback of IP rights – and prizes – is that they
require ex-ante private financing of R&D. In environments

The categorization presented in Table 2.2 ignores impor-

where such financing is hard to come by, “push” instru-

tant choices in the design of individual policy instruments

ments such as subsidies and soft loans may be needed

that affect innovation performance. However, it points

to encourage innovation, especially where risk is involved.

to some of the key advantages and drawbacks of the
IP system relative to other innovation policies. First, for

In sum, no single policy instrument works best in all

governments, the IP system is cheap; it does not require

circumstances. In considering which instrument to em-

government spending to finance R&D. Second, R&D

ploy, policymakers need to take into account financing

decisions based on IP rights are decentralized, reducing

conditions, risk levels, possible information failures,

information failures. Tax credits offer the same advantage,

performance incentives and other variables. Indeed,

but do not by themselves solve the appropriability prob-

since each policy instrument has both advantages and

lem. In fact, for tax credits to be effective, firms need to

drawbacks, the key challenge for policymakers is to mix

be able to appropriate innovation investment – including

policies so that they effectively complement each other.

through IP rights.

28 Much thought has been given in recent years
to designing innovation prizes in a way that
maximizes their effectiveness, especially in the
pharmaceutical sector. For example, see Love
and Hubbard (2009) and Sussex et al. (2011).

84

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Table 2.2: Overview of innovation policy instruments
Main
features

Research
direction

Financing
of R&D

Push
versus pull

Selecting
entity

Selection
criteria

Ownership of
results

Main
advantages

Main
drawbacks

Publicly funded and executed
Public research
organizations

• Public goods such
as defense and
health
• Does not
undertake commercialization of
knowledge

• Basic
• Generic

• Ex-ante
financing of
project cost

• Push

• Government

• Public interest • Public
• Peer review
• Institution

• Advance
fundamental
scientific
knowledge

• Uncertain
impact

Academic
research

• Aimed at increasing basic scientific
knowledge
• Does not
undertake commercialization of
knowledge

• Basic
• Generic

• Ex-ante
financing of
project cost

• Push

• Government
• University
• Philanthropy

• Public need
• Peer review

• Public
• Institution

• Advance
fundamental
scientific
knowledge

• Uncertain
impact

Publicly funded and privately executed
Procurement

• Government
purchases of
well-defined innovative goods – for
example, military
equipment

• Generic
• Applied

• Financing of
project cost
• Timing
depends on
contract

• Combination
of push and
pull depending on design

• Government

• Ex-ante
competition

• Depends on
contract

• Mobilizes
competitive
market forces
for the provision of public
good

• Difficult to
write perfect
contracts

Research
subsidies
and direct
government
funding

• Public support for
targeted research

• Generic
• Applied

• Ex-ante
financing
based on
estimated
project cost

• Push

• Government
• Firm

• Usually firm
• Competition
• Administrative
decision

• Mobilizes
competitive
market forces
for public
benefit

• Governments
are imperfectly informed about
success
potential of
R&D projects

Prizes

• Prizes for targeted
solutions to specific problems

• Generic
• Applied

• Ex-post
financing
based on
ex-ante
estimated
project cost

• Pull

• Government

• Competition

• Mobilizes
competitive
market forces
for public
benefit
• Subsequent
competitive
provision of
technology

• Difficult to
write perfect
contracts
• Requires
private exante financing
of R&D

Soft loans

• Subsidized
provision of credit
through belowmarket interest
rates, government
guarantees and
flexible reimbursement provisions

• Applied

• Ex-ante
financing
based on
estimated
project cost

• Push
• Some pull
depending on
design

• Government
• Firm

• Administrative • Firm
decision

• Reduces risks
associated
with large
R&D undertakings

• Governments
are asymmetrically informed about
success
potential of
R&D projects
• Does not address firms’
appropriability problem

R&D tax credits
and related
fiscal incentives

• Reduced taxation
of profits linked to
investment in R&D

• Generic
• Applied

• Ex-post
financing
dependent
on actual
investment
expenditure

• Push
• Some pull
depending on
design

• Firm

• Proof of R&D
investment

• Firm

• Decisions
on R&D
decentralized

• Does not address firms’
appropriability problem
• Requires
private exante financing
of R&D

• Generic
• Applied

• Ex-post
financing
based on
market value
of innovation

• Pull

• Firm

• As specified
in IP laws

• IP owner (firm
or institution)

• Decisions
on R&D
decentralized

• Static
misallocation
of resources
• Requires
private exante financing
of R&D

• Usually public

Privately funded and executed
IP rights

• Market exclusivity

Source: WIPO, extending on Guellec and van Pottelsberge de la Potterie (2007) and Granstrand (1999, 2011).

85

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

2.2

2.2.1

Taking a closer look at the
patent system

How patent protection affects
firm performance
As a first step, it is helpful to review the evidence on

The last three decades have seen use of the patent

how patent protection affects the performance of firms.

system increase to historically unprecedented levels (see

Subsection 2.1.1 pointed to one key difficulty in generat-

Figure 1.18). They have also seen substantial increases

ing empirical evidence: since patent systems have been

in real R&D investment and remarkable progress in

in place in most countries throughout recent history, no

many areas of technology – most spectacularly in the

obvious benchmarks exist against which the performance

information and communications technology (ICT) field.

of patenting firms can be compared. One way around this

While these trends indicate that patenting has become

problem is to directly survey firms about the importance

more central to strategies of innovative firms, they alone

they place on patents as an appropriation mechanism

do not reveal how effective the patent system has been

for innovative activity. Several such surveys have been

in promoting innovation and improving welfare.

conducted, and Table 2.3 summarizes their main results.

Prompted by the increase in patenting activity, econo-

As pointed out in Section 2.1, both lead time and sales

mists have scrutinized the role that patents play in the

and service activities emerge as the most important

innovation process. In addition, the construction of new

appropriation mechanisms. The importance of patents

databases – often combining unit record data on patents

varies across industries. In industries with short product

with firm-level information on innovative behavior and

life cycles – for example, electronics – patents appear to

economic performance – has enabled richer investiga-

be of lesser importance; indeed, technologies may be

tions into the effects of patent protection.

obsolete by the time patents are granted. By contrast,
patent protection is critically important in the chemical

This section takes a closer look at the economics of

and pharmaceutical industries. This results from the long

the patent system, focusing on more recent research. It

R&D process in these industries, combined with the fact

expands on several concepts and ideas introduced in

that chemical and pharmaceutical products are easily

the previous section and confronts them with empirical

imitated once introduced to the market. The surveys

evidence. In particular, it discusses how effective the pat-

summarized in Table 2.3 provide useful insights into the

ent system is as an appropriation mechanism in different

role of patent protection, but the evidence is qualitative

sectors of the economy (Subsection 2.2.1), how more

in nature.

widespread patenting affects the process of cumulative
innovation (Subsection 2.2.2), how patent rights shape the
interplay between competition and innovation (Subsection
2.2.3) and the role patents play in modern technology
markets and open innovation strategies (Subsection
2.2.4). The insights gained through more recent research
have led economists to refine their views on the role the
patent system plays in the innovation process.

86

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Table 2.3: Summary of survey evidence
Survey

Year

Country

Survey sample

Product
innovation

Yale

1982 US

Harabi

1988 Switzerland Firms engaging in R&D,
mainly in manufacturing
sector

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

Firms (publicly traded),
performing R&D in the
manufacturing sector

Sales or
service
efforts

Lead time

Fast
learning
curve

Patents

Secrecy

Lead time

Fast
learning
curve

Sales or
service
efforts

Secrecy

Patents

Sales or
service
efforts

Lead time

Fast
learning

Secrecy

Patent

Lead time

Sales or
service
efforts

Fast
learning

Secrecy

Patents

Dutch CIS 1992 Netherlands Firms (≥10 employees)
Lead time
that developed or
introduced new or
improved products,
services or processes
during the last three years
in the manufacturing
sector

Retain
skilled
labor

Secrecy

Patent

Complexity of
design

Lead time

Retain
skilled
labor

Secrecy

Complexity of
design

Certification

Carnegie 1994 US
Mellon

Firms (≥ 20 employees
Lead time
and ≥ USD 5 million in
sales) performing R&D in
the manufacturing sector

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Sales or
service
efforts

Patent

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Lead time

Sales or
service
efforts

Patents

Japan
1994 Japan
Carnegie
Mellon

Firms performing
R&D (≥ JPY 1 billion
capitalization) in the
manufacturing sector

Patents

Complementary
assets

Sales or
service
efforts

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Secrecy

Lead time

Patents

Sales or
services
assets

RIETIGeorgia
Tech

2007 Japan

Inventors who applied
Lead time
for triadic patents with
priority years 2000-2003

Complementary
assets

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Patents

Survey does not distinguish between product and process
innovation

Berkeley

2008 US

Small manufacturing firms Lead time
focusing on biotechnology,
medical devices and
software

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Patents

Reverse
engineering
difficult

Survey does not distinguish between product and process
innovation

Lead time

Process
innovation

Source: WIPO extending on Hall (2009). Results of the surveys were collected for Yale (Levin et al., 1987), Switzerland (Harabi, 1995), Dutch CIS (Brouwer and
Kleinknecht, 1999), Carnegie Mellon (Cohen et al., 2000), Japan Carnegie Mellon (Cohen et al., 2002), RIETI-Georgia Tech (Nagaoka and Walsh, 2008), Berkeley
(Graham et al., 2009).

Several studies have sought to generate quantitative evidence on the importance of patent protection. One study
by Arora and his co-authors (2008) employs detailed
data on firms’ innovative activity and patenting behavior
to estimate a so-called patent premium – defined as the
increment to the value of an invention due to having it
patented. The study’s methodology takes into account
that patenting decisions are not random: firms only seek
to patent inventions that can be expected to yield a net
benefit. The results indicate a premium of almost 50
percent for patented inventions.29 Confirming the earlier
survey evidence, patent premia are highest in the fields
of medical instruments, pharmaceuticals and biotechnology and lowest in the food and electronics sectors. The
results also show that patent premia are higher for larger
firms; one likely explanation for this finding is that larger
firms are better equipped to exploit and enforce patents
than smaller firms.30

29 Arora et al. (2008) estimate a negative patent premium
for all innovation – including innovative technologies
that firms do not actually patent. This suggests that
the costs of patenting – in the form of the possible
disclosure of knowledge that would otherwise be kept
secret – exceed its benefits for many innovations.
30 Patent renewal models also offer insight into
the private value firms derive from having their
inventions protected by patents. Important studies
in this field include Pakes (1986), Schankerman
and Pakes (1986), Lanjouw et al. (1998) and
Schankerman (1998). However, these studies do
not offer a direct estimate of the R&D-incentive
effect associated with patent protection.

87

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Studies have also investigated whether the prospect of

Thursby and Thursby (2006) studied the importance of

securing patent rights leads firms to invest more in R&D.

IP protection in the decision-making process of R&D-

A study by Qian (2007) focuses on the experience of 26

intensive multinational firms. In a survey of 250 such

countries that introduced pharmaceutical patent protec-

firms, respondents identified IP protection as an important

tion in the period 1978-2002. The pharmaceutical sector

factor in determining where to conduct R&D. However,

is especially suited for analyzing how patent protection

they still established R&D facilities in markets where IP

affects R&D behavior. The survey evidence summarized

protection was perceived to be weak. Indeed, other fac-

in Table 2.3 reveals the importance of patent protection

tors – notably, the potential for market growth and the

in this sector, and the establishment of pharmaceutical

quality of R&D personnel – emerge as important drivers

product patent protection typically represents a major

of location decisions. Further research work by Thursby

policy shift. The study finds no effect for patent protection

and Thursby (2011) highlights the fact that most “new-to-

across all countries, but a positive effect in countries that

the-world” research is conducted either in the US or in

are more developed and have higher levels of education.

other high-income countries where IP protection tends

This finding highlights the fact that pre-existing innovative

to be strong. Again, however, IP protection does not

capacity is an important factor in whether patent rights

appear to be the main driver of this outcome; university

matter (see Subsection 2.2.2).

faculty expertise and ease of collaboration with universities emerge as the key factors which explain where firms

A closely related study by Kyle and McGahan (2011)

carry out cutting-edge research.

draws similar conclusions. In addition, it finds that the introduction of patent protection in lower-income countries
has not created incentives for R&D related to diseases
primarily affecting those countries. The study argues that
this result is due to the small size of these countries and
calls for complementary innovation policies to incentivize R&D specific to the needs of poorer societies (see
Subsection 2.2.3).31
A related question concerns whether differences in the
level of patent protection across countries affect firms’
decisions on where to locate R&D. Such differences
may be of minor importance for R&D directed at global
markets. However, R&D often has a local component
– for example, where firms adapt technologies to local
markets or focus on the preferences and needs of local consumers.
31 The evidence from other studies is more ambiguous,
although many use a less convincing policy
counterfactual. Park and Ginarte (1997) and Kanwar
and Evenson (2003) use an index that measures
overall strength of a country’s IP rights. They also
find that patent protection leads to greater R&D
expenditure for countries above certain levels of
development. Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001)
studied the effects on R&D of Japan’s 1988 patent
reform and find only a small impact on R&D activity.

88

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Recognizing that patents can convey information about
the commercial potential of inventions, economists have
studied their role in mobilizing financial resources for
innovative firms. Indeed, studies have found that firms

2.2.2
How patent strategies shift where
innovation is cumulative

that own patents are more likely to receive financing from

To understand how patent protection affects innovation,

venture capitalists than those that do not. Recent surveys

it is essential to look beyond the individual firm. Innovative

conducted in the US show that this is the case for small

activity seldom happens in isolation; one firm’s solution to

rather than large firms. Two important studies on ven-

a problem typically relies on insights gained from previous

ture capital financing of US semiconductor firms show

innovation. Similarly, in competitive markets, firms inno-

that not only do patent applications convey important

vate simultaneously and develop technologies that may

information to investors about the quality of inventions,

complement each other. As pointed out in Subsection

they also help firms to attract funds in the earlier stages of

2.1.1, patent rights influence how prior or complementary

financing.33 At the same time, the importance of patents

knowledge can be accessed and commercialized.

32

in facilitating access to finance differs by industry, with,
for example, patents playing a more prominent role in

The rapid increase in the number of patent filings has

health care-related technologies than ICTs.

raised concerns about patents hindering cumulative in-

34

novation. Indeed, patenting activity has grown especially
fast for so-called complex technologies. Economists
define complex technologies as those that consist of
numerous separately patentable inventions with possibly
widespread patent ownership; discrete technologies, by
contrast, describe products or processes made up of
only a few patentable inventions. Figure 2.1 depicts the
growth in patent applications worldwide for these two
technology categories. The top figure compares patenting growth for first filings, approximating new inventions;
it shows consistently faster filing growth for complex
technologies since the early 1970s. The bottom figure
focuses on subsequent filings, made up mostly of filings
outside the applicants’ home country; it reveals equally
faster filing growth for complex technologies, though only
starting from the mid-1990s.
32 See Lemley (2000), Hsu and Ziedonis (2008),
Harhoff (2009), Graham and Sichelman (2008)
and Sichelman and Graham (2010).
33 Cockburn and MacGarvie (2009) examine how US
legislation enabling the patentability of software
in the mid-1990s has affected market entry of
new competitors. They use data on the financing
of entrants in 27 narrowly defined software
markets. One of their findings is that firms with
patents are more likely to be funded by venture
capitalists. See also Greenberg (2010).
34 See Graham et al. (2009). This study also
suggests that the role of patents differs
according to financing source.

89

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Figure 2.1: Complex technologies

What accounts for the difference in growth rates? The

see faster patenting growth

difference may partly reflect the nature of technological

Patent filings for complex versus discrete technologies,
1972=100, 1972-2007

change. For example, complex technologies include

First filings
First lings: complex technologies
First lings: discrete technologies

most ICTs which have experienced rapid advances over
the past three decades. However, economic research
suggests that faster growth in complex technologies is

400

also due to a shift in patenting strategies.

300

Hall and Ziedonis (2001) convincingly made this point in
their study of patenting behavior in the US semiconductor industry. Firm surveys such as the ones outlined in

200

Table 2.3 show that patents are among the less effective
mechanisms for appropriating returns on R&D in this

100

sector; because of short product life cycles, semiconductor firms mainly rely on lead time advantage and

19

72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
8
19 0
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
9
19 0
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
0
20 0
02
20
04
20
06

0

Subsequent filings
Subsequent lings: complex technologies
Subsequent lings: discrete technologies
400

300

trade secrets to recoup their investment in innovation.
Paradoxically, however, the US saw a sharp increase
in semiconductor patenting from the mid-1980s to the
mid-1990s. Moreover, semiconductor patenting grew
at a faster pace than real R&D investment, leading to a
doubling of the so-called patent yield (see Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Semiconductor patenting
grows faster than R&D investment

200

Patent yield in selected US manufacturing industries, 1979-2002
Semiconductors
Chemicals
Pharmaceuticals

100

Eletrical
& computing equipment
All

0.7
0.6

19

72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
8
19 0
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
9
19 0
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06

0

0.5
Note: WIPO’s IPC-Technology Concordance Table is used to classify the
data by field of technology. The classification of complex and discrete
technologies follows von Graevenitz et al. (2008).

0.4
0.3

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, March 2011.
0.2
0.1

00
20

97
19

94
19

91
19

88
19

85
19

82
19

19

79

0

Note: Patent yield is defined as the ratio of patents granted to constant dollar
R&D investment. It is based on a sample of publicly listed firms for which R&D
data are available through Compustat. Chemicals exclude pharmaceuticals
and electrical and computing equipment excludes semiconductors.
Source: Updated from Hall and Ziedonis (2001).

90

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Hall and Ziedonis relate the increase in semiconductor

What is the ultimate effect of strategic patenting behav-

patenting to shifts in the US legal environment that proved

ior on welfare and innovation? On the one hand, such

favorable to patent owners. Relying on econometric

behavior has not obviously prevented rapid progress in

analysis of firm-level data and interviews with semicon-

semiconductors and many other complex technologies

ductor firms, they conclude that these shifts prompted

– though the counterfactual scenario remains, of course,

firms to proactively build up large patent portfolios. One

unclear.41 In addition, the study by Hall and Ziedonis

motivation for such portfolios is to ensure a firm’s freedom

points out that patent protection fostered specialization

to operate in its innovation space and preempt litigation.

in semiconductor innovation; in particular, patent rights

In fact, the study finds that the large-scale and capital-

facilitated the entry of specialized semiconductor design

intensive manufacturers most vulnerable to holdup – for

firms which initially had relied on venture capital finance.42

example, through preliminary injunctions – invested
most aggressively in securing patent rights. A second
motivation for creating these portfolios is to strengthen
a firm’s bargaining position vis-à-vis its competitors. In
particular, a firm owning many patents in a crowded
technology space can preempt litigation by credibly
threatening to countersue competitors. In addition, it is
in a better position to negotiate favorable cross-licensing
arrangements that are often needed to commercialize
new technologies.35
How widespread is strategic patenting beyond the US
semiconductor industry? Clearly, patent portfolio races
have been documented for other complex technologies
– ICTs in general and, in particular, telecommunications,
software, audiovisual technology, optics and, more recently, smartphones and tablet computers.36 While the
Hall-Ziedonis study focused on the US, evidence suggests that electronics firms in other countries – especially
in East Asia – have also built up large patent portfolios
for strategic purposes.37 According to one study, a 1986
lawsuit by semiconductor firm Texas Instruments against
Samsung – which led to a settlement worth more than
USD 1 billion – proved to be a catalyst for Korean firms to
proactively build up their patent portfolios.38 Still, looking
at trends in patent filings and real R&D expenditure, the
US stands out as the only major jurisdiction that has seen
a consistent increase in the economy-wide patent yield
since the mid-1980s.39 While other factors may account
for this diverging trend, it is consistent with the conclusion of Hall and Ziedonis that patent portfolio races were
prompted by changes in the US legal environment.40

35 For survey evidence on the importance of
patent ownership for negotiating crosslicensing arrangements, see Cohen et al.
(2000) and Sichelman and Graham (2010).
36 See Harhoff et al. (2007) and, for software, Noel and
Schankerman (2006). In the case of smartphones,
evidence is still anecdotal in nature – see “Apple
and Microsoft Beat Google for Nortel Patents”
in The New York Times (Nicholson, 2011).
37 See Cohen et al. (2002).
38 See Lee and Kim (2010).
39 See WIPO (2011a), measuring patent yield as
first filings over real R&D expenditure. Similarly,
Switzerland and the Netherlands have seen a rise
in patent yield since the early 1990s. The Republic
of Korea experienced a rising patent yield from
1994 to 2000, but that measure has since fallen.
40 However, survey evidence suggests that
strategic use of patents is more prevalent in
Japan than in the US (Cohen et al., 2002).
41 To the extent that large patent portfolios can be said
to “neutralize” each other, the costs of acquiring
and administering them may, from an economywide perspective, be considered wasteful.
42 See also Arora et al. (2001a) and Arora
and Ceccagnoli (2006) for similar evidence
beyond the semiconductor industry.

91

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

On the other hand, econometric evidence suggests that
dense webs of overlapping patent rights – so-called patent thickets – can indeed slow or even forestall cumulative innovation processes.43 High transaction costs have
made it difficult for some – especially small – firms to ob-

2.2.3
How patent rights shape the
interplay between competition
and innovation

tain the licenses necessary for prior and complementary

Competition in product markets affects innovative behav-

technologies; the latter include patented research tools

ior in different ways. Subsection 2.1.1 discussed one such

that, for example, are of special relevance to biotechnol-

way: if firms cannot generate profits above competitive

ogy research.44 As will be further discussed in Chapter 3,

levels, they cannot recoup their initial R&D investment.

private collaborative arrangements can, to some extent,

Too much competition harms innovation. Indeed, this

preempt such adverse outcomes.

relationship appears to hold empirically; studies show
that, across industries, more intense competition is as-

Finally, strategic patenting affects the nature and inten-

sociated with less innovation. However, this correlation

sity of competition in product markets, in turn affecting

only holds above a certain threshold of competition.

innovation incentives. To understand precisely how first

Below that level, more intense competition is actually

requires a broader discussion of the interaction between

associated with increasing innovation.45 This latter find-

the forces of competition and innovation.

ing has an intuitive explanation: if firms generate large
economic rents and face little competition that threatens
these rents, market pressure to innovate is weak. If, by
contrast, firms’ economic rents are threatened by rival
innovative efforts, their incentive to innovate on their own
is stronger.
Overall, there is thus an inverted-U-shaped relationship
between competition and innovation, whereby investment
in innovation first increases with the level of competition,
and then declines as competition intensifies beyond that
level. Although intuitive, formally incorporating these relationships into theoretical models of industrial organization
has turned out to be difficult. Only recently have economists developed models that generate the inverted-U
relationship observed in the data.46
How do patent rights influence the competition-innovation
relationship? On the one hand, one may argue that patent
rights foster a healthy competitive balance. They prevent
competition of the free-riding type that undermines
the appropriation of R&D investment. But they permit

43 See Cockburn et al. (2010) for econometric evidence.
44 See Eisenberg (1996), Heller and Eisenberg
(1998), Murray and Stern (2006, 2007)
and Verbuere et al. (2006).
45 See Aghion et al. (2005).
46 Idem.

92

competition between substitute products each of which
may be protected by different patent rights. In addition,
certain features of the patent system directly promote
competitive market forces: the disclosure requirement
enables firms to learn from the inventions of rivals; and

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

the limited protection term ensures that the economic

A related strategy involves filing patents with broad

rent associated with a patent is time-bound, inducing

claims for trivial inventions and threatening competitors

firms to stay ahead by constantly innovating.

with litigation; even if the patent office eventually rejects
those patents, they may generate uncertainty among rival

On the other hand, patent ownership can, in certain situ-

firms who fear that their own innovative activity may clash

ations, significantly curtail competition. While rare, patent

with future patent rights. Small firms and new market

rights to key technologies for which few substitutes exist

entrants – often thought to be an especially important

can lead to concentrated market structures. In addition,

source of innovation in the economy – may be especially

the emergence of patent thickets, as outlined in the

vulnerable to these types of blocking strategy, because

previous subsection, can negatively affect competition

they may not have a large enough patent portfolio to

by marginalizing those firms that do not have a suffi-

deter litigious rivals.

ciently large patent portfolio as a bargaining tool. Where
patent rights overly restrict competition, society loses

The rise in patenting of complex technologies has argu-

twice: through higher prices and less choice in product

ably widened the scope for using patents anticompetitive-

markets; and through insufficient competitive pressure

ly. Identifying such practices is difficult. Patent documents

on firms to innovate. In practice, it is difficult for policy-

alone do not offer any insight into the strategic use of

makers to assess when such a situation arises. There is

patent rights.49 In addition, the line between a patent that

little empirical guidance on what “dose” of competition

aims to ensure freedom-to-operate versus a predatory

is optimal for innovation. Indeed, this will differ across

patent may not be easily drawn, especially in industries

industries and depends on the characteristics of markets

with dense patent thickets. As will be further explained

and technologies.

in Section 2.3, sound patent institutions can reduce
the potential for patents to be used anti-competitively.

Nonetheless, policymakers should be especially con-

In addition, there is an important role for competition

cerned about two types of patenting practices. First,

policy to play in containing outright predatory behavior

certain patenting strategies primarily serve to slow the

by patent owners.50

innovative efforts of rival firms. For example, a firm may
seek a patent for a technology that it does not commer-

A second area of emerging concern relates to the ac-

cialize, but may then sue rivals on the basis of that patent

tivities of so-called non-practicing entities (NPEs). These

to block entry into product markets.47 Indeed, a recent

entities are either individuals or firms that build up port-

inventor survey revealed that, for nearly one-fifth of pat-

folios of patent rights, but do not seek to develop or

ents filed at the European Patent Office (EPO), “blocking

commercialize any products based on technologies

competitors” was an important motivation for patenting.

they own. Instead, they monitor markets for potentially

48

infringing products and then enforce their patent rights by
approaching firms to negotiate licenses or by initiating litigation. Many larger NPEs do not file patents themselves,
but buy unused patents from firms that do not actively use
them or that are forced by bankruptcy to auction them.
47 See Gilbert and Newbery (1982) for
a theoretical exposition.
48 See Giuri et al. (2007).
49 However, Harhoff et al. (2007) argue that acts of
predation will leave traces in patent data if those
acts involve patent opposition or outright litigation.
50 See Harhoff et al. (2007).

93

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

NPEs can be beneficial to society by helping to create
secondary markets for technology (see also the discussion in Subsection 2.2.4). Such markets can foster innovation incentives as they enable firms to reap a return on
research activity, even if the resulting research output is

2.2.4
The role patents play in
technology markets and open
innovation strategies

not further developed and commercialized. Selling non-

Chapter 1 discussed the rise of so-called technology

essential patents may be especially attractive for small

markets, as reflected, for example, in more frequent pat-

companies or individual inventors that lack the resources

ent licensing. At first, the existence of such markets may

to effectively use or enforce them.51

seem surprising. Technologies are highly specialized and
non-standardized goods; matching sellers and buyers

Yet, critics of at least some NPEs argue that their activi-

can be difficult – not least because many firms keep

ties are primarily rent-seeking and that any benefit to the

their technologies secret. Even where there is a match,

original patent owners is more than offset by the costs to

strategic behavior and high transaction costs can prevent

52

the innovators targeted by NPEs’ enforcement actions.

firms from entering into licensing contracts.55 What then

A firm threatened with costly litigation may prefer to settle

motivates firms to participate in technology markets and

and agree to pay a royalty, even if it feels that it has not

why are they increasingly doing so?

infringed a patent. Since NPEs do not manufacture and
thus do not risk infringing someone else’s patent, they

Subsection 2.1.1 pointed to one important reason: tech-

face no chance of counter-lawsuits. According to critics,

nology markets allow firms to specialize. Firms may

NPEs are thus harmful to society, as they increase the

be both more innovative and efficient by focusing on

risks associated with and cost of innovation.

selected research, development or manufacturing tasks
– outweighing the difficulties related to participating

Empirical research on NPEs is still in its infancy. One re-

in technology markets. In addition, so-called general

cent study on litigation of financial patents in the US finds

purpose technologies (GPTs) – technologies that find

that parties other than the inventor or the original patent

application in a large number of product markets – are

applicant play a significant role in litigation. Patent own-

often best developed by specialized firms who can sell

ers initiating litigation fitted the profile of NPEs; they were

them to many downstream firms, thereby recovering

overwhelmingly individuals or small companies – unlike

large upfront R&D outlays.56

the larger financial institutions that commercialize most
financial innovations. Indeed, the latter were disproportionately targeted in litigation. The study also finds that
financial patents were litigated at a rate of 27 to 39 times
greater than that of US patents as a whole. These find53

ings are specific to the US financial service industry and
do not shed light on how litigation has affected financial
innovation. However, they point to NPEs as a rising force
that innovating companies need to take into account.
As in the case of anti-competitive patenting strategies,
sound patent institutions can make a difference in containing the possibly abusive behavior of NPEs that is
detrimental to innovation – as will be further discussed
in Section 2.3.54
94

51
52
53
54

See, for example, Geradin et al. (2011).
See, for example, Lemley and Shapiro (2007).
See Lerner (2010).
Some governments have also launched special
initiatives aimed at limiting the exposure of
innovating companies to NPE lawsuits. For example,
in 2010 the Korean government helped launch a
firm called Intellectual Discovery, which buys out
patents that might be asserted against Korean
firms. See “The Rise of the NPE” in Managing
Intellectual Property (Park and Hwang, 2010).
55 See, for example, Nelson and Winter
(1982), Teece (1988), Arora et al. (2001b)
and Arora and Gambardella (2010).
56 See Bresnahan and Gambardella (1998)
and Gambardella and McGahan (2010).

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

As discussed in Chapter 1, specialization is one important

A second reason why firms participate in technology mar-

element of open innovation strategies: firms license out

kets is to tap these markets for valuable knowledge. In-

those technologies that are outside their core business;

house research is an essential element of innovation, but

and they license in technologies that amplify their com-

firms advance their knowledge and draw inspiration from

petitive advantage. Evidence confirms that firms that do

the ideas of others. Economists have devised the concept

not have the complementary assets needed to bring their

of knowledge spillovers to describe situations in which

inventions to market tend to license them to others for

knowledge flows from one firm or individual to another,

commercialization. In addition, survey studies reveal that

without the originator receiving any direct compensation.

licensing is one of the main reasons for seeking patents

From society’s viewpoint, knowledge spillovers are desir-

57

in the US. In Europe, one in five companies licenses

able, because they lead to the wide dissemination of new

patents to non-affiliated partners, while in Japan more

ideas. However, if knowledge spills over to everyone as

than one in four companies do so. Studies on GPTs,

soon as it is created, the classic appropriability dilemma

in turn, have shown that licensing is more likely to occur

arises. A trade-off exists, for policymakers and firms.

58

59

where downstream product markets are fragmented.

60

There is also evidence that certain industries – notably,

Policymakers must balance incentives for creating knowl-

the biotechnology, semiconductor and software sectors

edge against the rapid diffusion of knowledge. The

– have seen an increase in specialized firms.61

patent system helps to strike this balance by granting
limited exclusive rights to inventors while, at the same

Little is known, however, about the fundamental factors

time, mandating the disclosure of information on inven-

that have driven greater specialization in more recent

tions to society. Inventor surveys reveal that published

history. One possible explanation is that smaller com-

patents are indeed an important knowledge source for

panies with fewer bureaucratic structures may be bet-

firms conducting R&D – more so in Japan than in the

ter positioned to find solutions to increasingly complex

US and Europe.62 No study has attempted to quantify

technological problems. Another reason may be that

the associated knowledge spillovers and their economic

ICTs and new business models have made it easier for

benefits. Such an exercise might indeed be elusive. Yet,

specialized firms to participate in technology markets.

the patent literature represents a valuable source of

Subsection 1.3.3 described, for example, the entry of

knowledge for creative minds anywhere in the world. In

new intermediaries with novel approaches to matching

addition, the easy availability of millions of patent docu-

technology sellers and buyers.

ments to anyone connected to the Internet has arguably
created new catch-up opportunities for technologically
less developed economies.

57 Using the 1994 Carnegie Mellon survey on industrial
R&D in the US, Arora and Ceccagnoli (2006) found
that firms that do not have specialized complementary
assets for commercializing their inventions are more
likely to license out their inventions than those who do.
58 See Cohen et al. (2000) and Sichelman
and Graham (2010).
59 See Zuniga and Guellec (2009).
60 See Gambardella and Giarratana (2011)
and Arora and Gambardella (2010).
61 See Arora et al. (2001a), Hall and Ziedonis
(2001) and Harhoff et al. (2007).
62 See Nagaoka (2011) and Gambardella et al. (2011).
63 See Krugman (1991).

Firms face a similar trade-off between guarding and
sharing knowledge. On the one hand, they need to earn
a return on their R&D investment, which calls for preventing knowledge from leaking to competitors. On the other
hand, absolute protection of ideas is not possible and,
more important, it may not even be desirable. Spillovers
are often a two-way street, involving give and take. For
example, economic research shows that innovating firms
have found it beneficial to collocate; being close to firms
operating in the same field brings learning benefits even
if it means sharing one’s own knowledge.63
95

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Generating spillovers is a second important element of

Finally, a third important reason why firms participate in

open innovation strategies: firms can be better innova-

technology markets and adopt open innovation strategies

tors by engaging with others – even if that involves some

is to access complementary skills and technologies. A

sharing of proprietary knowledge. Indeed, patent rights

firm may find that it stands to gain by collaborating with

are at the heart of the trade-off between guarding and

another firm or a university in developing a particular

sharing knowledge. They allow firms to flexibly control

technology. In other cases, a firm may require access

which technologies to share, with whom and on what

to proprietary technologies held by other firms in order

terms. Economic research provides only limited guidance

to commercialize a product – a frequent scenario in

on how different patent-based knowledge sharing activi-

technology fields in which patent thickets proliferate (see

ties – especially those associated with more recent open

Subsection 2.2.2). How technology markets operate

innovation strategies – affect spillovers and innovation.

when firms cooperate with each other or with universities

As described in Subsection 1.3.2, this is partly the result

will be discussed more fully in Chapters 3 and 4.

of insufficient data; in particular, patent licenses are often
confidential and escape statistical measurement. Box 2.4
summarizes evidence on one open innovation initiative
in the area of green technologies, and finds systematic
differences between the technologies that firms are willing
to share and those they keep in-house.
Box 2.4: Open Innovation and the Eco-Patent Commons
Recognizing the need for promoting innovation and the diffusion of
green technologies, in 2008 a number of multinational companies –
including IBM, Sony and Nokia – created an “Eco-Patent Commons”.
This initiative allows third parties royalty-free access to patented
technologies, voluntarily pledged by firms from around the world.
One key aim of the Commons is to encourage cooperation and
collaboration between pledging firms and potential users to foster
further joint innovation.
A recent study by Hall and Helmers (2011) analyzed the characteristics of the 238 patents pledged to the Commons. In particular, it
compared patents pledged to: i) patents held by pledging firms that
are not donated to the Commons; and ii) a randomly drawn set of
patents in the same technology field.
Approximating patent value by indicators such as patent family size
and patent citations received, the study finds that patents in the Commons are more valuable than the average patent held by pledging
firms and than comparable patents protecting similar technologies.
However, patents pledged do not seem to cover firms’ most radical
inventions. In addition, they do not appear to be at the core of firms’
patent portfolios, possibly explaining their willingness to place them
in the Commons. While these findings offer interesting insights
into firms’ open innovation strategies, it is too early to assess how
successful the Commons is at promoting further green innovation.

96

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

2.3

2.3.1

Appreciating the role of
patent institutions

What makes for sound
patent institutions
Patent institutions best serve innovation when they

Patent laws set the basic rules on what can be patented,

promote two broad principles: rigorous examination

for how long and under what conditions. However, the

leading to the grant of quality patents and balanced

incentives created by the patent system are critically

dispute resolution.

dependent on how these rules are implemented. This
is largely the responsibility of patent offices and courts.

Promoting the first principle has two important elements.

For a long time, economic research paid little attention

First, patent offices should grant patents only for those

to these patent institutions. This, arguably, has changed

inventions that strictly meet the standards of patentability

– partly because unprecedented levels of patenting have

– namely, novelty, inventive step and industrial applica-

put these institutions under considerable pressure.

bility. This sounds straightforward, but for patent offices
it is not: the complexity of technology is constantly on

This section seeks to highlight the important role played

the rise and many entities in different parts of the world

by patent institutions. It first discusses the characteris-

create new knowledge that may be relevant prior art.

tics of sound patent institutions. It then focuses on how

Second, patent documents should clearly delineate the

patenting trends over the past decades have challenged

patent’s inventive claims and describe the invention in a

many patent offices and what choices they face.

transparent way. Patents granted which meet both criteria
can be considered quality patents.64
The second principle recognizes that disputes over
patent rights invariably occur. But when they do, they
should be resolved in a way that balances the interests
of all parties involved. In particular, the parties should
have easy access to dispute resolution mechanisms, but
those mechanisms should minimize bad faith initiation of
disputes and remedies should be proportionate to any
damage suffered.
Why do these two principles matter? Poor-quality patents – including patents for trivial inventions or those with
overly broad or ambiguously drafted claims – can harm
innovation. At worst, they may lead firms to refrain from
certain research activities or from commercializing a new
technology for fear of violating patent rights; at best, they
burden innovating companies by leading to extra royalty
payments and legal costs.65 Poor-quality patents may also

64 Quality is here defined in terms of the rigor of
the examination process, not in terms of the
technical or commercial value of the invention.
65 See Choi (1998), Jaffe and Lerner (2004), Lemley
and Shapiro (2005) and Harhoff (2006).

increase the risk of anticompetitive uses of patent rights
(see Subsection 2.2.3). Vague descriptions of inventions
in patent documents, in turn, may curtail the spillover
benefits of patent disclosure.
97

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Imbalanced dispute resolution can have more varied
effects on innovative behavior. For example, if dispute
resolution is overly costly, it may bias the system against
smaller firms – whether they are claimants or defendants.

2.3.2
How patenting trends have
challenged patent offices

Smaller firms may thus innovate less, either because they

Over the last 15 years, many patent offices have seen

have difficulty enforcing their patent rights or they are

a rise in their application backlogs. While there is no

more exposed to infringement accusations from competi-

unique metric of office backlogs, WIPO estimates that

tors. Enforcement costs may be an especially binding

the number of unprocessed applications worldwide

constraint for firms in more resource-constrained low-

stood at 5.17 million in 2010.67 In absolute terms, the

and middle-income countries, which explains why many

Japan Patent Office (JPO), the United States Patent and

of them do not apply for patent rights in the first place.

Trademark Office (USPTO) and the EPO account for the

66

largest office backlogs (see Figure 2.3, left). However,
Promoting patent quality is bound to reinforce more bal-

relative to annual application flows, patenting backlogs

anced dispute resolution and vice-versa. Quality patents

are substantial in many other offices, including those in

that have undergone rigorous examination are less likely

low- and middle-income countries (See WIPO, 2011b).

to be challenged in court. Conversely, effective dispute
settlement preempts the filing of poor-quality patents, as

Figure 2.3: Workload in many

the prospect of enforcing them is low.

patent offices is piling up
Unprocessed patent applications in selected
large offices, 2007 and 2010
2007

2010

2'000'000
1'800'000
1'600'000
1'400'000
1'200'000
1'000'000
800'000
600'000
400'000
200'000
0

66 A study of IP enforcement in smaller UK firms confirms
that the financial costs of litigation deter enforcement.
See Greenhalgh and Rogers (2010). See also Lemley
(2001) and Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004).
67 This estimate is based on pending applications data
from 70 patent offices, which include the top 20 offices
except for China, India, and Singapore. Care is required
in comparing backlog figures across offices. In some
patent offices – notably, the Japanese and German
offices – applicants can delay patent examination for
several years. The JPO recently revised its statistics
on unprocessed patent applications downward.

98

Japan

US

European
Patent
Office

Republic
of Korea

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, October 2011.

Germany

Canada

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Many offices have also seen a lengthening of patent

Some firms – especially in industries with long product life

pendency times. For example, between 1996 and 2007,

cycles and high uncertainty about market developments

average pendency times increased from 21.5 to 32

– might welcome a longer patenting process to collect

months at the USPTO and from 24.4 to 45.3 months

more information about an invention’s technological and

at the EPO.68

commercial potential. Applicants can thus avoid paying
grant and renewal fee payments in case they decide to

Rising office backlogs and lengthening pendency times

drop the application. In addition, longer examination en-

have coincided with rapid growth in the number of pat-

ables applicants to submit new or amended patent claims

ent applications (see Subsection 1.3.1). However, fast

based on what they learn while developing an invention.

patenting growth is only one factor behind increased
office strain. Indeed, some offices have managed to

Even if some applicants gain, longer pendency times are

reduce backlogs and shorten pendency times despite

problematic for society as a whole, because they prolong

rapid patenting growth – mainly by expanding examina-

the period of uncertainty about which technologies may in

tion capacity.

the future be proprietary. In addition, longer examination

69

may invite anticompetitive and rent-seeking behavior. In
In addition, in those offices that have experienced grow-

particular, it creates incentives to file low-quality pat-

ing backlogs and longer pendency times, other factors

ents specifically intended to create uncertainty among

have played a role, especially an increase in the size of

competitors. It may also encourage applicants to insert

patent applications. At the EPO, for example, average

claims that map onto the uses of technology they see

application size jumped from 14 to 30 pages between

developing in the marketplace.

1988 and 2005, while the average number of claims per
patent increased from 12 to 21.70 Growing technological
complexity appears to be one important driver of larger
patent applications.71 Examining more complex patents
takes longer – not least because patent examiners need
to learn about new technologies and the corresponding
legal rules. Such patents may also require more frequent
communication between applicants and examiners,
further prolonging examination.
What is the effect of longer pendency times? At least
some innovating companies are bound to suffer from
long delays in the patenting process. Subsection 2.2.1
discussed evidence that, for some entrepreneurs, the
grant of a patent makes a difference in attracting financing from venture capitalists, especially in early financing
stages. However, for more established firms, patenting
delays may be less problematic and could even be
beneficial. Indeed, many patent offices allow applicants
to request accelerated examination of patents, but few
applicants actually do so.72

68 For the JPO, data are only available starting
in 2000, but the trend is the same: pendency
times increased from 26.9 months in 2000 to
32.4 months in 2007. As with backlog figures,
care is required in directly comparing pendency
times across offices. See WIPO (2011a).
69 See WIPO (2011a).
70 See van Zeebroeck et al. (2008) and
van Zeebroeck et al. (2009).
71 See Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001)
and van Zeebroeck et al. (2008).
72 To some extent, high costs and procedural
requirements may discourage the use
of accelerated examination.

99

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Realizing their possible harmful effects, many patent offices
have sought to reduce pendency times. However, this is
not always easy. Offices only partly control the length of ex-

2.3.3
The choices patent institutions face

amination. Applicants decide how to draft applications and

The choices facing patent institutions determine how

how they communicate with offices.73 To the extent that they

the system promotes the principles of patent quality and

benefit from longer examination – whatever the underlying

balanced dispute resolution. What may seem like a minor

reasons may be – applicants may seek to strategically delay

change in procedural rules or a management response

the process; for example, they may introduce ambiguities

to operational demands may have far-reaching conse-

in patent claims that prompt future examiner enquiries.74

quences for patent system use. Relevant institutional
choices are often specific to countries’ legal systems

In addition, confronted with large, growing backlogs,

and their level of development. However, a number of

patent offices face the risk that quicker examination may

common choices exist. This final subsection points to

compromise patent quality. Numerous commentators

some of the most important ones.

have argued that the pressure created by rising workloads
has caused deteriorating patent quality in some offices,

First, to ensure quality examination, patent offices need

especially in the US. Indeed, improving the quality of

to be properly resourced. This raises the question of how

patents granted was a key objective behind the patent

their operations should be funded. The two prevailing

reform legislation recently enacted in the US. More

models are: financing them out of general government

generally, given the difficulty of objectively measuring

spending; or through the fees they collect. Difficult trade-

patent quality, it is hard to empirically assess how sys-

offs exist. Fee-based financing can establish incentives

temic quality problems are and how quality differs across

for operational efficiency and insulates patent offices from

offices. Finally, how backlogs affect patent quality is not

the ups and downs of public budgets. However, patent

only important in high-income countries. As pointed out

offices that seek to maximize fee income may adjust

above, many offices in low- and middle-income countries

their operations in a way that conflicts with society’s best

have accumulated substantial backlogs in recent years.

interest. Above all, quickly processing patent applications

They also typically have fewer resources to support

may maximize fee revenue, but that might come at the

thorough examination, increasing the risk of granting

expense of patent quality. In fee-financed offices, it is

low-quality patents.

therefore important to establish complementary perfor-

75

76

77

mance incentives that promote patent quality.
73 For example, van Zeebroeck et al. (2008) argue that countries
that follow US drafting styles tend to have more voluminous
patent applications compared to filings at the EPO.
74 Mejer and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2011)
conjecture that applicants who delay the patenting
process are the root cause of backlogs at the EPO.
75 See, for example, Jaffe and Lerner (2004) and Guellec
and van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie (2007).
76 See the statement of USPTO Director David Kappos before
the US House of Representatives, available at www.uspto.
gov/news/speeches/2011/kappos_house_testimony.jsp.
77 Sampat (2010) discusses how resource constraints might
have affected pharmaceutical patents granted in India.
78 Using a panel dataset, Rassenfosse and van Pottelsberghe
de la Potterie (2011) estimate a demand elasticity for patents
of -0.3, implying that a 10 percent increase in the patenting
fee leads to a 3 percent fall in patent volumes.

100

A closely related second institutional choice concerns the
level and structure of patenting fees. While fees charged
by offices are only one – and usually a small – component
of the legal costs applicants face, studies have clearly
shown that higher fees lead to lower patenting activity.78
Fees are thus an important regulatory instrument. As a
rule of thumb, fees should be sufficiently low to ensure
equitable access to the system, but not so low as to
encourage speculative applications.

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

One dilemma in establishing a fee policy is that it can only
serve one purpose. In particular, a set of fees that ensures
office cost recovery may not coincide with society’s best
interest – and vice-versa. For example, cost recovery
would call for high filing fees to support labor-intensive
examination work and low fees for renewing patents that
involve very little work for offices. However, low renewal
fees may not be in society’s best interest, as they prolong
protection for patents inventors no longer highly value.79
In fact, for the latter reason, economists have argued for
an escalating renewal fee structure.80
A third important institutional choice concerns the interests of third parties in the patenting process. Third parties
may provide useful information on relevant prior art that
bears on the patentability of an invention. In addition,
if the grant of a patent affects them, they may want to
challenge its validity before it leaves the patent office,
preempting more expensive court litigation down the
road. Many patent offices have therefore adopted mechanisms allowing for third party information submission
and patent opposition (see Box 2.5 for one example).81
Such mechanisms can usefully promote patent quality.82

Box 2.5: Crowd-sourcing patent examination
No matter how qualified and dedicated patent examiners are, they
may miss out on important prior art. For example, there are instances
where the state of the art progresses at a faster pace than examiners
can match. In addition, examiners may only have incomplete access
to non-patented prior art, especially in new areas of patenting. In
such cases, it is useful to enlist the help of the public to identify
information related to inventions under review. A new crowd-sourcing
initiative – called Peer-to-Patent – makes use of social networking
software to assist patent offices in their examination work.
The original Peer-to-Patent initiative – launched by the New York Law
School and the USPTO as a pilot program in June 2007 – focused
on using members of the open source community to help identify
relevant prior art in the areas of computer architecture, software
and information security. Community members were able to review
and rate documents they considered important in determining the
patentability of particular inventions. Patent examiners could later
use these documents in examination if they were deemed relevant.
A review of the pilot program was positive, and the project has
now been extended to cover subject areas beyond the initial three
technology areas.
Given the success of the pilot program in the US, patent offices in
Australia, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the United Kingdom
(UK) have each launched similar initiatives to assess the feasibility
of this mechanism in their countries.
Source: Wong and Kreps (2009).

However, building on the principle of balanced dispute
resolution, they should be designed in such a way that
they open the door to legitimate third party interests,

Strategic use of ICTs by patent offices is an increasingly

but minimize the risk of bad faith challenges that unduly

important fourth institutional choice. Most patent office

burden patent applicants.

operations consist of the processing of information.
Modern ICTs can not only improve operational efficiency,
but also promote patent quality. This is especially the
case for prior art searches. Digital access to patent

79 Gans et al. (2004) provide a theoretical
exposition of this argument.
80 See Schankerman and Pakes (1986), Lanjouw,
Pakes and Putnam (1998), Scotchmer (1999)
and Cornelli and Schankerman (1999).
81 See WIPO (2009) for an overview of the patent
opposition system and a summary of some countries’
laws and practices. Rotstein and Dent (2009)
and Graham et al. (2003) compare the third party
opposition systems of the EPO, USPTO and JPO.
82 Hall et al. (2004), for example, discuss the
quality benefits of post-grant opposition.
83 Michels and Bertels (2001) show significant
differences in the results of prior art
searches across the major offices, partly
attributable to language barriers.

and non-patent literature, combined with sophisticated
search algorithms – and, increasingly, automated translation – can reduce the risk that examiners might miss
important prior art.83 In addition, the timely provision of
patent information in digital form enlarges the potential for
knowledge spillovers, as discussed in Subsection 2.2.4.

101

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

A fifth important institutional choice concerns international

There are other important considerations in designing

cooperation. As noted in Subsection 1.3.1, around one-

enforcement institutions – for example, whether judges

half of the increase in patent filings worldwide from 1995

should decide on patent infringement and validity at the

to 2007 was due to subsequent patent filings, most of

same time or in separate cases, and how courts should

which represented international filings. In practice, this

be financed. No comparative research exists that offers

means that national patent offices increasingly look at

general guidance on which approaches work best. A

the same patents. International cooperation – as already

better understanding of enforcement institutions and

practiced through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT)

their effects on patenting behavior are, arguably, priority

– can help in reducing duplication of work. In addition,

areas for future research.

combining the resources of more than one office can
help promote patent quality.
International cooperation can take place at different levels
of ambition – from the simple exchange of information to
the recognition of foreign grant decisions. In between,
there are many options. Deciding on the appropriate level
of cooperation involves many considerations – including
how offices trust the work of their foreign counterparts,
how compatible domestic patenting standards are with
those abroad, how cooperation affects filing behavior
and office workload, and the learning benefits that may
be lost by not examining patents domestically.
Finally, one of the most challenging choices is the design
of enforcement institutions. Litigation is invariably a costly
activity – for litigants and courts. Balanced and timely
dispute resolution requires substantial resources and
skilled judges. Specialized patent courts can improve efficiency and promote consistent rulings, but they may not
be an option in smaller and less developed economies.
Institutional innovation that provides for alternative dispute
resolution short of outright litigation may be helpful in
preempting costly litigation. For example, some patent
offices offer administrative dispute resolution, mediation
or advice on questions of patent validity and infringement
– including some offices in middle-income countries.84
Patent opposition – as outlined above – is another form
of early dispute resolution.
84 The UK Intellectual Property Office offers a
patent validity search service that provides firms
with information on whether a patent granted is
vulnerable to legal challenge see www.ipo.gov.uk/
types/patent/p-other/p-infringe/p-validity.htm.

102

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

2.4
Conclusions and directions
for future research

In more recent history, economists have refined their view
of the IP system – partly as a result of new research and
partly due to real world developments. The patent system has received special attention, in at least two ways:

Understanding how IP protection affects innovative

• The build-up of strategic patenting portfolios in com-

behavior has been a fertile field in economic research.

plex technologies has raised concerns about patent

Important insights gained long ago arguably still shape

rights slowing or even forestalling cumulative innova-

how economists view the IP system today. Above all,

tion processes. Entrepreneurs facing dense webs of

compared to other innovation policies, IP protection

overlapping patent rights – or patent thickets – may

stands out in that it mobilizes decentralized market forces

forgo research activities or shelve plans for commer-

to guide R&D investment. This works especially well

cializing promising technologies.

where private motivation to innovate aligns with society’s
technological needs, where solutions to technological

• Patents play an important role in modern technology

problems are within sight, and where firms can finance

markets. They enable firms to specialize, allowing

upfront R&D investment.

them to be more innovative and efficient at the same
time. In addition, they allow firms to flexibly control

However, difficult trade-offs exist in designing IP rights,

which knowledge to guard and which to share so as

not least because IP protection has multifaceted effects

to maximize knowledge spillovers – a key element of

on innovative behavior and market competition. As tech-

open innovation strategies. Finally, the widespread

nologies advance and business models shift, optimally

availability of patent information has created vast op-

balancing these trade-offs represents a continual high-

portunities for technological learning and catch-up by

stakes challenge.

less developed economies.
The effectiveness of the patent system in promoting
innovation is critically dependent on how the rules set
by laws are implemented in practice. Patent institutions
have moved to the center stage of the modern innovation
system. They perform the essential tasks of ensuring
the quality of patents granted and providing balanced
dispute resolution. Unprecedented levels of patenting
in many high- and middle-income countries have put
these institutions under considerable pressure. The
choices they make have far-reaching consequences on
incentives to innovate.

103

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Areas for future research
Even though economic research has come a long way
since the galvanizing work by Kenneth Arrow some 50
years ago, there are many questions for which future
research could offer better guidance to policymakers:
• Most academic studies have focused on high-income
countries. While they can in many ways inform policymakers throughout the world, the varying innovative
and absorptive capacity of middle- and low-income
countries suggests that IP protection operates differently in these economies. A better understanding
of the conditions under which different IP forms can
incentivize R&D and promote the formation of technology markets is therefore crucial.
• Only limited guidance is available on how the different
patent-based knowledge sharing activities – especially
those associated with more recent open innovation
models – affect knowledge spillovers and innovation
outcomes. A related question concerns the extent
to which greater openness in the innovation process
has created greater opportunities for technological
catch-up by firms in less developed economies.
• Further research is needed on how the choices of patent institutions affect innovation incentives, especially
in the area of rights enforcement.

104

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

References
Abbott, F.M., Cottier, T. & Gurry, F. (2007). International Intellectual
Property in an Integrated World Economy. Nashua: The Book Cellar, LLC.

Dushnitski, G. & Klueter, T. (2011). Is There an eBay for Ideas? Insights from
Online Knowledge Marketplaces. European Management Review, 8(1), 17-32.

Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R. & Howitt, P. (2005).
Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(2), 701-728.

Eisenberg, R.S. (1996). Intellectual Property Issues in Genomics. Trends in
Biotechnology, 14(8), 302-307.

Alchian, A.A. & Demsetz, H. (1972). Production, Information Costs, and
Economic Organization. The American Economic Review, 62(5), 777-795.
Arora, A. & Ceccagnoli, M. (2006). Patent Protection, Complementary
Assets, and Firms' Incentives for Technology Licensing. Management
Science, 52(2), 293-308.
Arora, A., Ceccagnoli, M. & Cohen, W.M. (2008). R&D and the Patent
Premium. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(5), 1153-1179.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. & Gambardella, A. (2001a). Markets for Technology
and Their Implications for Corporate Strategy. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 10(2), 419-451.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A. & Gambardella, A. (2001b). Markets for Technology:
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Arora, A. & Gambardella, A. (2010). Ideas for Rent: An Overview of Markets
for Technology. Industrial and Corporate Change, 19(3), 775-803.
Arrow, K. (1962). Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources
for Invention. In R.R. Nelson (Ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive
Activity: Economic and Social Factors. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 609-626.
Arrow, K. (1971). Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing. Chicago: Markham
Publishing Company.
Benavente, J.M. (2011). The Economics of IP in the Context of a Middle
Income Country. Unpublished manuscript. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
Bresnahan, T.F. & Gambardella, A. (1998). The Division of Inventive
Labor and the Extent of the Market. In E. Helpman (Ed.), General Purpose
Technologies and Economic Growth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 253-282.
Brouwer, E. & Kleinknecht, A. (1999). Innovative Output, and a Firm's
Propensity to Patent.: An Exploration of CIS Micro Data. Research Policy,
28(6), 615-624.
Choi, J.P. (1998). Patent Litigation as an Information-Transmission
Mechanism. The American Economic Review, 88(5), 1249-1263.
Coase, R.H. (1937). The Nature of the Firm. Economica, 4(16), 386-405.
Cockburn, I.M. & MacGarvie, M.J. (2009). Patents, Thickets and the
Financing of Early-stage Firms: Evidence from the Software Industry. Journal
of Economics and Management Strategy, 18(3), 729-773.

Fink, C., Smarzynska Javorcik, B. & Spatareanu, M. (2005). IncomeRelated Biases in International Trade: What Do Trademark Registration Data
Tell Us? Review of World Economics, 141(1), 79-103.
Gambardella, A. & Giarratana, M.S. (2011). General Technological
Capabilities, Product Market Fragmentation, and Markets for Technology:
Evidence from the Software Security Industry. Bocconi University
Working Paper.
Gambardella, A., Harhoff, D. & Nagaoka, S. (2011). The Social
Value of Patent Disclosure. Unpublished manuscript. Munich: LudwigMaximilians Universität.
Gambardella, A. & McGahan, A.M. (2010). Business-model Innovation:
General Purpose Technologies and Their Implications for Industry Structure.
Long Range Planning, 43(2-3), 262-271.
Gans, J.S., King, S.P. & Lampe, R. (2004). Patent Renewal Fees and Selffunding Patent Offices. Topics in Theoretical Economics, 4(1).
Geradin, D., Layne-Farrar, A. & Padilla, A.J. (2011). Elves or Trolls? The
Role of Nonpracticing Patent Owners in the Innovation Economy. Industrial
and Corporate Change, forthcoming.
Gilbert, R. & Shapiro, C. (1990). Optimal Patent Length and Breadth. The
RAND Journal of Economics, 21(1), 106-112.
Gilbert, R.J. & Newbery, D. (1982). Preemptive Patenting and the
Persistence of Monopoly. American Economic Review, 72, 514-526.
Giuri, P., Mariani, M., Brusoni, S., Crespi, G., Francoz, D., Gambardella
et al. (2007). Inventors and Invention Processes in Europe: Results from the
PatVal-EU Survey. Research Policy, 36(8), 1107-1127.
Graham, S., Hall, B., Harhoff, D. & Mowery, D. (2003). Patent Quality
Control: A Comparison of U.S. Patent Re-examination and European Patent
Oppositions. In W.M. Cohen & S.A. Merrill (Eds.), Patents in the KnowledgeBased Economy (Vol. 74-119). Washington, D.C.: National Academy of
Sciences, 74-119.
Graham, S. & Sichelman, T. (2008). Why Do Start-ups Patent? Berkeley
Technology Law Journal, 23(1), 1071-1090.
Graham, S.J.H., Merges, R.P., Samuelson, P. & Sichelman, T. (2009).
Entrepreneurs and the Patent System. Berkeley Technology Law Journal,
24(4), 1258-1328.
Granstrand, O. (1999). The Economics and Management of Intellectual
Property. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.

Cockburn, I.M., MacGarvie, M.J. & Müller, E. (2010). Patent Thickets,
Licensing and Innovative Performance. Industrial and Corporate Change,
19(3), 899-925.

Granstrand, O. (2011). The Economics of IP in the Context of a Shifting
Innovation Paradigm. Unpublished manuscript. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.

Cohen, W.M., Goto, A., Nagata, A., Nelson, R.R. & Walsh, J.P. (2002).
R&D Spillovers, Patents and the Incentives to Innovate in Japan and the
United States. Research Policy, 31(8-9), 1349-1367.

Green, J. & Scotchmer, S. (1995). On the Division of Profit in Sequential
Innovation. The RAND Journal of Economics, 26, 20-33.

Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1989). Innovation and Learning: The Two
Faces of R&D. The Economic Journal, 99, 569-596.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1990). Absorptive Capacity: A New
Perspective on Learning and Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly,
Special Issue: Technology, Organizations, and Innovation, 35(1), 128-152.
Cohen, W.M., Nelson, R.R. & Walsh, J.P. (2000). Protecting Their
Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing
Firms Patent (or Not). National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
No. 7552.
Cornelli, F. & Schankerman, M. (1999). Patent Renewals and R&D
Incentives. The RAND Journal of Economics, 30(2), 197-213.
David, P.A. (1993). Knowledge, Property and the System Dynamics of
Technological Change. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the World
Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, 1992.

Greenberg, G. (2010). Small Firms, Big Patents? Estimating Patent Value
Using Data on Israeli Start-ups Financing Rounds. Paper presented at the 4th
Israeli Strategy Conference.
Greenhalgh, C. & Rogers, M. (2010). Innovation, Intellectual Property and
Economic Growth. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Guellec, D. & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2007). The Economics
of the European Patent System: IP Policy for Innovation and Competition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hall, B.H. (2009). The Use and Value of IP Rights. Paper presented at the UK
IP Ministerial Forum on the Economic Value of Intellectual Property.
Hall, B.H., Graham, S., Harhoff, D. & Mowery, D. (2004). Prospects
for Improving U.S. Patent Quality via Postgrant Opposition. In A.B. Jaffe,
J. Lerner & S. Stern (Eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy (Vol. 4).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 115-144.
Hall, B.H. & Helmers, C. (2011). Innovation and Diffusion of Clean/Green
Technology: Can Patent Commons Help? National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper Series, No. w16920.

105

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Hall, B.H. & Lerner, J. (2010). The Financing of R&D and Innovation. In
B.H. Hall & N. Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation.
Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland.
Hall, B.H., & Ziedonis, R.H. (2001). The Patent Paradox Revisited: An
Empirical Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 32(1), 101-128.
Harabi, N. (1995). Appropriability of Technical Innovations: An Empirical
Analysis. Research Policy, 24(6), 981-992.
Harhoff, D. (2006). Patent Quantity and Quality: Trends and Policy
Implications. In B. Kahin & D. Foray (Eds.), Advancing Knowledge and the
Knowledge Economy. Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 331-350.
Harhoff, D. (2009). The Role of Patents and Licenses in Securing External
Finance for Innovation. European Investment Bank Papers, 14(2), 74-96.
Harhoff, D., Hall, B.H., von Graevenitz, G., Hoisl, K. & Wagner, S.
(2007). The Strategic Use of Patents and Its Implications for Enterprise and
Competition Policies. Report Commissioned by European Commission
(Tender ENTR/05/82). Brussels: European Commission.
Heller, M. & Eisenberg, R. (1998). Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research. Science, 280, 698-701.
Hsu, D. & Ziedonis, R.H. (2008). Patents as Quality Signals for
Entrepreneurial Ventures. Unpublished manuscript.
Jaffe, A.B. (2000). The US Patent System in Transition: Policy Innovation and
the Innovation Process. Research Policy, 29(4-5), 531-557.
Jaffe, A.B. & Lerner, J. (2004). Innovation and Its Discontents: How Our
Broken Patent System is Endangering Innovation and Progress, and What to
Do about It. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Kanwar, S. & Evenson, R.E. (2003). Does Intellectual Property Protection
Spur Technical Change? Oxford Economic Papers, 55, 235-264.
Kim, L. (1997). Imitation to Innovation: The Dynamics of Korea's
Technological Learning. Boston: Harvard Business Press.
Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing Returns and Economic Geography. Journal
of Political Economy, 99(3), 483-499.
Kyle, M. & McGahan, A.M. (2011). Investments in Pharmaceuticals before
and after TRIPS. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Lall, S. (2003). Indicators of the Relative Importance of IPRs in Developing
Countries. Research Policy, 32(9), 1657-1680.
Lanjouw, J.O., Pakes, A. & Putnam, J. (1998). How to Count Patents and
Value Intellectual Property: The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application
Data. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(4), 405-432.

Lemley, M.A. & Shapiro, C. (2007). Patent Holdup and Royalty Stacking.
Texas Law Review, 85.
Lerner, J. (2010). The Litigation of Financial Innovations. Journal of Law and
Economics, 53(4), 807-831.
Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2005). The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open
Source and Beyond. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2), 99-120.
Lerner, J. & Zhu, F. (2007). What is the Impact of Software Patent
Shift? Evidence from Lotus v. Borland. International Journal of Industrial
Organization, 25(3), 511-529.
Levin, R.C., Klevorick, A.K., Nelson, R.R., Winter, S.G., Gilbert, R. &
Griliches, Z. (1987). Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and
Development. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1987(3), 783-831.
Love, J. & Hubbard, T. (2009). Prizes for Innovation of New Medicines and
Vaccines. Annals of Health Law, 18(2), 155-186.
Mansfield, E. (1986). Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study.
Management Science, 32(2), 173-181.
Mejer, M. & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2011). Patent Backlogs
at UPSTO and EPO: Systemic Failure vs Deliberate Delays. World Patent
Information, 33(2), 122-127.
Michel, J. & Bettels, B. (2001). Patent Citation Analysis – A Closer Look at
the Basic Input Data from Patent Search Reports. Scientometrics, 21(1), 185201.
Moser, P. (2005). How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from
Nineteenth-Century World's Fairs. American Economic Review, 95(4), 12141236.
Murray, F. & Stern, S. (2006). When Ideas Are Not Free: The Impact of
Patents on Scientific Research. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 7, 33–69.
Murray, F. & Stern, S. (2007). Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights
Hinder the Free Flow of Scientific Knowledge?: An Empirical Test of the
Anti-commons Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
63(4), 648-687.
Nagaoka, S. (2011). Assessing the Basic Roles of the Patent System in
Incentivizing Innovation: Some Evidence from Inventor Surveys in Japan
and in the US. Unpublished manuscript. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
Nagaoka, S. & Walsh, J. (2008). The Objectives, the Process and the
Performance of R&D Projects in the US and Japan: Major Findings from the
RIETI-Georgia Tech Inventor Survey. RIETI Discussion Paper.
Nelson, R.R. (Ed.) (1993). National Innovation Systems: A Comparative
Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.

Lanjouw, J.O. & Schankerman, M. (2001). Characteristics of Patent
Litigation: A Window on Competition. The RAND Journal of Economics,
32(1), 129-151.

Nelson, R.R. & Winter, S.G. (1982). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic
Change. Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.

Lanjouw, J.O. & Schankerman, M. (2004). Protecting Intellectual Property
Rights: Are Small Firms Handicapped? The Journal of Law and Economics,
47(1), 45-74.

Nicholson, C.V. (2011). Apple and Microsoft Beat Google for Nortel
Patents. The New York Times. Retrieved from http://dealbook.nytimes.
com/2011/07/01/apple-and-microsoft-beat-google-for-nortel-patents/

Lee, K. (2010). Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in Economic
Development in Korea. Paper presented at the KDI International
Conference on Intellectual Property for Economic Development: Issues and
Policy Implications.

Noel, M. & Schankerman, M. (2006) Strategic Patenting and Software
Innovation. Vol. 740. Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper.
London: London School of Economics and Political Science.

Lee, K. & Kim, Y.-K. (2010). IPR and Technological Catch-up in Korea. In H.
Odagiri, A. Goto, A. Sunami & R.R. Nelson (Eds.), Intellectual Property Rights,
Development, and Catch Up: An International Comparative Study. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lemley, M.A. (2000). Reconceiving Patents in the Age of Venture Capital.
Journal of Small and Emerging Business Law, 4(1), 137-148.
Lemley, M.A. (2001). Rational Ignorance at the Patent Office. Northwestern
University Law Review, 95, 1495.
Lemley, M.A. & Burk, D.L. (2003). Policy Levers in Patent Law. Virginia Law
Review, 89, 1575.
Lemley, M.A. & Shapiro, C. (2005). Probabilistic Patents. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 19(2), 75-98.

106

Nordhaus, W. (1969). Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical
Treatment of Technological Change. Cambridge: MIT Press.
O'Donoghue, T., Scotchmer, S. & Thisse, J.-F. (1998). Patent Breadth,
Patent Life, and the Pace of Technological Progress. Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy, 7(1), 1-32.
Pakes, A. (1986). Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of
Holding European Patent Stocks. Econometrica, 54(4), 755-784.
Park, G.S. Hwang, S.D. (2010). The Rise of the NPE. Managing Intellectual
Property. Retrieved from www.managingip.com/Article/2740039/The-rise-ofthe-NPE.html

Chapter 2

The economics of intellectual property – old insights and new evidence

Park, W. & Ginarte, J.C. (1997). Intellectual Property Rights and Economic
Growth. Contemporary Economic Policy, 15, 51-61.
Qian, Y. (2007). Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a
Global Patenting Environment? A Cross-country Analysis of Pharmaceutical
Patent Protection, 1978-2002. Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(3).
de Rassenfosse, G. & van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. (2011). On the
Price Elasticity of Demand for Patents. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
Statistics, forthcoming.
Rotstein, F. & Dent, C. (2009). Third-Party Patent Challenges in Europe, the
United States and Australia: A Comparative Analysis. The Journal of World
Intellectual Property, 12(5), 467-500.
Sakakibara, M. & Branstetter, L. (2001). Do Stronger Patents Induce More
Innovation? Evidence from 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms. The RAND
Journal of Economics, 32(1), 77-100.
Sampat, B.N. (2010). Institutional Innovation or Institutional Imitation? The
Impacts of TRIPS on India's Patent Law and Practice. Paper presented at
the WIPO Seminar Series on "The Economics of Intellectual Property" on
December 13, 2010.

Tullock, G. (Ed.) (1987) New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Vol. 4).
van Zeebroeck, N., Stevnsborg, N., van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B.,
Guellec, D. & Archontopolos, E. (2008). Patent Inflation in Europe. World
Patent Information, 30, 43-52.
van Zeebroeck, N., van Pottelsberghe de la Potterie, B. & Guellec, D.
(2009). Claiming More: the Increased Voluminosity of Patent Applications
and its Determinants. Research Policy, 38(6), 1006-1020.
Verbeure, B., van Zimmeren, E., Matthijs, G. & Van Overwalle, G. (2006).
Patent Pools and Diagnostic Testing. Trends in Biotechnology, 24(3), 115-120.
Williamson, O.E. (1981). The Modern Corporation: Origins, Evolution,
Attributes. Journal of Economic Literature, 19(4), 1537-1568.
WIPO (2009). Opposition Systems. SCP/14/5. Document prepared for the
Standing Committee on the Law of Patents (SCP), Fourteenth Session,
January 25 to 29, 2010. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
WIPO (2011a). The Surge in Worldwide Patent Applications. PCT/WG/4/4.
Study prepared for the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) Working Group.
Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.

Schankerman, M. (1998). How Valuable is Patent Protection? Estimates by
Technology Field. The RAND Journal of Economics, 29(1), 77-107.

WIPO (2011b, forthcoming). World Intellectual Property Indicators. Geneva:
World Intellectual Property Organization.

Schankerman, M. & Pakes, A. (1986). Estimates of the Value of Patent
Rights in European Countries during the Post-1950 Period. The Economic
Journal, 96(384), 1052-1076.

Wong, C. & Kreps, J. (2009). Collaborative Approach: Peer-to-Patent and
the Open Source Movement. International Free and Open Source Software
Law Review, 1(1), 15-26.

Schumpeter, J. (1937). Preface to to the Japanese Edition. Theorie der
Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Reprinted in R.V. Clemence (Ed.), Essays on
Entrepreneurs, Innovations, Business Cycles and the Evolution of Capitalism.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers (1989), 165-168.

World Bank. (2001). Intellectual Property: Balancing Incentives with
Competitive Access. Global Economic Prospects. Washington, D.C.: World
Bank, 129-150.

Schumpeter, J. (1943). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New
York: Harper.
Scotchmer, S. (1991). Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative
Research and the Patent Law. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1), 29-41.

Yu, T.F.-L. (1998). Adaptive Entrepreneurship and the Economic
Development of Hong Kong. World Development, 26(5), 897-911.
Zuñiga, M.P. & Guellec, D. (2009). Who Licenses out Patents and Why?:
Lessons from a Business Survey. OECD Science, Technology and Industry
Working Papers 2009/5.

Scotchmer, S. (1996). Protecting Early Innovators: Should Secondgeneration Products be Patentable? The RAND Journal of Economics,
27(2), 322-331.
Scotchmer, S. (1999). On the Optimality of the Patent Renewal System. The
RAND Journal of Economics, 30, 181-196.
Scotchmer, S. (2004). Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Shapiro, C. (2001). Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent
Pools, and Standard Setting. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 1(119-150).
Sichelman, T. & Graham, S. (2010). Patenting by Entrepreneurs: An
Empirical Study. Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review,
17, 111-180.
Smith, A. (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations. London: W. Strahan and T. Cadell.
Sussex, J., Towse, A. & Devlin, N. (2011). Operationalising Value Based
Pricing of Medicines: A Taxonomy of Approaches. OHE Research Paper.
Suthersanen, U. (2006). Utility Models and Innovation in Developing
Countries. Geneva: ICTSD-UNCTAD.
Teece, D.J. (1986). Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications
for Integration, Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy. Research Policy,
15(6), 285-305.
Teece, D.J. (1988). Technological Change and the Nature of the Firm. In G.
Dosi, C. Freeman, R.R. Nelson, G. Silverberg & L. Soete (Eds.), Technical
Change and Economic Theory. London: Pinter, 256-281.
Thursby, J. & Thursby, M. (2006). Where is the New Science in Corporate
R&D? Science, 314(5805), 1547-1548.
Thursby, J. & Thursby, M. (2011). Protection of Intellectual Property
and R&D Location. Unpublished manuscript. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
Thursby, M. & Thursby, J. (2006) Here or There? A Survey on the Factors in
Multinational R&D Location. Report to the Government-University-Industry
Research Roundtable. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

107

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Chapter 3
Balancing collaboration
and competition
Greater collaboration between firms in the innovation
process is seen as one important element of the changing face of innovation. Survey evidence indicates that
the great majority of research and development (R&D)-

3.1
Collaborating to generate
new IP

intensive firms pursue some form of collaboration. Joining
forces with others is also at the heart of modern open

Firms may collaborate at different stages in the innovation

innovation approaches – even if the significance of such

process (see Subsection 1.2.5). Conceptually, it is helpful

approaches is still uncertain (see Chapter 1).

to distinguish between collaboration in producing IP and
collaboration in commercializing IP. This section focuses

Private collaboration has the potential to improve societal

on the former and considers the following two forms of

welfare by most effectively utilizing the core competencies

formal R&D collaboration:

of individual firms. However, collaboration also creates a
tension on two levels:

• Contractual partnerships – These often take place in
the context of a defined project and may involve the

• Tension due to the competing interests of collabo-

sharing of personnel and costs such as laboratories,

rators. Firms must weigh the efficiency gains from

offices or equipment. These arrangements are usu-

sharing efforts and knowledge against the risks that

ally of a smaller scale and finite time span. Given their

partners may act opportunistically.

project-specific nature, collaboration objectives are
usually relatively specific. For generating new IP, this

• Tension between producers of intellectual property

is by far the most common mode of collaboration.

(IP) and the public good. Policymakers are eager to
encourage the efficient introduction of new technolo-

• Equity-based joint ventures – These involve two or

gies, favoring cooperation; however, they must guard

more parent organizations creating and funding a

against harmful anticompetitive practices.

third entity. Companies may establish such collaboration agreements specifically to make the entity more

Drawing on the economic literature, this chapter explores

independent in governance. This form of collaboration

these tensions and their implications for business deci-

represents a larger commitment and requires higher

sions and policymaking. It first focuses on collaboration

coordination costs. Although it makes the option of

between firms in the production of IP (Section 3.1) and in

changing partners far less flexible, the entity’s actual

the commercialization of IP (Section 3.2). Then, the chap-

goals can be more flexibly defined at the organizational

ter reviews how anticompetitive practices are addressed

rather than the project level.

in the competition policy frameworks of certain jurisdictions (Section 3.3). The concluding remarks summarize
some of the key messages emerging from the economic
literature and point to areas where more research could
usefully guide policymakers (Section 3.4).

109

Chapter 3

These two forms of formal collaboration – generally referred to as R&D alliances – do not always result in new
IP. But frequently they do and provisions setting out who
owns joint research output and how it is shared are often

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.1.1
What the available data say about
formal R&D collaboration

a central element of collaboration agreements.
There is no perfect way to trace contractual R&D partnerFollowing a review of the available data on these forms

ships and joint ventures. Aside from a few exceptions,

of collaboration, the discussion explores what motivates

firms do not need to officially report information on their

firms to collaborate and the complications that arise in joint

collaborative arrangements. Company annual reports

R&D undertakings. It also briefly reviews the phenomenon

may offer a window onto their collaborative activity, but

of open source software, which departs in important

the information available is typically incomplete and

ways from more traditional collaboration approaches.

limited to larger firms.
Several non-official databases exist that track announcements of new R&D alliances. Figure 3.1 depicts the trend
in new agreements over the 1990-2005 period for different industries, as suggested by three such databases.
Two empirical patterns stand out. First, the formation of
R&D alliances appears to have peaked in the mid-1990s.
Second, the information and communications technology (ICT) industry accounts for the greatest number of
agreements for most years, although one data source
suggests that the biotechnology industry emerged as the
top collaborating industry in the early 2000s. In addition
to these industries, the chemical industry also exhibits
substantial numbers of collaborative agreements across
all three sources.

110

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Figure 3.1: Did R&D alliances peak in the mid-1990s?
SDC
CORE
MERIT-CATI
Number of R&D alliances (standardized), 1990-2005
3
MERIT-CATI
(a) Comparison
of SDC
the MERIT/CATI,CORE
CORE and SDC R&D
alliance databases
2.5
3
2
2.5
3
1.5
2
2.5
1
1.5
2
0.5
1
1.50
0.5
1
-0.5
0
0.5
-1
-0.5
0
-1.5
-1
-0.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-2.5
-2
-2.5

SDC

1990

1991

CORE

MERIT-CATI

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1993

1994

1995

1996

1990

1991

1992

1990

1991

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
Chemicals (including pharmaceuticals)

IT

1997

1998

1999

1997

1998

1999

1997
1998
1999
Biotechnology

(b)3500
SDC R&D alliance database by technology sector
IT
Chemicals (including pharmaceuticals)
3000
3500

IT

Chemicals (including pharmaceuticals)

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000

2001

2002

2003

2000
2001
2002
2003
Transportation Equipment

2004

2005

2004

2005

2004
2005
Total

Biotechnology

Transportation Equipment

Total

Biotechnology

Transportation Equipment

Total

3500
2500
3000
3000
2000
2500
2500
1500
2000
2000
1000
1500
1500
500
1000
1000
0
500
500
0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

0

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
(c) MERIT-CATI R&D alliance database by technology sector
IT

Biotechnology

Transportation Equipment

Chemistry

New materials

Total

900
800
900
700
900
800

IT

Biotechnology

Transportation Equipment

Chemistry

New materials

Total

IT

Biotechnology

Transportation Equipment

Chemistry

New materials

Total

600
800
700
500
700
600
400
600
500
300
500
400
200
400
300
100
300
200
0
200
100

1990

1991

2004

2005

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Notes:0 Following Schilling (2009), panel (a) standardizes R&D alliance counts to allow for easier comparisons between the three different databases.
As explained
in the Data
to this chapter,
data collection
methodologies
three different
differs
ways. 2004
1990
1991Annex
1992
1993 the
1994
1995
1996
1997 of the
1998
1999 databases
2000
2001 in important
2002
2003
For easier presentation, panel (b) scales down the total count of R&D alliances by a factor of two. In panels (b) and (c),
the technology sectors for the SDC and MERIT-CATI databases have been harmonized with a view to improve comparability.

2005

1000

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2005

Source: Schilling (2009).

111

Chapter 3

Notwithstanding these similarities, several empirical
patterns differ markedly across the three data sources
for which there is no obvious explanation. In addition,
relying on announcements of new R&D alliances to trace
collaborative behavior introduces several biases that may
lead to a distorted picture of actual collaboration (see Box
3.1). Another problem of simple alliance counts is that

Balancing collaboration and competition

Finally, co-patenting data offer an indirect way of capturing collaborative R&D activity between firms. The bibliographical data published in
patent documents offer, in principle, rich information on jointly owned
inventions. However, not all contractual R&D partnerships and joint
ventures may result in subsequent patenting, and co-patenting may
not be linked to any formal R&D collaboration. Indeed, the relationship
between formal collaboration and subsequent patenting is likely to
differ significantly across industries and countries.

every agreement receives the same weight; in practice,
the scope and underlying commercial value of alliances

A more indirect way of capturing R&D collaboration is

vary substantially. The above empirical insights thus need

to look at co-patenting behavior. Many joint R&D under-

to be treated with caution.

takings will result in subsequent patenting, and patent
databases can help to identify those patents that have

Box 3.1: Challenges in collecting consistent and comparable
data on collaborative agreements
While new open innovation approaches have highlighted the importance of collaboration, it is not a new phenomenon (Chapter 1).
Indeed, it is difficult to conclude from the available data that there
has been a continuous rise in collaborative agreements over the last
decades. However, measurement challenges abound.

two or more firms as applicants. An analysis of patent
filings at the United States Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) during the years 1989-1998 shows that copatenting was most frequent in the chemical, ICT and
instrumentation industries.1
Figure 3.2 depicts the technology breakdown of pat-

In principle, three different types of data could offer empirical
insights into collaborative behavior: counts of R&D alliances, innovation surveys and co-patenting behavior. Unfortunately, none of
these captures collaborative behavior perfectly, and data collection
methods often introduce biases that may even lead to a misleading
picture of such behavior.

ents with two or more applicants filed under the Patent

R&D alliance counts are the most direct way of measuring private
collaboration. The available collections – such as the SDC Platinum
and MERIT/CATI databases – use a variety of sources to trace R&D
alliances, including company annual reports and media announcements (see the Data Annex to this chapter). They invariably miss out
on collaboration that is not announced or that does not receive media
coverage. In addition, they predominantly cover English-language
publications, thus introducing an important geographical bias. Schilling (2009) further discusses the reliability of these data collections.

several countries. However, for the same reason, patents

Cooperation Treaty (PCT) system for the period 19902010. Filings under the PCT system are not directly
comparable to filings at national offices, as they only
cover patents for which applicants seek protection in
under the PCT are associated with more valuable inventions. The simple breakdown by technology – rather than
industry – shows some similarity to findings in the US;
co-patenting was most frequent in organic fine chemistry,
computer technology and electrical machinery, followed
by pharmaceuticals and basic material chemistry.

Innovation surveys offer, in principle, a more rigorous approach to
measurement. For example, European Community innovation surveys have collected some information on collaborative behavior and
provide important insights into how collaboration varies depending
on firm size (see also Subsection 1.3.3). However, innovation survey
data often do not distinguish between formal and informal forms of
collaborating; in addition, they cannot be easily compared across
countries and over time.
1

112

See Hagedoorn (2003). De Backer et al. (2008)
report similar findings for patents filed at the
European Patent Office. In addition, they show that
“pharmaceuticals-biotechnology” and “chemical
materials” have seen substantial increases in the
share of patent filings with multiple applicants.

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Normalizing co-patenting shares by total patent filings

Figure 3.2: Co-patenting is widespread

in given technology fields confirms the importance of

across technology fields

co-patenting in chemistry. However, other top-ranked

Distribution of PCT filings with two or more applicants, 1990 to 2010

fields in this case include materials and metallurgy and

(a) Absolute shares

semiconductors. In either case, Figure 3.2 shows that

Organic ne
chemistry

the top three technology fields account for less than a
quarter of the total, indicating that co-patenting activity

Computer
technology
Electrical
machinery,
apparatus,
energy

is relatively widespread.
Even though sectoral patterns of co-patenting show some
similarity to R&D alliance counts, the jury is still out as to
how accurately co-patenting activity reflects underlying

Pharmaceuticals
Other

Basic
materials
chemistry

collaboration agreements (see Box 3.1). Studying this
relationship at the firm level – while of interest in and of
itself – could offer useful guidance on the appropriateness of employing co-patenting data as a measure of
R&D collaboration.

(b) Shares normalized by total patenting in given technology field
Basic
materials
chemistry

Finally, neither R&D alliance counts nor co-patenting

Food
chemistry

data offer any insight into the share of overall R&D that
is undertaken collaboratively. The limited evidence dis-

Organic fine
chemistry

cussed in Subsection 1.2.5 suggests that formal R&D

Materials,
metallurgy

collaboration is still relatively rare.
Other

Semiconductors

Note: Co-patenting is defined as PCT filings with two or more applicants,
where at least two of the applicants are not individuals, universities or public
research organizations.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, October 2011.

113

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.1.2

In some cases, firms may build alliances with partners

Why firms collaborate for
strategic reasons

that are important when technology under development

they see as possessing complementary assets or skills
reaches the commercialization phase. If producers of
ideas anticipate that subsequent commercialization will

Collaboration may be strategically motivated. Alliances

require partnerships with those holding scarce, comple-

can provide a window onto the activities of competitors,

mentary assets, they may pursue collaboration to estab-

giving firms information that could shape their R&D in-

lish favored positions or agreements with potential allies.2

vestment or product strategies. While alliance partners
are typically careful to guard proprietary information

Alliances can be a means for improving efficiency, but

– especially from competitors – it is difficult to obscure

they can also open the door to anticompetitive behavior.

all sensitive information without choking off information

When joint ventures provide higher profits than non-

flows completely. Such secrecy is hard to maintain with

cooperative arrangements, the threat of a breakup can

alliance partners and makes alliances useful for monitor-

be used as an enforcing mechanism to sustain tacit

ing R&D activity.

collusion in product markets.3 Alliances can also be ve-

In highly concentrated industries, firms might find the

R&D investment such that both delay the introduction

leakage of strategic information beneficial. Information

of new technologies in order to extend higher prices on

shared within an alliance can provide useful signaling,

existing technologies.4

hicles by which two firms can coordinate a lowering of

and such disclosures may allow for tacit coordination.
Indirect cooperation might include avoiding direct market
competition, adopting common standards and coordinating product releases – particularly where product
complementarities are strong.
Indeed, product complementarities can give firms compelling reasons to cooperate. Such interdependencies
impact how technology producers think about investment. For example, it may not make sense to invest in
technology for an external disk drive that enables faster
writing than cable connection speeds would ever allow.
Collaborating with technology developers of complementary products can help to coordinate investment schedules and promote interoperability in new product releases.

2
3
4

114

See Teece (1986).
See Martin (1996).
See Cabral (2000).

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.1.3

Second, teaming up to divide efforts can provide ef-

How collaboration can
improve efficiency

same area. In particular, cost sharing is an important

ficiency gains where two firms want to explore the
reason for joining forces. R&D investment such as the
cost of laboratories, instrumentation, testing equipment

In addition to strategic motives, firms seek to collaborate

and technical specialists can be substantial. In some

to improve R&D efficiency – notably by benefiting from

industries, such as those producing semiconductors

others’ experience, dividing efforts, sharing risks and

and telecommunications equipment, the cost of a single

coordinating with producers of complementary goods.

R&D project can require investment that is so high that

This subsection discusses each of these efficiency mo-

it is beyond the reach of most companies.7 In the more

tives in turn.

typical case of smaller-scale R&D operations, effective
facilities require not only direct laboratory equipment

First, as discussed in Subsection 2.2.2, knowledge is

but also ancillary services – for example, administrative

often cumulative, and obtaining the foundational knowl-

support, maintenance staff that can handle specialized

edge required to pursue cutting-edge innovation is costly.

equipment or hazardous materials, testing technicians

Benefiting from the experience of others can be much

and others. Collaborating with another player with similar

cheaper than obtaining the same experience firsthand.

needs helps to spread these costs.

The time required to attain a PhD and to become a
seasoned scientist or technologist is lengthening as the

Third, R&D is a risky, exploratory process; not all efforts

“burden of knowledge” grows. Firms with complemen-

result in ideas that can be commercialized (see also

tary expertise can benefit by sharing. Collaborating with

Chapter 2). In areas like pharmaceuticals, the develop-

5

other firms can be a way to leverage others’ experience

ment of successful products only emerges out of many

without being locked into a commitment to build up

unfruitful attempts. Collaborating with others during the

knowledge internally. This option is particularly useful

exploration phase spreads development risk over multiple

when exploring new markets, geographical regions

firms, making it feasible to undertake riskier projects.

or technologies.

R&D project portfolios are similar to financial security

6

analogues: firms pursue multiple projects with the underSometimes, firms are interested not only in leveraging

standing that some will fail, but that high-value projects

the capabilities and accumulated knowledge of part-

will compensate for that. However, unlike the losses

ner firms, but also in learning from them. Collaborative

associated with poor security performance, unfruitful

arrangements may explicitly be put into place to fa-

projects have a silver lining: researchers learn something

cilitate knowledge spillovers between partners (see also

about the problem and can use that knowledge to more

Subsection 2.2.4).

accurately target successful outcomes. While the cost
of this learning must be borne once, the lessons learned
can have multiple uses if shared.8

5
6
7
8

See Jones (2009).
See Veugelers (1998).
See Hagedoorn (1993).
For more basic research, such lessons can
sometimes also be applied to projects unrelated to
the objectives of the project initially commissioned.

115

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Fourth, for firms with complementary offerings or R&D,
cooperation can yield efficiency gains. In addition to
the benefits of sharing knowledge and investment burdens, firms can coordinate by aligning their develop-

3.1.4
The complications that arise in
joint R&D undertakings

ment programs. For example, cooperation on interface
development can provide assurances with regard to

The preceding subsection described four rationales

interoperability as well as coordination in releasing new,

for collaboration based on efficiency gains: benefitting

improved technologies.

from the experience of others; dividing efforts; sharing
risk; and coordinating with producers of complementary

Collaboration for the development of new ideas can be

goods. For each of these rationales, conflicts of interests

doubly beneficial. First, the problem of underinvestment

may arise.

in R&D due to the appropriability dilemma introduced
in Chapter 2 can be partially addressed through cost

First, in the case of disclosure, conflicts of interest may

sharing; firms are more likely to invest sufficiently if the

arise because individual firms seek to maximize their

burden can be shared through partnerships. Second,

learning gains and minimize spillover leakages. It can

joint activities facilitate knowledge spillovers, which is

be difficult to ascertain which information a partner

beneficial from a social welfare perspective. Some econo-

firm chooses to withhold.10 Empirical studies measuring

mists have advanced these twin benefits as reasons why

joint venture failure rates have linked conflict of inter-

joint R&D may warrant more favorable consideration by

est to collaboration viability; where partners compete

competition authorities (see also Section 3.3).

in product markets, the failure rate of joint ventures

9

increases markedly.11
In the second case – dividing efforts – monitoring R&D
efforts can be difficult, in particular evaluating whether
researchers are working hard or moving slowly. Conflicts
of interest may arise because, while both parties benefit
from the outcome of the joint effort, each has an incentive to let the other party do most of the work. This can
be particularly pronounced where many partners are
involved. Since it is difficult to both monitor R&D efforts
and link each partner’s contribution to the results of a
joint venture, partners may exert less effort and free-ride
on the work of others (see Box 3.2 for an example).12

9

See, for example, Grossman and Shapiro
(1986) and Ordover and Willig (1985).
10 See Teece (1986).
11 See Harrigan (1988) and Kogut (1988).
12 See Deroian and Gannon (2006) and
Goyal and Moraga-Gonzalez (2001).

116

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Box 3.2: Conflict of interest in a pharmaceutical research alliance
In 1978, ALZA, a California-based drug company, and Ciba-Geigy, a
large Swiss pharmaceutical firm, entered into a research agreement.
In particular, Ciba-Geigy acquired a majority equity stake in ALZA and
contracted the firm to conduct research. However, ALZA maintained
activities with other parties which exploited technologies unrelated to
the joint venture with Ciba-Geigy. Ciba-Geigy possessed significant
control over ALZA – it had 8 out of 11 board seats, majority voting
control, extensive information rights and the decision rights to guide
90% of ALZA’s research activity through review panels which were
mostly controlled by Ciba-Geigy employees. Despite such formal
control rights, numerous conflicts arose regarding the kind of activities ALZA researchers participated in. Ciba-Geigy was particularly
concerned about “project substitution”, whereby ALZA scientists
would devote too much time to other efforts outside their contract.
Detailed accounting and monitoring of time had been stipulated in
the contract, but delays in approving outside activities resulted in
ALZA scientists circumventing the formal process.
Over time, Ciba-Geigy became increasingly concerned that its
partner might misappropriate research results for extraneous use.
As a result, it was reluctant to share information with ALZA. This
disclosure problem, along with tensions related to control over
outsideresearch, eventually led to the termination of their partnership at the end of 1981.
Source: Lerner and Malmendier (2010).

Lastly, product or technology complementarities expose
partners to so-called holdup risk.13 Joint development of
complementary assets can provide mutual benefits, but
partners may shape development in a way that locks in
their technologies to the exclusion of others. Such strategic maneuvers to embed switching costs also represent
a loss in social welfare, since consumers might be offered
an inferior technology.
In the case of R&D alliances, Table 3.1 describes both the
aligned objectives and conflicts of interest among collaborators and between technology producers and consumers.
Table 3.1: Aligned objectives and
conflicts of interest in R&D alliances

Among producers
of technologies

Aligned objectives

Conflicts of interest

•
•
•
•

• Free riding
• Risk shifting and moral hazard
• Holdup risk

Sharing experiences
Spreading costs
Spreading development risk
Coordinating the production
of complementary products

Between technology • Cost reduction
• Higher prices/less variety due
producers
• Ensuring compatibility among
to market power
and consumers
products
• Possible collusion to
slow introduction of new
technologies

In the case of risk sharing, partners with a higher tolerance
of risk might conceal this prior to joining a partnership.

Monitoring a partner’s behavior can be difficult if not

Even those partners who are risk averse may take on

impossible. The connection between research effort and

more risk with joint venture resources – a phenomenon

outcome is typically loose, making pay-for-performance

economists refer to as moral hazard. Sharing cost expo-

contracting difficult to specify – especially where R&D is

sure with partners can even lead to both parties taking on

exploratory in nature. In addition, too much surveillance

higher gambles, increasing the likelihood of alliance failure.

can have a chilling effect on knowledge exchange (see
also Box 3.2) – the heart of what makes an R&D joint
venture valuable in the first place.

13 See Gilbert (2010).

117

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

To the extent that contractual joint collaboration can be
troublesome, firms may choose to create a third independent entity for which parents hold equity stakes. By using
this arrangement, incentives are better aligned since both

3.1.5
How collaboration differs in the
case of open source software

partners have a stake in the success of the third entity.
Joint management and oversight make monitoring easier,

The previous subsection discussed the complications

and the ongoing relationship facilitates enforcement of

arising in R&D alliances, implicitly assuming that partner-

good behavior. When contracting becomes more hazard-

ing firms rely on IP exclusivity to appropriate their R&D

ous, independent management can be a more effective

investments. However, does exclusivity always have to

governance mechanism. One study that examines the

play such a central role in R&D collaboration? Open

organizational choice between contracting and equity

source software development provides an important

joint ventures across national boundaries, finds that

instance that appears to challenge this position.

contracting risks are higher where enforcement of IP
rights is more difficult.14

Open source software development involves developers
– either individuals or firms, from a variety of locations

However, the equity form of organization is not without

and organizations – voluntarily sharing code to develop

its own costs. Forming a separate entity is expensive,

and refine computer programs which are then distributed

and the cost of “excessive bureaucracy” may outweigh

at no or low direct cost.16 What makes open source so

the contracting hazards. In addition, conflicts of interest

revolutionary is that it challenges the assumption that

may arise where joint venture activities affect the profits

IP exclusivity is necessary to motivate the production

of one or more of its members.

of new and useful ideas – in clear contradiction to the

15

appropriability dilemma highlighted by Kenneth Arrow
(see Section 2.1). In addition, open source software development has shown that collaboration for innovation
can happen without IP exclusivity.

14 See Oxley (1999).
15 See Oxley (1997, 1999). The appropriateness of
these organizational choices has been linked to
performance outcomes. Sampson (2004) examines
joint R&D activity with varying levels of opportunism
risk. She uses transaction cost economics to predict
that collaboration with higher risks for opportunism
should adopt equity joint venture structures.
Alternatively, straightforward collaboration may most
efficiently be managed using contracts. Sampson
finds that those alliances that fail to align governance
mechanisms with the threat of opportunism
underperform compared to those that do align.
16 See Lerner and Schankerman (2010) for a detailed
treatment of the economics of open source software.

118

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Open source software development has undoubtedly

What drives participation in open source software

grown in influence. The number of such projects has

projects? Unlike in other open innovation models (see

increased rapidly: the website SourceForge.net, which

Subsection 1.2.5), compensation for innovative open

provides free services to open source software devel-

source efforts is not critical to success. At the same time,

opers, has grown from a handful of projects ten years

Lerner and Tirole (2005) argue that contributions to open

17

ago to over 250,000 today. Open source is attracting

source efforts are not inexplicable acts of altruism but

attention in the public sector as well. Government com-

can be explained by other incentives. For example, par-

missions and agencies have proposed – and in some

ticipating in open source projects can enhance the skills

cases implemented – a variety of measures to encour-

of contributors, and these improvements may translate

age open source developers, including R&D support,

into productivity gains in paid work. Open source projects

encouragement of open source adoption, explicit open

may also provide some intrinsic benefit if such projects are

source preferences in government procurement, and

more interesting than routine employer-assigned tasks.

even obligations regarding software choices.18

Finally, open source participation could give coders a
chance to showcase their talents to future employers.

Systematic evidence on the effects of open source development on firm performance, consumers and economic

Finally, the spread of open source software develop-

growth is still in its infancy. Existing studies suggest that

ment evokes the question whether similar practices are

both producers and users of open source products often

transferable to other industries. Indeed, models of the

blend participation in open source and proprietary soft-

open source type have been applied to other innovative

ware. In the case of producers, it is common for firms to

activity.20 However, their uptake appears less spectacu-

develop both proprietary and open source programs.

lar than for software. One explanation may be that the

19

Such mixing is likely to create cost savings, whether

success of open source software is closely linked to the

in product development or marketing. Firms may also

special circumstances of software development: projects

participate in open source software projects strategi-

can be broken into small, manageable and independent

cally to upset dominant players. Similarly, adopters of

modules; input by geographically dispersed developers

open source software use open source and proprietary

can be easily shared; upfront capital costs are limited;

products side by side. Users vary a great deal, both in

and new products do not face lengthy regulatory approval

their software needs and in how they evaluate costs.

processes.21 Nonetheless, additional opportunities for

Although proprietary software may cost more upfront,

open source types of collaboration may well arise in the

the costs of switching, interoperability and support

future as technology and the nature of innovation evolve.

services can be greater for open source products. The
comingling of proprietary and open source programs in
both production and use suggests a complementarity
between the approaches.

17 http://sourceforge.net/about
(accessed March 21, 2011).
18 See Lewis (2007).
19 See Lerner and Schankerman
(2010) and Lyons (2005).
20 See, for example, Maurer (2007).
21 See Lerner and Tirole (2005).

119

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.2

3.2.1

Collaborating to
commercialize existing IP

Why complementarities
require coordination

Collaboration between firms extends beyond the joint

Innovative activity typically builds on previous innovation,

production of IP. In many cases, firms only join forces

and takes place simultaneously with similar innovative ef-

when or even after they commercialize their technolo-

forts by competing firms (see Subsection 2.2.2). In such

gies. This section focuses on such cooperation. It first

an environment, so-called patent thickets may emerge:

describes what motivates firms to collaborate during the

relevant IP rights are distributed over a fragmented base

commercialization phase and the conflicts of interest that

of IP holders, and those who wish to introduce products

may arise between them. It then discusses two specific

using such technologies face the high cost of negotiating

forms of collaboration: patent pools and standard-setting

with multiple parties. If each technology is essential, a

organizations (SSOs).

negotiation failure with any of the IP holders is equivalent
to a failure with all. New products are blocked, all IP holders lose an opportunity to commercialize and society
misses out on new technology. Even in the case where
an enterprising entrepreneur could strike a deal with each
separate IP right holder, he or she is likely to overpay if
the number of IP holders that could claim infringement
is sufficiently large. Economists refer to this form of
overcharging as “royalty stacking”.22
One potential solution for IP owners is to offer a license
for their collective IP as a package. On the face of it, this
form of collaboration would seem to benefit everyone.
Suppliers can unlock the value of their IP holdings at a
higher profit, and consumers benefit from new technology. However, as in the case of IP-generating collaboration, conflicts of interest invariably arise making it difficult
for IP holders to agree on a deal; challenges also exist in
balancing the interests of IP producers with the public
good. Table 3.2 describes the aligned objectives and
conflicts of interest in these two cases.

22 See Lerner and Tirole (2007).

120

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Table 3.2: Aligned objectives and
conflicts of interest in coordinating
fragmented IP ownership
Aligned objectives
Among producers
of complements

3.2.2
How firms collaborate in
patent pools

Conflicts of interest

• Coordinate compatibility on
•
collective offering
• Manage the evolution of
•
technological advance within
the pool or standard
• Accelerate technology adoption
•

Compete for share of joint
license revenues
Reduce alternatives of
one’s own technology, while
increasing the substitutability of
others
Increase competition by
reducing transaction costs

Between technology • Minimize adoption risk
• Scope of interoperability
producers
• Lower integration costs across with rival offerings providing
and consumers
complementary offerings
complementary benefits
• Introduction of greater choice
of suppliers through more open
standards

The following subsections discuss how patent pools and
standard-setting institutions work to reconcile some of
these conflicts.

Patent pools are organizations through which patent
owners can share their patents with others, sometimes
licensing them to third parties as a package. The terms
of the patent pool agreement may specify licensing fees,
the distribution of returns among the participants and
the obligations of contributors regarding the use of their
present and future patent rights. Patent pools can be
seen as a market-based solution to the patent thicket
problem. A firm’s share in joint licensing revenue may
be better than the revenue the firm could generate by
licensing its patents individually. For consumers, such
coordination brings technologies to market that would
otherwise stay in the laboratory.
Available data suggest that patent pools have historically
been concentrated in Europe and the United States
(US).23 Many date to the earlier half of the 1900s (see
Figure 3.3). In the period after the Second World War,
a more stringent regulatory environment viewed many
patent pools as anticompetitive, which diminished the
entry of new pools.24 In the last decade, however, clearer
pronouncements on the part of the US and European
competition authorities have encouraged the creation
of patent pools once again. More recently, Asian participation in patent pools has increased, reflecting their
growing role in technological innovation. In addition, the
ICT industry – broadly defined – accounts for the majority
of patent pools established over the last two decades
(see Figure 3.4).

23 However, the identification of patent pools
underlying the data used in Figure 3.3 relied
mostly on English language publications. The
data may thus be biased towards US pools.
The Data Annex provides further details.
24 The linkage between increased scrutiny by US
federal regulatory agencies and the diminished
number of patent pools should be interpreted
with caution, as patent pool activity not captured
by news sources or regulatory reports may
have occurred during the intervening time.

121

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Figure 3.3: The popularity of patent

Notwithstanding the compelling rationales for IP holder

pools varies over time

cooperation, conflicts of interest can complicate the suc-

Number of patent pools by country/ region

cessful formation of patent pools. By lowering transaction

Europe only
North America only

costs and facilitating the commercialization of technolo-

North America and Europe
North America, Europe and Asia

gies, pools may intensify product market competition

35

among members, leading to reduced profit margins.25

30

Depending on their business model, members may also
have different views on the design of pools. For example,

25

pools can bring together players who participate in retail

20

markets with those who only produce IP. Those who
participate in retail market would be interested in trading

15

lower licensing fees for cheaper access to the pool’s IP,

10

while pure R&D players might more likely aim to maximize licensing fees since they cannot recover their outlay

5

through product sales. Pure R&D actors might prefer the
s

s

00
20

90

s

19

80

s

19

s

70
19

s

60
19

s

50
19

s

40
19

s

30
19

20
19

19

10

s

0

Note: Based on information for 75 documented pools. See the Data Annex for
further details.

broadest possible adoption, while competitors in retail
markets may seek to exclude rivals. Box 3.3 offers an
example of such conflicts of interest.

Source: Updated from Lerner et al. (2007).

Box 3.3: Conflicts of interest in the MPEG-2 patent pool

Figure 3.4: The ICT industry dominates
the recent wave of patent pools

The MPEG-2 patent pool offers an example of the complexities
of cooperating with firms of varying levels of vertical integration.
Contributing firm Sony also intended to license MPEG-2 patents; it
was interested in maximizing the adoption rate of the standard. On
the other hand, Columbia University and Lucent sought to maximize
licensing revenues, since they did not participate in the downstream
product market. Interestingly, the latter two acted in very different
ways. Columbia University chose to participate in the pool for fear
that negotiation failure would foreclose its hopes to gain any licensing
revenue. Lucent, however, opted to withdraw from the pool. The firm
believed that its two patents were critical to the MPEG-2 standard
and that the pool’s licensing fees were too low. Equipped with a
sizable internal licensing department, Lucent was convinced that
it could charger higher licensing fees independently.

Number of patent pools by industry
Other
Transportation equipment
Scienti c instruments
Chemicals

Communications
Packaged software
Metal products
Petroleum re ning

Electrical
Machinery

35
30
25
20
15
10

Source: Lerner and Tirole (2007).
5

20
00
s

19
90
s

19
80
s

19
70
s

19
60
s

19
50
s

19
40
s

19
30
s

19
20
s

19
10
s

0

Note: Based on information for 75 documented pools.
Source: Updated from Lerner et al. (2007).

25 See Gilbert (2010).

122

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

As in the case of contractual partnerships and joint

Grant backs commit pool members to offer future patents

ventures, a second conflict of interest arises where pool

to the pool at no fee if such patents are deemed relevant

members seek to maximize their return at the expense

to the patent pool.27 This prevents individual members

of consumers. Patent pools that charge too high a price

who patent technologies that become essential to the

effectively lower social welfare for the enrichment of pool

pool from holding up other members; it may also remove

members. Social welfare may also diminish if incentives

the incentive to hide development in progress. However,

to innovate are reduced. Pool members that enjoy mo-

there is a cost to implementing such terms. Grant backs

nopoly status may have less incentive to release improved

also lower the incentives to invest in future innovation;

versions of their technologies, and their market power

this not only works against the interests of pool members

could raise barriers to entry for those who might step

but also against the public interest. Policymakers need to

forward with better alternatives (see also the discussion

be particularly concerned about grant backs restricting

in Subsection 2.2.3).

technological progress.

Should pools be allowed as a market-based solution to

Independent licensing rules allow any pool member to

the coordination problem, or disallowed as a vehicle for

license their patent outside of the pool. These can work

collusion? The general principle is that competitive mar-

in the public interest in at least three ways. First, the

kets serve society’s interest; however, complementarities

outside option to license the patents independently puts

present a special case for which coordination needs to

a ceiling on the fees the pool can charge. As mentioned

be considered. The short answer is “it depends”. Patent

earlier, in the absence of cooperation and where each

pools comprising complementary patents can be welfare-

IP holder licenses independently, royalty stacking may

enhancing, because they solve the coordination problem.

create inefficiently high prices. Certainly, policymakers

On the other hand, patent pools containing substitute

would not want pool prices to be higher than this. Allowing

technologies are not, since their main is to soften price

pool members the option to independently license limits

competition among pool members. Unfortunately, this

the bundled price to the sum of the independent licens-

is far from a clear litmus test in real situations; patents

ing fees.

26

are rarely perfect complements or perfect substitutes.
Second, independent licensing can serve as a screenOne way to better differentiate beneficial pools from harm-

ing device for policymakers to separate anticompetitive

ful ones is to look at the detailed provisions governing

pools with substitute patents from beneficial pools of

them. Two types of provisions are particularly relevant:

complementary patents. In anticompetitive pools, the

so-called grant backs and independent licensing rules.

freedom of members to license their technology independently would break the pool’s ability to fix prices
above the competitive rate. Such pools would therefore
not include independent licensing provisions. On the
other hand, independent licensing does not negatively
impact pools of complementary patents, since external
licensing of any component is either not valuable without

26 However, Gilbert (2010) shows that substitute
patents in a pool do not increase member profits
if the pool also includes essential patents. In this
case, the inclusion of substitute patents could affect
the ability of the pool to influence the adoption of
technologies that do not require the essential patents.
27 See Layne-Farrar and Lerner (2010).
28 See Lerner and Tirole (2004, 2007).

the remaining complements or occurs in a market that
does not compete with the pool.28

123

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Third, independent licensing encourages alternative appli-

In relation to whether independent licensing can effec-

cations of patented technologies which may have alterna-

tively screen for socially beneficial pools, another study

tive uses outside the patent pool. Independent licensing

analyzes 63 patent pools and finds support for the as-

enables such multiuse patents to realize their potential

sociation between complementary patent pools and the

rather than restricting them to pool-related licensing.29

existence of independent licensing provisions.32 Since
patent pools do not spell out whether they comprise

Empirical research on patent pools has made some

either complementary or substitute patents, the study

headway in assessing whether the above predictions hold

employs records of legal challenges to capture the extent

true in the real world. One key empirical challenge is that

to which pools reduce competition.33 It finds that pools

patent pools are voluntary organizations, and the set of

with complementary patents are more likely to allow for

candidate patents for pooling is thus difficult to identify.

external licensing. In addition, among litigated pools,

One recent study overcame this challenge by focusing

those without independent licensing are more likely to

on patent pools emerging from standard-setting efforts.30

face more severe verdicts. These findings are consistent

Because SSOs typically identify all essential patents in

with the theory described earlier.

a patent pool, the authors were able to construct the
set of patents that could potentially be included in nine
modern patent pools.
Using data on participating companies as well as the
composition of the patent pools themselves, the study
reports several interesting findings. First, using patents
identified in a standard as the measure of potential
participation, they find that most pools contain roughly
one-third of eligible firms, underscoring the voluntary
nature of patent pools. This finding also points out that
the extent to which pools resolve the patent thicket problem is perhaps more limited in reality. Second, firms that
are vertically integrated in both R&D and downstream
product production are more likely to join a pool than
are pure R&D players.
Third, the study examines the impact of royalty sharing
terms. Where participants contribute patents of comparable value, it is more likely that sharing revenue based
on the number of patents contributed will be accepted.
Because sharing terms might be determined with the
specific intent of attracting participation, the authors look
at the subset of firms that join the pool after the terms
were formed. They find that firms are less likely to join an
existing pool that uses such numerical proportion rules.31

124

29 A possible fourth benefit of independent licensing
rules is that they reduce incentives for “socially
wasteful” inventive effort. Consider the “innovation
for buyout” scenario, whereby an enterprising
inventor produces a “me-too” innovation very
similar to a patent contained in a patent pool. The
entrepreneur pursues this marginal invention knowing
that the patent pool member will purchase the
entrepreneur’s patent in order to remove the threat
of being ousted from the patent pool. The effort to
develop a me-too invention and prosecute this buyout
strategy is socially wasteful, since it generates
little new knowledge; the primary purpose of this
tactic is essentially to blackmail pool members.
Mandated independent licensing can provide a
check on such wasteful practices. Such mandates
limit the opportunity to accumulate excess profits
within the pool, and this limits the potential reward
for pursuing innovation for buyout strategies.
30 See Layne-Farrar and Lerner (2010).
31 Given that few pools have adopted other approaches
to license revenue allocation, the study was
unable to conduct similar tests with valuebased allocation or royalty-free treatments for
licensing. See Layne-Farrar and Lerner (2010).
32 See Lerner et al. (2007).
33 In particular, the study uses records of both
private challenges and the memoranda from US
federal prosecutions to formulate this measure.
It considers both the occurrence of litigation and
remedies in such cases to measure the likelihood
that such pools have in fact reduced competition.

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Finally, the same study shows that grant back provisions
were more frequently used in complementary pools that
allow for independent licensing. This finding also supports
earlier arguments: grant back rules help remedy the

3.2.3
Why patent pools are emerging in
the life sciences

holdup problem (see earlier discussion), which is more
likely to arise in complementary pools.

As described in the previous subsection, the ICT industry
accounts for the majority of patent pools formed over
the last two decades. However, as patenting becomes
increasingly common in the life sciences, coordination
concerns for navigating patent thickets are also emerging
in the biotechnology industry.34
The incentives to create biotechnology patent pools are
similar to those in other industries. Overlapping patent
claims can block the commercialization and adoption of
technologies. The prospect of high coordination costs
can also dampen research efforts in the first place.
Patent pools offer a mechanism by which IP holders can
coordinate to remove such roadblocks.35
However, there are additional motives for considering
patent pools in the life sciences. Patent pools can be
created for philanthropic purposes (see Subsection 1.3.4).
For example, the Public Intellectual Property Resource
for Agriculture (PIPRA) patent pool for genetically modified rice brings together over 30 different IP owners. Its
purpose is to make patented technologies available to
less developed economies free of charge. Similarly, the
UNITAID patent pool focuses on making medicines for
diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis
available to countries in need.
Patent pools may be created as a commons for encouraging research. In 2009, GlaxoSmithKline contributed over 500 patents to a patent pool for the study of
neglected tropical diseases. In contrast to the UNITAID
pool which concentrates on product availability, the
GlaxoSmithKline patent pool focuses on the accessibility
of its stock of ideas.

34 See Verbeure et al. (2006).
35 See Lerner and Tirole (2004) and
Verbeure et al. (2006).

125

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Proponents of life science patent pools point out that
pools can also be a means for setting standards.
Following the example of the telecommunications industry, pools may be used to establish and legitimize, for

3.2.4
How firms cooperate to
set standards

example, standards for recognized genetic mutations.36
They could also be used to codify best practice guidelines

As described earlier, patent pools in the modern era have

for genetic testing of particular diseases.37

often been formed around certain standards. In fact,
patent pools can be the governing arrangement for a

While patent pools hold the potential to make technol-

standard-setting group.39 This subsection takes a closer

ogy more accessible – particularly to disadvantaged

look at the standard-setting process, exploring where

groups or countries – and to coordinate basic research

standards are important, the role SSOs play, and the

efforts, the biotechnology industry is in the early stages

conflicts of interest that arise in the setting of standards.

of determining how best to use them. Resolving conflicts
of interest is likely to be just as challenging, if not more

Standards become critical where interoperability is impor-

so, as it is for other industries. At this stage, many pools

tant. They define which devices will work with others and

appear to focus on more marginal technologies, which

the technology that enables them to do so. They might

firms release at least in part because they are not part

also specify not only the component technology, but

of their core business. Many patent pools have a largely

also the interface requirements between technologies.

philanthropic character; how patent pools will operate

Such interface standards allow producers to focus on

within the business models of the biotechnology industry

improving their own module without constantly revisit-

remains to be seen.38

ing interoperability.
The link between standards and patent pools arises from
the fact that many standards are based on complementary technologies, often developed by different firms.
Patent pools that set out how technologies covered by
a particular standard can be accessed are therefore a
natural vehicle for cooperation among firms. One of the
first patent pools associated with a standard was the
MPEG-2 video coding standard pool. In 1997, the US
Department of Justice issued a business review letter
favorably responding to a proposal to license patents
essential to the MPEG standard as a package. This decision – along with the positive response in 1998 to the DVD
standard patent pool proposal – set the template for patent pools that would not run afoul of US antitrust laws.40

36 See Van Overwalle et al. (2005).
37 See Verbeure et al. (2006).
38 See The Lancet, “Pharmaceuticals, Patents,
Publicity… and Philanthropy?” (2009).
39 In the nine modern patent pools studied by
Layne-Farrar and Lerner (2010) all were
associated with standard-setting efforts.
40 See Gilbert (2004).

126

Chapter 3

Standards can be particularly important in the early
stages of technology adoption, because they can reduce
consumer confusion in the marketplace. Where consumers are uncertain about which technology provides
the broadest compatibility, the rate of adoption is lower.
Standards provide some assurance that certain technologies will continue to be supported in the future through
upgrades and complementary products; they therefore
inform development efforts and consumer decisions.
Where industries adhere to standards, consumers can
mix and match the best technologies to suit their needs.41
Standard-setting based on patented technologies generally require voluntary participation by patent holders;
thus, many of the concepts and findings discussed in
Subsection 3.2.2 apply to the standard-setting process.
However, one economic characteristic associated with
standards further complicates incentives for cooperation
and has important social welfare implications: network
effects (see Box 3.4 for an explanation). In particular, there
is much to be gained by embedding one’s patent in a
standard and a great deal to lose by being excluded from
it. As a result, technology producers are keen to influence
the standard-setting process in their favor.

Balancing collaboration and competition

Box 3.4: What are network effects and how are they related
to standard setting?
Network effects occur where the value of a product increases as
more people use it. The classic example is the fax machine: such a
device is nearly worthless unless others own one; however, as more
consumers adopt the technology, it becomes increasingly valuable.
For a product to effectively exploit network effects, prior standard
setting is often necessary – as is the case for the fax machine. Producers aligned with the standard have the advantage of remaining in the
market as is, whereas those who are not so aligned must bring their
offerings into compliance. Indeed, producers with a head start may
be able to build a market share that makes it increasingly attractive
for subsequent producers and consumers to adopt their standard.
This positive feedback loop is referred to as an “indirect network
effect”, whereby the consumer benefit of a standard depends on
the number of producers that adopt the standard, and producers’
profits in turn depend on the number of consumers.42
Scholars who study network effects point out that, although according to theory there will be one or a handful of standards in a
given segment where network effects are present, it is not clear
which ones will be selected. Theoretical models which assume that
producers and consumers make irreversible sequential decisions,
predict that those who influence standards first will have the most
to gain. Yet in other models, standards emerge from producers’ and
users’ expectations about the future. In either case, these theories
point to a critical implication for both producers and policymakers:
the final standard adopted may not be the best one, but rather the
one advanced by early movers.43 Clearly, producers of goods for
which value depends on complementary technologies have a strong
interest in shaping standards.44

When the stakes are this high, it is not clear whether
open market competition will lead to the best standard.
IP holders will act to advance their own interests. Failure
to reach an agreement could result in no coordination,
even where it would be in society’s interest. Rather than
“voting with their money”, potential consumers may simply
choose not to adopt a technology, and the fear of poor
adoption rates becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.

127

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

SSOs may intervene to facilitate coordination by providing a forum for communication among private firms,
regulatory agencies, industry groups or any combination
thereof. This can improve the chances of a cooperative
agreement being reached in the first place. In addition,
45

market mechanisms may lead to an impasse or to failed
adoption if important information on the technologies
themselves is not taken into account. Standard-setting
forums provide an outlet for such information to be considered.
However, coordination via standards organizations is
not without its own challenges. Conflicts of interest in
the formation of standards are somewhat analogous
to those encountered for patent pools. Suppliers can
withhold information about R&D in progress to steer
the group toward their forthcoming patents. Similarly,
suppliers can use the knowledge gained in the standardsetting process to adjust their patent claims such that
they have greater power to hold up the group (see Box
3.5 for an example).46

Box 3.5: The case of Rambus and the Joint Electron Device
Engineering Council
One controversial example of a patent claim amendment is the
case of Rambus and the SSO, the Joint Electron Device Engineering
Council (JEDEC). Founded in 1990 as a technology licensing company,
Rambus was invited to join JEDEC shortly after its creation. Rambus
dropped out of the SSO in 1996. By that time, it had had the opportunity to observe the SSO’s proceedings and subsequently filed
for patent continuations. Rambus claimed that the decision to file
such continuations was independent from its participation in JEDEC;
however, Rambus’ patent claim language for these continuations
meant that those adopting JEDEC’s synchronous dynamic random
access memory (SDRAM) standard risked infringing Rambus’ patents.
In 2000, Rambus successfully filed an infringement suit against
Infineon, claiming that its memory manufactured under the SDRAM
standard infringed four of its patents. These patents were filed after
1997, but they were continuations of a patent application originally
filed in 1990. Over the next decade, Rambus was the subject of an
extensive investigation by the US Federal Trade Commission (FTC).
The agency charged Rambus with antitrust violations originating
from what was inferred to be its attempt to use knowledge gained
while participating in JEDEC to strategically expand the scope of
its patent claims. These claims were contested through the District
Courts and the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, until 2009
when the US Supreme Court rejected the FTC’s final appeal.
Source: Graham and Mowery (2004) and FTC Docket No. 9302.
www.ftc.gov/os/adjpro/d9302/index.shtm

In a close examination of the US modem industry, one
study finds that patent efforts may be the result, not the
antecedent, of participation in standard-setting activities.47 The study documents a high correlation between
patents granted for modem technology and participation
in standard setting. In addition, it finds that participation
in standard-setting predicts subsequent patents granted,
45 See Farrell and Saloner (1988).
46 A different conflict of interest arises in the case of
interface standards: firms can adopt “one-way”
technical standards in which the interface on one
side is openly disclosed but concealed behind a
“translator” layer on the other. Such maneuvers
allow some firms to enjoy protected positions within
the standard while exposing others to competition.
47 See Gandal et al. (2007).
48 In particular, Gandal et al. (2007) employ a
Granger causality test. In a nutshell, this test
establishes that X “causes” Y if lagged values of
X are significant in explaining outcome Y, where
lagged values of Y are also included as controls.

128

yet prior patents granted in the modem field are not indications of subsequent participation in standard setting.48
These effects hold even when accounting for anticipated
lags between patent applications and grants. While it is
possible that companies lobby for technologies that they
have not yet invented, the authors point out that such a
strategy is risky, because another company may learn
about the impending standard and overtake them in the
patenting race.

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Finally, there may also be conflicts of interest between
SSOs and society. Notably, SSO members may charge
higher royalties to non-members than to fellow members.

3.3
Safeguarding competition

One may argue that this would not be in the SSO’s interest, as it could discourage wider adoption of a standard.

The previous discussion pointed to a number of situations

However, there are more subtle means of creating dis-

in which private collaborative practices may conflict with

advantages for non-members. For example, delaying

society’s interests. In particular, collaborative practices

disclosure can severely raise costs in a rapidly developing

can curtail the functioning of market competition to the

industry, harming competitive market forces (see Box

extent that consumers face higher prices, lower output,

3.6 for an example).

less choice, the adoption of second-best technologies
and reduced innovation.

Box 3.6: Delayed disclosure in the case of the Universal Serial
Bus standard
One prominent example of delayed disclosure concerns the development of the Universal Serial Bus (USB) 2.0 standard. USB 2.0
improved speeds of the peripheral-to-computer connections by
as much as 40 times. USB 2.0 was only compatible with a new
controller interface, the Enhanced Host Controller Interface (EHCI).
Consortium members like NEC Technologies, Lucent and Phillips all
announced their new USB 2.0 and EHCI-compliant host controllers
well in advance of the full release of the EHCI specification. In the
fast-moving market of consumer electronics, such a head start can
create a significant competitive advantage.
Source: MacKie-Mason and Netz (2007).

There is thus a role for competition policy to play in identifying and prohibiting those collaborative agreements
which impose a net cost on society. Indeed, in many
countries, competition policy addresses the interface
between private collaboration, IP and competition. While
there are important differences across jurisdictions,
most policy frameworks explicitly recognize that collaboration can promote societal welfare; they are thus
generally permissive of collaborative practices, unless
they trigger certain warning signs. Even then, only a few
collaborative practices are expressly prohibited – mainly
those associated with the formation of hardcore cartels.

In the presence of network externalities, standards help to

In most cases, such warning signs prompt authorities

increase societal welfare through the mutual adoption of

to further examine the competitive consequences of

an agreed path for technological development. However,

collaborative agreements.

the same network externalities can trap society in an inferior standard (see also Box 3.4). Even were society to be
better off collectively absorbing the cost of upgrading to
another technology standard, no single firm may have the
incentive necessary to initiate such an upgrade.49 Private
incentives may thus be insufficient for ensuring socially optimal outcomes.50 This raises the question of which organizational attributes of SSOs best serve the public interest
and the appropriate form and level of government intervention in the standard-setting process. Difficult trade-offs
exist. For example, it may seem more efficient to decide
on standards quickly; converging on this allows producers to focus on performance improvements rather than
standard-setting. On the other hand, encouraging more
competition among alternative standards prior to selection
could help to ensure that the best standard emerges.

49 See Farrell and Saloner (1985).
50 See Katz and Shapiro (1985).

129

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Competition policy frameworks often spell out in some
detail the types of agreements that raise concerns in the
national context. This section reviews some of the key
rules and guidelines that have emerged in a number of
jurisdictions – namely, the European Union (EU), Japan,

3.3.1
The type of collaborative
R&D alliances that may be
considered anticompetitive

the Republic of Korea and the US.51 The discussion is
not meant to be comprehensive from a legal viewpoint,

There are three types of criteria that competition agencies

but merely seeks to illustrate the different approaches

employ to identify potentially anticompetitive collaborative

and key legal concepts applied. Following the structure

R&D alliances: whether the combined market share of

of the previous discussion, the section first looks at col-

participants exceeds certain concentration thresholds;

laborative R&D alliances, followed by patent pools and

how the joint research undertaking might affect market

standard-setting agreements.

competition; and whether an agreement includes certain
provisions that may be unduly harmful for competition.
First, several jurisdictions have established critical market
share thresholds above which collaborative agreements
may trigger closer scrutiny by competition authorities.
For example, EU guidelines refer to a combined market share threshold of 25 percent. In Japan and the
Republic of Korea, similar thresholds stand at 20 percent. Competition authorities in the US do not employ a
market share threshold, but use threshold values for a
broader measure of market concentration, in particular
the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index.52
Implementing such threshold criteria is often not straightforward, as authorities need to define what constitutes
a relevant market. One possibility is to define markets in
relation to a specific technology – for example, combustion engines. Other options are to define markets in relation to specific products and their close substitutes – for
example, car engines – or broader consumer markets
– for example, cars. Further complications arise where
R&D agreements concern radically new technologies
that have no close substitutes. Competition authorities

51 See guidelines on joint research practices for
the EU (2010, 2011), Japan (1993, 2007), the
Republic of Korea (2007, 2010) and the US
(1995, 2000). The US Department of Justice
and Federal Trade Commission (2007) reported
and reviewed the practices in this field.
52 The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index is calculated
by summing the squares of individual firms’
market shares thereby giving proportionately
greater weight to the larger market shares.

130

sometimes calculate market shares using alternative
market definitions, though the precise practice varies
across countries.

Chapter 3

Second, in assessing the competitive consequences of
collaborative agreements, some competition authorities look at the nature of the joint research undertaking.
In Japan, for example, an agreement is more likely to
raise concerns the closer the joint research activity is to

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.3.2
How competition rules treat
patent pools and standardsetting agreements

the commercialization stage. Similarly, US competition
authorities are more circumspect of agreements that

As pointed out in Subsection 3.2.2, competition au-

assign marketing personnel to an R&D collaboration. In

thorities have become more lenient towards the for-

the EU, R&D agreements that cover basic research are

mation of patent pools in the last two decades, which

less likely to raise concerns than agreements covering

partly explains their historical resurgence (see Figure

the production and marketing of research results. In

3.3). Nonetheless, they still scrutinize such agreements

addition, many competition authorities are more lenient

for potential anticompetitive effects.

towards agreements involving firms that clearly possess
complementary assets and for which the rationale for

As in the case of collaborative R&D alliances, most juris-

collaboration is thus strongest.

dictions prohibit agreements that facilitate the formation
of hardcore cartels, that is, participants jointly determining

Finally, the inclusion of certain provisions in collaborative

prices or quantities in product markets. In addition, many

R&D agreements may trigger action by competition au-

competition frameworks may question agreements that

thorities. As already pointed out, provisions that facilitate

unduly slow innovative activity and, interestingly, they

the formation of hardcore cartels – notably, price-fixing,

sometimes employ the criteria outlined in Section 3.2.

market sharing or joint marketing – are illegal per se in
most countries. In addition, authorities may investigate

Specifically, in the US, provisions that discourage par-

agreements that impose restrictions on collaborating

ticipants from engaging in further R&D – for example,

partners which could result in reduced innovative activ-

through grant back obligations – may be considered

ity. For example, in the EU and Japan, authorities may

anticompetitive.53 In the Republic of Korea and Japan,

question agreements that limit participants’ research

authorities may challenge agreements that do not allow

activity in areas different from those of the joint project,

for independent licensing. In addition, EU, Korean and US

or that takes place after the joint project is completed. In

authorities may investigate patent pools if the technolo-

addition, EU authorities may challenge agreements that

gies included are seen as substitutes.

do not allow all participants access to the results of the
joint research or that prevent participants from exploiting

Relatively few countries have developed detailed competi-

research results individually.

tion rules on the treatment of patent rights in standardsetting agreements, although certain business practices
by patent holders may be covered by general competition
law principles such as price gouging or refusal to deal.
Nonetheless, competition policy frameworks in some
countries address the patent-standards interface. Thus,
in the Republic of Korea, standard-setting agreements
that disclose only limited patent information or that do
not spell out the detailed licensing conditions affecting

53 At the same time, the US Department of Justice has
expressly considered grant back provisions in its
business review letters, without rejecting them.

participants may be considered anticompetitive.

131

Chapter 3

Similarly, China’s Standardization Administration has issued draft rules requiring patent holders to disclose their
patents if they are involved in standard-setting or if they
are otherwise aware that standards under development

Balancing collaboration and competition

3.4
Conclusion and directions
for future research

cover a patent they own. These rules also foresee that
patents relevant to a national standard be licensed either

Firms increasingly look beyond their own boundaries to

free-of-charge or at a below-normal royalty rate.54

maximize their investment in innovation. From society’s
perspective, private collaboration promises clear benefits:
it encourages knowledge spillovers; promotes an efficient
division of labor; reduces innovation risks; and fosters the
interoperability of complementary products. However,
leaving the formation of collaboration arrangements to
private market forces may not lead to socially optimal
outcomes; firms may either collaborate below desirable
levels or they may do so in an anticompetitive manner.
Insufficient levels of collaboration may occur where there
are conflicts of interest between potential collaborators.
Fears of free riding, risk shifting and other forms of opportunistic behavior may lead firms to forgo mutually beneficial
cooperation. Differences in business strategies between
specialized R&D firms and vertically integrated R&D and
production firms may contribute to negotiation gridlock.
In principle, the failure of private markets to attract an
optimal level of collaboration provides a rationale for
government intervention. Unfortunately, economic research provides no universal guidance to policymakers
on how such market failures are best resolved. This is
partly because the benefits of and incentives for collaboration are highly specific to technologies and business
models, and also because it is difficult to evaluate how
many potentially fruitful collaboration opportunities go
unexplored in different industries.
Some governments promote collaboration through fiscal incentives for firms and related innovation policy instruments.
In addition, there are incentive mechanisms for sharing IP
rights – for example, discounts on renewal fees if patent
holders make their patents available for licensing. However,
as greater technological complexity and a more fragment-

54 See Standardization Administration of the
People’s Republic of China (2009).

132

ed IP landscape have increased the need for collaboration, there is arguably scope for creative policy thinking.

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

The problem of anticompetitive collaborative practices

• The economic literature provides only limited guidance

seems easier to address from a policymaker’s viewpoint.

on situations in which governments should consider

Such practices are generally more observable, and

intervening in market processes for selecting stan-

authorities can assess the competitive effects of collab-

dards. This is a long-standing policy question, and

orative agreements on a case-by-case basis. In addition,

countries have opted for markedly different approach-

some consensus exists about the type of collaborative

es. Clear-cut answers may seem elusive; however, it

practices that should not be allowed or at the least trigger

would be useful to further investigate the effects of the

warning signs. For instance, the inclusion of grant back

different structures and decision-making rules of SSOs

provisions and restrictions on independent licensing have

on the speed and quality of standard adoption where

emerged as differentiating markers between beneficial

underlying IP landscapes are highly fragmented.

versus potentially anticompetitive agreements.
• Little insight exists on the effectiveness of government
Nonetheless, evaluating the competitive effects of specific

programs that support collaboration. For example, as

collaborative agreements remains challenging – especial-

pointed out above, many patent offices offer incentives

ly where technologies move fast and their market impact

to patent owners for making their patents available for

is uncertain. In addition, many low- and middle-income

licensing; no research has sought to systematically

countries have less developed institutional frameworks

evaluate whether such incentives matter and, if so,

for enforcing competition law in this area – although they

how. More generally, no research exist on how other

may benefit from the enforcement actions of high-income

elements of the IP system – above all, firms’ prospect

countries where most collaborative agreements with

of effectively enforcing IP rights – affects incentives

global reach are concluded.

for different forms of collaboration.

Areas for future research

• As many collaborative agreements have a global
reach, national enforcement of competition law is

Seeking a better understanding of how collaborative

bound to have international spillovers. However, the

practices involving IP affect economic performance is a

precise extent and nature of these spillovers is not

fertile area for future research. In guiding policymakers

well understood. Generating evidence on this ques-

on how best to balance cooperation and competition in

tion would be important in assessing the need for

the generation of new ideas, further investigation in the

low- and middle-income countries to further develop

following areas would seem especially helpful:

competition rules in this area.

• Much of the available evidence on collaborative R&D

• Finally, available evidence on collaborative practices

alliances is based on case studies. This partly reflects

focuses almost entirely on high income countries. In

the fact that the impact of these alliances is critically

the case of patent pools, this may be because many

dependent on specific business strategies and tech-

of the patent families behind patent thickets do not

nology properties, but it also reflects inadequate data.

extend to low- and middle-income countries – though

Collecting more and better data through carefully

this is an important research question in its own right.

designed firm surveys could generate more system-

In the case of R&D alliances, innovation surveys in

atic evidence of the patterns, motives and effects of

middle income countries suggest that local firms do

collaborative R&D, thereby usefully complementing

collaborate frequently. However, no evidence is avail-

the available case study evidence.

able to assess whether the motivations and effects
of such collaboration differ systemically from high
income countries.
133

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

References
Arthur, W.B. (1989). Competing Technologies, Increasing Returns, and Lockin by Historical Events. The Economic Journal, 99(394), 116-131.
Bresnahan, T.F. & Yin, P. (2007). Standard Setting in Markets: The Browser
War. In S.M. Greenstein and V. Stango (Eds.), Standards and Public Policy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 18-59.
Cabral, L.M.B. (2000). R&D Cooperation and Product Market Competition.
International Journal of Industrial Organization, 18(7), 1033-1047.
Carlson, S.C. (1999). Patent Pools and the Antitrust Dilemma. Yale Journal
on Regulation, 16, 359-399.
Commerce Clearing House. (various years). Trade Regulation Reporter.
New York: Commerce Clearing House.
Dahlander, L. & Gann, D.M. (2010). How Open is Innovation? Research
Policy, 39(6), 699-709.
De Backer, K., Lopez-Bassols, V. & Martinez, C. (2008). Open Innovation
in a Global Perspective – What do Existing Data Tell Us? OECD STI Working
Paper, 2008/4.
Deroian, F. & Gannon, F. (2006). Quality-Improving Alliances in
Differentiated Oligopoly. International Journal of Industrial Organization,
24(3), 629-637.
Dun and Bradstreet (yearly). Who Owns Whom. In Dun and Bradstreet
WorldBase (Ed.).
European Commission. (2010). Commission Regulation No. 1217/2010
on on the Application of Article 101(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union to Certain Categories of Research and
Development Agreements.
European Commission. (2011). Communication from the Commission:
Guidelines on the Applicability of Article 101 of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union to Horizontal Co-Operation Agreements.
Fair Trade Commission Republic of Korea. (2007). Guidelines for
Cartel Review.
Fair Trade Commission Republic of Korea. (2010). Review Guidelines on
Undue Exercise of Intellectual Property Rights.
Farrell, J. & Klemperer, P. (2007). Coordination and Lock-in: Competition
with Switching Costs and Network Effects. Handbook of Industrial
Organization, 3, 1967-2072.
Farrell, J. & Saloner, G. (1988). Coordination through Committees and
Markets. The RAND Journal of Economics, 19(2), 235-252.
Federal Trade Commission & US Department of Justice. (2000). Antitrust
Guidelines for Collaborations Among Competitors.
Gandal, N., Gantman, N. & Genesove, D. (2007). Intellectual Property and
Standardization Committee Participation in the US Modem Industry. In S.M.
Greenstein and V. Stango (Eds.), Standards and Public Policy. Cambridge
University Press, 208-230.
Gilbert, R.J. (2004). Antitrust for Patent Pools: A Century of Policy Evolution.
Stanford Technology Law Review, 3, 7-38.
Gilbert, R.J. (2010). Ties that Bind: Policies to Promote (Good) Patent Pools.
Antitrust Law Journal 77(1),1-48.
Goyal, S. & Moraga-Gonzalez, J.L. (2001). R&D Networks. The RAND
Journal of Economics, 32(4), 686-707.

Hagedoorn, J. (2003). Sharing Intellectual Property Rights—An Exploratory
Study of Joint Patenting amongst Companies. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 12(5), 1035-1050.
Harrigan, K.R. (1988). Strategic Alliances and Partner Asymmetries. In F.
Contractor and P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative Strategies in International
Business. Lanham: Lexington, 205-226.
Japanese Fair Trade Commission. (1947, amended 2009). Act on
Prohibition of Private Monopolization and Maintenance of Fair Trade (Act no.
54 of April 14, 1947).
Japanese Fair Trade Commission. (1993, updated in 2009). Guidelines
concerning Joint Research and Development under the Antimonopoly Act.
Japanese Fair Trade Commission. (2007). Guidelines for the Use of
Intellectual Property under the Antimonopoly Act.
Jones, B.F. (2009). The Burden of Knowledge and the"Death of the
Renaissance Man": Is Innovation Getting Harder? Review of Economic
Studies, 76(1), 283-317.
Kaysen, C. & Turner, D.F. (1965). Antitrust Policy: An Economic and Legal
Analysis. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kogut, B. (1988). A Study of the Life Cycle of Joint Ventures. In F. Contractor
and P. Lorange (Eds.), Cooperative Strategies in International Business.
Lanham: Lexington Books, 169-186.
Langlois, R.N. (2007). Competition through Institutional Form: The Case of
Cluster Tool Standards. In S.M. Greenstein and V. Stango (Eds.), Standards
and Public Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 60-86.
Layne-Farrar, A. & Lerner, J. (2011). To Join or Not to Join: Examining
Patent Pool Participation and Rent Sharing Rules. International Journal of
Industrial Organization, 29(2), 294-303.
Lerner, J. & Malmendier, U. (2010). Contractibility and the Design of
Research Agreements. The American Economic Review, 100(1), 214-246.
Lerner, J. & Schankerman, M. (2010). The Comingled Code: Open Source
and Economic Development. Boston: MIT Press.
Lerner, J., Strojwas, M. & Tirole, J. (2007). The Design of Patent Pools:
The Determinants of Licensing Rules. The RAND Journal of Economics,
38(3), 610-625.
Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2004). Efficient Patent Pools. The American Economic
Review, 94(3), 691-711.
Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2005). The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open
Source and Beyond. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2), 99-120.
Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. (2007). Public Policy toward Patent Pools. Innovation
Policy and the Economy, 8, 157-186.
Lewis, J.A. (2007). Government Open Source Policies. Center for Strategic
and International Studies.
Link, A. (2005). Research Joint Ventures in the United States: A Descriptive
Analysis. In A. N. Link & F. M. Scherer (Eds.), Essays in Honor of Edwin
Mansfield. New York: Springer, 187-193.
Lyons, D. (2005). Has Open Source Become a Marketing Slogan? Forbes.
MacKie-Mason, J.K. & Netz, J.S. (2007). Manipulating Interface Standards
as an Anticompetitive Strategy. In S.M. Greenstein and V. Stango(Eds.),
Standards and Public Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 231259.

Graham, S. & Mowery, D. (2004). Submarines in Software: Continuations
in U.S. Software Patenting in the 1980s and 1990s. Economics of Innovation
and New Technology, 13, 443-456.

Martin, S. (1996). R&D Joint Ventures and Tacit Product Market Collusion.
European Journal of Political Economy, 11(4), 733-741.

Grossman, G.M. & Shapiro, C. (1986). Optimal Dynamic R&D Programs.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 17(4), 581-593.

Maurer, S. (2007). Open Source Drug Discovery: Finding a Niche (or Maybe
Several). University of Missouri at Kansas City Law Review, 76(1-31).

Hagedoorn, J. (1993). Understanding the Rationale of Strategic Technology
Partnering: Inter-organizational Modes of Cooperation and Sectoral
Differences. Strategic Management Journal, 14(5), 371-385.

Merges, R.P. (1999). As Many as Six Impossible Patents before Breakfast:
Property Rights for Business Concepts and Patent System Reform. Berkeley
Technology Law Journal, 14, 557-616.

Hagedoorn, J. (2002). Inter-firm R&D partnerships: an overview of major
trends and patterns since 1960. Research Policy, 31(4), 477-492.

Merges, R.P. (1999). Institutions for Intellectual Property Transactions: The
Case of Patent Pools. University of California at Berkeley Working Paper.

134

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Ordover, J.A. and Willig, R.D. (1985). Antitrust for High-technology
Industries: Assessing Research Joint Ventures and Mergers. Journal of Law
and Economics, 28(2), 311-333.
Oxley, J.E. (1997). Appropriability Hazards and Governance in Strategic
Alliances: A Transaction Cost Approach. Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 13(2), 387-409.
Oxley, J.E. (1999). Institutional Environment and the Mechanisms of
Governance: The Impact of Intellectual Property Protection on the Structure
of Inter-firm Alliances. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,
38(3), 283-309.
Pharmaceuticals, Patents, Publicity… and Philanthropy? (February
2009). The Lancet, 373, 693.
Sampson, R.C. (2004). Organizational Choice in R&D Alliances: KnowledgeBased and Transaction-Cost Perspectives. Managerial and Decision
Economics, 25(6-7), 421-436.
Schilling, M.A. (2009). Understanding the Alliance Data. Strategic
Management Journal, 30(3), 233-260.
Shapiro, C. (2000). Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent
Pools, and Standard Setting. Innovation Policy and the Economy, 1, 119-150.
Standardization Administration of the People’s Republic of China.
(2009). Regulations on Administration of Formulating and Revising National
Standards Involving Patents.
Teece, D. (1986). Profiting from Technological Innovation: Implications for
Integration, Collaboration, Licensing and Public Policy. Research Policy,
15(6), 285-305.
US Department of Justice & Federal Trade Commission. (1995). Antitrust
Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual Property.
US Department of Justice & Federal Trade Commission. (2007).
Antitrust Enforcement and Intellectual Property Rights: Promoting Innovation
and Competition.
Van Overwalle, G., van Zimmeren, E., Verbeure, B. & Matthijs, G. (2005).
Models for Facilitating Access to Patents on Genetic Inventions. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 7(2), 143-154.
Vaughan, F.L. (1925). Economics of Our Patent System. New York: The
Macmillan Company.
Vaughan, F.L. (1956). The United States Patent System: Legal and
Economic Conflicts in American Economic History. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press.
Verbeure, B., van Zimmeren, E., Matthijs, G. & Van Overwalle, G. (2006).
Patent Pools and Diagnostic Testing. TRENDS in Biotechnology, 24(3), 115120.
Veugelers, R. (1998). Collaboration in R&D: An Assessment of Theoretical
and Empirical Findings. De Economist, 146(3), 419-443.
War and Peace and the Patent System (1942). Fortune, 26, 102105,132,134,136,138,141.

135

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Data Annex
R&D alliances

The MERIT-CATI database refers to Cooperative
Agreements and Technology Indicators (CATI) alliance

The SDC Platinum, CORE and MERIT-CATI databases

data administered by the UNU Maastricht Economic and

are the three most used sources for measuring R&D-

Social Research Institute on Innovation and Technology

specific alliances between firms across technology fields

(MERIT) in the Netherlands. Information on agreements

and industrial sectors.

that cover technology transfer – including joint research
agreements and joint ventures involving technology

The SDC Platinum database is maintained by Thomson

sharing between two or more industrial partners – is

Reuters and provides information on financial transac-

collected on a worldwide basis. It relies on print publica-

tions between firms, including merger and acquisition

tions including newspapers, company annual reports,

(M&A) activity. Data on alliance activity, a section of the

the Financial Times and Who Owns Whom, published

M&A, capture a wide range of collaborative agreements,

yearly by Dun and Bradstreet. Further description of the

including agreements between industrial partners on

database is available in Hagedoorn (2002).

distribution, licensing, manufacturing, marketing, R&D,
sales and supply, as well as joint ventures and strategic

These databases are likely to capture only a fraction of the

alliances. They also comprise of alliances between

total instances of collaboration between firms worldwide.

governments and universities. The data shown here

One weakness is that they predominantly cover R&D

represent the count of R&D alliances classified in one

alliances documented in English-language publications,

of the following four categories: R&D alliances, cross-

although the MERIT-CATI database also includes an-

licensing, cross-technology transfer and joint ventures.

nouncements in Dutch and German. The language bias

Information is collected based on Security and Exchange

also limits the geographical coverage of collaborative

Commission (SEC) filings, trade publications as well as

agreements. By definition, the CORE database covers

news sources.

only US agreements.

The Cooperative Research (CORE) database, from the
National Science Foundation (NSF), collects information on industrial partnerships which are filed under the
National Cooperative Research and Production Act
(NCRPA) in the US. Disclosure of any research and/
or production collaboration with other firms under the
NCRPA limits the possible antitrust liabilities arising
from those activities. NCPRA filings are published in
the Federal Register and include information on R&D
partners as well as partnership objectives. The CORE
database catalogues those filings and is further described
in Link (2005).

136

Chapter 3

Balancing collaboration and competition

Patent pools
The patent pool data presented in this chapter were kindly
supplied by Josh Lerner and Eric Lin from the Harvard
Business School. They build on an earlier database
described in Lerner et al. (2003), since updated to 2010.
No official reporting requirement exists for patent pools.
One therefore needs to rely on a variety of secondary
sources to track the formation of such pools. The patent
pool database relies on a variety of English-language
publications, reports by US government agencies, and
company news releases. Some of these publications
include Carlson (1999), Commerce Clearing House
(various years), Kaysen and Turner (1965), Merges (1999),
Vaughan (1925, 1956) and Fortune (1942). The coverage
of pools is clearly biased towards those formed in the US.
However, even for the US the data may be incomplete.
Patent pools are defined as patent-based collaborative
agreements of the following two types: (i) at least two
firms combine their patents with the intention to license
them, as a whole, to third parties; and (ii) at least three
firms come together to share their patents among themselves. The count of patent pools captured here does
not include cross-licensing agreements, new entities
established to manufacture products based on different
firms’ IP, firms that acquire patents and license them to
interested parties, or patent pools dominated by nonprofit entities (such as universities).

137

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Chapter 4
Harnessing public research
for innovation – the role of
Intellectual Property
Universities and public research organizations (PROs)

The first section of this chapter assesses the role of uni-

play a key role in innovation through their contribution to

versities and PROs in national innovation systems. The

the production and diffusion of knowledge.1

second section describes the ongoing policy initiatives
that promote university and PRO patenting and licensing,

In the last decades, various national strategies have aimed

and presents new data. The third section evaluates the

to improve the linkages between public research and

impacts of these policies based on the findings of the

industry. As innovation becomes more collaborative, the

growing empirical literature, while the fourth section is

objective will be to find the most adequate frameworks for

concerned with implications for middle- and low-income

spurring the commercialization of publicly-funded inven-

countries. Finally, the fourth section presents new prac-

tions. Universities are therefore fostering entrepreneurial

tices that act as safeguards against the potential down-

activity along many dimensions, including by creating

side effects of commercializing publicly-funded research.

incubators, science parks and university spin-offs.

The analysis is supplemented by a background report to

2

this chapter (Zuñiga, 2011).
In the above context, patenting and licensing inventions
based on public research are used as instruments for

The concluding remarks summarize some of the key mes-

accelerating knowledge transfer, fueling greater cross-

sages emanating from the economic literature and point

fertilization between faculty and industry which leads to

to areas where more research could usefully guide poli-

entrepreneurship, innovation and growth. While this has

cymakers.

been an ongoing trend in high-income economies over
the last decades, it is increasingly also a matter of priority
in low- and middle-income economies. This has raised
numerous questions regarding the resulting economic
and other impacts, including those on the broader science system.
This chapter reviews the developments and outcomes
of these approaches for countries at different stages
of development.

1

2

The text mostly covers universities and PROs.
At times, the term “public research institutions”
is used to cover both of the above. It must be noted
that the exact definition of what falls under “PROs
and universities” varies from country to country.
See Rothaermel et al. (2007).

139

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.1

4.1.1

The evolving role of
universities and PROs in
national innovation systems

Public R&D is key, in particular for
basic research
The R&D conducted by universities and PROs accounts
for a substantial share of total R&D.

Universities and PROs play a key role in national innovation systems and in science more broadly. This has to

In high-income economies, the public sector is respon-

do with the magnitude and direction of public research

sible for anywhere between 20 and 45 percent of annual

and development (R&D) (see Subsection 4.1.1) and the

total R&D expenditure (see Annex Figure 4.1). Importantly,

impacts of these public research institutions on the

with some exceptions governments usually provide the

broader innovation system at different levels: first by pro-

majority of the funds for basic research.3 On average,

viding human capital and training, advancing knowledge

in 2009 the public sector performed more than three-

through public science, and lastly through technology

quarters of all basic research in high-income economies

transfer activities (see Subsection 4.1.2).

(see Figure 4.1).4 This contribution to basic research is
becoming more vital as firms focus mostly on product
development and as multinational companies in highincome countries scale back their basic research in a
number of R&D-intensive sectors.5

Figure 4.1: Basic research is mainly conducted by the public sector
Basic research performed in the public sector for 2009 or latest available year, as a percentage of national basic research
Higher education

Government

100
80
60
40
20

Note: The above graph provides data from the most recent available years,
mostly between 2007 and 2009 for each country, except Mexico for which the
year provided is 2003. As noted in footnote 1, some of the distinction between
higher education institutions – universities and government as well as PROs –
is simply definitional and depends on what is defined as a university or a PRO
in a given country.

3

Basic research means experimental or theoretical
work undertaken primarily to acquire new
knowledge of the underlying foundation of
phenomena and observable facts, without
any particular application or use in view.

140

Isr
ae
l
Un
J
ite
ap
an
Re d K
in
pu
gd
bl
om
ic
of
Ko
re
a

Ita
Au ly
st
ra
Po lia
rtu
ga
l
A
So ust
r
u
i
a
Un
th
A
ite
d
Sw fric
St
itz a
at
e
es
r
of land
Am
er
ica

a
ni

ia

lan
d
Cz
I
ec cela
h
n
d
Re
pu
bl
ic
Ne Sp
a
w
Ze in
ala
nd
M
ex
ic
No o
rw
a
Hu y
ng
ar
y
Fr
an
ce
Ch
ile
Ire
l
a
Ru
nd
ss De
ian nm
Fe ark
de
ra
tio
n

Po

to

Es

ak

Ch

Sl

ov

in
a

0

Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
Research and Development Database, May 2011.

4

5

See OECD, Research & Development Statistics.
Depending on the country in question, it accounts for
about 40 percent (Republic of Korea) to close to 100
percent (Slovakia) of all basic research performed.
See OECD (2008b).

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

PROs – rather than universities – are often the main R&D
actors in low- and middle-income economies, where – in
many cases – industry often contributes little to scientific research (see Chapter 1 and Annex Figure 4.1). On

4.1.2
Public R&D stimulates private R&D
and innovation

average, government funding is responsible for about

Beyond the mere contribution to total R&D, the economic

53 percent of total R&D in the middle-income countries

literature stresses that universities and PROs – and sci-

for which data are available.6 As the level of a country’s

ence more generally – are a fundamental source of

income decreases, governmental funding approaches

knowledge for the business sector (see Box 4.1).8

100 percent, in particular for R&D in the agricultural and
health sectors. For instance, the public sector funded 100

Firms and other innovators depend on the contributions

percent of R&D in Burkina Faso in the last year for which

of public research and of future scientists to produce

data are available. R&D is also essentially conducted by

innovation of commercial significance.9 Science serves

PROs. For example, In Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, India,

as a map for firms, facilitating the identification of promis-

Peru and Romania the share of public-sector R&D often

ing venues for innovation, avoiding duplication of efforts

exceeds 70 percent of total R&D.7

by companies. Close interaction with public research
enables firms to monitor scientific advances likely to

In low- and middle-income countries for which data

transform their technologies and markets. It also facilitates

are available, public research is also responsible for the

joint problem solving and opens up new avenues for

majority of basic R&D, e.g., close to 100 percent in China,

research. Given the increasingly science-based nature

close to 90 percent in Mexico, about 80 percent in Chile

of technological advances, this interaction with science

and the Russian Federation, and about 75 percent in

is more and more key to innovation.10

South Africa.
Box 4.1: The economic impact of publicly-funded research

6
7

See UNESCO (2010).
Exceptions are Malaysia, China, the Philippines
and Thailand where, for both R&D funding and
performance, the business sector has the largest
share but, nonetheless, PROs play a key role in
contributing to industry R&D and ensuing innovation.
8 See Caballero and Jaffe (1993).
9 See Nelson (2004).
10 See Section 3.4 on technology-science linkages;
OECD (2011) based on patents citing non-patent
literature (forward and backward citations).
Patents that rely on scientific knowledge are on
the increase in high-growth industries such as
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals and information
and communication technologies (ICT).
11 See Stephan (2010).
12 See Jaffe (1989).

The economic rationale for publicly-funded research relates largely
to the concept of appropriability discussed in Chapter 2. Economists
have traditionally seen knowledge produced by universities and PROs
as a public good. First, the economic value attached to certain kinds
of basic and other research cannot be fully appropriated by the actor
undertaking the research. Second, the value of such knowledge is
often difficult or impossible to judge ex ante. As a result, firms alone
would tend to underinvest in the funding of research, in particular in
fields that show little prospect of near-term profitability.
To avoid this underinvestment in science and research, governments
fund research. Scientists are thus enabled to pursue blue-sky
research without the pressure of immediate business considerations.11 The reward system is based on the scientist’s publication
and dissemination record.12

141

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Economic studies have examined the impact of academic research
on business innovation.13 While imperfect, aggregate studies have
found that academic research, and basic research in particular, has
a positive effect on industrial innovation and industry productivity.14
Importantly, public R&D does not directly contribute to economic
growth but has an indirect effect via the stimulation of increased
private R&D. In other words, “crowding in” of private R&D takes
place as public R&D raises the returns on private R&D.15
Yet, the effect of public R&D is mostly found to be smaller in size
than the impact of private R&D. The link to an immediate commercial
application is not direct. Moreover, detailed econometric studies at
the firm and industry level provide less conclusive results as to the
positive impact of public R&D.
This failure to show a strong impact can convincingly be blamed
on the difficulty in constructing such empirical studies. Given the
many channels of knowledge transfer, assigning a figure to all
associated impacts is challenging. Many transactions rarely leave
a visible trace that can be readily identified and measured.16 The
contribution of public R&D can take also a long time to materialize.
Finally, the non-economic impact of research in areas such as health,
and others, is even harder to identify. Yet it is of an equally, if not
more important, nature.

Although this chapter focuses on the role of intellectual
property (IP), public-private knowledge transfer occurs
through a large number of formal and informal channels,
and IP issues are only one part of the bigger landscape.
Figure 4.2 sets out the following informal and formal

It is through informal as opposed to formal links that
knowledge most frequently diffuses to firms. Formal
and “commercial” channels of knowledge transfer are
frequently ranked lower in importance in firm surveys for
high-, middle- and low-income countries.19 Importantly,
policies or research that account for only one type of
linkage will thus provide only a partial understanding of
the patterns of interaction and their inter-reliant nature.
Figure 4.2: The multiple vectors of knowledge
transfer from universities and PROs to industry
Research
and publications
Dissemination of knowledge via
conferences, seminars, meetings
with industry and others

Public
research and
education

Education and training of
students / researchers recruited
by the private sector
Consultancies, contract
research, university-industry joint
research projects, joint research
centers and PhD projects

Industry
and
innovation

Creation of IP available for
licensing to established firms
and new start-up companies
Creation of spin-offs and
other forms of academic
entrepreneurship of faculty or
students (with or without IP)

channels of exchange:17
• Informal channels include the transfer of knowledge
through publications, conferences and informal
exchanges between scientists.
• Formal channels include hiring students and researchers from universities and PROs, sharing equipment and instrumentation, contracting technology
services, research collaboration, creating university spin-offs or joint firms, and newer IP-related
transmission channels such as licensing inventions
from universities.18

142

13 For example, Adams (1990) has found that basic
research has a significant effect on increasing
industry productivity, although the effect may be
delayed for 20 years. Similarly, Manfield's survey
of R&D executives from 76 randomly selected firms
estimated that 10 percent of industrial innovation
was dependent on the academic research conducted
within the 15 years prior. See also Mansfield (1998).
14 See Griliches (1980), Adams (1990)
and Luintel and Khan (2011).
15 For an overview of the literature, see David
and Hall (2006). In turn, some public R&D
may crowd out private R&D if it is not focused
on basic (pre-commercial) R&D.
16 See Vincett (2010) and OECD (2008a).
17 See Bishop et al. (2011) and Merrill and Mazza (2010).
18 See Foray and Lissoni (2010).
19 See Zuñiga (2011).

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

The payoffs of academic research are maximized when
the private sector uses and builds on these multiple
channels of transfer.20 These are not one-way exchanges
from universities to firms. Industrial research comple-

4.1.3
Fostering the impact of publiclyfunded research on innovation

ments and also guides more basic research. It is also a

Based on the above, policymakers have been keen to

means of “equipping” university scientists with new and

bolster the effectiveness with which publicly-funded

powerful instruments.

research can foster commercial innovation.22

For knowledge transfer to work, firms need to be able

Since the late 1970s, many countries have changed their

to assimilate and exploit public research. Often this is

legislation and created support mechanisms to encour-

attained by firms actively engaged in upstream research

age interaction between universities and firms, includ-

activity and actively participating in science. Promoting

ing through technology transfer.23 Placing the output

outward knowledge transfer from universities and PROs

of publicly-funded research in the public domain is no

where this capacity does not exist will be ineffective.

longer seen as sufficient to generate the full benefits of the

21

research for innovation.24 Also, countries have intended
Fostering this two-way exchange, which builds on the

that budget cuts to universities should be compen-

mutual capacities of the public and private research

sated by proactive approaches to revenue generation.25

sectors, is a challenge for high-income countries but
particularly so for less developed economies with fewer

In high-income countries, policy approaches promot-

links among PROs, universities and the private sector

ing increased commercialization of the results of public

(see Section 4.4).

research have included reforming higher education systems; creating clusters, incubators and science parks;
promoting university-industry collaboration; instituting
specific laws and institutions to regulate technology
transfer; and encouraging public research institutions
to file for and commercialize their IP.
The transformation of research institutions into more
entrepreneurial organizations is also taking place in
middle- and low-income countries by increasing the
quality of public research, creating new incentives and
performance-linked criteria for researchers, enhancing
collaboration of universities and PROs with firms, and

20 See David et al. (1992).
21 See Cohen and Levinthal (1989).
22 See Foray and Lissoni (2010) and
Just and Huffman (2009).
23 See Van Looy et al. (2011).
24 See OECD (2003) and Wright et al. (2007).
25 See Vincent-Lancrin (2006). There is increasing
evidence that countries seek to recover the full
economic cost of research activity in order to
allow research institutions to amortize the assets
and overhead, and to invest in infrastructure at
a rate adequate to maintain future capability.
26 See Zuñiga (2011).

setting up mechanisms for formal technology transfer.26

143

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.2
Public research
institutions’ IP comes of age

4.2.1
Developing policy frameworks for
technology transfer
University- and PRO-industry relationships have existed
for many years, and there have long been efforts to commercialize public research, even before legal acts began
to facilitate the commercialization of patents.27
In the last three decades, however, the legislative trend
to incentivize university and PRO patenting and commercialization has clearly intensified (see Box 4.2). Almost all
high-income countries have adopted specific legislative
frameworks and policies.28
Promoting technology transfer and the development of
industry-university collaboration has only been given
attention much later in less developed economies.29
Recently a number of more advanced middle- and lowincome economies have followed suit.

27 See Mowery et al. (2004); and Scotchmer
(2004). In the US, in particular, technology
transfer organizations, such as the Research
Corporation created in 1912, have sought
to commercialize academic research and to
channel monetary gains back into research.
28 See OECD (2003) and Guellec et al. (2010).
29 See Kuramoto and Torero (2009).
30 See Geuna and Rossi (2011) and Montobbio (2009).
31 See Cervantes (2009) and Foray and Lissoni (2010).
32 Professor’s privilege was abolished in Germany,
Austria, Denmark, Norway and Finland during
the period 2000-2007, but was preserved
in Sweden and Italy where, in the latter,
professor’s privilege was introduced in 2001.

144

Box 4.2: A short history of university technology transfer
legislation
In the 1960s, Israel was the first country to implement IP policies for
several of its universities. However, in 1980 the Bayh-Dole Act of the
US was the first dedicated legal framework which institutionalized the
transfer of exclusive control over many government-funded inventions
to universities and businesses operating under federal contracts. The
shift and clarification of ownership over these inventions lowered
transaction costs as permission was no longer needed from federal
funding agencies, and because this gave greater clarity to ownership
rights and therefore greater security to downstream – sometimes
exclusive – licensees. For instance, the Act also contains rules for
invention disclosure and requires institutions to provide incentives
for researchers. It also contains march-in provisions reserving the
right of government to intervene under some circumstances (see
Section 4.5).
Several European, Asian and other high-income countries have
adopted similar legislation, in particular as of the latter half of the
1990s onwards.30 In Europe, in many cases the challenge was to
address the established situation according to which IP ownership
was assigned to the faculty inventor – the so-called professor’s
privilege – or to firms that funded the researchers rather than to the
university or PRO itself.31 Since the end of the 1990s, most European
countries have been moving away from inventor ownership of patent
rights towards university or PRO ownership.32 European policy efforts
have sought to increase both IP awareness within the public research
system and the rate of commercialization of academic inventions.
In Asia, Japan was the first to implement similar legislation in 1998
and, in 1999, shifted patent rights to public research institutions. The
Republic of Korea implemented similar policies in 2000.
A number of middle- and low-income countries have also moved
in this direction, whereas in other such countries these efforts are
still nascent (for more details, see Zuñiga, 2011).

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

A review of existing mechanisms reveals a few important
In spite of the lack of an explicit policy framework, many of these
countries have put in place general legislation regulating or facilitating
IP ownership and commercialization by research institutions (see
Annex, Table A.4.1).33 There are four distinct sets of countries. In
the first set, there is no explicit regulation, but rather general rules
defined in the law – mostly in patent acts – or legislation regulating
research institutions or government funding. A second model consists
of laws in the form of national innovation laws. A third, adopted in
Brazil, China, and more recently in economies such as Malaysia,
Mexico, the Philippines and South Africa, builds on the model of
high-income countries which confers IP ownership to universities
and PROs, spurring them to commercialize. Fourth, some countries,
for example Nigeria and Ghana, have no national framework but rely
on guidelines for IP-based technology transfer.
Fast-growing middle-income economies, such as Brazil, China, India,
the Russian Federation and South Africa, have already implemented
specific legislation or are currently debating its introduction (see
Annex, Table A.4.1). China was among the first to adopt a policy
framework in 2002.34 In addition, a significant number of countries
in Asia – in particular Bangladesh, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan
the Philippines, and Thailand – and in Latin America and the Caribbean – in particular Brazil, Mexico and more recently Colombia,
Costa Rica and Peru – have been considering such legislation.35
However, only Brazil and Mexico have enacted explicit regulations
regarding IP ownership and university technology transfer so far.
In India, institutional policies have recently been developed at key
national academic and research organizations, complementing
legislative efforts which aim to implement university IP-based
technology transfer rules.36
In Africa, most countries other than South Africa have neither a specific law on IP ownership by research institutions nor any technology
transfer laws. However, several countries have started to implement
policy guidelines and to support technology transfer infrastructure.
Nigeria and Ghana for instance do not have specific legislation but
are both in the process of establishing technology transfer offices
(TTOs) in all institutions of higher education.37 Algeria, Egypt, Morocco
and Tunisia have been working on drafts for similar legislation. In
2010, South Africa implemented the Intellectual Property Rights from
Publicly Financed R&D Act, which defines a number of obligations
ranging from disclosure, IP management and inventor incentives,
to the creation of TTOs and policies regarding entrepreneurship.

33 See Zuñiga (2011). Thailand and the Russian
Federation, for instance, do not have specific
legislation defining ownership and commercialization
rules for research funded by the federal budget
at universities and PROs. Yet existing revisions to
the patent law or other policies leave universities
the flexibility to create and own their own IP.

lessons. First, despite the general trend towards institutional ownership and commercialization of university and
PRO inventions, a diversity of legal and policy approaches
persists, both in terms of how such legislation is anchored
in broader innovation policy (see Box 4.2) as well as how
it is designed with respect to specific rules on the scope
of university patenting, invention disclosure, incentives for
researchers (such as royalty sharing) and whether certain
safeguards are instituted to counteract the potentially
negative effects of patenting (see Subsection 4.4.1 and
Section 4.5).38 Second, the means to implement such
legislation, as well as the available complementary policies to enhance the impact of public R&D and to promote
academic entrepreneurship, vary widely (see Section 4.3).

34 In 2002, the government provided universities with
full rights of ownership and commercialization for
inventions derived from state-funded research.
The “Measures for Intellectual Property Made
under Government Funding” legislation provides
specific rules for IP ownership and licensing,
inventor compensation and firm creation.
35 See Zuñiga (2011) and internal contributions
to this report made by WIPO’s Innovation
and Technology Transfer Section.
36 See Basant and Chandra (2007).
37 Nigeria is in the process of establishing TTOs inall
institutions of higher education and research. In
terms of its policy framework; however, there is
no specific law on IP creation and management
at publicly-funded research institutions. Instead,
regulations are set within federal research institutes
and, recently, the the National Office for Technology
Acquisition and Promotion (NOTAP) published
“Guidelines on Development of Intellectual Property
Policy for Universities and R&D Institutions”.
These guiding principles explain how each R&D
institution can formulate and implement its IP
policy to protect tangible research products in order
to make them demand-driven and economically
viable. The guidelines also promote the use of IP
for the benefit of society, and strengthen researchindustry linkages by establishing intellectual
property and technology transfer offices (IPTTO).
38 These can range from legal approaches (standalone or as part of more comprehensive reforms)
and university by-laws, to “codes of practice” or
general guidelines on IP ownership and management
for fostering greater transparency and consistency.
See Grimaldi et al (2011) and OECD (2003).

145

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Most policies and practices are in flux in both more and
less developed countries as policymakers strive to improve the linkages between public R&D and innovation.
The policy options being manifold and intricate, it is best

4.2.2
Measuring the increase in
university and PRO patenting

not to center policy discussion on simple binary choices,

In the absence of comprehensive data on formal and in-

i.e., whether ownership of inventions by public research

formal university-industry relationships, figures on patents

institutions is a good or a bad thing.

and licenses are used by researchers and policymakers
to gain insights into university knowledge transfer and

Finally, legal changes alone have not started or contrib-

research performance. The idea is to gauge the patenting

uted to sustained patenting by public research institu-

output of these institutions in order to detect the evolution

tions. In the US, university patenting is said to also have

over time, to enable cross-country comparisons and to

been driven by growing technological opportunities in the

benchmark performance. While this has been influential

biomedical and other high-tech fields, as well as a culture

in the policy debate, there are certain related caveats (see

change favoring increased university-industry linkages.

Box 4.3). An important one is the fact that patent data do

39

say relatively little about whether these patents do actually result in innovations. In that sense, patent data stay
a relatively imperfect measure of technological activity.40
This subsection presents novel data for university and
PRO patenting under the Patent Cooperation Treaty
(PCT) and less complete data at the national level (see
the Methodological Annex). It is appealing to use data
based on PCT filings as they are complete and comparable across countries. Identifying universities’ and
PROs’ patents on the basis of statistics from the PCT
system is therefore also more straightforward. Only a
fraction of national patents – most likely the more valuable ones – are filed in addition under the PCT. Also, PCT
data underestimate the activity of non-PCT members,
such as Argentina and other Latin American countries.
Looking only at PCT data will thus provide a partial picture of patenting by public research institutions. For that
reason, an effort has been made to show estimates for
national patenting as well.

39 See Mowery et al. (2001).
40 See Khan and Wunsch-Vincent (2011).

146

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Box 4.3: Caveats in the use of the available data on universities’
and PROs’ patents

Figure 4.3 shows totals worldwide for both university and
PRO applications as well as their share of total applications filed. Most of the growth in applications is driven by

When using data on universities’ and PROs’ patents to compare
the efficacy of university technology transfer across institutions or
countries, two technical issues must be kept in mind.

high-income economies, where France, Germany, Japan,

First, it is difficult to appropriately identify patents filed in the name
of a university or PRO. Patent documents do not contain standardized
information on the affiliation of the applicant to a particular category:
public, private, university, hospital, etc. One can only rely on the
information contained in the applicant’s name or address in developing search algorithms to identify universities’ and PROs’ patents.

period. The share of universities’ and PROs’ patents out

Second, a large share of inventions originating from research performed at universities or PROs – university-invented patents – are
not patented under the institution’s name. Frequently, researchers
patent separately either as individuals or through companies. According to some studies, in Europe, the number of university-owned
patents is frequently a small fraction of university-invented patents:
4 percent in Germany and Italy, 12 percent in France, 20 percent
in the Netherlands, 32 percent in the United Kingdom (UK) and 53
percent in Spain.41 Firms in Europe own no less than 60 percent
of academic patents.42 Also, university researchers in the United
States of America (US) often do not disclose valuable inventions to
a TTO. The same trends are true for PROs. As a result, a sizeable
share of patents derived from public research goes unmeasured.

by firms, in particular in high-income countries which still

the UK and the US represent approximately 72 percent
of all university and PRO PCT applications in the selected
of total patents under the PCT has been increasing since
1983, reaching 6 percent for universities and 3 percent
for PROs in 2010. This shows that, despite the increase
in university applications, the PCT system is mostly used
make up for the most filings under the PCT.

The patents which universities and PROs file under
the PCT are steadily increasing
Since 1979, the number of international patent applications filed under the PCT by universities and PROs has
been steadily increasing, except for a drop in 2009 linked
to broader economic conditions. In fact, these university
and PRO filings have grown faster than total PCT applications over the period 1980-2010. The compound annual
growth rate for this period was about 13 percent for all
PCT applications, 35 percent for university applications
and about 29 percent for PRO applications.

41 See Daraio et al. (2011).
42 See Lissoni et al. (2008).

147

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure 4.3: Universities’ and PROs’ patents are increasing under the PCT
PRO and university PCT applications worldwide, absolute numbers (left) and as a percentage of total PCT applications (right), 1980-2010

PRO

University share

PRO share

7
6
5

6'000

4
3

4'000

2
2'000

1

0
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10

19

19

19

19

81
82

0

Share in total PCT applications (%)

University

8'000

80

Number of PCT applications

10'000

Note: As noted in footnote 1, the distinction between universities and PROs often depends on the definition in a given country.
The same note applies to the figures which follow.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

Figure 4.4 reports the growing share of university and

Among high-income countries, the US has the largest

PRO applications from middle- and high-income coun-

number of university and PRO filings under the PCT with

tries as a share of total PCT applications for three periods

52,303 and 12,698 filings respectively (see Figures 4.5

starting in 1980.

and 4.6).43 The second largest source of PRO applications is France with 9,068, followed by Japan with 6,850.

Figure 4.4: Universities and PROs
make up a growing share of PCT filings

Among middle-income countries, China leads in terms

in middle-income countries

of university applications with 2,348 PCT filings (see

Share of university and PRO applications in total national PCT
applications broken down by income group (percent), 1980-2010

Figures 4.7 and 4.8), followed by Brazil, India and South

University middle-income
PRO middle-income

University high-income
PRO high-income

Africa. The distribution of PRO patent applications is
more concentrated. PROs from China (1,304) and India
(1,165) alone represent 78 percent of total patents by
PROs originating from middle-income countries. They

Share in Total PCT applications (%)

6

are followed by Malaysia, South Africa and Brazil.

5
4
3
2
1
0

1980-1990

1991-2000

2001-2010

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

43 The shares are calculated based on
the sum of applications for individual
countries for the period 1980-2010.

148

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure 4.5: US and Japan lead in

The highest rates of university PCT applications as a share

university PCT applications

of total patents under the PCT are reported for Singapore

University patent applications under the PCT from highincome countries, country shares, in percent, 1980-2010

(13 percent), Malaysia (13 percent), Spain (12 percent),

2%
3% 2%

2% 1%
2% 1%

3%
4%
4%
4%

56%

7%
9%

US
Japan
UK
Other
Germany
Republic of Korea
Canada
France
Australia
Israel
Spain
Netherlands
Switzerland
Italy

Ireland (11 percent) and Israel (10 percent). The countries
with the highest participation of PROs out of total PCT
filings are Malaysia (27 percent), Singapore (19 percent),
India (14 percent) and France (10 percent).
Figure 4.7: China and Brazil lead in
university PCT applications
University patent applications under the PCT from middle- and
selected low-income countries, country shares, in percent, 1980-2010

4%

Figure 4.6: US, France and Japan
lead in PRO PCT applications

3%
4%

25%

4%
4%
8%
18%
12%
13%

China
Brazil

4%

India
South Africa

6%

PRO patent applications under the PCT from high-income
countries, country shares, in percent, 1980-2010
2% 1%
3% 2% 1%

2% 2%
3%

US
France
Japan
Germany
Republic of Korea
Other
UK
Australia
Netherlands
Canada
Spain
Singapore
Finland
Italy

Note: Some countries have been members of the PCT system for longer than
others, which impacts on the comparability of some country shares.44
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

Malaysia

7%
8%

64%

Russian
Federation
Mexico
Chile
Other

Figure 4.8: China and India lead
in PRO PCT applications
PRO patent applications under the PCT from middle-and selected
low-income countries, country shares, in percent, 1980-2010

4%

1%
2%
2% 1%

China
India

4%

Malaysia
South Africa

9%

41%

36%

Brazil
Russian
Federation
Other
Mexico
Argentina

Note: Some countries have been members of the PCT system for longer than
others, which impacts on the comparability of some country shares.45

44 The France, Germany, Japan, the UK and the US
(since 1978), the Netherlands (since 1979), Australia
(since 1980), the Republic of Korea (since 1984),
Canada (since 1990) and Israel (since 1996).
45 Brazil and the Russian Federation since 1978 (date
of Ratification of the Soviet Union, continued by the
Russian Federation from December 25, 1991), China
since 1994, Mexico since 1995, India since 1998,
South Africa since 1999, Malaysia since 2006.

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

149

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure 4.9 shows the evolution of PCT applications jointly

National patent filings of universities and PROs are

filed by universities and firms for high- and middle-income

more heterogeneous

countries (see also Annex Figure 4.2). In particular, after
2000, joint filings have been on the rise, including as a
share of total university PCT patent applications. In 2010,
they made up about 18 percent of all PCT applications
from high-income countries involving universities, up from
about nil in 1980 and from about 12 percent in 2000.
On average, university-company co-ownership of PCT
patents is more prevalent in middle-income (25 percent)
than in high-income countries (14 percent); albeit the levels of filings are substantially lower in the former country
group. Japan has the highest share of university-company partnerships at 42 percent of all university applications,
followed by the Russian Federation (30 percent), China
(29 percent) and Brazil (24 percent). University and PRO
partnerships are most prevalent in France (50 percent),
followed by Spain (22 percent), India (12 percent), Brazil
(10 percent), Germany and South Africa (8 percent each).

Aside from a few high-income countries, statistics on
national patent applications from universities and PROs
are largely unavailable. Producing such data is, however,
a valuable exercise, given that PCT statistics do not
describe the full extent of university and PRO patenting
activity. Other than problems related to measurement, the
difference in national patenting versus PCT trends could
reflect whether universities have a stronger or weaker
propensity to file abroad.
Table 4.1 summarizes the numbers of university and
PRO resident applications in several countries, for a
select number of countries based on a comparable
methodology applied by WIPO for this report (see the
Methodological Annex). These exploratory data show
quite heterogeneous trends across countries, with increases in Brazil, Germany and Italy between 2000 and
2007, and less activity in Israel and the UK.

Figure 4.9: The share of joint university-firm patent applications under the PCT is increasing rapidly
Joint university-firm PCT applications in absolute numbers (left) and as a percentage share of total university PCT applications (right): 1980-2010
High-income countries

Middle-income countries

Share in high-income countries

1.800

20

1.600

18

1.400

16
14

1.200

12

1.000

10

800

8

600

6

2

0

0
19

19

81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10

4

200

80

400

Note: “University-firm co-ownership” refers to the situation where there are at least two applicants, one being a university and another being a company.
Inventors are not considered. The share of university-firm applications in total PCT applications by middle-income countries are not shown due to their high
volatility. Since 2001 this share has been in the range between 16.9 percent and 34.5 percent.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

150

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Table 4.1: National university and PRO

Patents granted to US universities – which cannot be

patent filings for selected countries

directly compared to the above figures on application –

Resident university and PRO patent applications for selected countries, 2000-2007

period 1998-2008, and declined from 3,461 in 2000 to

Country

Institution

Germany

University

231

240

357

487

509

563

670

647

3,042 in 2008 (about 4 percent of total resident patents

PRO

385

396

482

466

589

580

622

618

UK

University

897

942

971

911

770

803

824

734

granted in 2008).51 US universities started patenting at

PRO

186

192

135

125

72

83

89

83

a much earlier phase and, given the volume of private

Brazil

University

60

65

162

176

187

233

246

325

PRO

20

10

27

39

32

26

25

39

sector patenting, the university share stands at about 5

University

66

108

62

26

139

133

186

197

PRO

52

78

30

19

35

38

41

21

University

61

77

112

66

36

21

68

70

PRO

10

9

13

6

5

4

8

8

Italy
Israel

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

amounted to between 3,000 and 3,500 per year in the

Note: These calculations only concern countries for which the Patstat
database is reasonably complete for specific years.46

percent of total resident patents granted in 2008.
Figure 4.10 depicts the share of university and PRO
resident applications out of total national resident applications for selected countries. The countries with the

Source: WIPO, based on the Worldwide Patent Statistical Database (Patstat)
of the European Patent Office (EPO), July 2011.

largest share of university applications are China (13.4

According to available national reports or studies, resident

Morocco (11.2 percent).52 The countries with the largest

university and PRO applications in France almost doubled

share of PRO resident applications are India (21 percent,

between 1996 and 2004, reaching 724 applications. In

based on unofficial data), Mexico (9.5 percent), China (7.2

Japan, the number of resident university applications filed

percent) and France (3.6 percent).53

47

percent), Spain (13.2 percent), Mexico (12.6 percent), and

stood at 7,151 in 2009 (compared to 1,089 in 2000).48 In
the Republic of Korea, 9,980 university resident applications were filed in 2008, a compound annual growth rate
of 41 percent since 2000.49 In China, resident university
patent applications grew to 17,312 in 2006, a compound
annual growth rate of 44 percent since 2000, representing
about 14 percent of total resident applications which is
far superior to other countries. Analysis of Chinese university patenting from 1998 to 2008 shows a significant
overall increase, making Chinese universities some of
the most active in the world. This can be explained in
part by government grants to research institutes and to
universities filing a large number of patent applications,
and related initiatives.50

46 The discrepancy between the number of published
resident applications (country totals) according
to Patstat 2011 and WIPO’s Statistics Database
on aggregate resident applications filed (for the
period 2000-2007) is: -21.8 percent for Germany,
-29.2 percent for the UK, -3.1 percent for Brazil,
-16 percent for Italy and -17.3 percent for Israel.
The WIPO Statistics Database does not provide
numbers for Italy for the period 2001-2006.

47 See Inspection générale des finances (2007).
The number excludes filings at the EPO.
48 See Japan Patent Office (2010).
49 See Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy (2010).
50 See Luan et al. (2010).
51 See NSF (2010). On average, and for all patents
not limited to universities, about 42 percent of
applications filed are granted by the United States
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). See European
Patent Office, Japan Patent Office, Korean Intellectual
Property Office and USPTO (2009), “Four Office
Statistics Report”, available at:
www.trilateral.net/statistics/tsr/fosr2009/report.pdf.
52 It is interesting to compare those numbers
with the ones from PCT filings for the same
periods. They are almost identical for Spain
(14.1 percent), Mexico (7.8 percent), China
(5.6 percent) and Morocco (3.6 percent).
53 In comparison, those shares for the same periods
for PCT data are 18.3 percent for India, 2.5
percent for Mexico, 2.8 percent for China and
10.3 percent for France. Note that the data for
the French report is an average for three years
(one before, one after and the reported year).

151

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure 4.10: China has the greatest share of national applications from universities while
India has the greatest share of applications from PROs (among selected countries)
University and PRO patent applications as a share of total national applications for selected countries
(percent), for different time spans
University share

PRO share

16%
Indian PROs stand at 22 percent. Capped for better readability
of the gure

14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%

Re

a

ce
an
Fr

So

ut

h

Af

m
er
G

p.

ric

an

y

n
pa
Ja

ly
Ita

a
of

Ko

re

US

a
In

di

il
az
Br

UK

l
ae
Isr

co
oc
or
M

M

ex

ico

ain
Sp

Ch

in

a

0%

Note: China (2000-2006), Spain (2005-2009), Mexico (2006-2009), Morocco (2008-2010), Israel (2000-2007), United Kingdom (2000-2007), Brazil (2000-2007), India
(1990-2007), United States (2000-2008), Republic of Korea (2000-2008), Italy (2000-2007), Japan (2000-2009), Germany (2000-2007), South Africa (2000-2004),
France (2000-2004). No data on PRO patenting are available for Japan, Morocco, South Africa and Spain. Direct country comparisons are not advisable as the
methodologies and years vary country by country, and because some sources are more reliable than others. The data for India includes patents filed via the PCT.
Source: Various national reports, selected studies reporting unofficial data (notably for India) and Patstat, July 2011.54

The large share of Indian PROs in total patent filings and
the large share of Chinese universities in total patent filings
stand out in the above figures. The trend in China can be
linked to strong growth in university patenting over the
last decade. In the case of India, the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR) – the largest domestic
patentee with more than 4,000 patents (from 1990-2007)
and over 80 percent of public sector patents – is primarily
responsible for the large share of Indian PROs.

54 The Republic of Korea: number of university
applications filed, from "Analysis of Technology
Transfer," Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy
(2010); total resident applications, from WIPO
Statistics Database. Number of resident PRO
applications and total number of resident applications
used to calculate the PRO share, from Patstat 2011
for the period 2000-2007. According to Patstat
2011 and WIPO’s Statistics Database on aggregate
resident applications filed (for the period 20002007), the discrepancy between the number of
published resident applications is -10.6 percent
for the Republic of Korea. Brazil, Israel, Italy, UK,

152

Germany: Patstat 2011. France: university and PRO
application numbers from Balme et al. (2007); number
of total applications from WIPO Statistics Database.
French patent applications filed at the EPO are not
included. Japan: university applications filed, from JPO
Annual Report (2010); number of total applications
from WIPO Statistics Database. China: all numbers
from Chinese National Science and Technology
reports from 2007 and 2004. US: university patents
granted and totals from National Science Board,
Science and Engineering Indicators 2010, for the
period 2000-2008. PRO and totals (both granted)
used for PRO share, from Patstat 2011 for the period
2000-2007. According to Patstat 2011 and WIPO’s
Statistics Database on aggregate resident applications
granted (for the period 2000-2007), the discrepancy
between the number of resident applications granted
is 3 percent for the US. South Africa: see M. Sibanda
(2007). India: patents by origin, some granted others
applications filed, including patents filed under the
PCT, all data from Gupta (2008). Mexico: university
and PRO applications filed, from INPI Mexico; for
the number of total applications, see the WIPO
Statistics Database. Morocco: applications filed, data
from Office Marocain de la Propriété Industrielle et
Commerciale (OMPIC), Rapport annuel 2010. Spain:
resident university applications filed, from the Spanish
Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Commerce; for total
applications filed, see the WIPO Statistics Database.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Technological fields of university and PRO patenting

4.2.3

Overall, university and PRO patenting primarily concerns

University and PRO licensing
growing but from low levels

biomedical inventions and pharmaceuticals, broadly defined. This is true of high-income and other economies

Few indicators exist for assessing the scale of university

alike. The result is not surprising as these industries are

commercialization and related impacts.

the most science-driven. However, whether patenting in
these technological fields is demand- or supply-driven

The most widely used indicators for measuring university

is less clear.

technology transfer are the number of licenses issued and
the associated income. These data are only available for

On the basis of PCT data, it can be shown that, for the

a few countries, are often based on non-governmental

period 1980-2010, university patenting was largely limited

surveys using varying methodologies and schedules, and

to a few fields, including the following major areas for

are largely confined to universities without covering PROs.

both high- and middle-income countries: biotechnology, with 22 percent of all university applications in

Broadly speaking, the data tend to support the view that

high-income countries and 18 percent in middle-income

university and PRO licenses and related income are grow-

countries; pharmaceuticals, with 15 percent in high-

ing from low levels. However, outside the US, both are

and 14 percent in middle-income countries; medical

still relatively modest compared to the number of patents

technology, with 8 percent in high- and 5 percent in

filed by public research institutions, or compared to their

middle-income countries; organic fine chemistry, with

income from R&D contracts and consulting or their R&D

6 percent in high- and middle-income countries; and

expenditure. Furthermore, while licensing revenue has

measurement technologies, with 6 percent in high- and

been increasing, it has been largely driven by a few in-

middle-income countries.

stitutions in a few sectors – notably the pharmaceuticals,
biomedical and software sectors – and mostly by a few

For PRO applications, during the same period the most

specific patents. As shown below, however, in particular in

prominent technological fields in high-income countries

Table 4.2, this is diversifying. Finally, universities and PROs

were biotechnology (21 percent), pharmaceuticals (10

often seem to generate more income from non-patent

percent), measurement technologies (8 percent), organic

licensing relating to biological materials or know-how and

fine chemistry (5 percent) and analysis of biological mate-

from copyrighted materials.

rials (5 percent). For middle-income countries, the largest
share of PRO applications related to pharmaceuticals (17

• Licensing income has grown consistently in both

percent), organic fine chemistry (17 percent), biotechnol-

Canada and the US (see Table 4.2, which also notes

ogy (14 percent), basic materials chemistry (5 percent)

that this growth is partly explained by the growth in

and digital communications (5 percent).

reporting institutions). Five institutions were responsible for 53 percent of all reported licensing income in

The available data on national patent filings – based

1991, 48 percent in 2000 and 33 percent in 2009. In

on Patstat and the WIPO methodology – confirm this

the light of the discussion in Section 4.3 on the impact

trend. For the period 1989-1998, 287 university applica-

of exclusive licenses on innovation, it is important

tions (resident and non-resident) were published by the

to note that the majority of licenses in the US and

Brazilian patent office, with the two largest fields being

Canada are non-exclusive (1,682 exclusive versus

pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.

2,595 non-exclusive licenses in the US, and 177 out
of 317 in Canada, both for 2009).

153

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Table 4.2: Canadian and US university

On average, university and PRO licensing income is still

technology transfer: 1991-2009

marginal compared to total university and PRO funding

Year
Reporting
institutions
(Canada/US)

1991

2001

9/841

27/169

2002

2005

2006

31/181 33/180 39/182

2007

2008

2009

37/187 35/184 36/175

Canada
US

US has been highlighted.60 However, this is also related
570

462

675

620

690

4,648

4,678

4,882

4,993

5,214

43.7

56.6

58.6

53.9

52.1

Licensing income (in million US dollars)
US

licensing income per dollar spent on R&D. The small
size of licensing revenue in Europe in comparison to the

Number of licenses and options55 executed

Canada

or research expenditure. Table 4.3 shows the ratio of

3.3

42.1

32.8

162.2 1,039.3 1,175.3 1,927.3 1,854.0 2,656.4 3,410.4 2,277.7

to measurement issues concerning the identification of
university and PRO patents (see Box 4.3) and different
approaches to technology transfer.61

Note: As shown above, the number of reporting institutions has grown
throughout the selected time period and, in particular, in the 1990s. The
totals shown reflect the growth of reporting institutions plus growth in the
number of reporting universities. Aside from universities, the above numbers
also cover hospitals and research centers, but exclude institutions that
reply anonymously.
Source: Statistics Access for Tech Transfer (STATT), database of the US
Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM), May 2011.

• According to a survey of Australia, the amount of income from licenses, options and assignments stood
at USD 246 million in 2009.56 One patent filed by the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organization generated the majority of this income.
• According to a survey of Switzerland, about half of
institutions surveyed provide data on licensing income,
which amounted to USD 7.55 million in 2009.57
• According to a survey of Spain, the number of licenses
executed grew to 190 in 2007, and income increased
from about EUR 1.69 million in 2003 to EUR 1.98 million in 2007.58
• In France, the amount of licensing revenue is reported
to be modest and concentrated in a few patents and
institutions. It has not grown much since the commercialization of university technologies became a
declared policy objective in the late 1980s.59

154

55 An option agreement gives potential licensees a
certain amount of time to evaluate the technology
and to discuss and arrange a licensing agreement.
56 Based on the OECD exchange rate for 2009: Australian
Dollar (AUD) 1.282 for USD 1. See Commonwealth
of Australia (2011). Seventy-two publicly-funded
research organizations responded to the survey,
including universities, medical research institutes,
publicly-funded research agencies. Definitions as
per the report: “A license agreement formalizes the
granting of IP rights between two parties where
the owner of the IP (the licensor) permits the other
party (the licensee) to have access to and the
right to use the IP. An option agreement grants the
potential licensee a period during which it may
evaluate the IP and negotiate the terms of a licensing
agreement. An assignment agreement conveys
all rights, title and interest in and to the licensed
subject matter to the named assignee.” The data for
Europe are derived from the Association of European
Science and Technology Transfer Professionals
(ASTP) survey. It is similar to the AUTM and NSRC
surveys and covers approximately 100 research
institutions from up to 26 European countries.
57 Based on the OECD exchange rate for 2009: Swiss
Francs (CHF) 1.086 for USD 1. The respondents to
the survey were 7 cantonal universities, 2 federal
institutes of technology, 6 universities of applied
sciences and 3 related research institutions in
the ETH domain. About half of the participants in
the survey provided data on licensing income.
58 See RedOTRI (2008). The Spanish Network
of University Knowledge Transfer Offices
(RedOTRI) provides information on Spanish
university inventions. In 2007, the network had
62 member universities. There were 44 valid
answers on royalties from licenses for 2007.
59 See Inspection générale des finances (2007).
60 See Conti and Gaulé (2011).
61 Idem.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Table 4.3: Ratio of income from “IP

• In South Africa, most universities received no rev-

licenses, options and assignments” to total

enue from their patents, other than the Council for

research expenditure, 2000 to 2009

Scientific and Industrial Research, the University of

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Johannesburg and North-West University.67

Australia

2.8

2.0

1.9

1.6

1.3

1.3

2.1

3.6

1.5

4.1

Canada

1.8

2.3

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.4

1.2

1.0

-

Table 4.4: Technology transfer activity by

Europe

-

-

-

-

3.2

3.2

0.4

1.0

1.3

-

UK

0.6

1.1

1.1

1.1

1.5

1.3

1.3

1.4

2.1

-

Chinese higher education institutions, 2000-2007

US

4.8

3.4

3.5

3.4

3.4

5.3

5.3

5.5

6.6

6.5

Note: The methodology is described in the report below. See footnote 56 for
definitions. Here, “Europe” includes 26 countries but not the UK.62
Source: Commonwealth of Australia (2011).

In middle- and low-income countries, data on university
technology transfer are even scarcer. All existing studies, however, point to the nascent stage of IP and its
commercialization which is limited to a few patents and

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Number of patents
licensed and sold

299

410

532

611

731

842

701

711

as a percentage of
patents granted to
higher education
institutions

45.9

70.8

76.3

35.3

21

18.9

11.3

8.7

as a percentage
of university R&D
revenue

2.3

2.6

1.7

2.3

1.5

1.3

1.1

1.4

Source: Wu (2010).

patenting institutions.63
The scarcity of information also suggests that patents are
used much less for technology transfer, due in part also
to a lack of a culture and institutions supporting formal
IP-based technology transfer in these countries, and
weak research activity with few technology applications.
Also in these countries, other forms of IP and knowhow are more commonly used to transfer knowledge
to businesses.
• A study surveying selected Latin American universities
reports that 17 out of the 56 universities surveyed in
Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Mexico have
licensed some type of IP.64 This mostly concerns
designs, know-how or secrets, rather than patents.
• In China, 8.7 percent of patents granted to higher
education institutions were licensed out in 2007,
contributing only a minor share to total revenue but,
admittedly, representing a very large figure in absolute
terms.65 One study concludes that patent licensing is
underutilized, compared to the very large amount and
the high growth of Chinese university patenting (see
Section 4.2.2).66

62 The European data are derived from the Association
of European Science and Technology Transfer
Professionals (ASTP) survey, which is similar to
the AUTM and NSRC surveys. The ASTP survey
covers about 100 research institutions from
up to 26 European countries. Where reported,
the ASTP data exclude UK institutions.
63 See Dalmarco and Freitas (2011).
64 See PILA Network (2009).
65 See Wu (2010).
66 See Luan et al. (2010) and Sibanda (2009).
67 See Sibanda (2009).

155

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.3

4.3.1

Assessment of impacts
and challenges in highincome countries

Direction of impacts

A large body of economic literature has assessed the effi-

Conceptually, the question is whether an exclusive system

ciency and impacts of university patenting in high-income

based on university patenting is the optimal approach

countries. Research now also focuses on PRO patenting.

for driving business innovation and, at the same time,

The literature is divided as to the impacts of IP-based
technology transfer laws and practices.

preserving the science system.69
The studies aim to identify the impacts of increased university IP technology transfer and examine the optimal

The various impacts discussed in the literature are set out

design of policies and the institutions that carry them

in Tables 4.5 and 4.6. They distinguish possible benefits

out. A first set of studies has mapped various linkages

and costs for the two respective main agents – firms

between universities and industry and explored the use

and public research institutions – and broader systemic

of patents in such transactions. Since then, a second

impacts on science, the economy and society.

68

stream of research has moved from universities and firms
to a more disaggregated level, often studying the effects

On the one hand, economists have argued that allowing

of patenting on the behavior of individual academics.

universities and PROs to patent inventions enables them
to “reveal their inventions” while improving incentives for
firms to develop and commercialize them further, and
creating a “market” for university and PRO inventions.70
The rationale behind this argument is that inventions
developed by universities are often embryonic and need
further development in order to be useful. Firms will be
reluctant to invest in further development if these inventions and the resulting products can be appropriated
by third parties, as well as if there is legal uncertainty
regarding the ownership of results. In many cases, they
will want to obtain an exclusive license. For universities
and PROs, the benefits may include increased revenue,
more contractual research and greater cross-fertilization
between entrepreneurial faculty and industry. TTOs or
other intermediaries lead to a division of tasks by undertaking IP administration and commercialization, thus
contributing to a new form of technology market. This
IP-based technology transfer is meant to lead to a better use of research results, different forms of academic
entrepreneurship and therefore improved economic and

68 See Gulbrandsen et al. (2011).
69 See Foray and Lissoni (2010).
70 See Mowery et al. (2001).

156

social development.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

This can bring about the following benefits (see also

tions; (v) positive impacts on entrepreneurship and

Tables 4.5 and 4.6):

local jobs; and (vi) for the wider economy, greater
competitiveness in the global market.

• For universities, this set-up can lead to (i) increased IP
ownership, facilitating academic and other entrepre-

On the other hand, it has been argued that patents are

neurship (including academic spin-offs) and vertical

not necessary to provide incentives for university scien-

specialization; (ii) cross-fertilization between faculty

tists and engineers to invent and to disclose inventions.

and industry; and (iii) increased student intake and

It is also argued that university and PRO patents do not

ability to place students in firms.

necessarily facilitate the collaboration between public
research institutions and firms.71

• For firms, it (i) facilitates the revelation of useful university inventions to the business sector; (ii) enables the

According to this view, university research has been asso-

creation of a market for inventions based on publicly-

ciated with the norms of rapid disclosure of research results

funded research; and (iii) can spur the commercializa-

and an environment of knowledge sharing, co-authorship

tion of new products generating profits and growth.

and joint projects which contribute to cumulative learning.
The patenting of university inventions and related conflicts

• Positive systemic outcomes could include (i) increased

of interest might, however, have negative influences on

impact of more research with the potential for appli-

these norms; slow the diffusion of university inventions, in-

cation; (ii) improved innovation system linkages; (iii) a

cluding research tools; and stifle innovation.72 The exclusive

higher quality of research and education, in particular

licensing of patents to single firms might, in particular, limit

for science; (iv) greater commercialization of inven-

the diffusion of knowledge generated with public funds.

Table 4.5: Impacts of IP-based technology transfer policies on universities/PROs and firms
Potential benefits
Universities and PROs

1) Increased IP ownership facilitating
entrepreneurship and vertical specialization
• Reinforcing other policies aimed at academic
entrepreneurship (e.g., enhancing access to finance)
• Licensing and other revenues (e.g., consulting)
can be invested in research
2) Cross-fertilization between faculty and industry
• Intangible benefits to university reputation and the quality of research
• Helping to identify research projects with a dual
scientific and commercial purpose
3) Increased student intake and ability to place students in firms

Firms

Potential costs (or investment)
1)	Diversion of time away from academic research
• Distorting incentives for scientists and potentially also
for the nature of public-oriented institutions
• Reorganizing university processes and culture
with a view to commercialization
2) IP-related establishment and maintenance costs
• Establishing and maintaining a TTO and related IP management,
including investment in expertise and human resources
• Spending time on IP filings and technology
transfer (even if contracted out to a TTO)
• Additional financial and reputational costs
associated with defense of IP rights

1) Facilitates the revelation of useful university
inventions to the business sector
• Enabling firms to have access to top scientists and to
collaborate with the scientific community in developing
innovation within a clear contractual setting

1)	Barriers to access of university inventions
• Precludes free access to university inventions – including
the more basic research fields and research tools, except
where research is the result of a sponsored contract
• Lack of access if another firm has secured an exclusive license

2)	Enables the creation of a market for ideas
and contracting with universities
• Framework diminishes transaction costs and increases
legal certainty, facilitating investment by private sector
• Securing an exclusive license increases
incentives for further investment
• Ability to specialize is competitive advantage (vertical specialization)

2) IP-based transaction costs and tensions in
industry-university relationships
• University scientists lack an understanding of development
costs and market needs (cognitive dissonance) leading
to higher probability of bargaining breakdown
• IP negotiations can interfere with establishment of joint
R&D and university-industry relations, where universities
act as revenue maximizer with strong stance on IP

3) Commercialization of new products
generating profits and growth

71 See David (2004) and Dasgupta and David (1994).
72 See Eisenberg (1989); Heller and Eisenberg
(1998); and Kenney and Patton (2009). The latter
authors note that the institutional arrangements

within which TTOs are embedded have
encouraged some of them to become revenue
maximizers rather than facilitators of technology
dissemination for the good of the entire society.

157

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Critics also suggest that IP-based technology transfer by re-

• Negative systemic impacts could include (i) a reorienta-

search institutions limits the diversity of research that would

tion of the direction of research towards less diversity

otherwise be pursued by follow-on innovators. The decline

and an overemphasis on short-term, commercially-

in the intensity and diversity of research has made for rather

oriented research; (ii) negative impacts on open sci-

minimal income prospects for institutions themselves.

ence; (iii) prospects of reduced government funding

Moreover, a strong stance on IP by universities and PROs

for public research, for science and for the economy

might negatively impact other knowledge transfer channels

more widely; (iv) long-run negative effect of diverting

– such as informal knowledge exchanges with the private

attention away from academic knowledge production;

sector and fellow scientists, as well as more formal R&D

(v) long-run negative effects of IP on open science and

collaboration – due to the complexity of negotiating IP rights.

follow-on innovation; and, finally, (vi) the fact that IP
might inhibit rather than promote commercialization

The following costs may arise (see also Tables 4.5 and 4.6):

of inventions.

• For universities, this set-up can lead to (i) a diversion
of time away from scientific research; and (ii) IP-related
establishment and maintenance costs (which can
howere also be seen as an investment).
• For firms, this could result in (i) potential barriers to
access of university inventions; and (ii) increased
IP-based transaction costs and tensions in industryuniversity relationships.
Table 4.6: Systemic impacts of IP-based technology transfer policies

Broader impacts
on science

Potential Benefits

Potential costs

1) Increased impact of more focused research
with potential for application

1)	Reorientation of the direction of research
• Overemphasis on applied, short-term, more lucrative research
• Less diversity in scientific disciplines as focus
on patentable outcomes increases
• Other university missions are neglected, such as teaching and training

2) Improved innovation system linkages
• Efficient division of labor in the generation and
commercialization of new inventions
• Private sector contribution to funding basic and applied research
3) Increase in the quality of research and education

2)	Negative impacts on open science
• Crowds out/displaces the use of other knowledge
transfer channels to industry
• Publication delays, increased secrecy, less
sharing, including the withholding of data
• Decrease in international scientific exchanges
3) The promise of university income can reduce
government commitment to funding

Innovation and
growth

1) Commercialization of inventions with economic and social impacts
• Increase in consumer welfare and business productivity
via access to innovative products and processes
2) (Localized) positive impacts on R&D, technology
spillovers, entrepreneurship, employment and growth
3) Higher competitive position of country in global market

1)	Long-run negative effect of diverting attention
away from academic knowledge production
2)	Long-run negative effects of IP on open
science and follow-on innovation
• Patenting of broad upstream inventions, platform technologies and
research tools increases the cost of follow-on research and innovation
• Reduction in the diversity of research
3) Focus on IP might inhibit rather than promote
commercialization of inventions

158

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.3.2

Yet, the literature and information on past experiences

Impacts and experiences in highincome countries

do not easily lend themselves to a complete cost-benefit
analysis of the above impacts, which could be easily
generalized across sectors and countries with very different characteristics. The literature does not send an

This section sets out the key lessons learned from the

unambiguously clear message on the most adequate

experiences of high-income countries and the associated

ownership model, i.e., whether the university-ownership

economic literature.

model is superior to one in which faculty retains own-

73

ership of inventions, or to other models.76 Finally, the
The evidence confirms the potential benefits mentioned

long-term implications of patenting on science are also

in the previous subsection. University and PRO patenting

still under discussion.

and efficient technology transfer policies and institutions
are an important precondition for increasing opportuni-

One reason for this incomplete cost-benefit analysis

ties for commercializing university inventions (see Table

is that these policies, institutional practices and their

4.5). Access to early stage university research is critical

implementation are still relatively young, in particular

to firms, in particular in the science-intensive sectors.

outside the US.

Turning university ideas into innovation requires substantial development by the private sector and the involvement

In addition, however, two other interrelated factors compli-

of academic inventors, lending credence to the motive

cate the evaluation of policy initiatives aimed at IP-based

behind such patent-based policies.

university technology transfer.

The evidence also suggests a synergy among a wide

i) Definitional and measurement challenges: So far,

range of traditional academic, entrepreneurial and pat-

mostly IP-based indicators have been used to evalu-

enting activity of scientists as well as interaction with

ate university technology transfer. However, surveys of

the private sector.75 It also confirms the complementary

patenting and licensing activity – undertaken by national

nature of the different technology transfer channels. Firms

governments, multilaterally, or by PROs themselves – are

that actively engage with public research institutions, both

rare.77 Often they tend to underestimate the number of

through informal exchanges – such as at scientific confer-

university inventions and the broader impacts of university

ences – and formally-organized knowledge exchanges

technology transfer (see Box 4.3).78

74

– such as in R&D collaboration – are also likely to license
more inventions from universities. They may also engage
intensively with faculty to further develop inventions as
the tacit knowledge involved in an invention is important
in turning it into a commercial innovation.

73 See Baldini (2006) and Larsen (2011).
74 See Goldfarb et al. (2011); Goldfarb et al. (2001);
and Jensen and Thursby (2001).
75 See Boardman and Ponomariov (2009).

76 Kenney and Patton (2009) argue that the universityownership model is neither optimal in terms
of economic efficiency nor for advancing the
interest of rapidly commercializing technology and
encouraging entrepreneurship. They maintain that
this model is plagued by ineffective incentives,
information asymmetries and contradictory
motivations for universities, inventors, potential
licensees and university TTOs. These structural
uncertainties can lead to delays in licensing,
misaligned incentives among parties and obstacles
to the flow of scientific information and the
materials necessary for scientific progress.
77 See OECD (2003).
78 See Aldridge and Audretsch (2010).

159

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Furthermore, the drivers of successful commercializa-

Moreover, the introduction of formal IP ownership models

tion of academic research – whether via licensing or an

for universities and PROs is often not responsible for

academic spin-off – and the different vectors of university-

the formation of IP rights to begin with. To the contrary,

industry knowledge transfer are numerous. However, no

their objective is to further clarify existing IP ownership

framework exists for measuring and evaluating these

in order to facilitate follow-on transactions. Specifically,

knowledge transfers, their interactions and the role of

the alternative, existing settings are often of the following

various policies to spur them on.79 In this data context,

nature: (1) unclear ownership rules lacking incentives to

and given the unique conditions of particular institutions

further develop inventions, as was previously the case in

and countries, the ability to draw clear causal conclu-

high-income countries and as is still often the case in less

sions concerning the effect of a particular IP-based

developed economies; (2) governments own the title to

technology transfer policy on the commercialization of

inventions emanating from publicly-funded research, as

academic research or on wider economic indicators is

was previously the case in the US; (3) faculty members

limited. Furthermore, caution needs to be exercised in

own the title, as was previously the case in Europe; or

generalizing particular case-specific findings to other

(4) particular firms solely own the title resulting from joint

institutions, disciplines or countries.

university-industry projects. Compared to the introduction of IP-based technology transfer practices, these

ii) Benchmarking against appropriate alternatives:

scenarios mostly provide less legal certainty as to owner-

It is vital to benchmark outcomes resulting from new

ship of inventions and offer less potential for innovation as

IP-based technology transfer policies against realistic

firms will neither be aware of nor interested in developing

alternatives or a careful assessment of the status quo.

these inventions further.

Often, new outcomes are benchmarked against scenarios that entail a perfect “open science” system with

With these caveats in mind the next subsections portray

rapid knowledge diffusion and strong incentives to in-

the evidence for wider economic impacts, the factors

novate. Arguably, in most cases the policy alternatives

determining a successful IP-based university and PRO

are less favorable. For a start, the science system itself

technology transfer system, and the evidence regarding

is also prone to malfunction, in particular with regard

the most severe concerns with respect to such a model.

to internal communication and its efficacy in helping to
spur innovation, and the resulting economic and social

Evidence for wider economic impacts

development. Furthermore, with or without IP-based
technology transfer models, the linkages between dif-

Policy-makers in many high- and middle-income coun-

ferent actors in national innovation systems are rarely

tries alike are lamenting the fact that too little innova-

perfect and mostly deserve policy attention.

tions result from the growing number of university and
PRO patents.
It is important to move beyond the number of patents filed
and licensing revenue earned as measures of success
in technology transfer.

79 Arundel and Bordoy (2010) explore the
possibilities and difficulties of developing
internationally comparable output indicators
for the commercialization of public science.

160

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

As desirable as this is, the contribution that commercial-

Yet, these absolute numbers might miss out on the truly

ization of university IP makes to economic development

important question of which start-ups produce tangible

is hard to demonstrate convincingly in economic studies.

economic results and improve employment in the medi-

The calculations are plagued by the same issues that

um- to longer-run. Studies show that university patenting

complicate impact assessments of public R&D (see Box

and licensing have been fundamental to the emergence of

4.1 and the previous section), i.e., constructing data that

new industries, such as the scientific instruments industry,

effectively capture other dimensions of the impacts of

semiconductors, computer software and the nano- and

IP-based technology transfer is challenging (for example,

biotechnology industries.84 Several major corporations

productivity gains of downstream firms using or building

originated from academic start-ups facilitated by TTOs.85

on such IP, or a consumer surplus from the resulting in-

US university start-ups also seem disproportionately

novation). Establishing clear causal relationships between

more likely to develop into viable businesses and to create

IP-based technology transfer and these social gains is

more jobs.86 For instance, the US AUTM collects case

even harder. Only one study, prepared for an industry

studies and examples of university IP contributions over

association, aims to assign figures to wider economic

the last 30 years, with 423 start-ups still operating as of

impacts in the US.80

the end of 2009, in particular in the health care sector.87
The literature also shows that academic start-ups are

Given the above difficulties, many related studies show

more likely to commercialize new technologies that are

impacts of university-industry interactions, without neces-

radical, early stage and of a general purpose nature.88

sarily implying that technology transfer based on IP, or

Again, attributing these positive impacts exclusively to IP-

for that matter the university-IP ownership model, is the

based technology transfer is most likely not appropriate.

essential condition and trigger for this impact.
The literature shows that university-industry technology
transactions can generate important spillovers by stimulating additional R&D investment, new firms and products,
and job creation.81 Benefits for firms include an increase
in the level of applied research effort, higher overall R&D
productivity as measured by patents, a higher quality
of patents, the introduction of new products, increased
sales and labor cost reductions. Linkages with industry
are shown to have enriching effects for university research
and also lead to synergies between applied and basic
research and the development of new research ideas.82
Beyond this, studies have used the limited statistics on
the number of academic spin-offs directly or indirectly
linked to IP-based commercialization efforts of TTOs to
evaluate IP-based technology transfer legislation (see
Box 4.5). Given the generally low figures, some observers have used these data to cast doubt on the overall
impact of such policies.83

80 See Roessner et al. (2009), cited in AUTM (2010).
This widely cited study states that, over the last 30
years, more than 6,000 new US companies were
formed on the basis of university inventions; 4,350
new university-licensed products entered the market;
and these inventions made a USD187 billion impact
on the US gross domestic product, with 279,000 jobs
created. The authors argue that no attempt was made
to valuate the other significant economic contributions
of university-based research, and that estimates are
therefore considered to be significantly conservative.
81 See Rosenberg and Nelson (1994).
82 See Azoulay et al. (2006)
and Owen-Smith and Powell (2003).
83 See Aldridge and Audretsch (2010).
84 See Rosenberg and Nelson (1994)
and Zucker et al. (1998).
85 Several major corporations began as TTO start-ups,
including Genentech in biotechnology, Cirrus Logic
in semiconductors, and Lycos in Internet search
engines. See Di Gregorio and Shane (2003).
86 See Di Gregorio and Shane (2003) and Shane (2004).
87 See AUTM (2010).
88 In contrast, licensing to established firms is
used to commercialize new technologies that
are more incremental, codified, late stage and
specific in purpose. They also tend to involve
minor technical advances, provide moderate
customer value and have weaker IP protection.

161

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Box 4.5: Academic entrepreneurship stimulated by university
inventions
The same surveys that produce data on licenses for a few countries
(see Subsection 4.2.3) also report on the creation of spin-offs. Table
4.7 shows Canadian and US data. The frequency of TTO start-up
activity varies significantly across universities. Some universities
routinely transfer their technology through the formation of new firms,
while others rarely generate start-ups. Moreover, rates of start-up
activity are not a simple function of the magnitude of sponsored
research funding or the quantity of inventions created.

At the country level, the positive impact of university
technology transfer based on patenting will largely depend on the broader technology transfer environment,
in particular: 1) sound research capabilities and human
capital; 2) the broader legal and regulatory framework;
3) the institutional setting of research institutions, their
governance and autonomy; 4) access to finance; and 5)
the absorptive capacity of firms. It is also critical to preserve the diversity of other knowledge transfer channels
between universities and firms.

Table 4.7: Creation of Canadian and US
university start-ups, selected years
Year
Canada
US

At the institutional level, a sizeable amount of literature ex-

1996 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
46

68

49

57

45

36

31

48

39

48

199

424

393

352

436

437

534

544

584

585

Note: The number of reporting institutions has grown throughout the
selected time period, contributing to some upward movement in the
figures. Beyond universities, the above numbers also cover hospitals
and research centers.
Source: Statistics Access for Tech Transfer (STATT), AUTM, May 2011.

In Australia, 19 start-up companies based on research commercialization were created in 2009. In Spain, 87 start-up companies
were created in 2003, and 120 in 2007. The Swiss Technology
Transfer Association reports that 66 new start-ups were created
in 2009, 45 involving a transfer of IP and 21 using the know-how
of the research institution. A study that surveyed a select number of
Latin American universities reports that 11 out of the 56 universities
had created a spin-off.

ists on the following success criteria, only some of which
are under the control of universities and policymakers:89
• the location of the university in a dynamic region near
innovative firms, venture capital, etc.;
• the size and type of the university, private universities
with a commercial orientation being more active than
public universities, for instance;
• the portfolio of disciplines, some of which are more
prone to patenting than others;
• the research quality of the institution, its reputation

Importantly, the involvement of a university or a PRO
in the creation of firms or licensing will depend on their
technology transfer strategies, and which channels are
prioritized to commercialize technology. The creation of
firms requires not only the participation by researcher,
under clear and appropriate incentives, but also the
involvement of surrogate entrepreneurs.
Success factors for harnessing the knowledge
from public research

and network;
• the extent of existing collaboration with a university
and its entrepreneurial climate;
• organizational practices and an institutional culture
which foster IP-based technology transfer;
• the establishment of institutional strategies for knowledge transfer and commercialization;

Successfully transferring inventions from universities
to businesses is a resource-intensive and complex
undertaking. Various policy and other factors need to
coincide to ensure that laws spurring university and PRO
patenting bear fruit.
89 See Belenzon and Schankerman (2009).

162

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

• competitive faculty salaries and incentives to file for
IP rights and to disclose inventions to a TTO, notably
also with respect to whether patents are considered
in the attainment of academic tenure;
• the characteristics of the relevant TTO (see Box
4.6);90 and
• complementary factors and policies that encourage
academic start-ups, such as allowing faculty to create and own a share in a start-up or to take a leave of
absence, providing additional financing and support,

Open questions include:
1) What is the optimal degree of involvement of scientists in the
development of an idea, and should inventors have the option to
select commercial providers?
2) How can the danger of “capture” of TTOs by industrial interests
or specific firms be avoided?93
3) To what extent should a TTO be the only body able to commercialize university inventions? Should researchers be obliged to
go through a TTO or also be able to manage and commercialize
IP on their own?94
4) Given the costs involved, should universities have an individual
TTO? Several institutions are experimenting with regional or
sectoral TTOs, recognizing that many individual universities or
PROs do not have the necessary scale for their own TTOs.

and framework conditions such as incubators and
science parks.

Beyond these factors, the evidence stresses the importance of a well-defined university IP policy. Universities

The required institutional, financial and human resources

with internal rules regulating the participation of research-

represent a sizeable investment by universities and

ers in the transfer of technology perform better than

PROs. The often volatile and skewed licensing income

universities without such rules.95 Well-defined university

typically does not recover these costs. As a result, the

policies with clear rules on benefit sharing improve per-

idea that licensing could act as a potential substitute for

formance by giving researchers incentives to participate

other university income or other funding sources should

in the transfer of technology.96 Rules that help to stan-

be discarded.

dardize relationships with potential licensees through
standard forms and contracts also reduce transaction

Box 4.6: The role of technology transfer offices and open
questions
The activities TTOs undertake can exclusively be confined to IP
management and commercialization; or, alternatively, they can
have a broader scope and also conduct activities related to regional
economic development, the funding of education, and industry
training in areas such as IP and technology transfer.91
The nature and type of technology transfer intermediaries are
important factors influencing the technology transfer performance
of universities.92 The size and age of a TTO, the number of its staff,
their experience (in particular in industry) are major success criteria
for building a qualitative portfolio of inventions. However, these
attributes are not a guarantee of success. Experience shows that
building successful TTO interfaces between science and industry
is a challenge even in the high-income countries with the most
technology transfer experience.

costs in finalizing agreements with the private sector. In
addition, these policies can help address some of the
concerns raised above, ensuring that universities and
PROs – and their faculties – do not neglect their other
major missions of teaching and research in the name
of commercialization.

90 See Belenzon and Schankerman (2010).
91 See Zuñiga (2011), Sections 3 and 5.
92 See Debackere and Veugelers (2005); OwenSmith and Powell (2001); Lach and Schankerman
(2008); and Chapple et al. (2005).
93 See Owen-Smith and Powell (2001).
94 A “Free agency” approach, according to which
faculty members choose who will negotiate
licensing agreements for them while promising
a share of income to the university, could be an
alternative to TTOs or relevant competition.
95 See Debackere and Veugelers (2005).
96 See Lach and Schankerman (2008).

163

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Substantiating the concerns about

On the contrary, the studies conducted in the US and

publicly-funded research

Europe find a positive relationship between interactions
with the private sector, patenting and publishing. In fact,

Table 4.6 describes a spectrum of concerns about the

scientists who have research contracts with industry

impact of IP-based technology transfer on the science

demonstrate superior productivity, both in terms of

system and on relationships between universities, PROs

number and quality of publications as measured by cita-

and firms.

tions, compared to their non-inventing peers.99 Academic
patenting may well be complementary to publishing at

The empirical literature has, however, been narrowly

least up to a certain level of patenting output, after which

focused on gauging the impacts of university patents on

some studies find a substitution effect.100 This evidence is

the publication activity of scientists. Indeed, the existing

interpreted to show that no substantial shift towards ap-

studies are also severely limited, because metrics on

plied research is taking place.101 It is argued that scientists

the broader impacts on science are hard to come by.

are likely to publish results even if they are also patented,

Thus, the literature stresses “the ambiguous nature of

because of the continuing importance of publishing in

current empirical evidence on the long-term implications

establishing priority and reputation in academia. Also,

of academic enterprise”.

new research – especially, but not only, in the biomedical

97

field – may be dual-purpose, both basic, in that it uncovIn any case, the available evidence does not lend itself

ers new scientific principles, and commercially applicable,

to exaggerated concerns with respect to impact. In fact,

perhaps even commercially motivated.102

the opposite is true.
Interestingly, the evidence on whether the establishment
1) Impacts on scientific publications and the norms

of an academic spin-off has an adverse effect on scientific

of “open science” in academia: The majority of stud-

output is less clear and somewhat mixed. Some stud-

ies focusing on the relationship between publishing –

ies find that faculty entrepreneurs are more productive,

the proxy used for open science – and patenting have

while others see a decrease in publishing, subject to

found little evidence of conflict between interactions with

variations by field.

industry and traditional academic roles.98
Substitution effects between patenting and publishing
may arise under specific circumstances, notably where
97
98

99
100

101
102
103

164

See Larsen (2011); Engel (2008);
and Geuna & Nesta (2006).
See, for good overviews Grimaldi et al.
(2011); Fabrizio and Di Minin (2008);
and Czarnitzki et al. (2009).
See Thursby and Thursby (2011).
A few studies have also established a positive
relationship between licensing and publishing
activity. Jensen et al. (2010), for instance,
show that the ability to license their university
research will lead scientists to devote more
time to university research and less time to
consulting on applied projects with firms.
See Thursby and Thursby (2007).
These fall under what has been referred to as
“Pasteur's quadrant” in Stokes (1997).
See, for instance, Crespi et al. (2010); Czarnitzki
et al. (2011); and Gulbrandsen et al. (2011).

researchers have already achieved a prominent scientific
career; at high levels of patenting; and, in some cases,
where academics are involved in corporate patents.103
Nevertheless, the above results which suggest that a
positive relationship between publishing and patenting
could be influenced by the sample of respondents and
some inherent statistical problems related to endogeneity. This could simply mean that the best scientists
happen to be good at publishing, attracting public and
private research funds, and patenting at the same time.
Alternatively, it could mean that cooperation with industry
positively influences both publishing and patenting, but
that one neither causes nor influences the other.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Furthermore, this evidence depends on the scientific

To put these findings into perspective, the data show

discipline in question, and the positive relationship is

that universities continue to account for the majority

strongest in fields such as biomedicine and the life sci-

of basic and academic research, while pursuing little

ences, i.e., in research motivated by both a quest for

development. If anything, basic R&D as a percentage

fundamental understanding and considerations of use.

of gross domestic product (GDP) has increased or
remained the same over time, including in high-income

Finally, these findings say little about potential publication

economies.109 Also, the risk of industry exerting an overly

delays or violations of open science principles. Surveys

great influence might be exaggerated as it funds only a

of scientists have indeed documented increased secrecy

small share of academic R&D. In the US, for example,

and delays in publication; in addition, a refocusing of

companies finance about 5 to 6 percent of basic and

research activity can accompany the involvement of

applied academic R&D, respectively, with a focus on

particular researchers in patenting and commercializa-

basic R&D (see Figure 4.11).

tion activity.104 Examples have been noted of companies restricting the findings of university researchers

This evidence notwithstanding, it remains a complex task

or researchers denying others access to their data.105

to distinguish between, and separately measure, basic

Despite these examples, no broad evidence exists that

research, applied research and development activity.

could unambiguously demonstrate alarming impacts

In any event, the whole breakdown may be misleading

and that, moreover, would causally link such behavior

if there are important feedback effects from later stage

to faculty patenting activity. Increased secrecy is often

research that may affect earlier stage research.

also a consequence of greater industry collaboration as
well as other factors. Nonetheless, this is an important
area for future study. Policy approaches to mitigate these
potential effects are needed.
2) Impacts on basic research: Insofar as this can be
measured, the existing literature – mostly focused on
the US and the life sciences – finds neither a decrease
in basic research nor an effect on the ratio of applied
versus basic research as a result of patenting.106 It has
been shown that the great majority of licensed university
inventions require substantial effort by firms to develop
commercially viable products from them. According
to the literature, this is a clear indication that university
research continues to be fundamental in nature.107 The
literature also shows that commercially-oriented research may be complementary to more fundamental
research.108 The positive feedback loops running from
firms to universities, and for the benefit of science, may
indeed be underappreciated.

104 See, for an overview of this literature,
Azoulay et al. (2009).
105 See, for instance, Campbell et al. (2002);
Campbell et al. (2000); and the related literature.
106 See Rafferty (2008) and Larsen (2011).
107 See Rafferty (2008).
108 See Breschi et al. (2007); Van Looy
(2006); and Van Looy et al. (2004).
109 OECD Main Science, Technology and
Industry Statistics (MSTI).

165

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure 4.11: Industry funding of US basic and applied academic R&D, 1978-2008
in current USD million (left) and as a percentage of total university applied and basic R&D (right)
Academic basic R&D funded by Industry
Academic basic R&D, share funded by Industry

Academic applied R&D funded by Industry
Academic applied R&D, share funded by Industry
12

2'500

10

2'000

8
1'500
6
1'000
4
500

2

08
20

06
20

04
20

02
20

00
20

98
19

96
19

94
19

19

92

90
19

88
19

86
19

84
19

82
19

19

19

80

0

78

0

Note: Data for 2008 are preliminary.
Source: WIPO, based on data provided by the National Science Foundation (NSF).

3) Impacts on the diversity of research: More and more

Another concern is that universities or firms do not have

university patents contain scientific references, which

access to or are forced to license expensive tools, and

raises the question whether universities are increasingly

that this would create barriers to entry in a particular

patenting elements of science rather than technological

field of scientific research. More research is warranted

Yet it has been argued

to substantiate this and to determine whether existing

that the openness of upstream research encourages

research exemptions would prevent firms and universities

higher levels of downstream research as well as new

from circumventing related patents.113

results derived from research.

110

research directions. Patenting by public research institutions might hamper this openness (see Table 4.6).
The evidence on this is unsatisfactory and mixed. On
the one hand, studies show that scientists have not
stopped pursuing a line of research because of thirdparty patents on research input.111 On the other hand, a
recent study finds that restrictions on scientific patenting
may have negative impacts on the diversity of research
(see Box 4.7). Also, in another study, the citation rate
for particular papers declines after a patent is granted
on the ideas they discuss. This is taken as evidence for
a subsequently reduced ability of researchers to draw
upon that knowledge in an unrestricted fashion.112 Both
of these studies focus on biomedical technologies where
applied and basic research overlap and holdup situations
are more likely than in other disciplines.

166

110
111
112
113

See Sampat (2006).
See Walsh et al. (2005).
See Murray and Stern (2007).
One issue is that, depending on the country in
question, research exemptions provide different
degrees of flexibility in this regard. The exemptions,
at times, also do not clearly seem to cover research
tools, as opposed to other patented inventions.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Box 4.7: Of mice and academic freedom

Few studies have assessed this potential downside
effect. Instead, studies show that often – and despite

A recent paper tests the issue of whether restrictions on scientific
openness – such as those created by university patenting – may
limit diversity and experimentation in basic research itself. The
authors use the example of certain genetically-engineered mice and
related scientific papers to examine the effects of more relaxed IP
policies following an agreement between the private sector and the
US National Institutes of Health (NIH). Specifically, that agreement
eased IP-based restrictions limiting access to research materials
(the mice) and limitations on downstream expropriation by followon innovators. In particular, the authors evaluate how the level and
type of follow-on research using these mice changes after the
NIH-initiated increase in openness.

potential friction – university IP, collaboration and re-

The authors find a significant increase in the level of follow-on
research driven by a substantial increase in the rate of exploration
of more diverse research paths. They interpret this to mean that
openness of upstream research does not simply encourage higher
levels of downstream exploitation; it also increases incentives for
additional upstream research by encouraging the establishment of
new research directions, and an increase in more basic and higher
quality research publications. The authors suggest that the effects of
university IP legislation should be studied in the light of these findings.

higher education R&D expenditure financed by industry

search productivity go hand in hand. In other words,
those universities that collaborate more with industry
also tend to be the ones with the most patents – again,
no causality is implied.
When looking at official statistics, one cannot help observing modest but continued industry-university collaboration, measured in terms of the share of industry-funded
R&D carried out in academia. Specifically, the share of
has always been small, but increases when looking at
averages for all Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) countries (from 2.9 percent in
1981, to about 6.6 percent in 2007).117 In Argentina, China
and the Russian Federation, for example, firms also fund
a stable or increasing percentage of academic R&D.

Source: Murray et al. (2009)

Finally, and as mentioned in Chapter 1, when dealing
with universities, firms are also increasingly inventive
4) Influences on university and industry relations:

with regard to their IP policies, fostering cooperation on

Anecdotal evidence from the US suggests that proactive

the one hand while ensuring control on the other. For

university efforts to own results of co-sponsored research

instance, university researchers are granted access to

and to generate licensing income have become contro-

the company’s internal IP, for example antibody libraries

versial (see Table 4.5).114 The fact that universities insist

and research tools, and, in certain cases, are allowed to

on their own IP terms prior to working with industry has

publish in addition to obtaining external funding.

been framed as a barrier to collaboration, given the long
delays and potential for friction where universities act to
maximize profits.115 Some frustration stems from the fact
that universities may tend to deploy a “one-size-fits-all”
approach to patenting research results, notwithstanding
the evidence that patents and exclusive licensing play
different roles in the development of complex versus
discrete technologies (see Chapter 2).116
114 See Thursby and Thursby (2007)
and Litan et al. (2008).
115 See Alexy et al. (2009) and Wadhwa (2011).
Specific firms have argued that it has distanced
universities from firms in the US and has been
a reason for US firms to collaborate more
with firms abroad. See Litan et al. (2008).
116 See So et al. (2008).
117 OECD MSTI.

167

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.4

The possible benefits to be derived from the IP-based

IP-based technology
transfer and the case
of low- and middleincome countries

technology transfer of academic inventions tend to be the
same as for high-income countries, except that poorer
countries can theoretically benefit from public R&D spillovers from high-income countries, without necessarily
investing large amounts in public R&D themselves. In
addition, strengthening patents in these countries may

Few studies exist on the challenges and impacts of

also shift the research interest in high-income countries

academic technology transfer in low- and middle-income

towards projects with relevance to markets in less de-

countries.

veloped economies.

118

Two main themes can be identified: (i) the

impacts of technology transfer legislation enacted in
high-income countries on less developed countries – the

However, the ability to benefit is critically dependent on

international dimension (see Subsection 4.4.1); and (ii) the

the less developed country’s aptitude – in particular of

impacts of the nascent home-grown technology transfer

firms – to produce and absorb science despite a poten-

legislation of middle- and low-income countries – the

tially weaker scientific and industrial base. Either domestic

domestic dimension (see Subsection 4.4.2).

firms or locally present multinationals can take on the role
of further developing university and PRO inventions. The

Table 4.13 summarizes the various dimensions of the

potential costs are also the same as mentioned above,

potential impacts.

except that they could be heightened by greater resource
constraints and the greater reliance on knowledge of
more developed economies. In this context, it has been
argued that would be easier for public research institutions and firms in developing countries to access such
knowledge when it is not protected.

Table 4.13: Impacts on low- and middle-income countries
Potential benefits

Potential costs

1) All the same benefits mentioned above (see Tables 4.5 and 4.6)
• This depends, however, on the capacity to absorb and further develop university inventions
– either by domestic firms or by locally present multinational firms – and on whether these
inventions are at all relevant to low- and middle-income country needs
2) Ability to contribute to local or global markets for university inventions
• This depends on the capacity to generate university inventions and to file patents
• University inventions might also attract the presence of multinational companies and their
associated complementary R&D
• The strengthened science-industry links can help reorient research towards local needs

1) All the same above-mentioned costs (see Tables 4.5 and 4.6), some of which are
amplified given the greater resource constraints of less developed economies
• Reduced or no access to critical technologies owned by universities in high-income
countries
• Overemphasis on applied, lucrative projects may lead to less useful inventions from the
point of view of low- and middle-income countries
• The decrease in international scientific exchanges and a reduced eagerness of
institutions in high-income countries to collaborate as a result of more complex IP
ownership issues and secrecy

118 The above effects are more significant with regard
to sectors in which large amounts of patents are
owned by universities and non-profit research
institutions. In agriculture, almost a quarter of
patents are owned by universities and nonprofit research Institutions. See Graff (2003).

168

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.4.1

That said, more research is required on this potential

Impacts of high-income countries’
technology transfer legislation on
low- and middle-income economies

downside effect. The earlier sections of this chapter show
that the number and share of university and PRO patents
are growing and, in particular, in the pharmaceutical and
health area. It would be of interest to determine which pat-

The literature on this topic has focused on how technol-

ents are filed in areas critical to low- and middle-income

ogy transfer legislation originating in high-income coun-

economies and their related effects, including the terms of

tries impacts on low- and middle-income economies.

access and impacts on consumption. The extent to which
research in high-income countries focuses on neglected

In that context, the literature considers their reduced and

diseases or crops for the tropics – areas of great interest

more expensive access to knowledge.119 One concern

for less developed countries – and the extent to which

is that the patenting of scientific results in high-income

this research is being patented is likely to be limited. Yet

countries could restrict access to research tools, da-

this question deserves more research. It would also be

tabases and technologies.

In particular, stricter IP

interesting to ascertain which safeguards could be put in

practices may hinder access to technologies that are

place to avert the possible downside effects of university

particularly critical for less developed economies, for

and PRO patenting (see Section 4.5).

120

example in agriculture and health and for particular lifesaving medications (see Section 4.5 in this regard, which

Finally, the literature considers the potentially harmful

suggests policies to counteract such impacts).121

impact of international knowledge diffusion that could
be triggered by increased university and PRO patent-

At the outset, the impacts of reduced access to such

ing in high-income countries. The concern is that op-

knowledge are critically dependent on whether the uni-

portunities for scientific networking between scientists

versity or PRO inventor has been granted a patent by the

in high-income and less developed countries might be

national patent office of the country in question.

Also,

narrowed.123 Examples have been cited of cooperation

the costs depend on whether (i) the technology is at all

agreements between institutions of more and less devel-

meaningful to the country and (ii) whether such country

oped countries being abolished due to across-the-board

has the ability to take up and develop unpatented univer-

patenting strategies.124 In particular in the climate change

sity inventions prior to such legislation in the first place.

debate, less developed countries have called on high-

122

income countries to make the results of publicly-funded
research in this area available. In the absence of more
systematic evidence, it is of central importance to further
119 Kapsynski et al. (2003) cite major HIV treatment
drug patents held by Yale University, the University
of Minnesota, Emory University and Duke University.
120 See Boettiger and Benett (2006); So et al.
(2008); Montobio (2009); and Engel (2008).
121 See Boettiger (2006).
122 Sampat (2009) explains that for university patenting
in the North to affect access to drugs in middleand low-income countries, two things need to be
true: universities would have to own a substantial
number of patents; and, second, universities or
firms licensing university technologies would have
to file patents in low-and middle-income countries.
123 See Clemente (2006).
124 Idem.

substantiate concerns of faltering scientific cooperation
between richer and poorer countries that could be linked
to IP, and a corresponding decline in scientific openness.

169

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.4.2
Challenges to home-grown
technology transfer in low- and
middle-income countries
Despite costs and benefits similar to high-income coun-

Generally speaking, however, a key difference with highincome countries is the weak linkages between public
R&D and national economic development which is often
rooted in the factors below:
• a lower level of science and technology activity (S&T);

tries, low- and middle-income economies’ differing needs
must be taken into consideration in formulating technol-

• the fact that the government and international donors are

ogy transfer policies and anticipating their related impacts.

often the main funders of S&T, and that national PROs
are the main R&D performers (see Subsection 4.1.1), im-

Experience and the economic literature show that dif-

plying low research and innovation capabilities of firms;

ferent stages of development and different innovation
systems require different policies in order to promote

• less developed human capital for S&T activity, particu-

IP-based incentives for the commercialization of public

larly a low number of scientists in firms and the best do-

research.125 Conditions for technology transfer develop

mestic scientists moving abroad (“brain drain” effect);

over time and depend heavily on research capabilities
and science-industry linkages. Having a broad view of
the concept of technology commercialization, looking

• lower quality research and low relevance of public
research to the business sector;

at intermediate steps and broad technology transfer
activities – not exclusively focused on IP creation and

• limited science-industry linkages, explained by a low

licensing, and academic entrepreneurship – makes for

absorptive capacity of firms combined with an ensuing

good policy advice.

lack of “business” demand for S&T;

The importance of improved science-industry
linkages in low- and middle-income economies
Low- and middle-income countries vary substantially
with regard to the R&D capacity of their public research

• a lack of policies and structures to facilitate academic
and other start-ups; and
• constrained access to financing as a barrier to the
development of innovation.

institutions, science-industry cooperation and their infrastructure and policy framework for technology transfer

Linkages between PROs and the business sector are

(see Chapter 1 and Subsection 4.2.1).

constrained by a number of structural factors and inertia.
In many less developed economies, government-funded
S&T expenditure has largely focused on agriculture and
overlooked engineering and industrial research. The lack
of applied research, the deficit of trained engineers and
applied scientists, and weak technological capabilities in
the manufacturing sector are all factors contributing to a
disconnection between science and firms.

125 See Guellec et al. (2010).

170

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Structural features have also constrained the development

Compared to high-income countries, the following are

of linkages between universities and firms. Often, com-

additional barriers to technology transfer in low- and

mercial activity by universities and researchers has been or

middle-income countries:

is still highly regulated or forbidden. With few exceptions,
most universities fully depend on federal budgets and have
weak linkages with regional governments and economies.

• lack of clear university and PRO technology transfer policies;

The lack of absorptive capacity in firms and their natural

• weak operative guidelines on patenting, for example

focus on imitative innovation and acquisition of foreign

on disclosure and commercialization of IP at the

technology as innovation strategies also contribute to frag-

institutional level;

mentation in national innovation systems (see Chapter 1).126
The technological strategies of firms in lower- and middle-

• little awareness about and few incentives for research-

income economies often depend on off-the-shelf import-

ers to participate in IP-based technology transfer; and

ed technology, primarily in the form of machinery and turnkey technology transfer from abroad. Often these are also

• absence of or inadequate resources for TTOs, with

the only options for these firms to access current technol-

staff lacking the necessary skills and experience

ogy.127 The barriers to industry-science collaboration re-

related to IP and commercialization.

ported by firms include a lack of communication channels
with universities, differences in organizational culture (in

• more generally, an additional friction to the develop-

respect of timing and product delivery), uncertainty of a

ment of IP registration and commercialization in many

market perspective for research results, and high costs

middle- and low-income countries is the sluggish

for developing and commercializing university research.

process of patenting at national patent offices and

128

its relatively high cost.129
In this context, technology transfer policies that are not
accompanied by policies targeting the strengthening of

However, these characteristics are not shared equally

R&D capabilities in firms and industry-science linkages

across all low- and middle-income countries. For the

will unlikely be successful. Similar as in the case of high-

most part, work is ongoing to improve the systemic

income countries, transforming academia into more

weaknesses in national innovation systems and giv-

entrepreneurial institutions requires cultural change – in

ing increasing autonomy to universities. As evidenced

particular among researchers, and often increased uni-

earlier, many of these countries are also in the midst of

versity autonomy, including for more competitive hiring

implementing or setting up technology transfer policies

and in terms of resource management.

and practices (see Subsection 4.2.1). Indeed, in some
cases this has already led to significant impacts, both in

126 See Navarro et al. (2010).
127 See Zuñiga (2011). In Argentina, for example, according
to the innovation survey of 1998-2001, 84 percent
of firms that cooperated with other actors in the
national innovation systems did so for informational
purposes and 58 percent for training purposes;
only 21 percent engaged in cooperation for R&D. In
Colombia, the percentages of firms (within those that
reported links with agents providing technological
services) are 31, 50 and 15 percent, respectively.
128 For evidence from China on this,
see Guan et al. (2005).
129 See Zuñiga (2011).

terms of measured technology transfer and the related
broader impacts on public research institutions, firms
and the linkages between them.
Finally, it is also important to reiterate that high-income
countries struggle with many of the same challenges
when it comes to putting in place functioning technology transfer practices. Therefore, a perfect blueprint that
could easily be adopted does not exist.

171

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.5
New university policies act
as safeguards

• Second, where inventions are patented, the type of
and access to downstream licenses can be influenced
by legislation or institutional policies. For instance,
licensees of government-funded technologies can
be required to disclose follow-on investment and the

The preceding discussion pointed to possible downside

actual use of the patent, for instance avoiding that

effects of university and PRO patenting on knowledge

these patents are used to block follow-on inventions

diffusion and access to technology or critical products.

by incumbents or patent aggregators. Certain requirements can be instituted to ensure that products

Better monitoring and improved understanding of these

derived from these inventions are sold to consumers or

potential effects would seem to be desirable.

poorer countries on reasonable terms.130 Field-of-use
restrictions can also be implemented to ensure that

Furthermore, policies and practices are being tested

the IP is made available for future research, including

by governments and universities to institute safeguards

to other firms. Governments can also reserve the right

against unintended negative consequences.

to practice the invention or override exclusive licensing
rights (“march-in rights”).

Universities, PROs, funding agencies, donors and governments have essentially two levers for preventing or

Related codes of practice aim to prevent abusive patent-

limiting the potentially negative impacts of IP-based

ing and licensing:131

technology transfer.
• As of 2004, the European Commission suggested
• First, the patenting and the licensing of particular inventions and technologies can be restricted. For instance,

guidelines and established a recommendation based
on various expert groups.132

guidelines can demand that patents should be sought,
and exclusive licenses attributed, only where they are

• A nine-point plan has been set up by a group of aca-

a necessary condition for their commercialization.

demics and endorsed by a number of US universities

University policies and government bodies can also

which provide safeguards (see Box 4.8). This plan is

declare certain areas off-limits to university patenting:

particularly concerned with the preservation of follow-

basic research, research tools, technologies critical

on science and innovation, and with ensuring that

to public health in low-income countries.

patents do not create undue burdens. One of the nine
points stresses that patenting universities should be
sensitive to poor countries, in particular with respect
to their medical and food needs.
• A number of prominent US institutions have also en-

130 See OECD (2003) and So et al. (2008).
131 See Montobbio (2009); OECD (2003);
and Sampat (2009).
132 See MacDonald et al. (2004) and European
Commission (2008, 2009).
133 www.autm.net/Content/NavigationMenu/TechTransfer/
GlobalHealth/statementofprincliples.pdf
(accessed on October 11, 2011).
134 See Chokshi (2006) and Chokshi
and Rujkumar (2007).

172

dorsed a “Statement of Principles and Strategies for the
Equitable Dissemination of Medical Technologies”.133
• Legislation and practices that facilitate or guarantee
humanitarian access for poorer countries to technologies and products based on publicly-funded research
are being established.134

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Box 4.8: “Nine Points to Consider in Licensing”
• Universities should reserve the right to practice licensed inventions
and to allow other non-profit and governmental organizations to do so.
• Universities should also endeavor to structure licenses, especially exclusive licenses, in ways that promote investment, technology development and use, with milestone criteria to back up such requirements.
• Universities should strive to minimize the licensing of “future
improvements”.
• Universities should anticipate and do their best to manage or
eliminate technology transfer-related conflicts of interest.
• Universities should try to ensure broad access to research tools.
• Enforcement action should be carefully considered.
• Universities should be careful to avoid working with private
patent aggregators (referred to as non-practicing entities in
Chapter 2) whose business model is limited to asserting patents
against established firms rather than seeking to promote further
development and commercial application of the technology.
• In cases where there is a market for the sale of unlicensed patents,
universities should try to ensure that purchasers operate under
a business model that allows for commercialization rather than
a model based on threats of patent infringement litigation to
generate revenue.
• Universities should try to anticipate which technologies may have
applications that address important unmet social needs unlikely
to be served by terms appropriate for commercial markets and
to structure agreements to allow for these applications. The
examples are technologies suited to meeting the agricultural,
medical and food needs of less advanced countries.

Moreover, universities and PROs are trying a number of
interesting additional approaches (see Table 4.12). These
include patenting strategies but also access to research
tools and to copyrighted works such as teaching materials, an often neglected IP issue in this debate.
Table 4.12: University and PRO “open IP policies”
Licensing strategies • A preference to grant companies non-exclusive rather than
exclusive licenses135
• Universities discriminate in issuing licenses, making them
free or cheaper if used for humanitarian, not-for-profit
purposes136
• Free licenses to small companies or start-ups for selected
technologies
• Instituting favorable licensing strategies to promote access
by poorer countries
Access to
copyrighted
materials

• Free access to research materials, publications and teaching
materials
• Open source or, more recently, open hardware licenses137

To conclude, the extent to which these policies are implemented and successful in reaching their intended goal is
an issue for further research. Governments, including in
low- and middle-income countries, that are in the process
of adopting technology transfer laws and policies can
consider formally instituting such safeguards.138

Source: Drawing on Merrill & Mazza (2010), based on the informal White
Paper “In the Public Interest: Nine Points to Consider in Licensing
University Technology”, March 6, 2007 http://otl.stanford.edu/documents/
whitepaper-10.pdf.

135 See Nill (2002).
136 Examples are: the University of Leuven not requiring
royalties on Tenofavir from drugs sold in countries
that belong to the Gilead Access Program; Yale
University negotiating humanitarian terms with
Bristol Myers Squibb for sales of drugs in Africa;
University of California, Berkeley, with several
licensing agreements for humanitarian purposes.
137 European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN)
open hardware license:
www.ohwr.org/projects/ohr-support/wiki/Manifesto.
138 See So et al. (2008).

173

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

4.6
Conclusions and directions
for future research

Moreover, the evidence shows that simply instituting
relevant laws and regulations is only a first ingredient to
stimulating industry-science linkages. A number of conditions need to be in place at the country and institutional
level to reap the resulting benefits. Moreover, diverse

Policymakers increasingly seek to bolster the effective-

stages of development will require different approaches

ness of academic research in fostering innovation. In this

and complementary policies, including safeguards for

context, universities and PROs have been encouraged

avoiding the downside risks of university patenting. A

to patent their inventions and license them to the private

blueprint that could easily be adopted across institutions

sector. Technology transfer policies and institutions have

and countries therefore does not yet exist, even in high-

been put in place to facilitate this knowledge transfer. This

income economies.

approach of commercializing publicly-funded research
aims to enable firms to better identify and further develop

Areas for future research

inventions based on academic research, thus generating
wider economic and social benefits.

In the light of the discussions in this chapter, the following
areas emerge as promising fields of research:

As a result, the number of national and international
patent applications by research institutions has been

• The interactions between IP-based knowledge transfer

increasing, in particular in fields such as biotechnology

channels and other vectors need more careful analysis;

and pharmaceuticals. The licensing income generated

this concerns, in particular, the question whether and

is still relatively modest and concentrated within a few

where they are substitutes rather than complements.

institutions, but it is growing fast and diversifying.
• Based on better search algorithms and targeted
Based on the available evidence, this chapter concludes

institutional surveys, better data are required to

that IP-based technology transfer policies and institutions

clearly identify patents, licensing income and spin-

are instrumental to increasing opportunities for the com-

offs derived from academic research, and benefits

mercialization of academic inventions. The evidence also

from faculty involvement. The role of IP in transforming

suggests a synergy between academic and entrepre-

a scientist into a successful entrepreneur deserves

neurial activity and the complementary nature of different

particular attention. The respective impacts of licensing

knowledge transfer channels. That said, the chapter has

university technologies to existing firms versus the

also discussed potential costs of such initiatives.

creation of academic spin-offs is also of interest.
• Experiences related to making technology transfer institutions efficient should be documented more widely,
in particular with an eye for lessons applicable to lesser
endowed research institutions. Examples include the
design of university policies, the design of performance
incentives for researchers and the most optimal interface between public research and firms. The question
whether the current approach of “one-size-fits-all” laws
and practices suits the different scientific disciplines
– on the supply side – and industrial sectors – on the
demand side – needs to be explored.

174

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

• More compelling studies are needed to demonstrate
the economic benefits of IP-based technology transfer,
and the benefits of the university-ownership model
in particular. Quantifying the missed opportunities
resulting from a lack of incentives to commercialize,
in particular in low- and middle-income countries,
would be equally desirable.
• Work is required to better document the potential
negative effects of IP-based knowledge transfer on the
broader science system. The design and implementation of policy safeguards which are emerging should
be monitored and evaluated. At the same time, the
positive feedback loops on the science system from
industry-science linkages deserve more attention.
• Finally, analytical work with respect to low- and middleincome countries is only now emerging, as the majority of these countries are just starting to implement
associated policies and as many of these countries
may not have much innovation capacity in the interim
to experience the impact of such mechanisms.

175

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

References
Adams, J.D. (1990). Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity
Growth. Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), 673-702.
Aldridge, T. & Audretsch, D.B. (2010). Does Policy Influence the
Commercialization Route? Evidence from National Institutes of Health
Funded Scientists. Research Policy, 39(5), 583-588.
Alexy, O., Criscuolo, P. & Salter, A. (2009). Does IP Strategy Have to Cripple
Open Innovation? MIT Sloan Management Review, October 1, 2009.
Arundel, A. & Bordoy, C. (2010). Developing Internationally Comparable
Indicators for the Commercialization of Publicly-funded Research. UNUMERIT Working Paper Series, 075.
AUTM (2010). The Better World Report – A Positive Impact of Academic
Innovations on Quality of Life. Deerfield: The Association of University
Technology Managers.
Azoulay, P., Ding, W. & Stuart, T. (2009). The Impact of Academic Patenting
on the Rate, Quality and Direction of (Public) Research Output. The Journal of
Industrial Economics, 57(4), 637-676.
Baldini, N. (2006). University Patenting and Licensing Activity: A Review of
the Literature. Research Evaluation, 15(3), 197-207.
Balme, P., Cytermann, J.-R., Dupont, J.-L., Guillaume, H., LangloisBerthelot, M., Macron, E., de Malleray, P.-A. & Szymankievicz, C. (2007).
Rapport sur la valorisation de la recherche. Paris: Ministère de l'Économie, de
l'industrie et des finances.
Basant, R. & Chandra, P. (2007). University-Industry Link and Enterprise
Creation in India – Some Strategic and Policy Issues. In Yusuf & Nabeshima
(Eds.), How Universities Promote Economic Growth. Washington, D.C.: The
World Bank, 209-226.
Belenzon, S. & Schankerman, M. (2009). University Knowledge Transfer:
Private Ownership, Incentives, and Local Development Objectives. Journal of
Law and Economics, 52(1), 111-144.
Belenzon, S. & Schankerman, M. (2010). Spreading the Word:
Geography, Policy and University Knowledge Diffusion. CEP Discussion
Paper, CEPDP1005.
Bishop, K., D'Este, P. & Neely, A. (2011). Gaining from Interactions with
Universities: Multiple Methods for Nurturing Absorptive Capacity. Research
Policy, 40(1), 30-40.
Boettiger S., B.A.B. (2006). The Bayh-Dole Act: Implications for Developing
Countries. IDEA: The Intellectual Property Law Review, 46(2), 259-279.
Breschi, S., Lissoni, F. & Montobbio, F. (2007). The Scientific Productivity of
Academic Inventors: New Evidence from Italian Data. Economics of Innovation
and New Technology, 16(2), 101-118.
Caballero, R.J. & Jaffe, A.B. (1993). How High are the Giants' Shoulders:
An Empirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction
in a Model of Economic Growth. In O.J. Blanchard & S. Fischer (Eds.),
NBER Macroeconomics Annual (Vol. 8). Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press, 15-74.
Campbell, E.G., Clarridge, B.R., Gokhale, M., Birenbaum, L., Hilgartner,
S., Holtzman, N.A. & Blumenthal, D. (2002). Data Withholding in Academic
Genetics: Evidence from a National Survey. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 287(4), 473-480.
Campbell, E.G., Weissman, J.S., Causino, N. & Blumenthal, D. (2000). Data
Withholding in Academic Medicine: Characteristics of Faculty Denied Access
to Research Rsults and Biomaterials. Research Policy, 29(2), 303-312.
Cervantes, M. (2009). Academic Patenting: How Universities and Public
Research Organizations are Using Their Intellectual Property to Boost
Research and Spur Innovative Start-ups. Retrieved from www.wipo.int/sme/
en/documents/academic_patenting.html
Chapple, W., Lockett, A., Siegel, D. & Wright, M. (2005). Assessing the
Relative Performance of U.K. University Technology Transfer Offices:
Parametric and Non-parametric Evidence. Research Policy, 34(3), 369-384.
Chokshi, D.A. (2006). Improving Access to Medicines in Poor Countries: The
Role of Universities. PLoS Medicine, 3(6).
Chokshi, D.A. & Rujkumar, R. (2007). Leveraging University Research
to Advance Global Health. Journal of the American Medical Association,
29(16), 1934-1936.

176

Clemente, F.-P. (2006). The Impact of Stronger Intellectual Property Rights
on Science and Technology in Developing Countries. Research Policy,
35(6), 808-824.
Cohen, W.M. & Levinthal, D.A. (1989). Innovation and Learning: The Two
Faces of R & D. The Economic Journal, 99(397), 569-596.
Commonwealth of Australia (2011). National Survey of Research
Commercialization 2008 and 2009 – Selected Measures of
Commercialisation Activity in Australia’s Universities, Publicly Funded
Research Agencies, Medical Research Institutes and Cooperative Research
Centres. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia.
Conti, A. & Gaule, P. (2011). Is the US Outperforming Europe in University
Technology Licensing? A New Perspective on the European Paradox.
Research Policy, 40(1), 123-135.
Craig Boardman, P. & Ponomariov, B.L. (2009). University Researchers
Working with Private Companies. Technovation, 29(2), 142-153.
Crespi, G.A., Geuna, A., Nomaler, Ö. & Verspagen, B. (2010). University
IPRs and Knowledge Transfer: Is University Ownership More Efficient?
Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 19(7), 627-648.
Czarnitzki, D., Glänzel, W. & Hussinger, K. (2009). Heterogeneity of
Patenting Activity and Its Implications for Scientific Research. Research
Policy, 38(1), 26-34.
Czarnitzki, D., Hussinger, K. & Schneider, C. (2011). Commercializing
Academic Research: the Quality of Faculty Patenting. Industrial and
Corporate Change.
Dalmarco, G. & Freitas, d.M. (2011). Universities' Intellectual Property: Path
for Innovation or Patent Competition? Journal of Technology Management &
Innovation, 6(3).
Daraio, C., Bonaccorsi, A., Geuna, A., Lepori, B., Bach, L., Bogetoft, P.
et al. (2011). The European University Landscape: A Micro Characterization
Based on Evidence from the Aquameth Project. Research Policy, 40(1), 148164.
Dasgupta, P. & David, P.A. (1994). Toward a New Economics of Science.
Research Policy, 23(5), 487-521.
David, P.A. (2004). Can "Open Science" Be Protected from the Evolving
Regime of IPR Protections? Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
JITE, 160(1), 9-34.
David, P.A. & Hall, B.H. (2006). Property and the Pursuit of Knowledge: IPR
Issues Affecting Scientific Research. Research Policy, 35(6), 767-771.
David, P.A., Mowery, D. & Steinmueller, W.E. (1992). Analysing the
Economic Payoffs from Basic Research. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology, 2(1), 73-90.
Debackere, K. & Veugelers, R. (2005). The Role of Academic Technology
Transfer Organizations in Improving Industry Science Links. Research Policy,
34(3), 321-342.
Di Gregorio, D. & Shane, S. (2003). Why Do Some Universities Generate
More Start-ups than Others? Research Policy, 32(2), 209-227.
Du Plessis, M., Van Looy, B., Song, X. & Magerman, T. (2010). Data
Production Methods for Harmonized Patent Statistics: Patentee Sector
Allocation 2009. Brussels: Eurostat.
Edwin, M. (1991). Academic Research and Industrial Innovation. Research
Policy, 20(1), 1-12.
Eisenberg, R. (1989). Patents and the Progress of Science: Exclusive Rights
and Experimental Use. University of Chicago Law Review, 56, 1017-1055.
Engel, N. (2008). University Patenting and its Effects: An Assessment for
Developing Countries. In C. S. Krishna (Ed.), Technology Transfer: Intellectual
Property Rights Hyderabad: Amicus Books/The Icfai University Press, 127142.
European Commission (2008). Commission Recommendation on the
Management of Intellectual Property in Knowledge Transfer Activities and
Code of Practice for Universities and Other Public Research Organizations.
Luxembourg: European Commission.
European Commission (2009). Expert Group on Knowledge Transfer
– Final Report. In Directorate General for Research (Ed.). Brussels:
European Commission.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Fabrizio, K.R. & Di Minin, A. (2008). Commercializing the Laboratory: Faculty
Patenting and the Open Science Environment. Research Policy, 37(5), 914931.

Khan, M. and S. Wunsch-Vincent. (2011). Capturing Innovation: The Patent
System. In S. Dutta & I. Mia (Eds.), The Global Information Technology Report
2010–2011. Geneva: World Economic Forum. Chapter 1.1, Box 3.

Foray, D. & Lissoni, F. (2010). University Research and Public-Private
Interaction. In B.H. Hall & N.Rosenberg (Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of
Innovation (Vol. 1). Amsterdam: North Holland, 275-314.

Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy (2010). Analysis of Technology
Transfer. Seoul: Korean Ministry of Knowledge Economy.

Geuna, A. & Nesta, L.J.J. (2006). University Patenting and Its Effects on
Academic Research: The Emerging European Evidence. Research Policy,
35(6), 790-807.
Geuna, A. & Rossi, F. (2011). Changes to University IPR Regulations in
Europe and the Impact on Academic Patenting. Research Policy, 40(8), 10681076.
Goldfarb, B., Henrekson, M., & Rosenberg, N. (2001). Demand vs.
Supply Driven Innovations: US and Swedish Experiences in Academic
Entrepreneurship. SIEPR Discussion Paper, 0436.
Goldfarb, B., Sampson, R.C. & Ziedonis, A.A. (2011). Incentives or
Resources? Commercialization of University Research by Start-Ups vs.
Established Firms. Paper presented at the DRUID 2011. Retrieved from http://
druid8.sit.aau.dk/druid/acc_papers/pejqk7endg416ljvit0t91ds0uac.pdf
Graff, Gregory D., Bradford, Kent J., Zilberman, David & Bennett, Alan B.
(2003). The Public-Private Structure of Intellectual Property Ownership in
Agricultural Biotechnology. Nature Biotechnology, 21, 989-995.
Griliches, Z. (1980). R&D and the Productivity Slowdown. The American
Economic Review, 70(2), 343-348.
Grimaldi, R., Kenney, M., Siegel, D.S. & Wright, M. (2011). 30 Years after
Bayh-Dole: Reassessing Academic Entrepreneurship. Research Policy,
40(8), 1045-1057.
Guan, J.C., Yam, R.C.M. & Mok, C.K. (2005). Collaboration Between Industry
and Research Institutes/Universities on Industrial Innovation in Beijing, China.
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 17(3), 339-353.
Guellec, D., Madies, T. & Prager, J.-C. (2010). Les marchés de brevets
dans l'économie de la connaissance. Les Rapports du Conseil d'analyse
économique. Paris: Conseil d'analyse économique.
Gulbrandsen, M., Mowery, D. & Feldman, M. (2011). Introduction to the
Special Section: Heterogeneity and University-Industry Relations. Research
Policy, 40(1), 1-5.
Gupta , V.K. (2008). Indian Patent Output 1990-2007. India, Science and
Technology: 2008. S&T Output and Patents. New Delhi: National Institute of
Science, Technology and Development Studies.
Heller, M. & Eisenberg, R. (1998). Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research. Science, 280, 698-701.
Inspection générale des finances (2007). Rapport sur la valorisation de
la recherche, Pour le Ministère de l'économie, des finances et de l'industrie
et le Ministère de l'éducation nationale, de l'enseignement supérieur et de la
recherche. Paris.
Jaffe, A. B. (1989). Real effects of academic research. The American
Economic Review, 79(5), 957-970.
Japan Patent Office (2010). Japan Patent Office Annual Report. Tokyo: Japan
Patent Office.
Jensen, R., Thursby, J. & Thursby, M.C. (2010). University-Industry
Spillovers, Government Funding, and Industrial Consulting. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 15732.
Jensen, R. & Thursby, M. (2001). Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The
Licensing of University Inventions. The American Economic Review, 91(1), 240259.

Kuramoto, J., & Torero, M. (2009). Public–Private Research, Development,
and Innovation in Peru. In M. Graham & J. Woo (Eds.), Fuelling Economic
Growth: The Role of Public–Private Sector Research in Development (pp.
105-158). Ottawa: Practical Action Publishing/International Development
Research Centre.
Lach, S. & Schankerman, M. (2008). Incentives and Invention in Universities.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), 403-433.
Larsen, M.T. (2011). The Implications of Academic Enterprise for Public
Science: An Overview of the Empirical Evidence. Research Policy, 40(1), 6-19.
Lissoni, F., Llerena, P., McKelvey, M. & Sanditov, B. (2008). Academic
Patenting in Europe: New Evidence from the KEINS Database. Research
Evaluation, 16(2), 87–102.
Litan, R.E., Mitchell, L. & Reedy, E.J. (2008). Commercializing University
Innovations: Alternative Approaches. In A.B. Jaffe, J. Lerner & S. Stern
(Eds.), Innovation Policy and the Economy (Vol. 8). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 31-57.
Luan, C., Zhou, C. & Liu, A. (2010). Patent Strategy in Chinese Universities: A
Comparative Perspective. Scientometrics, 84(1), 53-63.
Luintel, K. B., & Khan, M. (2011). Basic, applied and experimental knowledge
and productivity: Further evidence. Economics Letters, 111(1), 71-74.
MacDonald, L., Capart, G., Bohlander, B., Cordonnier, M., Jonsson, L.,
Kaiser, L., Lack, J., Mack, J., Matacotta, C., Schwing, T., Sueur, T., van
Grevenstein, P., van den Bos, L. & Vonortas, N.S. (2004). Management of
Intellectual Property in Publicly-Funded Research Organisations: Towards
European Guidelines, Expert Group Report to the European Commission.
Luxembourg: European Communities.
Mansfield, E. (1998). Academic Research and Industrial Innovation: An
Update of Empirical Findings. Research Policy, 26(7-8), 773-776.
Merrill, S.A. & Mazza, A.-M. (2010). Managing University Intellectual
Property in the Public Interest National Research Council: Committee on
Management of University Intellectual Property: Lessons from a Generation of
Experience. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences.
Montobbio, F. (2009). Intellectual Property Rights and Knowledge Transfer
from Public Research to Industry in the US and Europe: Which Lessons
for Innovation Systems in Developing Countries? The Economics of
Intellectual Property: Suggestions for Further Research in Developing Countries
and Countries with Economies in Transition. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R., Sampat, B.N. & Ziedonis, A.A. (2001). The
Growth of Patenting and Licensing by U.S. Universities: An Assessment of
the Effects of the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980. Research Policy, 30(1), 99-119.
Mowery, D.C., Nelson, R.R., Sampat, B.N. & Ziedonis, A.A. (2004). Ivory
Tower and Industrial Innovation: University-Industry Technology Transfer Before
and After Bayh-Dole. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Murray, F., Aghion, P., Dewatripont, M., Kolev, J. & Stern, S. (2009). Of Mice
and Academics: Examining the Effect of Openness on Innovation. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, 14819.
Murray, F. & Stern, S. (2007). Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder
the free Flow of Scientific Knowledge?: An Empirical Test of the Anti-commons
Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 63(4), 648-687.

Just, R.E. & Huffman, W.E. (2009). The Economics of Universities in a New
Age of Funding Options. Research Policy, 38(7), 1102-1116.

Navarro, J.C., Llisterri, J. & Zuñiga, P. (2010). The Importance of Ideas
for Innovation and Productivity. In C. Pages (Ed.), The Age of Productivity:
Transforming Economies from the Bottom Up. Washington, D.C.:
Pallgrave, Macmillan.

Kapsynski, A., Crone, T.E. & Merson, M. (2003). Global Health and
University Patents. Science, 301, 1629.

Nelson, R.R. (2004). The Market Economy, and the Scientific Commons.
Research Policy, 33(3), 455-471.

Kenney, M. & Patton, D. (2009). Reconsidering the Bayh-Dole Act and the
Current University Invention Ownership Model. Research Policy, 38(9), 14071422.

Nill, D.W. (2002). Corporate Sponsored Research and Development at
Universities in the US. AIPPI Journal, June 2002.
NSF (2010). Science and Engineering Indicators. Arlington, VA: National
Science Board.

177

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

OECD (2003). Turning Science into Business – Patenting and Licensing at Public
Research Organisations. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
OECD (2008a). Assessing the Socio-economic Impacts of Public R&D:
Recent Practices and Perspectives. Science, Technology and Industry Outlook
2008. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
OECD (2008b). ICT Research and Development and Innovation. Information
Technology Outlook. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development.
OECD (2011). Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2011. Paris:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Owen-Smith, J. & Powell, W.W. (2001). To Patent or Not: Faculty Decisions
and Institutional Success at Technology Transfer. Journal of Technology
Transfer, 26(1-2), 99-114.
Owen-Smith, J. & Powell, W.W. (2003). The Expanding Role of University
Patenting in the Life Sciences: Assessing the Importance of Experience and
Connectivity. Research Policy, 32(9), 1695-1711.
PILA Network (2009). Gestión de propiedad intelectual e industrial en las
instituciones de educación superior. Buenas practicas en universidades de
Latinoamérica y Europa, Research Report: Red de Propiedad Intelectual e
Industrial en Latinoamérica.
Rafferty, M. (2008). The Bayh-Dole Act and University Research and
Development. Research Policy, 37(1), 29-40.
RedOTRI (2008). Annual Survey on Knowledge and Technology Transfer: Red
Oficinas de Transferencia de Resultados de Investigación.
Roessner, D., Bond, J., Okubo, S., & Planting, M. (2009). The Economic
Impact of Licensed Commercialized Inventions Resulting from University
Research, 1996-2007, Final Report prepared for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, www.oregonbio.org/Portals/0/docs/Education/BIO_EDU_
partnership_final_report.pdf.

Thursby, J.G. & Thursby, M.C. (2011). Faculty Participation in Licensing:
Implications for Research. Research Policy, 40(1), 20-29.
UNESCO (2010). UNESCO Science Report 2010. Paris: United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Van Looy, B., Callaert, J. & Debackere, K. (2006). Publication and Patent
Behavior of Academic Researchers: Conflicting, Reinforcing or Merely Coexisting? Research Policy, 35(4), 596-608.
Van Looy, B., Landoni, P., Callaert, J., van Pottelsberghe, B., Sapsalis, E. &
Debackere, K. (2011). Entrepreneurial Effectiveness of European Universities:
An Empirical Assessment of Antecedents and Trade-offs. Research Policy,
40(4), 553-564.
Van Looy, B., Ranga, M., Callaert, J., Debackere, K. & Zimmermann, E.
(2004). Combining Entrepreneurial and Scientific Performance in Academia:
Towards a Compounded and Reciprocal Matthew-effect? Research Policy,
33(3), 425-441.
Engel, N. (2008). University Patenting and its Effects: An Assessment for
Developing Countries. In C. S. Krishna (Ed.), Technology Transfer: Intellectual
Property Rights Hyderabad: Amicus Books/The Icfai University Press, 127142.
Vincent-Lancrin, S. (2006). What is Changing in Academic Research? Trends
and Future Scenarios. European Journal of Education, 41(2), 169-202.
Vincett, P.S. (2010). The Economic Impacts of Academic Spin-off
Companies, and Their Implications for Public Policy. Research Policy,
39(6), 736-747.
Wadhwa, V. (2011). Innovation's Golden Opportunity. Washington
Post. Retrieved from http://wadhwa.com/2011/06/12/washington-postinnovation%E2%80%99s-golden-opportunity/
Walsh, J., Cho, C. & Cohen, W.M. (2005). Patents, Material Transfers and
Access to Research Inputs in Biomedical Research. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy of Sciences.

Rosenberg, N. & Nelson, R.R. (1994). American Universities and Technical
Advance in Industry. Research Policy, 23(3), 323-348.

Wright, M., Clarysse, B., Mustar, P. & Lockett, A. (Eds.). (2007). Academic
Entrepreneurship in Europe. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

Rothaermel, F.T., Agung, S.D. & Jiang, L. (2007). University
Entrepreneurship: A Taxonomy of the Literature. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 16(4), 691-791.

Wu, W. (2010). Higher Education Innovation in China; Washington DC: World
Bank, East Asia and Pacific Region Human Development Department.

Sampat, B.N. (2006). Patenting and US Academic Research in the 20th
Century: The World Before and After Bayh-Dole. Research Policy, 35(6), 772789.
Sampat, B.N. (2009). Academic Patents and Access to Medicines in
Developing Countries. American Journal of Public Health, January, 99(1), 9-17.
Sampat, B.N. (2009). The Bayh-Dole Model in Developing Countries:
Reflections on the Indian Bill on Publicly Funded Intellectual Property.
UNCTAD – ICTSD Policy Brief (5).
SCImago (2010). SIR World Report, SCIMAGO Institution Rankings.
Scotchmer, S. (2004). Innovation and Incentives. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Shane, S. (2004). Academic Entrepreneurship. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Sibanda, M. (2007). The State of Patenting in South Africa. Special
Report 2007.
Sibanda, M. (2009). Intellectual Property, Commercialization and Institutional
Arrangements at South African Publicly Financed Research Institutions, The
Economics of Intellectual Property in South Africa. Geneva: World Intellectual
Property Organization.
So, A.D., Sampat, B.N., Rai, A.K., Cook-Deegan, R., Reichman, J.H.,
Weissman, R. et al. (2008). Is Bayh-Dole Good for Developing Countries?
Lessons from the US Experience. PLoS Biol, 6(10), e262.
Stephan, P.E. (2010). The Economics of Science. In B.H. Hall & N. Rosenberg
(Eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Innovation (Vol. 1). Amsterdam: North
Holland, pp. 217-273.
Stokes, D.E. (1997). Pasteur's Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological
Innovation. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Thursby, J.G. & Thursby, M.C. (2007). University Licensing. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 23(4), 620-639.

178

Zucker, L.G., Darby, M.R. & Brewer, M.B. (1998). Intellectual Human Capital
and the Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises. The American Economic
Review, 88(1), 290-306.
Zuñiga, P. (2011). The State of Patenting at Research Institutions in
Developing Countries: Policy Approaches and Practices. WIPO Economics
Research Working Papers, World Intellectual Property Organization.

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Data Annex
Table A.4.1: Technology transfer frameworks
and legislation in selected low- and middle-income economies
Law/Policy/Decree entitling ownership & inventor rights

Innovation and related policies

Inventor
compensation

Mandatory
TTO creation

Brazil

Ownership: 1996 Patent Law (Law 9279)
Inventors: 1998 Law on Industrial Property (Art. 93):
maximum of one-third of the value of the invention

2004: Innovation Law (Law No. 10.973)
Incentives for R&D, collaboration and technology transfer

YES
5% to 33%
of royalties or
licensing income

YES
At each institution
or shared among
institutions

Russian
Federation

Ownership: 1998 Decree and
2003 Revision of the Patent Law

2007-2012: R&D in priority fields of science and technology
development in the Russian Federation for 2007–2012
2002: Technology Transfer Network

NO

NO
Not mandatory but
encouraged

India

Ownership: 2000 Governmental Ruling
Inventors and clarification of ownership rules: Utilization of
Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill 2008 (under approval)

YES
At least 30% of
licensing income

NO
Not mandatory but
encouraged

China

Ownership: 2002 Measures for Intellectual Property Made
under Government Funding (entitling patenting)
Inventors: S&T Findings Conversion Law

1998: the S&T Advancement Law and the S&T Findings
Conversion Law 2002: Opinion on Exerting the Role of
Universities in S&T Innovation

YES
Varies according
to type of
transfer

NO
Not mandatory but
encouraged

South Africa

Ownership: Patent Law
Ownership and inventors: 2010 IPfrom Publicly Financed
R&D Act

National Research and Development Strategy (R&D Strategy)

YES
At least 20% of
licensing income

YES
Mandatory

Argentina

Ownership: 1995 Law of Patents of Invention and Utility Models
(Joint ownership by the university and the centralized agency
CONICET)

1995: Law on National Higher Education
2002: National Program for the support and fortification of
university linking with industry

YES
Up to 50%
(patent law)

NO

Chile

Ownership: 1991 Industrial Property Law

National Innovation Plan

NO
(statuary
rules left to
institutions)

NO
National TTO

Malaysia

Ownership and inventors:
2009 Intellectual Property Commercialization Policy for
Research & Development Projects Funded by the Government
of Malaysia

Second National Plan for Science and Technology Policy
2002-2020

YES
Varying shares
according to
value of revenue

YES
For public sector
R&D institutions

Mexico

Ownership: 1991 Industrial Property Law
Inventors: Federal Law of Labor and Innovation Law of 2010

2002 Science and Technology Law
2010 Innovation Law: inventor compensation and TTOs

YES
Up to 70% of
income

YES
Not mandatory but
encouraged

Nigeria

Ownership: 2004 Scheme of Service for Nigeria’s Federal
Research Institutes, Colleges of Agriculture and Allied
Institutions

Guidelines on Development of Intellectual Property Policy for
Universities and R&D Institutions

NO
(recommended;
left to
institutions)

YES

Philippines

Ownership and inventors:
2009 Technology Transfer Bill

1997: Magna Carta for Scientists, Engineers, Researchers,
and other S&T Personnel in the Government (for researchers at
PROs) and 2002: National Science and Technology Plan

Only available
for governmental
institutions
60% (PRO)-40%
(inventor)

NO
National TTO (1997)

Other countries

Source: Zuñiga (2011) and WIPO.

179

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Figure A.4.1: Share of public sector in total R&D, high- and middle-income economies
Share of public sector in total R&D in high-income countries, in percent, 2009 or latest available year
Private Sector R&D

Public Sector R&D

Others

ss

UK

8)
00

Au

st
ra
li

a

(2

ap

or
e

ce

ian

Si

ng

n

Fr
an

ia

ra
tio

de
Fe

Sl

ov

en

nd

ar
k
m

Ire
la

m

Be

De
n

lg

iu

an

y

en
ed

er
m

Sw

Au

nl
Fi

US

d
er
lan

G

d

st
ria

an

8)

a

(2

00

in

8)
00
(2

bo

Ch

ur
g

8)

Ru

Re

p.

Sw

of

itz

Lu

Ko

xe

re
a

m

(2

Ja

00

pa

Isr
ae

l

n

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Share of public sector in total R&D in middle-income economies, in percent, 2009 or latest available year

Private Sector R&D

100%

Public Sector R&D

Others

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
)
08
20

00

r(

ua
Ec

Ur

G

do

y

(2

ua

re

ug

ua

Li

th

(2
e
ec

8)

a
ni

7)

ia

00

ar
lg

00

Ri
a
st

Co

Ar

Bu

(2
ca

a
in

ge

nt

Ka

8)

7)
00

st

(2

kh
za

(2
a
di
In

an

7)
00

ey
Tu

rk

ia
m

Ch

ile

Ro

(2

(2

00

an

8)

7)

7)

00

00

d
an

Th

ex
M

ail

ico

(2

Sp

ain

us

e
in

lar
Be

ra

7)
00

Uk

(2
ne

Ph

ilip

Af
h

pi

ric

h
ec

ut
So

Cz

s

a

Re

(2

pu

00

bl

8)

ic

0%

Note: Total R&D is composed of R&D conducted in the private sector (business sector R&D), the public sector (government and higher education R&D),
and others (private non-profit and not specified R&D).
Source: WIPO, based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics, Eurostat and OECD, September 2011.

Figure A.4.2: Share of joint university-firm and university-PRO applications
out of total university PCT applications: 1980-2010, in percent
University- rm

100%

University only

University-PRO

90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, June 2011.

180

Ire

lan

d

a
th

Af

ric

UK
So
u

a

US

ad
Ca
n

in
Sp
a

ys

ia

e
om

ala
M

ly
Ita

in
c
hHi
g

di
a

an
m

In

y

l
ae

er
G

Isr

an
c
Re e
p
of ub
Ko lic
re
Au a
st
ra
lia

Fr

il
az
Br

Ja

pa

n
R
Fe us
de sia
ra n
tio
n
C
M
hi
id
na
dl
ein
co
m
e

0%

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

Methodological annex
Counting university and PRO patents

The performance of the two search methods has been

in filings under the PCT

compared for countries with at least 4,000 PCT applications over the period 1990-2010. Some differences

PCT records do not classify applicants by institutional category. To count the number of university and PRO applications, one needs to identify applicants and assign them
to a category. This is done by searching the names of
applicants or their addresses as recorded in patent documents, and determining, based on the name, whether the
applicant is a university, PRO, company or an individual.
WIPO’s Statistics Database contains PCT application
data. Upon filing, an applicant is classified as an individual
or non-individual. The following procedures have been
used to categorize PCT applicants as a university139 or
PRO: as a first step, the names of non-individual applicants were consolidated in order to obtain a standard
name for each. Next, a list of keywords identifying universities, university hospitals and PROs was compiled.
In the final phase, manual checks were performed to
ensure that applicants were classified correctly. Where in
doubt about the classification, a web-based search was
performed for additional information. One should note
that, in the chosen methodology, applicants are classified
according to their names only, without considering their
employment relationship or address. Therefore, where a
natural person is identified as the applicant filing on behalf
of an educational institution, that application would not
be classified as belonging to a university.
A similar search method has been developed at the
Catholic University of Leuven (Belgium).140 It also relies
on information contained in the applicant’s name and,
with the help of a list of keywords, assigns applicants to
a category. A notable difference in assigning an appli-

emerge, with the WIPO method reporting greater shares
of both university and PRO applications. This can be attributed to differences in classification of organizations
with the definitions and interpretations varying country
by country, and/or to the use of different data sources.
Counting university and PRO patents
in national patent filings
Data on national patent applications are generally difficult
to obtain for a larger group of countries on a consistent
and comparable basis. Showing such data is, however,
a valuable exercise, because international applications
filed through the PCT system capture only a small proportion of a country’s total patenting activity, and they
underestimate the activity of non-PCT members such
as Argentina and other Latin American countries. Most
reliable statistics originate from national patent offices
or government institutes which track patent applications
or patents granted. Frequently, however, a given measurement approach may differ from that of a reporting
institution in another country, making cross-country
comparisons difficult.
An additional source of national patent applications data
is the Patstat database compiled by the EPO. Due to
missing data for some countries and years, it is more
challenging to analyze and especially to compare country
patent output at the national level. The data provided here
should be read with caution and seen as an attempt to
provide a broader overview of country patenting activity
that goes beyond PCT applications.

cation to a country is that Leuven’s method uses every
applicant’s country of origin whereas, in the method described above, only the first applicant’s country of origin
is used. This could potentially lead to a downward bias
in the contribution of low- and middle-income countries
to academic patenting.

139 The university category includes all types
of educational establishments (e.g.,
university, colleges, polytechnics, etc.).
140 See Du Plessis et al. (2010).

181

Chapter 4

Harnessing public research for innovation – the role of Intellectual Property

As was done for PCT data, Patstat does not classify pat-

Several quality checks have been performed. Two issues

ent applicants in groups that separate individuals from

emerge when producing university and PRO numbers

institutions or that show institutional affiliation. In order to

from Patstat: first, the reliability of the data and, second,

identify universities and PROs, one would need to per-

the reliability of the search method itself, or how well it

form a search that relied entirely on applicants’ names.

identifies those institutions. The first question can be

Certain words – like “university”, “college”, “school”,

addressed by comparing Patstat values on aggregate

“government”, or “ministry” – in various languages can

applications per year per country of origin to aggregate

help to identify institutions. An extensive list of such key-

numbers reported to WIPO by national patent offices.

words forms the basis of the search method for identifying

WIPO conducts an annual survey of national patent of-

universities and PROs in the Patstat database.

fices’ data on patent applications filed. Patstat collects
data on applications published. A small discrepancy

Through direct contact with government officials, and by

between the two groups – filed versus published – can

consulting government websites and university directo-

be expected, the first being always larger, since some

ries, lists of universities for 54 countries were carefully

applications are withdrawn and never published.

checked, and keywords that help identify universities
were selected.141 Through the same approach, lists of

To verify how well the search method identifies institu-

PROs for 38 countries were compiled from which, again,

tions, the results are compared to government reports

keywords identifying PROs were selected.

for selected countries, wherever available.

142

Scopus is

a database containing citations and abstracts for scientific journal articles. The top 200 publishing institutions

It is important to note that the country assigned to an ap-

in 62 countries143 (out of a total of 12,400 institutions)

plication is the country of residence of the first applicant.

were identified from that database. In addition, the list of

Data are classified either by origin – all applications with

keywords and institutions was enriched by using the SIR

the first applicant originating from that country – or by

World Report (2010), which provides a list of top publish-

office – all applications filed in that country. Data by of-

ing institutions in the world – 2,833 in total.

fice are broken down into resident applications (filed by
individuals or institutions originating from that country)
and non-resident applications (filed by individuals or
institutions from abroad).

141 Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cuba,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Russian Federation, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Turkey, UK, Ukraine, US, Uzbekistan, Venezuela.
142 Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, UK, US.

182

143 Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana,
Hungary, India, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Mozambique, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Republic
of Korea, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam.

Acronyms

Acronyms
ASTP
AUTM
BRICS

Association of European Science and

JEDEC

Joint Electron Device Engineering Council

Technology Transfer Professionals

JPO

Japan Patent Office

Association of University

JPY

Japanese Yen

Technology Managers

KIBS

Knowledge-Intensive Business Services

Brazil, the Russian Federation,

KTI

Knowledge- and Technology-

India, China and South Africa
CATI
CDIP

Intensive Industries

Cooperative Agreement and

LDCs

Least Developed Countries

Technology Indicators

MERIT

UNU Maastricht Economic and

WIPO Committee on Development

Social Research Institute on

and Intellectual Property
CERN

European Organization for

Innovation and Technology
MNEs

Multinational Enterprises

Nuclear Research

MPEG

Motion Picture Experts Group

CHF

Swiss Franc

MSTI

Main Science and Technology Indicators

CIS

Community Innovation Survey

NACE

Statistical Classification of Economic

CORE

Cooperative Research

CPI

Consumer Price Index

CSIR

Council of Scientific and

DVD

Digital Video Disc

EHCI

Enhanced Host Controller Interface

NIH

National Institute of Health

EPO

European Patent Office

NOTAP

National Office for Technology

Industrial Research

Activities in the European Community
NCRPA

National Cooperative Research
and Production Act

NESTI

National Experts in Science and
Technology Innovation

EU

European Union

EUR

Euro

NPEs

Non-Practicing Entities

FDI

Foreign Direct Investment

NSB

National Statistics Bureau of China

FT

Financial Times

NSF

National Science Foundation

Acquisition and Promotion

FTC

Federal Trade Commission

NSRC

National Survey Research Center

GBP

Great Britain Pounds

OECD

Organization for Economic Co-

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

GERD

Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D

GPT(s)

General Purpose Technology(ies)

HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/

operation and Development
OMPIC

Office Marocain de la Propriété
Industrielle et Commerciale

PATSTAT Worldwide Patent Statistical Database

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

PCT

Patent Cooperation Treaty

ICT(s)

Information and

PILA

Propiedad Intelectual e Industrial

IDRC

International Development Research Centre

Communications Technology(ies)

en Latinoamérica
PIPRA

Public Intellectual Property

IMF

International Monetary Fund

INPI

Institut national de la propriété industrielle

PPP

Purchasing Power Parity

IP

Intellectual property

PRO(s)

Public Research Organization(s)

IPTTO

Intellectual Property and

R&D

Research and development

Technology Transfer Offices

RedOTRI Red de Oficinas de Transferencia

IRS

Internal Revenue Services

ISIC

International Standard
Industrial Classification

Resource for Agriculture

de Resultados de Investigación
RIETI

Research Institute of Economics,
Trade and Industry
183

Acronyms

RLF

Royalties and License Fees

S&T

Science and Technology

SCP

Standing Committee on the Law of Patents

SDRAM

Synchronous Dynamic
Random Access Memory

SMEs

Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises

SSO(s)

Standard Setting Organization(s)

STATT

Statistics Access for Technology Transfer

TRIPS

Trade-Related Aspects of

TTO(s)

Technology Transfer Office(s)

UK

United Kingdom

UN

United Nations

Intellectual Property Rights

UNCTAD United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization
UNIDO

United Nations Industrial
Development Organization

US

United States

USB

Universal Serial Bus

USD

United States Dollars

USPTO

United States Patent and Trademark Office

WIPO

World Intellectual Property Organization

184

For more information contact
WIPO at www.wipo.int
World Intellectual Property Organization
34, chemin des Colombettes
P.O. Box 18
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Telephone :
+4122 338 91 11
Fax :
+4122 733 54 28

WIPO Publication No. 944E/2011 			

ISBN 978-92-805-2160-3

