Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 1

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 1

Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France

WWDR4 has been published on behalf of the United Nations World
Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) with the support of the
following organizations:

© UNESCO 2012
All rights reserved

United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT)
United Nations University (UNU)

Chapter 24, ‘Investing in water infrastructure, its operation and its
maintenance’, © The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
ISBN 978-92-3-104235-5
e-book ISBN 978-92-3-001045-4
Original title: The United Nations World Water Development
Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk (Vol. 1),
Knowledge Base (Vol. 2) and Facing the Challenges (Vol. 3).
Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
UNESCO Publishing: http://publishing.unesco.org/
Suggested citation:
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2012. The United
Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of
the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not
commit the Organization.

—
The contents of Volume 2 were contributed by the UN-Water
members and partners listed on the title pages of the chapters
therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content
provided or for discrepancies in data and content between
contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as
authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in Volume 2.
WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.

—
Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid
A/S, an ISO 14001 (environmental management) and a DS 49001
(corporate social responsibility) certiﬁed and approved carbon
neutral company.
Printed by Imprimerie Centrale S. A. (Imprim’Vert certiﬁed) for
UNESCO CLD, Paris.
This publication is printed with vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources
paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves. This is a carbon
neutral print product. Imprimerie Centrale will contribute funds to a
project replanting trees in Panama for this publication.
Printed in Luxembourg

Specialized UN Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
(UNESCAP)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA)
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation (UNCCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR)
United Nations Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword

v

by Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General, United Nations

Foreword

vi

by Irina Bokova, Director-General, United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization

Foreword

vii

by Michel Jarraud, Chair, UN-Water

Preface
by Olcay Ünver, Coordinator, United Nations World Water Assessment Programme

viii

Aknowledgements

x

Main Messages

1

Introduction
What’s new in the WWDR4
Structure and content

17
19
20

Chapter 1. Recognizing the centrality of water and its global dimensions
1.1
Beyond the concept of water as a sector
1.2
Beyond the basin: The international and global dimensions of water governance
1.3
Recognizing water in global policy
Conclusion

22
24
29
35
39

PART 1. STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES
Chapter 2. Water demand: What drives consumption?
2.1
Food and agriculture
2.2
Energy
2.3
Industry
2.4
Human settlements
2.5
Ecosystems

WWDR4

44
46
52
59
64
69

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

Chapter 3. The water resource: Variability, vulnerability and uncertainty
3.1
The hydrological cycle, external stressors on water resources, and sources of uncertainty
3.2
The vulnerability of natural long-term storage: Groundwater and glaciers
3.3
Water quality

77
79
83
94

Chapter 4. Beyond demand: Water’s social and environmental beneﬁts
4.1
Water and human health
4.2
Water and gender
4.3
Ecosystem health
4.4
Water-related hazard risk
4.5
Impact of desertiﬁcation on water resources
4.6
In or out of balance?

101
103
109
110
115
119
123

Chapter 5. Water management, institutions and capacity development
5.1
Why do we need to manage water?
5.2
The importance of water institutions for sustainable development
5.3
Institutional knowledge and capacity

133
135
141
147

Chapter 6. From raw data to informed decisions
6.1
Data, monitoring and the purpose of indicators
6.2
Key indicators
6.3
State of data and information
6.4
Constraints on better monitoring and reporting
6.5
Improving the ﬂow of data and information

157
159
162
165
167
168

Chapter 7. Regional challenges, global impacts
7.1
Africa
7.2
Europe and North America
7.3
Asia-Paciﬁc
7.4
Latin America and the Caribbean
7.5
Arab and Western Asia region
7.6
Regional–global links: Impacts and challenges

174
176
184
192
198
207
215

PART 2. MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ii

Introduction
Acting in an environment of uncertain change

230
231

Chapter 8. Working under uncertainty and managing risk
8.1
Concepts of uncertainty and risk
8.2
How uncertainty and risk affect decision-making
8.3
Using ecosystems to manage uncertainty and risk

235
237
240
249

Chapter 9. Understanding uncertainty and risks associated with key drivers
9.1
Possible evolution of key drivers
9.2
Responding to the challenges: The past is a poor guide to an uncertain future
9.3
Peering into possible futures
9.4
Water futures for better decision-making

259
261
266
268
274

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Chapter 10. Unvalued water leads to an uncertain future
10.1 The political economy of investing in water: Stating the beneﬁts
10.2 Valuing water
10.3 Using beneﬁts and values to inform water policies
10.4 Allocating water under conditions of risk and uncertainty

276
278
281
284
284

Chapter 11. Transforming water management institutions to deal with change
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Principles for managing water under risk and uncertainty
11.3 Approaches for managing water under risk and uncertainty
11.4 Institutions for managing risk and uncertainty
11.5 Communicating risk and uncertainty
Conclusion

289
291
293
295
298
303
306

Chapter 12. Investment and ﬁnancing in water for a more sustainable future
12.1 Investing in water for sustainable development
12.2 Funding governance, institutional reform and management
12.3 Funding for information
12.4 Funding in response to climate change and growing water scarcity
12.5 Funding diversiﬁcation and demand management
12.6 Generating ﬁnance for water infrastructure and services
12.7 Mitigating ﬁnancial and political risks
Conclusion

309
311
313
314
315
317
318
320
321

Chapter 13. Responses to risk and uncertainty from a water management perspective
13.1 Reducing uncertainty
13.2. Reducing exposure to threat and minimizing risks
13.3 Living with risks and uncertainties: Trade-offs in water decision-making

325
327
334
339

Chapter 14. Responses to risks and uncertainties from out of the water box
14.1 Reducing poverty and greening growth and economies
14.2 Responding to climate change: Adaptation and mitigation
14.3 Business decisions to reduce risk and uncertainties
14.4 Managing sectoral risks to generate beneﬁts to water
14.5 Mitigating risks and uncertainties
Conclusion

343
345
345
347
349
352
354

Conclusions

356

List of boxes, tables, ﬁgures and maps

361

Abbreviations and acronyms

365

Glossary

370

Index

xiii

WWDR4

TABLE OF CONTENTS

iii

FOREWORD
by Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations
—

Water links the local to the regional, and brings together global questions of food security, public health,
urbanization and energy. Addressing how we use and manage water resources is central to setting the world on a
more sustainable and equitable path.
Universal access to safe drinking water and water resources is an imperative that cuts across all internationally
agreed development objectives, including the Millennium Development Goals. Improving access to water improves
health and education outcomes. It increases agricultural productivity. It is a force for gender equality and
women’s empowerment.
Yet pressures on freshwater are rising – from the expanding needs of agriculture, food production and energy
consumption to pollution and the weaknesses of water management. Climate change is a real and growing threat.
Without good planning and adaptation, hundreds of millions of people are at risk of hunger, disease, energy
shortages and poverty.
This fourth edition of the World Water Development Report is the product of synergy within the United Nations
system, in particular the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme hosted by UNESCO. It shines a
spotlight on water use, analyses the question of managing water under uncertainty, and addresses gender issues
throughout. The result is a call to action – to strengthen mechanisms of global coordination, to improve national
institutions and to weave the two levels more tightly together.
This report is also intended to contribute to the Rio+20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. If
Rio+20 is to succeed, it must renew political commitment to integrated approaches to the sustainable management
of the world’s freshwater resources. Just as water is central to every aspect of life on earth, it must lie at the heart
of the new vision we forge for sustainable development for the century ahead.

Ban Ki-moon

WWDR4

FOREWORD v

FOREWORD
by Irina Bokova
Director-General of UNESCO
—

What is the state of the world’s freshwater today? What can we expect in the future? What must we do now to
prepare better for tomorrow?
These questions concern the ability of women and men across the world to live in dignity. They touch upon the
need to manage sustainably the earth’s increasingly ﬁnite resources. They go to the heart of all efforts to reach
internationally agreed development goals, including the Millennium Development Goals. Freshwater is a core issue
for sustainable development – and it is slipping through the cracks.
We need new leadership on freshwater today. This leadership must bring together the multitude of actors involved
in using and managing water. It must link different sectors and activities into a coherent whole. It must join the local
with the national, and the regional to the global. We must manage freshwater more sustainably in order to make
the most of it for the beneﬁt of all. For this, we need a clear map of where we stand.
The fourth edition of the World Water Development Report provides this map. Hosted by UNESCO, the United
Nations World Water Assessment Programme has brought together members and partners of UN-Water to draw
a unique picture of the state, use and management of the world’s freshwater resources. The report highlights
different regions and examines the global pressures of uncertainty and risk. I am especially pleased that gender
issues are mainstreamed throughout the analysis.
The conclusions are clear. Freshwater is a cross-cutting issue that is central to all development efforts. It faces rising
challenges across the world – from urbanization and overconsumption, from underinvestment and lack of capacity,
from poor management and waste, from the demands of agriculture, energy and food production. Freshwater is
not being used sustainably according to needs and demands. Accurate information remains disparate, and
management is fragmented. In this context, the future is increasingly uncertain, and risks are set to deepen.
If we fail today to make water an instrument of peace, it might become tomorrow a major source of conﬂict.
More than ever, we need Integrated Water Resources Management to provide coherent leadership. We need better
information gathering and sharing on the state of freshwater, on the nature of demand and its use. We need better
systems for measurement and control at the local, national and global levels. We must start early, by building water
issues into education. We need also for governments, the private sector and civil society to work more closely
together and to integrate water as an intrinsic part of their decision-making.
Our next step must be taken in Rio, by the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. Rio+20 must
set a roadmap for the twenty-ﬁrst century that includes a new direction for the sustainable use and management
of the world’s freshwater resources. Water is the condition for life; it is vital for sustainable development and for
lasting peace. We must act today to protect it tomorrow. This means moving ﬁrmly in the direction charted by the
World Water Development Report.

Irina Bokova

VI
VI

FOREWORD
by Michel Jarraud
UN-Water Chair and Secretary-General of WMO
—

It is an honour and a pleasure to have been invited to provide my brief remarks to the fourth edition of the United
Nations World Water Development Report.
The report is the result of a broad collective teamwork of UN-Water agencies and partners, implemented through
its World Water Assessment Programme, in particular to meet the challenges, risks and uncertainties blocking the
road to sustainable development and the achievement of the UN Millennium Development Goals.
Today, water issues are positioned higher than ever on the international agenda, thanks in particular to the inspired
leadership of the UN Secretary-General, who has expressed that ‘Safe drinking water and basic sanitation are
intrinsic to human survival, well-being and dignity’.
The cross-cutting nature of water and the vital implications of international collaboration in this key area, spurred
by the UN System acting As One through UN-Water, are intrinsic elements of the UN-Water mission statement and
thereby essential for our actions to provide knowledge, tools and skills to various socio-economic sectors and to
prop up high-level decision-making at global, regional and local scales.
This is especially signiﬁcant at times of such crises as we encounter today when, for example, several consecutive
seasons of drought in the Horn of Africa have left millions on the borderline of survival, thereby requiring
emergency food assistance as well as sanitation, energy generation, and many other forms of support in disaster
risk reduction.
I look forward to delivering the important messages of this key report in Rio in June 2012. However, since I have
taken office very recently as UN-Water Chair, I wish to underscore that I make no claim of personal merit for this
achievement which reﬂects the results of three years of collective UN-Water efforts.

Michel Jarraud

WWDR4

FOREWORD vii
VII

PREFACE
by Olcay Ünver
Coordinator, United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme
—

Released every three years since March 2003, the United Nations World Water Development Report (WWDR), a
ﬂagship UN-Water report published by UNESCO, has become the voice of the United Nations system in terms of the
state, use and management of the world’s freshwater resources. The report is primarily targeted at national
decision-makers and water resource managers, but is also aimed at educating and informing a broader audience,
from governments to the private sector and civil society. It underlines the important roles water plays in all social,
economic and environmental decisions, highlighting policy implications across various sectors, from local and
municipal to regional and international levels.
Coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), this fourth edition of the WWDR is the result of
a concerted three-year effort by UN-Water agencies, in collaboration with dozens of scientists, professionals, NGOs
and other UN-Water partners. The report addresses the most salient strategic and technical aspects relating to how
and why we need to use, manage and allocate water to meet multiple, often competing goals, from all major policy
directions – from poverty alleviation and human health to food and energy security and environmental stewardship.
In describing how water underpins all aspects of development, the report provides a critical point of reference for
linking water to global policy tracks, such as those for poverty eradication, including the Millennium Development
Goals; sustainable development, the Rio+20 process; climate change, and the respective COP process.
While the report is factual, containing the most current information available concerning the state of knowledge
about our water resources and covering the most recent developments that affect it, the report also provides
decision-makers with concrete examples of approaches and potential responses for addressing water-related
challenges from both a water management perspective and a broader political and sectoral scope, which covers
development, ﬁnancing, capacity-building and institutional reform.
The fourth edition of the WWDR builds upon the previous three editions. Similarly to the ﬁrst two editions, it
includes a comprehensive and up-to-date assessment of several key challenge areas, such as water for food, energy
and human health, and governance challenges such as institutional reform, knowledge and capacity-building, and
ﬁnancing, each produced by individual UN agencies. And, as in the third edition, the report offers a holistic and
integrated approach to examining the links between water and the drivers that create pressures on the resource,
climate change, ecosystems and various aspects of human security as embodied under the Millennium Development
Goals and other key global policy tracks. This fourth edition also continues to focus on how decisions made outside
the ‘water box’ affect the resources and other users, linking water to a number of cross-cutting issues. Through this
approach, the report illustrates how interactions between water and a multiplicity of externalities can be incorporated
into analyses and decision-making processes in various sectors and domains. It is fortuitous that the release date
for this report occurs a few months prior to the Rio+20 Earth Summit, thus providing a sound basis for discussions
on the future of our planet in which the centrality of water can be clearly highlighted.
Several new elements have also been added to this fourth edition of the report. For the ﬁrst time since the inception
of the series, the WWDR4 has been developed under an overarching theme – ‘Managing Water under Uncertainty
and Risk’ – which has served as a guide for the authors and collaborating agencies, allowing for the streamlining of
the many different written contributions into a cohesive narrative. Second, the report has been enriched by the
addition of ﬁve regional reports through the efforts of the ﬁve Regional UN Economic Commissions, which
complement the challenge area reports by offering a more geographically focused examination of the issues and

VIII
VIII

challenges related to water, including the identiﬁcation of critical ‘hotspots’. Third, this edition reports on the results
of the ﬁrst phase of the WWAP World Water Scenarios Project, which examines possible future developments in
externalities that impinge upon water stress and sustainability. Finally, the entire report underwent a gender
mainstreaming exercise to ensure that the important gender and social-equity issues were properly and systematically
addressed, and a new chapter speciﬁcally focused on gender and water has been included in this edition.
In order to help countries improve their self-assessment capability by building on existing strengths and experiences,
the report is once again accompanied by a set of case studies from countries around the world highlighting the
state of water resources where different physical, climatic and socio-economic conditions prevail.
A series of collective and collaborative efforts has led to a highly comprehensive and integrated WWDR. Coordinating
the fourteen challenge area reports, ﬁve regional reports and three special reports that make up the chapters in
Volume 2, as well as the supplementary material and the multitude of comments from partners, reviewers and the
general public over three years was a challenging process. The members of WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee
were particularly generous in providing insight and expertise to the production team. Given such a broad scope of
expertise over such a wide range of interests and sectors for which water is a vital component, a focused analysis
was required to achieve a balanced structure to the report and to provide the most up-to-date knowledge and
information in a consistent and harmonious manner.
It is hoped that this report, like its previous editions, will continue to be the main reference document about water
and the central role it plays in all aspects of human development, that it will continue to be considered as essential
reading for decision-makers, their advisors and anyone interested in – and concerned about – the state and the use
of our planet’s freshwater resources, and that this edition will reach an ever-widening audience that includes actors
outside the ‘water box’ who make or inﬂuence broad socio-economic policies that affect water.
On behalf of the staff of WWAP and the authors, writers, editors and contributors of the fourth edition of the
WWDR, I extend my sincerest appreciation to the members of UN-Water and its partners in producing this authoritative
and critically important report that will serve as the knowledge base for understanding and solving water-related
challenges around the world. A special word of thanks goes to Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, without
whose crucial support this report would not be completed. Last but not the least, my undying gratitude goes to all
members of the WWAP Secretariat, whose names are listed in Acknowledgements, for their professionalism and
ceaseless efforts in completing the report.

Olcay Ünver

WWDR4

PREFACE ix
IX

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This report would not have been possible without ﬁnancial support from the Italian Government and the
contributions of many individuals and organizations from around the world.
The personal support of Ms Irina Bokova, Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) created a secure and enabling environment.
The excellent collaboration and timely contributions from the organizations that make up UN-Water and its partners
were critical throughout the preparation of the report, from the initial conceptual discussions on to the ﬁnal
clearance stages, and through numerous exchanges and consultations in between.
We thank the management of the UNESCO Natural Sciences Sector and colleagues of the UNESCO International
Hydrological Programme (IHP) for their support.
The contributions and counselling of Albert Wright, Josue Dione, Bai-Mass Taal, Stephen Maxwell Kwame Donkor
and Members of UN Water/Africa were essential to the successful completion of the chapter on Africa and to
various sections of the report focusing on the region.
A great deal of appreciation is extended to David Coates, Gerry Galloway, Jack Moss, Mike Muller and Uri Shamir for
their extraordinary advice and special contributions to the report.
We also thank Aquafed, the Global Water Partnership (GWP) and the US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) for
their substantial and substantive support.
A special acknowledgement goes to all of the case study partners who volunteered their efforts, without which
Volume 3 would not be possible. Special thanks to Laura Dubin and Mateo Gallego for assistance with this volume.
The rights to twenty beautiful photographs were graciously donated by Phillipe Bourseiller for use throughout the
report and in accompanying material. Thanks also go to all other individuals who provided photographs (whose
names are listed with the photographs).

WWDR4 Team
Content Coordinator
Olcay Ünver
Lead Author
Richard Connor
Contributing Lead Author (Part 2)
Daniel P. Loucks
Senior Advisor
William J. Cosgrove
Process Coordinator
Simone Grego
Case Studies and Indicators Coordinator and Volume 3 Author
Engin Koncagül
Publication Coordinator
Alice Franek
Process and Publication Assistant
Valentina Abete

X

Editorial Team: Caroline Andrzejewski, Adrienne Cullen, Bonnie Dash, Alice Franek, Maria Kelty, David McDonald,
Marilyn Smith, Samantha Wauchope and Pica Publishing.
Volume 3 map design and editorial coordination: Roberto Rossi at Pica Publishing.
Special thanks are extended to Lene Søjberg and her design and layout team at Phoenix Design Aid.

United Nations World Water Assessment Programme
Donors
Ministry of the Environment, Land and Sea of Italy
Government of the Region of Umbria, Italy
The Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs ﬁnancially contributed to the ﬁndings described in Chapter 9.
Technical Advisory Committee: Uri Shamir (Chair), Dipak Gyawali (Deputy Chair), Fatma Abdel Rahman Attia,
Anders Berntell, Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, Daniel P. Loucks (until 15 August 2010), Henk van Schaik, Laszlo
Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini and Albert Wright.
Advisory Group on Gender Equality: Gülser Corat and Kusum Athukorala (Co-Chairs), Joanna Corzo, Irene Dankelman,
Manal Eid, Atef Hamdy, Deepa Joshi, Barbara van Koppen, Kenza Robinson, Buyelwa Sonjica and Theresa Wasike.
Secretariat:
Olcay Ünver (Coordinator) and Michela Miletto (Deputy Coordinator)
Executive Assistant: Adriana Fusco
Administration: Floriana Barcaioli, Lisa Gastaldin, Barbara Bracaglia, Arturo Frascani and Hakim Shaukat
Programmes: Daniel Perna, Engin Koncagül, Simone Grego and Léna Salamé
Communications and Networking: Hannah Edwards, Stéfanie Néno, Simona Gallese, Francesca Greco and Abigail Parish
Publications: Alice Franek, Valentina Abete and Samantha Wauchope
Security: Michele Brensacchi, Fabio Bianchi and Francesco Gioffredi
Temporary Staff: Lea Malling Bernard, Pietro Fusco and Gabriella Pizzonia
Interns: Laura Dubin, Sibel Güner, Pierpaolo Papini Papi and Sisira Saddhamangala Withanachchi

Participants at preparatory meetings and workshops
1st Meeting of the Interim Core Group for the production of the WWDR4, 23–25 April 2009, Paris, France.
Participants: Akif Altundas, Alice Aureli, Richard Connor, William J. Cosgrove, Gilberto Gallopin, Simone Grego, Engin
Koncagül, Michela Miletto, Anil Mishra, Jack Moss, Mike Muller, Andras Szöllösi-Nagy, Stéfanie Néno, Daniel Perna,
Walter Rast, Olcay Ünver, Samantha Wauchope and James Winpenny.
2nd Meeting of the Interim Core Group for the production of the WWDR4, 21–29 May 2009, Perugia, Italy.
Participants: Richard Connor, William J. Cosgrove, Jean-Mark Faurés, Gerald E. Galloway, Simone Grego, Engin
Koncagül, Johan Kuylenstierna, Michela Miletto, Mike Muller, Stéfanie Néno, Daniel Perna, Walter Rast, Joana Talafré,
Olcay Ünver, James Winpenny and Albert Wright.
Workshop for the production of the WWDR4, 14 August 2009, Stockholm, Sweden. Participants: UN-Water
Members and Partners, WWAP Secretariat.

WWDR4

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS xi

Issues Workshop for the production of the WWDR4, 16–17 November 2009, Perugia, Italy. Participants: Yoganath
Adik, Guy Alearts, Kodwo Andah, Kusum Athukorala, Reid Basher, Anders Berntell, Peter Koefoed Bjørnsen, Giorgio
Cesari, Emmanuel Chinyamakobvu, Thomas Chiramba, Rudolph Cleveringa, Richard Connor, William J. Cosgrove,
Andre Dzikus, Karen Frenken, Gilberto Gallopin, Joakim Harlin, Pierre Hubert, Angelo Izzo, Nancy Kgengwenyane,
Spyros Kleitsas, Peter Kristensen, Henrik Larsen, Lifeng Li, Joseﬁna Maestu, Anil Mishra, Jack Moss, Mike Muller,
Johnson Oguntola, Walter Rast, David Tickner, Håkan Tropp, Lucio Ubertini, Konrad Vielhauer, Enrique Urrutia López
de Viñaspre and James Winpenny.
Coordination Meeting on Substance, 16–17 March 2010, Perugia, Italy. Participants: Reid Basher, Peter Koefoed
Bjørnsen, Claudio Caponi, Emmanuel Chinyamakobvu, Rudolph Cleveringa, Richard Connor, William J. Cosgrove,
Rainer Enderlein, Karen Frenken, Matt Hare, Melvyn Kay, Eric Mimo, Anil Mishra, Diego Rodriguez, Kulwant Singh,
Håkan Tropp and Pieter Van Der Zaag.
WWAP Core Group Meeting WWDR4, 14–15 March 2011, Paris, France. Participants: Anders Berntell, Richard
Connor, William J. Cosgrove, Simone Grego, Engin Koncagül, Daniel P. Loucks, Michela Miletto, Jack Moss, Henk van
Schaik, Uri Shamir, Olcay Ünver, James Winpenny and Albert Wright.

Consultations
We thank participants in the stakeholder consultations listed below (including consultation events and online
consultations and surveys) as well as Anders Berntell, Bekithemba Gumbo, Howard Passel, Willi Struckmeier and
Kristin Schumann for solicited feedback.
-

Short survey on lessons learnt from the WWDR3 process, January–March 2009
Consultation meetings at the 5th World Water Forum, March 2009
WWDR3 Side Event at the 5th World Water Forum, March 2009
WWDR3 Production Team meeting, March 2009
Meeting of the WWAP Technical Advisory Committee, March 2009
1st UN-Water and stakeholders electronic surveys, June 2009
UN-Water Delphi, July 2009
Side Event at the Stockholm World Water Week, August 2009
Public consultation on the table of contents, January 2010
Expert survey on drivers, April 2010
Side Event at the Stockholm World Water Week, August 2010
Side Event at the 3rd Africa Water Week, November 2010
Public consultation on Draft 1 of Parts 1 and 2, December 2010
Policy survey for decision-makers, January 2011
Side Event at the Stockholm World Water Week, August 2011

We apologize for any inadvertent errors or omissions of contributors to the report.

xii

MAIN MESSAGES

—
Compiled by William J. Cosgrove

WWDR4
©
Philippe Bourseiller

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

1

Chapter 1. Recognizing the centrality of water and its
global dimensions
Water is a critical natural resource upon which all social and economic activities and ecosystem functions
depend. Managing water well requires appropriate
governance arrangements that move considerations of
water from the margins of government to the centre
of society. On national and local scales, appropriately
funded infrastructure and adequately funded robust
governance mechanisms are required to protect water
resources and ensure sustainable development and the
equitable distribution of water-derived beneﬁts.
The cross-cutting nature of the resource and its global
dimensions underline the importance of addressing
water issues in the context of all existing and developing international processes.
There are major uncertainties about the amount of
water required to meet demand for food, energy and
other human uses, and to sustain ecosystems. These
uncertainties are compounded by the impact of climate change on available water resources.
Greater recognition is needed of the fact that water is
not solely a local, national or regional issue that can be
governed at any of those levels alone. On the contrary, global interdependencies are woven through water,
and decisions relating to water use on a local, national,
river basin or regional level often cannot be isolated
from global drivers, trends and uncertainties.

governance requires cooperation and coordination
across diverse stakeholders and sectoral ‘jurisdictions’.
Furthermore, water availability must be understood
within the context of the hydrological cycle, which is
inﬂuenced by multiple factors, trends and uncertainties
that extend beyond a narrow sectoral focus.
Climate change is a central external driver that affects
both water and demands for all uses directly; mitigation measures are concentrated around the reduction
of energy consumption and carbon emissions, while
adaptation means planning and preparing for increasing hydrological variability and extreme weather
events, including ﬂoods, droughts, and storms.
Addressing water challenges necessitates interventions
across an entire economy, undertaken by strong institutions with the authority and leadership to take a proactive rather than a reactive role in water management,
and to drive the productive use of water across sectors
within the framework of environmental sustainability.
Members of the water community have the duty to inform and provide guidance on decision-making and to
regulatory authorities on how to use and managed the
resource sustainably, so as to optimize and share its
many beneﬁts.
Efficiency and productivity gains alone cannot alter
global patterns of unequal supply of resources and
consumption or access to beneﬁts. Addressing the

Water demands and uses are often managed in silos
with each focused on meeting speciﬁc developmental objectives, rather than as part of an overarching
and strategic framework that balances different water
uses in order to optimize and share its various beneﬁts
across society and the economy. This fragmentation
increases risks to the sustainability of water resources
as well as to the different development objectives that
depend upon (and may be in competition for) limited
supplies. Climate change exacerbates this problem still
further.
The job of delivering adequate water for social, economic and environmental needs is often understood as
the preserve of the ‘water sector’, which is expected
to provide the appropriate infrastructure and channel
water in the right direction. Yet in reality, water cuts
across all social, economic and environmental activities. As such, it cannot be conﬁned to one sector; its
© Peter Prokosch/UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://www.grida.no/photolib)

2

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

cross-sectoral and global dimensions of water will
require that all countries take an interest and make
speciﬁc commitments in the global forums designed
to address and create solutions to impending resource
challenges. The water community in general, and water
managers in particular, have the responsibility of informing the process.
Implementing the outcomes from global policy agreements will remain a national imperative, and countries
are responsible for setting international policy in the
ﬁrst place. Setting the framework requires a widening
of the sectoral and spatial horizons of all those who
have a stake in water management. However, many
of the global policy agreements have been developed
without proper local and national consultation processes and are, in many cases, general agreements
that do not reﬂect the political economy and institutional capacities of the countries, thus compromising
the overall effectiveness of said policies at national and
subnational levels.

Part 1: Status, trends and challenges
Chapter 2. Water demand: What drives consumption?
Agriculture accounts for 70% of all water withdrawn by
the agricultural, municipal and industrial (including energy) sectors. Responsible agricultural water management will make a major contribution to future global
water security.

Predicting future water demand for agriculture is
fraught with uncertainty. Future demand for water in
this sector is in part inﬂuenced by demand for food,
which depends in part on the number of people needing to be fed, and in part on what and how much they
eat. This is complicated by, amongst other factors,
uncertainties in seasonal climatic variations, efficiency
of agriculture production processes, and crop types
and yields.
The main challenge facing the agricultural sector is not
as much growing 70% more food in 40 years, but making 70% more food available on the plate. Reducing
losses in storage and along the value chain may go
a long way towards offsetting the need for more
production.
Innovative technologies will be needed to improve
crop yields and drought tolerance; produce smarter
ways of using fertilizer and water, new pesticides and
non-chemical approaches to crop protection; reduce postharvest losses; and ensure more sustainable
livestock and marine production. The industrialized
countries are well placed to take advantage of these
technologies, but they must also take responsibility to
ensure that the least developed countries have opportunities to access them on equitable and non-discriminatory terms.

© Taco Anema

WWDR4

MAIN MESSAGES

3

Reducing vulnerability to drought will require investment in both constructed and ‘green’ infrastructure to
improve water measurement and control and, where
appropriate, increase surface water and groundwater
storage in constructed reservoirs and in natural storage in wetlands and in the soil.
Most beneﬁts are expected to come from applying existing water management technologies and adapting
them to new situations.
Over 1 billion people lack access to electricity and
other clean sources of energy today. When added to
meeting these needs, external challenges, including
demographic development from population increase
and migration and increased economic activity, will
create a surge of energy consumption, particularly in
non-OECD countries.
Energy and water are intricately connected. There are
different sources of energy and electricity, but all require water for various production processes, including
extraction of raw materials, cooling in thermal processes, cleaning materials, cultivation of crops for biofuels
and powering turbines. Conversely, energy is required
to make water resources available for human use and
consumption through pumping, transportation, treatment, desalination and irrigation.
Regions that are water scarce will face more water-forenergy stresses than others and will need to explore

more water-efficient technologies to develop both primary energy and electric power.
Water and energy policies, which are often made in
different government departments or ministries, will
need to be integrated, with policy-makers increasingly
working in close coordination.
Effective operation of an industry requires a sustainable supply of water in the right quantity, of the right
quality, at the right place, at the right time and at the
right price.
Industry should play an important role in effectively
addressing the unsustainable exploitation of freshwater resources around the world by addressing ﬁrst its
own priorities and values.
The urban population of the world is forecast to grow
to 6.3 billion people in 2050, from 3.4 billion in 2009.
Urban growth will be equal to all of the world population growth over this period plus some net moves from
the current rural population. Problems of adequate water supply, sanitation and drainage will increase in the
urban slum areas already faced with a backlog of unserved populations. Initiatives worldwide are emerging
to address the need for improved and comprehensive
urban water planning, technologies, investment and
associated operations.
Water management in urban areas can beneﬁt from
more comprehensive urban planning and integrated
urban water management (IUWM). IUWM involves
managing freshwater, wastewater and stormwater as
links within the resource management structure, using
an urban area as the unit of management.
Ecosystems underpin the availability of water, including its extremes of drought and ﬂood, and its quality.
Growing attention to resolving the increasing competition for water between ecosystems and socioeconomic sectors signals progress towards better
integrated water management and more sustainable
development.
Chapter 3. The water resource: Variability,
vulnerability and uncertainty
Freshwater supplies are erratically distributed in
time and space. From one year to the next, there can
be considerable variability between arid and humid

© Philippe Bourseiller

4

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

climates and wet and dry seasons. Water resource
management plans and policies need to take into account this variability and distribution of freshwater
supplies.
The state of water resources is inﬂuenced by withdrawals to meet socio-economic demands. This in turn is affected by drivers such as population growth, economic
development and dietary changes, as well as the need
for control of water resources to protect settlements in
ﬂood plains and drought prone regions.
The global groundwater abstraction rate has at least
tripled over the past 50 years. This has fundamentally
changed the role of groundwater in human society, in
particular in the irrigation sector, where it has triggered an ‘agricultural groundwater revolution’.
Groundwater is crucial for the livelihoods and food security of 1.2 to 1.5 billion rural households in the poorer
regions of Africa and Asia, and for domestic supplies of
a large part of the population elsewhere in the world.
Withdrawals in many basins are exceeding the rate of
recharge and are unsustainable.
In spite of valid concerns about unsustainable abstraction rates and pollution in many parts of the world,
groundwater resources if carefully managed can make
a signiﬁcant contribution to meeting the demand for
water in the future and to adapting to climate change.
The shrinking of glaciers is, in the short term, adding
water to streamﬂows over and above annual precipitation and thus increasing water supply; in the longer term (decades to centuries) as glaciers disappear
those additional sources of water will diminish and the
buffering effects of glaciers on streamﬂow regimes will
lessen.
Sufficient water supply, of good quality, is a key ingredient in the health and well-being of humans and ecosystems and for socio-economic development. Though
there have been some regional successes in improving
water quality, there is no data to suggest that there
has been an overall improvement in water quality on a
global scale.
Water quality is just as important as water quantity for satisfying basic human and environmental needs, yet it has
received far less investment, scientiﬁc support, and public
attention in recent decades than water quantity.

WWDR4

© UN Photo/Ky Chung

Poor water quality has many economic costs associated with it, including degradation of ecosystem services;
health-related costs; impacts on economic activities such
as agriculture, industrial production and tourism; increased
water treatment costs; and reduced property values.
With freshwater projected to become an increasingly
scarce resource in the coming years, the costs associated with addressing water quality problems can be
expected to increase.
Chapter 4. Beyond demand: Water’s social and
environmental beneﬁts
Improving water resource management, increasing access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation and
promoting hygiene have the potential to improve the
quality of life of billions of individuals and are critical
for the achievement of the goals to reduce child mortality, improve maternal health and reduce the burden
of waterborne disease.
A preventive and collaborative approach of Water
Safety Planning has demonstrated beneﬁts, including
cost savings and sustainable improvements in water quality. Each risk management solution needs to
be tailor-made to the water supply in question, and
demands that key stakeholders become engaged and
committed to a common goal. These include land users or householders who may discharge industrial,
agricultural or domestic waste into a catchment area,

MAIN MESSAGES

5

policymakers from various ministries overseeing the
implementation and enforcement of environmental
regulations, practitioners delivering water and consumers at the tap.
Poor women shoulder the brunt of economic crises
and women with less education tend to increase their
work participation more in times of crisis in almost
every region of the world.
Social and ﬁnancial investment along with policy support to improve women’s access and control over water resources will reduce vulnerability to poverty and
enable women to secure sources of food and livelihoods, and to maintain the health of themselves and
their families.
Ecosystems deliver multiple beneﬁts (services) that
are essential for sustainable development. Many of
these key services are derived directly from water, and
all are underpinned by it. Trends in ecosystem health,
therefore, indicate trends in the delivery of these overall beneﬁts and provide a key indicator of whether we
are in or out of balance with water.
Trends in ecosystems, including the life they support,
are telling us that things are out of balance. Policymakers and managers need to recognize that ecosystems do not consume water – they supply and recycle
it – and water taken from ecosystems unsustainably

reduces their ability to deliver the beneﬁts we need
ecosystems to provide.
While we are getting better at saving lives, saving livelihoods and assets remains a key development challenge: water-related disasters are a major obstacle to
poverty reduction efforts and to meeting development
objectives, such as the Millennium Development Goals.
One of the major impacts of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought (DLDD) associated water scarcity is felt through food insecurity and starvation among
affected communities, particularly in developing countries in the drylands.
If dryland countries could reduce the impacts of DLDD
on water resources and achieve water security, opportunities of achieving food security would be greatly
enhanced.
Different developmental sectors are often in competition with each other for the ﬁnite water resources
upon which they all depend. While they can be ‘in
competition’ over water, it is clear that all the beneﬁts
of water are required for sustainable economic development. In countries and regions where water resources are limited, decisions made to generate beneﬁts
through water from one sector often produce negative consequences for other sectors. Uncertainties regarding future demands add to the complexity of the
challenge.
Where water resources are limited, certain trade-offs
may be required in order to allocate water towards different uses in order to maximize the various beneﬁts
water provides though different developmental sectors.
This is a critical yet difficult and complex challenge.
Decisions about water allocation are not merely social
or ethical, but are also economic, such that investing
in water infrastructure and management generates increasing returns though these various beneﬁts.
Chapter 5. Water management, institutions and
capacity development
Water is characterized by the fact that all beneﬁt from
it but few understand why and fewer actually manage
it.
Water management requires a mix of structural and
non-structural options. Adaptive Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM) can provide the necessary integration of water management across sectors, policies and institutions in a continuous process

© Shutterstock/Markus Gebauer

6

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

of adjustment that attempts to deal with the increasingly rapid changes in our societies, economies, climate and technologies.

from technological solutions to management of processes and people, involving inclusive decision-making
and bottom-up approaches.

Competing user groups (e.g. water utilities, farmers,
industry and mining, communities, environmentalists)
can inﬂuence strategies for water resource development
and management, meaning that the process becomes
more political and less purely technical as integration
occurs and a potential basket of beneﬁts emerges.

At the national level, it is essential to establish sustainable frameworks for capturing, storing and disseminating data, information and knowledge to all
stakeholders in the water sector, thus contributing to
improved decision-making regarding water resource
management.

Water management now has to account for unforeseeable changes in the nature and timing of issues
like population growth, migration, and globalization,
changing consumption patterns, technological advances, and agricultural and industrial developments. The
spectre of climate change has drawn attention to the
importance of these and added a new dimension.
The rules of the game for water are often dictated by
actors other than water managers, and are not set with
water as their central focus or with the recognition
of its pivotal importance. Making coherent decisions,
with the various trade-offs they imply, calls for some
institutional machinery linking decision-makers in key
sectors with those responsible for water management.
A wider group of stakeholders needs to be involved in
the ‘rule-setting’ process.

At the community level, concrete steps towards sharing information and knowledge, contributing to improved decision-making and resource management
can include creating dialogue platforms involving local
stakeholders and their assisting service organisations;
for example, government institutions, extension services, NGOs and other service providers.

Water institutions are still largely technology and water
supply driven. To improve the effectiveness of these
institutions, the emphasis has to gradually change

Chapter 6. From raw data to informed decisions
Information about water supply and use is becoming
increasingly important to national governments, who
need reliable and objective information about the state
of water resources, their use and management.
Farmers, urban planners, drinking water and wastewater utilities, the disaster management community, business and industry, and environmentalists all need to be
informed.
The data required to populate the indicators are seldom systematically or reliably available at a global,
national, regional or basin level. If actual data are not
obtained, trends will not be tracked, even if they are
substantial.
For the purposes of planning and design, engineers
have typically assumed that the hydrological processes
in a particular watershed or basin could be described
by probability distributions that were not changing
over time; that is, the historical statistical characteristics of those processes were assumed essentially constant over time, or stationary. The more these extreme
events happen due to changes in the Earth’s climate or
from unpredictable human behaviour, the more challenging it is to plan and manage water. The question is
how best to include these nonstationarity considerations of both water supply and demand in water planning and management.

© UN Photo/UNICEF/ZAK

WWDR4

MAIN MESSAGES

7

Concerns about climate change, one of the factors
that have led to the growing interest in water indicators, explicit recognition that the ‘stationary hydrology’
assumption can no longer be used as the basis for assessment of water availability. This has focused attention on the limited availability of global data on stream
ﬂows, on which estimates of water resource availability
must be based. While there are a great deal of available data on precipitation, which can be measured by
remote sensing, changes in runoff to rivers or recharge
of groundwater are much harder to measure.
Because of the relatively low value and wide distribution of water, its use is often not measured directly.
Because water resources are often ‘shared’ between a
number of different political jurisdictions, there is often a disincentive for upstream communities to share
information about resource availability and use with
downstream jurisdictions, as the information may be
used in disputes about the division of the resource.
To achieve a balanced allocation and protection of
water resources, indicators should support policy instruments which are carefully chosen and designed.
They may include regulation (e.g. technical standards,
performance standards), quotas, access rules and allocation procedures, as well as economic instruments
(especially pricing mechanisms and payments for ecosystem services).
Because water occurs in natural structures whose
behaviour often varies from one season to the next,

measuring simple parameters such as ﬂow is often extremely expensive. There is a huge resource base from
remote sensing, which has not yet been translated into
signiﬁcant ﬂow of useful processed information about
water and its use. However, using remote sensing data
without ground truth may be risky; strengthening existing hydromet networks and services is a necessary
condition for proper water resources management,
planning, design and operation.
The most effective driver of efforts to improve the ﬂow
of information about water will be a demand from
policy-makers and decision-makers in the socioeconomic sectors of activity.
From a government perspective, economic policymakers have recognized that water resources have an
important but largely unaccounted for inﬂuence on national economies. There are now signiﬁcant opportunities for the global community of water practitioners, as
well as water users and the much broader community
that has a stake in water, to make substantial improvements in the availability and quality of information
about the resource, its use, users, beneﬁts derived
from its use and how these beneﬁts are allocated, and
who bears the costs and negative impacts.
Chapter 7. Regional challenges, global impacts
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa faces endemic poverty, food insecurity, very low coverage of both drinking water and
sanitation, and pervasive underdevelopment, with almost all countries lacking the human, economic and
institutional capacities to effectively develop and manage their water resources sustainably.
Overall, only one in four people in Africa has electricity.
Hydropower supplies 32% of Africa’s energy; only 3% of
its renewable water resources are exploited for hydroelectricity. Yet the region has vast hydropower potential
– enough to meet all the continent’s electricity needs.
Drought in sub-Saharan Africa is the dominant climate
risk; it destroys economic livelihoods and farmers’ food
sources and has a signiﬁcant negative effect on GDP
growth in one-third of the countries. Floods are also
highly destructive – to infrastructure and transportation and to goods and service ﬂows, and they can contaminate water supplies and cause waterborne disease
epidemics.

© UN Photo/Albert Gonzalez Farran

8

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Europe and North America
The relatively affluent lifestyles of most Europeans and
North Americans make large demands on the region’s
water resources. North Americans, the highest per
capita water users in the world, however, consume two
and a half times the volume that Europeans use per
capita: one reason is that water is relatively inexpensive compared to other industrialised countries.
Some 120 million people in the European region do
not have access to safe drinking water. Even more lack
access to sanitation, resulting in water-related diseases.
Water quality remains a persistent problem in many
parts of the region. Agrochemicals in particular have
had a detrimental impact on water resources throughout the region as nitrogen, phosphorus and pesticides
run into water courses.
The Water Framework Directive concluded in 2000,
and including more recent directives on standards
and groundwater, is the most important piece of EU
water legislation and the only such supra-national water arrangement in the world. It has accelerated and
deepened a historical process of transboundary water
management.
Asia-Paciﬁc
The Asia and Paciﬁc region is extremely dynamic, undergoing rapid urbanisation, economic growth, industrialization, and extensive agricultural development.
Although these trends are desirable in many ways, they
also represent drivers that are affecting the region’s
capacity to meet its socioeconomic water development needs. They are accompanied by the intensive
use of resources that exert considerable pressure on
aquatic ecosystems, which continue to deteriorate.
Food security is an important issue since about twothirds of the world’s hungry people live in Asia.
The Asia-Paciﬁc is the world’s most vulnerable region
with respect to natural disasters, which undermine
economic development to varying degrees. Much economic growth is generated in coastal and ﬂood-prone
areas, for example, which are heavily populated and
especially vulnerable to typhoons and rainstorms.
The Paciﬁc’s small island developing states (SIDS) are
particularly vulnerable to environmental natural hazards, such as tropical cyclones, typhoons and earthquakes turning into disasters. Climate change will

WWDR4

© Shutterstock/Shi Yali

further exacerbate the vulnerability of SIDS with anticipated sea-level rise and the risk of storm surge and
beach erosion. One tropical cyclone can negate years
of development efforts.
The region is shifting from predominantly short-term
beneﬁt planning and development of water infrastructure, to a more strategic and long-term beneﬁt planning concept that also addresses ecological efficiency
in economic development.
Latin America and the Caribbean
Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) is basically a
humid region although it contains some very arid areas. The pattern of water use in the region can be described as spatially sporadic and highly concentrated
in relatively few areas.
With the exceptions of Mexico, Brazil and some of
the small Central American countries, LAC economies
depend on the export of natural resources. Global
demand for these products, which include minerals,
food and other agricultural products, timber, ﬁsh and
tourism services, has increased notably in recent years.
This has implications for competing water demands
and the export of ‘virtual’ water from the region.
Although most LAC countries enjoy high levels of
coverage of improved water and sanitation, there is a
large variation in the quality of services and important

MAIN MESSAGES

9

differences between rural and urban areas and among
countries. Almost 40 million people still lack access to
improved water and nearly 120 million to proper sanitation facilities. The majority of those without access
to services are poor and live in rural areas.
In general, poor governance in many LAC countries extends from the top to the bottom. It is not restricted to
the management of the water resource, but rife in the
management of most water-based services. With relatively weak water management capacities, the region’s
poorest countries in Central America, the Caribbean
and the Andes will be at the highest risk from the impacts of climate change.
Arab and Western Asia region
Population growth and migration, growing consumption, regional conﬂicts and governance constraints in
the Arab and Western Asia region have resulted in increasing risks associated with water quantity and quality, but are accompanied by the sustainable management of shared resources and their use, as well as the
success of policies to promote rural development and
food security.
Water scarcity leads to food insecurity concerns in
the Arab region. Imported grain accounts for a large
amount of ‘virtual’ water consumed in the Middle East
and North Africa, which was importing 50 million
tonnes of grain annually by the year 2000. This has
fostered interest in agricultural investments outside
the region to produce food, which in effect increases
the importation of virtual water.
Cyclical conﬂict has been characteristic of the Arab
region. Violent conﬂict has also destroyed water infrastructure at different times in Beirut, Kuwait and
Lebanon, requiring rehabilitation instead of expansion
of delivery. About 66% of the Arab region’s available
surface water originates from outside of the region. At
times, this has led to conﬂict with upstream countries.
Local-level water conﬂicts can also exist between administrative districts, communities and tribes.
Regional–global links: Impacts and challenges
Water-related natural disasters pose major impediments to achieving human security and sustainable
socio-economic development. Droughts have signiﬁcantly impacted agricultural production, which in turn
have contributed to soaring food prices and shortages. These increases have other major socio-political

10

impacts and can lead to far reaching consequences
such as food riots and political instability.
Water shortages can cause conﬂicts of varying intensity and scale. Although conﬂicts may appear localized, they present challenges to the broader context of
peace and security. Conﬂicts over water resources can
also turn into or fuel ethnic conﬂicts – as ethnic conﬂict is most commonly fuelled by collective fears for
the future, one can see how water scarcity could play
into such fears.
There are useful reasons for incorporating the positive
aspects of the market when considering water resources. For instance, one of the reasons for water resource
depletion is that typically it has been undervalued as
a resource. It is thus important to place a value on it.
Whether earmarking it as a commodity is the best solution for placing value on it is subject to debate.
Whether through norms or values, water resources
must be valued for their worth, else the trend of degradation will ensue.

Part 2: Managing water under uncertainty
and risk
Introduction to Part 2
Political and social systems are changing in ways and
with impacts not always predictable. Technology is
evolving, living standards, consumption patterns and
life expectancies are changing, and human populations
are growing and increasingly moving to expanding urban areas. Consequently, land use and cover is changing, as is the climate. The rates at which these changes
are occurring are often increasing and their long-term
impacts are usually uncertain. Discontinuities are
possible and tipping points can exist beyond which
change is irreversible.
Adapting to change presents an opportunity. What has
happened in the past cannot be changed, but the future
can be inﬂuenced by the decisions being made now.
Water is a primary medium through which changes in
human activity and the climate impact with the earth’s
surface, its ecosystems, and its people. It is through
water and its quality that people will feel the impact of
change most strongly.
Without proper adaptation or planning for change,
hundreds of millions of people will be at greater risk

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

envelope of variability deﬁned by past events. The
world is witnessing the occurrence of such extreme
events today. Because of this water resources planners
and managers must apply a signiﬁcant amount of judgment in their analyses due to changes in land use, urbanization, and the impacts of a changing climate that
inﬂuence future precipitation, evaporation, groundwater
inﬁltration, surface runoff and channel ﬂow.
No matter what design is chosen there is always a risk
of failure. Questions that plague anyone making longterm decisions include what levels of risk are acceptable, and just how much more money, if any, should be
spent on designs that reduce the costs of infrastructure expansion in the future, should future conditions
warrant it.

© UN Photo/Kibae Park

of hunger, disease, energy shortages and poverty due
to water scarcity, pollution or ﬂooding. Adapting to
changes in water quantity and quality, together with
their risks and uncertainties, is a challenging area for
water management.
The risks, or consequences of making decisions under uncertainty, can be qualiﬁed and even sometimes
quantiﬁed. Robust decision-making is a tool that attempts to support different management actions under deep uncertainty.
Providing decision-makers with tools that show the
broader water resource consequences of various decisions (actions, inaction) can substantially contribute
to better overall resource management, and reduced
threats and adverse impacts.

When sufficient information is available to determine
probabilities of decision outcomes and evaluate the
consequences, decision-making can be based on risk
analysis. Decision-making may be assisted by the use
of a wide variety of analytical tools and techniques,
varying from the simple to the sophisticated.
The decision process should encourage active participation from interested stakeholder groups. This will
ensure that differences in the perception of risks and
values are fully explored within the risk assessment
and decision appraisal process. Interactive decision
support models have been developed and successfully used to facilitate stakeholder participation.
In situations where it is difficult to assign probabilities
to possible events or future outcomes, perhaps due
to our limited understanding of human and ecological processes or due to the intrinsic indeterminism of
complex dynamic systems, we can still create scenarios that force us to consider the possibility of such
outcomes and whether or not we should make decisions that might lead to such outcomes. Water futures
depend on human choices that are yet to be made.

Chapter 8. Working under uncertainty and managing risk
Risk and uncertainty characterize much of what water
managers and socio-economic policy-makers must
deal with. The more they understand these uncertainties and risks, the more effectively they can plan, design and manage water systems to reduce these risks
and uncertainties.

Water management agencies with users and policymakers need to participate in the development of alternate methodologies that take into account nonstationarity and make water resource projects more
adaptable, sustainable and robust.

Today water planners and engineers are particularly
concerned with uncertainties associated with extremes
that have not yet been observed and are outside the

If humans are to live within the limits of their water resources (and there is no other choice), they must live
within the limits of the natural systems that provide,

WWDR4

MAIN MESSAGES

11

treat and distribute those resources. Humans need to
include natural ecosystems, along with built infrastructure and human activities that determine the allocation
and use of water, in an integrated way, each affecting and beneﬁting the other and necessarily managed
together within an integrated system of a river basin.
Recognizing and managing the interconnectedness
among living systems is a means of reducing both
short and long-term risks.
Chapter 9. Understanding uncertainty and risks
associated with key drivers
Projected pressures on water resources lie outside the
control of water managers. These can signiﬁcantly
affect the balance between water demand and supply – sometimes in uncertain ways – and thus create
new risks for water managers and users. Such increasing uncertainties and risks necessitate a different approach to water management strategies.
Drivers that directly impinge upon water stress and sustainability are the ecosystem, agriculture, infrastructure,
technology and demographics. The ultimate drivers
– governance, politics, ethics and society (values and
equity) and climate change – exert their effect mostly
through their impacts upon the proximate drivers.
In the absence of technological improvements or
policy interventions, economic polarities will increase
between water-rich and water-poor countries, as well
as between sectors or regions within countries. This
would mean higher numbers of people with higher needs competing for less water, of lesser quality.
Because allocation will inevitably go to the highest
paying sector or region, this may result in an increasingly signiﬁcant portion of people not being able to
satisfy their basic needs for food, energy, water and
sanitation. This would not be mere stagnation, but
would likely take the form of a distinctly regressive
trend compared to current conditions.

A legally binding international agreement to combat
climate change could be in place by 2040, along with
signiﬁcant ﬁnancing for awareness-raising and adaptation in low-income countries. Because most climate
change impacts are felt through water, this would have
positive repercussions on the overall levels of ﬁnancing
for water. This could mean higher levels of investment
in water infrastructure, leading to reductions in waste
and increases in sustainable mobilization, as well as increased sanitation network coverage.
Central water authorities, supported by river-basin
institutions and decentralized entities would be given
increased power and resources to effectively manage
water within countries. This would promote dynamic
and climate-responsive re-allocation of water among
users, facilitated by well-regulated pricing and, potentially, innovative water rights trading mechanisms.
The development of water scenarios appears ever
more necessary in the face of the risks and uncertainties involved in continuing with the business-as-usual
modes of water management.
Chapter 10. Unvalued water leads to an uncertain future
Policies with profound effects on water are made by
agents – politicians and officials in planning, economic,
ﬁnance and water-using departments – that are
heavily inﬂuenced by national economic and ﬁnancial
considerations. In addition, the case for investment in
water, and for making the reforms to its development
and management is also commonly framed in social,
ethical, equity or public health terms.

Further technology developments applicable to urban
water production and waste handling that are likely
to increase due to sheer urban population growth are
also expected to contribute to reducing absolute water
withdrawals and waste. Rapid uptake of these technologies would be paired with the anticipated evolution
of global consciousness regarding human impacts on
environment, and in particular, an increased understanding of water scarcity.
© Philippe Bourseiller

12

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Water is increasingly becoming a critical factor in decisions for the location of economic activities such as industry, mining, power and tourism. Companies working
or contemplating investment in water-stressed regions
are becoming aware of their ‘water footprint’ and its
impact on local communities, which could pose operational and reputational risk to their business.
Valuing the multiple socio-economic beneﬁts of water
is essential for improving decisions of governments,
international organizations, the donor community, civil
society and other stakeholders. Conversely, a failure to
fully value all the beneﬁts of water in its different uses
is a root cause of the political neglect of water and its
mismanagement.
The allocation of scarce water to competing uses lies
at the heart of water management. In many parts in
the world, increasing pressures on water resources
are leading to a shortage of water to satisfy all needs.
Stresses on water are mainly driven by four interrelated processes: population growth; economic growth;
increased demand for food, feed and energy (of which
biofuel is one source); and increased climate variability. Choices must be made about how to share, allocate
and reallocate the increasingly scarce water within
sectors, from one user group to another, or between
sectors.

© Shutterstock/Diane Uhley

promotes ﬂexible decision-making in the face of uncertainties as outcomes from management actions and
other events become better understood.

Chapter 11. Transforming water management
institutions to deal with change
There are calls for a change in thinking away from
separate ecosystems and social systems to socio-ecological systems instead. Rather than planning for one
deﬁned future, water management agencies increasingly need to improve their methods of assessment in
order to respond to a range of possible future scenarios, all uncertain but presenting at varying degrees of
probability.

In an inherently complex world, most of the important
decisions impacting on water occur out of the water
box. They are taken by leaders in governments, private
sector and civil society. It is therefore important that
new methods be developed for technical people to inform decision-makers in government, as well as those
who are affected by these decisions. This requires a
formal structuring of relationships between technical
specialists, government decision-makers and society
as a whole.

Deﬁning social risk tolerance and service reliability is
part of a social contract to be determined through a
continuing dialogue within each society, whether it be
for new drugs, nuclear power plants or water infrastructure. IWRM is contextually shaped through this
process to encompass the different dimensions of sustainability (ecological, biophysical, economic, social
and institutional), but it is also often path dependent.
Thus, effective IWRM is knowledge-intensive and simply needs to be adaptive if it is to continue to respond
to exogenous changes over which it generally has little
direct control. Adaptive management is a process that

Looking beyond what is traditionally considered water
management – going outside the water box – is inevitable. Interconnecting water management with land
management and sectors like agriculture, mining and
energy, at the institutional level, will enhance the probability of effective decision-making. Realising this is
highly demanding on leadership. Overcoming the inertia of traditional approaches and resistance from various actors remains daunting. Decision-makers need
support in putting these ideas into practice, as well as
the courage to withstand criticism and to share power
with other actors.

WWDR4

MAIN MESSAGES

13

In order to make appropriate decisions to manage
particular uncertainties and risks, they have to be
clearly understood. It is therefore important to supply
enough accurate information to provide the decisionmaker(s) a certain amount of control when faced with
uncertainty. Managing uncertainty can then become
less stressful and result in more positive and realistic
outcomes.
Chapter 12. Investment and ﬁnancing in water for a
more sustainable future
Water in all its facets needs ﬁnancing – at a higher
level than is currently happening – for both ‘hard’ infrastructure and the ‘soft’ but equally important items
such as data collection, analysis and dissemination, human resources and technical capacities, regulation and
other governance issues.
Investment in water infrastructure, in both its physical
and natural assets, can be a driver of growth and the
key to poverty reduction.
Adequately funded water governance is essential for
reducing uncertainty and managing risks. Effective
governance in areas such as environmental controls,
groundwater monitoring and abstraction licensing,
and monitoring and control of pollution can reduce
the risk of overexploitation of water resources or of
catastrophic surface water pollution and irreversible
contamination of aquifers. Some of these governance
functions can sometimes be self-ﬁnancing through abstraction and pollution charges.
The neglect and decline of national observation systems cause loss of vital hydrological data. Investment
in the technology needed to upgrade countries’ water
and water-related information bases can show good
returns, and is being targeted for support by the international development community. Such information
is of vital national concern, but is often a local, river
basin, regional or international public good that is seriously underfunded and under-provided.
Adaptation and mitigation projects implemented by
public agencies can draw on a range of development
funds, including new adaptation funds created for this
speciﬁc purpose. However, much of the adaptation/
mitigation effort will fall to private companies, farmers
and households, as well as subsovereign agencies that
will have to rely on other sources of ﬁnancing according to their particular situation.

14

© Shutterstock/sootra

Increasing the use of technologies, such as desalination and reclaimed water can reduce and distribute
risk, compared with relying on withdrawals of fresh
surface and groundwater. Desalination plants and
some projects for the use of reclaimed water (entailing sizeable investment in wastewater treatment
plants) potentially lend themselves to stand-alone
commercial ventures funded from equity and commercial ﬁnance.
Raising commercial ﬁnance for water has become
more difficult due to the global ﬁnancial situation
since 2007. This, as well as the problems typical of
certain regions, most notably Latin America,, have
discouraged new private interest in water infrastructure projects, and has unsettled partners in existing private public partnership (PPP) ventures. The
ﬁnancial climate has affected both the supply of risk
capital (e.g. equity) and loan capital to ﬁnance these
concession deals, as liquidity has become scarce, and
the problems of international banks have had repercussions on local banks. Many innovative deals, developed with technical assistance and risk-sharing from
donor agencies, are at risk.
As a general principle, the risk of ﬁnancial default can
be managed by tailoring ﬁnancial terms to the risk
proﬁle and expected cash ﬂow of the project concerned. For large and complex projects it is becoming
common to blend different types of ﬁnance (commercial loans, concessionary loans, grants, equity) to
achieve an acceptable overall mix.
There is a feasible approach to ﬁnancing in the face of
unknowns and risks. It involves a mixture of efficiency
measures, review of standards and technological options, improved rates of collection, better cost recovery
from water users, more predictable government subsidies and ODA, and the intelligent use of such basic

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

revenues to attract repayable funding sources using
the array of risk-sharing devices now available.
Chapter 13. Responses to risk and uncertainty from a
water management perspective
There are no responses to risk and uncertainty that
can be universally applied. However, by examining
approaches that have been tried by others it is possible to learn from one or more that have succeeded
or failed elsewhere under different circumstances.
These responses have usually involved the use of various tools to identify and evaluate alternative water
resources plans, policies, infrastructure designs and
operating rules applicable to different regions of the
developed and developing world.
One of the most direct ways of reducing uncertainty
is to generate new knowledge or understanding of
conditions governing water availability and quality in
the present and in the future. Data collection, analytical capacity and predictive ability are all required to
reduce uncertainty and therefore to facilitate decisionmaking about allocations, uses, mobilization and treatment. While the risk to water is not reduced, it is better
understood.
Adaptive management strategies allow changing
course based on new insights, help establish and sustain institutional settings and technological systems
that are ﬂexible and error-tolerant, and offer a framework for transparent decision-making processes.
Funding a diversity of water storage projects, from
small-scale rainwater tanks and larger-scale dams to
systems that artiﬁcially recharge groundwater aquifers, to improving the soil so it can hold more water, is
one option to meeting the increased need for storage.
Stored water in times of drought can lead to increased
food security. Just as modern consumers diversify their
ﬁnancial holdings to reduce risk, smallholder farmers
can use a wide array of ‘water accounts’ to provide a
buffer against climate change impacts.

of maintaining the status quo exceed the transaction
costs of implementing change. However, not all tradeoffs need be negative. There are indeed examples of
win–win situations where addressing risks and uncertainties in and outside of the water realm have led to
multiple multi-sectoral beneﬁts and to beneﬁts for water in the long term.
Chapter 14. Responses to risks and uncertainties from
out of the water box
Many of the problems faced within the water sector
are caused by decisions made in other sectors, while
many of the solutions to water problems can also be
found within these sectors. Most decisions, within or
outside the water world, involve some form of risk
management. Anticipation of future beneﬁts or threats
is an integral part of sectoral decisions and business
decisions alike. These decisions do not always take
water into consideration, but often have an impact on
water – and an impact on the types of decisions and
reactions that water managers have to choose from.
Beyond the provision of water for basic human needs,
such as food, drinking and hygiene, many development
efforts have an impact on water risks and uncertainties.
In most cases, more development means more water
use, and more water pollution arises from higher levels
of economic growth.

Limited water availability, growing and evolving demands, and competition among increasingly scarce
ﬁnancial and physical resources create difficult tradeoffs for decision-makers who must plan effectively
under considerable risk and uncertainty. Countries can
take precautionary or status quo approaches towards
addressing risk and uncertainty, and these reﬂect the
trade-offs they are willing to make to address risk and
uncertainty. Policy changes only occur when the costs
© Shutterstock/jaymast

WWDR4

MAIN MESSAGES

15

Tools such as the proper pricing and valuation of water resources can drive business decisions, particularly
when water is a key input in production. They can also
help to highlight trade-offs, costs and beneﬁts/co-beneﬁts that would otherwise not be apparent to business
owners.

© UN-HABITAT

Choosing diverse economic growth pathways could
help to address risks and uncertainties related to water
availability; however, very few countries have the option to do so because the trade-offs and political costs
are so high and immediately felt.
In some cases, green growth entails turning a development challenge – for example, lack of access to chemical fertilizer – into a sustainable development opportunity. Following this model, existing water scarcity
could provide a basis for technological innovation to
help countries leapfrog towards greener growth, while
avoiding the common risks faced by other countries.
Climate change represents one of the greatest uncertainties currently facing human society. At the global level, there may be a high degree of likelihood for
certain types of impact such as temperature increases
and sea level rise; however, impacts at the local level
are far less predictable.

Win–win beneﬁts between water and health planning
can be found as the world’s concern over pandemics
and rapidly transmissible animal and human diseases
increases. Because water acts as a vector of transmission or as a determining factor in the prevalence of
certain transmissible diseases, efforts to prevent (or
prepare for) global pandemics could generate beneﬁts
for managing risks and uncertainties related to water.
A number of international organizations highlight the
water–food–energy nexus as illustrating the most difficult choices, risks and uncertainties facing policy-makers today. Examples abound of the various intended or
unintended consequences of favouring one pillar over
the other (e.g. food security versus energy security).
A key challenge is to incorporate the complex interconnections of risks into response strategies that are
integrated and take into account the many relevant
stakeholders.
Insurance is of one of the oldest risk mitigation mechanisms – one that is applicable to all sectors, but that
also helps to reduce the impacts of water-related risks.
Index-based (or parametric) insurance is also emerging as a potentially powerful tool for risk management
in all sectors.

Most business decisions are based on an approach to
risks and uncertainties. Decisions on investments and
modes of production make presumptions about the future. Many decisions that are uniquely motivated by the
ﬁnancial bottom line can also provide effective means of
reducing risks and uncertainties related to water.

Water treaties or agreements regarding water allocation in shared transboundary basins are multiplying,
and are often quoted as having side beneﬁts for reducing other risks, through the establishment of trustbuilding mechanisms and a certain amount of predictability in stakeholder behaviours.

Government policies such as taxation rates, or ﬁscal
incentives for attracting investment and business in a
given location, while legal frameworks can go a long
way to reducing uncertainties by providing boundaries
for the investment context.

Agreements and treaties signed for purposes other
than water may help reduce risks and uncertainties regarding water, particularly where they provide mutual
assurance of the other party’s behaviour regarding
natural resource use.

Governments may choose to attract investments that
provide the highest value for water units, although examples of such types of decision remain unfortunately
rare.

16

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

INTRODUCTION

—
Author Richard Connor
Contributors Daniel P. Loucks and Marilyn Smith

WWDR4
©
Philippe Bourseiller

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

17

No water users, anywhere in the world, can be guaranteed they will have uninterrupted access to the water
supplies they need or want or to the water-derived
beneﬁts from key developmental sectors such as agriculture, energy and health. Examples from around the
world warn us that disregard for the central importance of water will eventually lead to breakdowns in
the socio-economic and environmental systems so vital to the prosperity of all countries and their citizens.
While it is true that all aspects of social and economic
development – often referred to as the food–energy–
health–environment ‘nexus’ – depend on water, that is
only half of the truth; the relationship is one of interdependency. All of the activities that drive development
also shape important political and economic decisions
that inﬂuence how water resources are allocated and
managed, all of which often has substantial impacts on
the quantity and the quality of the water available, and
thus on other developmental sectors. Indeed, all of the
sectors of the nexus are interlinked through water.
The combination of growing populations, increasing demands for resources associated with improving
standards of living, and various other external forces
of change are increasing demand pressures on local
and regional water supplies required for irrigation, energy production, industrial uses and domestic purposes. These forces are undergoing rapid, accelerating
and often unpredictable change, creating new uncertainties for water managers and increasing risks to all
developmental sectors of the nexus through water. At
the same time, climate change is creating new uncertainties with regard to freshwater supplies and to the
main water use sectors such as agriculture and energy,
which will in turn exacerbate uncertainties regarding future demands for water. In summary, the determinants of change in water demand and supply are
themselves undergoing unpredictable changes.
Water is a vital component in the production of all
goods and commodities, particularly food, and is thus
embedded in marketed goods. Globalization of trade
means that all countries and companies (consciously
or unconsciously) are involved in the ‘import and export’ of virtual water and therefore share some responsibility for the local and regional impacts associated
with international trade (including increasing scarcity
and pollution) and the foreign investment protection
system. As water demand and availability become
more uncertain, all societies become more vulnerable

18

to a wide range of risks associated with inadequate
water supply, including hunger and thirst, high rates of
disease and death, lost productivity and economic crises, and degraded ecosystems. These impacts elevate
water to a crisis of global concern.
This fourth edition of the World Water Development
Report (WWDR4) drives home the point that all water
users are – for better or worse and knowingly or unknowingly – change agents who affect and are affected
by the water cycle. It presents the case that, in today’s
world, a ‘business-as-usual’ approach to water management is tantamount to blind neglect of the ecosystems
that sustain life and well-being. Past attitudes – which
in many cases were of an expectation of governments
to manage water as a ‘sector’ while decision-makers
in other true sectors (food, energy, health and others)
paid little attention to how their actions affected the
water cycle (and other users) – have created a disconnect between policies and actions, and the role of managing both their consequences. The lack of interaction
between the diverse communities of users, decisionmakers and isolated water managers has caused serious
degradation of the water resource and increased the
risks to all the other sectors that depend upon it.
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of this assessment
is that the rate of change now seen across the water
cycle leaves water experts somewhat perplexed; history is no longer a reliable means of predicting future water demand and availability. In admitting that
current understanding of the various pressures being
placed on the water cycle is akin to islands of knowledge in a vast sea of unknowns, the WWDR4 also sets
a challenge for all water users and the full spectrum of
leaders and decision-makers to invest in building and
sharing knowledge about how their actions affect water quality, quantity, distribution and use. Only through
such a collective effort can ways be found to reduce
uncertainty and manage risk to balance and optimize
the many fundamental beneﬁts provided to society
through water.
As discussed in the WWDR3, globalization processes
have brought beneﬁts to billions of people, but have in
large part left the ‘bottom billion’, in which women and
children are disproportionally represented, marginalized and most vulnerable to existing risks. Learning
how to equitably balance the many beneﬁts, from
local to global, derived from water will be a necessary key for change. If measures taken to deal with

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

water-related issues do not explicitly incorporate equity issues, the poorest and the most underprivileged
people are likely to continue being excluded from beneﬁting from the outcomes of these measures.
There are success stories of multiple stakeholders
working together to turn rapid change in the forces
that inﬂuence the water cycle into new opportunities to improve water provision, use and management.
Presented throughout the report (and especially in
Chapters 13 and 14), these examples of progress highlight the interaction of knowledge-building, policy,
technology and greater input by a wider range of water stakeholders. Yet they also highlight the complexity of each and every situation – overemphasis on one
aspect can unbalance the effort.
What’s new in the WWDR4
The ﬁrst two editions of the WWDR provided comprehensive assessments of the issues, trends and developments affecting and related to water on the basis of
different ‘challenge areas’. Under the coordination of
leading United Nations (UN) agencies, these challenge
areas were presented as individual chapters that described the state of the resource and ecosystems; major use sectors (human health, food and agriculture, industry, energy, human settlements); and management
challenges (managing risks, sharing water, valuing water, enhancing knowledge and capacity, governance).
The third WWDR took a different approach (and structure) by providing a holistic analysis of the water domain while recognizing the externalities and their role
on the state, use and management of the earth’s water
resources. It introduced the concept of external forces,
providing a general description of the main ‘drivers’ of
change and how these ultimately affect demand for –
and thus have impacts on – freshwater resources. The
key message of the report was that most decisions
about water are not made by water managers, but by
decision-makers outside the ‘water box’; that is, actors
from the spheres of civil society, business and government leadership, whose decisions concerning policy
formulation, resource allocation and other political and
operational issues affect water directly (through allocation and demand) and indirectly (through various
drivers of change).
This fourth report builds on different elements of the
ﬁrst three editions and incorporates some entirely new
aspects.

WWDR4

First, it reintroduces the twelve challenge area reports
that provided the foundation for the ﬁrst two editions.
These were again prepared under the coordination of
leading UN agencies. However, unlike the earlier versions, which provided a comprehensive overview of
the issues, the new challenge area reports are shorter,
with a focus on key challenges, recent developments
and emerging trends, and on the external drivers and
the pressures they place on water systems and how
these can lead to a better understanding of uncertainty, management of risk and identiﬁcation of opportunities. This is the context in which approaches to water
management and policy are illustrated through specific examples, ranging from adaptive design criteria for
infrastructure or demand management to institutional
capacity development and policies for different developmental sectors.
Second, in addition to these challenge area reports,
four new reports have been introduced, covering issues that had not been speciﬁcally covered under previous WWDRs: Water Quality, Groundwater, Gender,
and Desertiﬁcation, Land Degradation and Drought.
Third, in recognition that the global challenges of
water can vary considerably across countries and
regions, a series of ﬁve regional reports have been
included, providing for the ﬁrst time a regional focus
to the WWDR4. These ‘regional reports’, which follow
the same overall structure as the challenge area reports, were coordinated by the UN regional economic
commissions.
Fourth, WWDR4 delves into a deeper analysis of the
drivers described in the third edition, and examines
possibilities for their future evolution. This analysis emanates from the results of the ﬁrst phase of the World
Water Assessment Programme’s (WWAP) Scenarios
Project, which is also described in WWDR4.
Fifth, this fourth edition of the WWDR incorporates a
theme, ‘Managing water under uncertainty and risk’,
which serves as the overarching topic for the report. This
does not mean that the WWDR4 is about uncertainty
and risk; rather, the WWDR4 examines current challenges
to water resources, their use and management through
the lens of uncertainty and risk. The WWDR4 considers the uncertainties associated with different external
drivers and looks at managing the risks emanating from
within and outside the water box, thus further building on
the holistic approach taken in the WWDR3.

INTRODUCTION

19

In summary, building on the comprehensive approach
taken in WWDRs 1 and 2, and the holistic view taken
in WWDR3, this fourth edition gives an account of the
critical issues facing water’s challenge areas and different regions and incorporates a deeper analysis of the
external forces (i.e. drivers) linked to water. In doing so,
the WWDR4 seeks to inform readers and raise awareness of the new threats arising from accelerated change
and of the interconnected forces that create uncertainty
and risk – ultimately emphasizing that these forces can
be managed effectively and can even generate vital opportunities and beneﬁts through innovative approaches
to allocation, use and management of water.
Structure and content
The WWDR4 is separated into four parts. Part 1, ‘Status,
trends and challenges’, provides an overview of recent
developments, emerging trends and key challenges,
including the external forces driving these and the
uncertainties and risks created by the drivers. Part 2,
‘Managing water under uncertainty and risk’, is the thematic part of the report in which decisions affecting
water, from management and institutions to allocation
and ﬁnancing, are investigated through the lens of risk
and uncertainty, with particular emphasis on climate
change and other drivers of change. Part 3 (Volume
2), ‘Knowledge base’, contains each of the challenge
area reports prepared by UN-Water agencies and the
regional reports prepared by the UN regional economic commissions – from which much of the material in
Parts 1 and 2 was extracted – as well as other supporting documents. Like the earlier editions, the WWDR4
also contains case studies, Part 4 (Volume 3). The 15
country-level case studies describe the progress made
in meeting water-related objectives, as well as some
obstacles leading to lingering and in many cases worsening problems, showing that there are lessons to be
learned from success stories as well as from failures.
The WWDR4 opens with Chapter 1, which describes
the global dimensions of water and underlines the
need to move beyond the concept of water as a sector. It discusses water’s central role and cross-cutting
nature in achieving various developmental targets, a
reality that is evolving in key international processes
such as the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiations and the preparatory work leading up to the Rio+20 Conference
of the UN Commission for Sustainable Development
(CSD), or being adequately implemented in national
frameworks.

20

Part 1 begins with Chapter 2, which focuses on the key
sectors of water demand: food and agriculture, energy,
industry, and human settlements. In addition to reporting recent trends and developments, this chapter describes the pressures for the main drivers, the uncertainties and risks related to each sector, projections on
future demands (where possible) and possible response
measures. The chapter concludes with a section on ecosystems as a ‘user’ of water, arguing that water demand
by ecosystems is to be determined by the water requirements to sustain or restore the beneﬁts for people
(services) that we want ecosystems to supply.
Chapter 3 looks at the supply-side aspects of the water
resources equation. Focusing on information provided
in previous WWDRs, the chapter examines the role of
large-scale climate drivers in distributing the earth’s
water resources over time and space. Two very important storage-related issues, groundwater and glaciers,
are addressed here in terms of their vulnerability and
the long-terms risks that may evolve from over-exploitation (groundwater) and from climate change (glaciers). The chapter concludes with an examination of
the most pressing water quality issues and the risks
these can engender.
Chapter 4 focuses on the beneﬁts received through
water in terms of human health and ecosystems and
the challenges faced from natural hazards and desertiﬁcation. These are examined in terms of current trends
and hotspots, with uncertainties and risks associated
with the main external drivers, and response options.
The chapter includes a section focusing on gender-related challenges and opportunities and concludes with
an examination of the current global water balance,
describing the role of water as the nexus for sectors
related to development and poverty eradication.
Chapter 5 describes how different water management
systems and institutions function, looks at the challenges they face, and examines the important role of
developing knowledge and capacity in addressing increasing uncertainty and risk.
Chapter 6 explores the need for better data and information for improved decision-making. The chapter describes the value of focusing on a small set of
speciﬁc data items from which myriad indicators of
performance can be developed, and highlights several
promising options that, if properly implemented, could
begin providing highly valuable information for water

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

managers, institutions and decision-makers inside and
outside the water box alike.
Chapter 7 presents a summary of each of the ﬁve regional reports contained in Part 3/Volume 2: Africa;
Europe and North America; Asia-Paciﬁc; Latin America
and the Caribbean; and the Arab and Western Asia
region. Each region is examined in terms of the driving forces and pressures on water resources, the main
challenges, risks and uncertainties associated with
these, hotspots, examples from responses to the challenges, and potential response options. The chapter
(and Part 1) closes with an examination of the interlinkages between different regions and global challenges,
which describes how actions in one part of the world
can create negative impacts, as well as opportunities,
in other parts of the world.
Part 2 begins with Chapter 8, which introduces some
of the basic concepts of uncertainty and risk, including
thresholds, tipping points and nonstationarity and what
they mean in terms of water management, decisionmaking and policy formulation. Different principles and
approaches to dealing with uncertainty and risk are presented with examples of their strategic applications.
Chapter 9 builds on the analysis of the main external
forces (i.e. drivers) that were ﬁrst introduced in the
WWDR3. It includes an examination of the possible
evolution of ten key drivers and the uncertainties and
risks associated with them. It also reports on the results from Phase I of WWAP’s World Water Scenarios
Project, demonstrating the complexity of the interlinkages between these drivers of change. The chapter concludes with short examples that illustrate the
possible futures that could arise from a water-centred
scenario development exercise.
Chapter 10 focuses on the values of water, its beneﬁts
and its allocation. It sets out the elements of an economic case for investment in water and for reforming
its development and management, starting with the
overall beneﬁts of water to an economy, and proceeding to consider the value of water in the various parts
of its cycle. It shows how these beneﬁts and values can
be used to inform policies for the allocation and use of
water in situations of growing resource pressures, uncertainties and associated risks.

make most of the important decisions impacting water. Important instruments to support decision-making
include forecasts and scenarios, as combining a range
of forecasts of possible futures allows for more robust
decision-making. A key tool to initiating the muchneeded adaptation, proactive adaptive integrated water resources management (IWRM), is also presented.
The chapter closes with a focus on ways institutions
can be reformed to better deal with uncertainty and
manage risk.
Chapter 12 builds on the case made in Chapter 10,
showing that water development is key to sustainable
development and an integral part of a green economy,
and explaining how increased ﬁnancing is necessary
for all facets of water development, ranging from ‘hard’
infrastructure to equally important ‘soft’ items such as
capacity; management; data collection, analysis and
dissemination; and regulation and other governance
issues. It examines efforts to help reduce the funding
gap through internal efficiency and other measures;
improve the generation of revenues from users, government budgets and official development assistance
(ODA); and use these ﬂows to leverage repayable ﬁnance such as bonds, loans and equity.
Chapter 13 presents a set of responses to risk and
uncertainty from a water management perspective. Examples of reducing uncertainty are provided
in terms of monitoring, modelling and forecasting to
reduce uncertainty and understand risk; adaptive planning; and proactive management. Examples of reducing exposure and minimizing risk are also presented in
relation to investments in infrastructure and environmental engineering. Finally, examples of trade-offs in
water decision-making are presented.
Part 2 concludes with Chapter 14, which focuses on
responses to risks and uncertainties from outside the
water box. Examples are provided of how water can
be affected (positively or negatively) through actions
and policies aimed at reducing poverty and promoting
green growth, responding to climate change (in terms
of adaptation and mitigation), informing business decisions and managing sectoral risks. The chapter closes
with approaches to mitigating risks and uncertainties,
with a look at the roles of insurance, treaties and multisectoral cooperation.

Chapter 11 describes a set of different tools for leaders
in government, the private sector and civil society who

WWDR4

INTRODUCTION

21

CHAPTER 1
Recognizing the centrality of
water and its global dimensions

—
Authors Richard Connor and Hannah Stoddard
Contributors David Coates, William J. Cosgrove, Felix Dodds, Joakim Harlin,
Paul Heigl, Karen Lexén and Jack Moss

© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Altitude-Paris
Italy: Countryside around Siena, Tuscany (43°19’ N, 11°19’ E)

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Water is an essential resource required for sustaining life and livelihoods: safe water is required
for drinking, hygiene and providing food; and adequate water to produce energy and support
economic activities such as industry and transportation. Water in the natural environment
ensures the provision of a multitude of ecosystem services to meet basic human needs and
support economic and cultural activities. For too long water has been an issue that is at once
everywhere and nowhere: it is the lifeblood of our planet and of the human societies that
ﬂourish upon it, but is frequently taken for granted, with decisions at all levels and across all
sectors made without full consideration of the potential impacts on water resources and other
water users. The challenge for twenty-ﬁrst century governance is to place water at the heart
of decision-making at all levels – horizontally across departments and sectors, and vertically at
local, national, regional and global scales. Two prerequisites are essential to this happening.
First, it must be understood that water is a natural resource upon which all social and
economic activities and ecosystem functions depend. It cuts across and affects more aspects
of life than can be easily listed or categorized. It is a basic amenity of life, as well as being
indispensable for other necessities: as an input to agriculture for food, ﬁbre, feed and biofuels,
the production of energy, and for industrial and manufacturing processes for multitudes of
products. Water also has tradable aspects – both directly, for example, through pipes and
bottles, in tankers and vessels, and indirectly or ‘virtually’ through products. In many contexts
it is understood as a commodity although with many characteristics of a public good.
Understanding the multiple aspects and roles of water is crucial to governing it effectively.
Second, greater recognition is needed of the fact that water is not solely a local, national
or regional issue that can be governed at any of those levels alone. On the contrary, global
interdependencies are woven through water, and decisions relating to water use on a local,
national or regional level often cannot be isolated from global drivers, trends and uncertainties.
Impacts on water resources are driven by factors both outside the ‘water box’ and, importantly,
outside the ‘decision-making box’ of local, national and regional actors. The recognition that
water is an ubiquitous cycle, tapped into by development at all levels, has implications for
the processes instituted for governing water at local, national and regional levels, for sharing
expertise, and moving towards more robust water management in different locations.
Some global dynamics and drivers, such as climate change and patterns of global trade
or foreign investment regimes, cannot be dealt with solely at local, national or regional
levels. Recognition of these global dimensions at the country level may inﬂuence the kinds
of institutional arrangements necessary at the international level to address water-related
challenges that demand an international response. The United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development (UNCSD) in 2012 and its subsequent plan of action1 offer an
opportunity for countries to advance discussions in this area, as do the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in its negotiations on climate
change mitigation and adaptation and the post-2015 processes surrounding the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Other relevant processes include Ramsar and the conventions
on biodiversity and desertiﬁcation. Forums and groups of formal and semi-formal nature such
as the G8, G20, the World Economic Forum, the World Water Forum, and the World Social
Forum also have an impact on global thinking.
This chapter explores these observations – that water is a natural resource critical to socioeconomic development, and that some dimensions of water management are global. These
factors sometimes demand global responses in addition to local, national and regional
governance. Population growth, technology, changing lifestyles and increasing consumption
and climate change, among others, introduce uncertainty to water management at both local
and global levels.

© Philippe Bourseiller

1.1 Beyond the concept of water as a sector
Water is a necessary component for all major socioeconomic sectors, contributing to each in different ways.
Agriculture requires large quantities of water for irrigation as well good quality water for various production
processes. Energy requires water for powering turbines
(hydroelectricity), cooling power plants (thermal and
nuclear electricity) and growing biofuels. Access to safe
water supplies and basic sanitation are necessary for
maintaining public health, and water is needed to support healthy ecosystems, which in turn provide critical
environmental goods and services. The beneﬁts from
each of these sectors are provided through water.
A core focus of the third edition of the World Water
Development Report was the impact on water resources of decisions taken outside the ‘water box’.
Planning for public health, urbanization, industrialization, energy production and agricultural development
– to name but a few areas – is all too often conducted
in isolation from water ministries and water managers. Furthermore, water demands and uses are often
managed in silos with each focused on meeting speciﬁc developmental objectives, rather than as part of
an overarching and strategic framework that balances
different water uses in order to optimize and share
its various beneﬁts across society and the economy.
This fragmentation increases risks to the sustainability
of water resources as well as to the different development objectives that depend upon (and may be
in competition for) limited supplies. Climate change
exacerbates this problem still further. Climate change
impacts on water resources, as well as the ‘drivers’
of demand, stand to turn water from an intermittent
problem to an acute one in many parts of the world
(Steer, 2010), making the case for consultation with
actors outside the water box even more compelling.
The job of delivering adequate water for social, economic and environmental needs is often understood as
the preserve of the ‘water sector’, which is expected
to provide the appropriate infrastructure and channel
water in the right direction. Yet in reality, water cuts
across all social, economic and environmental activities. As such, its governance requires cooperation and
coordination across diverse stakeholders and sectoral
‘jurisdictions’. Furthermore, water availability must be
understood within the context of the hydrological cycle, which is inﬂuenced by multiple factors, trends and
uncertainties that extend beyond a narrow sectoral focus. This principle has been captured to a great extent

24

CHAPTER 1

by the movement towards integrated water resources
management (IWRM), a governance framework for
water resources that seeks to manage water across
competing uses and needs – including agriculture, energy and industry – as well as water for basic human
needs and ecosystem functions (see Chapter 5). Yet
progress towards such governance frameworks has
been slow, as operationalizing the principle of IWRM
necessitates institutions that facilitate discussion and
decisions on the targets of society, and the allocation
of water resources across sectors to meet them. In the
absence of institutionalized IWRM (or a similar coordinating mechanism), growing recognition of the waterfood-energy-health-environment nexus concept can
help raise awareness among managers responsible for
planning in different water-dependent sectors of the
broader implications of their actions, including their
water use, on the resource and other users.
It is true that water unites a community of experts,
managers, officials and other stakeholders who are
tasked with managing the resource effectively and
responding to increasing demand. As such, its status
as a sector cannot be completely denied. The crucial
factor for water governance is therefore the recognition that water is not only a sector, but also a necessary element that provides beneﬁts for all sectors, thus
requiring active consultation with, and coordination
among, the sectors and communities that depend
upon it. In particular, members of the water community have the duty to inform and provide guidance to
decision-making and to regulatory authorities on how
to use and manage the resource sustainably, so as to
optimize and share its many beneﬁts and minimize
conﬂicts. In short, addressing water challenges necessitates interventions across an entire economy, undertaken by strong institutions with the authority, capacity and leadership to take a proactive rather than a
reactive role in water management, and to drive the
productive use of water across sectors within the limits
of social and environmental sustainability (Steer, 2010).
The importance of political leadership in establishing,
reviewing and maintaining the frameworks to manage these competing demands cannot be understated.
Some of the areas where this is particularly critical are
outlined in this section.
1.1.1 Food
Water for irrigation and food production constitutes
one of the greatest pressures on freshwater resources. Agriculture accounts for around 70% of global

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

freshwater withdrawals (reaching up to 90% in some
fast-growing economies). Global population growth
projections of 2 to 3 billion people over the next 40
years, combined with changing diets, result in a predicted increase in food demand of 70% by 2050 (see
Section 2.1 and Chapter 18). However, as the largest
user of water, food production also represents the largest unknown in terms of future global water demand,
for several reasons.
First, it is difficult to predict how diets in different
countries and regions will evolve over the next few
decades, and therefore what type of food (with its varying demands for water) will be produced. The quantity of biofuel that will be needed is also unknown, or
how this demand will affect food production through
increased competition over land and water. The extent
to which technological improvements in agricultural
water productivity (‘crop per drop’) will affect future
water demand is extremely difficult to predict. Finally,
because of climate change, there are many uncertainties concerning how much water will be available
where and when.
In the short-term, increased demands for food represent a signiﬁcant economic opportunity for farmers
and agricultural producers all over the world, especially
in developing countries whose economies are often
highly dependent upon agricultural production and export. There are plenty of sustainable ways of responding to increased food demand, such as drought resilient crops, incentives for more efficient irrigation and
water usage, removal of subsidies encouraging inefficient water use, and regulatory frameworks to control
water pollution from excess fertilizer use (WEF, 2011).
Dialogue between water managers and agricultural
planners is crucial to ensuring that the right combination of the above is identiﬁed and properly implemented, so as to reduce uncertainties and risks related
to food and water security. This dialogue must include
stakeholders who make a living from agriculture (including biofuels), at all levels, in order to inform the
decision-making authorities about their current and
future allocation needs.

“The crucial factor for
water governance is
... the recognition that
water is not only a
sector. ”
produced globally, 7% to 8% is used to lift groundwater
and pump it through pipes, and to treat both groundwater and wastewater (Hoffman, 2011) – a ﬁgure that
rises to around 40% in developed countries (WEF,
2011). Desalination, the process by which seawater is
converted to freshwater, is especially energy intensive.
The treatment of wastewater also requires signiﬁcant
amounts of energy, and demand for energy to do this
is expected to increase globally by 44% between 2006
and 2030 (IEA, 2009), especially in non-OECD countries where wastewater currently receives little or no
treatment (Corcoran et al., 2010).

1.1.2 Energy
The relationship between water and energy is reciprocal (see Section 2.2 and Chapter 19). Energy is required for humans to make use of water – to lift, move,
process and treat it at every phase of its extraction,
distribution and use (USAID, 2001). Out of all energy

Conversely, water is needed to produce and make use
of energy. It is required for cooling in the generation
of thermal and nuclear electricity, and is necessary for
alternative or renewable forms of energy such as hydropower (as a direct input), as well as concentrated
solar energy. Biofuels represent an additional demand
on water resources, and also compete with food for
limited water and land. In 2009, the number of people without access to electricity was 1.4 billion or 20%
of the world’s population. Global energy consumption
is expected to increase by about 50% between 2007
and 2035 with non-OECD countries accounting for
84% of this increase (IEA, 2010b). The need to increase
energy supplies to meet rising populations and living
standards, as well as presently unmet demand, creates
several unknowns: which energy mix will be used (and
where), and how much more water will be needed to
generate this additional energy? These unknowns add
to the other major uncertainties regarding future demands for water. Climate change further complicates
the issue because mitigation and adaptation imperatives have energy implications (see Section 1.2.1). As
the pressure to invest in renewable energy intensiﬁes
in an effort to achieve mitigation objectives, there may
be signiﬁcant trade-offs in relation to water resources.

WWDR4

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

25

The relationship between water and energy illustrates
the centrality of water in relation to other developmental sectors. For example, health problems induced by a
lack of access to clean energy (e.g. cooking inside on
wood burners) often go hand-in-hand with diseases
caused by lack of access to safe drinking water (see
Section 4.1 and Chapter 34). How can governments
simultaneously deliver expanded energy access while
also increasing access to water for both personal and
productive uses? Enhancing efficiency in both energy
production and the extraction, delivery and treatment
of water will be critical, as will the choice of energy
source according to context. Biofuels are an increasingly prominent component of the energy mix, as
exempliﬁed by the EU target for biofuels to constitute 10% of transport fuel by 2020 (EU, 2007). This
target has been hotly debated as it acts as a driver
for conversion of land from food to biofuel production, placing upward pressure on food prices, and in
some cases leading to the conversion of forest ecosystems to land to ‘grow’ biofuels. Estimates vary, but
even modest projections of biofuel production suggest
that if by 2030 – as the IEA suggests – just 5% of road
transport is powered by biofuels, this could amount to
at least 20% of the water used for agriculture globally
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture, 2007). Of course, should alternative technologies for biofuel (e.g. photobioreactors for algae)
become available on a large scale, these projections
could change dramatically, further illustrating the increasing uncertainties related to future water demands
from different, often interconnected, demand sectors.
1.1.3 People
Beyond physiological hydration (roughly 60% of human body weight is water) water is necessary for
meeting most of our basic physiological needs and
provides us with myriad additional beneﬁts (see
Chapter 4). Access to drinking water supply and sanitation (WSS) services is key to meeting many of these
needs. The importance of safe drinking water and sanitation for human health, well-being and socio-economic development is well established and is, quite understandably, a recurring issue in this report.
WSS is a ‘service sector’, which like electricity is supported by different institutional arrangements and
ﬁnancial mechanisms to provide people with a set of
basic services. In fact, the WSS services sector is so
important that it has led to a common and reoccurring
misperception: that water and the WSS services sector

26

CHAPTER 1

are synonymous. This is not true. As is the case for
agriculture, energy and other sectors, water is the resource upon which the sector is based – in this case, it
is both the substance and the medium through which
water supply and most urban sanitation services are
provided. This can (and has been) the source of some
confusion, even among those in the water community.
But it is important to differentiate water (which is a
fundamental natural resource that needs to be managed and protected) from WSS services, which are services that need to be provided.
Providing increased access to WSS services raises
some interesting questions with respect to uncertainties. For example, will sanitation always be closely
linked to water – or will it evolve to capturing urine
and excreta for productive uses? Will there be more
capture of rainwater or reuse of wastewater for gardens and urban green spaces? This would naturally
make a major change in household water consumption.
Many of water’s beneﬁts to people are imparted
through the services provided by the WSS services sector. Direct beneﬁts to living standards include health
and dignity. These also lead to indirect beneﬁts such as
increased access to higher levels of income and education, as well as the promotion of gender equality and
empowerment of women. But there are also several
beneﬁts that are not necessarily related to WSS services. For example, water is indispensible for ‘income
sources for both smallholders and landless people, such
as raising livestock. Trees and shrubs for fuel wood,
timber, fruits and medicaments need water. Catching
ﬁsh for family consumption can provide a major source
of protein for poor households and provides incomes
for small artisan ﬁshermen and women. Water is also
needed for various small industries and crafts, like brickmaking, pottery, or beer-making.’ (WWC, 2000, p. 15).
Transportation and recreation are yet other examples of
the beneﬁts we receive through water.
Water can also help to shape our values and ethics, as
individuals or as part of wider communities that can
work together to manage the resource and share its
beneﬁts. Involving end users, particularly women, in
water management contributes to optimizing beneﬁts
from water projects (see Section 4.2 and Chapter 35).
It should also be remembered that, in Africa, women
are the ones who produce 60% to 80% of the food for
their families (FAO, n.d.). Water and energy are needed
for this and it is imperative that women have access to

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

water for irrigation from surface, ground and rainfed
sources, generally at a small scale. This is sometimes a
function of land and water rights, but also requires that
local water managers recognize women’s water needs
outside of the household. Water managers can work
with men and women who use WSS services to ﬁnd out
what they need and what the best solutions are. Urban
and rural communities can make practical contributions
regarding new approaches to urban planning and land
use, and can identify the most suitable technical solutions, including technology, the location of various facilities, and the most appropriate sources of water, according to what they can afford. The community can support
their water facility through resource mobilization and
labour for construction, operation and maintenance.
1.1.4 Ecosystems
Ecosystems provide a multitude of beneﬁts to humans
(ecosystem services); for example, products such as
food, timber, medicines and ﬁbre, regulating climate
and supporting nutrient cycling, and soil formation
and deposition. Providing water, as a resource for direct use, is also an ecosystem service in terms of both
its quality and its quantity. Ecosystems, in turn, also
depend on water in order to function; when they are
stressed the beneﬁts are reduced or eliminated (see
Sections 2.5 and 4.3 and Chapter 21).
The water cycle is a biophysical process. Without life
on earth the water cycle would still exist, but be quite
different. Ecosystems underpin the sustainable quantity and quality of water available: for example, the life
in soils regulates water storage there and nutrient cycling, supporting all terrestrial life (including food production); forests (through plant transpiration) regulate
local and regional humidity and precipitation; wetlands
(and soils) regulate the extremes of drought and ﬂood.

The stability of ecosystems is under increasing threat
from unsustainable patterns of human consumption,
development, and climate change across the globe.
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment states that
the ‘primary indirect drivers of degradation and loss
of inland and coastal wetlands have been population
growth and increasing economic development’ (MA,
2005). Examples of ecosystem damage largely coincide with areas of high water stress, such as in West
Asia and the Indo-Gangetic Plain in South Asia, the
North China Plain and the high plains in North America
(Arthurton et al., 2007). Excessive withdrawal of both
surface and groundwater over the past 50 years for
agriculture, energy, industry and urban growth has led
to a situation in many parts of the world where water
abstraction exceeds the threshold of water renewability in the river basin, resulting in widespread damage
to ecosystems (Molle and Vallée, 2009). The precise
amount of water required to sustain a given ecosystem
over a certain period is often unknown, and allocation
decisions would also depend on the type of ecosystem
services to be maintained. As this is a societal judgement that can also vary over time, it adds to the uncertainties in anticipating future water demands.
1.1.5 Water-related hazards
Many of the impacts of natural hazards on socio-economic development occur through water (see Section
4.4 and Chapter 27). Between 1990 and 2000, in several developing countries, natural disasters caused
damage representing between 2% and 15% of their annual GDP (World Bank, 2004; WWAP, 2009). Waterrelated hazards account for 90% of all natural hazards,
and their frequency and intensity is generally rising.
Some 373 natural disasters killed over 296,800 people
in 2010, affecting nearly 208 million others and costing
nearly US$110 billion (UN, 2011).

The role of ecosystems in the water cycle has two interrelated implications for water management. The
ﬁrst is that water must be allocated so as to allow ecosystems to continue to deliver the level of beneﬁts we
need (e.g. through maintaining environmental ﬂows).2
The second is that ecosystems can be proactively managed (other than by allocating water to them), through,
for example, conservation or rehabilitation, in order
to deliver what we need to meet water-related objectives. For example, forests are very good at delivering clean water, and wetlands at regulating ﬂoods and
restoring soil functionality, a key mechanism to combat
desertiﬁcation.

The increase in natural disaster losses over the past few
decades is largely attributable to the increase in the
value of exposed assets (Bouwer, 2011). While there is
currently no evidence that climate change is directly
responsible for increased losses associated with waterrelated hazards (Bouwer, 2011), it is expected to bring
about an increase in the frequency of certain natural
hazards, including ﬂoods and droughts (IPCC, 2007).

WWDR4

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

Water management plays a central role in reducing the
risks of natural disasters. Water storage (via reservoirs,
aquifer recharge or other means) is vital to combating
the effects of drought, providing a supply buffer that

27

“Managing water
sustainably supports
the overall objectives
of a green economy
or a green growth
pathway, and also
satisﬁes critical social
imperatives.”
can be made available for key beneﬁcial uses during
times of scarcity. Reservoirs can also serve to retain
ﬂoodwaters, and are often an important component
of physical ﬂood defence systems, along with levees,
weirs and dykes designed to prevent rivers from bursting their banks.
Such infrastructure forms part of a broader and integrated water management system (see Chapters 5,
11 and 12), which also include ecosystems and urban
drainage systems, whose operation and maintenance
(when available) reduce uncertainties and risks to water use sectors and development goals. Rising levels
of uncertainty and risk associated with extreme events
are indeed worrying, but must not become paralyzing.
Quite the opposite: not knowing something implies
opportunities to ﬁnd out more and the notion of risk
implies the existence of choices. It is possible to inﬂuence outcomes including minimizing risk or mitigating
its impacts (see Chapter 8).
1.1.6 Water’s role in greening economies and growth
Recognizing the centrality of water for sustainable
development is crucial in the development of a green
economy. In a green economy, the role of water in
maintaining ecosystem services and water supply
would be acknowledged, appreciated and paid for
(UNEP, 2011). Direct beneﬁts to society as a whole can
be gained by increasing investment in water supply
and sanitation, including investment in wastewater
treatment, watershed protection and the conservation of ecosystems critical for water. New approaches,
such as planning for adaptation to uncertain futures,

28

CHAPTER 1

the adoption of green technologies, improving the efﬁciency of water provision, and developing alternative
water sources and forms of management (e.g. desalination, water recovery and reuse, payment for environmental services, ecosystem conservation, improved
property rights) will play an essential role in enabling a
cross-sectoral transition to a green economy. The consideration of full costs of service provision may also be
an enabling factor, but this principle has often proven
to be impractical in many situations as it can be difficult to implement in practice, especially in developing
countries.
Managing water sustainably supports the overall objectives of a green economy or a green growth pathway,
and also satisﬁes critical social imperatives of poverty
alleviation, food and energy security, and health and
dignity, through the provision of water and sanitation
services. Investment in and protection and sustainable management of water resources, across society
as a whole, allow signiﬁcant steps to be made towards
achieving a green economy that advances long-term
human well-being within ecological limits (see Chapters
12 and 24). The way that water is managed and allocated has impacts across all areas of society and economy,
and its governance must move ‘from the pump room
to the Boardroom’ (Steer, 2010). Embedding water
management as the central pillar of sustainable development requires institutions that facilitate discussion
and decisions on society’s targets and the allocation of
water resources to optimize generation and equitable
distribution of its many beneﬁts. It is, then, the role of
water managers to inform the process and do what is
necessary to implement the decisions.
As conceptualized within a green economy, those beneﬁtting from environmental services would be valued
stakeholders, alongside other water users who would
be recompensed to provide more equitably distributed
beneﬁts. The ‘polluter pays principle’ provides a basic
model with which to achieve this, supported by robust
and proactive regulation on a relevant river basin scale
to identify polluters and enforce compensation for the
restoration of environmental impacts. Furthermore, existing aspects of sound water policies related to poverty
alleviation and gender equality are already supportive
of the objectives of a green economy, whereby all water
users have fair and equitable access to the beneﬁts of
maintaining a healthy environment. For example, the
provision of water services to families in extreme poverty in Lima, Peru, within the framework of the Water for

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

All Programme, is estimated to have increased total disposable family income by 14% per month, resulting from
lower water expenditures and reduced health care costs
(Garrido-Lecca, 2010; see Box 1.1).

1.2 Beyond the basin: The international and
global dimensions of water governance
The drivers of water use and availability (the impact of
many of which is uncertain) are found not just outside
the water box and beyond the sector, but also often
in other nation states. Although water is distributed
unevenly across the planet, it forms part of a global
cycle – the hydrological or water cycle – which can be
interrupted by actions and phenomena that take place

BOX 1.1
Water for All Programme, Peru

In Peru, the Water for All Programme was designed not
only as a mechanism for expanding the coverage of water supply and sanitation services, but also as a ‘costbased approach’ to the alleviation of extreme poverty or
indigence.
Once connected to the network, families living in extreme poverty, who previously bought water in drums,
more than tripled their water consumption. However,
their monthly spending on water decreased, resulting in a
10% increase in disposable income. The Programme also
helped reduce gastrointestinal diseases caused by a lack
of basic services and by inadequate sanitary conditions,
with estimated additional monthly savings for families
from lower health care costs – taking account only of the
elimination of the episodes of acute diarrhoeal diseases
– of about 4% per month (resulting in a total increase in
disposable family income of 14% per month).
The aspiration of the Programme is that, by reducing
unavoidable expenses, freeing up cash ﬂow and increasing disposable income, it will ultimately generate a small
amount of savings that will allow families to transition
towards poverty levels that at least make inclusion in the
formal market possible.
A potentially attractive feature of the Programme is that it
has a once-off investment cost; the families themselves then
pay for the service with only a small, pre-existing crosssubsidy that covers an initial consumption block. Therefore,
in terms of sustainability and from a ﬁscal point of view, the
Programme does not jeopardize its continuity or the beneﬁciaries’ chances of escaping from extreme poverty.

Sources: Garrido-Lecca (2010, 2011).

WWDR4

beyond the nation state (e.g. regionally through upstream diversions and globally through the impacts of
climate change). Other aspects of the global equation
include the international distribution of certain waterrelated beneﬁts (predominantly expressed through
trade in agricultural products), the rising global demand for water, the limited availability of the resource
at any one time or place, and the over-consumption of
water and high-water content of goods and commodities in some developed countries. Building on these
observations, this section addresses four prominent,
interconnected factors that introduce a global dimension to water governance: climate change, transboundary basins, global trade and international investment protection, and equity.
1.2.1 Climate change
Climate change highlights the centrality of water in
relation to a key global issue. First, because the worst
climate impacts are delivered through a changing water
cycle, and their avoidance requires global cooperation
on a climate change agreement. Second, unavoidable
climate change impacts through water in developing
countries result in an obligation for developed countries
to assist some in adapting to these impacts. Third, efforts to improve water governance arrangements are,
in effect, the focus of climate change adaptation needs,
and must be explicitly recognized as such in climate
change funding. And last, climate change mitigation
and adaptation responses are related because the carbon and water cycles are interdependent.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) states that ‘water and its availability and quality
will be the main pressures on, and issues for, societies
and the environment under climate change’ (Bates et
al., 2008, p. 7). People will feel the impact of climate
change most strongly through changes in the distribution of water around the world and its seasonal and
annual variability (Stern, 2007). The poor, who are the
most vulnerable, are also likely to be affected the most
(Stern, 2007). Climate change also leads to new uncertainties concerning future water demand through
different water-using sectors. For example, global
warming suggests increased energy demands for air
conditioning, and higher evapotranspiration rates
could increase future demands for agriculture.
The precise impacts of climate change through water, in particular locations, remain uncertain and are
notoriously difficult to predict, especially at the local

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

29

“The carbon cycle
(the realm of climate
change mitigation) and
the water cycle (the
realm of adaptation)
are interlinked:
ecosystems require
water to store carbon
and by doing so
impact water.”
or river basin level. Under different IPCC scenarios,
regions may become ‘drier’ or ‘wetter’, as there are a
variety of possible ways in which climate change may
impact the hydrological cycle in different areas and at
different times. What is certain is that the uncertainties generated by climate change add a global dimension to the challenges of water resources management,
as efforts to effectively manage water locally may be
impeded by climate-induced hydrological impacts or
increasing demands. Efforts to limit negative climate
change impacts occurring through the water cycle require collective, global efforts to reduce carbon emissions, which ‘go beyond the governance domain of water managers who operate at the local, national or river
basin level’ (Hoekstra, 2011, p. 24). Indeed, discussions
on the respective responsibilities and capabilities of
states to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are
rightly conducted through the UNFCCC.
Even if the most ambitious GHG reduction agreement were to be implemented now, it would likely not
prevent the world from experiencing a certain level
of climate change. The interconnected nature of our
global economy means, for example, that climate-induced water shocks in an important food-producing
region may potentially have signiﬁcant impacts on
food security in other parts of the world. But the capacity to adapt to climate change impacts through the
water cycle is extremely low, particularly in a number

30

CHAPTER 1

of developing countries, which may be facing increasing water scarcity, and where the adaptive capacity of
institutions is often restricted by deﬁcient design, low
operational capacity, and insufficient human and ﬁnancial resources. For these countries, which have contributed the least amount of GHGs, adaptation represents
an additional ﬁnancial burden that many ﬁnd difficult
to support without assistance from the most prominent GHG-producing countries.
The cost of adapting to the impacts of a 2°C rise in
global average temperature could range from US$70
to US$100 billion per year between 2020 and 2050
(World Bank, 2010). Of these costs, between US$13.7
billion (drier scenario) and US$19.2 billion (wetter scenario) will be related to the ‘water sector’, predominantly through water supply and ﬂood management.
However, these estimates do not take account of the
beneﬁts water provides through other ‘sectors’ (food,
energy, health, etc.) and is thus under-representative
of the full value of the beneﬁts that would be obtained
from a greater focus on adaptation through water.
Water’s central role in adaptation, and in socioeconomic development in general, merits explicit recognition in the ongoing negotiations concerning Green
Climate Fund (GCF)3 and other ﬁnancing mechanisms.
Furthermore, infrastructure development, as well as
the institutional reforms required to ensure the optimization of water’s beneﬁts across various socio-economic sectors, should be considered as key components of climate change adaptation.
In mitigation terms, the appropriateness of global interventions and mechanisms relating to land use, notably forestry and agriculture should be analysed in ways
that include their potential impacts on water in each
context.
In recognition of the role that deforestation plays in
contributing to global GHG emissions (estimates suggest between 20% and 25% of total emissions), the
UNFCCC has explored options through its initiative
on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD) (UN, 2009). REDD basically ascribes a value to the carbon sequestration potential
of forests and calls on developed countries to transfer
funds to developing countries to preserve those forests to help mitigate climate change. However, the relationship between water and forests is complex. While
it is true that forests rely on water availability for their
long-term sustainability through groundwater, surface

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

water and precipitation, it is also true that forests play
a central role in improving water quality and, by maintaining or improving soil inﬁltration and soil water storage capacity, they inﬂuence the timing of water delivery (Hamilton, 2008). Forests also play an important
self-regulating role in the regional cycling of water by
re-intercepting atmospheric water locally generated by
evaporation and redistributing it over different parts
of the forest (Hamilton, 2008). The key point is that

BOX 1.2
Climate change adaptation: The pivotal role of water

Water is the primary medium through which climate
change inﬂuences Earth’s ecosystem and thus the livelihood and well-being of societies. Higher temperatures
and changes in extreme weather conditions are projected
to affect availability and distribution of rainfall, snow melt,
river ﬂows and groundwater, and further deteriorate water
quality. The poor, who are the most vulnerable, are likely
to be adversely affected.
Adaptation to climate change is urgent. Water plays a
pivotal role in it, but the political world has yet to recognize this notion. As a consequence, adaptation measures in water management are often underrepresented
in national plans or in international investment portfolios. Therefore, signiﬁcant investments and policy shifts
are needed. These should be guided by the following
principles:
đƫƫƫ %*/0.!)ƫ ,00%+*/ƫ3%0$%*ƫ0$!ƫ.+ !.ƫ !2!(+,ment context
đƫƫƫ0.!*#0$!*ƫ#+2!.**!ƫ* ƫ%),.+2!ƫ30!.ƫ
management
đƫƫƫ),.+2!ƫ* ƫ/$.!ƫ'*+3(! #!ƫ* ƫ%*"+.)0%+*ƫ+*ƫ
climate and adaptation measures, and invest in data
collection
đƫƫƫ1%( ƫ(+*#ġ0!.)ƫ.!/%(%!*!ƫ0$.+1#$ƫ/0.+*#!.ƫ%*/0%010%+*/Čƫ
and invest in infrastructure and in well-functioning
ecosystems
đƫƫƫ*2!/0ƫ%*ƫ+/0ġ!û!0%2!ƫ* ƫ ,0%2!ƫ30!.ƫ)*#!ment as well as technology transfer
đƫƫƫ !2!.#!ƫ %0%+*(ƫ"1* /ƫ0$.+1#$ƫ+0$ƫ%*.!/! ƫ*tional budgetary allocations and innovative funding
mechanisms for adaptation in water management
Application of these principles would require joint efforts
and local-to-global collaboration among sectoral, multisectoral as well as multidisciplinary institutions.

Source: An extract from the UN-Water policy brief Climate Change
Adaptation: The Pivotal Role of Water, available at http://www.
unwater.org/downloads/unw_ccpol_web.pdf (p. 1, Executive
Summary).

WWDR4

the carbon cycle (the realm of climate change mitigation) and the water cycle (the realm of adaptation) are
interlinked: ecosystems require water to store carbon
and by doing so impact water.
Agriculture has in recent years also emerged as a potential area for carbon sequestration, and discussions
have emerged as to whether sustainable agricultural
practices that reduce ‘business-as-usual’ carbon emissions might be eligible for carbon credits. Yet water
remains an under-recognized part of this equation.
Farming practices that sequester more carbon usually do so by restoring soil functions and land cover,
both of which require the conservation of soil water.
The linkages between carbon, water and sustainable
farming are therefore usually signiﬁcant and mutually inclusive. A global market incentive for low-carbon
farming, therefore, involves a signiﬁcant water dimension. These examples serve to highlight the global and
multi-disciplinary, interfaces of water governance in
relation to climate change objectives.
A policy brief issued by UN-Water makes the case for
water’s role in adaptation to climate change (Box 1.2).
1.2.2 Transboundary basins
Water is not conﬁned within political borders. An estimated 148 states have international basins within their
territory (OSU, n.d., 2008 data), and 21 countries lie
entirely within them (OSU, n.d., 2002 data). In addition,
about 2 billion people worldwide depend on groundwater supplies, which include to date 273 transboundary
aquifer systems (ISARM, 2009; Puri and Aureli, 2009).
There are numerous examples where transboundary waters have proved to be a source of cooperation rather than conﬂict. The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has identiﬁed more than 3,600 treaties relating to international
water resources (FAO, 1984). The earliest recorded
water-related international treaty is usually considered
to be the one which concluded the ﬁrst and only water
war (between Umma and Lagash city states). Nearly
450 agreements on international waters were signed
between 1820 and 2007 (OSU, n.d., 2007 data).
There are numerous examples of existing bilateral and
regional water agreements, including the Great Lakes
Water Quality Agreement (1978), the Convention on
Co-operation for the Protection and Sustainable Use
of the River Danube (1994) and the Agreement on the

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

31

Cooperation for the Sustainable Development of the
Mekong River Basin (1995). The Indus Water Treaty,
signed between Pakistan and India in 1960, has survived three major conﬂicts and remains intact today.
Beneﬁt sharing, as opposed to the sharing of water
resources, represents a key positive aspect in transboundary cooperation, as exempliﬁed by the Nile
Basin Initiative’s Socio-economic and Beneﬁts Sharing
Project (2010) that builds a ‘network of professionals from economic planning and research institutions,
technical experts from both the public and private
sectors, academics, sociologists, and representatives
from civic groups and NGOs from across the basin to
explore alternative Nile development scenarios and
beneﬁt-sharing schemes’.4 However, multiple and increasing drivers of water use and the uncertainties
associated with them are likely to put existing transboundary agreements under signiﬁcant strain. The
increasing demand for water for agriculture, industry,
energy and urbanization is likely to put pressure on
transboundary relations as states may seek to make
more river diversions, store more water and further
exploit aquifers. The need to meet a 60% increase in
demand for energy over the next three decades, combined with the imperative to invest in clean energy to
mitigate climate change, is already making hydropower and biofuels critical parts of the development equation (Steer, 2010). Only 5% of total hydropower potential has been exploited in Africa (IEA, 2010a), where
many hydropower sites are situated on transboundary
rivers, thus providing signiﬁcant opportunities for increased cooperation on beneﬁt-sharing among neighbouring states.
The increasing pressures on transboundary waters require signiﬁcant investment in political capital (Steer,
2010) so as to either renegotiate existing but inadequate transboundary arrangements where needed,
or establish new ones that as yet do not exist. Despite
the proliferation of agreements on transboundary water management, there remain numerous river basins
and aquifers without adequate legal frameworks for
cooperation. According to a recent study, 60% of the
world’s 276 international river basins lack any type of
cooperative management framework (De Stefano et al.,
2010).
The role of global guidelines and normative legal principles is critical in this regard. The UN Convention on
the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International
Watercourses was adopted in 1997 after 27 years of

32

CHAPTER 1

development. The Convention establishes the rights
and obligations between states relating to the management, use and protection of international watercourses, which includes groundwater. To date, only 24
nations have ratiﬁed the Convention and a further 11
are required for it to enter into force. The principles
enshrined within the Convention, including those widely recognized as part of customary law, can still be
used as helpful guidelines irrespective of ratiﬁcation.
Nevertheless, entry into force represents a vital step
in the process of further clarifying and, where necessary, developing and adapting the rules of the game to
emerging challenges, so that the Convention can effectively fulﬁl its roles of governing and guiding interstate
relations. In Europe, the 1992 United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE) Convention on the
Protection and Use of Trans-boundary Watercourses
and International Lakes has been used as the basis
for adoption of many bilateral and multilateral agreements. The Convention was amended in 2003 to allow
accession to countries outside the UNECE region. The
amendment is expected to enter into force in 2012,
thereby making this successful framework available to
all UN Member States. There is also emerging recognition of the governance dimensions of transboundary
aquifers. The International Shared Aquifer Resources
Management (ISARM) Programme is a UNESCOled worldwide effort involving multiple UN agencies,
which strive to draw attention to the issue.5 The UN
General Assembly reaffirmed in its sixty-sixth session
on 9 December 2011 the importance of transboundary aquifers and the related Draft Articles. It adopted
a resolution in which States are encouraged to make
proper arrangements for transboundary aquifer management and UNESCO-IHP to continue its related
scientiﬁc and technical support to the States. In addition, the General Assembly decided to put ‘The Law
of Transboundary Aquifers’ on the provisional agenda
of its sixty-eight session, in order to examine – among
others – the ﬁnal form to be given to the Draft Articles.
The unavoidable reality that water resources do not
respect political boundaries demonstrates the supranational dimensions of water, and represents a compelling case for international cooperation on water
management. Multiple and mounting pressures on
water resources globally urge caution against complacency. A strong focus on resource protection, sustainability and beneﬁt sharing between states through
robust and fair basin, aquifer, estuarine and inshore
arrangements and institutions, supported by a strong

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

and solid system of international water law, will be
critical in an impending era of global water resource
constraints.

In many ways – at least at face value – virtual water trade is a process that represents a sensible and
win–win realignment of the water needs of countries
and their environmental and economic circumstances. Analyses show that, indeed, the trading of virtual
water has in many cases led to certain efficiency savings. Figure 1.1 shows trade ﬂows that save more than
5 Gm3 per year. Export of agricultural products (mainly
maize and soybean products) from the United States
of America (USA) to Japan and Mexico represent the
largest global water savings, accounting for over 11% of
the total global water saving (Hoekstra and Mekonnen,
2011).

1.2.3 Global trade
Water is a truly global issue through its trade as ‘virtual
water’ (also known as embedded water). This refers to
the volume of water used in the production of a good
or service. Through this process, countries engage in
water trading through products rather than through
the physical transportation of water itself, which is
a difficult and costly exercise. As a result, billions of
tonnes of food and other products that require water to produce are traded globally. Some water-scarce
countries, including a number in the Middle East, have
become net importers of virtual water, relying on the
importation of agricultural commodities to meet the
food needs of their growing populations. As per capita
water scarcity grows, more and more countries may
be increasingly incapable of feeding themselves with
the amount of water they have available, and will thus
have to make trade-offs in their economic, agriculture
and trade policies. Other countries, including a number
of European nations, are also net importers of virtual water due to the consumer tastes and demands of
their populations for particular foodstuffs and products
via imports (Hoekstra, 2011).

Although global water trade can lead to signiﬁcant
national water savings, through virtually transporting
water from a place of relative abundance to a place of
relative scarcity, trade alone cannot guarantee sustainable water management at the source. Indeed, as
virtual water-exporting nations increasingly respond
to global demand, the dimensions of responsibility for
sustainable water management are subsequently elevated to a more complex and supranational relationship between consumer and producer.
One of the challenges to enhancing water efficiency
and productivity is that there are no immediate, direct

FIGURE 1.1
Global water savings associated with international trade in agricultural products (1996–2005)

24%
-5%
71%
-12%
-3%
85%
37% 60%
-3%
1%
45%

-6%

54%

5.4
Gm3/yr

25
Gm3/yr

5.6
Gm3/yr

6%
17%
5.7
Gm3/yr

77%

12
Gm3/yr

21%
73%
16
Gm3/yr

14%
-1%

-9% 8%
83%

85%

5.0
Gm3/yr

13%
9.3
-2%
Gm3/yr
85%

7.8
Gm3/yr
-10%
40%
50%

5.1
Gm3/yr

7.4
Gm3/yr

Grey Green
Blue

32% 38%

6%
5%

5.0
Gm3/yr

-30%

89%

Note: Only the biggest water savings (> 5 Gm3 per year) are shown.
Source: Mekonnen and Hoekstra (2011, p. 24).

WWDR4

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

33

“As is the case with
most globalization
processes, virtual
water trade can
lead to a further
marginalization of
the world’s poorest
women and men.”
incentives to actually do this. The incentives that are
available are in turn inﬂuenced by global trade imperatives which are clearly beyond regulatory reach of water managers. If water-intensive products were traded
only within the nation state then market-based policies
to incentivise sustainable water management practices could potentially be instituted relatively easily,
including perhaps a ‘water scarcity rent’ or through an
‘internalization of externalities’; for example, incorporating into the cost of a product its negative impact on
freshwater ecosystems and thereby incentivizing the
producer to reduce or eliminate their environmental
impact. But in a globalized economy it is a challenge
to institute such policies on a national or a regional
level as they may artiﬁcially increase costs of products
from that area and make them uncompetitive.
The virtual water trade can provide opportunities for
developing countries blessed with a relative abundance of renewable freshwater supplies to grow their
economies by exporting increasing amounts of food, if
they can afford the infrastructure to harness the water
and there are no artiﬁcial barriers in international trade.
Unfortunately, many countries still require some kind
of ﬁnancial support in order to develop this infrastructure and remain competitive within the global markets.
Another troubling issue concerns developing countries
that are water-scarce and whose people are too poor
to buy imported food. As is the case with most globalization processes, virtual water trade can lead to a
further marginalization of the world’s poorest women
and men.

34

CHAPTER 1

The growing trend towards large land acquisitions,6
which in some cases can lead to signiﬁcant advances
in infrastructure development, also raises some concerns about equitable distribution of beneﬁts to the
host country and its people. Although water shortages
are an important driver of large-scale land acquisitions
by investors, water is typically not explicitly mentioned in disclosed land deals. In the few cases where
water is referred to, the amount of water withdrawals to be permitted is not speciﬁed. The rural poor end
up competing for scarcer water with actors that are
more powerful and technically better equipped to take
control of the water. Potential inter-state tensions and
conﬂicts, especially in transboundary basins, are also a
cause for concern.
A subject relevant to the governance of water resources and public services is the effect that international investment agreements may have on national
capacities to manage water resources and to regulate public services (see Solanes and Jouravlev, 2007;
Bohoslavsky, 2010; Bohoslavsky and Justo, 2011). As a
consequence of globalization, many public services are
provided and water rights held by companies within
foreign investment protection systems or special conﬂict resolution regimes, which means that external jurisdictions can intervene in local matters. Agreements
which over-ride national laws can restrict the power of
governments to act in the best public interest and in
that of local communities. Many countries have yet to
assess the consequences that international investment
agreements may have on the economic, social and
environmental sustainability and efficiency of water resources utilization and provision of public services.
1.2.4 Equity
Discussions relating to pricing mechanisms and other
incentives are predominantly motivated by the objective to enhance efficiency and encourage sustainable
water usage at the source of production. Increased
efficiency and productivity at a local and national
level will be critical in meeting growing global aggregate demands, given mounting pressures on and
demand for water resources globally (predominantly
through food and agricultural products). Yet it will
be important for enhancements in water efficiency
and productivity to be accompanied by concomitant
efforts to reduce demand. If society operates within
ecological limits, and recognizes the limited availability of water resources globally at any one time, it will
be unviable for all citizens globally to consume the

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

same amount of water as the highest consuming individuals (and countries) do today. Therefore, efforts to
tackle excessive demand in the developed world need
to comprise part of a more equitable distribution of
the beneﬁts of water globally if increases in demand
within emerging economies and developing countries are to be even partially satisﬁed without heavily
depleting aquifers or irreversibly damaging freshwater ecosystems. Although the physical distribution of
water across the earth, through the hydrological cycle,
is by its nature uneven (see Section 3.1 and Chapter
15), the way in which the goods, products and beneﬁts derived from that water are distributed can be
inﬂuenced by policy interventions – including global
governance frameworks and national water governance arrangements.
In addition to addressing inequities in global demand
and consumption, it is also critical to address inequities at the local and national level in terms of the impacts of and beneﬁts derived from the global trade
in water resources. Many national or regional water
resource management and allocation mechanisms
are currently insufficient to sustainably protect resources and equitably distribute any water-derived
beneﬁts. The production and export of water-‘thirsty’
products, such as rice or cotton, in arid areas where
water is already under pressure to meet local needs,
can exacerbate local and national challenges – including food security. Furthermore, the beneﬁts derived
from such production and export are often not experienced by local communities (e.g. through either health
care or infrastructure). The virtual water concept has
been a useful tool in highlighting the global transport
of water through trade; however, new tools will need
to be devised to enable the development of sustainable governance mechanisms and policies that rebalance pressures on water resources and seek to equitably distribute any beneﬁts derived from reducing local
availability of this precious resource. In this regard, the
fact that inequity discriminates against women and
children, who make up the largest proportion of the
bottom billion, must also be taken into account.

Nations General Assembly, recognizing access to safe
water and sanitation as a human right, the HRC resolution states that ‘the human right to safe drinking water
and sanitation is derived from the right to an adequate
standard of living and inextricably related to the right
to the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health, as well as the right to life and human
dignity.’8 This bestows upon states a certain obligation to promote governance arrangements that secure
drinking water supply and sanitation services, and it
also provides a basis for further potential discussion
and debate on and equitable distribution of social and
economic beneﬁts derived from water through agriculture, energy, health and other productive activities.
However, these resolutions fail to provide guidance
on how progress can be accurately monitored, or how
to provide for capital costs – as well as operation and
maintenance costs – of the infrastructure (new as well
as expanded) required to operationalize them while
maintaining affordable prices for the poor.

1.3 Recognizing water in global policy
Recognition of the centrality of water to socio-economic development comes at an opportune time.
There are three processes underway to establish global
policies that will beneﬁt from this: the MDGs, the
UNFCCC and the UNCSD (also referred to commonly
as Rio+20).
These three particular processes have been highlighted
because of their signiﬁcant proﬁle and the impact they
have at an international level, and because together
they cover a number of dimensions relating to global
water governance: human health and development,
environment and climate change, and broader sustainable development objectives. Importantly, all three
processes operate under the auspices of the United
Nations, which makes them particularly relevant to this
publication. It should be noted, however, that other
international forums such as the G8/G20, the World
Economic Forum and the World Water Forum can also
play an inﬂuential role in the recognition of water’s
central role in socio-economic development, as exempliﬁed by the G8 Water Action Plan (Evian, 2003).

One tool that presents an opportunity to uphold the
importance of the equitable distribution of water and
its beneﬁts on a national level is the consensus adoption by the United Nations Human Rights Council
(HRC) in September 2010 of a resolution affirming
that access to water and sanitation is a human right.
Building on the July 2010 Resolution7 by the United

Although these processes can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on national policy, their agendas and negotiations
are in fact driven by the member states. It is therefore
up to the different member states themselves to take
leadership and ensure that water is put on the agenda
of these processes.

WWDR4

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

35

1.3.1 Millennium Development Goals
It was appropriate at the turn of the millennium to
shine a light on the alarming persistence of poverty in
many parts of the world, and on the shameful inequality globally in people’s access to basic services. The
MDGs helped to emphasize the existence of a right
to development, and that the international community has a responsibility to alleviate global suffering. Although many of the MDGs are unfortunately off
track, there is no doubt that the framework of clear
time-bound goals and targets has been a valuable tool
in enabling civil society and the general public to hold
governments to account, and that the existence of a
relatively short-term ‘end-date’ has helped to accelerate action in a number of areas.
Yet the MDGs also have their limitations, not least in
their failure to recognize the cross-cutting nature of
water in relation to all MDGs. For example, it is wellestablished that improving access to water improves
education outcomes (Goal 2) and gender equality and
empowerment of women (Goal 3). Water is required to
grow food (Goal 1) and improve all aspects of economies to eradicate poverty (Goal 1). These are just a few
examples of the positive and cross-sectoral interactions between water and other diverse development
imperatives outlined in the MDGs. Energy is another
essential, cross-cutting – and water dependent – element of socio-economic development that was overlooked in the MDGs.

One of the targets of the seventh MDG (MDG7), the
overall objective of which is to ensure environmental
sustainability, is to halve, by 2015, the proportion of
the world’s population without access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation (Target 7c). However,
as currently formulated, it fails to consider essential aspects of service provision, such as their quality, mode of provision or access, and affordability. The
world is on track to meet the ‘access to safe drinking
water’ target, although progress varies across regions
and sub-Saharan Africa and the Arab Region lag behind. By contrast, the sanitation target (which is not
necessarily linked to water, although hygiene is) currently appears out of reach, as half the population of
developing regions continue to lack access to basic
sanitation.9
In light of both progress and continued challenges, it
is important that efforts are maintained and intensiﬁed to achieve MDG7c by 2015. This poses a real challenge for the international community, especially as
the characteristics and criteria related to the requirements to comply with the right to water and sanitation,
as recognized by the Human Rights Council, may render the criteria used to set the MDGs obsolete. To date,
this community has had no better way to measure and
monitor progress than to use the criteria of the MDGs
as monitored by WHO/UNICEF’s Joint Monitoring
Program (JMP) and WHO/UN-Water’s Global Analysis
and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water

“It was appropriate at the turn of the millennium
to shine a light on the alarming persistence
of poverty in many parts of the world,
and on the shameful inequality globally in
people’s access to basic services. The MDGs
helped to emphasize the existence of a right
to development, and that the international
community has a responsibility to alleviate
global suffering.”
36

CHAPTER 1

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

(GLAAS), which are based on the concepts of access
to improved sanitation facilities and drinking water sources. However, new approaches to monitoring
these goals are being produced to monitor the goals
as now described.
Another limitation of the MDGs is that they neglect
the ‘centrality of water’ to the other goals. While delivery of drinking water and sanitation services should
remain a focus of human health and development,
the importance of water resources and water governance in achieving the goals collectively needs explicit
recognition. It is critical that the drinking water and
sanitation issues do not divert attention from the need
for efforts to enhance institutional arrangements for
water, with water allocation frameworks that prioritize
water for these and other basic human needs above
all other uses, and which encourage efficiency and
productivity in resource use and management. For example, subsidies for irrigation might well be employed
to achieve MDG1 to eradicate poverty and hunger, but
such policies often discourage efficient water usage
and therefore lead to unnecessary levels of extraction,
which may ultimately compromise the water source,
and in turn the sustainability of both MDG7 and indeed
a number of other water-dependent MDGs.
These observations are relevant to water on a number
of levels, and the messages from this chapter do have
relevance for the way that the MDGs are addressed beyond 2015. First, freshwater is a ﬁnite precious natural
resource that is essential to all aspects of development.
Second, water not only creates connections between
the goals, but is also a potential source of conﬂict between them. In moving beyond 2015, it will be critical
to word each of the new goals in such a way as to recognize the role(s) that water plays in achieving them.
1.3.2 The UN Framework Convention on
Climate Change
In June 2008, the IPCC Working Group II released a
technical paper on water and climate change, which
stated that ‘the relationship between climate change
and freshwater resources is of primary concern to human society and also has implications for all living species’ (Bates et al., 2008, p. vii).
Water resources are referred to in Article 4 of the
Convention, while at the UNFCCC’s 15th Conference of
the Parties (COP15) in Copenhagen in 2009, the importance of water resources management for climate

WWDR4

change adaptation was referred to in a footnote of the
outcome document. Under the UNFCCC, Parties have
provided information on freshwater-related impacts
and vulnerabilities in their national communications10
and national adaptation programmes of action (or
NAPAs),11 in which they also spell out adaptation and
development priorities.
The newly created institutions in the Cancun
Agreements, particularly the Cancun Adaptation
Framework and the Adaptation Committee, will provide new and increased opportunities to address
the issues around water. At the 16th session of the
Conference of the Parties (COP16) in Cancun, 2010,
Parties agreed to establish the Cancun Adaptation
Framework,12 with the objective of enhancing action
on adaptation, including through international cooperation and coherent consideration of matters relating to adaptation under the Convention. The Cancun
Agreement makes speciﬁc reference to water resources, freshwater, marine ecosystems and coastal zones
when it refers to ‘Planning, prioritizing and implementing adaptation actions, including projects and
programmes’.13
As part of the Cancun Adaptation Framework, developing countries will have the opportunity to address
water issues in their National Adaptation Plan, which
will provide the opportunity to identify targeted actions. In addition, water and related extreme events
like droughts and ﬂoods will be considered in the
agreed activities under the loss and damage work
programme.14 It is urgent for the member states (i.e.
‘Parties’) to ensure that water be addressed as a key issue on the agenda for upcoming negotiations.
In a unique move water was tabled for discussion
on provisional agenda for the Subsidiary Body for
Scientiﬁc and Technological Advice (SBSTA) at its 34th
session in June 2011, which requested the Secretariat
prepare, before its 35th session, a technical paper on
water and climate change impacts and adaptation
strategies. It was eventually agreed that water would
be addressed under the auspices of the Nairobi Work
Programme on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation
to climate change (the NWP), the work programme
with an objective to assist all Parties, in particular
developing countries, including the least developed
countries (LDCs) and small island developing states
(SIDS), to improve their understanding and assessment
of impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

37

change, and to make informed decisions on practical adaptation actions and measures to respond to
climate change on a sound scientiﬁc, technical and
socio-economic basis, taking into account current and
future climate change and variability. Although not
developed to exclusively target speciﬁc vulnerable
sectors, knowledge products, such as the adaptation
practices interface15 and the local coping strategies database,16 provide information on adaptation planning
and practices on vulnerable sectors at various levels of
implementation.
Several partner organizations have pledged actions to
undertake research and assessment; enhance technical
and institutional capacities; promote awareness; and
implement adaptive actions on the ground. These actions have contributed to the enhancement of understanding and assessment of vulnerabilities and adaptation practices related to water resources management.
Relevant documents prepared under the NWP to date
on water include a synthesis publication on climate
change and freshwater resources UNFCCC, 2011) and a
technical paper on water and climate change impacts
and adaptation strategies.17
The mandate for the NWP represents an important
building block in mainstreaming and integrating water more effectively in the decision-making of the
Convention. Limiting a discussion on water under the
UNFCCC to a programme on adaptation means that
the cross-cutting and multifaceted nature of the resource will be hard to fully capture unless a congregate of Parties steps forward and assumes a leadership position in recognizing the need to address the
multiple and cross-cutting elements of water more
comprehensively.
It will also be important to address water in relation to other emerging and important entities of the
Convention, including the Adaptation Committee and
the Green Climate Fund (GCF). One of the functions of
the Adaptation Committee is to provide technical support and guidance to the Parties. Such technical support and guidance should arguably include the provision of expertise in relation to water and adaptation.
The UNFCCC remains to this day one of the most
signiﬁcant global conventions addressing sustainable development. Despite the multitude of valuable
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), the
UNFCCC has captured the imagination and buy-in of

38

CHAPTER 1

international policy-makers and the general public
alike more than any other process on environment or
sustainable development in the past decade. In this
context, ensuring a strong focus on water under the
UNFCCC is likely to remain a high priority for the water
community.
1.3.3 Beyond the UN Conference on Sustainable
Development
The UNCSD 2012, or Rio+20, will take place in Rio de
Janeiro 20 years after the ﬁrst Rio Earth Summit in
1992. The Rio Summit succeeded in putting sustainable water management on the global agenda with
Chapter 18 of Agenda 21 (the outcome document from
the Summit) dedicated to the ‘protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources’. This chapter represented a signiﬁcant milestone in the promotion of integrated approaches to water management;
that is, managing water across its multiple users.18 The
World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD)
in 2002 agreed on a speciﬁc target for integrated water resources management (IWRM), a concept that by
then had become an established part of global water
discourse. The target (Article 26) included a call, at all
levels, ‘to develop IWRM and water efficiency plans by
2005 with support to developing countries’. IWRM is a
holistic water management framework that recognizes the multiple users of water – including ecosystems
– and so the WSSD’s call to plan for it represented a
signiﬁcant step in the right direction. Although its existence has led to a number of national-level initiatives
and monitoring processes, progress is far short of the
ambitions of the 2005 target and the principle it was
trying to push forward. In countries where national
plans have been developed, many are not being implemented. Moreover, these plans were meant to be adaptive – in other words, to be part of an ongoing process
and thus adaptable to changing conditions and new
uncertainties.
In 2006, a task force on water resources management
was established under UN-Water, which in its review
for the 13th session of the Commission on Sustainable
Development in 2008 found that only 6 out of 27 developed countries surveyed had fully implemented
IWRM plans, and that only 38% of the developing
countries surveyed had plans completed or under implementation. At the request of the UN Commission
on Sustainable Development, UN-Water conducted
a similar global survey in 2011 to determine progress
towards sustainable management of water resources

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

using integrated approaches for the Rio+20 conference. Preliminary ﬁndings from the analysis of data
from over 125 countries show that there has been
widespread adoption of integrated approaches with
signiﬁcant impact on development and water management practices at the country level. The survey showed
that 64% of countries have developed IWRM plans, as
called for in the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation
(JPoI), and 34% report an advanced stage of implementation. However, progress appears to have slowed

BOX 1.3
UN-Water’s recommendation to UNCSD and
potential actions in support of green economic
approaches
1. Success of green economy depends on sustainable
management of water resources and on safe and sustainable provisioning of water supply and adequate
sanitation services. This approach must be underpinned by timely measurement of economic performance in terms of indicators of social and environmental sustainability.
2. The integrated approach to water resources management, as deﬁned in Agenda 21, remains relevant
and must be central in strategies towards a green
economy.
3. The highest priority must be given to the ‘bottom billion’ people while addressing inequities in access to
water, which are closely linked to energy security as
well as food security.
4. Effective management of water variability, ecosystem
changes and the resulting impacts on livelihoods in a
changing climate scenario are central to a climate-resilient and robust green economy.
5. Universal coverage of water supply and sanitation services must be a central development goal in the post2015 period. UN-Water urges national governments to
set realistic intermediate targets and goals.
6. There must also be a commitment to build the foundation for a water resource efficient green economy.
7. There is a need for increased water resilience and sustainability of cities, keeping in view the global challenges and urbanization trends.
8. Water challenges are a global concern and international action and cooperation at all level are required
to accommodate them within the green economy.
9. Green economies can only be achieved if they are supported by green societies.

Source: Water in a Green Economy: A Statement by UN-Water for
the UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) 2012
(Rio+20 Summit), November 2011.

WWDR4

in low and medium Human Development Index (HDI)
countries since the survey in 2008.
Though debate and dialogue on the appropriateness
of these and other such speciﬁc targets will continue
beyond the Rio+20 Summit in June 2012, the consistent messages emerging on water will help to focus
and mobilize the water community and hopefully
other stakeholders and ensure that water emerges
as a priority issue in the global discourse on sustainable development. However, deﬁning and monitoring
targets is a difficult exercise, especially given water’s
centrality, its cross-cutting nature and its wide range of
roles and beneﬁts. It may be appropriate for the water
community to work with member states, NGOs, various UN agencies and other stakeholders to provide
a set of principles recognizing water’s central role in
achieving various developmental goals. Furthermore,
without institutional arrangements for the equitable
optimization of water’s many beneﬁts in the face of
increasing uncertainty, funding for water infrastructure (including operation and maintenance), improved
capacity to manage water resources in an integrated
and adaptive fashion, most development goals and the
‘green economy’ itself will continue to be signiﬁcantly
compromised.
UN-Water, following consultations with its members
and partners, produced a statement, reﬂecting the collective opinion of its members on the green economy,
as input into the Rio+20 Summit. The statement comprises UN-Water’s recommendation to the participants
of the Summit as well as a list of potential actions in
support of green economic approaches. The main
messages of the statement are in Box 1.3.

Conclusion
This chapter has sought to explore the cross-sectoral and global dimensions of water – looking beyond
the boundaries of traditional water governance. The
mounting demand for water from a diverse range of
social and economic sectors, and the potentially irreversible ecosystem impacts of unregulated demand,
require strong water governance institutions that facilitate discussion and decisions on the targets of society
and the allocation of water resources across sectors
to meet them. Equally, water governance frameworks
at local, national and regional levels must be complemented by global governance processes, frameworks
and institutions that can appropriately address the
global dimensions of the beneﬁts of water resources

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

39

beyond the basin. Water has long ceased to be solely
a local issue. Not only do many river basins and aquifers transcend national boundaries, water has also
been globalized through international trade in waterdependent products and international investment protection agreements, as well as through climate change
impacts on the hydrological cycle, which stand to have
potentially devastating affects in certain locations. In
a world of increasing uncertainty regarding the demand for ﬁnite water resources, global water use will
also have to be considered through the lens of equity.
Efficiency and productivity gains alone cannot alter
global patterns of unequal supply of resources and
consumption or access to beneﬁts. Addressing these
cross-sectoral and global dimensions of water will require that all countries take an interest in the global
forums designed to address and create solutions to
impending resource challenges. The water community,
and water managers in particular, have the responsibility of informing the process. Implementing the
outcomes from global policy agreements will remain
a national imperative, but setting the framework requires a widening of the sectoral and spatial horizons
of all those who have a stake in water management.
Global policy agreements made with local and national processes and reﬂecting the political economy and
institutional capacities of the countries will assure the
overall effectiveness of these policies at national and
subnational levels.

7

Resolution 64/292, 28 July 2010.

8

Human Rights Council, Promotion and protection of all human
rights, civil political, economic, social and cultural rights
including the right to development, p. 15. Human Rights and
Access to Water and Sanitation, 24 September 2010.

9

For further analysis of progress see UN (2010, pp. 58–60).

10

For more information see
http://unfccc.int/ 1095.php and http://unfccc.int/2716.php

11

For more information see http://unfccc.int/cooperation_
support/least_developed_countries_portal/items/4751.php

12

FCCC/CP/2010/7/Add.1.

13

From page 5 of the report of the Conference of the Parties on
its sixteenth session, held in Cancun from 29 November to 10
December 2010, available at
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2010/cop16/eng/07a01.pdf

14

For more information see http://unfccc.int/ 6056.php

15

The adaptation practices interface is available at
http://unfccc.int/4555.php

16

The local coping strategies database is available at
http://maindb.unfccc.int/public/adaptation.

17

See http://unfccc.int/documentation/documents/advanced_
search/items/3594.php?rec=j&priref=600006592#beg

18

The United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Agenda 21, UN, 1992.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Arthurton, R., Barker, S., Rast, W. and Huber, M. 2007. Water.
Global Environment Outlook 4. Nairobi, UNEP, pp. 115–56.

Notes

40

Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. P.
(eds). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Geneva, IPCC.

1

At the time of preparing the ﬁnal draft of the WWDR4, the
speciﬁc post-UNCSD 2012 process was undetermined.

2

The concept of environmental ﬂows recognizes that ecosystems,
too, are water users, and that to function properly and provide
the necessary services they must beneﬁt from water allocation
of sufficient quantity and quality (see eFlowNet, n.d.).

3

For information on the Green Climate Fund see
http://unfccc.int/5869.php

4

For more information see http://www.nilebasin.org/newsite/

5

The ISARM2010 International Conference ‘Transboundary
Aquifers: Challenges and new directions’, which took place in
Paris, 6–8 December 2010.
See http://www.isarm.net/publications/360

Bohoslavsky, J. P. and Justo, J. B. 2011. Protección del
derecho humano al agua y arbitrajes de inversión.
LC/W.375. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.
cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/2/42342/Lcw0375e.pdf

6

For the purposes of the WWDR4, ‘land acquisition’ is deﬁned
as the gaining of tenure rights to large areas of land through
purchase, lease, concession or other means.

Bouwer, L. M. 2011. Have disaster losses increased due to
anthropogenic climate change? American Meteorological
Society, Vol, 92, No. 6, pp. 39–46.

CHAPTER 1

Bohoslavsky, J. P. 2010. Tratados de protección de las
inversiones e implicaciones para la formulación de
políticas públicas (especial referencia a los servicios de
agua potable y saneamiento). LC/W.326. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/
xml/4/40484/Lcw326e.pdf

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D.
and Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role
of Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development.
A Rapid Response Assessment. The Hague, UN-Habitat/
UNEP/GRID-Arendal.
De Stefano, L., Duncan, J., Dinar, S., Stahl, K. and Wolf, A.
2010. Mapping the Resilience of International River Basins
to Future Climate Change-induced Water Variability. World
Bank Water Sector Board Discussion Paper Series 15.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
eFlowNet (Global Environmental Flows Network). n.d.
Website. http://www.eﬂownet.org/viewinfo.cfm?linkcate
goryid=4&siteid=1&FuseAction=display (Accessed 10 May
2011.)
EU (Council of the European Union). 2007. Energy efficiency
and renewable energies. Presidency Conclusions of the
Brussels European Council (8/9 March 2007). Brussels, EU,
pp. 20–22.
Evian. 2003. Water – A G8 Action Plan. Document presented
at the 2003 Evian Summit, 1–3 June, 2003, Evian-les-Bains,
France. http://www.g8.fr/evian/english/navigation/2003_
g8_summit/summit_documents/water_-_a_g8_action_
plan.html
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 1984. Systematic Index of International Water
Resources by Treaties, Declarations, Acts and Cases, by
Basin. Vol. II, Legis. Study No. 34. http://faolex.fao.org/
watertreaties/index.htm
––––. n.d. Women and Population Division. Web page. http://
www.fao.org/sd/fsdirect/fbdirect/FSP001.htm
Garrido-Lecca, H. 2010. Inversión en agua y saneamiento
como respuesta a la exclusión en el Perú: gestación, puesta
en marcha y lecciones del Programa Agua para Todos
(PAPT). LC/W.313. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/41044/lcw313e.
pdf
Garrido-Lecca, H. 2011. Design and implementation of
and lessons learned from the Water for All Programme.
Circular of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water
Resource Management for Sustainable Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 33. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/
circulares/2/42122/Carta33in.pdf
Hamilton, L. S. 2008. Forests and Water. A thematic study
prepared in the framework of the Global Forest Resources
Assessment. Rome, FAO. ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/
fao/011/.../i0410e01.pdf
Hoekstra, A. Y. 2011. The global dimension of water
governance: Why the river basin approach is no longer
sufficient and why cooperative action at global level is
needed. Water, Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 21–46. http://www.mdpi.
com/2073-4441/3/1/21/

WWDR4

Hoekstra, A. Y. and Mekonnen, M. M. 2011. Global Water
Scarcity: Monthly Blue Water Footprint Compared to
Blue Water Availability for the World’s Major River Basins.
Value of Water Research Report Series No. 53, Delft, The
Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. http://www.waterfootprint.org/
Reports/Report53-GlobalBlueWaterScarcity.pdf
Hoffman, A. R. 2011. The Connection: Water Supply and
Energy Reserves. Washington DC, US Department of
Energy. http://waterindustry.org/Water-Facts/worldwater-6.htm (Accessed 10 May 2011.)
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2009. World Energy
Outlook 2009. Paris, IEA.
––––. 2010a. Renewable Energy Essentials: Hydropower.
Paris, IEA. http://www.iea.org/papers/2010/Hydropower_
Essentials.pdf
––––. 2010b. World Energy Outlook 2010. Paris, IEA.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
Fourth Assessment Report. Geneva, IPCC.
ISARM (International Shared Aquifer Resources
Management). 2009. Transboundary Aquifers of the World
(2009 update). Presented during a special meeting at
World Water Forum 5. Utrecht, The Netherlands, ISARM.
http://www.isarm.net/publications/319#
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. Washington DC, World
Resources Institute.
Mekonnen, M. M. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2011. National Water
Footprint Accounts: The Green, Blue and Grey Water
Footprint of Production and Consumption. Value of Water
Research Report Series No. 50. UNESCO-IHE, Delft,
Netherlands. http://www.waterfootprint.org/Reports/
Report50-NationalWaterFootprints-Vol1.pdf
Molle, F. and Vallée, D. 2009. Managing competition for water
and the pressure on ecosystems. United Nations World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO Publishing/Earthscan, pp. 150–9.
OSU (Oregon State University). n.d. TFDD: Transboundary
Freshwater Dispute Database. Corvallis, Oreg., Department
of Geosciences, Oregon State University. http://www.
transboundarywaters.orst.edu
Puri, S. and Aureli, A. (eds.) 2009. Atlas of Transboundary
Aquifers – Global Maps, Regional Cooperation
and Local Inventories. Paris, UNESCO-IHP ISARM
Programme, UNESCO. [CD only.] http://www.isarm.org/
publications/322
Solanes, M. and Jouravlev, A. 2007. Revisiting Privatization,
Foreign Investment, International Arbitration, and
Water. LC/L.2827-P. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/0/32120/lcl2827e.
pdf
Steer, A. 2010. From the Pump Room to the Board Room:
Water’s Central Role in Climate Change Adaptation.
Washington DC, The World Bank. http://www.d4wcc.org.
mx/images/documentos/Presentaciones/andrew_steer_
keynote_presentation_water_event_december_2_ﬁnal.pdf

RECOGNIZING THE CENTRALITY OF WATER AND ITS GLOBAL DIMENSIONS

41

Stern, N. 2007. How climate change will affect people around
the world. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern
Review. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, pp.
65–103.
UN (United Nations). 2009. United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Copenhagen
Accord. UN Conference of the Parties.
––––. 2010. The Millennium Development Goals Report.
New York, UN. http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/
MDG%20Report%202010%20En%20r15%20-low%20
res%2020100615%20-.pdf#page=60
––––. 2011. United Nations Secretary General Report to the
66th General Assembly on the Implementation of the
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction. New York,
UN.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2011.
Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable
Development and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/GreenEconomy/Portals/93/
documents/Full_GER_screen.pdf
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). 2011. Climate Change and Freshwater
Resources. A Synthesis of Adaptation Actions Undertaken
by Nairobi Work Programme Partner Organizations. Bonn,
Germany, UNFCCC. http://unfccc.int/4628.php

42

CHAPTER 1

UN-Water. 2008. Transboundary Waters: Sharing Beneﬁts,
Sharing Responsibilities. Thematic paper. Zaragoza, Spain,
UN-Water/International Decade for Action (UN-IDfA).
USAID. 2001. USAID Global Environment Center Environment
Notes, The Water-Energy Nexus: Opportunities for
Integrated Environmental Management. Washington DC,
USAID.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2011. Water Security: The
Water-Food-Energy-Climate Nexus. Washington DC, Island
Press.
World Bank. 2004. Natural Disasters: Counting the Costs.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
––––. 2010. The Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change:
Synthesis Report. Washington DC, The World Bank.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009.
United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water
in a Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO Publishing/
Earthscan.
WWC (World Water Council). 2000. World Water Vision
– Results of the Gender Mainstreaming Process: A Way
Forward. Marseilles, WWC.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

PART 1

2. Water demand: What drives consumption?
3. The water resource: Variability, vulnerability and uncertainty
4. Beyond demand: Water’s social and environmental beneﬁts
5. Water management, insitutions and capacity development
6. From raw data to informed decisions
7. Regional challenges, global impacts

Status, trends and
challenges
—

CHAPTER 2
Water demand:
What drives consumption?

—
Authors David Coates, Richard Connor, Liza Leclerc, Walter Rast,
Kristin Schumann and Michael Webber

© Shutterstock/Joe Gough

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Human demands for water are usually broken down into ﬁve major water use sectors:
đŏŏŏŏ++ ŏ* ŏ#.%1(01.!Čŏ3$%$ŏ+1*0/ŏ"+.ŏ0$!ŏ)&+.%05ŏ+"ŏ30!.ŏ3%0$ .3(/ŏ#(+((5Ď
đŏŏŏŏ*!.#5Čŏ"+.ŏ3$%$ŏ0$!ŏ-1*0%0%!/ŏ+"ŏ30!.ŏ1/! ŏĨ+*/1),0%2!(5ŏ* ŏ*+*ġ+*/1),0%2!(5ĩŏ.!ŏ
rarely reported and thus are poorly known;
đŏŏŏŏ* 1/0.5Čŏ3$%$ŏ+2!./ŏ*ŏ!4!,0%+*((5ŏ.+ ŏ.*#!ŏ+"ŏ%*+)!ġ#!*!.0%*#ŏ0%2%0%!/ŏ3%0$ŏ
equally broad impacts on both the quantity and the quality of local water resources and
the environment;
đŏŏŏŏ1)*ŏ/!00(!)!*0/Čŏ3$%$ŏ%*(1 !/ŏ30!.ŏ"+.ŏ .%*'%*#ŏ* ŏ$+1/!$+( ŏ1/!/ŏ/1$ŏ/ŏ
cooking, cleaning, hygiene and some aspects of sanitation;1 and
đŏŏŏŏ+/5/0!)/Čŏ3$+/!ŏ30!.ŏ !)* /ŏ.!ŏ !0!.)%*! ŏ5ŏ0$!ŏ30!.ŏ.!-1%.!)!*0/ŏ0+ŏ/1/0%*ŏ
or restore the beneﬁts for people (services) that societies want ecosystems to supply.
Water managers and decision-makers concerned with meeting humans’ basic water-related
needs are faced with some important questions: How much water are we using now? How
efficiently are we using it? How much will we need 30 years from now? Fifty years? Although
these questions appear simple, getting the answers right is not as straightforward as it might
seem.
Each of the water use sectors is driven by a number of external forces (such as demographic
changes, technological developments, economic growth and prosperity, changing diets, and
social and cultural values) which in turn dictate their current and future demands for water.
Unfortunately, predicting how these drivers will evolve over the next few decades – and
how they will ultimately affect water demand – is fraught with a multiplicity of uncertainties.
Future water demands will depend not only on the amount of food, energy, industrial activity,
and rural and urban water-related services we will need to meet the requirements of growing
populations and changing socio-economic landscapes, but also on how efficiently we can
use limited water supplies in meeting these needs.
This chapter draws principally from the Part 3/Volume 2 challenge area reports ‘Managing
water along the livestock value chain’ (Chapter 18), ‘The global nexus of energy and water’
(Chapter 19), ‘Freshwater for industry’ (Chapter 20), ‘Human settlements’ (Chapter 17) and
‘Ecosystems’ (Chapter 21) to highlight the current challenges and trends speciﬁc to each
sector, the main drivers and their related uncertainties and risks, and potential response
options. With the exception of Section 2.1 (Food and Agriculture) for which all content has
been extracted from the respective challenge area report. Sections of this chapter also
include complementary material that is not part of the ﬁnal Part 3 chapters, which were
subject to strict length limitations.

2.1 Food and agriculture
The link between water and food is a simple one.
Crops and livestock need water to grow, and lots of it.
Agriculture accounts for 70% of all water withdrawn
by the agricultural, municipal and industrial (including
energy) sectors.
Water is the key to food security. Globally, there is
enough water available for our future needs, but this
world picture hides large areas of absolute water scarcity which affects billions of people, many of whom are
poor and disadvantaged. Major changes in policy and
management, across the entire agricultural production
chain, are needed to ensure best use of available water
resources in meeting growing demands for food and
other agricultural products.
2.1.1 Water use in agriculture
The agricultural sector as a whole has a large water
footprint when compared to other sectors, particularly
during the production phase. The booming demand for
livestock products in particular is increasing the demand
for water, not just during production, but also at every
stage along the livestock value chains. It is also affecting water quality, which in turn reduces availability.
The annual global agricultural water consumption includes crop water consumption for food, ﬁbre and
feed production (transpiration), plus evaporation losses from the soil and from open water associated with
agriculture, such as rice ﬁelds, irrigation canals and
reservoirs. Only about 20% of the total 7,130 km3 of
agriculture’s annual water consumption is ‘blue water’
– that is, water from rivers, streams, lakes and groundwater for irrigation purposes. Although irrigation is
only a modest part of agricultural water consumption,
it plays a crucial role, accounting for more than 40% of
the world’s production on less than 20% of the cultivated land.
Concerns about food insecurity are growing across
the globe, but people generally have little or no appreciation of the dependency of food production
on water. There is little recognition that 70% of the
world’s freshwater withdrawals are already committed to irrigated agriculture (Figure 2.1) and that more
water will be needed in order to meet increasing
demands for food and energy (biofuels). Relatively
speaking, withdrawals for agriculture tend to decrease with increasing levels of development.

46

CHAPTER 2

However, in many countries, not just in the least developed countries (LDCs), water availability for agriculture is already limited and uncertain, and this is set
to worsen. Agricultural water withdrawal accounts for
44% of total water withdrawal in OECD countries, but
this rises to more than 60% within the eight OECD
countries that rely heavily on irrigated agriculture. In
the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russian Federation, India
and China),2 agriculture accounts for 74% of water
withdrawals, but this ranges from a low 20% in the
Russian Federation to 87% in India. In LDCs the ﬁgure
is more than 90% (FAO, 2011c).
Globally, irrigated crop yields are about 2.7 times those
of rainfed farming, hence irrigation will continue to
play an important role in food production. The area
equipped for irrigation increased from 170 million ha in
1970 to 304 million ha in 2008. There is still potential
for expansion, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa and
Southern America, in places where there is sufficient
water available. Pathways to improve productivity and
bridge the yield gap in irrigation include increasing the
quantity, reliability and timing of water services; increasing the beneﬁcial use of water withdrawn for irrigation; and increasing agronomic or economic productivity so that more output is obtained per unit of water
consumed (FAO, 2011a).
Although there is still potential to increase the cropped
area, some 5–7 million ha (0.6%) of farmland are lost
annually because of accelerating land degradation
(see Section 4.5 and Chapter 28), and urbanization
(see Section 2.4 and Chapter 17), which takes agricultural land out of production and reduces the number
of farms as more people move to the cities. Increasing
population means that the amount of cultivated land
per person is also declining sharply: from 0.4 ha in 1961
to 0.2 ha in 2005.
2.1.2 Expected growth in demand
The world population is predicted to grow from 6.9 billion in 2010 to 8.3 billion in 2030 and 9.1 billion in 2050
(UNDESA, 2009). By 2030, food demand is predicted
to increase by 50% (70% by 2050) (Bruinsma, 2009),
while energy demand from hydropower and other renewable energy resources will rise by 60% (WWAP,
2009) (see Section 2.2 and Chapter 19). These issues
are interconnected – increasing agricultural output, for
example, will substantially increase both water and
energy consumption, leading to increased competition
for water between the different water-using sectors.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Predicting future water demand for agriculture is
fraught with uncertainty. It is partially inﬂuenced by
demand for food, which in turn depends partly on the
number of people needing to be fed, and partly on
what and how much they eat. This is complicated by,
among other factors, uncertainties in seasonal climatic
variations, efficiency of agriculture production processes, crop types and yields.

In essence, the main challenge facing the agricultural
sector is not so much growing 70% more food in 40
years, but making 70% more food available on the
plate. Reducing losses in storage and along the value
chain may go a long way towards offsetting the need
for more production.
2.1.3 Agriculture’s impacts on water and ecosystems
The way that water is managed in agriculture has
caused wide-scale changes in ecosystems and undermined the provision of a wide range of ecosystem services. Water management for agriculture has changed
the physical and chemical characteristics of freshwater
and coastal wetlands and the quality and quantity of
water, as well as direct and indirect biological changes
in terrestrial ecosystems. The external cost of the damage to people and ecosystems, and clean-up processes,
from the agricultural sector is signiﬁcant. In the United
States of America (USA), for instance, the estimated
cost is US$9–20 billion per year (cited in Galloway et
al., 2007).

Although projections vary considerably, based on different scenario assumptions and methodologies, future global agricultural water consumption (including
both rainfed and irrigated agriculture) is estimated to
increase by about 19% to 8,515 km3 per year in 2050
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture, 2007). The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates
an 11% increase in irrigation water consumption from
2008 to 2050. This is expected to increase by about
5% the present water withdrawal for irrigation of 2,740
km3. Although this seems a modest increase, much
of it will occur in regions already suffering from water
scarcity (FAO, 2011a).

FIGURE 2.1
Water withdrawal by sector by region (2005)

Water withdrawal by sector (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Agricultural

Industrial

Least Developed
Countries

Western and
Central Europe

Eastern Europe
(incl. Russian Fed.)

Northern America

Central America
and Caribbean

Paciﬁc Islands

Southern America
(incl. Brazil)

East Asia
(incl. China)

Australia and
New Zealand

South-East Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Western Asia

Northern Africa

South Asia
(incl. India)

Central Asia

World

0

Municipal

Source: FAO AQUASTAT (http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm, accessed in 2011).

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

47

Land-use changes as a result of agriculture have produced a wide range of impacts on water quantity and
quality (Scanlon et al., 2007). Wetlands in particular have been affected. Poor water quality originating
from agricultural pollution is most severe in wetlands
in Europe, Latin America and Asia (Figure 2.2). The
status of species in freshwater and coastal wetlands
has been deteriorating faster than those of other ecosystems (MA, 2005a).
Diffuse pollution from agricultural land continues to
be of critical concern throughout many of the world’s
river basins (see Sections 3.3 and 4.3). Eutrophication
from agricultural runoff ranks among the top pollution
problems in Canada, the USA, and Asia and the Paciﬁc.
Australia, India, Pakistan and many parts of the arid
Middle East face increasing salinization as a result of
poor irrigation practices (MA, 2005).
Nitrate is the most common chemical contaminant in
the world’s groundwater resources. According to available data in FAO AQUASTAT (2011c), the USA is currently the country consuming the largest amount of

pesticides, followed by countries in Europe, especially
those of Western Europe. In terms of use per unit area
of cultivated area, Japan is the most intensive user of
pesticides. Over-abstraction of renewable groundwater resources and abstraction of fossil groundwater
reserves in arid North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula,
driven primarily by the agricultural sector, are exerting
irreconcilable pressures on water resources.
2.1.4 Pressures from population growth and
changing diets
The growing population (9.1 billion by 2050, as per
above) is increasing the pressures on land and water. At the same time, economic growth and individual
wealth are shifting diets from predominantly starchbased to meat and dairy, which require more water.
Producing 1 kg rice, for example, requires about
3,500 L water, 1 kg beef some 15,000 L, and a cup of
coffee about 140 L (Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2008).
This dietary shift is the greatest to impact on water
consumption over the past 30 years, and is likely to
continue well into the middle of the twenty-ﬁrst century (FAO, 2006).

FIGURE 2.2
Wetlands water quality state changes by continent
%
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Africa
Eutrophication

Asia
Agricultural pollution

Average eutrophication and quality

Europe

Neotropics

North America

Oceania

Water quality lowered
Average agricultural pollution

Source: FAO (2008, p. 50).

48

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Demand for livestock products is closely linked to
economic growth
The world food economy is being increasingly driven
by the shift in diets and food-consumption patterns
towards livestock products (FAO, 2006). In 2008,
3,350 million ha were used as permanent meadows
and for pasture – more than twice the area used for
arable cropping and permanent crops. Livestock provides not just meat, but also dairy products, eggs,
wool, hides and so on. The livestock sector is now
changing at an unprecedented pace as demand
for food derived from animals has boomed in the
world’s most rapidly growing economies (Steinfeld et
al., 2006). Livestock already contributes 40% of the
global value of agricultural output. It constitutes one
of the most dynamic parts of the agricultural economy, driven by population growth, rising affluence and
urbanization.
But the increasing demand for livestock products is
being matched by concerns about its impacts on the
environment. The expansion of land for livestock has
led to deforestation in some countries (e.g. Brazil) and
intensive livestock production (mainly in OECD countries) is already a major source of pollution. Livestock
contributes less than 2% of global gross domestic
product (GDP), yet produces some 18% of greenhouse gases (GHGs) (Steinfeld et al., 2006b). Hence
critics argue that the dis-beneﬁts from livestock far
outweigh the beneﬁts, but others argue that this seriously underestimates the economic and social importance of livestock, particularly in low-income countries.
Regardless of the balance of these arguments, the increasing demand for livestock seems likely to continue
(FAO, 2006). This means that resource-use efficiency
in livestock production is now an urgent priority, and
this includes the management of water.
Water pollution from livestock production and
processing
During the production phase, livestock requires water
for drinking, cooling and cleaning, but the amounts
required differ according to the animal, the method of
rearing and the location. Extensive livestock systems
can increase water demand because of the additional
effort required as animals search for feed. Intensive or
industrialized systems, however, require additional service water for cooling and cleaning facilities. Globally,
the annual drinking water requirement for livestock
is about 16 km3 and services require another 6.5 km3
(Steinfeld et al., 2006).

WWDR4

The amount of water used to grow feed and fodder is
much more signiﬁcant in volume terms. This amount
depends not just on the number and kinds of animals
and amount of food they eat, but also where the food
is grown. It is estimated that livestock consume about
2,000–3,000 km3 of water annually – as much as
45% of the global water embedded in food products
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture, 2007; Zimmer and Renault, n.d.) – although these estimates are quite imprecise. Rainfed
grasslands and non-cultivated grazed fodder crops
consume most of this water and this is generally
thought to be of little environmental value. Indeed, if
these lands were not used for grazing there would be
very little water saving or potential for alternative use.
Irrigation water volumes are much smaller, but play
an important role in producing feed, fodder and grazing for livestock, and have a much greater opportunity
cost than rainfed cropping.
During meat processing, the slaughterhouse is the second largest user of water in the meat-processing value
chain (after the production phase), and a potentially
signiﬁcant point source of pollution to local ecosystems and communities. But the most serious aspect of
food consumption is food wastage. This is particularly
the case in industrialized countries where food is wasted because too much perishable food is produced and
not sold, products deteriorate in storage, and food is
bought and not consumed and hence thrown away. All
this adds up to both a signiﬁcant waste of food, and
also a signiﬁcant waste of the water used to produce it
(Lundqvist, 2010).
2.1.5 Other pressures on water resources in the
agriculture sector
Climate change
Agriculture contributes to climate change through its
share of GHG emissions, which in turn affect the planet’s water cycle, adding another layer of uncertainties
and risks to food production. Climate change impacts
are mainly experienced through the water regime, in
the form of more severe and frequent droughts and
ﬂoods, with anticipated effects on the availability of
water resources through changes in rainfall distribution, soil moisture, glacier and ice/snow melt, and river
and groundwater ﬂows. These climate change-induced
hydrological changes are likely to affect both the extent and productivity of irrigated and rainfed agriculture worldwide, hence adaptation strategies will focus
on minimizing the overall production risk (FAO, 2011b).

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

49

“Food security is
threatened by the
potential for waste as
agricultural products
move along extensive
value chains and pass
through many hands ...
from ﬁeld to fork.”
It is predicted that South Asia and Southern Africa are
predicted will be the most vulnerable regions to climate change-related food shortages by 2030 (Lobell
et al., 2008). Their populations are food-insecure because they are highly dependent on growing crops in
ecosystems that display high vulnerability and consequences to climate change projections of temperature
and precipitation changes.
Food, economy and the energy crisis
The food price crisis, followed shortly by the 2009 economic crisis, has had tragic consequences for world
hunger. Food prices are signiﬁcantly higher than they
were in 2006. Although the factors which led to this
increase in food prices were thought to be temporary –
such as drought in wheat-producing regions, low food
stocks and soaring oil barrel prices that drove up the
price of fertilizers – food prices in 2010 had not yet
returned to their pre-2006 levels. Poor women shoulder the brunt of economic crises and women with less
education tend to increase their work participation
more in times of crisis in almost every region of the
world (FAO, 2009).
The demand for biofuels has also soared in recent years.
Substantial amounts of maize in the USA, wheat and
rapeseed in the European Union (EU), oil palm in parts
of sub-Saharan Africa and South and South-East Asia,
and sugar in Brazil, are being raised for ethanol and
biodiesel production. In 2007, biofuel production was
dominated by Brazil, the USA, and to a lesser extent, the
EU. Biomass and waste represented 10% of the world’s

50

CHAPTER 2

primary energy demand in 2005, more than nuclear
(6%) and hydro (2%) combined (IEA, 2007).
If a projected bio-energy supply of 6,000–12,000 million tonnes of oil equivalent were to be reached in
2050,3 this would require one-ﬁfth of the world’s agricultural land (IEA, 2006). Biofuels are also water intensive and can add to the strains on local hydrological
systems and GHG emissions.
Land acquisitions and land-use changes
The relatively recent phenomenon of large-scale, international land acquisitions is leading to land-use changes, which in turn impacts water use. Since 2007–2008,
sovereign funds and investment companies of some
OECD and BRICS countries have bought or leased
large tracts of farmland across Africa, Asia and Latin
America in order to secure their fuel and food requirements. This was triggered in part by the fuel crisis and
the demand for biofuels to replace petroleum-based
products, as explained in greater detail in Chapter 7
(Box 7.14). The problem is that in most states where
such contracts are being completed, water rights are
often not codiﬁed in ‘modern’ law, but are based on
local traditions, weak and outdated water legislation
or non-existent in any formal legal terms (Mann and
Smaller, 2010).
2.1.6 Waste in the food chain
When water is scarce it is no longer enough just to
consider the amount of water needed to grow food
(Lundqvist, Fraiture and Molden, 2008). The way
water is used along the entire value chain must be
examined, from production to consumption and beyond. This is particularly true for the more industrialized countries, and also to some extent in the towns
and cities of BRICS countries, where food increasingly comes from many different sources, often over
long distances, and in some cases from many different countries. Food security is threatened by the potential for waste as agricultural products move along
extensive value chains and pass through many hands
– farmers, transporters, store keepers, food processors, shopkeepers and consumers – as it travels from
ﬁeld to fork. Food can be wasted at every step along
the value chain, which means that the water used to
produce it is also wasted.
Water management has traditionally been the responsibility of governments, but major international food companies are beginning to realize the importance of water

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

to their businesses, particularly where their value
chains are situated in water-short countries. Although
their concern may have more to do with customer
perceptions and security of proﬁts, using water with
greater care can provide potential knock-on beneﬁts
for all. Initiatives to promote more efficient use of water along the value chain include, for example, the CEO
Water Mandate and the Alliance for Water Stewardship.
2.1.7 ‘Water-smart’ food production
The world is clearly entering a new era of water management characterized by increasing recognition of
the links between water and other resources and the
socio-economics of poor post-harvest management
and food waste along the value chain.
The role of technology
In higher income countries, science and technology
have long been major drivers of global prosperity. This
will undoubtedly continue in the future. Food production will need to be much ‘greener’ and more sustainable to ensure that it does not add to the burden of
climate change and ecosystem deterioration.
Innovative technologies will be needed that can improve crop yields and drought tolerance; produce
smarter ways of using fertilizer and water; improve
crop protection through new pesticides and nonchemical approaches; reduce post-harvest losses; and
create more sustainable livestock and marine production. Industrialized countries are well placed to take
advantage of these technologies, but also have the responsibility to ensure that LDCs have opportunities to
access them on equitable or non-discriminatory terms.
Human capacities and institutions are assets
Agricultural development in LDCs lies mainly in the
hands of smallholders, a large majority of whom are
women. Water technologies appropriate to their needs
will play a crucial role in meeting the food security challenge. However, in many LDCs women have only limited
access to a wide range of physical assets and lack the
skills to deploy them. Multiple water-use schemes can
provide opportunities for women to extend their inﬂuence over water allocation and management.
Major changes in policy and management will be
needed to make best possible use of available water
resources. New institutional arrangements are needed
that centralize the responsibility for water regulation,
yet decentralize water management responsibility and

WWDR4

increase user ownership and participation. New arrangements are required for safeguarding access to
water for poor and disadvantaged groups, particularly
women, and ensuring they have long-term land and
water security.
A focus on the value chain
Improvements will be needed all along the agricultural
value chains. Early gains include opportunities to reduce post-harvest crop losses in LDCs and food wastage in the higher income countries, hence saving the
water embedded in them. In the medium term, innovations in climate-smart cropping are possible. In the
longer term, energy-smart conversion of feed and fodder for livestock is also possible. Water recycling at all
stages of the value chain can help secure environmental water requirements when reuse of treated water is
not culturally acceptable for other uses.
Managing risk creatively
Reducing vulnerability to drought will require investment in both constructed and ‘green’ infrastructure to
improve water measurement and control and, where
appropriate, increase surface water and groundwater
storage in constructed reservoirs and in natural storage
both in wetlands and in the soil. Most beneﬁt is expected to come from existing water management technologies through adaptation to new situations. ‘Design for
management’, promoted in the 1980s to ensure infrastructure design took account of who would manage it
and how it would be managed, remains highly relevant
today and important for future water management.
Virtual water trade
Virtual water may play an increasing role as water-rich
countries export water embedded in food to watershort countries that ﬁnd it increasingly difficult to grow
sufficient staple food crops. But the aqua-politics of
exporting/importing food versus self-sufficiency will
not be easy to resolve. Food-producing countries may
not wish to export crops when food security is threatened; lower income and LDCs may need to continue
over-exploiting water resources to feed their populations to avoid market-imposed high prices. Subsidies
on food and other products can distort markets with
possible negative implications on the use of the virtual
water notion.
Implementing ‘water smart’ production
A twin-track approach is needed that makes best use
of available water: demand-management options that

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

51

“All forms of energy
require water at
some stage of their
life cycle, which
includes production,
conversion, distribution
and use.”
increase productivity (more ‘crop per drop’) and supply management that makes more water available
through water storage to cope with seasonality and
increasingly unpredictable rainfall.
Major investment in agricultural water management
will be needed and the present-day national priorities
in some countries give cause for serious concern. In
2010, it was estimated that only US$10 billion was invested globally in irrigation systems, a surprisingly low
ﬁgure given the importance of water for the agricultural sector (in comparison, the global market volume
for bottled water in the same year was US$59 billion)
(Wild et al., 2010). Surely it is time for the world to
wake up to the fact that agriculture is a major, valid
consumer of water, and that investment is essential
for the future of food and water security. When water
is scarce there is a global responsibility to use water
wisely, efficiently and productively. Agriculture needs
to be much more ‘water-smart’ and must be given the
right signals and incentives to make this happen.

The challenge of managing this nexus is increased by
external drivers, whose impact can only be estimated
but never wholly planned for. Climate change is a central external driver that affects both water and energy
directly; mitigation measures are concentrated around
the reduction of energy consumption and carbon
emissions, while adaptation means planning for increasing hydrological variability and extreme weather
events, including ﬂoods, droughts and storms. Further
external pressures are created through demographic
development, both from population increase and migration, as well as from increased economic activity
and living standards, which will generate a surge of
energy consumption, particularly in non-OECD countries. Lastly, policy choices by governments often exacerbate the strains by pursuing more water-intensive
energy and more energy-intensive water.
2.2.1 Water for energy
Trends and forecasts in the demand for different types
of energy
EIA (2010) estimates that global energy consumption will
increase by around 49% from 2007 to 2035 (Figure 2.3).
This increase in energy consumption will be higher in
non-OECD countries (84%) than in OECD countries (14%),
with the primary driver being the expected growth in
GDP and the associated increased economic activity.
Energy sources are often divided into primary and
secondary energies. Primary energies are extracted,
captured or cultivated, and include crude oil, natural

FIGURE 2.3
World marketed energy consumption, 2007–2035

800
Non-OECD

Energy and water are intricately connected. Although
there exist different sources of energy and electricity,
all require water for various production processes, including extraction of raw materials, cooling in thermal
processes, cleaning materials, cultivation of crops for
biofuels, and powering turbines. Conversely, energy
is required to make water resources available for human use and consumption through pumping, transportation, treatment, desalination and irrigation. This
double-sided interdependency of both resources has
been coined the water-energy nexus, and introduces
key cross-sectoral vulnerabilities.

52

CHAPTER 2

OECD

700
Quadrillion British Thermal Units
(BTU)

2.2 Energy

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2007

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

Source: EIA (2010, p. 1).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

gas, coal, biomass and geothermal heat. Secondary
energies undergo a transformation process into petroleum products and electricity generated from thermal processes (coal, fossil fuels, geothermal, nuclear)
and hydropower, solar/photovoltaic (PV) and wind
(Øvergaard, 2008).
With regard to primary energy carriers, Figure 2.4
shows that fuel production is expected to increase until 2035. While the increase in crude oil production is
expected to be small, signiﬁcant increases are expected in the production of biofuels, coal and natural gas.
In particular, the production of biofuels has signiﬁcant
water impacts because of the water requirements of
crops for growth during photosynthesis, along with
other water uses at the bioreﬁnery.
Similarly, there are great disparities in the 2035 trends
for electricity production. Figure 2.5 shows that no
increases can be expected in electricity from liquid
fossil fuels, and very little from nuclear production.
Notably, the global nuclear policy consequences of the
nuclear accident in Fukushima, Japan, in March 2011
might further inhibit future nuclear generation. The
production of electricity from coal, renewable energy
and natural gas, however, is expected to increase signiﬁcantly. Electricity production from renewables is
expected to more than double until 2035 (Figure 2.4),

with hydropower growing in overall production, but
less signiﬁcantly in percentage than wind, solar and PV
(EIA, 2010; WWF, 2011).
Water requirements for primary energy
All forms of energy require water at some stage of
their life cycle, which includes production, conversion, distribution and use. This chapter focuses on
water quantity requirements, instead of water quality impacts. The water requirements for fuel production for coal, natural gas and uranium, while non-trivial,
are much smaller than the water requirements at their
use within power plants, and are therefore considered negligible by comparison. By contrast, the water
requirements to produce coal, natural gas and petroleum for transportation applications are signiﬁcant by
comparison (because transport vehicles have no water
requirements on-board.) Each fuel and technology has
a slightly different set of requirements.
Crude oil
Crude oil is currently the largest primary energy source
globally. Its production requires water at various stages,
including drilling, pumping, reﬁnement and treatment.
The average water use is estimated to be 1.058 m3 per
GJ (Gerbens-Leenes, et al., 2008). Unconventional oil
production, which is projected to increase in North,

FIGURE 2.5
FIGURE 2.4
Historical world fuel production from 1990 to 2007
with projections to 2035

Projections for world net electricity generation,
2007–2035

Billion megawatthours (MWh)

40,000
800

Million barrels per day

700
600
500
400
300

35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000

200

5,000

100

0
2007

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

0
1990

2000

2007

Crude Oil
Biofuels

Source: Data from EIA (2010).

WWDR4

2015

Natural gas
Nuclear

2025

2035

Fossil fuels
Renewables

Coal
Nuclear

Natural gas

Coal

Note: for this ﬁgure, fossil fuels refers to liquids such as petroleum
and liqueﬁed gases. Coal and natural gas are considered separately.
Source: Data from EIA (2010).

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

53

Central and South America until 2035, consumes 2.5 to
4 times more water (WEC, 2010).
Coal
Coal is the second largest primary energy source
globally, and its use is projected to increase by 2035
(Figure 2.4). Gerbens-Leenes et al. (2008) estimate
that approximately 0.164 m3 per GJ are used in the
various processes, signiﬁcantly more of which is used
during underground mining operations than in open
pit mining (Gleick, 1994).
Natural gas
Signiﬁcant increases are expected in the production
of natural gas by 2035 (Figure 2.4). Water requirements for the drilling, extraction and transportation
of conventional gas sources are relatively modest, at
an estimated 0.109 m3 per GJ (Gerbens-Leenes et al.,
2008). However, shale gas production, which is expected to increase in Asia, Australia and North America
(Gascoyne and Aik, 2011), has slightly higher waterintensity than conventional gas, because its extraction
method, hydraulic fracturing, injects millions of litres of
water into each well.
Uranium
Uranium’s share of global energy consumption is
projected to increase from about 6% today to 9% by
2035 (Figure 2.4) (WEC, 2010). Gerbens-Leenes et al.
(2008) estimate that water requirements for uranium
mining and processing are modest at 0.086 m3 per GJ.
Biomass and biofuel
Biomass, including wood, agro fuel, waste and municipal
by-products, is an important source of ﬁre and heating
in many non-OECD country households (WEC, 2010).
Furthermore, biofeedstocks are increasingly grown
commercially to replace the use of fossil fuels in OECD
countries – a trend that has raised concerns over the
crop water requirements. However, the water intensity
depends on the feedstock, where and how the crops are
grown, and whether they are ﬁrst or second-generation
crops (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008; WEF, 2009). Due to
this variety of production processes, it is impractical to
attribute a singular value or even a representative range
of water consumption to biofuel production.
Water requirements for the generation of electricity
Thermal electricity
Thermal power plants (coal, gas, oil, biomass, geothermal or uranium) generate electricity by heating water

54

CHAPTER 2

or gases and running them through steam or gas
turbines to drive electrical generators. After passing
through turbines, the water in the steam cycle is generally cooled (via water cooling loops) in a condenser
and recycled. These processes currently account for
78% of world electricity production (EIA, 2010) and
output is expected to grow, implying that even more
water cooling will be needed.
Two types of water-cooling technologies as well as dry
cooling are currently used (WEF, 2011). Once-through
cooling withdraws relatively large quantities of water
that are returned to the water body downstream after
passing through the condenser. While some water is
lost to evaporation (WEC, 2010), little water is actually
consumed. However, signiﬁcant downstream stresses
on aquatic life can occur when the returned water has
a signiﬁcantly higher temperature than the environment, or if aquatic life is entrained into the cooling
systems (DOE, 2006). Closed loop systems re-circulate
the cooling water in the condenser and eject excess
heat through cooling towers or ponds (WEF, 2011).
These closed systems withdraw 95% less water than
once-through technologies, but all of this water is lost
to evaporation such that no water is returned directly
to the natural system. Dry cooling systems do not require water for cooling, but have parasitic efficiency
losses and have varying performance depending on
the local temperature and humidity.
Values for the water consumption of thermal power
plants vary due to the variety of existing technologies
and fuel sources, as well as the climatic differences,
which inﬂuence evaporation and the selection of the
cooling process.
Hydropower
Hydropower presents the largest renewable source
of electricity generation (15% of global production
in 2007), and it is estimated that two-thirds of the
world’s economically feasible potential is still to be
exploited (WEC, 2010). Hydropower uses water as its
fuel by running it through turbines and discharging
it to a water body further downstream. In this process, the water remains unpolluted and the hydropower production process is therefore by deﬁnition
non-consumptive. However, in the case of storage
reservoirs, additional evaporation might occur and has
recently come to be considered by some observers as
the water consumption of hydropower – even though
evaporation losses are not usually factored into other

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

reservoir-related uses. Estimation of water consumption for hydroelectricity is particularly difficult as it relies on modelling rather than measuring (WEF, 2009).
Most of the latest research on this topic comes from
the USA with ﬁndings presenting a range from 0.04
to 210 m3 per MWh with an expected median of 2.6
to 5.4 m3 per MWh (Gleick, 1994). Such estimates are
meant to reﬂect losses through evaporation that would
exceed what would have occurred if the basin had
remained at its normal run-of-river surface area. It is
important to note that these losses are not caused by
hydropower generation itself, but by the surface area
of reservoirs and site-speciﬁc climatic conditions, and
could thus be applied to any water use that includes
a reservoir, man-made or natural. Box 2.1 presents
this and some of the complexities that are associated
with the consideration of water use and consumption

during hydropower production in comparison with
other types of energy, and raises several points that
are valid to measuring ‘losses’ attributable not exclusively to hydropower but to reservoirs for different, often multiple uses.
Wind, solar and photovoltaic
Wind and solar PV currently account for 3% of global
electricity production. During operation, these technologies use virtually no water with the exception of
that for washing of blades or solar cells (WEF, 2009).
However, water requirements for washing of solar
panels can be important to remove dust when operating in or near deserts. Also, in the case of large-scale
deployment of concentrating solar power, the electricity is generated via the same steam cycle as thermal
power plants and will therefore have cooling water

BOX 2.1
Complexities in comparing water use and consumption for hydropower production with that for other
types of energy

Evaporation from hydroelectric power plants was initially researched in the early 1990s in the United States of America in an
attempt to quantify the water usages of several energy resources. While few recent measurements exist, the US ﬁgures from
the 1990s are frequently used to represent water requirements for hydropower at a global level (Figure 2.5). Pegasys (2011)
notes that several points need to be considered when considering the impact of hydropower on the water resource:
đƫƫƫUnderstanding water ‘use’, ‘consumption’ and ‘loss’. It is important to clarify the concepts and terminology associated
with the ‘non-consumptive use’ of water for hydropower generation. While hydroelectric production does not ‘consume’
water, there are: (1) losses through evaporation that exceed what would have happened if the basin had remained at its
run-of-river surface area, and (2) downstream impacts associated with altered ﬂow regimes that need to be taken into account. Perhaps the most common complication arises with uses that rely on reservoir storage to allocate annual stream
ﬂow over time. For example, in many locations, as in Chile, hydroelectricity generation competes with other water uses because it shapes stream ﬂows to meet power demand that are often out of phase with the seasonal requirements for other
uses (Huffaker, Whittlesey and Wandschneider, 1993; Bauer, 1998).
đƫƫƫNature of generation capacity. Understanding a generation technology and its footprint outside of the wider national or
regional electricity system raises particular difficulties. Each generation facility has a prescribed performance and cost proﬁle that determine its dispatch order and therefore water usage. This role can only be understood in the context of the other sources of power generation. For example hydropower has multiple uses in systems either as baseload capacity, peaking
capacity or support. Furthermore, hydropower reservoirs potentially serve multiple purposes, including recreation, navigation, ﬂood control and water storage, hence allocating its impacts across its myriad of services is difficult.
đƫƫƫEnergy supply chain. Each generation technology has a different supply chain. A consideration of this supply chain from
extraction of raw material to ﬁnal product is critical in understanding the footprint of that technology. An omission of the
supply chain obscures the water requirements for the technology and complicates comparisons between technologies.
đƫƫƫAttribution of losses. Hydropower in many instances is one of the functions in a multi-objective project, and the attribution
of reservoir evapotranspiration to all of the uses is necessary when considering the footprint and usage of hydropower.
đƫƫƫStructure of the hydropower system. Each hydropower system is structured differently based on the nature and ﬂow of the
river system. Reservoir sizes, depth and shapes, as well as installed capacity, depend on the pre-existing geography, and determine the evaporation as well as generation value, highlighting the need to evaluate each project based on its speciﬁcs.
đƫƫƫClimatic setting. There is considerable debate around impact (or opportunity cost) of the footprint on the water resources of
local basins. The meaning of the same footprint in a basin with excess water is different from that in a water-scarce basin.

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

55

requirements, which can be a challenge in hot and dry
regions (Carter and Campbell, 2009).

the water availability required for energy production
is often not considered when new energy production
facilities are planned. Similarly, energy needs for water
systems are also often overlooked.

As a general trend, energy and electricity consumption are likely to increase over the next 25 years in all
world regions, with the majority of this increase occurring in non-OECD countries. This trend will have direct
implications for the water resources needed to supply
this energy. Table 2.1 shows that the anticipated water
requirements for energy production will increase by
11.2% by 2050 if current consumption modes are kept.
Under a scenario that assumes increasing energy efﬁciency of consumption modes, WEC (2010) estimates
that water requirements for energy production could
decrease by 2.9% until 2050 (Table 2.2). Unfortunately,

Water resources are not evenly distributed on the
planet, and correspondingly some regions will face
more severe water-for-energy stresses than others.
WEC (2010) estimates that China, India and the Middle
East, which already experience water stresses and are
forecast to experience a ﬁve-fold increase in electricity
production, will increasingly need to explore new technologies for processing primary energies and generating electricity. Other regions, although experiencing
increasing water requirement for energy production,

FIGURE 2.6
Operational water consumption for the production of various types of energy

Recirculating Cooling

Once-Through
Cooling

Pond
Cooling

Hybrid Cooling

209 m3/MWh

Dry
Cooling

Operational Water Consumption (m3/MWh)

5

Non-renewables

Non-thermal
Technologies

Renewables

4

3

2

Hydropower

Ocean

PV

Wind

CSP

Natural Gas CC

Biopower Biogas

CSP

CSP Dish Stirling

Coal

Natural Gas CC

Nuclear

Biopower Steam

Coal

Natural Gas CC

Nuclear

Biopower Steam

Coal IGCC with CCS

Coal IGCC

Coal with CCS

Coal

Natural Gas CC

Nuclear

Biopower Steam

Biopower Biogas

CSP

0

Natural Gas CC with CCS

1

Source: IPCC (2011, ﬁg. 9.14, p. 49). Trends in the demand of water for energy

56

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

will most likely not suffer from water stress or scarcity,
as they possess sufficient resources. WEC (2010) estimates that this scenario will be the case for most parts
of North and South America and the Caribbean.

in several regions. In addition, where surface water is
not abundant, importing water into the region might
be more energy intensive than pumping available
groundwater resources.

2.2.2 Energy for water
Energy is needed for extraction (surface water,
groundwater), transformation (treatment to drinking
water standards, desalination), water resource delivery
(municipal, industrial and agricultural supply), reconditioning (wastewater treatment) and release. However,
few countries currently research and report on energy
requirements for water.

Water is commonly cleaned to meet drinking water
standards by removing salts and chemical and biological contaminants. The energy requirements used for
surface and groundwater treatment vary largely, based
on water quality (WEF, 2011), technology used (Strokes
and Horvath, 2009) and national drinking water standards. However, in international life-cycle analyses, it
has been observed that desalination of locally available sources generally requires signiﬁcantly more energy than importing water sources (Strokes and Horvath,
2009), and requires generally six times more energy
than wastewater treatment (WEF, 2011). Electricity
requirements for desalination are relatively well researched, and Strokes and Horvath (2009) found
that international electricity use for conventional and
membrane seawater desalination treatment averaged
0.38 kWh per year per m3, while brackish groundwater desalination requires about 0.26 kWh per year per

EPRI (2002) estimates that 2-4% of total US electricity consumption is used for water provision at water
and wastewater treatment plants. Including end-uses,
the national US energy consumption for water is approximately 10% (Twomey and Webber, 2011). Energy
requirements for surface water pumping are generally 30% lower than for groundwater pumping (EPRI,
2002). It can be expected that groundwater will become increasingly energy intensive as water tables fall

TABLE 2.1
Population, energy consumption and water consumption for energy, 2005–2050
World

2005

2020

2035

2050

Population (million)

6290

7842.3

8601.1

9439.0

Energy consumption (EJ)

328.7

400.4

464.9

518.8

Energy consumption (GJ/capita)

52.3

51.1

54.1

55

Water for energy (billion m3/year)

1815.6

1986.4

2087.8

2020.1

Water for energy (m3/capita)

288.6

253.3

242.7

214.0

Source: Adapted from WEC (2010, table 1, p. 50, various data sources).

TABLE 2.2
Population, energy consumption and water consumption for energy, 2005–2050, with improved energy efficiency
World

2005

2020

2035

2050

Population (million)

6290

7842.3

8601.1

9439.0

Energy consumption (EJ)

328.7

364.7

386.4

435.0

52.3

46.5

44.9

46.1

1815.6

1868.5

1830.5

1763.6

288.6

238.3

212.8

186.8

Energy consumption (GJ/capita)
3

Water for energy (billion m /year)
3

Water for energy (m /capita)

Source: Adapted from WEC (2010, table 2, p. 51, various data sources).

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

57

m3. The price of desalinated water is therefore closely
linked to the energy price, which, despite ﬂuctuations,
has been steadily increasing over the past decade (EIA,
2010). However, while such global averages may be interesting in theory, drinking water is so important that
local choices of water provision will in practice depend
on availability of the resource. Furthermore, desalination produces highly concentrated waste brine streams
that must be disposed of. Coastal desalination plants
discharge that brine into neighbouring waters, with
negative impacts on coastal marine ecology. Inland
desalination plants face an equal challenge to ﬁnd ecologically benign ways to dispose of the brine.
As Table 2.3 shows, wastewater treatment also requires
large amounts of energy (WEF, 1997). High-income
countries that have stricter discharge regulations install more energy-intensive treatment technologies.
Trickling ﬁlter treatment, which uses a biologically active substrate for aerobic treatment, is a reasonably
passive system, consuming over 250 kWh per ML on
average (EPRI, 2002; Stillwell, 2011). Diffused air aeration, as part of activated sludge processing, is a more
energy intensive form of wastewater treatment, requiring 340 kWh per ML due to blowers and gas transfer
equipment (EPRI, 2002; Stillwell, 2011). More advanced
wastewater treatment, utilizing ﬁltration and the option of nitriﬁcation, requires 400–500 kWh per ML
(EPRI, 2002; Stillwell et al., 2011). In fact, more advanced sludge treatment and processing can consume
energy in the range 30–80% of total wastewater plant
energy use (Center for Sustainable Systems, 2008).

Treating wastewater sludge through anaerobic digestion can also produce energy through the creation
of methane-rich biogas, a renewable fuel that can be
used to generate up to 50% of the treatment plant’s
electricity needs (Sieger and Whitlock, 2005; Stillwell,
King and Webber, 2010).
Because wastewater treatment is generally more energy intensive than standard water treatment, the trend
towards these higher treatment standards will likely
increase the unit energy needs of wastewater treatment in the future for countries moving up in income
(Applebaum, 2000). However, it is possible that the
introduction of greater energy efficiency will offset
the expected increases in energy intensity for stricter
treatment standards, limiting the projected growth
in electricity use at treatment plants. The higher per
capita energy expenditures for wastewater treatment
in order to achieve stricter environmental standards
is a scenario likely to be repeated in analogous ways
throughout all societies achieving affluence; that is, as
nations get richer, they will demand more energy.
Energy is also used for irrigation of crops. In OECD
countries, energy for irrigation account for a small
fraction of the total energy embedded in water (heating, treating and disposing of water requires much
more energy). However, in non-OECD countries where
treating and heating are less common, irrigation takes
up a relatively larger share of energy for water.
Water requirements to support growing populations
are increasing, and water scarcity will oblige nations to

TABLE 2.3
Average US ﬁgures for water production
Source / treatment type

Energy use
(kWh/million L)

Surface water

60

Groundwater

160

Brackish groundwater

1 000-2 600

Seawater

2 600-4 400

Trickling ﬁlter

250

Activated sludge

340

Advanced treatment without nitriﬁcation

400

Advanced treatment with nitriﬁcation

500

Water

Wastewater

Note: The table does not include energy used for distribution.
Sources: CEC (2005); EPRI (2002); Stillwell (2010); Stillwell et al. (2010, 2011).

58

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

progressively explore unconventional sources of water
with larger electricity requirements. Thus, while technologies are steadily becoming more energy efficient
(Strokes and Horvath, 2009), this gain in efficiency
risks being offset by the increased energy requirements for delivering water from increasingly distant
sources and sources disadvantageous due to their
location, or treating water that is of lower quality.

there will also likely be an increase in localized measures
to supply water and energy to remote locations in order to empower communities and promote sustainable
livelihoods. Such measures include small and micro-hydropower and other small-scale renewables to provide
electricity for communities (GVEP, 2011), as well as sand
dams (Excellent, 2011) and energy-independent pumps
for the provision of rural water sources.

2.2.3 Drivers, challenges and responses to the
water-energy nexus
As stated earlier, global energy consumption is expected to increase dramatically over the next two
decades. This trend is primarily a function of population and economic growth in developing countries. The
main challenge with regard to water and energy will
be the provision of water resources to ensure that the
increased energy needs can be supplied. This need
requires policy-makers to promote more efficient and
integrated water uses for energy and vice versa. The
ﬁrst step toward such policies will be comprehensive
assessments of water availability on a country level.
Second, water and energy policies, which are often
made in different government departments or ministries, will need to be integrated with policy-makers increasingly working in close coordination.

There are also technical solutions to more efficient
water use in the energy sector. For example, brackish
water, mine pool water, or domestic wastewater and
dry cooling have been used for cooling power plants
(NETL, 2009). Research is also ongoing into the water
efficiency of biofuels (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008),
the energy-efficiency of desalination (AFF, 2002), and
the reduction of evaporation from reservoirs.

All the aforementioned trends suggest a potential
movement towards water-production methods that are
increasingly energy-intensive. Many high-income societies are moving towards more energy-intensive water
because of a push by many water utilities for new supplies of water from sources that are farther away and
lower quality, and which thereby require more energy
to get them to the right quality and location. In addition to treating water to higher standards of cleanliness,
societies are also going to greater lengths to transport
freshwater from its sources to dense urban areas. These
efforts include digging to ever-deeper underground reservoirs, or moving water via massive long-haul projects
(Stillwell, King and Webber, 2010).
In politically stable regions, there is a strong possibility that the role of national decision-making frames will
decline and that decisions on water and energy may
increasingly be subjected to inﬂuences at the supranational level, with governments working together in
basin organizations and power pools – assuming (as
mentioned in Chapter 1) that such processes and related
agreements reﬂect the political economy and institutional capacities of the countries involved. Conversely,

WWDR4

The water–energy nexus will transcend water use and
consumption in mere quantity considerations. Energy
production also impacts water quality. Thermal, chemical,
radioactive or biological pollution can have direct impacts
on downstream ecosystems; where emissions are not sufﬁciently controlled, considerable amounts of agricultural
land may be affected by acid rain. Similarly, where water
scarcity obliges nations to use non-traditional sources
of water (e.g. desalination, brackish water), choices will
need to be sensitive to the water and environmental impacts of the required electricity.

2.3 Industry
2.3.1 Status and trends
Although industry uses relatively little water on a
global scale, it nevertheless requires an accessible,
reliable and environmentally sustainable supply. It
is generally reported that approximately 20% of the
world’s freshwater withdrawals are used by industry,
although this varies between regions and countries.
Furthermore, as described in Section 2.2, water withdrawals for industry are most often reported in combination with those for energy. In addition, the water
required for small-scale industry and commerce is often confused with domestic consumption. As a result,
surprisingly little is known about how much water is
actually withdrawn and consumed by industry for its
purposed manufacturing, transformation and production needs.
The percentage of a country’s industrial sector water demands is generally proportional to the average
income level, representing only about 5% of water

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

59

“Surprisingly little is
known about how
much water is actually
withdrawn and
consumed by industry
for its purposed
manufacturing,
transformation and
production needs.”
withdrawals in low-income countries, compared to
over 40% in some high-income countries (Figure 2.1).
This observation suggests that the level of a country’s
or a region’s economic development is an important
driver of its industrial water use, and may ultimately
have as much inﬂuence on water use as its population
growth.
Water management in the industry sector is typically
considered in terms of industrial withdrawals and consumption. Total industrial water withdrawals can be
calculated as: Water Withdrawal = Water Consumption
+ Effluent Discharge (Grobicki, 2007).
Industry’s total water withdrawal from surface water and groundwater is usually much greater than the
quantity of water it actually consumes. Improved water
management is generally reﬂected in overall decreased
industrial water withdrawals or increased wastewater
treatment, highlighting the connection between higher
productivity and lower consumption and effluent discharges and reduced pollution.
The quality of water required by industry for speciﬁc
needs can vary considerably. Water of lesser quality
may be adequate for many industries, facilitating the
use of recycled and reclaimed water. Conversely, some
industries may have water quality requirements more
demanding than those for drinking water; for example, food processing. Pharmaceutical and high technology industries can require very high-quality water,

60

CHAPTER 2

necessitating additional treatment of water from primary supplies. Other sectors, such as tourism, power
generation and transportation, can also have differing
water quality requirements.
The water quality of effluent discharges can have very
signiﬁcant environmental impacts, particularly on
regional and local scales (UNEP, 2007). Small-scale
industries such as agro-processors, textile dyeing,
abattoirs and tanneries can cause the presence of
toxic pollutants in local water resources. Not only do
the pollutants make the water non-potable, but they
also kill ﬁsh, which are a source of protein for many
poor people. Certain toxic chemicals enter the food
chain when polluted water or untreated wastewater from industries is used for agriculture. Industrial
contamination tends to be more concentrated, more
toxic, and often harder to treat than pollutants from
other sectors or activities. The persistence of these
contaminants, and their rate of movement though the
environment and hydrological cycle, can often involve
long periods of impaired water resources (UNEP,
2007).
In addition to considering water quantity and quality concerns, industry must also use water efficiently
and wisely, even as it seeks to augment its economic
output and proﬁt. This concept of water productivity
refers to the value that can be obtained from each unit
of water used. The third edition of the World Water
Development Report (Chapter 7) reported values ranging from well over US$100 to less than US$10 per m3
of water used, depending on the country. As technology improves, industrial water productivity also typically rises. Thus, low productivity may indicate that the
water is either under-priced or simply abundant, which
results in cost becoming an insigniﬁcant factor. High
productivity is linked to high water re-use, with reduced water withdrawals. Water productivity also can
be of considerable interest to decision-makers concerned with water allocations.
In addition to water withdrawals, signiﬁcant industrial
interventions affecting the hydrological cycle include
effluent discharges into surface water bodies, contaminant inﬁltration into groundwater, and atmospheric distribution and fallout of contaminants into
water bodies. One approach to decreasing or avoiding environmental degradation from industrial activities, even as industry continues to develop, is through
cleaner production and sustainability practices. Cleaner

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

production has many facets, and one of its main objectives is to move toward zero effluent discharges, with
industry working to convert wastewater streams into
useful inputs for other processes, industries and industrial clusters.
2.3.2 External drivers
Industry is strongly inﬂuenced by external drivers that,
indirectly, can add complexity and uncertainty to industry water needs. Economic growth and development are the overall main drivers of industrial water
use, and that relationship is reciprocal: while economic
forces affect water, the availability and state of water
resources also inﬂuences economic activity. Ecosystem
stress, societal values and security are also important
drivers, but are typically more local in nature.
International trade – which a driver for industry and
water – requires that exports from a source country meet environmental regulations in the destination country. A number of global Multilateral
Environmental Agreements (MEAs), such as the Basel
Convention,4 have also resulted in global standards.
Developing countries in particular can face trade
hurdles in meeting the environmental requirements
of developed countries, including ISO certiﬁcations,
environmental management systems (EMS) and corporate social responsibility (CSR), which could be
seen by some as non-tariff barriers to trade. Thus,
industries in developing countries can be subjected
to stricter, explicit and implicit international requirements, as well as some control, by the multinational
companies to which they supply goods or services.
However, these requirements can in turn lead to better product manufacturing standards, including energy efficiency and climate change (carbon footprint)
considerations, with industry beneﬁting from better
management (including water resources management) and resulting increased efficiency. Finally, the
focus on ‘green growth’ and the ‘green economy’ (see
Section 12.1) at the Rio+20 Summit in 2012 will likely
lead to agreements among member states on the
adoption of standards and/or protocols, which will
in turn have signiﬁcant implications for industry. The
challenge and opportunity for business is to understand the concrete possibilities of a green economy,
with its opportunities and risks for its many sectors
and different national contexts. Governments will
need to work collectively to ensure the prevention of
pollution havens in countries with poor enforcement
capacities.

WWDR4

The industrial utilization of water resources – including water supply quality and wastewater treatment – is
greatly impacted by technological innovation, which
can lead to cleaner production and sustainability.
Assuming appropriate technologies are available to all
(a situation not necessarily applicable to local industries in developing countries), water treatment constraints are primarily a function of cost rather than
a lack of technical capability to achieve high-quality
water. Although revolutionary technological breakthroughs for water treatment seem unlikely at present,
there are nevertheless many incremental technological
advances that often bring cost reductions, consistent
with a primary industry goal of ensuring the most economic system for achieving required water quality.
In the past, water has been considered a relatively
certain component of industrial processes. Indeed, it
has been typically assumed that the needed water
supply would be easy and relatively cheap to secure.
Wastewater discharges have been more of a challenge, although effluent discharges were permissible
provided water quality (or treatment) standards were
achieved. The recent number of new external drivers on water and its management, however, has now
made water use a much riskier proposition for industry
(Figure 2.7). Effective operation of an industry requires
a sustainable supply of water in the right quantity, of
the right quality, at the right place, at the right time
and at the right price (Payne, 2007). Industry will ﬁnd
itself increasingly competing for limited water resources as water demands and consumption increase in all
sectors, particularly agriculture with its substantial
water needs. Thus, all these factors are now subject to
greater uncertainty.
Water scarcity is viewed as an increasing business risk,
with industrial water supply security dependent on
sufficient resources. This problem is compounded by
geographic and seasonal variations, as well as water
allocations and competing water needs in a given region (e.g. agriculture vs drinking water or residential
supply vs industry), a situation that may be beyond
the control of industry. This is especially true for transboundary water situations, where the needs of two
or more countries may conﬂict or overwhelm water
availability.
Water quality risks associated with both water supply
and effluent discharges can affect industry, thereby restricting industrial expansion. In terms of water supply,

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

61

it has been noted that many sectors require high-quality
water, thereby necessitating additional water treatment. In cases of contaminated surface or groundwater supplies, industry faces increased costs associated
with additional water treatment needs. Although this
requirement may well prompt industry to more strongly consider using reclaimed or recycled water, it will
most likely weigh on decisions regarding the location
of a company’s industrial activities.
In terms of industrial wastewater discharges, the vast
majority in developing countries is discharged with
little or no treatment (WWAP, 2009). Thus, there is
considerable pressure on industry to clean its effluents.
While compliance will doubtless become stricter and
more onerous, the actual criteria and severity of standards vary by jurisdiction. An associated risk is investing
in new treatment technology that may subsequently
become obsolete within only a few years. Moreover,
industrial accidents, such as uncontrolled discharges,
may be the result of economic and other drivers that
forced industrial expansion more quickly than was justiﬁable in a given situation, possibly utilizing unproven
technology and/or in sensitive locations. Poor water quality, therefore, can restrict industrial expansion.

Likewise, industrial expansion can place unsustainable
strain on water resources.
Government policies regarding water must often
respond to multi-faceted agendas on the national to
local level. Government priorities and policies inevitably
change over time. These changes, particularly unpredictable ones, can make it difficult for industry, especially
multi-national companies, to locate successfully in certain
countries. For example, poor policy decisions can lead
to over-use of water resources in some locations and
under-use in others. Furthermore, governmental perceptions of water risks in a given case can be at odds
with those of industry. Environmental concerns and
pressures from the public, special interest groups and
business can further inﬂuence government decisions
regarding water.
2.3.3 Adaptations and options for solutions
Undoubtedly, business and industry can play a leading role in sustainable water practices. To successfully
adapt to water scarcity – which can involve not only a
lack of water but also poor water delivery infrastructure and/or poor water management – a business or
industry must have accurate knowledge of its speciﬁc

FIGURE 2.7
Inter-relationship of water risks among business, government and society
CIVIL SOCIETY RISK

PHYSICAL
WATER FAILURE
SOCIAL,
ECONOMIC,
ECOLOGICAL
IMPACTS

primary water resource
shortage, degradation
or ﬂooding
–
secondary water supply
and waterwaste failure

BUSINESS
RISK
operational risk
–
reputational risk
–
regulatory risk

GOVERNMENT RISK

Sources: SABMiller Plc and WWF-UK (2009, ﬁg. 2, p. 5, refer to www.sabmiller.com/water).

62

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

water needs. For example, establishing water accounting techniques and measuring water impacts can allow
an industry to more readily identify potential areas of
increased water use efficiency; however, the accumulation of accurate data and a consistent approach to
water measurements and monitoring are needed to
achieve this end. Another approach to increasing water productivity involves ‘doing more with less’, ideally
moving toward a goal of zero discharge (i.e. utilizing
a closed-loop production system). This objective underpins the recent development of industrial ecology
(eco-innovation) as a means of addressing the
inter-relationship of industrial and economic systems
to natural systems.
Industry is generally accustomed to having water available at a relatively inexpensive price. Increasing water
scarcity, however, will result in higher charges, including additional charges for water treatment and discharge. There is an argument for developing a different
price structure for industrial water use; that is, requiring
industry to pay more per unit of water than the public,
as well as increasing amounts per unit with increasing
water use. The impacts of such practices on industry will
naturally promote increased water use efficiency, since
the economic realities of the cost of water will increase
the price of the associated products. These effects
could have an impact on the industrialization process
in developing countries where water costs are usually
low if not non-existent, and the concepts of water productivity and cleaner production are either unknown or
sidelined in efforts to make goods and create jobs.
Against this background, the embracing challenge is
for industry to play its appropriate role in effectively
addressing unsustainable exploitation and contamination of freshwater resources around the world. This
includes the impacts of industry on those supplies and
the challenge of mitigating them for the beneﬁt of all
water users and the environment – a goal that must
be approached within the context of corporate, social
and environmental responsibility. Although there are
ways to address the issues, risks and challenges of water productivity, they require effective implementation
and oversight, including the application of environmental technologies to help conserve the natural environment and resources, as well as to curb the negative impacts of human activities. Moreover, information
without action and public disclosure does not constitute real progress. Focusing on meeting this challenge
will provide industry with an opportunity to increase

WWDR4

“Effective operation of
an industry requires
a sustainable supply
of water in the right
quantity, of the right
quality, at the right
place, at the right time
and at the right price.”
productivity, efficiency and competitiveness in a sustainable way.
The problems surrounding water productivity in industry and broader global water concerns are interrelated. As such, they require integrated management,
strategy, planning and actions to provide effective
solutions. To meet these challenges, industry must ﬁrst
look to its management priorities and style, and its
company values and culture, to encourage a positive
response from within its own sphere. An integrated
management approach, promoting proactive measures
by industry, including consideration of the needs and
interests of affected stakeholders and the environment,
will not only anticipate the future, but actually help
shape it (BSR and Paciﬁc Institute, 2007). Innovation,
investment and collaboration are key elements to addressing this goal, and achieving it will require a strategic approach, including the following points:
đ A measure of industry’s operational and supply-chain
water use (‘you can’t manage what you don’t measure’).5 An accurate water impact assessment considers a product’s water content, and the less obvious
inputs and uses of water in its production (virtual
water). A further determination is where and when
the water is used, and for what purpose. This determination requires accurate data and a consistent approach to measurement and monitoring.
đ A measure of industry exposure to water risks involving a risk assessment that evaluates relevant hydrological, economic, social, political and environmental
factors in different contexts.

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

63

đ A corporate water policy that embraces strategies
ranging from corporate values to communication,
and which may include:
o Promoting CSR
o Encouraging cradle-to-cradle industrial
operations6
o Using the precautionary principle to promote action, develop options and assist decisions
o Introducing EMS
o Setting measurable goals and targets with regard
to water efficiency, conservation and impacts, accompanied by public disclosure of relevant data
o Decoupling material and energy consumption, and
integrating energy needs and water requirements
o Constant and effective communication with the
public and local stakeholders regarding the economic and environmental costs and beneﬁts of
various industrial policies, strategies and measures
o Collaboration with government agencies
o Becoming involved with like-minded companies
through such avenues as the CEO Water Mandate
and the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development, as a means of sharing and promoting successful actions, thereby assuming a proactive leadership role in sustainable practices
đ An innovation implementation strategy involving both ongoing initiatives needing reinforcement
and others that might be considered for the future,
including:
o Decreasing water use and increasing water productivity through water audits, zero discharge and water
optimization techniques, water recycling and reuse,
addressing water losses from aging infrastructure,
and full and consistent monitoring activities
o Introducing new technologies, including adapting
new environmental technologies and incorporating
natural water treatment systems, transferring environmentally sound technologies in conjunction with
environmental management accounting (EMA)
o Employing industrial ecology (eco-innovation),
including employing environmental design into
industrial design and planning, investing in environmental and ecological restoration, and using a
life-cycle approach within the context of a closedloop system

2.4 Human settlements
2.4.1 Urbanization and population trends
Between 2009 and 2050, the world population is expected to increase by 2.3 billion, from 6.8 to 9.1 billion
(UNDESA, 2009). At the same time, urban populations

64

CHAPTER 2

are projected to increase by 2.9 billion, from 3.4 billion
in 2009 to 6.3 billion total in 2050. Thus, the urban areas of the world are expected to absorb all of the population growth over the next four decades, while also
drawing in some of the rural population. Furthermore,
most of the population growth expected in urban areas will be concentrated in the cities and towns of less
developed regions. Asia’s population is projected to increase by 1.7 billion; Africa has a projected urban population gain of 0.8 billion; and Latin American and the
Caribbean urban populations are projected to grow by
0.2 billion. In 1950, New York City and Tokyo were the
only two cities with populations exceeding 10 million.
By 2015, it is expected that there will be 23 such cities
of which 19 will be in developing countries. Projections
indicate a continuing increasing trend of urbanization
in developing countries. By 2030, it is anticipated that
the urban population in developing and developed
countries will amount to 3.9 billion and 1 billion respectively. Population growth is therefore becoming largely
an urban phenomenon concentrated in the developing
world (UN-Habitat, 2006).
Migration from rural to urban areas poses a major
challenge for city planners; extending basic drinking water and sanitation services to peri-urban and
slum areas to reach the poorest people is of the
utmost importance to prevent outbreaks of cholera and other water-related diseases in these often
overcrowded places. (WHO/UNICEF, 2006, p. iii)
Slums generally present a set of unique problems, including poor housing conditions, inadequate access to safe
water and sanitation, overcrowding and insecure tenure;
thus, the welfare of those living in these areas are seriously impacted (Sclar, Garau and Carolini, 2005). The
relation between climate change and slum areas is cause
for alarm in terms of disaster vulnerability resulting from
meteorological phenomena. To complicate matters further, slums are usually built on dangerous land, unsuitable
for human settlement. For example, shantytowns near
Buenos Aires are built on ﬂood-prone land, and residents
are therefore forced to make a difficult choice between
their safety and health and their need for shelter (Davis,
2006). In some cities, for example Mumbai, nearly half
the urban population reside in slums and shantytowns
(Stecko and Barber, 2007). As is evident from Figure 2.8,
not only is the slum population rising, it is also highly
concentrated in developing countries, especially in subSaharan Africa, Southern Central and Eastern Asia. In
Latin America and the Caribbean, a signiﬁcant reduction

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

is observed in the proportion of the urban population living in marginal areas – from 37% (110 million people) in
1990 to 25% (106 million) in 2005 (United Nations, 2010).

177 (55% of the city’s communes) covering 61% of the
city area (ADB, 2010).
2.4.2 Water supply and sanitation coverage: Keeping
up with urban growth
Worldwide, 87% of the population gets its drinking water from improved sources, and the corresponding ﬁgure for developing regions is also high at 84%. Access is
far greater, however, in urban areas (at 94%), while only
76% of rural populations have access to improved sources (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). However, these estimates do
not take into consideration service quality (e.g. intermittent supply, disinfection) or affordability. Also, given the
lack of reliable data concerning human populations in
marginalized communities (i.e. slums), governments and
international agencies are likely to signiﬁcantly underestimate the number of urban dwellers lacking adequate
provision for drinking water. Furthermore, this number
is actually increasing as rapid urbanization continues in
many regions (UN-Habitat, 2003, 2010).

Cities in developing countries face enormous backlogs in shelter, infrastructure and services, as well as
insufficient water supply, deteriorating sanitation and
environmental pollution. Population growth and rapid
urbanization will create an even greater demand for
water while decreasing the ability of ecosystems to
provide more regular and cleaner supplies.
Climate change is posing an additional challenge to
urban water supplies by changing water availability and exacerbating water-related disasters such as
ﬂoods and droughts. For example, tropical storms
were rare in Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam, until fairly
recently. But over the past 60 years, 12 large tropical storms – including Vae (1952), Linda (1997) and
Durian (2006) – have affected the city. Typically,
these storms bring heavy rainfall, increased localized
ﬂooding and storm surges along the coastal areas,
causing serious extensive ﬂooding of 1.0 to 1.2 m. Of
the Ho Chi Minh City’s 322 communes and wards, 154
have a history of regular ﬂooding. These ﬂoods cover
close to 110,000 ha and affect some 971,000 people
(12% of the population). It is predicted that by 2050,
such regularly ﬂooded areas will have increased to

In 2010, a reported 2.6 billion people in the world did
not use improved sanitation facilities (WHO/UNICEF,
2010). Of the approximately 1.3 billion people who
gained access to improved sanitation during the period 1990–2008, 64% live in urban areas. However, urban areas, although better served than rural areas, are
struggling to keep up with urban population growth

FIGURE 2.8
Slum population by region, 1990–2020 (thousands)

1,600,000
1,400,000
Oceania
1,200,000

Western Asia
South-East Asia

1,000,000
South-central Asia
Eastern Asia

800,000

Latin America and
600,000

the Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa

400,000

Northern Africa
Other

200,000

Europe
0
1990

2001

2005

2010

2015

2020

Source: Produced by UN-Habitat based on data available at http://ww2.unhabitat.org/programmes/guo/documents/Table4.pdf (published in
State of the World’s Cities Report 2001).

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

65

(WHO/UNICEF, 2010). Again, projected demographic
growth in urban areas gives rise for concern: if efforts
continue at the current rate, improvements in sanitation facility coverage will only increase by 2% – from
80% in 2004 to 82% in 2015 (an additional 81 million
people) (WHO/UNICEF, 2006).
A comparison of the latest estimates from 2008 with
those of 2000 indicates a deterioration in both water
and sanitation coverage in urban areas. Over those
eight years, in cities and towns of all sizes, the number
of people without access to tap water at home or in
the immediate vicinity increased by 114 million, and the
number of people without access to private sanitary
toilets (basic sanitation) increased by 134 million. In
both cases, this means an increase of 20% in the number of individuals living in cities who lack access to basic facilities (AquaFed, 2010).
Keeping up with the population increase in cities and
maintaining current water supply and sanitation (WSS)
services coverage levels for 2015 requires serving
700 million urban dwellers over the coming decade
(WHO/UNICEF, 2006). At present, the urban population
is increasing faster than the speed of improvement in
WSS services; however, current efforts to address this
challenge are not insigniﬁcant (UNDESA, 2009). For
example, the total percentage of individuals with access
to improved WSS declined between 2000 and 2008,
but the number of urban residents with access to tap
water are estimated to have grown by 400 million
(AquaFed, 2010).
Other improvements have been made, such as in
Northern Africa, South-East Asia, Eastern Asia, and
Latin America and the Caribbean, where access to improved water supply and sanitation has signiﬁcantly increased (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). However, up to 50% of
the urban population in Asia overall still lacks adequate
provision of water, and up to 60% lacks adequate sanitation (UN-Habitat, 2010). In sub-Saharan Africa, the
numbers of urban dwellers without access to tap water
has increased by 43% in eight years.
2.4.3 Pressure from urban areas on water
Water withdrawals
Relative to other sectors, water withdrawal for urban use
is low: industrial (including energy) use is around 20%,
domestic use is about 10%, and abstraction for agriculture is as high as 70% globally (WWAP, 2009). Increasing
water demands are leading to over-abstraction from

66

CHAPTER 2

groundwater, areas outside cities and upstream watershed areas, as well as from rural areas, depriving other
users and challenging ecosystem functions.
In areas where surface water is not readily available,
groundwater is the primary water source (UNEP/GRIDArendal, 2008). Excessive groundwater abstraction is
resulting in falling water tables, water quality degradation and land subsidence (see Section 3.2.1), as is
the case in several cities in Asia – including Bangkok,
Beijing, Chennai, Manila, Shanghai, Tianjin and Xian
(Foster, Lawrence and Morris, 1998).
The supplying aquifer in Mexico City fell by 10 m as of
1992, resulting in land subsidence of up to 9 m. Overabstraction in coastal areas results in saltwater intrusion: in Europe, 53 out of 126 groundwater areas show
saltwater intrusion, mostly in aquifers that are used for
public and industrial water supply (Chiramba, 2010).
A growing number of large urban centre aquifers are
also facing pollution from organic chemicals, pesticides, nitrates, heavy metals and water-borne pathogens (UNEP/GRID-Arendal, 2008).
Pollution and wastewater
Urban settlements are also the main source of pointsource pollution. Urban wastewater is particularly
threatening when combined with untreated industrial
waste. In many fast-growing cities (small and mediumsized cities with populations of less than 500,000),
wastewater infrastructure is non-existent, inadequate
or outdated. For example, the city of Jakarta, with a
population of 9 million, generates 1.3 million m3 of sewage daily, of which less than 3% is treated. In contrast,
Sydney, with a population of 4 million, treats nearly all
of its wastewater (1.2 million m3 per day) (Chiramba,
2010). Chile made impressive progress in urban wastewater treatment, increasing it from only 8% in 1989
to almost 87% in 2010 (SISS, 2011), with plans to treat
all urban wastewater in 2012 (Pickering de la Fuente,
2011). Worldwide, it is estimated that over 80% of
waste water worldwide is not collected or treated
(Corcoran et al., 2010). As shown in Figure 2.9, the ratio of untreated to treated wastewater reaching water
bodies for 10 regions in signiﬁcantly higher in developing regions of the world.
Wastewater contributes to increase in eutrophication
and dead zones in both oceans and freshwater. Dead
zones affect about 245,000 km2 of marine ecosystems,
with consequent impacts on ﬁsheries, livelihoods and

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

the food chain. Discharge of untreated wastewater
shifts problems to downstream areas. In coastal areas,
seagrass ecosystems/habitats are damaged, and invasive species are increasing in estuarine ecosystems.
The economic recession of the 1990s combined with
decline in highly polluting industries led to reduced
discharge of wastewater and pollutants in Eastern
Europe, relieving some of the pressure on river quality in many areas. It also resulted in the breakdown
of water supply and wastewater treatment systems,
and consequently heavy pollution of rivers and drinking water supplies in downstream cities in industrial
and mining regions. Major losses of seagrass habitats occurred in Australia, Florida Bay (USA) and
the Mediterranean, while increases occurred in the
Caribbean and Southeast Asia (Chiramba, 2010).
Illegal and unreported releases of untreated wastewater continue to be an issue all over the world. Recently,
for example, the city of Revere, Massachusetts has
agreed to spend approximately US$50 million to reduce illegal discharges of raw sewage overﬂows into
the environment from its wastewater collection system

and separate storm sewer system, and to pay a penalty of US$130,000 for the Clean Water Act violation
(CTBR, 2011) Corcoran et al. (2010) report that up to
90% of wastewater in developing countries ﬂows untreated into rivers, lakes and highly productive coastal
zones, threatening health, food security and access to
safe drinking and bathing water.
2.4.4 Water management in urban areas
Integrated urban water management
Water management in urban areas can beneﬁt from more
comprehensive urban planning and integrated urban
water management (IUWM). IUWM involves managing
freshwater, wastewater and stormwater as links within
the resource management structure, using an urban area
as the unit of management. The objective of such an approach is to facilitate the multi-functional nature of urban
water services in order to optimize the outcomes of the
system as a whole. The approach encompasses various
aspects of water management, including environmental,
economic, technical and political, as well as social impacts and implications. Issues, options and examples for
arid, semi-arid and humid regions can be found in Tucci
et al. (2010) and Mays (2009).

FIGURE 2.9
Ratio of treated to untreated wastewater discharged into water bodies

Baltic Sea
Central and East Europe
Western
Europe
North
Atlantic

Caspian Sea

Mediterranean

Caribbean

East
Asia
Southern
Asia
West and
Central Africa
Untreated

Treated

Note: Ratio of wastewater treatment (March 2010).
Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/ratio-of-wastewater-treatment1, adapted from a map by H. Alhenius with
sources UNEP-GPA [2004]).

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

67

Urban agriculture
Urban and peri-urban agriculture (UPA) is the safe
production of agriculture and cattle products in and
around cities. UPA is estimated to involve 800 million urban residents worldwide (Smit et al., 1996) and
contributes to solving several urbanization problems
by enhancing food availability, particularly of fresh
produce; providing employment and increasing income, food security and nutrition of urban dwellers;
and greening cities and also recycling wastes. However,
these areas can use water of lesser quality that contains nutrients beneﬁcial to agriculture while preventing pollution downstream. UNEP estimates that sewage water irrigates about half the gardens, roadside
verges and small ﬁelds where food is grown in the
world’s urban and peri-urban areas. A new look is being taken at how to use this traditional resource safely
(Corcoran et al., 2010).
Urban food security projects are being undertaken in
large cities of the Middle East and Africa with local
partners, including women’s farmers groups. For example, in Istanbul, an urban agriculture project supports and trains unemployed, poor women of Gürpinar
to develop urban agricultural activities (e.g. composting, processing, marketing and organization) to help
sustain them in the future (ETC Urban Agriculture,
2011). A study by Hovorka et al. (2009) provides evidence for the important role women play in household
food production, growing vegetables in gardens and
vacant urban spaces, raising animals, and trading in
fresh and cooked foods.
Infrastructure and maintenance
Protecting [and ﬁnancing] the infrastructure used
to treat and transport water (including sources,
treatment plants and distribution systems) is an important step in ensuring safety in public health and
the environment. However, in most cities worldwide,
there has been years of neglected maintenance to
water storage, treatment and distribution systems.
A large proportion of this infrastructure is over
100 years old, placing it at increased risk for leaks,
blockages and malfunctions due to deterioration
(Vahala, 2004). Higher rates of water leakage mean
greater water losses and higher chances of inﬁltration and ex-ﬁltration of water. This will create higher
chances of drinking water contamination and outbreak of water-borne diseases. (Vairavamoorthy,
2008, p. 5)

68

CHAPTER 2

The cost of rehabilitation of water infrastructure is increasing substantially due to their deterioration over
the world. In the USA, for example, the American
Society of Civil Engineers forecasts a funding gap
of US$108.6 billion over ﬁve years for drinking water
and wastewater infrastructure system improvements
and operations (ASCE, 2009). An earlier study (Olson,
2003) of urban water supply networks in 19 US cities
revealed that ‘pollution and deteriorating, out-of-date
plumbing are sometimes delivering drinking water that
might pose health risks to some residents’
(NRDC, n.d.).
The deterioration process is more severe for developing countries, due to poor construction practices, little
or no maintenance and rehabilitation activities, lack of
records, and operation at higher capacities than design. The water supply services sector in sub-Saharan
Africa, for example, has long suffered from poor performance of its public water utilities. Apart from service coverage of less than 60% (WHO/UNICEF, 2006),
other problems that plague water utilities include high
unaccounted-for water (UfW), which often averages
between 40% and 60%, and overstafﬁng (Mwanza,
2005). Moreover, service providers are often confronted with ﬁnancial problems due to a combination
of low tariffs, poor consumer records and inefﬁcient
billing and collection practices (Foster, 1996; Mwanza,
2005; International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/World Bank, 1994).
In addition, the informal sector often supplies water to
households and is unregulated and difficult to monitor. The poorest families in urban areas, often living in
informal settlements lacking public services, often end
up paying the most for drinking water that may be
unsafe (Briscoe, 1993; Jouravlev, 2004; Garrido-Lecca,
2010). The highest risk for health occurs where there is
a lack of basic access to safe drinking water (Howard
and Bartram, 2003). The same families that purchase
inexpensive drinking water from street vendors may
also have poorer hygiene. A study in Jakarta, for example, showed that 55% of drinking water samples taken
from households in the slums of east Jakarta had faecal contamination (Vollaard et al., 2004).
Cities of the future
Initiatives are emerging worldwide to address the
need for improved and comprehensive urban water planning, technologies, investment and associated operations. The International Water Association

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

(IWA), for example, has launched the ‘Cities of the
Future’ programme, which focuses on water security
for the world’s cities, and how the design of cities –
including the water management, treatment and delivery systems that serve them – could be harmonized
and re-engineered to minimize the use of scarce
natural resources, and increase the coverage of water
and sanitation in lower and middle-income countries.
The Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional
Authorities, endorsed in 2009 during the ﬁfth World
Water Forum in Istanbul, is a local and regional government declaration that asks signatory cities to
commit to developing water management strategies
suitable to work towards the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs); and to address urbanization, climate
change and other global pressures at local level. At
the national level an example comes from a highly urbanized nation, Australia, where the government has
recently re-evaluated the urban water sector within
the framework of the National Water Initiative, and
has identiﬁed reforms and changes in policy and
institutional settings (National Water Commission,
2011).
Water management together with land-use planning
for urban areas will need to become more efficient to
meet current and growing demand through technology, investment, and comprehensive and integrated planning for multiple users. Water education can
play a very important role in this regard by changing behaviour and attitudes in wider society. The
Human Values-Based Approach to Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene Education promoted by UN-Habitat is a
proven approach that can be incorporated into current
educational curricula without imposing a heavy burden
on teachers and learners.
Investing in drinking water supply and sanitation systems, promoting efficiency in service provision, providing subsidies for the poor and protecting water resources from pollution and over-extraction are imperative to
ensuring access to safe water for all, particularly poor
urban populations who are too often left behind.

2.5 Ecosystems
Ecosystems underpin the availability of water, including its extremes of drought and ﬂood, and its quality.
Water management often involves trade-offs – and
often the transfer of risks – between ecosystem services. Water demand by ecosystems is determined by

WWDR4

the water requirements to sustain or restore the beneﬁts for people (services) that we want ecosystems
to supply. Better-integrated water management and
more sustainable development require the focusing
of greater attention on ways to resolve the increasing
competition for water between ecosystems and socioeconomic sectors.
Human versus ‘environment’ or ‘ecosystem’ demands
for water have been the subject of debate for decades. A root cause of early disagreement has been the
perception that these are somehow different subjects,
thereby promoting conﬂicts between development
and environment or nature conservation interests. Over
recent years, there has been better convergence of
interest through improved recognition that the water used to maintain the environment, or ecosystem
integrity, is in fact also a means to support human
needs through sustaining the beneﬁts to people that a
healthy ecosystem delivers. Such beneﬁts are termed
‘ecosystem services’ (Box 2.2).
Ecosystems – including, for example, forests, wetlands
and grassland components – lie at the heart of the
global water cycle. All freshwater ultimately depends
on the continued healthy functioning of ecosystems,
and recognizing the water cycle as a biophysical process is essential to achieving sustainable water management (Figure 2.10).
Historically, some have regarded ecosystems as an unproductive ‘user’ of water. This is fundamentally incorrect as ecosystems do not use water – they recycle it.
But perceptions are shifting towards managing human
interactions with ecosystems (‘the environment’) in order to support water-related development goals.
All terrestrial ecosystem services, such as food production, climate regulation, soil fertility and functions, carbon storage and nutrient recycling, are underpinned
by water, as are, of course, all aquatic ecosystem services. Water availability and quality, in terms of direct
use by humans, are also ecosystem services, as are the
beneﬁts ecosystems offer to mitigate the extremes of
drought and ﬂood. Most ecosystem services are interrelated, and particularly so through water. Decisions
that favour increasing one service over, or at the expense of, another therefore inevitably involve tradeoffs. Importantly, this trading between ecosystem services can also carry with it the transfer of risks through
associated ecosystem changes. Some examples of
such trade-offs are provided in Section 8.3.

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

69

Biodiversity is also sometimes regarded as an ecosystem service as it does have direct value (i.e. cultural/
aesthetic/recreational beneﬁt, existence value); however, it is more widely regarded as underpinning the
functioning of ecosystems and therefore their ability to
continue to sustain service delivery (Box 2.3).

BOX 2.2
Water and ecosystem services

Ecosystem services (beneﬁts for people) can be grouped
in various ways. The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
has provided the most comprehensive assessment of the
state of the global environment to date, and has classiﬁed
ecosystem services as follows:
Supporting services: The services necessary for the production of all other ecosystem services. Supporting services include soil formation, photosynthesis, primary production, nutrient cycling and water cycling.
Provisioning services: The products obtained from ecosystems, including food, ﬁbre, fuel, genetic resources, biochemicals, natural medicines, pharmaceuticals, ornamental resources and freshwater.
Regulating services: The beneﬁts obtained from the
regulation of ecosystem processes, including air quality
regulation, climate regulation, water regulation, erosion
regulation, water puriﬁcation, disease regulation, pest regulation, pollination and natural hazard regulation (including extremes in water availability).
Cultural services: The non-material beneﬁts people obtain
from ecosystems through spiritual enrichment, cognitive
development, reﬂection, recreation and aesthetic experiences, thereby taking account of landscape (including
waterscape) values.

Comprehensive valuation of ecosystem services is not
yet a precise science, but the process illuminates the
potential stakes and provides good comparative indications of where priorities should lie (see Chapters 21 and
23 for further information on valuing ecosystem services). While some services are difficult to value, others are
easier because information on how much their losses
cost is available. A very large proportion of the capital
investment and operational cost of physical water infrastructure is in effect expenditure that compensates for
the loss of an ecosystem service, which can therefore

BOX 2.3
Biodiversity increases ecosystem efficiency

The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment concluded that human development had tended to promote certain services
(especially provisioning services) at the expense of others.
This has led to an imbalance in services and indicates a
path towards decreasing sustainability.

Controlling nutrient levels in watersheds is a primary
objective of most water management policies. Much research has shown that ecosystems with more species are
more efficient at removing nutrients from soil and water
than ecosystems with fewer species. Recent experiments
have demonstrated, for example, that different forms of
algae dominate each unique habitat in a stream, and the
more diverse communities achieved a higher biomass
and greater nitrogen uptake. When habitat diversity was
experimentally removed, these bioﬁlms collapsed to a
single dominant species and nutrient cycling efficiency
decreased. Maintaining both the physical (habitat) and
biological diversity of streams therefore helps to buffer
ecosystems against nutrient pollution, demonstrating that
the conservation of biodiversity is a useful tool for managing nutrient uptake and storage.

Source: Adapted from Ecosystem Services (2011, Crown Copyright).

Source: Cardinale (2011).

Water is multi-dimensional in the context of ecosystem
services. Its availability and quality are products (services)
provided by ecosystems. But water also inﬂuences how
ecosystems can function and therefore underpins all other
ecosystem services. This gives water paramount importance in managing ecosystems so as to deliver beneﬁts to
people.

70

The subject of ‘water demand’ by ecosystems therefore
involves identifying ecosystem ‘deliverables’ and managing water accordingly. The valuation of these services
is central to this, and the advances made over the past
20 years provide a range of techniques that can be used
in practice. Even for many terrestrial ecosystems (such
as forests), values related to water services outstrip
more conspicuous beneﬁts (such as timber products
and carbon storage). For example, the water-related
services provided by tropical forests include regulation
of water ﬂows, waste treatment/water puriﬁcation and
erosion prevention. These collectively account for a value of up to US$7,236 per ha per year – more than 44%
of the total value of forests, exceeding the combined
value of carbon storage, food, raw materials (timber),
and recreation and tourism services (TEEB, 2009).

CHAPTER 2

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

be used to indicate the value of that service. The classic
example is water quality whereby, with very few exceptions, healthy ecosystems deliver clean water and any
subsequent investment in treating a human-induced
water quality problem can be attributed to the loss of
this ecosystem service originally provided for free.
Water ‘demand’ by ecosystems, to a large extent, can
therefore be assessed based on socio-economic criteria, as for any other use. Indeed, allowing water to underpin ecosystem health and therefore service delivery
can result in net economic gains, or cost savings, very
visible on ﬁnancial balance sheets (Box 2.4).
An increasingly useful hydro-ecological expression for
the quantity of water needed for healthy ecosystem

functioning is ‘environmental or minimum ﬂow’. The
approach originates from the consideration of ﬂows
required to maintain the life cycles of biodiversity in
rivers, as used most frequently in relation to water allocation and the design and operation of water infrastructure such as large dams. But in the past decade or
so, the concept of environmental ﬂow, and the science
underpinning it, has shifted towards including socioeconomic considerations by assessing requirements
to maintain or restore the desired levels of ecosystem
services in a given area (Box 2.5). The approach is
therefore becoming a more powerful decision support tool. Its full application would consider not only
surface water ﬂows, but broader ecosystem ﬂows (e.g.
considering managing evapotranspiration, soil moisture and groundwater, as per Figure 2.10), and as a

FIGURE 2.10
A simpliﬁed conceptual framework illustrating the role of ecosystems in the water cycle

Cliimate regulation
on –
ev
vapotranspiration rates
fro
om soils and vegetation
supporting humidity and
raiinfall patterns

Mitigation of ﬂooding
in downstream areas
(disaster risk
reduction)

Sanitatiion –
nutrientt cycling

Surface wate
er
availability a
and
quality

Hydropower

Food produ
uction
(e.g. crop w
water
requiremen
nts)

Soil moisture
(soil services)

Clean
n water
(drinking
wate
er supply)

Mitigation of
ﬂooding
(disaster risk
reduction)
Surface water ﬂow
and sediment
formation and
transfer

r
te
wa
nd
ou
gr

Groundw
water
recharge
e and
quality

Regulating coasta
al
ecosystem
functions – nutrien
nt
transfer/cycling
sediment transfer
(land formation an
nd
coastal protection
n,
disaster risk
reduction), coasta
al
ﬁsheries

Cultural services
(e.g. recreational ﬁshing)

Note: The ﬁgure lists in blue some of the water-related ecosystem services provided and underpinned. In reality the various services illustrated,
and others, are more dispersed, interconnected and impacted by land and water-use activities (not shown in full).
Source: Adapted from MRC (2003).

WWDR4

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

71

quantitative tool to assist more holistic approaches
within integrated water resources management (IWRM).
One of the biggest historical failings of water management has been to base allocations on demand

BOX 2.4
Rethinking ecosystem water ‘demand’ using an
ecosystem services framework: Disaster risk transfer
and mitigation in the Mississippi Delta, USA

River deltas are dynamic and complex ecosystems driven
largely by hydrology, including the regular transfer of
sediments and nutrients from the catchment into lowlands and the estuary. Their functioning underpins numerous ecosystem services, in particular land regulation
and formation. This in turn delivers beneﬁts through the
maintenance of coastal stability and erosion regulation,
thereby, for example, reducing disaster vulnerability. The
Mississippi River Delta, in common with many rivers, has
been highly modiﬁed: its hydrology has been changed
through water abstraction, principally for agriculture,
while reservoir construction, also for hydropower, has
interrupted sediment transfer. The resulting degradation
of associated wetlands services is becoming regarded
by some as a major contributing factor to the scale of
economic and human losses resulting from hurricanes.
If treated as an economic asset, the delta’s minimum asset value would be US$330 billion to US$1.3 trillion (at
2007 values) in terms of hurricane and ﬂood protection, water supply, water quality, recreation and ﬁsheries.
Rehabilitation and restoration of this natural infrastructure would have an estimated net beneﬁt of US$62 billion
annually. This includes reduced disaster risk vulnerability
and savings in capital and operational costs for physical
infrastructure-based solutions (factoring in the economic
costs on existing users of reallocating water use).
Agriculture has been a key driver of water allocation policy. Yet the value of food, ﬁbre and feed produced by agriculture represents only a fraction of the multitude of other
services provided by the ecosystem, particularly wetlands.
Historically, water development policy for the Mississippi
has effectively traded increased agricultural production
for other ecosystem services in the delta, and with signiﬁcant net overall economic loss when viewed holistically.
In the context of uncertainty and risk, history shows that
the reduction of risks to agriculture (i.e. more stable crop
water supply) resulted in the transfer and ampliﬁcation of
risks downstream, amply demonstrated by the impact of
hurricane Katrina on New Orleans in 2005.

Source: Batker et al. (2010).

72

CHAPTER 2

as driven by ‘sectors’, and a worse failing, in many
cases, has been to disregard the sustainable supply.
Unsurprisingly, this has led to conﬂict, crisis, overuse
and environmental degradation. But approaches are
evolving, and the role of the ecosystem in sustaining water supply is becoming increasingly recognized.
Furthermore, as described further in Section 8.3, a new
paradigm is emerging, which shifts understanding of
the ‘ecosystem’ (environment) as an unfortunate but
necessary cost of development to an integral part of
development solutions.
Ecosystems are increasingly seen as solutions to water
problems, not just as a casualty. The change in perception of ecosystems as just another ‘demand’ sector is
the result of increasing recognition of the services they
deliver, their value and an increasing willingness, if not
necessity, to sustain them. In practice, this has inevitably led to ever increasing ‘competition’ between, and
debate about, the needs of sectors and ‘the ecosystem’. But this is a welcome and positive trend as it also
reﬂects improvement in dialogue and a step towards
better-integrated water resources management, and
therefore more sustainable development.

BOX 2.5
The Mekong River Basin, South-East Asia

The Mekong River Agreement, signed in 1995 between
Cambodia, Lao PDR, Thailand and Viet Nam, established
the Mekong River Commission, and speciﬁcally requires
minimum stream ﬂows ‘of not less than the acceptable
minimum monthly natural ﬂow during each month of
the dry season’ (Mekong River Agreement 1995, Article
6, point A). An Integrated Basin Flow Management
Programme has been undertaken since 2004 to support
discussions between the governments on sustainable development and reasonable and equitable transboundary
sharing of beneﬁcial uses. The process essentially involves
assessment of ecosystem services and the relationships
between them as illuminated by environmental ﬂows,
consideration of water ‘demand’ as required to achieve
agreed multiple uses, and recognition and agreement on
relevant trade-offs.
Note: For further information, see MRC (2011). For further
information about environmental ﬂows, including 22 different case
studies, see Le Quesne et al. (2010).
The text cited in the box is drawn from the Mekong River
Agreement, signed by the four countries in 1995. The agreement can
be found here: http://www.mrcmekong.org/assets/Publications/
agreements/agreement-Apr95.pdf

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

Notes
1

2

3

4

For detailed reports concerning the coverage of water supply
and sanitation services and progress towards the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) relating to drinking water and
sanitation (MDG 7, Target 7c), see the latest reports from the
Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and
Sanitation (WHO/UNICEF) at http://www.wssinfo.org and the
Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and DrinkingWater (GLAAS) (UN-Water/WHO) at
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/glaas.
South Africa has now been added to this list and the present
abbreviation is BRICS (not BRIC). However, the earlier
designation is used in this passage because the statistical
information here does not include South Africa.
IEA (2006) states that, taking into account very rapid
technological progress, the higher ﬁgure could be 26,200
million tonnes of oil equivalent instead of 12,000. However, IEA
also indicates that a more realistic assessment based on slower
yield improvements would be 6,000–12,000. A mid-range
estimate of around 9,500 would require about one-ﬁfth of the
world’s agricultural land to be dedicated to biomass production.
The Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal is the most
comprehensive global environmental agreement on hazardous
and other wastes. The Convention has 175 Parties and aims
to protect human health and the environment against the
adverse effects resulting from the generation, management,
transboundary movements and disposal of hazardous and other
wastes. The Basel Convention came into force in 1992.

5

The ecological or social impact of a water footprint obviously
depends not only on the volume of water use, but also on
where and when the water is used.

6

The cradle-to-cradle approach is based on a life-cycle or
ecosystem view that aims not just to reduce the negative
impacts of industry and growth, but to create equal or positive
environmental and social footprints. Cradle-to-cradle products
are designed to be completely waste-free, using renewable
sources of energy in their production and ensuring water and
energy efficiency in their use.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2010. Ho Chi Minh
City: Adaptation to Climate Change. Mandaluyong City,
Philippines, ADB. http://www.adb.org/documents/reports/
hcmc-climate-change/hcmc-climate-change-summary.pdf
AFF (Australian Government Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry). 2002. Introduction to Desalination
Technologies in Australia. Canberra, AFF. http://www.
environment.gov.au/water/publications/urban/pubs/
desalination-summary.pdf (Accessed 2 May 2011.)

WWDR4

Applebaum, B. 2000. Water and Sustainability, Vol. 4: US
Electricity Consumption for Water Supply and Treatment
– The Next Half Century. Report 1006787. Palo Alto,
CA, Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI). http://
dc213.4shared.com/doc/BJ17AQaE/preview.html
AquaFed. 2010. Access to Drinking Water is Deteriorating
in the Urban Half of the World. Press release issued 6
September 2010. Stockholm, AquaFed. http://www.
aquafed.org/pdf/AquaFed_UrbanTrends_PressRelease_
Stockholm_EN_Pd_2010-09-07.pdf
ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers). 2009. Drinking
Water. 2009 Report Card for America’s Infrastructure.
Reston, Va., ASCE. http://www.infrastructurereportcard.
org/fact-sheet/drinking-water
Batker, D., de la Torre, I., Costanza, R., Swedeen, P., Day,
J., Boumans, R. and Bagstad, K. 2010. Gaining Ground
– Wetlands, Hurricanes and the Economy: The Value of
Restoring the Mississippi River Delta. Tacoma, Washington
DC, Earth Economics. http://www.eartheconomics.org/
Page12.aspx
Bauer, C. J. 1998. Against the Current: Privatization, Water
Markets, and the State in Chile. Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bruinsma, J. 2009. The Resource Outlook to 2050: By How
Much do Land, Water and Crop Yields Need to Increase by
2050? Prepared for the FAO Expert Meeting on ‘How to
Feed the World in 2050’, 24–26 June 2009, Rome.
BSR (Business for Social Responsibility) and Paciﬁc Institute.
2007. At the Crest of a Wave: A Proactive Approach to
Corporate Water Strategy San Francisco/Oakland, BSR/The
Paciﬁc Institute.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute.
Cardinale, B. J. 2011. Biodiversity improves water quality
through niche partitioning. Nature, Vol. 472, pp. 86–9.
Carter, N. T. and Campbell, R. J. 2009. Water Issues of
Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) Electricity in the U.S.
Southwest. Washington DC, Congressional Research
Service (CRS). http://www.circleofblue.org/waternews/
wp-content/uploads/2010/08/Solar-Water-Use-Issues-inSouthwest.pdf. (Accessed 2 May 2011.)
CEC (California Energy Commission). 2005. California’s
Water – Energy Relationship. Prepared in Support of
the 2005 Integrated Energy Policy Report Proceeding
(04-IEPR-01E). Calif., US, CEC. http://www.energy.
ca.gov/2005publications/CEC-700-2005-011/CEC-7002005-011-SF.PDF
Center for Sustainable Systems. 2008. US Wastewater
Treatment Factsheet. University of Michigan. http://css.
snre.umich.edu/facts/factsheets.html (Accessed 9 March
2008.)
Chiramba, T. 2010. Ecological Impacts of Urban Water. A
presentation for World Water Week in Stockholm, 5–11
September. Nairobi, UNEP.

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

73

Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D.
and Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role
of Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development.
A Rapid Response Assessment. UN-Habitat/UNEP/
GRID-Arendal.
CTBR (Clean Technology Business Review). 2011. Lindsey
Construction to Pay Civil Penalty for Clean Water Act
Violations. CBTR Website. 2 September 2011 http://
waterwastemanagement.cleantechnology-business-review.
com/news/lindsey-construction-to-pay-civil-penalty-forclean-water-act-violations-020911
Davis, M. 2006. Slum ecology: inequity intensiﬁes
Earth’s natural forces. Orion, March/April. http://www.
orionmagazine.org/index.php/articles/article/167
(Accessed October 2009.)
DOE (US Department of Energy). 2006. Energy Demands
on Water Resources. Report to Congress on the
Interdependency of Energy and Water. Washington DC,
US DOE. http://www.sandia.gov/energy-water/docs/121RptToCongress-EWwEIAcomments-FINAL.pdf (Accessed
30 April 2011.)
Ecosystem Services. 2011. Website. http://www.
ecosystemservices.org.uk/ecoserv.htm
EIA (US Energy Information Administration). 2010.
International Energy Outlook 2010: Highlights. Washington
DC, Office of Integrated Analysis and Forecasting, EIA, US
Department of Energy. http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/archive/
ieo10/highlights.html (Accessed 3 November 2011.)
EPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). 2006. Global
Anthropogenic Non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas Emissions: 1990–
2020. Washington DC, EPA.
EPRI (Electric Power Research Institute). 2002. Water and
Sustainability (Volume 4): U.S. Electricity Consumption for
Water Supply and Treatment – The Next Half Century. Palo
Alto, Calif., EPRI. http://www.circleofblue.org/waternews/
wp-content/uploads/2010/08/EPRI-Volume-4.pdf
(Accessed 2 May 2011.)
ETC Urban Agriculture. 2011. Website. Leusden, The
Netherlands. http://www.etc-urbanagriculture.org/
Excellent. 2011. Sand Dams. Online article. Brentford, UK.
http://www.excellentdevelopment.com/dams.php
(Accessed 7 May 2011.)
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2006. World Agriculture: Towards 2030/2050 –
Interim Report – Prospects for Food, Nutrition, Agriculture
and Majority Commodity Groups. Rome, FAO.
––––. A. Wood and G. E. van Halsema (eds). 2008. Scoping
Agriculture-Wetland Interactions: Towards a Sustainable
Multiple-Response Strategy. FAO Water Reports 33. Rome,
FAO.
––––. 2009. The State of Food Insecurity in the World (SOFI)
2009: Economic Crises – Impacts and Lessons Learned.
Rome, FAO.
––––. 2011a. The State of the World’s Land and Water
Resources: Managing Systems at Risk. London, Earthscan.
––––. 2011b. Climate Change, Water and Food Security. FAO
Water Report 36. Rome, FAO.

74

CHAPTER 2

––––. 2011c. AQUASTAT online database. Rome, FAO. http://
www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/index.html
Foster, S. S. D., Lawrence, A. R. and Morris, B. L. 1997.
Groundwater in Urban Development: Assessing
Management Needs and Formulating Policy Strategies.
World Bank Technical Paper 390. Washington DC, The
World Bank.
Galloway, J. N., Burke, M., Bradford, G. E., Naylor, R., Falcon,
W., Chapagain, A. K., Gaskell, J. C., McCullough, E., Mooney,
H. A., Oleson, K. L. L., Steinfeld, H., Wassenaar, T. and Smil,
V. 2007. International trade in meat: the tip of the pork
chop. Ambio, Vol. 36, No. 8, pp. 622-9.
Garrido-Lecca, H. 2010. Inversión en agua y saneamiento como
respuesta a la exclusión en el Perú: gestación, puesta en
marcha y lecciones del Programa Agua para Todos (PAPT).
LC/W.313. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.
cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/41044/lcw313e.pdf
Gascoyne, C. and Aik, A. 2011. Unconventional Gas and
Implications for the LNG Market. Global Facts Energy.
Jakarta, Paciﬁc Energy Summit. http://www.nbr.org/
downloads/pdfs/eta/PES_2011_Facts_Global_Energy.pdf
(Accessed 30 April 2011.)
Gerbens-Leenes P. W., Hoekstra, A. Y. and Van der
Meer, Th. 2008. Water Footprint of Bio-Energy
and Other Primary Energy Carriers. Value of Water
Research Report Series No. 29. Delft/Enschede, The
Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education/
Delft University of Technology/University of Twente.
http://www.waterfootprint.org/Reports/Report29WaterFootprintBioenergy.pdf (Accessed 30 April 2011.)
Gleick, P. H. 1994. Water and energy. Annual Review of
Energy and Environment, Vol. 19, pp. 267–99.
Grobicki, A. 2007. The Future of Water Use in Industry.
Technical report for the UNIDO TF Summit. Technology
Foresight Summit 2007, 27–29 September 2007, Budapest,
Hungary, organized by UNIDO in cooperation with the
Government of Hungary.
GVEP (Global Village Energy Partnership International). 2011.
Website. London, GVEP. http://www.gvepinternational.org/
en/community/products-services (Accessed 7 May 2011.)
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Chapagain, A. L. 2008. Globalization of
Water: Sharing the Planet’s Freshwater Resources. Oxford,
UK, Blackwell Publishing.
Hovorka, A., de Zeeuw, H. and Njenga, M. (eds). 2009.
Women Feeding Cities – Mainstreaming Gender in Urban
Agriculture and Food Security. Warwickshire, UK, Practical
Action Publishing.
Howard, G. and Bartram, J. 2003. Domestic Water Quantity,
Service Level and Health. Geneva, WHO.
Huffaker, R., Whittlesey, N. K. and Wandschneider, P. R. 1993.
Institutional feasibility of contingent water marketing to
increase migratory ﬂows for salmon on the upper Snake
River. Natural Resources Journal, Vol. 33, No. 3, pp. 671–96.
ICOLD (International Commission on Large Dams). 2009.
World Register of Large Dams. Paris, ICOLD.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006. World Energy
Outlook 2006. Paris, IEA.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

––––. 2007. World Energy Outlook 2007. Paris, IEA.
IHA (International Hydropower Association). 2009. IHA
Statement on Evaporation from Hydropower Reservoirs.
London, IHA.
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/
World Bank. 1994. World Development Report 1994:
Infrastructure for Development. New York, Oxford
University Press.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2011.
IPCC Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and
Climate Change Mitigation (SRREN). Prepared by Working
Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Geneva, IPCC.
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century. LC/L.2169-P.
Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/9/19539/lcl2169i.pdf
Le Quesne, T., Kendy, E. and Weston, D. 2010. The
Implementation Challenge: Taking Stock of Government
Policies to Protect and Restore Environmental Flows.
Washington DC, The Nature Conservancy/Worldwide Fund
for Nature (WWF).
Lobell, D. B., Burke, M. B., Tebaldi, C., Mastrandrea, M. D.,
Falcon, W. P. and Naylor, R. L. 2008. Prioritizing climate
change adaptation needs for food security in 2030.
Science, Vol. 319, pp. 607–610.
Lundqvist, J. 2010. Producing more or wasting less. Bracing
the food security challenge of unpredictable rainfall. L.
Martínez-Cortina, G. Garrido and L. López-Gunn, L. (eds)
Re-thinking Water and Food Security: Fourth Marcelino
Botín Foundation Water Workshop. London, Taylor &
Francis Group.
Lundqvist, J., de Fraiture, C. and Molden, D. 2008. Saving
Water: From Field to Fork – Curbing Losses and Wastage
in the Food Chain. Policy Brief. Stockholm, Stockholm
International Water Institute (SIWI).
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Fresh water
ecosystem services. Ecosystems and Human Well-being:
Synthesis. Washington DC, Island Press, pp. 213–255.
Mann, H. and Smaller, C. 2010. Foreign land purchases for
agriculture: What impact on sustainable development?
Sustainable Development Innovation Briefs, Issue 8. http://
www.un.org/esa/dsd/resources/res_pdfs/publications/ib/
no8.pdf
Mays, L. (ed.). 2009. Integrated Urban Water Management:
Arid and Semi-Arid Regions. Urban Water Series. Paris/
London, UNESCO-IHP, Taylor & Francis.
MRC (Mekong River Commission for Sustainable
Development). 2011. The Mekong River Commission.
Website. http://www.mrcmekong.org
––––. 2003. Mekong River Awareness Kit. Website. Phnom
Penh/Vientiane, MRC. http://ns1.mrcmekong.org/RAK/
html/rak_frameset.html
Mwanza, D. 2005. Promoting good governance through
regulatory frameworks in African water utilities. Water Sci.
Technol., Vol. 51, No. 8, pp. 71–79.

WWDR4

NETL (National Energy Technology Laboratory). 2009. Use
of Non-Traditional Water for Power Plant Applications: An
Overview of DOE/NETL R&D Efforts. Pittsburgh, Pa., NETL.
NRDC (Natural Resources Defense Council). n.d. What’s
on Tap? Website. New York, NRDC. http://www.nrdc.org/
water/drinking/uscities/contents.asp
NWC (National Water Commission). 2011. Urban Water in
Australia: Future Directions. Canberra, NWC. http://www.
nwc.gov.au/resources/documents/Future_directions.pdf
Olson, E. 2003. What’s on Tap? Grading Drinking Water in
U.S. Cities. New York, Natural Resources Defense Council
(NRDC). http://www.nrdc.org/water/drinking/uscities/pdf/
whatsontap.pdf
Øvergaard, S. 2008. Issue Paper: Deﬁnition of Primary
and Secondary Energy. Prepared as input to Chapter 3:
Standard International Energy Classiﬁcation (SIEC) in the
International recommendation on Energy Statistics (IRES).
Oslo, Division of Energy Statistics, Statistics Norway.
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/envaccounting/londongroup/
meeting13/LG13_12a.pdf (Accessed 30 April 2011.)
Payne, J. G. 2007. Matching Water Quality to Use
Requirements. Technical Report for UNIDO Technology
Foresight Summit 2007, 27–29 September 2007, Budapest.
Pegasys. 2011. Conceptual Framework for Assessing Water
Use in Energy Generation with a focus on Hydropower.
Cape Town, Pegasys.
Pickering de la Fuente, G. 2011. El hito ambiental de 2012.
Newsletter ANDESS, No. 25. Santiago, Asociación Nacional
de Empresas de Servicios Sanitarios (ANDESS).
http://www.andess.cl/news/News25/nota1.html
SABMiller Plc and WWF-UK. 2009. Water Footprinting:
Identifying and Addressing Water Risks in the Value Chain.
Technical report. Woking/Surrey, UK, SABMiller Plc/World
Wide Fund for Nature UK.
Scanlon, B. R., Jolly, I., Sophocleous, M. and Zhang, L. 2007.
Global impacts of conversions from natural to agricultural
ecosystems on water resources: quantity versus quality.
Water Resources Research, Vol. 43, W03437.
Sclar, E. D., Garau, P. and Carolini, G. 2005. The 21st century
health challenge of slums and cities. The Lancet, Vol. 365,
pp. 901–903.
Sieger, R. B. and Whitlock D. 2005. Session for the CHP and
Bioenergy for Landﬁlls and Wastewater Treatment Plants
workshop, Salt Lake City, UT, 11 August 2005. http://www.
docstoc.com/docs/22892252/CHP-and-Bioenergy-forLandﬁlls-and-Wastewater-Treatment-Plants
SISS (Superintendencia de Servicios Sanitarios). 2011. Informe
de Gestión del Sector Sanitario 2010. Santiago, SISS.
http://www.siss.gob.cl/577/articles-8333_recurso_1.pdf
Smit, J., Ratta, A. and Nasr, J. 1996. Urban Agriculture: Food,
Jobs, and Sustainable Cities. New York, United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP).
Stecko, S. and Barber, N. 2007. Exposing Vulnerabilities:
Monsoon Floods in Mumbai, India. Unpublished case study
prepared for the Global Report on Human Settlements 2007.

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

75

Steinfeld, H., Gerber, P., Wassenaar, T., Castel, V., Rosales,
M. and de Haan, C. 2006. Livestock’s Long Shadow:
Environmental Issues and Options. Rome, FAO/LEAD.
ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/a0701e/a0701e.pdf
Stillwell A. S. 2010. Energy Water Nexus in Texas, Master’s
Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Stillwell, A. S., King, C. W. and Webber, M. E. 2010.
Desalination and long-haul water transfer as a water
supply for Dallas, Texas: A case study of the energy-water
nexus in Texas. Texas Water Journal, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 33–41.
Stillwell, A. S., King, C. W., Webber, M. E., Duncan, I. J. and
Hardberger, A. 2011. The energy-water nexus in Texas.
Ecology and Society (Special Feature: The Energy-Water
Nexus: Managing the Links between Energy and Water for
a Sustainable Future), Vol. 16, No. 1, p. 2.
Strokes, J.R. and Horvath, A. 2009. Energy and air emission
effects of water supply. Environmental Science and
Technology, Vol. 43, No. 8, pp. 2680–7.
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity),
2009. TEEB Climate Issues Update. Geneva, United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP). http://www.teebweb.
org/InformationMaterial/TEEBReports/tabid/1278/
language/en-US/Default.aspx
Tucci, C., Goldenfum, J. A. and Parkinson, J. N. (eds). 2010.
Integrated Urban Water Management: Humid Tropics. IHP
Urban Water Series. Paris/Boca Raton, Fla., UNESCO-IHP,
CRC Press.
Twomey, K. M. and Webber, M. E. 2011. Evaluating the energy
intensity of the US public water system. Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Energy Sustainability.
Washington DC, American Society of Mechanical Engineers
(ASME).

Vahala, R. 2004. European Vision for Water Supply
and Sanitation in 2030. Water Supply and Sanitation
Technology Platform.
Vairavamoorthy, K. 2008. Cities of the Future and Urban
Water Management. Paper presented on 27 June 2008
during Thematic Week 2 of the Zaragoza International
Exhibition, 2008.
Vollaard, A. M., Ali, S., van Asten, H. A. G. H., Widjaja, S.,
Visser, L. G., Surjadi, C. and van Dissel, J. T. 2004. Risk
factors for typhoid and paratyphoid fever in Jakarta,
Indonesia. J. Am. Med. Assoc., Vol. 291, pp. 2607–2615.
WEC (World Energy Council). 2010. Water for Energy.
London, WEC. http://www.worldenergy.org/documents/
water_energy_1.pdf
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2009. Energy Vision Update
2009: Thirsty Energy: Water and Energy in the 21st Century.
Geneva/Englewood, Colo., WEF/Cambridge Energy
Research Associates. http://www.weforum.org/reports/
thirsty-energy-water-and-energy-21st-century?fo=1
(Accessed 30 April 2011.)
––––. 2011. Water Security: the Water-Food-Energy-Climate
Nexus: the World Economic Forum initiative. Washington
DC, Island Press.
WEF (Water Environment Federation). 1997. Energy
Conservation in Wastewater Treatment Facilities Manual of
Practice. Alexandria, VA, WEF.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs, Population Division). 2009. World
Population Prospects: The 2008 Revision, Highlights,
Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP.210. New York, UN.

WHO/UNICEF. 2006. Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and
Sanitation Target: the Urban and Rural Challenge of the
Decade. Geneva/New York, WHO/UNICEF. http://www.who.
int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmpﬁnal.pdf

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007.
Global Environment Outlook 4. Nairobi, UNEP.

––––. 2010. Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply
and Sanitation. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-Water:
2010 Update. Geneva/New York, WHO/UNICEF.

––––. 2010. UNEP Yearbook: New Science and Developments
in Our Changing Environment. Nairobi, UNEP.
UNEP/GRID-Arendal. 2008. Vital Water Graphics. An
Overview of the State of the World’s Fresh and Marine
Waters (2nd edn). Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/
dewa/vitalwater/article48.html
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements
Programme). 2003. The Challenge of Slums: Global Report
on Human Settlements. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
––––. 2006. Meeting Development Goals in Small Urban
Centres: Water and Sanitation in the World’s Cities. Nairobi/
London, UN-Habitat/Earthscan.
––––. 2010. The State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011: Cities for
All: Bridging the Urban Divide. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.

76

United Nations (under the coordination of A. Bárcena, A.
Prado and A. León). 2010. Achieving the Millennium
Development Goals with Equality in Latin America and
the Caribbean: Progress and Challenges. LC/G.2460,
Santiago, United Nations Publications. http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/5/39995/portada-indice-intro-en.pdf

CHAPTER 2

Wild, D., Francke, C-J., Menzli, P. and Schön, U. 2010. Water:
A Market of the Future. A Sustainable Asset Management
(SAM) Study. Switzerland, SAM.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2011. The Energy
Report. 100% Renewable Energy by 2050. Gland,
Switzerland, WWF. http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/
footprint/climate_carbon_energy/energy_solutions/
renewable_energy/sustainable_energy_report/ (Accessed
2 May 2011).
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009.
United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water
in a Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO Publishing/
Earthscan.
Zimmer, D. and Renault, D. n.d. Virtual Water in Food
Production and Global Trade: Review of Methodological
Iissues and Preliminary Results. FAO, Rome.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

CHAPTER 3
The water resource: Variability,
vulnerability and uncertainty

—
Authors Rajagopalan Balaji, Richard Connor, Paul Glennie, Jac van der Gun,
Gareth James Lloyd and Gordon Young
Contributor Tarendra Lakhankar

© Shutterstock/Lukas Hlavac

WATER DEMAND: WHAT DRIVES CONSUMPTION?

77

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Past editions of the World Water Development Report (WWDR) have addressed the state
of the world’s water resources in different but complementary ways. WWDR1 reported on
long-term averages and general patterns of water availability through different elements of
the hydrological cycle at the global scale. WWDR2 added a greater focus to the dimension
of ‘variability’ in the distribution of water resources over space and through time, also
describing some of the main human impacts in terms of the quantity and quality of the
resource. WWDR3 explored the relationship between the water cycle and other global
biogeochemical cycles, observational evidence of the impacts of climate change on the
water cycle, and the need for increased observation and monitoring.
This chapter builds on the information provided in previous WWDR editions, focusing now
on speciﬁc elements that had not received detailed coverage in the series. In an effort to
better understand variability in the resource and the origins of the related uncertainties, this
chapter opens with a description of the external stressors on water resources as sources
of uncertainty in the hydrological cycle, including the complex, inter-related ensemble of
dynamic natural processes, such as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation, which scientists refer to
as ‘climate forcings’. The chapter then focuses on long-term natural storage via two speciﬁc
but often overlooked or misunderstood elements of the hydrological cycle – groundwater
and glaciers – in terms of their beneﬁts and vulnerabilities. The chapter concludes with a
section describing how water quality and quantity are inextricably linked key elements of
water availability, adding yet another layer of uncertainty and complexity to understanding
and addressing water supply and availability issues.
With the exception of the subsection on glaciers, which is original to Part 1, the material in
this chapter has been condensed from the challenge area reports (Part 3/Volume 2) ‘State of
the resource: Quantity’ (Chapter 15) and ‘State of the resource: Quality’ (Chapter 16) as well
as the special report on Groundwater (Chapter 36).

3.1 The hydrological cycle, external
stressors on water resources, and sources of
uncertainty

development and management (see Chapter 4,
Section 4.6.1).

Precipitation delivers water unevenly over the planet
from one year to the next. There can be considerable
variability between arid and humid climates and wet
and dry seasons. As a result, distribution of freshwater supplies can be erratic with different countries and
regions receiving different quantities of water over any
given year.

Understanding the spatial and temporal distribution
and movement of water is crucial for efficient water
resources management. Water resource management
plans and policies must take into account this variability and distribution of freshwater supplies.

The average total annual renewable water resources (TARWR) available to each country (Figure 3.1)
provides an overview of this geographical variability.
Clearly, some countries have more water than others.
However, such a measure is imprecise since a country’s size can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence much of the variation between different countries. It is often therefore
more useful to consider the total water available per
person (Figure 3.2), which can provide a more appropriate indication of water availability for social or
economic purposes.1 It should be noted, however, that
tropical countries in Asia and Africa with the highest
populations have low availability of freshwater. This
poses a serious challenge to future water resources

The hydrological cycle is driven by a complex, interrelated ensemble of dynamic natural processes, which
scientists refer to as ‘climate forcings’. The Earth’s tilt
and rotation around the Sun are among the primary
drivers of seasonal variations in precipitation and water availability. Atmospheric and oceanic circulation
patterns and their interactions are equally important
drivers of weather, climate and the hydrological cycle.
A better understanding of these phenomena (e.g. the
El Niño-Southern Oscillation) and the ‘teleconnections’2 among different drivers can enhance predictive
capability in many regions.
Humans are in the process of altering the earth’s climate and by inference the global patterns in the circulation of moisture. Signiﬁcant control over this part of

FIGURE 3.1
Total annual renewable water resources (TARWR) by country – most recent estimates (1985–2010)

71%

1%
3

Natural TARWR
km3 per year
0-50
51-100
101-200
201-500
501-1,000
1,001-5,000
5,001-10,000

Source: FAO AQUASTAT database (http://www.fao.org/nr/aquastat, accessed in 2011).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

79

the hydrological cycle is not possible, but humans do
have a signiﬁcant impact on other components of the
cycle. Some interventions are deliberate, such as modifying runoff through storage and inter-basin transfers.
The former impacts ﬂoods and droughts to ensure
water is available when needed and damage is averted
or minimized when there is an excess; the latter brings
water to where it is needed. Other interventions such
as changing land surfaces for urban settlements or
agriculture can severely alter the hydrological cycle
through changes in inﬁltration, runoff and evapotranspiration rates.
The state of water resources is one of constant change,
resulting from the natural variability of the earth’s climate system and the anthropogenic alteration of that
system and the land surface through which the hydrological cycle is modulated. Speciﬁc changes to water
resources and the hydrological cycle include:
đ Changes in mean surface ﬂows due to natural climate variability at interannual and multidecadal time
scales and climate change
đ Increased ﬂood potential due to climate change
đ Increased losses due to temperature increase

đ Changes in the seasonality (or timing) of ﬂows, especially in snow melt basins
đ Changes in ﬂows from glaciers due to their retreat
đ Decreasing snow and permafrost
đ Groundwater depletion – losing the buffer against
rainfall variability
đ Changes in soil moisture
The state of water resources is also inﬂuenced by
withdrawals to meet socio-economic demands. These
are in turn inﬂuenced by population growth, economic development and dietary changes, as well as
by control measures exerted to protect settlements
in ﬂood plains and drought-prone regions. These
change forces and possible developments are described in Chapter 9. These sources of change and
the interactions between them create a new level of
uncertainty associated with the use and availability of
water resources – in addition to existing uncertainties
related to the earth’s climate system and hydrological
cycle. As a result, it is no longer possible to assume
that the future hydrological record will follow the
course of the historical record.

FIGURE 3.2
Per capita total annual renewable water resources (TARWR) by country – population data from 2009

71%

1%
3

Actual TARWR
m3 per year per capita
7-500
501-1,000
1,001-2,000
2,001-5,000
5,001-10,000
10,001-20,000
>20,000
Source: FAO AQUASTAT database (http://www.fao.org/nr/aquastat, accessed in 2011).

80

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

3.1.1 Drivers of global climate and hydrological
variability
Water movement on spatial and temporal scales over
the globe plays a crucial role in creating areas of abundance and scarcity. It is increasingly evident that a few
large-scale climate drivers orchestrate this movement:
the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Paciﬁc
Decadal Oscillation (PDO), the North Atlantic Oscillation
(NAO) and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO).
Increased understanding of these drivers has led to their
use in interannual predictions of hydrology and climate
and efficient resource planning. The following sections
brieﬂy describe ENSO, PDO and NAO.

FIGURE 3.3
Schematic of normal and El Niño conditions in the
tropical Paciﬁc Ocean

Normal Conditions
Convective
Circulation

Equator

Thermocline

120°E

80°W

El Niño Conditions

Equator

Thermocline

120°E

Source: NOAA/PMEL/TAO (n.d.).

WWDR4

80°W

“It is no longer possible
to assume that the
future hydrological
record will follow the
course of the historical
record.”

ENSO
The El Niño-Southern Oscillation is a coupled oceanatmospheric phenomenon in the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean
and the dominant driver of global climate at seasonal
to interannual time scales. Warm waters in the equatorial western Paciﬁc Ocean shift to the central and eastern region periodically over a three to eight-year time
scale (Figure 3.3). As an immediate consequence, tropical western Paciﬁc regions and Northern Australian
regions see a reduction in rainfall and tropical eastern parts of South America see an increase in rainfall. These convection changes in the tropical Paciﬁc
trigger teleconnection responses to other parts of the
world (Figure 3.4), especially South and South-East
Asia and Africa. These changes also impact the location and strength of the mid-latitude jet stream and
consequently the weather over North America. There
has been extensive documentation of ENSO impacts
on precipitation, temperature, hurricanes and tropical
cyclones, ecosystems, agriculture, water resources and
public health around the world, especially from the
tropical countries where most of the world’s population reside. Figures 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 show the ENSO
schematic, global teleconnections and mid-latitude jet
stream shifts.
Understanding the ENSO teleconnections alone can
provide signiﬁcant predictive capability in many places.
These efforts have received a signiﬁcant boost since
the mid-1990s with ongoing observation of the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean, which has led to skilful long-lead
ENSO predictions of immense value to society. The
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) has created a dedicated site on El Niño3
that provides information on ENSO monitoring and

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

81

prediction efforts, and compiles links on impacts as
well as numerous references.

resembles that of ENSO, but is slightly broader; furthermore, its index demonstrates a distinct variability over a decadal timescale. PDO has been shown to
impact ﬁsheries in the north-western United States
of America (USA), and there is a growing body of literature that identiﬁes its impacts on hydrology and
extreme events such as droughts, focusing in particular on the same region. Figure 3.4 shows the spatial

PDO
The Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation is manifested in the
large-scale sea surface temperature pattern predominant in the Northern Paciﬁc region, but also includes
participation from the tropical Paciﬁc. The pattern

FIGURE 3.4
Impacts of El Niño on global climate during northern hemisphere summer and winter seasons

Northern Hemisphere Summer

60°N
50°
40°
30°
20°
10°
EQ
10°S
20°
30°
40°
50°°
00°

20°

40°

60°

80°

100°

120°

140°

160°

180°

160° W 140°

120°

100°

80°

60°

40°

20°

Northern Hemisphere Winter

60°N
50°
40°
30°
20°
10°
EQ
10°S
20°
30°
40°
50°°
00°

20°

40°

60°

80°

100°

120°

140°

160°

180°

160° W 140°

120°

100°

80°

60°

40°

20°

Note: The La Niña impacts are quite symmetric. Notice that ENSO impacts rainfall and temperature especially in the developing countries in
the tropics.
Source: NOAA/PMEL/TAO (n.d.).

82

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

pattern and time series of this phenomena. The Joint
Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean
(JISAO) has a site that provides substantial details on
PDO: data, impacts and bibliography.4
NAO
The North Atlantic Oscillation is a climate driver in
the North Atlantic region and functions as an atmospheric feature mainly in the winter season. It is characterized by the location and strength of subtropical high-pressure and subpolar low-pressure centres
in the North Atlantic (Figure 3.5). The location and
strength of these pressure centres steer the jet stream
and the storm tracks and consequently the regional
climate and hydrology. The role of NAO in modulating European and North American climate has long
been known, but the physical mechanism and its role
in modulating sea surface temperatures are the subject
of intense study. Recent studies have also identiﬁed
NAO to be part of a hemispherical wide series of pressure centres named the Arctic Oscillation (AO). This
has a decadal timescale of variability.5

Other drivers
Other climate drivers that that drive the global climate and hydrology at multi-decadal timescales
are being studied. These include the Atlantic Multi
Decadal Oscillation (AMO) and the Atlantic Meridional
Overturning Circulation (AMOC) linked with the thermohaline circulation of which the Gulf Stream is an integral component.6

3.2 The vulnerability of natural long-term
storage: Groundwater and glaciers
3.2.1 Groundwater: A resilient resource in transition
The changing role of groundwater in the world
Unlike surface water, which has been intensively developed in many parts of the world for thousands
of years, groundwater has remained until less than
a century ago a rather sparsely developed resource.
However, during the twentieth century, an unprecedented ‘silent revolution’ (Llamas and Martínez-Santos,
2005) in groundwater abstraction took place across
the globe. This boom was driven by population growth

FIGURE 3.5
Spatial pattern and time index of PDO and El Niño

Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation

El Niño-Southern Oscillation

0.8
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.6

Monthly El Niño 3.4 index values
1

Monthly PDO index values

1

2

2

0

0

-2

-2

-1

-1
1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Source: JISAO (2000).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

83

and the associated increasing demand for water, food
and income, and facilitated by knowledge, technology
and access to funding. Intensive groundwater abstraction began in the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century in
a limited number of countries including Italy, Mexico,
Spain and the USA, and then expanded worldwide
since the 1960s (Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007). This fundamentally
changed the role of groundwater in human society, in
particular in the irrigation sector where it triggered
an ‘agricultural groundwater revolution’ (Giordano and

Villholth, 2007), signiﬁcantly boosting food production
and rural development. The use of groundwater has
also considerably modiﬁed local and global water cycles, environmental conditions and ecosystems.
As of 2010 the world’s aggregated groundwater abstraction is estimated at approximately 1,000 km3 per
year – about 67% of which is used for irrigation, 22%
for domestic purposes, and 11% for industrial purposes (AQUASTAT, 2011; EUROSTAT, 2011; IGRAC, 2010;
Margat, 2008; Siebert et al., 2010).7 Figure 3.7 shows

FIGURE 3.6
NAO spatial pattern and its impact on the mid-latitude jet stream and its impacts on climate over North
America and Western Europe

North Atlantic Oscillation
80°
70°
60°
50°

80°
40°

70°

Positive
Mode

Cold and more
sea ice

50°

40°
30°

30°

Warm
and wet

60°

20°
10°

Strong
Low

0°
100°W
20°E
85°W
5°E

Cool
and dry

eam
Jet Str

70°W
10°W

55°W

40°W

25°W

Warm

20°

Strong
High

10°

Associated
SST Patterns
( 12–14 year period)
˜

0°
100°W
20°E
85°W
5°E
70°W
10°W

55°W

40°W

25°W

80°
70°
60°

80°

50°

70°

40°
30°

40°

60°

am
tre
tS
Je

Negative
Mode
50°

Warm and less
sea ice

Weak
Low

20°

Cold
and dry

10°
0°
100°W
20°E
85°W
5°E
70°W

30°

Cold and
snowy

‘Blocking’

55°W

40°W

25°W

Warm
and wet

Weak
High

20°

10°W

10°

Enhanced
Trough

0°
100°W

20°E
85°W
5°E
70°W
55°W

10°W
40°W

25°W

Source: AIRMAP (n.d., ﬁg.4) (J. Bradbury and C. Wake).

84

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

the global distribution of groundwater abstraction
by the year 2000. Two-thirds of the total amount is
abstracted in Asia with India, China, Pakistan, Iran
and Bangladesh as major consumers (Tables 3.1 and
3.2). The global groundwater abstraction rate has at

TABLE 3.1
Top 10 groundwater-abstracting countries as of 2010
Country

Abstraction (km3/year)

1. India

251

2. China

112

3. United States of America

112

4. Pakistan

64

5. Iran

60

6. Bangladesh

35

7. Mexico

29

8. Saudi Arabia

23

9. Indonesia

14

10. Italy

14

Note: About 72% of the global groundwater abstraction takes place
in these ten countries.
Source: Data from IGRAC (2010), AQUASTAT (2011) and EUROSTAT
(2011).

least tripled over the past 50 years and continues to
increase at an annual rate of 1 to 2%. In a number of
countries, however, abstraction rates have peaked and
are now stable or even decreasing (Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture,
2007), as illustrated in Figure 3.8. These estimates may
not be precise, but they suggest that the abstraction
of groundwater accounts for approximately 26% of
total global water withdrawal and equals around 8% of
mean global groundwater recharge.
Groundwater is now a signiﬁcant source of water
for human consumption, supplying nearly half of
all drinking water in the world (WWAP, 2009) and
around 43% of all water effectively consumed in irrigation8 (Siebert et al., 2010). Yet the relevance and
socio-economic impacts of groundwater development are higher than these percentages may suggest.
Due to the relatively large volumes of water stored
underground, most aquifers have a considerable
buffer capacity, which keeps their water available for
withdrawal even during very long periods without
rainfall. This enables people to have reliable access to
water in regions that would otherwise be too dry if
their water supply depended only on precipitation or
surface water. The most striking example of this buffer capacity is formed by non-renewable groundwater
resources: various large aquifer systems on earth still

FIGURE 3.7
Intensity of groundwater abstraction by the year 2000 (in mm per year), as allocated to 0.5° x 0.5° grid cells
by the PCR-GLOBWB model

No data

0–2

2–20

20–100

100–300

300–1,000

Source: Wada et al. (2010, p. 2, © American Geophysical Union, reproduced by permission).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

85

contain very large volumes of groundwater in spite of
not having received signiﬁcant replenishment during
recent millennia (Foster and Loucks, 2006). However,
no matter how large the volumes of water contained
in these aquifers may be, the fact that they are nonrenewable means they can eventually be mined to
exhaustion if their use is not managed properly. And
there are hotspots where the availability of non-renewable groundwater resources has reached critical
limits (see below).
Groundwater is crucial for the livelihoods and food security of 1.2 to 1.5 billion rural households in the poorer
regions of Africa and Asia (Comprehensive Assessment
of Water Management in Agriculture, 2007), but also
for domestic supplies of a large part of the population
elsewhere in the world. Furthermore, groundwater-fed
irrigation is usually considerably less susceptible to
water shortage risks than irrigation supplied by surface
water. This is likely to result in higher economic returns
per unit of water used, as demonstrated by studies
in Spain (Llamas and Garrido, 2007) and India (Shah,
2007). Consequently, the share of groundwater in the
overall socio-economic beneﬁt from abstracted water
tends to be higher than its volumetric share in the total
water abstraction.

Signiﬁcant changes in the state of groundwater systems
Inﬂows and outﬂows, the volume of water stored and
related groundwater levels, and water quality, are key
characteristics of the state of any groundwater system.
Steadily increasing rates of groundwater abstraction
and other human interactions with groundwater, such as
those produced by changing land use and emission of
polluting substances, all affect the state of groundwater
systems. Climate change and water resources management measures also have an impact on the state of
groundwater systems. As a result, the majority of the
world’s groundwater systems are no longer in dynamic
equilibrium, but do show signiﬁcant trends. In particular, reduction of natural outﬂows, decreasing stored volumes, declining water levels and water quality degradation are widely observed, along with changes in the
mean rate of groundwater renewal.
The groundwater resources world map produced by
WHYMAP (2008) provides a visual impression of the
global geographic distribution of favourable versus less
favourable groundwater zones in terms of hydraulic continuity, stored volume and rate of groundwater renewal
(recharge). A large proportion of the earth’s groundwater (probably 80 to 90%) is stored in the zones mapped
as ‘major groundwater basins’, covering only around 35%

TABLE 3.2
Key estimates on global groundwater abstraction (reference year 2010)
Continent

Groundwater abstraction1

Compared to total water abstraction
Total water
abstraction2

Share of
groundwater

%

km3/year

%

143

15

524

27

2

14

1

149

9

8

6

26

3

182

14

23

37

16

76

8

497

15

Africa

27

15

2

44

4

196

23

Asia

497

116

63

676

68

2257

30

Oceania

4

2

1

7

1

26

25

World

666

212

108

986

100

3831

26

Irrigation

Domestic

Industrial

Total

km3/year

km3/year

km3/year

km3/year

North America

99

26

18

Central America and
the Caribbean

5

7

South America

12

Europe (including
Russian Federation)

1 Estimated on the basis of IGRAC (2010), AQUASTAT (2011), EUROSTAT (2011), Margat (2008) and Siebert et al. (2010).
2 Average of the 1995 and 2025 ‘business as usual scenario’ estimates presented by Alcamo et al. (2003).

86

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

of land surface. The global volume of stored groundwater
is poorly known; estimates range from 15.3 to 60 million
km3, including 8 to 10 million km3 of freshwater, while the
remainder – brackish and saline groundwater – is predominant at great depth (Margat, 2008).
Recent model studies have produced global patterns of mean annual groundwater recharge (Döll and
Fiedler, 2008; Wada et al., 2010), showing a strong
correlation with global mean annual rainfall maps.
The mean global groundwater recharge estimated by
these models – 12.7·103 km3 per year (Döll and Fiedler,
2008) and 15.2·103 km3 per year (Wada et al., 2010),
respectively – is at least three orders of magnitude
smaller than the estimated total groundwater storage. What these estimates do not take into account
is the possible impact of climate change. However, a
recent study by Döll (2009) simulates climate change
impacts on the basis of four Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios, comparing the
model outcomes with those of the reference period

FIGURE 3.8
Groundwater abstraction trends in selected
countries (in km3 per year)

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1950
India
Mexico

1960

1970

USA

China

Saudi Arabia

1980
Pakistan
Russia

1990

2000

Iran
France

Source: Adapted from Margat (2008, ﬁg. 4.6, p. 107).

WWDR4

2010

1961–1990. The study concludes that groundwater recharge is likely to increase in the northern latitudes
by the 2050s, but strongly decrease (by 30 to 70% or
more) in certain currently semi-arid zones, including
the Mediterranean, North-Eastern Brazil and SouthWestern Africa. The numerous narrow and shallow alluvial aquifers (strip aquifers) in dry climatic zones are
among the world’s most vulnerable with respect to
climate change (van der Gun, 2009).
Groundwater abstraction causes depletion of groundwater storage until a new dynamic equilibrium is established, under conditions of reduced natural outﬂow
and/or induced recharge. In the world’s arid and semiarid zones, numerous groundwater systems are not
resilient enough to accommodatestorage depletion
under intensive groundwater development.9 Evidently,
this is true for non-renewable groundwater (Foster and
Loucks, 2006), but it applies as well to many aquifers
currently being recharged. The result is a progressive
depletion of groundwater, accompanied by steadily declining groundwater levels. Konikow and Kendy
(2005) estimate that about 700 to 800 km3 of groundwater has been depleted from aquifers in the USA
during the twentieth century. Recently, the Gravity
Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) produced
estimates of the current rate of groundwater depletion
in a number of very large aquifers (Rodell et al., 2009;
Famiglietti et al., 2009) and a global simulation model
produced estimates for the entire planet (Wada et al.,
2010). Results so far show that signiﬁcant groundwater storage depletion is taking place in many areas of
intensive groundwater withdrawal.10 Physical exhaustion of groundwater storage is a threat in very shallow
aquifers only. More commonly, the more important impacts of groundwater depletion are side-effects of the
associated declining water levels, and include increasing cost of groundwater (due to larger pumping lifts),
induced salinity and other water quality changes, land
subsidence, degraded springs and reduced baseﬂows.
While the bulk of global groundwater resources at
shallow and intermediate depths have adequate quality for most uses, gradual changes in local groundwater
quality have been observed in zones scattered around
the world. The most ubiquitous changes are caused by
pollutants produced by humans such as liquid and solid waste, chemicals used in agriculture, manure from
livestock, irrigation return ﬂows, mining residues and
polluted air. A second category results from the migration of poor quality water into aquifer zones, such as

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

87

saltwater intrusion in coastal areas or upward migration of deep saline groundwater as a result of groundwater abstraction. Climate change and associated sea
level rise are expected to constitute another threat to
groundwater quality in coastal areas.

exploited aquifers. In ﬂat areas with shallow water tables, land subsidence may generate the need for more
intensive drainage, which in turn accelerates land subsidence (Oude Essink et al., 2010).
Of particular note is the impact of groundwater depletion on sea level rise. Konikow (2009), Konikow and
Kendy (2005) and Wada et al. (2010) argue that the
ultimate sink for most of the groundwater removed
from aquifers by depletion is the oceans. Although
their estimates are not yet precise, they make a plausible argument for groundwater depletion contributing
signiﬁcantly to sea level rise, implying that the current
rise in sea level is due in part to inﬂuences other than
climate change.11

Impacts on other components of the physical
environment
The most visible impact of groundwater abstraction
and associated changes in the groundwater regime
relates to the reduction of natural groundwater outﬂows. The decrease or disappearance of the baseﬂow
of streams, spring discharge and groundwater-related
ecosystems has signiﬁcantly changed the physical environment in many parts of the world, especially in arid
and semi-arid zones.

Groundwater: Cause for concern or opportunity?
Groundwater constitutes a signiﬁcant part of the
water resource with profound impact on human welfare. Groundwater systems around the world are coming under increasing stress from various anthropogenic
and natural factors. In many areas, this threatens the
future availability of good-quality groundwater at affordable cost or in situ environmental functions of
groundwater. Sound water resources management
based on scientiﬁc knowledge and paying due attention to groundwater is therefore crucial. It should strive
for a balance between present and future beneﬁts

Figure 3.9 shows a striking example of baseﬂow reduction due to groundwater storage depletion. In ﬂat areas, the hydraulic setting may be such that part of the
direct ﬂow of streams (i.e. the more rapid and often
more voluminous ﬂow component) may be lost to adjacent aquifers.
Groundwater abstraction has caused land subsidence
in numerous areas around the world where water-saturated compressible formations at relatively shallow
depths are in hydraulic connection with intensively

FIGURE 3.9
Stream and well hydrographs from the North China Plain, showing evidence of reduced stream ﬂow caused by
groundwater depletion

0

800

10

Observation well

600
20
400
30
200

Fuyang River

Depth to water table (m)

Annual ﬂow (103 m3)

1000

40
2000

1990

1980

1970

1960

1950

0

Year
Source: Konikow and Kendy (2005, ﬁg. 1, p. 318, with kind permission of Springer Science+Business Media).

88

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

from groundwater, pay attention to deterioration of
groundwater quality, control environmental impacts of
groundwater abstraction, and mitigate such impacts in
cases where reduced groundwater availability cannot
be prevented.
In spite of real concerns about unsustainable abstraction rates and pollution in many parts of the world,
groundwater presents many opportunities and will
continue to do so in the future if carefully managed.
Groundwater’s omnipresence and unique buffer capacity
have enabled people to settle and survive in dry areas
where rainfall and runoff are scarce or unpredictable.
Groundwater is a reliable source of domestic water to
many rural and urban areas around the world, and subsequent to the silent revolution has contributed and
still contributes to signiﬁcant socio-economic development and poverty alleviation. Groundwater is also
likely to play a crucial role in the context of climate
change and adaptation. In many water-scarce regions,
climate change is expected to result in reduced and
more erratic surface water and ‘green water’ availability. Groundwater recharge will decrease there as well,
but the groundwater storage buffer will in most cases
ensure uninterrupted water availability, thus triggering
a shift in withdrawals from surface water to groundwater. This will reduce overall water supply risks and suggests that groundwater in such regions will provide the
key to coping with water scarcity problems imposed or
aggravated by climate change during the twenty-ﬁrst
century.
3.2.2 Glaciers
The role of glaciers within mountain hydrology
Mountains are the ‘water towers’ of the world, receiving much more precipitation than the surrounding lowlands. Their contribution to water supply is of particular signiﬁcance where the lowlands are arid (Viviroli et
al., 2003).
Mountain stream ﬂow is composed of three major
elements: rainfall, snow melt and water from glacier
melt. The relative importance of these elements, varying through time and with elevation, is largely controlled by temperature and seasonality of precipitation.
In many mid-latitude situations there is, on average,
no marked seasonality in precipitation; winters are
characterized by snowfall and summers by rainfall.
In spring, snow melt may dominate the hydrograph,
while glacier melt becomes more important in late
summer. During years of low snowfall, glacier ice will

WWDR4

“The global
groundwater
abstraction rate has
at least tripled over
the past 50 years and
continues to increase
at an annual rate of
1 to 2%.”
begin to contribute melt-water to the streams earlier
in the season and will be more dominant in late summer; thus, glaciers act as buffers with waters being released from permanent storage in years of low snowfall and as retaining waters (in the form of ice) in years
of heavy snowfall.
The differences between winter and summer become
more pronounced moving pole-wards from mid-latitudes, and are reduced moving towards the equator.
Precipitation also varies with the type of climate: in
Mediterranean climates winter precipitation predominates, while in monsoon climates summer precipitation
is more pronounced.
Rising global temperatures have a particular effect on
the relative importance of rainfall and snowfall, and
on the rates at which glaciers are melting. In general,
mountain glaciers are shrinking worldwide – with some
notable exceptions, for example, in the Karakoram
(Hewitt, 2005). In the short term, the shrinking of glaciers is adding water to stream ﬂow over and above
annual precipitation, thus increasing water supply. In
the long term (decades to centuries), those additional
sources of water will diminish as glaciers disappear, and
the buffering effects of glaciers on stream ﬂow regimes
will lessen. Overall changes in glacier mass balance are
well summarized by Dyurgerov (2010) and the Global
Land Ice Measurements from Space (GLIMS) database.
Glacier-related ﬂoods are also important in many
mountain regions, as illustrated in the examples below.

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

89

Regions of the world affected by glacier melt-waters
The global distribution of glaciers and ice sheets
is illustrated in Figure 3.10. Most large ice masses
are found in regions with sparse human habitation.
However, glaciers of the Alps, the Andes, Central Asia,
the Caucasus, Norway, New Zealand and Western
Canada are important for water supply. In most of
these regions glaciers are shrinking with impacts on
stream ﬂow as described above.

This region is characterized by great climatic, glaciological and hydrological diversity. The eastern Himalaya
is dominated by the summer monsoon. Westward,
the intensity of the monsoon diminishes, while in the
Karakoram, intensive summer precipitation occurs only
in exceptional years. Local precipitation varies greatly from less than 5,000 mm per year on the southern
ﬂanks of the eastern Himalaya to less than 250 mm per
year on the northern slopes (Young, 2009).

Populations are growing in all of these regions, and
the subsequent demands for water are increasing. In
several regions alternative sources of water are being
depleted, in particular, groundwater. In most regions,
supply is being outstripped by demand. It is arguable
that changes in demand are often more signiﬁcant
than changes in supply; thus, care must be taken to
consider both sides of the supply/demand equation in
assessing water resources.

Figure 3.12 illustrates glacier extent in the region. Most
of the glaciers in the Himalaya are relatively small; they
are found predominantly at high elevations and respond
relatively quickly to global warming. Large glaciers
dominate the Karakoram with areal extents of greater
than 500 km2. Such glaciers, many of which are surgetype, extend to elevations below 3,000 m and respond
very slowly to changes in climate. Many are currently
growing in areal extent and probably also in mass.

Examples from the Himalayan region
The basins of the Brahmaputra, Ganges and Indus, encompassing the Himalaya and Karakoram (illustrated
in Figure 3.11) demonstrate the importance of glaciers
on stream ﬂow. Within these basins live some 0.8 billion people dependent on stream ﬂow for water supply
and at risk from glacier-related ﬂoods.

Glacier melt contribution to stream ﬂow
The signiﬁcance of glacier melt contribution to stream
ﬂow may be divided into two components:
đ The melting of glacier ice in the ablation zone, that
is, the part of the glacier with an annual net loss of
mass. Such melting varies in importance within the
Himalayan region. In the eastern Himalaya glacier,

FIGURE 3.10
Global distribution of glaciers and ice sheets (Antarctica excluded)

90˚N

60˚N

30˚N

0˚

30˚S

60˚S
180˚

120˚W

60˚W

0˚

60˚E

120˚E

180˚

Source: Armstrong et al. (2005, courtesy B. H. Kaup, National Snow and Ice Data Center, GLIMS).

90

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

FIGURE 3.11
Delineation of the basins of the Brahmaputra, Ganges and Indus

Major river
River basin boundary
National boundary
Elevation (m a.s.l.)
0–500
500–1,000
1,000–2,000
2,000–3,000
3,000–4,000
4,000–5,000
5,000–6,000
6,000–6,752

Source: Miller et al. (2011 [in press], ﬁg. 1, p.7, using US Geological Survey ESRI data).

FIGURE 3.12
GRACE satellite image showing the extent of glacier cover in the Himalaya – Karakoram and estimation of
groundwater depletion in north-west India

Nov 2002-2008
Equivalent Height Anomaly
-12

-8

-4

0

4

8

12

Centimetres

Note: The loss of 109 km3 over a six-year period is signiﬁcant.
Source: NASA GRACE Satellite image (http://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/features/india_water.html), T. Schindler and M. Rodell.

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

91

ice melt is completely overshadowed by monsoon
rainfall and snow melt, with the ice melt contributing
less than 3% of annual stream ﬂow. In the Karakoram,
the glacier melt contribution is much more signiﬁcant, reaching more than 20% of annual ﬂow in
some years during late summer.

de Ruiz, 2010]), with the resulting decrease in water supply for various uses, as in some areas of
Argentina, Chile and Peru (ECLAC, 2009).

FIGURE 3.14
đ The contribution derived from shrinkage of the glacier mass due to global warming, that is, water being released from permanent storage and adding
to stream ﬂow derived from annual precipitation.
While there is good evidence that most glaciers in
the Himalaya are, very slowly, losing mass, many
glaciers in the Karakoram are gaining mass (Hewitt,
2005). It has been clearly demonstrated that glaciers in different parts of the region are shrinking
(or in some instances gaining) mass at very different
rates (Scherler et al., 2011.) Those that are shrinking are doing so very slowly, probably contributing
much less than 1% to annual stream ﬂows. It is likely
that very large glaciers will contribute melt-water to
stream ﬂow at much the same rate for many decades and possibly centuries; however, some glaciers
will recede or even disappear (as in Peru [Oblitas

Lugge Tsho Glacial lake, Bhutan

Source: Mool et al. (2001b, plate 9.13, p. 93).

FIGURE 3.13
Dangerous glacier dammed lakes within Bhutan

Northern Basin

Chu
Pho Ch
P
hu
Mo
M
o Chu
u

Kuri
Kur
Ku
K
u i Chu
u

Mangde
Chu
Ma
Man
M
a gde
g e Ch
gd
C
u
Pa
a Chu

Dang
Chu
Dan
Da
D
a gC
h
hu

Chamkar
Cha
ha
amka
m r Chu

Dangme
Dan
Da
D
a
an
ngme
gme
gm
me Chu

Chu
Thim
mC
h
hu
Ha
H
a Chu
u
Am
A
Amo
mo
m
o Chu
Nyere
Chu
Nye
Ny
N
y re
eA
Ama
ma
a Ch
C
u

Potentially dangerous glacial lake (total =24)
Basin boundary
River
International boundary

Source: Mool et al. (2001a, p. 109).

92

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Glacier-related ﬂoods
There are two types of glacier-related ﬂoods in the
region: glacier lake outburst ﬂoods (GLOFs) and outbursts of glacier-dammed lakes (jökulhlaups).
GLOFs result from small pro-glacial lakes – that is lakes
impounded by terminal and lateral moraines in front
of the glacier termini – emptying very rapidly, producing ﬂoods of high intensity and short duration. With
glaciers retreating due to global warming, such lakes
are becoming larger. Sudden releases can result from
the collapse of the retaining moraine or as a result of
landslides into the lake with sudden displacement of
the waters. The risks from such ﬂoods are increasing.
There are many thousand such glacier lakes in the region. GLOFs can cause extensive damage downstream,
with loss of life and economic damage from destruction of bridges, hydro plants and other infrastructure
(Ives et al., 2010). In Bhutan, there are over 2,400 such
lakes, 24 of which have been identiﬁed as potentially
catastrophic (Figures 3.13 and 3.14).
Jökulhlaups result from the sudden release of water
from lakes impounded by glaciers that have dammed

valleys. Sudden release of lake waters can be truly catastrophic for the Karakoram (Hewitt, 1982), as illustrated in Figure 3.15. In the 1920s, successive ﬂoods initiated on the Shyok River resulted in an 18 m increase in
the water level at Attock 1,400 km downstream, with
catastrophic results in the plains of the Punjab.
Policy options to deal with uncertainty and risk related
to glaciers in the Himalayan region
The transboundary nature of all three of the river systems
concerned – with headwaters in China, mid-sections in
Nepal/Bhutan and/or India, and lower sections in Pakistan
or Bangladesh – means that policy options for water resources management need to be considered within a
broad political and economic context. The sharing of water
resources between these countries is a challenge.
Demands for water supply are growing with dramatic
population increases, a situation further complicated by
the migration of people from rural to urban settings. In
addition, economic development and higher standards
of living are increasing demands for water. All of these
issues pose challenges for water managers.

FIGURE 3.15
Indus River: Glacier dams and related events

an

Study area

Hun

ki

st

Tibet

Pa

K2 (8,611 m)

Shimshal

India

za

Braldu R.
Gilgit

Skordu
S h yo

In

du

sR

.

As

to

rR

k R.

N

.

In

du

sR

.

Glaciers interfering with rivers
Glacial dams
Glacial dams with catastrophic outburst
Landslide dams

0

km

50

Landslide dams with catastrophic outburst
Glacial 'surges'

Source: Hewitt (1982, p. 260, by permission IAHS).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

93

“Wastewater
management solutions
also need to be
combined with public
education efforts,
such as those related
to personal hygiene
and environmental
education.”
Alternative water supplies, particularly groundwater resources in north-west India vital to human life and livelihoods, are being depleted unsustainably (Figure 3.12).
This has important implications for overall water supply.
A summary of how the countries in the region are
adapting to the effects of climate change is provided
in ICIMOD (2009). However, there is a general perception within most government circles that glacier
melt and shrinkage will be highly detrimental to water
supply. This perception is almost certainly misplaced.
Most glaciers will continue to shrink very slowly, adding water to the streams over and above annual precipitation, but only in very small quantities relative to
precipitation.
An example of how Bhutan is addressing ﬂood risk issues is given within the UNDP Adaptation Learning
Mechanism. The objective of the project is to reduce
climate change-induced GLOF risks. Through the project, the Government of Bhutan will integrate long-term
climate change-induced risks into the existing disaster
risk management framework. It will demonstrate practical measures to reduce GLOF risks, such as installing
pumps to reduce lake levels and introducing early warning systems to alert downstream populations.

3.3 Water quality
The ‘quality’ of water is a relative term. The notion of
‘good’ or ‘bad’ water quality is not only a function of its
state and what it contains, but also depends on what
it is used for. ‘Pure’ water does not exist in nature but

94

CHAPTER 3

only in the laboratory, and all substances may be pollutants depending on their concentration in water. This
is one of the reasons health professionals often prefer
to use the term ‘safe’ water rather than ‘clean’ water.
Sufficient water supply of appropriate quality is a key
ingredient in the health and well-being of humans and
ecosystems, and for social and economic development. Water quality is becoming a global concern of
increasing signiﬁcance, as risks of degradation translate directly into social economic impacts. Although
there have been some regional successes in improving
water quality, there are no data to suggest that there
has been an overall improvement in water quality on a
global scale.
Water quality is inextricably linked with water quantity
as both are key determinants of supply. Compared to
water quality, water quantity has received far more investment, scientiﬁc support and public attention in recent decades. However, water quality is just as important as water quantity for satisfying basic human and
environmental needs. Moreover, the two are inextricably linked, with poor water quality impacting water
quantity in a number of ways. For example, polluted
water that cannot be used for drinking, bathing, industry or agriculture may effectively reduce the amount
of water available for use in a given area (UNEP, 2010).
The more polluted the water is, the greater the incremental cost of treatment required to return it to a useable standard (UNEP, 2010).
According to Stellar (2010), ‘The link between quality
and quantity can take different forms in the cases of
ground water and surface water. Where subterranean
aquifers are concerned, there is an explicit connection
between over-use and quality degradation’. Excessive
pumping of groundwater over time can diminish water quality in two ways. First, quality can be affected
through increased concentrations of naturally occurring compounds that become dangerously high as
the amount of water dwindles, as in the case of India
where ﬂuorosis potentially threatens or directly affects
millions of people. Second, quality can be affected by
increasing salinity levels as a result of saltwater intrusion into coastal aquifers, as in the case of Cyprus and
the Gaza Strip (Stellar, 2010). The most immediate
problem that saltwater intrusion typically causes is a
reduction in the amount of water available for human
consumption, but it also directly impacts other uses including those relating to agriculture and industry.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Overuse of surface water, such as rivers and lakes, can
lead to increased concentrations of harmful substances
present in the water due to pollution or mineral leaching. ‘A marked example of this is seen in the case of
the Rio Grande River, where decreased ﬂows in summer months coincide with large declines in water quality. During the dry season, pathogen concentrations
increase by almost 100 times’ (Stellar, 2010).

toxic substances, such as inorganic compounds and
untreated sewage, degrades the function of aquatic
ecosystems by reducing the multifaceted goods and
services they are able to provide. As many of the
world’s poorest people depend directly upon these
goods and services for their existence, this situation
further complicates efforts to alleviate poverty (MA,
2005a,b).

Policy-makers must make a concerted effort to better integrate the issues of water quantity and water
quality in their responses. In turn, they need the support of the research community who can help to better quantify the problems, as well as the development
of remedial solutions. Without an appropriate level of
intervention, the major social, economic and environment-related risks, uncertainties and impacts related
to water quality are expected to increase.

In terms of responses, there is a need for cost-effective
options for collection, treatment and disposal of human wastes. It is estimated that over 80% of used water
worldwide is not collected or treated (Corcoran et al.,
2010). Wastewater management solutions also need
to be combined with public education efforts, such as
those related to personal hygiene and environmental
education. Studies have shown that the provision of
improved sanitation and safe drinking water could reduce diarrhoeal diseases by nearly 90% (WHO, 2008b).
There is also a need to direct efforts toward industries
using or producing toxic substances. Development of
clean technology and substitution processes, combined
with cost-efficient treatment options, is a priority component. The control of non-point sources of pollution,
particularly nutrients leading to eutrophication, is an
increasing global challenge. Regulations and efficient
regulatory enforcement are essential – alongside institutional efforts to strengthen emergency responses, in
particular when the safety of drinking water supplies
is compromised during natural disasters. This issue

Socio-economic development is dependent on water
quality. Risks to human and ecosystem health are
linked to poor water quality, which in turn threatens socio-economic development. Ecosystem health
has historically been a concern of the richer, more
developed countries and their environmental movements. However, increasing recognition of the multitude of beneﬁts of ecosystem goods and services,
including wastewater treatment, has gradually made
ecosystem health an important socio-economic issue,
even in the poorest countries. Water polluted with

FIGURE 3.16
Annual cost of the environmental degradation of water

3.0

Share of GDP (%)

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Algeria

Egypt

Iran

Jordan

Lebanon

Morocco

Syria

Tunisia

Source: World Bank (2007, ﬁg. 4.4, p. 109, from data sources cited therein).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

95

will increase in importance with the emerging threats
brought about by climate change impacts.

drinking water supplies represent one of the major
threats to the world’s vulnerable poor.

Water quality is linked to human health. Human health
risks are without doubt the major and most widespread concern linked to water quality. Approximately
3.5 million deaths related to inadequate water supply, sanitation and hygiene occur each year, predominantly in developing countries (WHO, 2008a) (see
Section 4.1 and Chapter 34). Diarrhoeal diseases, often
related to contaminated drinking water, are estimated
to cause the death of more than 1.5 million children
under the age of ﬁve per year (Black et al., 2010). The
MDGs state that waterborne diseases related to unsafe

Toxic water contamination is less widespread, but remains an important issue in many regions, particularly emerging economies. The release of toxic wastes
from waste dumps and industrial enterprises is also
a major threat and expense to the provision of safe
water in the developing world. An important share
of the total burden of disease worldwide – around
10% – could be prevented by improvements related
to drinking water, sanitation, hygiene, and use of environmental management and health impact assessments (see Section 4.1).

TABLE 3.3
Key water quality risks
Risk

Waterborne
diseases

Toxic
contamination

Oxygen deﬁcit
Poisoning
and eutrophication

Ecosystem
modiﬁcation

Millions of cases
Increasing trends

Thousands of cases
of serious impacts
in hot spots
Lack of reliable
documentation

Thousands of km2
Decline in coastal
ﬁsheries
Decrease in
recreational value

Increase in
invasive species
Increase in
invasive pests
Increase in
turbidity

Natural Processes

Increasing
ﬂooding incidents

Saltwater intrusion

Heat waves

Social

Urban migration
Poverty

Waste disposal
attitudes
Poverty

Poor application
of fertilizers

Waste disposal
attitudes
Poverty

Poverty

Economic

Inadequate
investment in
wastewater
treatment

Industrial waste
and spills

Intensive
agriculture
Mining
Urban wastewater
Industrial
wastewater

Agriculture
Urban wastewater
Industrial
wastewater
Mining

Agriculture
Forestry
Urban wastewater
Industrial
wastewater
Hydropower

Sustainable
agricultural
practices
Nutrient removal in
wastewater

Industrial waste
treatment
Clean technology
Integrated pest
management

Sustainable
agricultural
practices
Sustainable
forestry
Nutrient removal
in wastewater

Severity
Hundreds of km2
Destruction of
ﬁsheries

Main drivers
Seawater
intrusion
Heating
Erosion after
forest ﬁres

Response options
Interventions

96

CHAPTER 3

Urban wastewater Industrial waste
treatment
treatment
Clean technology
Warning systems

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Poor quality water is expensive. Poor water quality incurs many economic costs: degradation of ecosystem
services; health-related costs; impacts on economic
activities such as agriculture, industrial production
and tourism; increased water treatment costs; and reduced property values among others. In some regions
these costs can be signiﬁcant (UNEP, 2010). Figure 3.16
shows the estimated annual cost of poor water quality in countries in the Middle East and North Africa as
a share of GDP (World Bank, 2007). Projections for
these and other regions show increasing scarcity of
freshwater in forthcoming years. The costs associated
with addressing water quality problems can therefore
be expected to increase.

Conversely, taking action to improve or ensure the maintenance of water quality can save lives and achieve significant savings. Examples include a reduction in industrial
production costs and the use of natural waste treatment
services provided by freshwater ecosystems. Although
more research is needed to better understand and quantify the economic costs and beneﬁts of industry and
ecosystem services, most evidence suggests that many
social and economic beneﬁts derived from addressing
water quality issues today will increasingly outweigh the
future costs of inaction or delayed responses.
A global water quality assessment framework is necessary. While there are many possible ways to address

TABLE 3.4
Summary of possible water quality interventions by scale
Scale

Education
and capacitybuilding

Policy/law/
governance

Financial/
economic

Technology/
infrastructure

Data/
monitoring

International/national

Initiate training
and awareness
building

Institute integrated
approaches

Institute polluter/
beneﬁciary pays
system

Promote best
practice and
support capacity
building

Develop
monitoring
framework

Institute pricing
systems

Invest in
infrastructure
and appropriate
technologies

Build regional
capacity to collect
and process water
quality data

Consider
decentralized
treatment
technologies

Carry out
and analyse
household/
community
surveys

Institute pollution
prevention
Watershed

Strategic level for
raising awareness
of the impacts
of individuals on
water quality

Create watershedbased planning
units.
Develop water
quality goals

Create incentives
for efficiency

Establish training
for practitioners
and develop best
practice
Community/
household

Connect
individual/
community
behaviour to
water quality
impacts.

Institute cost
recovery

Amend codes to
allow innovative
storm water
treatment options.

Encourage
investments

Promote access to
information

Build capacity
to make
improvements
in sanitation/
wastewater
treatment

Source: Adapted from UNEP (2010, p. 73).

WWDR4

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

97

water quality issues from the international to the
household level, there is an urgent lack of water quality data to support decision-making and management
processes. A global water quality assessment framework is needed to draw on existing national, regional
and key basin-level data sources. Such a framework
would go well beyond the current Global Environment
Monitoring System (GEMS)12 mandate to include a
host of other international, regional and national programmes. According to Alcamo (2011) this type of
framework could value freshwater goods and services,
provide an assessment of water quality and data push,
support the development and application of international water quality guidelines, develop international
governance and institutions to support water quality
protection, and include an assessment of ecologically
based technologies for restoring water quality.
Such a framework would also help to increase understanding of the state of water quality, its causes and
recent trends; identify hot spots; test and validate policy and management options; provide a foundation for
scenarios used to understand and plan for appropriate
future actions; and provide much-needed monitoring
bench markers (Alcamo, 2011). As described in Chapter
6, there is growing interest from multiple stakeholders
in improved data, information and accounting, all of
which needs to be translated into improved data availability. Technological advancements are also making it
easier to monitor and report on various dimensions of
water resources. The main constraints to fulﬁlling these
important needs are institutional structures and mandates, as well as political will, even though the beneﬁts
of improved water quality monitoring are likely to outweigh the costs, especially in areas with dense human
populations or intense agricultural activity.
3.3.1 Water quality risks and potential interventions
The multitude of water quality parameters, uncertainties
and impacts makes water resources management a complex and multidimensional issue, particularly with respect
to human activities. Improved management of vulnerability and risks is essential to cope with as-yet unknown and
unexpected factors in an era of accelerated changes and
new uncertainties. Table 3.3 provides a summary of water quality risks describing the severity of each, the main
drivers involved and the potential response options.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

Notes
1

This measure is not necessarily a robust indicator of a country’s
potential for water-related challenges. Canada and Brazil, for
example, both have a very high level of available water per
capita, yet are still subject to various water-related problems.

2

Teleconnections are climate anomalies that are related but
often widely spaced in distance and/or time. The relationship
between two climate patterns is not necessarily one of cause
and effect. Often unusual climate phenomena are caused
by some third factor, such as when El Niño events increase
the chance of above average precipitation in the south-west
USA from January through March and increase the chance
of drought in Indonesia from June through August. For more
information see http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/
HighWater/high_water1a.php

3

For more information see
http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tao/elnino/nino-home.html

4

For more information see: http://jisao.washington.edu/pdo/

5

For a good resource on NAO, its climate impacts and other
information, readers are referred to
http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/res/pi/NAO/

6

See the website of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation Program for more details:
http://www.atlanticmoc.org/

7

Almost all values mentioned in this paragraph are globally
aggregated or averaged, and thus cannot be used to draw
conclusions on conditions at a local or regional scale.

8

Siebert et al. (2010) estimate global consumptive irrigation
water use at 1,277 km3 per year, or 48% of global agricultural
water withdrawals. Their estimate for groundwater use is 545
km3 per year, which is fairly consistent with the estimated
global groundwater abstraction for irrigation, taking into
account irrigation water losses.

9

Examples of large aquifers in this category are the Highland
Plains and Central Valley aquifers in the USA, the north-west
India plains aquifers, the North China Plain aquifer and the
Australian Great Artesian Basin.

10

For more details see Chapter 36.

11

For more details see Chapter 36.

12

The United Nations GEMS/Water Programme provides
scientiﬁcally sound data and information on the state and
trends of global inland water quality required as a basis for the
sustainable management of the world’s freshwater to support
global environmental assessments and decision-making
processes (see http://www.gemswater.org/).

In addition to the response options provided in Table
3.3, some broad response options are provided in
Table 3.4.

98

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
AIRMAP (J. A. Bradbury and C. P. Wake). El Nino, The North
Atlantic Oscillation and New England Climate. Winter
Season Teleconnections and Climate Prediction. Durham,
NH, Climate Change Research Center, Earth Sciences,
University of New Hampshire. http://airmap.unh.edu/
background/nao.html
Alcamo, J. 2011. The Global Water Quality Challenge. A
presentation at the UNEP Water Strategy Meeting, Nairobi,
7 June 2011.
Alcamo, J., P. Döll, P., Henrichs, Th., Kaspar, F., Lehner, B.,
Rösch, Th. and Siebert, S. 2003. Global estimates of water
withdrawals and availability under current and future
‘business-as-usual’ conditions. Hydological Sciences Journal,
Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 339–48.
AQUASTAT. 2011. Online database. Rome, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/data/query/index.
html (Accessed August 2011).
Armstrong, R., Raup, B., Khalsa, S. J. S., Barry, R., Kargel, J.,
Helm, C. and Kieffer, H. 2005. GLIMS Glacier Database.
Boulder, Colo., National Snow and Ice Data Center.
http://nsidc.org/glims/ and http://nsidc.org/glims/
glaciermelt/index.html.
Black, R. E., Cousens, S., Johnson, H. L., Lawn, J. E., Rudan, I.,
Bassani, D. G., Jha. P., Campbell, H., Walker, C. F., Cibulskis,
R., Eisele, T., Liu, L. and Mathers, C. 2010. Presentation for
the Child Health Epidemiology Reference Group of WHO
and UNICEF. Global, regional, and national causes of child
mortality in 2008: a systematic analysis. The Lancet, Vol.
375, No. 9730, pp. 1969–87. http://www.who.int/child_
adolescent_health/data/cherg/en/index.html (Accessed 3
October 2011.)
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute.
Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D.
and Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role
of Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development.
A Rapid Response Assessment. The Hague, UN-Habitat/
UNEP/GRID-Arendal.
Döll, P. 2009. Vulnerability to the impact of climate change
on renewable groundwater resources: a global-scale
assessment. Environm. Res. Lett. Vol. 4, 035006.
Döll, P. and Fiedler, K. 2008. Global-scale modelling of
groundwater recharge. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., Vol. 12, pp.
863–885.
Dyurgerov, M. B. 2010. Reanalysis of Glacier Changes: From
the IGY to the IPY, 1960–2008. Data of Glaciological
Studies, Publication 108, Moscow, October (in English).

WWDR4

ECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean) (coordinated by L. M. Galindo
and C. de Miguel). 2009. Economics of Climate Change
in Latin America and the Caribbean: Summary. LC/G.2425.
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/3/38133/02_
Economics_of_Climate_Change_-_Summary_2009.pdf
EUROSTAT. 2011. Online database. Brussels, European
Commission (EC). http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/
page/portal/eurostat/home/
Famiglietti, J., Swenson, S. and Rodell, M. 2009. Water
Storage Changes in California’s Sacramento and San
Joaquin River Basins, Including Groundwater Depletion
in the Central Valley. PowerPoint presentation, American
Geophysical Union Press Conference, 14 December, 2009,
CSR, GFZ, DLR and JPL.
Foster, S. and Loucks, D. 2006. Non-renewable Groundwater
Resources. UNESCO-IHP Groundwater series No. 10. Paris,
UNESCO.
Giordano, M. and Vilholth, K. (ed.) 2007. The Agricultural
Groundwater Revolution. Wallingford, UK, Centre for
Agricultural Bioscience International (CABI).
Hewitt, K., 1982. Natural Dams and Outburst Floods of the
Karakoram Himalaya. Proceedings of the Symposium on
Hydrological Aspects of Alpine and High Mountain Areas.
International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS)
Publication No. 138. Wallingford, UK, IAHS Press.
Hewitt, K. 2005. The Karakoram Anomaly? Glacier expansion
and the ‘elevation effect’, Karakoram Himalaya. Mountain
Research and Development, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 332–40.
ICIMOD (International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development). 2009. Water Storage: A Strategy for
Climate Change Adaptation in the Himalayas. Publication
no. 56. Kathmandu, ICIMOD. http://books.icimod.org/
uploads/tmp/icimod-water_storage.pdf
IGRAC (International Groundwater Resources Assessment
Centre). 2010. Global Groundwater Information System
(GGIS). Delft, The Netherlands, IGRAC.
http://www.igrac.net
Ives, J., Shresta, R. and Mool, P. 2010. Formation of
Glacial Lakes in the Hindu Kush-Himalayas and GLOF
Risk Assessment. Kathmandu, International Centre for
Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD).
JISAO (Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and
Ocean). 2000. The Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation. University of
Washington, Seattle, Wash., JISAO.
http://jisao.washington.edu/pdo/
Konikow, L. and Kendy, L. 2005. Groundwater depletion:
A global problem. Hydrogeology Journal, doi:10.1007/
s10040-004-0411-8
Konikow, L. 2009. Groundwater Depletion: A National
Assessment and Global Perspective. The Californian
Colloquium on Water, 5 May 2009.
http://youtube.com/watch?v=Q5s0Uit8V6s.
Llamas, M. R. and Garrido, A. 2007. Lessons from intensive
groundwater use in Spain: economic and social beneﬁts
and conﬂicts. M. Gordano and K. G. Vilholth (ed.) The
Agricultural Groundwater Revolution. Wallingford, UK,
Centre for Agricultural Bioscience International (CABI), pp.
266–95.

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY, VULNERABILITY AND UNCERTAINTY

99

Llamas, M. R. and Martínez-Santos, P. 2005. Intensive
groundwater use: a silent revolution that cannot be
ignored. Water Science and Technology Series, Vol. 51, No.
8, pp. 167–74. London, IWA Publishing.
Margat, J. 2008. Les eaux souterraines dans le monde. Paris,
BGRM/Editions UNESCO.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005a. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Wetlands And Water Synthesis.
Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI).
––––. 2005b. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis.
Washington DC, Island Press.
Miller, J. M., Rees, H. G., Young, G., Warnaars, T., Shrestha, A.
B. and Collins, D. C. 2011 (in press). What is the Evidence for
Glacial Shrinkage Across the Himalayas? Systematic Review No.
CEE10-008 (Collaboration for Environmental Evidence [CEE]).
Wallingford, UK, Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH).
Mool, P. K., Bajracharya, S. R. and Joshi, S. P. 2001a. Inventory
of Glaciers, Glacial Lakes, and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods:
Monitoring and Early Warning Systems in the Hindu KushHimalayan Region – Nepal. Kathmandu, International
Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD).
Mool, P. K., Bajracharya,S. R., Joshi, S. P., Wangda, D.,
Kunzang, K. and Gurung, D. R. 2001b. Inventory of Glaciers,
Glacial Lakes and Glacial Lake Outburst Floods: Monitoring
and Early Warning Systems in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan
Region – Bhutan. Kathmandu, International Centre for
Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD) and United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). http://www.
icimod.org/publications/index.php/search/publication/130.
NOAA/PMEL/TAO (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration)/ Paciﬁc Marine Environmental Laboratory/
Tropical Atmosphere Ocean Project). n.d. El Niño Theme
Page. Seattle, Wash., NOAA/PMEL/TAO.
http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tao/elnino/nino-home.html
Oblitas de Ruiz, L. 2010. Servicios de agua potable
y saneamiento en el Perú: beneﬁcios potenciales y
determinantes de éxito. LC/W.355. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/
xml/4/41764/lcw355e.pdf

Siebert, S., Burke, J. Faures, J., Frenken, K., Hoogeveen,
J., Döll, P. and Portmann, T. 2010. Groundwater use for
irrigation – a global inventory. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., Vol.
14, pp. 1863–80.
Stellar, D. 2010. Can we have our water and drink it, too?
Exploring the water quality-quantity nexus. State of the
Planet blog. New York, Earth Institute, Columbia University.
http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2010/10/28/can-we-haveour-water-and-drink-it-too-exploring-the-water-qualityquantity-nexus/ (Accessed September 2011.)
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2010.
Clearing the Waters. A Focus in Water Quality Solutions.
Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/PDF/Clearing_the_
Waters.pdf
––––. 2011. Policy Brief on Water Quality. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unwater.org/downloads/waterquality_
policybrief.pdf
Van der Gun, Jac A. M. 2009. Climate change and alluvial
aquifers in arid regions: examples from Yemen. Climate
Change and Adaptation in the Water Sector. London,
Earthscan, pp. 143–58.
Viviroli, D., Weingartner, R. and Messerli. B. 2003. Assessing
the hydrological signiﬁcance of the world’s mountains.
Mountain Research and Development, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp.
32–40.
Wada, Y., Van Beek, L. P. H., Van Kempen, C. M., Reckman,
J. W. T. M., Vasak, S. and Bierkens, M. F. P. 2010. Global
depletion of groundwater resources. Geophysical Research
Letters, Vol. 37, L20402. doi:10.1029/2010GL044571
WHO (World Health Organization). 2008a. The Global
Burden of Disease: 2004 Update. Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2008b. Safer Water, Better Health: Costs, Beneﬁts and
Sustainability of Interventions to Protect and Promote
Health. Geneva, WHO.
WHYMAP, 2008. Groundwater Resources of the World, Map 1:
25 M. Paris, UNESCO/IAH/BGR, CGMW, IAEA.

Oude Essink, G. H. P., van Baaren, E. S. and de Louw, P. G. B.
2010. Effects of climate change on coastal groundwater
systems: a modelling study in the Netherlands. Water
Resources Research, Vol. 46. Washington DC, American
Geophysical Union (AGU).

World Bank. 2007. Making the Most of Scarcity:
Accountability for Better Water Management Results in
the Middle East and North Africa. Washington DC, The
World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMENA/
Resources/04-Chap04-Scarcity.pdf

Rodell, M., Velicogna, I. and Famiglietti, J. 2009. Satellitebased estimates of groundwater depletion in India. Nature,
Vol. 460, pp. 999–1002.

WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. Water
in a Changing World. World Water Development Report 3.
Paris/London, UNESCO Publishing/Earthscan.

Scherler, D., Bookhagen, B. and Strecker, M. R. 2011. Hillslopeglacier coupling: the interplay of topography and glacial
dynamics in High Asia. J. Geophys. Res., Vol. 116, F02019.

Young, G. J. 2009. The Elements of High Mountain Hydrology
with Special Emphasis on Central Asia. Proceedings
of Workshop, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 28–30 November
2006. Joint Publication of UNESCO-IHP and the German
National Committee for IHP/HWRP, 9–18. http://www.
indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/ﬁles/Glacier%20in%20Asia_
lowres.pdf

Shah, T. 2007. The groundwater economy of South Asia:
an assessment of size, signiﬁcance and socio-ecological
impacts. M. Giordano and K. G. Villholth (eds) The Agricultural
Groundwater Revolution: Opportunities and Threats
to Development. Colombo, Sri Lanka/Wallingford, UK,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI)/Centre for
Agricultural Bioscience International (CABI), pp. 7–36.

100

––––. 2009. Climate change and water: India’s opportunities
for mitigation and adaptation. Environm. Res. Lett. Vol. 4,
035005.

CHAPTER 3

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

CHAPTER 4
Beyond demand: Water’s social and
environmental beneﬁts

—
Authors Rajagopalan Balaji, Jamie Bartram, David Coates, Richard Connor, John Harding,
Molly Hellmuth, Liza Leclerc, Vasudha Pangare and Jennifer Gentry Shields

© Shutterstock/Brandon Alms
WWDR4
Red-eyed
tree frog

THE WATER RESOURCE: VARIABILITY,
WATER DEMAND:
VULNERABILITY
WHAT DRIVES
AND
CONSUMPTION?
UNCERTAINTY

101

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The many beneﬁts humans derive through water are by no means limited to the ﬁve major
use sectors described in Chapter 2. Water also provides a range of beneﬁts through its
impacts on human health. Healthy ecosystems provide an even broader array of beneﬁts
and services to individuals and societies. In addition to these beneﬁts, water can also create
serious risks when there is too much of it, as in the case of ﬂoods, or too little of it, as during
periods of drought, especially in areas already subject to the processes of desertiﬁcation
and land degradation. Unfortunately, in many parts of the world, access to water’s
beneﬁts are not equitably balanced, nor are vulnerabilities to water-related hazards, which
disproportionally affect the poorest populations, and women and children in particular. This
chapter examines water in relation to each of these important issues.
The ﬁrst section, on water and human health, focuses on water-related diseases in the
context of public health interventions, water management, drinking water supply and
sanitation, and hygiene, identifying trends and hotspots, key external drivers and related
uncertainties, and provides insights on actions for combating the major water-related disease
burdens at different levels. The following section describes how gender differences in access
to and control over water resources are key ingredients of many water-related challenges
worldwide. The third section explores how healthy ecosystems offer solutions to achieving
water-related objectives and help reduce uncertainty and risk as they deliver multiple
beneﬁts (or services) that are essential for sustainable development – many of these vital
services are derived directly from water, and all are underpinned by it. The fourth section, on
water-related hazards, reports on recent trends and examines the increased risks disasters
create with respect to property, lives and livelihoods. The ﬁfth section describes how the
processes of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought (DLDD) are increasing pressure
on water resources, adding a new layer of uncertainty and risk in regions already facing water
scarcity, and presents different measures that are being applied worldwide to reduce the
impacts of DLDD.
The chapter closes with a discussion of the current balance between limited and often
variable water supplies (Chapter 3), growing demands from the major user groups
(Chapter 2), and the need to maintain beneﬁts and reduce risks (this chapter). This section
addresses concepts such as water stress and water scarcity, making the case that balancing
the beneﬁts and maximizing the returns from water and its multiple uses is essential for
sustainable development and poverty eradication.
With the exception of Section 4.6, the material in this chapter has been condensed from
the challenge area reports (Part 3/Volume 2) ‘Water and health’ (Chapter 34), ‘Ecosystems’
(Chapter 21), ‘Water-related disasters’ (Chapter 27) and ‘Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and
drought and their impacts on water resources in the drylands’ (Chapter 28) as well as the
special report ‘Water and gender’ (Chapter 35).

4.1 Water and human health
Improving water resource management, increasing access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation, and
promoting hygiene (WaSH) have the potential to improve the quality of life of billions of individuals. The
global importance of water, sanitation and hygiene
for improving health is reﬂected in the United Nations
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), explicitly, Goal
7, Target c, which aims to reduce by half the proportion
of people without sustainable access to safe drinking
water and basic sanitation by 2015). Yet water management, drinking water supply and sanitation, and
hygiene are also critical for the achievement of MDGs
4, 5 and 6, and for sustaining the achievements thus far
to reduce child mortality, improve maternal health and
reduce the burden of malaria.
As public health interventions, water management,
drinking water supply and sanitation, and hygiene can
form the primary basis for prevention against a signiﬁcant majority of the global burden of water-related disease. This includes diarrhoeal diseases, arsenic
and ﬂuoride poisoning, intestinal nematode infections, malnutrition, trachoma, schistosomiasis, malaria,
onchocerciasis, dracunculiasis, Japanese encephalitis, lymphatic ﬁlariasis and dengue. However, efforts
to implement successful WaSH public health interventions to combat these diseases are complicated
by the fact that each is associated with a variety of
economic, societal and environmental driving forces.
Responsibilities within governments are fragmented
over a number of entities at different levels, and coordination among these and across sectors continues
to be a challenge. Moreover, large knowledge gaps
currently prevent adequate prediction of trends and
regional hotspots. Nevertheless, illustrative examples
reveal how these interventions can contribute to reducing or preventing disease.
4.1.1 Trends and hotspots
Identifying trends and hotspots around the interface
of water and health is extremely difficult, due to challenges in monitoring and reporting, a lack of information on environmental health determinants, and the
interplay of non-environmental determinants on health.
Nevertheless, available insights do provide a basis for
effective action. Despite a lack of localized disease
prevalence estimates, some diseases are clearly on the
rise (such as cholera, see Box 4.1), and select reasons
for these increases can be addressed. Three examples
are provided below that illustrate the complex nature

WWDR4

of disease risk, and highlight the ways in which strategies are already being investigated and implemented
to combat these risks.
4.1.2 Drivers
The global drivers predicted to have the greatest effect
on human health via the water environment include
demography, agriculture, infrastructure and climate
change.
Population growth and urbanization can signiﬁcantly
impact human health through increasing water demands and increasing water pollution. Rising demand
for water resources may contribute to water scarcity,
with potential implications for reliability of drinking
water access, water quality and hygiene. There will be
a tendency for increased incidence of diseases transmitted in the absence of sufficient safe water for washing and personal hygiene, or when there is contact
with contaminated water. These include diarrhoeal
diseases, intestinal nematode infections and trachoma.
Rapid population growth in urban or peri-urban areas
that lack services for reliable provision of safe water,
basic sanitation services or solid waste management
can lead to increases in small-scale water storage
(Bradley and Bos, 2010), water pollution and growing
proportions of the population exposed to pathogens
(WHO, 2007). Such situations amplify the risk for diseases such as diarrhoea, intestinal nematode infections,
trachoma, schistosomiasis, dengue and lymphatic
ﬁlariasis.
The accelerating process of global urbanization translates into increased exposure to poorly designed or
managed water systems and poor access to hygiene
and sanitation facilities in public settings (e.g. healthcare centres, schools, public offices). This results in an
increased risk of disease outbreaks. Action to reduce
this risk in public settings is a public health priority.
The morbidity and mortality associated with healthcare-associated infections represents a loss of healthsector and household resources worldwide. Schools,
particularly in rural and peri-urban areas, often lack
drinking water, sanitation and hand-washing facilities. The resulting transmission of disease manifests as
signiﬁcant absenteeism. Public settings provide an opportunity to educate visitors about minimizing disease
transmission with targeted messages and a ‘model’
safe environment, which can be emulated at home.
National policies, standards, guidelines on safe practices, training and promotion can aim to reduce the

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

103

BOX 4.1
Cholera

Number of cholera cases reported to the World Health Organization
between 2000 and 2010
Number of cases
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Year

Source: Adapted from WHO (2011a, ﬁg. 1).

Cholera is an acute diarrhoeal disease caused by
the ingestion of food or water contaminated with
the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. Every year, there
are an estimated 3–5 million cholera cases and
100,000–120,000 deaths due to cholera. (WHO
estimates that only 5–10% of cases are officially
reported.) Moreover, the number of cholera cases
continues to rise (see ﬁgure to the left): the number
of cases reported to the World Health Organization
(WHO) increased by 16% from 2008 to 2009, 43%
from 2009 to 2010, and the overall increase for the
decade 2000–2010 was 130% (WHO, 2010a). The
massive increase in 2010 is largely due to the outbreak that began in Haiti in October 2010, following
an earthquake in January 2010.
Cholera is endemic in regions with poor socioeconomic conditions, rudimentary sanitary systems, absence of wastewater treatment and where
public hygiene and safe drinking water is lacking
(Huq et al., 1996). Speciﬁcally, cholera is endemic

Hierarchical model for environmental cholera transmission
Ingestion of
infectious dose
of V. cholerae

Transmission to humans

Seasonal Effects
Sunlight
Temperature
Precipitation
Monsoons

V. cholerae
proliferate in
association with
commensal copepods

Algae promote survival
of V. cholerae and provide food
for zooplankton

Abiotic conditions favour growth of
V. cholerae and/or plankton and
expression of virulence

Zooplankton: copepods,
other crustaceans
Vibrio cholerae

Human
socio-economics,
demographics,
sanitation

Phytoplankton and
aquatic plants

Climate Variability
Temperature, pH
Fe3+, salinity
sunlight

Climate change
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
North Atlantic Oscillation

Source: Lipp et al. (2002, ﬁg. 1, p. 763, reproduced with permission from The American Society for Microbiology).

Up to 80% of cholera cases can be treated simply and successfully through administration of oral rehydration salts.
Prevention of cholera, however, relies on the availability and use of safe water, improved sanitation, including

104

CHAPTER 4

wastewater treatment, and hygiene. Prevention strategies
are also critical in averting or mitigating cholera outbreaks.
In the case of the outbreak in Haiti, the country’s public health response strategy, led by the Ministry of Public

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

number of infections associated with these settings
(WHO, 2011c; WHO/UNICEF, 2009).

in many parts of Africa and Asia, and has more recently
become endemic in the Americas. Risk factors in endemic
regions can include proximity to surface waters, high population densities and low educational levels (Ali et al., 2002),
while factors affecting V. cholerae include temperature, salinity, sunlight, pH, iron, and phytoplankton and zooplankton growth (Lipp et al., 2002). The ﬁgure below describes a
hierarchical model for environmental cholera transmission.
The risk of cholera outbreaks intensiﬁes during humanitarian crises, such as conﬂicts and ﬂoods, and displacement of
large populations. Typical at-risk areas include peri-urban
slums without basic water and sanitation infrastructure, and
refugee camps, where minimum requirements of safe water and sanitation are not met. In fact, the re-emergence of
cholera has coincided with the increase in populations living in unsanitary conditions (Barrett et al., 1998). For example, the onset and spread of the cholera epidemic of 1991 in
Peru are closely related to the deterioration in the drinking
water supply, sanitation and health services brought by the
economic crisis of the 1980s (Brandling-Bennett, Libel and
Migliónico, 1994).

Health and Population and supported by WHO and
other partners, has incorporated multiple health solutions to reduce the levels of morbidity and mortality due
to cholera: delivery of soap for hand washing; delivery
of chlorine and other products or devices for household water treatment; construction of latrines; improved
hygiene in public places (such as markets, schools,
healthcare facilities and prisons); and implementation
of health education campaigns through various media
including community mobilizers (WHO, 2010b). In fact,
the availability of safe water supplies may prove to be
more important for combating cholera than antibiotics or vaccines. A recent study showed that the provision of safe water might have averted 105,000 cholera
cases (95% Conﬁdence Interval 88,000–116,000) and
1,500 deaths (95% Conﬁdence Interval 1,100–2,300) in
Haiti between March and November of 2011 – more than
the estimated individual effects of antibiotics or vaccines
(Andrews and Basu, 2011). With increasing populations
living in peri-urban slums and refugee camps, as well as
increasing numbers of people exposed to the impacts of
humanitarian crises, the risk from cholera will likely increase worldwide, reinforcing the need for safe drinking
water, adequate sanitation and improved hygiene behaviour under these conditions.

WWDR4

Agriculture is essential to food security and adequate
nutrition; yet certain practices can adversely impact
human health by increasing water withdrawals for
irrigation, changing water regimes in agro-ecosystems, and increasing water pollution. Growth in agriculture and industry is currently reported to be the
main cause of surface water and groundwater quality deterioration (WWAP, 2006). Poor agricultural
practices can lead to pollution of surface water and
groundwater with pesticides, pollutants, nutrients
and sediments. Impacts also include increased breeding grounds for disease vectors and contamination of
water supplies with pathogens from animal manure.
Diseases that are likely to increase with agricultural
expansion and intensiﬁcation include diarrhoeal diseases, trachoma, schistosomiasis, lymphatic ﬁlariasis
and malaria (Jiang et al., 1997; Nygard et al., 2004;
Prüss and Mariotti, 2000; Rejmankova et al., 2006).
Contaminated waters can also facilitate transmission
of diarrhoeal diseases when wastewater (sewage)
and excreta are used to irrigate or fertilize crops. This
practice is employed increasingly in many peri-urban
areas of the world, especially those in arid and semiarid zones characterized by intense competition for
water between agriculture and urban uses, and, combined with the changing nutritional habits of urban
populations, poses a real health threat (Drechsel et
al., 2010). Expansion of agriculture may also lead to
deforestation, as regions seek to enlarge the areas
available for agricultural practices. Deforestation can
impact human health by removing the forest buffers that contribute to controlling non-point source
pollutants from entering watercourses, increasing
the concentration of pollutants downstream. Nonpoint source pollutants include nutrients, chemicals,
sediments and pathogens, such as those that cause
diarrhoeal disease. In addition to increasing water
pollution, deforestation also affects disease rates by
changing vector and host ecology and behaviour, potentially increasing the rates of malaria and onchocerciasis (Adjami et al., 2004; Walsh et al., 1993; Wilson
et al., 2002).
The construction of infrastructure, including dams and
irrigation projects, plays an important part in meeting
demands for water. Yet while they contribute to food
and energy and help manage the extremes of water, water resources infrastructure can also adversely

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

105

impact human health. Dams and irrigation projects
can, if not appropriately designed and managed, create breeding grounds for the black ﬂies that spread
onchocerciasis and the mosquitoes that spread malaria, lymphatic ﬁlariasis and Japanese encephalitis
(Erlanger et al., 2005; Keiser et al., 2005a; Keiser et al.,
2005b). These projects may also create habitats that
encourage growth of the host snail of schistosomes
(Molyneux et al., 2008).

BOX 4.2
Harmful algal blooms

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are algae harmful to humans,
plants or animals, as opposed to most algal species, which
are nontoxic and constitute natural parts of marine and
freshwater ecosystems. While HABs do not represent a
dominant global disease burden, there is a trend of increasing bloom detection, which likely indicates a real increase
in incidence as well as increased surveillance. The reasons
for this growth are varied, and include natural mechanisms
of species dispersal and anthropogenic causes, such as
pollution, climate change and transport via ballast water
(Granéli and Turner, 2006). Approximately 60,000 individual cases and clusters of human intoxication occur annually around the world (Van Dolah et al., 2001). Although
the mechanisms by which HABs affect human health are
not fully understood, government authorities are conducting monitoring for HABs and developing guidelines
for public health action in order to mitigate their impact.
For example, the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has added speciﬁc HAB-related algae to its Drinking
Water Contaminant Candidate List, which identiﬁes organisms and toxins believed to be priorities for investigation.
Direct control of HABs is much more difficult and controversial than mitigation, and strategies include mechanical,
biological, chemical, genetic and environmental control.
Conversely, prevention of HABs is currently hampered by
a lack of understanding of the causes of HAB formation
in many areas, as well as an inability to modify or control
known determining factors. For example, increased inputs of nutrients from agricultural, domestic and industrial
sources are a known cause for many HABs. Yet much of the
nutrient input comes from non-point sources (Anderson et
al., 2002), which are often difficult to control. The most effective strategies include controlling land use, maintaining
landscape integrity, and implementing structural and nonstructural practices for reducing nonpoint source pollution
(e.g. stormwater detention ponds and improved infrastructure design) (Piehler, 2008). As the world’s population continues to grow, its demands on coastal resources will most
certainly increase, reinforcing the need to understand HAB
phenomena and develop sound policies and practices.

106

CHAPTER 4

Global climate change is expected to exacerbate
current stresses on water resources from population
growth and land use, and also to increase the frequency and severity of extreme weather and hydrological events (e.g. inland ﬂooding). Higher water
temperatures, increased precipitation intensity and
longer periods of low ﬂows are projected to exacerbate many forms of water pollution and increase
pressure on diseases such as malaria, schistosomiasis
and diarrhoea (Bates et al., 2008; Koelle et al., 2005;
Zhou et al., 2008). For example, climate has been
found to inﬂuence cholera dynamics in Bangladesh
(Bouma and Pascual, 2001; Colwell, 1996; Koelle et
al., 2005; Pascual et al., 2000; Rodo et al., 2002;),
Peru (Colwell, 1996; Speelmon et al., 2000) and ﬁve
countries in Africa (Constantin de Magny et al., 2007).
More frequent heavy rainfalls will also likely overload
the capacity of sewer systems, resulting in untreated

BOX 4.3
Dengue

In 2004, approximately 9 million people contracted the
febrile illness dengue (WHO, 2008). Global incidence continues to rise with approximately 2.5 billion people now
at risk. There is no drug or vaccine for the virus; therefore,
safe drinking water and sanitation are key interventions
for this disease. Dengue is transmitted by two mosquito
species, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, which breed
in temporary water-storage containers in the domestic environment. Thus, safe storage of household water supplies
is a critical component of dengue prevention, especially
in areas that practice rainwater harvesting and use large
household water storage vessels (Mariappan et al., 2008).
Household water containers can be ﬁtted with screens or
proper lids to exclude mosquitoes, but their scrupulous
maintenance and consistent use is hard to achieve. Covers
treated with insecticide can further reduce densities of
dengue vectors and potentially impact dengue transmission (Kroeger et al., 2006; Seng et al., 2008). Water containers can also be eliminated entirely with piped water
supplies. However, the extension of piped water supplies
to villages has expanded the range of dengue from urban
to rural environments, where the unreliability of piped
water supplies has forced people to store water in their
homes for longer periods of time when previously they
relied on well water (e.g. Nguyen et al., 2011). In effect, an
integrated approach, combining household water treatment and safe storage, is necessary for the reduction of
diarrhoeal as well as other water-associated diseases (e.g.
dengue and malaria) in the households and communities
of developing and developed countries.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

sewage, with its associated pathogens, ﬂowing into
water bodies, with a tendency towards increases in
diarrhoeal diseases, including outbreaks.
The Vision 2030 study (WHO/DFID, 2009) advocates
the need to integrate resilience of water and sanitation infrastructure into the planning, policy-making
and management of drinking water and sanitation, to
adapt and cope effectively with the potential adverse
impacts of climate variability. A major paradigm shift
from the ‘business-as-usual’ approaches in drinking
water and sanitation systems and services is essential in order to adapt to climate change and transform
threats into opportunities. Optimizing resilience of water and sanitation infrastructure will maximize health
beneﬁts of future investments, and ensure that drinking water and sanitation infrastructure remain functional in the face of climate change-induced extreme
weather events.
There is an urgent need to improve our understanding
of the dynamics relating to the ways in which each
of these drivers affect human health: the complex set
of factors that generate them, the characteristics of
populations that increase their vulnerability, and the
identiﬁcation of populations most at risk for each of
these threats (Myers and Patz, 2009). Such improved
understanding would also provide a basis for measures aimed at reducing health risks from water-related diseases, and would thereby aid resource managers and policy-makers in determining the health
impacts associated with their decisions, and allow
aid organizations to target their resources more
effectively.
4.1.3 Options and consequences
Key messages
1. The global drivers predicted to have the greatest
effect on disease rates via the water environment
are population growth and urbanization, agriculture,
infrastructure and global climate change. Trends in
these drivers directly and indirectly impact the global burden of disease, largely adversely, and increase
the overall uncertainty in future human health.
2. There are numerous non-water-related environmental determinants of health, as well as non-environmental determinants of health that confound
the attribution of health trends and hotspots to
water.
3. By outlining the environment-health nexus for each
of the major water-related disease groups, ﬁve key

WWDR4

solutions were identiﬁed: access to safe drinking
water, access to basic sanitation, improved hygiene,
environmental management, and the use of health
impact assessments. Implementation of these actions serves to reduce the burden of multiple diseases and improve the quality of life of billions of
individuals.
4. In-depth studies targeting the future impacts of
powerful underlying drivers, such as those identiﬁed in this report, are required to more accurately
identify the risks and opportunities related to water and health. These studies would evaluate the
complex interactions around population, development and urbanization, similar to The 2030 Vision
Study, which determined the major risks, uncertainties and opportunities related to the resilience
of water supply and sanitation in the face of climate change.
5. Protection of human health requires collaboration among multiple sectors, including actors and
stakeholders in non-water and non-health sectors.
Determining how past and present (and indeed projected future) driving forces contribute to the burden of disease provides a basis for the development
of the aforementioned primary prevention strategies.
Outlining this pathway for each of the major waterassociated diseases leads to the formulation of ﬁve key
actions for combating the burdens they cause: access
to safe drinking water, access to basic sanitation, improved hygiene, environmental management and the
use of health impact assessments. Implementation of
these actions would contribute to reducing the burdens of diverse diseases and improve the quality of life
for billions of individuals.
This fact was reaffirmed in May 2011, when the 64th
World Health Assembly unanimously adopted resolutions on ‘drinking-water, sanitation and health’ (WHA,
2011b) and ‘cholera: mechanism for prevention and
control’ (WHA, 2011a). These resolutions established
the policy framework for WHO, its sister UN agencies
– in particular UNICEF, and the ministries of health of
its 193 Member States –to take determined action to
promote access to safe and clean drinking water, and
basic sanitation and hygiene practices. Member States
were urged to re-affirm a strong role for drinking water,
sanitation and hygiene considerations in their national
public health strategies.

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

107

Actions for combating the major water-related disease
burdens can be pursued at a variety of different levels:
đ The formulation of national policies and the creation of
institutional frameworks: efforts in these areas can result
in an enabling environment for universal and efficient
provision of safe drinking water and sanitation services.
đ Networking: bringing together professionals to share
information and experiences can play a key role in
combating the water-related disease burden. Examples
of such networks include WHO-hosted international
networks (e.g. the Drinking-water Regulators Network
and the Small Community Water Supplies Management
Network), the WHO/UNICEF Network on Household
Water Treatment and Safe Storage, and the WHO/IWA
Network on Operation and Maintenance.
đ Normative capacities: efforts to strengthen normative capacities can bolster disease prevention, for example, the fourth edition of the WHO Drinking Water
Quality Guidelines (WHO, 2011b) and subsequent
water safety planning approach for implementation
(WHO/IWA, 2009).
đ Monitoring and surveillance: global monitoring by
the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme on
Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP) and by the UNWater/WHO Global Analysis and Assessment of
Sanitation and Drinking-water (GLAAS) guides policies, resource allocation and actions to achieve the
MDG target, and provides a platform for the development of indicators and targets for post-2015 monitoring, linked to criteria for the human right to water
and sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, 2011).
Health impact assessments (HIAs) can be used to objectively evaluate the potential health effects of a water policy or project before it is implemented or constructed, and provide recommendations to increase
positive health outcomes and minimize adverse health
outcomes as part of a public health management plan.
The HIA framework is used to comprehensively address
public health issues in the decision-making process for
development planning that fall outside of traditional
public health arenas: transportation, agriculture, land
use, energy and infrastructure. Taking public health
consequences into consideration ‘upstream’ as part
of the early planning process creates a window of opportunity for design and management interventions
that cannot be deployed once the project is operational. It also fosters an intersectoral approach to reduced
pathogen transmission and prevents the subsequent
transfer of ‘hidden costs’ to the health sector.

108

CHAPTER 4

Determining how past, present and predicted future
driving forces contribute to the water-related disease
burden has also led to the identiﬁcation of major risks,
uncertainties and opportunities. These include the risk
of increasing failures of aging water infrastructure and,
conversely, the opportunity to increase the overall impact of water resources and water supply and sanitation infrastructure through improved management. The
impact of such actions improves use of limited ﬁnancial
resources, thereby enhancing both access to water and
sanitation, and associated service quality, and leads indirectly to improvements in wider health indicators such
as malnutrition.
Additional in-depth studies are required to more accurately identify the risks and opportunities related to
water and health. The 2030 Vision Study, commissioned
by the United Kingdom Department for International
Development (DFID) and WHO, performed such an
analysis of the major risks, uncertainties and opportunities related to the resilience of water supply and sanitation in the face of climate change (WHO/DFID, 2009).
The study brought together evidence from projections
on climate change, trends in technology application,
and developing knowledge about drinking water and
sanitation adaptability and resilience, to identify key
policy, planning and operational changes required to
adapt to climate change, particularly in low and middleincome countries where access to water supply and
sanitation services are more limited. Five key conclusions resulted from this study:
1. Climate change is widely perceived as a threat
rather than an opportunity. There may be signiﬁcant
overall beneﬁts to health and development in
adapting to climate change.
2. Major changes in policy and planning are needed
if ongoing and future investments are not to be
wasted.
3. Potential adaptive capacity is high but rarely
achieved. Resilience needs to be integrated into
drinking water and sanitation management to cope
with present climate variability. It will be critical in
controlling adverse impacts of future variability.
4. Although some of the climate trends at regional
levels are uncertain, there is sufficient knowledge
to inform urgent and prudent changes in policy
and planning in most regions.
5. There are important gaps in our knowledge that
already or soon will impede effective action.
Targeted research is urgently needed to ﬁll gaps in

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

technology and basic information, to develop simple tools, and to provide regional information on
climate change. (WHO/DFID, 2009, p. 3)
The relationship between the drivers of water-related
diseases and human health is complex. Thus, protection of human health requires collaboration among
multiple sectors. Policies and projects in non-water or
non-health sectors should reﬂect the links between
water management and health in decision-making
processes in order to avoid unintended adverse public health consequences, as well as to increase overall
beneﬁts. To do so requires the engagement of health
professionals and institutions.
In the case of drinking water quality management,
there is increasing recognition that addressing the
complex root causes of water contamination is a more
effective and sustainable approach then reacting to
problems after they occur. The fourth edition of the
Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality (WHO, 2011b)
emphasizes the need for collaboration between all
stakeholders, including land users or householders
who may discharge industrial, agricultural or domestic waste into a catchment area; policy-makers from
various ministries overseeing the implementation and
enforcement of environmental regulations; practitioners delivering water; and consumers at the tap.
This preventive and collaborative water-safety planning approach has demonstrated beneﬁts, including
cost-savings and sustainable improvements in water
quality. Experience also shows, most recently in South
and East Asia, that while progress is being made, implementing such a ‘no short-cut’ approach remains a
challenge. Each risk management solution needs to
be tailor-made to the water supply in question, and
demands that key stakeholders become engaged and
committed to a common goal.

4.2 Water and gender
Among the many water-related challenges worldwide,
the crisis of scarcity, deteriorating water quality, the
linkages between water and food security, and the
need for improved governance are the most signiﬁcant in the context of gender differences in access to
and control over water resources. These challenges are
expected to become more intense in the future, due to
the growing uncertainty and risk associated with the
availability and quality of freshwater resources, arising
from increasing demand for various uses, climate variability and natural disasters.

WWDR4

“In the case of
drinking water quality
management, there is
increasing recognition
that addressing the
complex root causes
of water contamination
is a more effective and
sustainable approach
then reacting to
problems after they
occur.”
Water is used for a wide range of socio-economic activities including public health, agriculture, energy and industry. Unsustainable and short-term decisions taken in
the context of these activities have an impact on water
resources, with different social and economic consequences for men and women in the community. Over
the longer term, scarcity created at the local level as a
result of this crisis is likely to increase inequity within local communities with regard to access and control over
local water resources, affecting poor women the most.
Decisions related to water sharing, water allocation
and water distribution between different uses and
across regions are most often made at higher levels
where economic and political considerations generally play a more important role than social concerns.
These decisions impact the water resources locally
available to communities, who are likely to lose access to the very resources that sustain their livelihoods
and fulﬁl their needs. Rural women often rely upon
common water resources such as small water bodies,
ponds and streams to meet their water needs, but in
many regions these sources have been eroded or have
disappeared due to changes in land use, or have been
appropriated by the state or industry for development
needs or to supply water to urban areas.

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

109

Water has different values for different uses and purposes, and the same source of water can be used for
social as well as economic purposes. Social and environmental valuation is more prevalent at the local level,
where water sources may be designated for different
uses such as drinking, common uses such as bathing and washing depending on the quality of water,
or regarded as sacred for religious purposes. Water
that has been valued as an economic good, such as irrigation water supplied through an irrigation scheme,
also has a social value for local communities, especially for women, who may use the same irrigation
water source for both domestic and farming purposes.
Opportunities for improving access to water for women and improving their water security can be found by
analysing water values through a gender lens.

Although it is true that many socially constructed barriers need to be overcome in order to facilitate the involvement of both men and women in decision-making
and management of water resources, it is also true that
traditional gender roles have often been challenged successfully by developing women’s capacities to manage
water interventions, and providing them with opportunities to play leadership roles and improve their economic
conditions. However, these successes are often limited
to the local context, as the larger issues, such as providing water rights to women, are governed by external
factors, which are not only outside the purview of these
interventions, but involve traditional, cultural and political realities that are difficult to change in the short term,
and require long-term commitment from policy-makers,
governments, politicians and advocacy groups.

Water policies based on broad, generalized perspectives are more likely to omit local knowledge, and
social and gender dimensions and their implications.
Recognizing the various purposes for which these local
water resources are used by different groups of men
and women in the community would help to successfully integrate gender considerations, not only in water
resource management, but also in sectors such as urban water supply, agriculture, industry and energy that
depend upon water resources, and which often conﬂict
over water allocations and their demand for freshwater resources. By working together in partnership with
these sectors, decision-makers in government bodies,
private sector and civil society can understand and address the potential synergies and trade-offs that occur when providing access to different groups of men
and women in local communities. This approach would
help to anticipate risks and uncertainties and plan for
safeguards to protect the most vulnerable groups in
the community.

Over many decades, the United Nations has made
signiﬁcant progress in advancing gender equality, including through landmark agreements such as
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), and the
setting up of UN Women to accelerate progress in
achieving gender equality and women’s empowerment. Water and Gender is listed as one of UNWater’s Thematic Priority Areas in its 2010–2011 Work
Programme, while the promotion of gender equality is
one of UNESCO’s two global priorities for 2008–2013.

There is enough evidence to show that integrating a
gender-sensitive approach to development can have
a positive impact on the effectiveness and sustainability of water interventions and on the conservation
of water resources. Involving both men and women in
the design and implementation of interventions leads
to effective new solutions to water problems; helps
governments to avoid poor investments and expensive
mistakes; makes projects more sustainable; ensures
that infrastructure development yields the maximum
social and economic returns; and furthers development
goals, such as reducing hunger, child mortality and improving gender equality (Oxfam, 2005, 2007).

110

CHAPTER 4

4.3 Ecosystem health
Trends in ecosystems and the beneﬁts they deliver indicate the presence of a serious ecological imbalance.
This instability and degradation in ecosystems increases
uncertainty and ampliﬁes risk. Tipping points in ecosystems, beyond which damage accelerates and becomes
irreversible, are being rapidly approached, and involve
high risk and potentially major socio-economic impacts.
There is some good news: the current situation has resulted in increasing attention to ecosystems, some successful responses, and a narrowing divide between water,
ecosystems, environment, biodiversity and human development interests. Ecosystems offer solutions to achieving water-related objectives and reducing uncertainty
and risk; the task is to mainstream and upscale them.
Ecosystems deliver multiple beneﬁts (or services) that
are essential for sustainable development. Many of these
key services are derived directly from water, and all are
underpinned by it. Trends in ecosystem health, therefore,

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

indicate trends in the delivery of these overall beneﬁts
and provide a key indicator of whether human society is
in or out of balance with water. And the trends in ecosystems, including the life they support, are indicating clearly
and unambiguously that things are out of balance.
WWDR2 (WWAP, 2006) and WWDR3 (WWAP, 2009)
reviewed the principal pressures and impacts on freshwater ecosystems. The key direct water-related drivers
involved are ecosystem conversion (e.g. drainage and
conversion of wetlands); fragmentation (e.g. dams and
reservoirs); and degradation (principally, water availability/ﬂow and water quality/pollution). The indirect
drivers responsible for these arise from the social (including demographic) and economic changes associated with development, and the fact that most human needs and activities directly or indirectly impact
limited water resources. At global and regional scales,
the nature of these drivers remains largely unchanged.
Although there are some shifts in their relative weight,
most drivers show increasing negative trends overall.

Considering the trends in these drivers, the recent
overall picture of ecosystem health is unsurprisingly
one of escalating degradation. The increasing negative
trend presented in WWDR2 and WWDR3, and comprehensively outlined by the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment (MA, 2005a), is maintained based on
several recent detailed assessments; these include
Global Environment Outlook 4 (UNEP, 2007), Global
Biodiversity Outlook 3 (CBD, 2010a), and regional assessments such as those undertaken for Africa (UNEP,
2008). A review of progress towards the 2010 biodiversity target for inland waters concluded that the
2010 target and subtargets for inland waters biodiversity have not been achieved; the drivers of biodiversity
loss remain unchanged and are all escalating; excessive nutrient loading has emerged as an important direct driver of ecosystem change in inland (and coastal)
waters (Figure 4.1), and groundwater pollution remains
a major concern; the surface water and groundwater portions of the water cycle have been subjected
to massive changes by direct human use on local,

FIGURE 4.1
Nutrient loading in inland and coastal waters
Number of dead zones
500

400

300

200
Dead zone location

100

0

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Note: The number of observed ‘dead zones’, coastal sea areas where water oxygen levels have dropped too low to support most marine life, has
roughly doubled each decade since the 1960s. Many are concentrated near the estuaries of major rivers, and result from the buildup of nutrients,
largely carried from inland agricultural areas where fertilizers are washed into watercourses. The nutrients promote the growth of algae that die
and decompose on the seabed, depleting the water of oxygen and threatening ﬁsheries, livelihoods and tourism.
Source: CBD (2010a, ﬁg. 15, p. 60).

WWDR4

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

111

regional and continental scales; and ecological sustainability of water available for abstraction is giving alarm
signs (Box 4.4). Although progress has been made in
policy and practical responses (e.g. designation of protected areas), the rate of increase is slowing, and most
other indicators show continuing or often accelerating declines (Butchart et al., 2010). While protected
wetland areas are increasing, most wetland sites are
degrading (CBD, 2010b).
Some positive trends in developed regions – for example, improvements in managing nutrient loads (Figure
4.2), wetlands restoration, or a slowing or reversal of
biodiversity loss – are offset by accelerated degradation in developing countries. An underlying problem
is that rich nations are tending to maintain or increase
their consumption of natural resources (WWF, 2010),
but are exporting their footprints to producer, and typically, poorer, nations. For example, 62% of the United
Kingdom’s water footprint is virtual water embedded
in agricultural commodities and products imported
from other countries – 38% originates from domestic water resources – (Chapagain and Orr, 2008). In
addition, much of the progress in pollution control in
rich countries is attributable to the shift of industrial
production elsewhere, for example, to China. This is
particularly the case for water-related impacts, including through trade in virtual water. Notably, this also
transfers uncertainty and risk to developing nations
less prepared to deal with these impacts. Until richer
consumers recognize and take responsibility for their
global footprint, society shall continue to address the
symptoms of the problem as a distraction from tackling its root cause.
There is ample evidence that humans are over-consuming natural resources overall at an unsustainable
rate. Various estimates indicate that, based on business as usual, approximately 3.5 planet Earths would
be needed to sustain a global population achieving
the current lifestyle of the average European or North
American. Importantly, the sustainability of water resources is a key subset of this dilemma. Recent studies suggest that the planetary limits of sustainable
water may have already been reached or exceeded
(Box 4.4). ‘Hotspots’ for ecosystem service degradation have not been systematically mapped, as such,
but they correlate closely with areas of water stress
(see Section 4.6) and high pollution loads (Figure
4.1). Rapid development, high population density and
growth, industrialization, and to some extent limited

112

CHAPTER 4

water availability characterize the locations of the
most impacted ecosystems.
‘There is often an assumption that useable water in
nature can be readily accessed and moved around at
will. For example, many governments have ambitious
plans to move massive volumes of water from waterrich to water-poor river basins’ (Molden, 2009, p. 116).
The consequences of these inter-basin water transfers on ecosystem health remain unclear, but they are
likely to be immense. Water management also often
focuses on surface water and groundwater to the
detriment of ecosystems and their role in the water
cycle. There needs to be broader recognition of the

FIGURE 4.2
Nitrogen balance in Europe

Kg per ha
400

Netherlands

300

Belgium

200

Denmark

100
OECD
Czech Republic
Sweden
Spain
0
1990

1995

2000

2005

Note: The average nitrogen balance per ha of agricultural land (the
amount of nitrogen added to land as fertilizers, compared with
the amount used up by crops and pasture) for selected European
countries. The reduction over time in some countries implies
improved efficiency in the use of fertilizers, and therefore a reduced
risk of damage to biodiversity through nutrient runoff.
Source: CBD (2010a, ﬁg. 16, p. 61).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

importance of conserving and restoring soil moisture,
underpinned by soil ecosystem health, and the relationship between ground vegetation cover and local
and regional humidity. Policy-makers and managers
need to understand that ecosystems do not consume
water – they supply and recycle it – and water taken
from ecosystems unsustainably reduces their ability
to deliver the beneﬁts that society needs.
TEEB (2009) states that ecosystem loss and degradation does not always result in an immediately detectable or proportional response in terms of lost ecosystem services. Instead, a ‘tipping point’ may be reached,
at which rapid and catastrophic collapse occurs following a period of apparent stability (e.g. Lenton et al.,
2008). This potentially reverses sustainability and progress towards human welfare. The poor usually face

BOX 4.4
Have the global limits of water sustainability
already been reached?

Based on an assessment of what the planet’s ecosystem
can sustainably supply, Rockström et al. (2009a) suggest that safe and sustainable consumption of ‘blue water’
sources (evaporation and transpiration from rivers, lakes,
groundwater reservoirs and irrigation) should not exceed
4,000 km3 per year. At present, blue water consumption
is estimated at 2,600 km3 per year. But Molden (2009)
notes that, based on a wider review of studies on the
global supply and demand of water, the 4,000 km3 limit
may be too high. These studies suggest that society is
close to approaching the global limit of sustainable availability of water.
But distribution and consumption of water are uneven.
The limits to sustainable water abstraction are already
surpassed in many regions. For example, there is little
or no additional stream ﬂow or groundwater for further
development in the Murray–Darling River in Australia,
the Yellow River in China, the Indus in Pakistan and India,
the Amu and Syr Darya in Central Asia, the Nile River,
the Colorado River in the United States of America and
Mexico, and in most of the Middle East. Many of these are
important food-producing areas. The stress is reﬂected
in ecosystem health, where all of these basins suffer from
excessive pollution, river desiccation, competition for supplies and other ecosystem degradation (Molden, 2009).
Globally, a strikingly small fraction of the world’s rivers
remain unaffected by humans, with the majority of river
basins now exhibiting similar signs of stress (Vörösmarty
et al., 2010).

WWDR4

BOX 4.5
Ecosystem tipping points: Theory or reality?

Deforestation can be seen as a mechanism that leads to decreasing regional rainfall through the loss of cloud-forming
evapotranspiration from the forest. Local climate then becomes drier, thereby accelerating ecosystem change. In the
Amazon, for example, an apparently moderate deforestation
of 20% could mean that a tipping point is reached, beyond
which forest ecosystems would collapse across the entire basin (World Bank, 2010a). This would have devastating impacts
on water security and other ecosystem services that would
reach far beyond the Amazon basin itself, including impacts on
regional agriculture and global carbon storage.1 Unfortunately,
Amazon deforestation is already at approximately 18%.
Intact tropical forests of South America shifted from buffering the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide to accelerating it during recent drought events; this was not compensated by recovery in non-drought years. If drought
events continue, whether through climate change, deforestation or direct water use, the era of intact Amazon forests buffering the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide
may have passed (Lewis et al., 2011).
Nkem et al. (2009) provide evidence that these tipping
points are being reached or surpassed in reality, as evidenced through some national reports to the UNFCCC,
particularly for Central America. These suggest that the
impacts of deforestation are already affecting water supply, to the extent of undermining, for example, sustainable
hydropower. The countries surveyed also very clearly see
the climate change-water-forest nexus as one of managing
uncertainty and risk.
Tipping points triggered by multiple stressors go beyond
just water and carbon. Rockstrom et al. (2009b) identify nine planetary boundaries beyond which ecosystems
should not pass: climate change (greenhouse gas levels);
ocean acidiﬁcation; stratospheric ozone; nitrogen and phosphorus loads (cycling); global freshwater use; land-system
change; the rate of loss of biodiversity, for which quantiﬁed
limits are identiﬁed; and chemical pollution and atmospheric aerosol loading (which await metrics). They estimate
that humanity has already transgressed three planetary
boundaries: climate change, rate of biodiversity loss and
the global nitrogen cycle (and note earlier that freshwater
use is near or may have also exceeded the limits). ‘The social impacts of transgressing boundaries will be a function
of the social–ecological resilience of the affected societies.
… The proposed concept of “planetary boundaries” lays the
groundwork for shifting our approach to governance and
management, away from the essentially sectoral analyses
of limits to growth aimed at minimizing negative externalities, toward the estimation [and management] of the safe
space for human development’ (Rockström et al., 2009b).

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

113

the earliest and most severe impacts of such changes,
but ultimately all societies and communities would suffer as a result (CBD, 2010a) (Box 4.5).

BOX 4.6
Trends in wetlands in China: Reversing losses to
restore beneﬁts

One useful development is growing attention to the
need to integrate available knowledge and datasets
to better explain and illuminate the interdependency
of water, ecosystems and humans. The aforementioned reviews of trends in environment, ecosystems
and biodiversity continue a shift in this direction, but
largely through interpretation of trends in numerous subject areas independently. The most signiﬁcant
advances are now likely to emerge from approaches
that better integrate different datasets and knowledge sources. For example, Vörösmarty et al. (2010)
used data depicting 23 stressors (drivers), grouped
into four major themes representing environmental
impacts (catchment disturbance, pollution, water resource development and biotic factors), to assess a
‘cumulative threat framework’. The results show that
nearly 80% of the world’s population is exposed to
high levels of threat to water security, based on ﬁgures for the year 2000, implying a much greater level
of risk than previous assessments.

There is evidence of wholesale shifts in the right direction.
For example, China’s remarkable economic growth has unsurprisingly resulted in serious environmental problems, in
particular rapid wetland degradation and loss, serious water shortages in the north, and wastewater pollution across
the country. One report states that over 30% of natural
wetland area may have been lost in only 10 years from
1990 to 2000 (Cyranoski, 2009). This is one of the highest
rates of natural habitat loss recorded, outstripping trends
in global forest loss, but is notably typical of the impacts
of development. Where data exist they show even more
extensive wetlands loss in OECD countries; for example,
over 90% for New Zealand (Ausseil et al., 2008). However,
wetland policies have changed in China, including shifts
towards major rehabilitation efforts. A recent review suggests that in the ﬁve years post 2000, the wetland area in
China has stabilized, possibly even increasing slightly (Xu et
al., 2009). The driving force for this shift in policy has been
recognition of the value of water-related wetland ecosystem services and the need to restore these as cost-effective
solutions to water management problems.

FIGURE 4.3
Since 1997, the proportion of river basins in Malaysia classiﬁed as clean has been increasing
100
90
80
70

Percentage

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1990

1992
Polluted

1994

1996

1998

Slightly polluted

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

Clean

Source: CBD (2010a, ﬁg. 11, p. 43).

114

CHAPTER 4

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Assessments of global or regional trends disguise good
progress made at local and national scales. While water
quality overall continues to deteriorate, there are signs
of several pollutants coming under control through effective management measures (Figure 4.3), although
non-point source pollution, particularly from agriculture,
remains challenging in almost all areas. One positive
trend is the emergence of more widespread attention to,
and practical examples of, ecosystem-based approaches
to achieving water management objectives. These approaches have yet to be upscaled and mainstreamed to
attain the necessary impact on achieving global beneﬁts, but there are promising signs (Box 4.6).

4.4 Water-related hazard risk
Water-related hazards form a subset of natural hazards; the most signiﬁcant ones include ﬂoods, mudslides, storms and related ocean storm surge, heat
waves, cold spells, droughts and waterborne diseases.
Most disasters are caused by a combination of hazards,
some related to water and other of geological and
biological origin. Such events include those triggered
by earthquakes, such as tsunamis, landslides that dam
rivers, breakage of levees and dams, as well as glacier lake outbursts, coastal ﬂooding associated with

abnormal or rising sea levels, and epidemics and pest
outbreaks associated with too little or too much water.
Water-related hazards account for 90% of all natural
hazards, and their frequency and intensity is generally
rising. ‘Some 373 natural disasters killed over 296,800
people in 2010, affecting nearly 208 million others and
costing nearly US$110 billion’ (UN, 2011).
One water-related hazard that seldom makes it into the
impacts statistics is drought. According to the United
Nations Global Assessment Report, since 1900 more
than 11 million people have died as a consequence of
drought and more than 2 billion have been affected by
drought, more than any other physical hazard (UNISDR,
2011). However, these ﬁgures are probably lower than
the real total as few countries systematically report and
record drought losses and impacts. According to same
report, countries that do, such as the United States of
America (USA), only report insured losses.
Disasters caused by water-related hazards have taken
a toll not just on individual lives and livelihoods, but
also on national development. Climate variability,
which shows a strong correlation to the occurrence of

FIGURE 4.4
Climate variability has an impact on GDP

2.5

Coefficient of Variation of
Monthly Rainfall (CVM)

GDP per capita (Low CVI)
2

GDP per capita (High CVI)

1.5

1

0.5

0
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Mean Annual Precipitation (cm)

Note: This graph indicates that countries with a higher climate variability index (CVI) (dark brown dots) generally have lower GDP per capita
(reﬂected in the size of the dots). The large dark brown dots here indicate the oil-producing states Kuwait, Oman and the United Arab Emirates
Source: Brown and Lall (2006, p. 310).

WWDR4

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

115

water-related hazards, has always existed and impacted development; in fact, countries with higher climate
variability have generally been shown to have lower
GDP per capita (Brown and Lall, 2006) (Figure 4.4).
Between 1990 and 2000, natural disasters in several
developing countries had caused damage representing
between 2% and 15% of their annual GDP (World Bank,
2004; WWAP, 2009).
Due to climate change, it is expected that the frequency of certain natural hazards will increase (IPCC,
2007). While there is currently no evidence that climate change is directly responsible for increased
losses associated with water-related hazards (Bouwer,
2011), given the increasing exposure and extremes,
many countries are looking to reduce their risk to disasters as part of climate change adaptation (UNISDR,
2011).
A World Bank study released in 2010 examined the
costs and beneﬁts of speciﬁc prevention measures.
The report examines government expenditures on prevention and ﬁnds that it to be generally lower than relief spending, which rises after a disaster and remains
high for several subsequent years. But effective prevention depends not just on the amount, but on what
funds are spent on. For example, Bangladesh reduced
deaths from cyclones by spending modest sums on

shelters, developing accurate weather forecasts, issuing warnings that people heeded, and arranging for
their evacuation. All this cost less than building largescale embankments that would have been less effective (World Bank, 2010b).
The increasing economic cost and toll of disasters
should be a signiﬁcant incentive for governments and
humanitarian organizations to focus more attention
on preparedness, prevention and addressing the root
causes of vulnerability. In fact, increased donor interest
in disaster prevention and risk reduction has not been
matched by substantive amounts of new funding or
new projects (Martin et al., 2006).
4.4.1 Trends in water-related hazard impacts and risk
Water-related disasters pose both direct impacts
(e.g. damage to buildings, crops and infrastructure,
and loss of life and property) and indirect impacts
(e.g. losses in productivity and livelihoods, increased
investment risk, indebtedness and human health impacts). The impacts of hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones depend on wind speed (category 1–5), where
a storm strikes, how much ﬂooding it causes, and the
population density and quality of buildings and infrastructure in the affected area. Such storms cause
impacts through high winds, tornadoes, storm surges
(around 80–160 km wide across the coastline), storm

FIGURE 4.5
People exposed to ﬂoods
Absolute: people exposed per year
20 000 000

16 000 000

12 000 000

Relative: people exposed per year, percentage
8 000 000

4 000 000

2

4

6

Bangladesh

8

10

12
Cambodia

India

Bangladesh
China

Viet Nam

Viet Nam

Bhutan

Cambodia
Indonesia
Thailand
Philippines
Pakistan
Myanmar
Nepal
Brazil
Russian Federation
Nigeria

India
Thailand
Nepal
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Myanmar
Philippines
Benin
Haiti
Guyana
Belize

Sudan

Dominican Republic

Egypt

Mozambique

Republic of Korea
Colombia
United States of Ameria
Mexico

Sri Lanka
New Zealand
Sudan
Indonesia

Source: UNISDR (2009, ﬁg. 2.14, p. 36).

116

CHAPTER 4

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

tides (tidally enhanced storm surges), and ﬂooding associated with torrential rain. Along immediate
coastlines, storm surges are the greatest threat to
life and property. These types of storms can cause
tremendous damage and loss of life in a matter of
seconds.
Floods are one of the most frequent natural hazards,
and they occur in almost every country. The severity
of ﬂash ﬂoods, river ﬂoods and urban ﬂoods depends
on rainfall intensity, spatial distribution of rainfall, topography and surface conditions. Climate change is
expected to increase the severity and frequency of
ﬂooding (IPCC, 2007). Drought affects more people
globally than any other natural hazard (UNISDR, 2011).
It does not destroy infrastructure or directly lead to
human mortality, although famines may be triggered
by drought (ultimately, however, mortality is due to a
complex set of interactions surrounding food security).
The 2011 famine in the Horn of Africa, which threatened the livelihood of more than 13.3 million people
(UNOCHA, 2011), highlights the complex interaction
between (and potential catastrophic consequences of)
the climatic phenomenon resulting in low rainfall, the
vulnerable pastoralist population with limited capacity
to cope, and a political context of conﬂict.

An observation of ﬂood and drought ‘risk patterns
and trends at the global level allows a visualization of
the major concentrations of risk and an identiﬁcation
of the geographic distribution of disaster risk across
countries, trends over time and the major drivers of
these patterns and trends’ (UNISDR, 2011).
Between 1970 and 2010 the world’s population increased by 87% (from 3.7 billion to 6.9 billion)
(UNISDR, 2011). During the same period, the annual
average population exposed to ﬂood increased by 112%
(from 33.3 to 70.4 million per year) (UNISDR, 2011)
(Figure 4.5).
‘Countries in all regions have strengthened their capacities to reduce mortality risks associated with major weather-related hazards such as tropical cyclones
and ﬂoods’ (UNISDR, 2011, p. 18). Figure 4.6 shows an
updated global distribution of mortality risk for three
weather-related hazards (tropical cyclones, ﬂoods and
landslides provoked by rains). The areas of highest risk
visible in these maps correspond to areas where concentrations of vulnerable people are exposed to severe
and frequent major hazards.
In contrast, countries have had a far more difficult time
successfully addressing other risks. Economic loss risk

FIGURE 4.6
Hazard mortality risk (ﬂoods, tropical cyclones and precipitation-triggered landslides)

Risk
High

Low

Source: Developed by the GAR team at UNISDR.

WWDR4

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

117

“Despite improvements
in preventive efforts,
disasters will still occur
and preparedness and
response capacity is
essential.”

to tropical cyclones and ﬂoods is trending up because
the rapidly increasing exposure of economic assets is
outstripping reductions in vulnerability (IPCC, 2007).
Flood mortality risk is highest in rural areas with a dense
and rapidly growing population and in countries with
weak governance. Across all water-related hazards,
countries with low GDP and weak governance tend
to have drastically higher mortality risk than wealthier
countries with strong governance (UNISDR, 2011).
Human health is both directly and indirectly impacted
by water-related hazards. Outbreaks of waterborne
diseases, such as cholera, can occur after disasters as
a result of contaminated or inadequate water supplies,
sometimes affecting thousands of people and causing
many deaths. Outbreaks of vector-borne disease can
also occur. For example, malaria epidemics have been
shown to occur more frequently (in epidemic-prone
areas) following dry periods associated with El NiñoSouthern Oscillation – as documented in Colombia, Sri
Lanka and Venezuela (PAHO, 2000).
In complex disasters where malnutrition, overcrowding
and lack of the most basic sanitation are common, catastrophic outbreaks of gastroenteritis (caused by cholera or other diseases) have occurred (PAHO, 2000a).
In Haiti in 2010, ﬁgures released by the government
after the earthquake cite over 200,000 deaths, leaving
a large and highly susceptible displaced population to
confront hurricane season and potential disease outbreaks. In the aftermath of the earthquake disaster and
ﬂooding, the cholera outbreak resulted in the hospitalization of nearly 150,000 people, and left nearly 5,000
dead (USAID, 2011).

118

CHAPTER 4

4.4.2 Behind the trends: Drivers of change
Understanding the underlying factors of risk for waterrelated hazards is the cornerstone of any effort to
reduce risk and future impacts. The factors that have
led to increased water-related disasters include natural pressures such as climate variability; management
pressures such as lack of appropriate organizational
systems and inappropriate land and water management; and social pressures such as population growth,
assets and settlements in high-risk areas (Adikari and
Yoshitani, 2009).
The increase in natural disaster losses over the past
few decades is largely attributable to the increase in
value of exposed assets, while anthropogenic climate
change has not had a discernable impact on losses
(Bouwer, 2011). By 2050, rising populations in ﬂoodprone lands, climate change, deforestation, loss of
wetlands and rising sea levels are expected to increase
the number of people vulnerable to ﬂood disaster to
2 billion (UNU, 2004).
4.4.3 Meeting the challenges ahead
Meeting the challenges associated with disasters
caused by water-related hazards requires investment
in and implementation of good disaster risk-reduction (DRR) practice. Despite improvements in preventive efforts, disasters will still occur and preparedness
and response capacity is essential. Examples of best
practices led by humanitarians, governments, water resources managers, the private sector and development
agencies abound, although scaling these up to meet
real needs remains a central challenge.
Disaster preparedness is improving; investments enabling earlier early warnings and actions are being
undertaken (IFRC, 2009). For example, real investments in capacity and tools that incorporate weather
and climate information into contingency planning
and preparedness action are improving preparedness
and response-saving resources, livelihoods and lives
(Hellmuth et al., 2011). Investments in the capacity
of communities and early warning systems in ﬂoodprone areas, such as Mozambique, have resulted in
better preparedness and response during ﬂood events
(GIZ, 2007). In Botswana, seasonal forecasts can provide useful indications of the likelihood of a malaria
epidemic several months in advance (Hellmuth et al.,
2009; Thomson et al., 2006).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

To deal with escalating costs, governments are increasingly using insurance mechanisms and weather indexes
to help them manage risk more effectively. These offer
payouts when extreme weather events occur, offering
the key advantage of speeding injections of cash, allowing for more timely responses. Another advantage
is the ability to make concrete plans even before disaster strikes, knowing that funds will be available when
needed. The Caribbean, Ethiopia, India, Malawi and
Mexico provide examples of index insurance for disaster relief (Hellmuth et al., 2009).
Investment in DRR targets the root causes of vulnerability, which often stem from a combination of political, economic and social forces, as well as the impacts
of highly variable rainfall. For example, in chronic food
insecurity regions, programmes that complement food
aid and build resilience and productivity are necessary
to lift people out of poverty traps (Trench et al., 2007).
Households, for example, may employ mitigation
strategies to reduce vulnerability or the impact of risk
by pooling risks through informal or formal insurance
mechanisms.
With regard to extreme events, a recent study of 141
countries found that more women than men die from
natural hazards, and that this disparity is linked most
strongly to women’s unequal socio-economic status.
‘Where the socio-economic status of women is high,
men and women will die in roughly equal numbers
during and after natural hazards, whereas more women than men die (or die at a younger age) where the
socio-economic status of women is low’ (Neumayer
and Plumper, 2007, p. 5). Mainstreaming gender into
DRR offers an opportunity for improving disaster resilience and enhancing gender equality and sustainable
development. However, introducing a gender perspective to DRR requires a change in attitude for policymakers and implementers. Every citizen has a role to
play in reducing disaster risk, but governments can
create an enabling environment for women and men
to participate in the effort. This would include communications and warning systems that can be accessed
by women, and tapping into their knowledge and skills,
which are crucial when managing and addressing risks
(UNISDR et al., 2009; see Box 4.7).
Although investment in DRR, including water resources infrastructure, continues to lag, awareness is being
raised and quantiﬁed evidence is being produced regarding its relative cost-effectiveness. Humanitarians

WWDR4

have changed their approach over the past few
decades, shifting from response and recovery to a
more balanced approach that includes risk reduction: However, complementary capacity-building and
ﬁnancing mechanisms are sorely needed to ﬁll the gap.
Given that the cost and frequency of ﬂood disasters is
on the rise, investments in preparedness activities and
associated infrastructure, ﬂood plain policy development, effective watershed land use planning, ﬂood
forecasting and warning systems, and response mechanisms are essential to reducing risks and impacts
(UNISDR, 2011). Comprehensive assessments of risks
from water-related hazards are necessary, not only for
improved understanding of changing risks, but also for
better decision-making, planning and implementation
of sustainable solutions.
Finally, because of rapid change and sometimes discontinuity in the combination of political, economic
and social forces, future risks are unknown. Reﬂecting
on scenarios describing possible futures can help decision-makers to take a longer-term view.

4.5 Impact of desertiﬁcation on water
resources
Poor and unsustainable land utilization and management practices are leading to desertiﬁcation and land
degradation around the world, increasing pressure on

BOX 4.7
Women in times of disaster
Women are usually responsible for children and the elderly; therefore the demands on them immediately prior
to and during a disaster are very different from those of
men. Such different demands are especially important
to consider in the case of rapid onset disasters, when
the time between receiving a warning and responding
can be very limited. A report on Mainstreaming Gender
into Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction (Dimitríjevics,
2007) provides some examples of disaster managers setting up childcare facilities on-site so that female staff who
are impacted by a disaster can still work to assist others.
This type of on-the-spot decision illustrates how routine
contingency planning to provide childcare to women involved in early warning and emergency response could
help more people. The example above also illustrates that
knowledge, acceptance and respect for gender differences and strong social norms, can improve response as well
as the planning and administration of relief items (UNISDR
et al., 2009).

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

119

water resources and leading to water scarcity. Recent
estimates indicate that nearly 2 billion ha of land worldwide – an area twice the size of China – are already seriously degraded, some irreversibly (FAO, 2008). Land
degradation is increasing, with almost one-quarter of
the global land area being degraded between 1981 and
2003. The emphasis on land degradation has focused
on dryland areas, but humid areas are also experiencing
a surprising level of global land degradation, more than
initially thought (Bai et al., 2008).
4.5.1 Recognizing desertiﬁcation, land degradation
and drought imperatives
Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought (DLDD)
constitute a ubiquitous challenge in the dryland regions of the world (Figure 4.7; Box 4.8), but are occurring in all agro-ecological zones and are increasingly considered a global problem with their extent and
impacts affecting environmental and social vulnerability. Throughout the world DLDD affects arable lands,

turning them into desolate wastes, affecting human
livelihoods and well-being, exacerbating poverty and
forced human migration, as well as inﬂicting destitution
on the populations of vast areas and threatening them
with food scarcity, malnutrition and famine.
Globally, DLDD affects 1.5 billion people who depend on
degrading areas, and it is closely associated with poverty, with 42% of the very poor living in degraded areas,
compared with 32% of the moderately poor and 15% of
the non-poor (Nachtergaele et al. 2010). According to
estimates, 24 billion tons of fertile soils are disappearing annually, and over the past 20 years the surface area
lost is equal to all of the farmland of the USA. In the
face of DLDD, it is estimated that a substantial proportion of the earth’s natural forests have already been
destroyed, and over 60% of ecosystem services are already degraded. This negative trend is set to continue
at an accelerating pace over the next half century. For
example, up to 90% of West Africa’s coastal rain forests
have disappeared since 1900 (MA, 2005b).

FIGURE 4.7
The extent of dryland systems worldwide (2000)

Notes: Drylands include all terrestrial regions where the production of crops, forage, wood and other ecosystem services are limited by water.
Formally, the deﬁnition encompasses all lands where the climate is classiﬁed as dry subhumid, semiarid, arid or hyper arid. This classiﬁcation is
based on Aridity Index (AI) values. The AI is the long-term mean of the ratio of an area’s mean annual precipitation to its mean annual potential
evapotranspiration.
Source: MA (2005c, appendix A, p. 23, from data sources cited therein).

120

CHAPTER 4

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Those affected include the world’s poorest, most marginalized and politically weak citizens. India alone accounts
for 26% of this population, China 17% and sub-Saharan
Africa 24%. The remaining part of the Asia-Paciﬁc accounts for 18.3%. The other parts of the world are not far
behind, with Latin America and the Caribbean accounting
for 6.2% and North-East and North Africa 4.6% (ICRISAT,
2008). While DLDD affects all regions of the world, it has
its greatest impact in Africa where two-thirds of the continent is desert or drylands.
Given desertiﬁcation and land degradation, a number of countries in the drylands face increasing water
scarcity. Most drylands have hyper-arid, arid, semi-arid
and subhumid climatic conditions with limited water
resources, which almost entirely depend on rainfall for
replenishment. Rainfall is highly variable with considerable regional variations. Two, three or more consecutive dry years are experienced during some severe
drought periods. Consequently, many people in the
drylands suffer from a lack of access to water where it
is very unevenly distributed.

BOX 4.8
Key facts on desertiﬁcation

đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ+1./ƫ0$.+1#$ƫ(* ƫ !#. 0%+*ƫ%*ƫ.% Čƫ
semi-arid and dry subhumid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human
activities.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ%/ƫ*+0Čƫ/ƫ+))+*(5ƫ0$+1#$0Čƫ0$!ƫ01(ƫ
expansion of existing deserts.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫû!0/ƫ*!.(5ƫāƫ%((%+*ƫ,!+,(!Čƫ+.ƫ+*!ġ
sixth of the world’s population.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ%/ƫ+1..%*#ƫ%*ƫĈĀŌƫ+"ƫ((ƫ .5(* /Čƫ+.ƫ
one-quarter of the total land area of the earth.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ%/ƫ.!/,+*/%(!ƫ"+.ƫ0$!ƫ !#. 0%+*ƫ+"ƫĈăŌƫ
of the world’s rangeland.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ%/ƫ!/,!%((5ƫ/!2!.!ƫ%*ƫ".%Čƫ3$!.!ƫ03+ġ
thirds of the continent is desert or drylands, and where
73% of its agricultural drylands are already seriously or
moderately degraded.
đƫƫƫ/%ƫ+*0%*/ƫ0$!ƫ(.#!/0ƫ)+1*0ƫ+"ƫ(* ƫû!0! ƫ5ƫ
desertiﬁcation of any continent-just under 1400 million
ha.
đƫƫƫ!.(5ƫ03+ġ0$%. /ƫ+"ƫ 0%*ƫ)!.%Ě/ƫ .5(* /ƫ.!ƫ)+ erately to severely desertiﬁed.
đƫƫƫ!/!.0%ü0%+*ƫ%/ƫ!/0%)0! ƫ0+ƫ+/0ƫ0$!ƫ3+.( ƫ)+.!ƫ0$*ƫ
US$40 billion a year in lost productivity.

Source: Reproduced from Rogers (1995).

WWDR4

Such is the case in sub-Saharan Africa, where 800 million people live, with a population growth rate of more
than 2.5% (Carles, 2009). Statistical analysis of rainfall patterns in some of the drylands regions reveals a
stepped drop in the early 1970s, which has persisted.
An analysis of the situation indicates a reduction of approximately 20% in precipitation levels, which results
in a 40% reduction in surface runoff (EU, 2007).
4.5.2 The impacts of DLDD on water resources
A variety of human activities modify the landscape,
such as deforestation, veldt ﬁres and inappropriate
farming and animal husbandry practices. These result
in the degradation and desertiﬁcation of watersheds
and catchment areas, and reduce the amount of usable
safe water available downstream. Often, such landscape modiﬁcations tend to exacerbate soil erosion and
reduce the soil water-holding capacity, and decrease
the recharge of groundwater and existing surface water storage capacity, through siltation and sedimentation of rivers and reservoirs that subsequently result in
water scarcity over time. Furthermore, the draining of
wetlands reduces water availability to recharge groundwater, resulting in water scarcity in the long term as the
groundwater table recedes. In addition, the diversion of
rivers for agricultural (irrigation) or industrial purposes
deprives rivers and lakes of their usual ﬂow, contributing to water scarcity in their hinterland.
Desertiﬁcation is a major culprit in inducing water
scarcity through direct reduction of freshwater reserves. It directly impacts river ﬂow rates by increasing
river water turbidity, which in turn enhances siltation
and sedimentation in surface water reservoirs and estuaries. Desertiﬁcation also negatively impacts groundwater tables by reducing a soil’s capacity to allow
water to percolate in the event of rainfall. In the face of
desertiﬁcation and the resultant water scarcity, accelerated and often rampant exploitation of underground
water reserves frequently occurs to meet socio-economic needs, leading to gradual depletion of groundwater and increased water scarcity.
Rich dryland nations like Australia are not immune to
water scarcity either. Drought is causing acute water shortages in large parts of Australia, Africa, Asia
and the USA (Morrison et al., 2009). Regardless, an
urban Australian on the average consumes 300 L water daily and a European 200 L, while in sub-Saharan
Africa an individual makes do with less than 20 L per
day (Natarajan, 2007). Besides droughts, river ﬂows

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

121

“In the drylands, the
timing of drought
and the lack of
suitable technological
options often limit
the ﬂexibility of poor
households to make
tactical adjustments in
drought management
practices to reduce
losses.”
and water supplies are being reduced by shrinking
snow caps across China, India and Pakistan – countries
where more than 1 billion people already lack access to
safe drinking water and adequate sanitation (Morrison
et al., 2009).
Often absent in these affected areas are efficient and
reliable early warning systems to alert the populations of impending DLDD-related disasters. In the drylands, the timing of drought and the lack of suitable
technological options often limit the ﬂexibility of poor
households to make tactical adjustments in drought
management practices to reduce losses (Pandey et
al., 2007). Where rains are late, farmers mostly delay
planting or replant when suitable opportunities arise,
and may reduce fertilizer use. When droughts and water scarcity are late, the opportunities for crop management adjustments to reduce losses are often no
longer available.
One of the major impacts of DLDD-associated water scarcity is felt through food insecurity and starvation among affected communities, particularly in
developing countries in the drylands. DLDD-related
water scarcity brings about uncertainties that inevitably make communities vulnerable. The major issue is

122

CHAPTER 4

the inevitable failure of agriculture, because it is the
largest water-consuming sector of poor economies
(Carles, 2009). Thus, if dryland countries could reduce
the impacts of DLDD on water resources and achieve
water security, opportunities of achieving food security would be greatly enhanced. It is therefore essential
for countries to take appropriate measures to address
DLDD imperatives in the quest for greater water and
food security.
In response to DLDD, some governments and water
authorities resort to investing in supply-side measures
that increase the extraction of countries’ water resources, such as river diversions, construction of water
reservoirs and groundwater pumping. Other investments that can be made include water-efficient processes, water-saving irrigation schemes and water recycling and reuse. Some of these measures, while they
enhance water availability and accessibility and improve the prospects for water security, bring environmental and further ﬁnancial costs, reduce downstream
water security and aggravate water stress.
The Aral Sea and Lake Chad, for example, are disappearing because of upstream infrastructure developments. Lake Chad has lost 95% of its size since the
1960s. River diversion can also cause conﬂicts where a
basin is shared by a number of riparian countries. For
example, a number of river basins in Africa are shared
by more than ﬁve riparian states, including the Congo
(13), the Niger (11), the Nile (10), the Zambezi (9) Lake
Chad (8) and the Volta (6) (Carles, 2009). The monitoring and management of such transboundary water
resources is more complex and can pose greater risks
in terms of DLDD if improperly managed, particularly
for downstream users.
4.5.3 Combating DLDD imperatives to mitigate the
challenges of water scarcity
Desertiﬁcation should not be considered as an isolated
process and neither should its mitigation processes. It
constitutes an integral part of socio-economic development involving sustainable management of the land
and water resources. Thus, combating desertiﬁcation is
complex and difficult, and usually impossible without
alteration of the very land management practices that
led to its occurrence.
A variety of different measures are being applied
worldwide to reduce land degradation and avert
desertiﬁcation and water scarcity. In rice paddies

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

throughout the mountainous regions of Asia, terracing is employed to restrain water erosion. On less
steeply sloping land, contour strip-farming works well.
Conservation agriculture, which includes both notill and minimum tillage, is an additional tool in soil
conservation. Conservation agriculture is widely used
in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada and the USA,
as well as in some parts of Africa, Asia and Europe,
(Brown, 2006).

Although predicting future water demands for agriculture – the greatest user of water by far – is fraught
with uncertainty, global agricultural water consumption is estimated to increase by about 20% by 2050.
This increase could be even higher if substantial improvement in productivity of rainfed and irrigated
agriculture are not set in place to meet the increasing
demand for food from population growth and changing diets.

The promotion of soil, water and vegetation conservation, combined with measures to rehabilitate, conserve
and protect the natural environment, are prerequisites
for sustainable land management (SLM). Practising
SLM is one of the few options for sustaining livelihoods
and generating income without destroying the quality
of the land and the water resources, which are needed
for agricultural production, food security, protection of
biological diversity, as well as preventing and mitigating DLDD imperatives.

The growing demand for energy will also create increasing pressure on water resources, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa and in the least developed countries of South Asia, which account for 80% of the 1.5
billion people lacking access to electricity globally.
Growing demand for biofuels and other water-intensive energy sources, such as bituminous sands and
shale gas, will only add to the energy sector’s growing
water footprint.

Decisions on how best to combat DLDD must also be
based on solid scientiﬁc and economic analysis, recognizing the importance of local knowledge in crosssectoral land and water resources management, and
shifting focus from human uses of freshwater as a
technical issue to the role of freshwater in catchments
for the generation of ecosystem and societal services.
Any policies adopted should enable participation of
key stakeholder and incorporation of their ecological
knowledge into institutional structures in a multi-level
governance system. Consequently, the development of
solutions must necessarily be inclusive and multi-sectoral (Climate Institute, 2009).
Finally, successful policies recognize that freshwater
systems are complex and adaptive and can be degraded irreversibly (SIWI, 2009). The effects of DLDD can
be felt globally, but the solutions are most often of a
local, national or regional nature. An integrated and
coordinated approach to combat DLDD, at local, national and transboundary levels, and policies that are
highly integrated, are required to mitigate the various
problems associated with water scarcity.

4.6 In or out of balance?
4.6.1 Balancing uses and supplies: Notions of water
stress and water scarcity
As described throughout Chapter 2, the global demand for water is expected to grow signiﬁcantly for all
major sectors using water.

WWDR4

Proportionally, water use by the industry sector tends
to increase with rising levels of national development,
as growing economies shift from agriculture-based to
more diversiﬁed economies. Demand should therefore
be expected to see the highest rate of growth in countries with the fastest growing economies.
Like energy and industry, demand for water supply
and sanitation services will also increase particularly in
developing countries. Although the MDGs have helped
to elevate the importance of these services onto national and international policy agendas, much remains
to be done. Furthermore, national and local governments, which are ultimately responsible for meeting the growth in domestic demand, will still need to
compete with other sectors for often-limited water
supplies.
Ecosystems are both users (Chapter 2) and suppliers
(Section 4.2) of water. Some water is required for the
protection and maintenance of healthy ecosystems,
which in turn provide important services related to water quality and protection against extreme events, as
well as maintaining livelihoods among other beneﬁts.
Human health (Section 4.1) will also vitally beneﬁt from
healthy ecosystems, safe water resources, and water supply and sanitation services. Maintaining human health
through water translates into productivity gains from
income earned from those saved from premature death
from diarrhoea, gains in health care services in treating

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

123

fewer patients, and the direct costs to patients of medication and transportation, as well as the time-saving beneﬁts for people currently with inadequate services who
gain access to nearby water and sanitation facilities.
As described in the previous section of this chapter,
the increasing number and cost of water-related disasters create negative consequences that directly affect
human livelihoods and impact national development.
While per capita consumption of water is decreasing
in most of the industrialized world, overall demand
for water is increasing throughout all major use sectors, driven primarily by the growing demands for
food and energy in the developing world and emerging economies. This will invariably increase pressure
on the earth’s limited water resources, which in many
regions are already experiencing varying levels of
water stress. The world is transitioning to a new era
where ﬁnite water constraints are starting to limit
future economic growth and development, and it is
becoming clear that even renewable water resources

cannot supply enough water if not managed carefully
(Patterson, 2009).
Water stress and water scarcity
‘Hydrologists typically assess scarcity by looking at the
population-water equation. An area is experiencing
water stress when annual water supplies drop below
1,700 m3 per person. When annual water supplies drop
below 1,000 m3 per person, the population faces water
scarcity, and below 500 m3 “absolute scarcity”’ (UNWater, n.d.) (Figure 4.8).
The notions of water stress and water scarcity might
appear synonymous, but this is not always the case,
and different deﬁnitions have been used to describe
these terms, sometimes leading to confusion. For example, the term water stress is generally used to describe the ratio of water use (i.e. the amount of water
withdrawn from the natural hydrological system) over
the total amount of renewable water available. Thus,
the higher the use as a fraction of available water, the
higher the stress on the supply system.

FIGURE 4.8
Freshwater availability (m3 per person per year, 2007)

Scarcity
Stress
Vulnerability
Data non available
0

1 000 1 700 2 500 6 000 15 000 70 000 684 000

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (2008) (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/global-waterstress-and-scarcity, P. Rekacewicz [cartographer]
(Le Monde diplomatique), with sources FAO and WRI).

124

CHAPTER 4

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

FIGURE 4.9
Global Water Stress Indicator (WSI) in major basins

Slightly Moderately Heavily
exploited exploited exploited

0,3

0,5

0,7

1

Over
exploited

and more

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (2008) (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/water-scarcity-index, P. Rekacewicz [cartographer], with sources
Smakhtin, Revenga and Döll [2004]).

FIGURE 4.10
Global physical and economic water scarcity

Little or no water scarcity
Physical water scarcity
Approaching physical
water scarcity
Economic water scarcity
Not estimated

Deﬁnitions and indicators
đƫƫƫ %00(!ƫ+.ƫ*+ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ċƫ1* *0ƫ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ.!(0%2!ƫ0+ƫ1/!Čƫ3%0$ƫ(!//ƫ0$*ƫĂĆŌƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ".+)ƫ.%2!./ƫ3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ$1)*ƫ,1.,+/!/ċƫ
đƫƫƫ$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫĨ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ !2!(+,)!*0ƫ%/ƫ,,.+$%*#ƫ+.ƫ$/ƫ!4!! ! ƫ/1/0%*(!ƫ(%)%0/ĩċƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫĈĆŌƫ+"ƫ.%2!.ƫý+3/ƫ.!ƫ
3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ#.%1(01.!Čƫ%* 1/0.5Čƫ* ƫ +)!/0%ƫ,1.,+/!/ƫĨ+1*0%*#ƫ"+.ƫ.!5(%*#ƫ+"ƫ.!01.*ƫý+3/ĩċƫ$%/ƫ !ü*%0%+*ģ.!(0%*#ƫ30!.ƫ2%(%(%05ƫ
0+ƫ30!.ƫ !)* ģ%),(%!/ƫ0$0ƫ .5ƫ.!/ƫ.!ƫ*+0ƫ*!!//.%(5ƫ30!.ƫ/.!ċ
đƫƫƫ,,.+$%*#ƫ,$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ċƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫćĀŌƫ+"ƫ.%2!.ƫý+3/ƫ.!ƫ3%0$ .3*ċƫ$!/!ƫ/%*/ƫ3%((ƫ!4,!.%!*!ƫ,$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ*!.ƫ"101.!ċ
đƫƫƫ+*+)%ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫĨ$1)*Čƫ%*/0%010%+*(Čƫ* ƫü**%(ƫ,%0(ƫ(%)%0ƫ!//ƫ0+ƫ30!.ƫ!2!*ƫ0$+1#$ƫ30!.ƫ%*ƫ*01.!ƫ%/ƫ2%((!ƫ(+((5ƫ0+ƫ)!!0ƫ$1)*ƫ
!)* /ĩċƫ0!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ.!ƫ1* *0ƫ.!(0%2!ƫ0+ƫ30!.ƫ1/!Čƫ3%0$ƫ(!//ƫ0$*ƫĂĆŌƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ".+)ƫ.%2!./ƫ3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ$1)*ƫ,1.,+/!/Čƫ10ƫ)(*10.%0%+*ƫ!4%/0/ċƫ

Source: Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture (2007, map 2.1, p. 63, © IWMI, http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/).

WWDR4

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

125

Several researchers and agencies have computed the
water stress of watershed and grid scales by incorporating domestic, industrial and agricultural water consumption, against renewable supplies of water from
precipitation, rivers and groundwater. Figure 4.9 shows
one such map, which is consistent with other maps
(e.g. Maplecroft, 2011; Smakhtin et al, 2003; Veolia
Water, 2011) as each is based on similar – if not identical
– datasets. The Arab Region countries nations have the
highest levels of water stress, as well as major parts of
Eastern China, India and the south-western USA.

impinges on the supply or quality of water under prevailing institutional arrangements to the extent that
the demand by all sectors, including the environment,
cannot be satisﬁed fully. Thus, where water ‘stress’ is
a physical concept, water ‘scarcity’ is therefore a relative concept and can occur at any level of supply or
demand. ‘Scarcity may be a social construct (a product
of affluence, expectations and customary behaviour)
or the consequence of altered supply patterns – stemming from climate change for example’ (UN-Water,
n.d.).

However, under this deﬁnition, low water stress does
not automatically imply ready access to water, which is
a paradox that a large swath of the global population
currently face. Whereas water stress is a function of
the availability of water resources, the concept of water scarcity is also a function of access. In this regard,
economic scarcity – whereby access is not limited by
resource availability, but by human, institutional and
ﬁnancial constraints over distribution of the resource
to different user groups – forms a major part of this
paradox. Figure 4.10 illustrates global physical and
economic water scarcity.

The physical scarcity regions are consistent with the
high-stress regions in Figure 4.9. However, regions
such as central Africa, north-eastern India, north-eastern parts of South America and South-East Asia, which
have medium to low water stress (Figure 4.9), experience water scarcity which is purely due to institutional
and economic barriers.

According to UN-Water,2 water scarcity is deﬁned as
the point at which the aggregate impact of all users

Although ﬁnite, as described in Chapter 3, the world’s
freshwater resources can be highly variable over time
and across rivers basins as a function of climate variability. Climate change will affect both precipitation
patterns as well as the melting of snow and ice, resulting in increasing variability in the ﬂows of surface waters from which most of our freshwater is withdrawn.

“Economic, social and political crises have been
emerging at an accelerated rate. Although
often described individually – the ‘food’ crisis,
the ‘energy’ crisis, the ‘ﬁnancial’ crisis, the
‘human health’ crisis, or the ‘climate change’
crisis, to name but a few – these crises are
all inter-related though their causes and
consequences. Their underlying causes often
boil down to the ever-increasing competition
for a few key – often-limited – resources, of
which water is common to all.”
126

CHAPTER 4

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Climate change models are constantly improving and
generating new information, but additional research
efforts are required to update our knowledge concerning possible future conditions, especially at regional
and basin-level scales. Furthermore, several of the
world’s major aquifers, especially in arid and semi-arid regions, are being depleted due to intensive use of
these limited and highly vulnerable reserves.
It is therefore highly unlikely that our increasing demand for water will be met solely through supply-oriented solutions. Rather, the key solutions to the global
– and most regional and local – water crises resides in
our ability to better manage demand while seeking to
balance and maximize the various beneﬁts of water.
4.6.2 Water as the nexus for sectors related to
development and poverty reduction: Balancing the
trade-offs
Food, energy, opportunity for economic growth, human and environmental health, and protection against
water-related disasters are all necessary ingredients of
development, including income generation and poverty reduction. They all depend on water. Yet these
challenges have too often been dealt with in isolation rather than as part of an overarching and strategic framework across society and the economy. As
a result, different developmental sectors often ﬁnd
themselves competition with each other for the ﬁnite
water resources upon which they all depend. Therefore,
in countries and regions where water resources are
limited, decisions made to generate beneﬁts from one
sector often produce negative consequences for other
sectors, through water, such that the overall economic
and developmental gains from one sector are offset by
losses to another.
This situation can ultimately lead to short-term and
unsustainable decision-making and increase the number of people affected by water shortages. Climate
change exacerbates this problem still further (Steer,
2010). Modern economic thinking and policy-making
have created an economy that is so out of alignment
with the ecosystem on which it depends that it is approaching collapse (Brown, 2011). Changing this situation will require the full inclusion of considerations
for water within the existing governance frameworks
under which water is managed – across sectors and
regions, locally and globally – through representative institutions that have the appropriate authority. Water managers, in turn, need to be familiar with

WWDR4

tools to measure social and economic impacts of their
interventions. It is important that they have an understanding of the social context and existing power relations before introducing a new project and informing
decision-makers accordingly. This approach will assist
in selecting solutions best suited to the community,
which will be sustainable in the long term.
Economic, social and political crises have been emerging at an accelerated rate. Although often described
individually – the ‘food’ crisis, the ‘energy’ crisis, the ‘ﬁnancial’ crisis, the ‘human health’ crisis, or the ‘climate
change’ crisis, to name but a few – these crises are all
inter-related though their causes and consequences.
Their underlying causes often boil down to the everincreasing competition for a few key – often-limited
– resources, of which water is common to all. These
inter-related crises also have consequences that negatively affect growth and development prospects and
have disproportionate, negative effects on the poor
and vulnerable.
Various approaches to international governance, as
elaborated in Chapter 1 – whether the MDGs or such
policy tracks for sustainable development as Rio+20
and the ‘green economy’3 – have failed to recognize
the central role of water as a key ingredient of poverty reduction and sustainable development, cutting
across the spectrum. In both cases, water is recognized as another ‘sector’, to be addressed more or
less independently of the other sectors. This may
seem appropriate from a purely ‘drinking water and
sanitation services’ perspective, as is the case for
the MDG target on drinking water and sanitation. It
may also seem appropriate when calling for the investment in infrastructure, water-policy reform and
in the development of new technology required
to bridge the gap between global supply and water withdrawals (UNEP, 2011) as a speciﬁc sector
of the green economy. However, such an approach
across the board further compartmentalizes water in
terms of national policies as different ministries and
other authorities become responsible for their own
commitments in terms of health, food and agriculture, energy or urban settlements. In fact, it is these
policy decisions that ultimately determine how water
resources are to be allocated. Therefore, the ‘water-policy reform’ (for example, as called for under
the green economy in the statement above) would
actually entail a broader reform of national policies
whereby considerations for water are fully included in

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

127

decisions regarding each political sector. And this is
where water managers can inform the process.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

A similar argument applies to the various global crises
outlined above, for which proposed solutions are often
compartmentalized and give little or no consideration
to the central importance of water.

References

Over the past few years, the term ‘nexus’ has been
used to describe the point at which different social,
economic and/or environmental sectors are linked to
each other. Climate change and energy are a perfect
example; in this case the nexus is greenhouse gas. In
agriculture, increased competition over land and water
between crops grown for food and those grown for
biofuels lead to the ‘food-energy nexus’. Recognizing
the important role of water, managing the water-foodenergy-climate nexus has been the subject of analysis
and discussion. Ecosystems, human health and urbanization/migration, with their links to competition over
water, meet the others at the same nexus.
Although it may seem logical to accept that different
sectors can be ‘in competition’ over water, it is clear
that all the beneﬁts of water are required for sustainable economic development. Where water resources
are limited, certain trade-offs are required to allocate
water towards different uses in order to maximize the
overall return made up by the beneﬁts water provides
though different developmental sectors. This is a critical yet difficult and complex challenge. Chapter 10 focuses on this challenge, making the case that decisions
about water allocation are not merely social or ethical, but are also economic, such that investing in water
infrastructure and management generates increasing
returns though these various beneﬁts.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

See Section 3.1 for a discussion of the teleconnections among
different drivers of the global water cycle.

2

See the UN-Water website on the International Decade for
Action ‘Water for Life, 2000–2015’ at http://www.un.org/
waterforlifedecade/scarcity.shtml

3

128

According to UNEP (2011), the 11 key sectors of the ‘green
economy’ are agriculture, buildings, cities, energy, ﬁsheries,
forestry, manufacturing, tourism, transport, waste management
and water.

CHAPTER 4

Adikari, Y. and Yoshitani, J. 2009. Global Trends in WaterRelated Disasters: an Insight for Policymakers. UN World
Water Assessment Programme. Insights. Paris, UNESCO.
Adjami, A. G., Toe, L., Bissan, Y., Bugri, S., Yaméogo, L., Kone,
M., Katholi, C. R. and Unnasch, T. R. 2004. The current
status of onchocerciasis in the forest/savanna transition
zone of Côte d’Ivoire. Parasitology, Vol. 128, No. 4, pp.
407–14.
Ali, M., Emch, M., Donnay, J. P., Yunus, M. and Sack, R. B.
2002. Identifying environmental risk factors for endemic
cholera: a raster GIS approach. Health & Place, Vol. 8, pp.
201–10.
Anderson, D. A., Gilbert, P. M. and Burkholder, J. M. 2002.
Harmful algal blooms and eutrophication: Nutrient sources,
composition, and consequences. Estuaries, Vol. 25, No. 4b,
pp. 704–26.
Andrews, J. R. and Basu, S. 2011. Transmission dynamics and
control of cholera in Haiti: An epidemic model. The Lancet,
Vol. 377, No. 9773, pp. 1248–1255.
Ausseil, A., Gerbeaux, P., Chadderton, W. L., Stephens, T., Brown,
D. and Leathwick, J. R. 2008. Wetland Ecosystems of National
Importance for Biodiversity: Criteria, Methods and Candidate
List of Nationally Important Inland Wetlands. Contract report
LC0708/158. Lincoln, New Zealand, Landcare Research New
Zealand Limited/Department of Conservation.
Bai, Z. G., Dent, D. L., Olsson, L. and Schaepman, M. E. 2008.
Proxy global assessment of land degradation. Soil Use and
Management, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 223–34.
Barrett, R., Kuzawa, C. W., McDade, T. and Armelagos, G.
J. 1998. Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases:
The third epidemiologic transition. Annual Review of
Anthropology, Vol. 27, pp. 247–271.
Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. P.
(eds). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Geneva, IPCC.
Bouma, M. J. and Pascual, M. 2001. Seasonal and interannual
cycles of endemic cholera in Bengal 1891-1940 in relation to
climate and geography. Hydrobiologia, Vol. 460, pp. 147–56.
Bouwer, L. M. 2011. Have disaster losses increased due to
anthropogenic climate change? American Meteorological
Society, Vol. 92, No. 6, pp. 39–46.
Bradley, D. J. and Bos, R. 2010. Water storage: Health risks
at different scales. J. Lundqvist. (ed.) On the Water Front:
Selecting from the 2009 World Water Week in Stockholm.
Stockholm, Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI).
Brandling-Bennett, D., Libel, M. and Migliónico, A. 1994. El
cólera en las Américas en 1991. Notas de población, No. 60,
LC/DEM/G.149. Santiago, Latin American and Caribbean
Demographic Center (CELADE).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Brown, C. and Lall, U. 2006. Water and economic
development: The role of interannual variability and a
framework for resilience. Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 30,
No 4, pp. 306–317.
Brown, L. R. 2006. Restoring the Earth: Rescuing a Planet
under Stress and a Civilization in Trouble. New York, W.W.
Norton & Company.
––––. 2011. World on the Edge: How to Prevent Environmental
and Economic Collapse. Washington DC, Earth Policy Institute.
Butchart, S. H. M., Walpole, M., Collen, B., van Strien, A.,
Scharlemann, J. P. W., Almond, R. E. A., Baillie, J. E. M.,
Bomhard, B., Brown, C., Bruno, J., Carpenter, K. E., Carr, G.
M., Chanson, J., Chenery, A. M., Csirke, J., Davidson, N. C.,
Dentener, F., Foster, M., Galli, A., Galloway, J. N., Genovesi,
P., Gregory, R. D., Hockings, M., Kapos, V., Lamarque, J. F.,
Leverington, F., Loh, J., McGeoch, M. A., McRae, L., Minasyan,
A., Morcillo, M. H., Oldﬁeld, T. E. E., Pauly, D., Quader, S.,
Revenga, C., Sauer, J. R., Skolnik, B., Spear, D., StanwellSmith, D., Stuart, S. N., Symes, A., Tierney, M., Tyrrell, T. D.,
Vie, J. C. and Watson, R. 2010. Global biodiversity: Indicators
of recent declines. Science, Vol. 328, pp. 1164–1168.
Carles, A. 2009. Water Resources in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Peace with Water, 12–13 February 2009, European
Parliament, Brussels. http://www.theworldpolitical forum.
net/wp-content/uploads/wpf2009/02_peace_with_water_
brussels/ doc/report_ africa_eng.pdf
CBD (Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity).
2010a. Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Montreal, Canada,
CBD. http://gbo3.cbd.int/
––––. 2010b. In-Depth Review of the Programme of Work on
the Biological Diversity of Inland Water Ecosystems. Paper
presented at the 14th meeting of the Subsidiary Body on
Scientiﬁc, Technical and Technological Advice, Nairobi,
10–21 May 2010. http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/sbstta/
sbstta-14/official/sbstta-14-03-en.doc
Chapagain, A. K. and Orr, S. 2008. UK Water Footprint: The
Impact of the UK’s Food and Fibre Consumption on Global
Water Resources. Volume 1. Godalming, UK, World Wide
Fund for Nature (WWF).
Climate Institute. 2009. Website. Washington DC, Climate
Institute. http://www.climate.org/topics/water.html
Colwell, R. R. 1996. Global climate and infectious disease: The
cholera paradigm. Science, Vol. 274, pp. 2025–31.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Constantin de Magny, G., Guégan, J. F., Petit, M. and B.
Cazelles, B. 2007. Regional-scale climate-variability
synchrony of cholera epidemics in West Africa. BMC Infec.
Dis., Vol. 7, No. 20.
Cyranoski, D. 2009. Putting China’s wetlands on the
map. Nature, Vol. 458, p. 134. Dimitríjevics, A. 2007.
Mainstreaming Gender into Disaster Recovery and
Reconstruction. Washington DC, The World Bank.

WWDR4

Drechsel, P., Scott, C. A., Raschid-Sally, L., Redwood, M. and
Bahri, A. (eds). 2010. Wastewater Irrigation and Health.
London, Earthscan.
EC (European Commission). 2007. Water Scarcity and
Droughts. Second Interim Report, June 2007. Brussels,
EC. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/quantity/pdf/
comm_droughts/2nd_int_report.pdf
Erlanger, T. E., Keiser, J., Caldas De Castro, M., Bos, R., Singer, B.
H., Tanner, M. and Utzinger, J. 2005. Effect of water resource
development and management on lymphatic ﬁlariasis,
and estimates of populations at risk. American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene Vol. 73, No. 3, pp. 523–33.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2008. Sustainable Land Management. Rome, FAO.
http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/csd/csd16/ documents/
fao_factsheet/land.pdf
GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit). 2007. Mozambique: Early Warning
System Protects Effectively Against Natural Disasters.
Eschborn, Germany, GIZ.
Granéli, E. and Turner, J. T. (eds) 2006. Ecology of Harmful
Algae. Ecological Studies 189. Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
Springer-Verlag.
Hellmuth, M. E., Mason, S. J., van Aalst, M. K., Vaughan, C.
and Choularton, R. (eds). 2011. A Better Climate for Disaster
Risk Management. Climate and Society No. 3. New York,
Columbia University, International Research Institute for
Climate and Society (IRI).
Hellmuth M. E., Osgood, D. E., Hess, U., Moorhead, A. and
Bhojwani, H. 2009. Index Insurance and Climate Risk:
Prospects for Development and Disaster Management.
Climate and Society No. 2. New York, Columbia University,
International Research Institute for Climate and Society (IRI).
Huq, A., Xu, B., Chowdhury, A. R., Islam, M.S., Montilla, R. and
Colwell, R. R. 1996. A simple ﬁltration method to remove
plankton-associated Vibrio Cholerae in raw water supplies
in developing countries. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., Vol. 62,
No. 7, pp. 2508–12.
ICRISAT (International Crops Research Institute for the SemiArid Tropics). 2008. Climate Change and Desertiﬁcation
Put One Billion Poor People at Risk. Hyderabad, India,
ICRISAT. http://www.icrisat.org/Media/2007/media14.htm
IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies). 2009. World Disasters Report 2009:
Focus on Early Warning, Early Action. Geneva, IFRC.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
Fourth Assessment Report. Geneva, IPCC.
Jiang, Z., Zengh, Q. S., Wang, X. F. and Hua, Z. H. 1997.
Inﬂuence of livestock husbandry on schistosomiasis
transmission in mountainous regions of Yunnan Province.
Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public
Health,, Vol. 28, No. 2, pp. 291–5.
Keiser, J., Caldas de Castro, M., Maltese, M. F., Bos, R., Tanner,
M., Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005a. Effect of irrigation
and large dams on the burden of malaria on a global and
regional scale. American Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, Vol. 72, No. 4, pp. 392–406.

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

129

Keiser, J., Maltese, M. F., Erlanger, T. E., Bos, R., Tanner, M.,
Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005b. Effect of irrigated rice
agriculture on Japanese encephalitis, including challenges
and opportunities for integrated vector management. Acta
Tropica, Vol. 95, No. 1, pp. 40–57.
Koelle, K., Rodo, X., Pascual, M., Yunus, M. and Mostafa, G.
2005. Refractory periods and climate forcing in cholera
dynamics. Nature, Vol. 436, pp. 696–700.
Kroeger, A., Lenhart, A., Ochoa, M., Villegas, E., Levy, M.,
Alexander, N. and McCall, P. J. 2006. Effective control of
dengue vectors with curtains and water container covers
treated with insecticide in Mexico and Venezuela: Cluster
randomised trials. BMJ, Vol. 332, pp. 1247–52.
Lenton, T. M., Held, H., Kriegler, E., Hall, J. W., Lucht, W.,
Rahmstorf, S. and Schellnhube, H. J. 2008. Tipping
elements in the Earth’s climate system. PNAS, Vol. 105, No.
6, pp. 1786–93.
Lewis S. L., Brando, P. M., Phillips, O. L., van der Heijden, G.
M. F. and Nepstad, D. 2011. The 2010 Amazon Drought.
Science, Vol. 331, p. 554.
Lipp, E. K., Huq, A. and Colwell, R. R. 2002. Effects of global
climate on infectious disease: The cholera model. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev., doi:10.1128/CMR.15.4.757-770.2002
Maplecroft. 2011. Maplecroft Global Water Stress Index. Bath,
UK, Maplecroft.http://maplecroft.com/about/news/water_
stress_index.html
Mariappan, T. 2008. A Comprehensive Plan for Controlling
Dengue Vectors in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Pondicherry, India, Vector Control Research Centre.
Mariappan, T., Srinivasan, R. and Jambulingam, P. 2008 Defective
rainwater harvesting structure and dengue vector productivity
compared with peridomestic habitats in a coastal town in
Southern India. J. Med. Entomol., Vol. 45, 148–56.
Martin, S. F., Fagen, P. W., Poole, A. and Karim, S. 2006.
Philanthropic Grant-making for Disaster Management:
Trend Analysis and Recommended Improvements.
Washington DC, Georgetown University, Institute for the
Study of International Migration.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005a. Ecosystems
and Human Well-being: Wetlands And Water Synthesis.
World Resources Institute (WRI), Washington DC.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005b. Living
Beyond Our Means. Natural Assets and Human Well-Being:
Synthesis from the Board. World Resources Institute (WRI),
Washington DC. http://www.millenniumassessment.org/
documents/document.429.aspx.pdf
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005c. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Desertiﬁcation Synthesis. World
Ressources Institute (WRI), Washington DC.
Molden, D. 2009. Planetary boundaries: The devil is in the
detail. Nature Reports Climate Change, 910: 116. http://www.
nature.com/climate/2009/0910/full/climate.2009.97.html
Molyneux, D. H., Ostfeld, R. S., Bernstein, A. and Chivian,
E. 2008. Ecosystem disturbance, biodiversity loss, and
human infectious disease. E. Chivian and A. Bernstein
(eds) Sustaining Life: How Human Health Depends on
Biodiversity. Oxford/New York, Oxford University Press, pp.
287–323.

130

CHAPTER 4

Morrison, J., Morikawa, M., Murphy, M. and Schulte, P. 2009.
Water Scarcity and Climate Change: Growing Risk for
Businesses and Investors. Baston, MA, Ceres. http://www.
pacinst.org/reports/business_water_climate/full_report.pdf
Myers, S. S. and Patz, J. A. 2009. Emerging threats to human
health from global environmental change. Annual Review
of Environment and Resources, Vol. 34, No. 1, pp. 223–52.
Nachtergaele, F., Petri, M., Biancalani, R., Van Lynden, G.
and Van Velthuizen, H. 2010. Global Land Degradation
Information System (GLADIS): Beta Version. An Information
Database for Land Degradation Assessment at Global
Level. Land Degradation Assessment in Drylands Technical
Report No. 17. Rome, FAO.
Natarajan, G. 2007. Water scarcity is a real threat. Financial
Express. Dehli, Indian Express. http://www.ﬁnancialexpress.
com/news/water-scarcity-is-a-real-threat/205820/
Neumayer, E. and Plümper, T. 2007. The gendered nature of
natural disasters: The impact of catastrophic events on the
gender gap in life expectancy, 1981-2002. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, Vol. 97, No. 3, pp.
551–66.
Nkem J., Oswald, D., Kudejira, D. and Kanninen, M.
2009. Counting on Forests and Accounting for Forest
Contributions in National Climate Change Actions. Working
Paper 47. Bogor, Indonesia, Center for International
Forestry Research (CIFOR).
Nguyen, L. A. P., Clements, A. C. A., Jeffrey, J. A. L., Yen, N.
T., Nam, V. S., Vaughan, G. V., Shinkﬁeld, R., Kutcher, S. C.,
Gatton, M. L., Kay, B. H. and Ryan, P. A. 2011. Abundance
and prevalence of Aedes Aegypti immatures and
relationships with household water storage in rural areas
of Southern Viet Nam. International Health, Vol. 3, No. 2,
pp. 115–25.
Nygård, K., Andersson, Y., Røttingen, J. A., Svensson,
Å., Lindbäck, J., Kistemann, T. and Giesecke, J. 2004.
Association between environmental risk factors and
campylobacter infections in Sweden. Epidemiology and
Infection, Vol. 132, pp. 317–25.
Oxfam International. 2005. The Tsunami’s Impact on Women.
Brieﬁng Note. Oxford, UK, Oxfam. http://www.oxfam.org.
uk/what_we_do/issues/conﬂict_disasters/downloads/bn_
tsunami_women.pdf
––––. 2007. Climate Alarm – Disasters Increase as Climate
Change Bites. Brieﬁng Paper. Oxford, UK, Oxfam. http://
www.oxfam.org.uk/resources/policy/climate_change/
downloads/bp108_weather_alert.pdf
PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). 2000. Natural
Disasters: Protecting the Public’s Health. Scientiﬁc
Publication No. 575. Washington DC, PAHO.
Pandey, S. Bhandari, H. and Hardy, B. (eds) 2007. Economic
Costs of Drought and Rice Farmers’ Coping Mechanisms.
International Rice Research Institute. http://www.philjol.
info/index.php/IRRN/article/ viewFile/1078/971
Pascual, M., Rodo, X., Ellner, S. P., Colwell, R. and Bourna, M. J.
2000. Cholera dynamics and El Nino-Southern Oscillation.
Science, Vol. 289, pp. 1766–9.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Patterson, K. A. 2009. Case for integrating groundwater
and surface water management. D. Michel and A. Pandya
(eds) Climate Change, Hydropolitics, and Transboundary
Resources. Washington DC, Henry L. Stimson Center, pp.
63–72.
Piehler, M. F. 2008. Watershed management strategies to
prevent and control cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms.
H. K. Hudnell (ed.) Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms:
State of the Science and Research Needs. (Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology, Vol. 619). New York,
Springer, pp. 259–73.
Prüss, A. and Mariotti, S. 2000. Preventing trachoma through
environmental sanitation: a review of the evidence base.
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Vol. 78, pp.
258–266.
Rejmánková, E., Grieco, J., Achee, N., Masuoka, P., Pope, K.
Robert, D. and Higashi, R. M. 2006. Freshwater community
interactions and malaria. S.K. Collinge and C. Ray (eds)
Disease Ecology: Community Structure and Pathogen
Dynamics. Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp. 90–105.
Rockström J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., Persson, Å., Chapin,
F. S., Lambin, E. F., Lenton, T. M., Scheffer, M., Folke, C.,
Schellnhuber, H., Nykvist, B., De Wit, C. A., Hughes, T., van
der Leeuw, S., Rodhe, H., Sörlin, S., Snyder, P. K., Costanza,
R., Svedin, U., Falkenmark, M., Karlberg, L., Corell, R. W.,
Fabry, V. J., Hansen, J., Walker, B., Liverman, D., Richardson,
K., Crutzen, P. and Foley, J.A. 2009a. A safe operating
space for humanity. Nature, Vol. 461, pp. 472–5.
––––. 2009b. Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe
operating space for humanity. Ecology and Society, Vol. 14,
No. 2, p. 32.
Rodo, X., Pascual, M., Fuchs, G. and Faruque, A. S. 2002.
Enso and cholera: a nonstationary link related to climate
change? Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, Vol. 99, pp. 12901–6.
Rogers, A. (ed). 1995. Taking Action: An Environmental Guide
for You and Your Community. Nairobi, UNEP and the United
Nations Non-Governmental Liaison Service.
http://www.nyo.unep.org/action/Text/TOC-t.htm
Seng, C. M., Setha, T., Nealon, J., Chantha, N., Socheat, D. and
Nathan, M. B. 2008. The effect of long-lasting insecticidal
water container covers on ﬁeld populations of Aedes
Aegypti (L.) Mosquitoes in Cambodia. Journal of Vector
Ecology, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 333–41.
SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute). 2009.
Resilience: Going from Conventional to Adaptive
Freshwater Management for Human and Ecosystem
Compatibility. Swedish Water House Policy Brief No.
3. Stockholm, SIWI. http://www.siwi.org/ documents/
Resources/Policy_Briefs/PB3_Resilience_2005.pdf
Smakhtin, V. U., Revenga, C., Döll, P. and Tharme, R.
2003. Putting the Water Requirements of Freshwater
Ecosystems into the Global Picture of Water Resource
Assessment. Washington DC, WRI (World Resources
Institute). http://earthtrends.wri.org/features/view_feature.
php?ﬁd=38&theme=2
Speelmon, E. C., Checkley, W., Gilman, R. H., Patz, J.,
Calderon, M. and Manga, S. 2000. Cholera incidence and El
Nino-related higher ambient temperature. JAMA, Vol. 283,
pp. 3072–4.

WWDR4

Steer, A. 2010. From the Pump Room to the Board Room:
Water’s Central Role in Climate Change Adaptation.
Washington DC, The World Bank. http://www.d4wcc.org.
mx/images/documentos/Presentaciones/andrew_steer_
keynote_presentation_water_event_december_2_ﬁnal.pdf
(Accessed 23 April 2011.)
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity). 2009.
Website. Geneva, United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP). http://www.teebweb.org (Accessed 26 January
2011.)
Thomson M. C., Doblas-Reyes, F. J., Mason, S. J., Hagedorn,
R., Connor, S.J., Phindela, T., Morse, A. P. and Palmer, T. N.
2006. Malaria early warnings based on seasonal climate
forecasts from multi-model ensembles. Nature, Vol. 439,
pp. 576–9.
Trench, P., Rowley, J., Diarra, M., Sano, F. and Keita, B. 2007.
Beyond Any Drought. Root causes of chronic vulnerability
in the Sahel. Sahel Working Group. London, International
Institute for Environment and Development.
UN (United Nations). 2011. United Nations Secretary
General Report to the 66th General Assembly on the
Implementation of the International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction. New York, UN.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007.
Global Environment Outlook 4. Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2008. Africa: Atlas of Our Changing Environment.
Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/dewa/Africa/
AfricaAtlas
––––. 2011. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable
Development and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy (Accessed 6 May 2011.)
UNEP/GRID-Arendal. 2008. Vital Water Graphics. An
Overview of the State of the World’s Fresh and Marine
Waters (2nd edn). Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/dewa/vitalwater/article48.html
UNISDR (United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction Secretariat). 2009. Global Assessment Report
on Disaster Risk Reduction – Risk and Poverty in a Changing
Climate. Invest Today for a Safer Tomorrow. New York,
UNISDR. http://www.preventionweb.net/english/hyogo/gar/
report/documents/GAR_Chapter_2_2009_eng.pdf
––––. 2011. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
United Nations University (UNU). 2004. Two Billion People
Vulnerable to Floods by 2050: Number Expected to Double or
More in Two Generations. News Release. Tokyo, Japan, UNU.
UNOCHA (UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs). 2011. Eastern Africa Drought Humanitarian Report.
UNOCHA. http://reliefweb.int/home
UN-Water (n.d.). International Decade for Action (UN-IDfA):
Water for Life, 2005–2015. Website. Zaragoza, Spain, UNWater/UN-IDfA. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/
scarcity.shtml
USAID (US Agency for International Development). 2011.
Haiti – Earthquake and Cholera. Fact Sheet 3, Fiscal Year
2011, 15 April, 2011. Washington DC, USAID.

BEYOND DEMAND: WATER’S SOCIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

131

Van Dolah, F. M., Roelke, D. and Greene, R. M. 2001. Health
and ecological impacts of harmful Aagal blooms: risk
assessment needs. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment,
Vol. 7, No. 5, pp. 1329–45.
Veolia Water. 2011. Finding the Blue Path for a Sustainable
Economy. White paper. Veolia Water/International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Vörösmarty C. J., McIntyre, P. B., Gessner, M. O., Dudgeon, D.,
Prusevich, A., Green, P., Glidden, S., Bunn, S. E., Sullivan,
C. A., Reidy Liermann, C. and Davies, P. M. 2010. Global
threats to human water security and river biodiversity.
Nature, Vol. 467, pp. 555–61.
Walsh, J. F., Molyneux, D. H. and Birley, M. H. 1993.
Deforestation: Effects on vector-borne disease.
Parasitology, Vol. 106, Suppl.: S55–75.
WHA (World Health Assembly). 2011a. Cholera: Mechanism
for Control and Prevention. 64th World Health Assembly,
WHA64.15 Agenda item 13.9, 24 May 2011. http://apps.who.
int/gb/ebwha/pdf_ﬁles/WHA64/A64_R15-en.pdf
––––. 2011b. Drinking-Water, Sanitation and Health. 64th
World Health Assembly, WHA64.24 Agenda item 13.15, 24
May 2011. http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_ﬁles/WHA64/
A64_R24-en.pdf
WHO (World Health Organization). 2007. Our Cities, Our
Health, Our Future: Acting on Social Determinants for
Health Equity in Urban Settings. Report to the WHO
Commission on Social Determinants of Health from the
Knowledge Network on Urban Settings. Kobe City, Japan.
Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2008. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update.
Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2010a. Cholera, 2009. Weekly Epidemiological Record,
Vol. 85, No. 31, pp. 293–308. Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2010b. Haiti: Cholera Response Update. 13 December
2010. Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2011a. Cholera, 2010. Weekly Epidemiological Record,
Vol. 86, No. 31, pp. 325–340. Geneva, WHO. http://www.
who.int/wer/2011/wer8631.pdf
––––. 2011b. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality (4th edn).
Geneva, WHO.
––––. 2011c. Water Safety in Buildings. Geneva, WHO.
WHO/DFID (UK Department for International Development).
2009. Vision 2030: The Resilience of Water Supply and
Sanitation in the Face of Climate Change. Geneva/London,
WHO/DFID.

132

CHAPTER 4

WHO/IWA (International Water Association). 2009. Water
Safety Plan Manual: Step-by-Step Risk Management for
Drinking-Water Suppliers. Geneva/London, WHO/IWA.
WHO/UNICEF. 2009. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Standards for Schools in Low-Cost Settings. Geneva/New
York, WHO/UNICEF.
––––. 2011. Post-2015 Monitoring of Water and Sanitation.
Report of a ﬁrst WHO/UNICEF Consultation. (Berlin, 3–5
May 2011). Geneva/New York, WHO/UNICEF.
WHO/UN-Water. 2010. GLAAS 2010: UN-Water Global Annual
Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water. Geneva, WHO.
Wilson, M. D., Cheke, R. A., Flasse, S. P., Grist, S., OseiAteweneboana, M. Y., Tetteh-Kumah, A., Fiasorgbor, G.
K., Jolliffe, F. R., Boakye, D. A., Hougard, J. M., Yameogo,
L. and Post, R. J. 2002. Deforestation and the spatiotemporal distribution of savannah and forest members of
the Simulium Damnosum Complex in Southern Ghana and
South-Western Togo. Transactions of the Royal Society of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 96, No. 6, pp. 632–9.
World Bank. 2004. Natural Disasters: Counting the Costs.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
––––. 2010a. Assessment of the Risk of Amazon Dieback. Main
Report. Washington DC, The World Bank.
––––. 2010b. Natural Hazards, UnNatural Disasters, The
Economics of Effective Prevention. Washington DC, The
World Bank/International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD).
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in A Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2010. Living Planet
Report 2010: Biodiversity, Biocapacity and Development.
Gland, Switzerland, WWF. http://wwf.panda.org/
about_our_earth/all_publications/living_planet_report
Xu, H., Tang, X., Liu, J., Ding, H., Wu, J., Zhang, M., Yang, Q.,
Cai, L., Zhao, H. and Liu, Y. 2009. China’s progress toward
the signiﬁcant reduction of the rate of biodiversity loss.
BioScience, Vol. 59, No. 10, pp. 843–52.
Zhou, X. N., Yang, G. J., Yang, K., Wang, X. H., Hong, Q. B.,
Sun, L. P., Malone, J. B., Kristensen, T. K., Bergquist, N. R.
and Utzinger, J. 2008. Potential impact of climate change
on schistosomiasis transmission in China. American Society
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 78, No. 2, pp. 188–94.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

CHAPTER 5
Water management, institutions
and capacity development

—
Authors Richard Connor, Patrik Klintenberg, Anthony Turton and James Winpenny
Contributors Jeroen Aerts, Daniel P. Loucks, Chris Perry, Walter Rast and
Jos G. Timmerman

WWDR4
©
UN Photo/Devra Berkowitz

THE BEYOND
WATER RESOURCE:
DEMAND: WATER’S
VARIABILITY,
WATER SOCIAL
DEMAND:
VULNERABILITY
AND
WHAT
ENVIRONMENTAL
DRIVES
AND
CONSUMPTION?
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFITS

133

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
As described throughout the preceding chapters (1–4), water is central to all aspects of
development, underpinning every social and economic sector. How humans manage water is
therefore vital to the growth and prosperity of communities and societies. Yet the term ‘water
management’ is often used (and misunderstood) with many meanings ascribed to it, even
among experts within the water community. But what does the term really mean? Protecting
and managing the natural resource? Providing water-related services? Meeting allocation and
entitlement agreements and distributing (sometimes limited) supplies across a broad range
of complex, interlinked uses with increasingly uncertain demands? The short answer is all of
the above – and more.
Previous editions of the World Water Development Report (WWDR) included calls
for sustainable, improved and of course integrated water resources management. And
indeed these concepts, along with adaptive management, are scattered throughout this
fourth edition too, in terms of challenges and opportunities facing water management in
different regions (Chapter 7); valuing and allocating water resources and beneﬁts (Chapter
10); transforming water management institutions to deal with change (Chapter 11); and
responding to risk and uncertainty from a water management perspective (Chapter 13).
Building on the water management-related issues addressed in previous WWDRs, this
chapter begins with a description of what water management actually is, including a brief
examination of how approaches to water management in some regions have evolved over
the past century and how they might continue to evolve to deal with increasing uncertainties
and associated risks (a discussion which is continued in Chapter 11). The chapter also provides
a descriptive overview of water-related institutions, which collectively set out the ‘rules of
the game’ for water management, and outlines some of the challenges these institutions will
face in an increasingly uncertain future. The chapter concludes with a section highlighting the
importance of knowledge and capacity as a critical element of institutional effectiveness.
With the exception of Section 5.1, the material in this chapter has been condensed from
the challenge area reports (Part 3/Volume 2) ‘Water and institutional change: Responding
to present and future uncertainty’ (Chapter 25) and ‘Developing knowledge and capacity’
(Chapter 26).

5.1 Why do we need to manage water?
Water is a fugitive resource, ﬂowing through space and
time across landscapes and through economies. All
beneﬁt from it, but few understand how it is actually
managed. The management of water is not merely a
technical issue; it requires a mix of measures including
changes in policies, prices and other incentives, as well
as infrastructure and physical installations. Integrated
water resources management (IWRM) focuses on the
necessary integration of water management across
sectors, policies and institutions.
Water management is underpinned by levels of uncertainty. These are changing as a consequence of global
trends in demography, consumption patterns and
migration, and climate change, resulting in increased
levels of risk (see Chapters 8 and 9). Adapting to these
uncertainties and developing strategies that mitigate
against emerging risks makes water management policies, institutions and regulations more resilient, thereby
increasing their chances of generating beneﬁts to society. Adaptive water management extends to IWRM
by focusing on a more ﬂexible management process
to address uncertainty and include actors whose decisions affect water, but who do not currently participate
as an active part of the water management process.
5.1.1 Characteristics of water management systems
As water moves in time and space consistent with the
hydrological cycle, the term ‘water management’ covers
a variety of activities and disciplines. Broadly speaking,
these can be divided into three categories: managing
the resource, managing water services, and managing
the trade-offs needed to balance supply and demand.
Water resource management is about managing water
found in rivers, lakes and groundwater. This includes
water allocation, assessment and pollution control; the
protection of water-related ecosystems and water quality; natural and man-made infrastructure for the redistribution and storage of these resources; and groundwater
recharge. Water service management consists of managing reticulation systems from the bulk water supplier,
through the processing phases, up to the point of need
by the end user; and again capturing the waste streams
for reticulation back to a wastewater treatment plant for
safe onward discharge. The management of trade-offs
concerns a range of administrative activities that meet
allocation and entitlement agreements across a wide
spectrum of socio-economic interests. Each activity has
different requirements, but together they add up to
what is called water management.

WWDR4

Water management is unique. It touches upon almost
every aspect of human well-being with links to socioeconomic development, safety, human health, the
environment and even cultural and religious beliefs
(Dalcanale et al., 2011). For example, all nations, developed as well as developing, are vulnerable to rare and
extreme ﬂood events. This was demonstrated in 2005
by the devastation wrought by hurricane Katrina in
the southern United States of America, by the massive ﬂooding which took place in Pakistan in 2010, and
the inundations caused by tsunamis in various parts
of southern and eastern Asia over the last decade.
Less visible, but often no less disastrous, effects occur
through droughts such as that being experienced in
the Horn of Africa in 2011 (where loss of crops threaten the lives of thousands of people), or through slow
onset disasters such as the shrinking of the Aral Sea,
which has affected many livelihoods, the ﬂow of toxic
acid mine drainage from various mining areas of South
Africa (Coetzee, 1995; Coetzee et al., 2006; Hobbs
et al., 2008; Winde, 2009; Winde and van der Walt,
2004), and the lack of adequate water supply and
sanitation, which causes a range of diseases and loss
of lives in many parts of the world. Yet socio-economic
development is dependent on, and therefore a function of, available water supplies. Thus, proper water
management is of vital importance to human society
in a world where increasing demands are being placed
on a relatively ﬁnite but potentially renewable resource.
Water management over the twentieth century often
involved large infrastructure projects such as dams and
river diversions (WCD, 2000). This has often been described as the Hard Path Approach by certain authors
(Wolff and Gleick, 2002), or the Hydraulic Mission
phase of economic development by others (e.g. Allan,
2000). These projects were used to address both conditions of water scarcity and water excesses; namely,
the construction of artiﬁcial water storage facilities
(dams) or the exploitation of natural systems (aquifer
storage and recharge), allowing water to be stored for
use during periods of scarcity, and controlling its potentially devastating impacts during ﬂoods. The course
of human development has not necessarily followed
natural patterns of sustainability; rather, the sustainability of water resources has in many locations been
overwhelmed by the continually expanding human activities associated with socio-economic development,
including agricultural production, urbanization and industrialization. Many of these demands are naturally in
conﬂict, raising the need to manage trade-offs. While

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

135

“The world is
transitioning to a
new era where ﬁnite
water constraints are
starting to limit future
economic growth and
development.”
all waters are under pressure globally, groundwater
is of particular concern: increasing exploitation as a
result of improved drilling and pumping technology
has resulted in situations of severe depletion in many
countries (see Chapter 3). The world is transitioning to
a new era where ﬁnite water constraints are starting
to limit future economic growth and development. It is
becoming clear that even renewable water resources
cannot supply enough water if not managed carefully
(Patterson, 2009).
The twentieth century was characterized by the dambuilding era, as engineering design improved and better steel-reinforced concrete became available. This
gave rise to what can be termed the ‘infrastructure
approach’, as an element of the Hard Path Approach
or the Hydraulic Mission, in which it was believed that
the mere provision of hard infrastructure would suffice
to meet the varied needs of humanity (Allan, 2000).
Over time the limitations of the hard infrastructure approach have become increasingly clear (Snaddon et
al., 1999). For example, in the Netherlands, it was realized that continual heightening of dykes was ultimately unsustainable. This has led to a new approach that
foregrounds respect for natural hydrological conditions and acknowledges the limitations to the beneﬁt of hard infrastructure (van Stokkom et al., 2005).
Experience is now showing that substantial alterations
in hydrological conditions, most notably changes in
the natural ﬂood pulse (Junk et al., 1989; Puckridge et
al., 1993) caused by interventions such as inter-basin
transfers (Snaddon et al., 1999), have led to unintended consequences, sometimes called revenge effects (Tenner, 1996). These include the deterioration of

136

CHAPTER 5

ecosystems, especially wetlands, which if left unaltered
offer a wide range of ‘beneﬁts that are often essential to maintaining a basic standard of living in both
urban and rural areas’ (Emerton and Bos, 2004, p. 20).
Natural ecosystems such as forests and wetlands generate important economic services which maintain the
quantity and quality of water supplies. Furthermore
they help to mitigate or avert water-related disasters such as ﬂooding and drought (Emerton and Bos,
2004).
Contemporary water managers have to deal with an
increasingly complex picture. Their responsibilities entail managing variable and uncertain supplies to meet
rapidly changing and uncertain demands; balancing
ever-changing ecological, economic and social values;
facing high risks and increasing unknowns; and sometimes needing to adapt to events and trends as they
unfold. In short, the management of water increasingly focuses on risk and uncertainty, and the emerging range of drivers and impacts often lie outside the
traditional water arena. Moreover, effective water management demands transboundary coordination in a
context where a total of 276 international river basins
cover almost half the earth’s surface (Bakker, 2007; De
Stefano et al., 2010; OSU, n.d., 2008 data), and some
273 identiﬁed transboundary aquifers underpin various
national economies (Puri and Aureli, 2009).
Water management consequently is not only a technical issue, but also one that requires a much more
nuanced and holistic approach to achieve its goals.
During the twentieth century the focus was traditionally on structural options for water management – developing physical infrastructure to ‘tame’ or ‘control’ water. Today, in the countries that have achieved essential
water infrastructure development, there is a need for
increased attention on non-structural management
options to deal with the limitation of infrastructural
interventions in hydrological systems, underpinned by
growing uncertainty. Emerging twenty-ﬁrst century
water management can be thought of as increasingly
focused on soft infrastructure, most notably associated with the management of trade-offs, and increasingly dependent on institutions, policy, legislation and
dialogue between competing users (see Chapter 11).
Some authors refer to this as the Soft Path Approach
(Brooks et al., 2009; Wolff and Gleick, 2002). Having
beneﬁted from decades of infrastructure development,
the challenge for most developed countries is to incorporate soft measures into existing water management

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

frameworks. However, most developing countries are
still in the process of meeting the most basic levels of
water infrastructure development. The challenge for
these countries will be to adopt and balance elements
of both the hard and soft paths, in order to maximize
the beneﬁts (and minimize the costs and risks) of both
approaches.
Water management through infrastructure
development
The hard approach to water management typically
focuses on the construction of water storage, transport, treatment, ﬂood protection, and other regulation and delivery (distribution and collection) systems; hydropower plants; and groundwater wells and
pumps, consistent with the goal of seeking additional
water supplies. The capacities of these structures have
typically been based on historical records of ﬂows,
stages and demands projected into the future or for
some return period (frequency). Some countries are
busy constructing such infrastructure to make use of
their often-scarce water resources, such as for irrigation, domestic and industrial uses, and sometimes for
environmental purposes. Other countries are devoting
considerable attention to the protection of their growing populations from ﬂooding, while others remove or
modify some of their hard infrastructure, mostly to enhance environmental and ecosystem services and their
associated beneﬁts.
Hard infrastructural measures include the high costs
of maintaining hydrological ﬁxes for prolonged periods and the risk of degraded performance over time.
These are still required by countries facing economic
water scarcity (see Section 4.6), where the social and
economic beneﬁts of such measures can greatly out
way the costs. Moreover, the costs of reducing the
unexpected negative impacts of these measures may
be high. Long-term planning is therefore critical, although fraught with uncertainties. Increasing emphasis on stakeholder participation is designed to balance
trade-offs between impacts on ecological systems
and potential beneﬁts. While this is more democratic,
it places greater demands on political leadership and
governance structures, and can sometimes delay project implementation, so it is not without risk.
Although water demand management can substantially reduce water needs and will always remain a central
component to sound management (see Chapter 11),
there is still a substantial requirement for increased

WWDR4

water storage, which necessarily increases with socioeconomic development and climate change. Innovative
storage infrastructure can sometimes help to overcome the disadvantages of hard infrastructural measures, while maintaining their advantages. The potential
of working with nature by using ‘green’ infrastructure
(such as wetlands) and less intrusive dams, therefore
offers very promising opportunities (Wolff and Gleick,
2002). One example is the use of permeable surface
coatings in urban areas, rather than concrete, to reduce
storm water runoff while enhancing the urban ecosystem; however, the implementation of such strategies is
usually beyond the scope of water managers. In recognition of the fact that new physical infrastructure will
be needed for food, energy and ﬂood protection and
enhanced storage to adapt to climate change, proper
measures must be taken in the overall spectrum from
planning to operation of such infrastructure. As with
all hard approaches, however, whether directed to
agriculture, urban or industrial water uses, new or updated water infrastructure may be necessary. It must
be noted that this increases the complexity of water
management, by virtue of the greater range of actors
and issues being incorporated into the decisionmaking process. This means that an increase in risk
and vulnerability is an inherent property of the system
by which water is managed.
Twenty-ﬁrst century water management: The
emergence of a range of softer measures
In response to the shortcomings of approaches based
on physical infrastructure, there has been a gradual
shift towards policies based on institutional reform,
incentives and behavioural change (see Chapter 11).
These types of approaches seek to reduce the uncertainties and manage the risks related to water resources by embracing more of the non-traditional elements
found outside the traditional ‘water box’. Here the role
of water managers is to inform the decisions taken
by others. These include changes in human behaviour related to water usage and revised water governance processes and systems. They constitute a range
of generally complementary actions, including cultural
values, water pricing, water conservation, water reallocation, economic incentives/disincentives, and social
recognition for reducing inefficient water use practices,
diversifying water sources and similar activities. As all
of these are considered to be out of the box, the soft
path approach requires signiﬁcant operational capacity
and high levels of coordination among and across various ministries. This is where the ‘I’ in IWRM becomes

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

137

of increased importance. Experience over the past half
century has demonstrated that soft options present
considerable potential for addressing water resource
issues, but are increasingly complex because of the
need to integrate across a range of previously uncoordinated actors. Meaningful stakeholder engagement
and participation is likely to grow in signiﬁcance when
developing such measures, placing new demands on
institutions and political leadership.
Solutions that embrace a range of softer approaches
will make use of forecasting and modelling advances
to facilitate more accurate risk assessment, thereby
working to increase the resilience and decrease the
vulnerability of water systems, while also working
across and beyond the traditional range of water resource management to include out-of-the-box actors. This can provide useful information to those water
users and stakeholders impacted by water resources
management but currently not serviced, such as stockbrokers and institutional investors concerned about
undeclared but embedded risk (ACCA, 2009; Chang,
2009; Klop and Wellington, 2008).
The public is often insufficiently informed to comprehend how its use of existing water resources can affect
either the quantity or quality of these resources. As
a result, the public is not always unaware of ways by
which it might contribute to solving the relevant problems. Proper public education and awareness can help
engage water stakeholders in needed actions, particularly with regard to reducing water demands and pollution, and it also puts pressure on governments and
other decision-makers. At the same time, sustainable
and equitable change requires water managers to understand the issues and perspectives of the users and
community at the initial stage of implementation, paying attention to their ideas and facilitating institutionbuilding. By identifying differences in power relations
and recognizing women’s needs and potential contributions, real change can be made in the functioning of
water systems, livelihoods and food security. In return,
the public can exert pressure, which can result in government agencies and other users and stakeholders
reﬁning their water-use policies and programmes.
Implementing non-structural management options
usually requires strong operational capacity but limited
investments that are often spread over time. Moreover,
when non-structural interventions do not lead to the
intended goals, contrary to structural measures, they

138

CHAPTER 5

can usually be modiﬁed or ended without substantial
extra investments. This ﬂexibility is beneﬁcial, but will
place increasing demands on political leadership and
the management of trade-offs between competing interest groups.
5.1.2 Integrated water resources management
IWRM is deﬁned as a process that ‘promotes the coordinated development and management of water, land
and related resources in order to maximize the resultant economic and social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the sustainability of vital
ecosystems’ (GWP-TAC, 2000, p. 22). IWRM recognizes the interdependencies of multiple components
of a regional water resource system: high irrigation
demands and polluted drainage ﬂows from agriculture mean less freshwater for drinking or industrial use;
contaminated municipal and industrial wastewater pollutes rivers and threatens ecosystems; the slow-onset
disaster of uncontrolled decanting of acidic water from
abandoned mines; and if water has to be left in a river
to protect ﬁsheries and ecosystems, less can be diverted to grow crops.
IWRM implies that all the different uses of water resources are considered together. Water allocation and
management decisions should consider the effects of
each use on the other, thus taking into account overall
social and economic goals, including the achievement
of sustainable development targets, health and safety.
This also means ensuring coherent policy-making related to all sectors, most notably between decision-makers concerned with national water security, national
food security and national energy security. Competing
user groups (farmers, communities, environmentalists,
etc.) can inﬂuence strategies for water resource development and management, with the result that the process becomes more political and less purely technical
as integration occurs and a potential basket of beneﬁts
emerges (Phillips et al., 2006, 2008). That brings additional beneﬁts, as informed users can often apply local
self-regulation in relation to issues such as water conservation and catchment protection (GWP-TAC, 2000).
Integrated management contrasts with the sectoral
approach where responsibility for drinking water rests
with one agency, for irrigation water with another, for
energy and mine water elsewhere and for the environment with yet another. Lack of cross-sectoral linkages
may lead to uncoordinated water resource development and management that may result in chaos, conﬂict and waste of resources (CapNet, GWP and UNDP,

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

2005) and an unsustainable overall picture where components vie for suboptimal solutions at best.
The essential purpose of IWRM is to manage water
more efficiently and effectively. IWRM entails the coordination of ‘policies, institutions, regulatory frameworks … planning, operations, maintenance and design
standards of numerous agencies and departments
responsible for one or more aspects of water and related natural resources management’ (Stakhiv and
Pietrowsky, 2009, pp. 4–5). Multi-disciplinary and multi-agency coordination and cooperation is therefore an
important feature of IWRM.
This edition of the World Water Development Report
provides an update on the commitment to IWRM
made by the international community and countries
(see Section 1.3.3). It states that while important developments have been made around the world, the preparation by governments of national IWRM plans and
the actual implementation rates of these plans remain
unsatisfactory and well behind targets. ‘Water management can work effectively (but not necessarily efﬁciently) in fragmented institutional systems (such as
the federally based systems of Australia, Brazil and the
United States of America), where there is a high degree of decision-making transparency, public participation, and adequate ﬁnancial support for planning and
implementation. It does not work well in most other
cases where these prerequisites do not exist. Setting
up the proper institutional framework is the ﬁrst step
toward IWRM’ (see Section 11.2).
One of the goals of IWRM is to reconcile economic
development and ecosystem maintenance. This is a
challenge because economic development goals and
environmental needs are associated with different
temporal scales, and both have been based on traditional water management concepts that do not always
consider the unexpected risks and uncertainties associated with the softer approaches. For this reason,
ecosystem goods and services and their valuation are
increasingly included in IWRM planning. However, they
can also constitute a major source of uncertainty for a
variety of reasons.
Workable and sustainable solutions in water management are achieved through integration: between land
and water management; between the management of
different urban water systems; between the water and
energy, mining and agricultural sectors; and between

WWDR4

“The public is often
insufficiently informed
to comprehend how
its use of existing
water resources can
affect either the
quantity or the quality
of these resources.”

construction and operation and maintenance procedures. Integration is generally achieved incrementally
in a step-wise process that can be drawn out. In particular, dialogue between stakeholders facilitates integration, which is itself shaped by the context.
These processes, as well as dialogue between stakeholders, can also help to address broader issues of coordination and integration outside the realm of IWRM,
which arise when water resources, use and management are impacted by actions taken by decision-makers in other, non-water sectors for other objectives, as
established by the WWDR3 (WWAP, 2009).
5.1.3 Water resource management under uncertain
demands
Hydro-climatologic information about frequencies,
magnitude, duration and incidence of precipitation
and runoff events ought to be the basic inputs into
most water management decisions. They have been
combined with more fundamental economic, environmental and socio-economic information and objectives
to better inform water management decisions. Land
use regulations, economic priorities, trade policies and
cost–beneﬁt criteria are among other inputs used to
decide between water management options (Stakhiv
and Steward, 2009). In all of this, water management now has to account for unforeseeable changes
in the nature and timing of population growth, migration, globalization, changing consumption patterns,
technological advances and agricultural and industrial

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

139

developments. These issues were already present, but
were for the most part neglected. The looming spectre of climate change has helped to draw attention to
their importance, adding a new dimension to the everincreasing complexity arising from the drivers mentioned above.
As the assumptions emanating from stable-state
systems are no longer appropriate, one of the current challenges involves determining the capacities of
new infrastructural components for a water resource
system whose future inputs or design ﬂows can no
longer be predicted or calculated from the historical
record. Under conditions of uncertainty it is no longer
possible to use today’s science, based on yesterday’s
experience, to predict the needs of the future (Turton,
2007). The challenge of predicting demands during
an era of accelerated changes adds to the complexity. Drivers of water also interact among themselves
(see Chapter 9), which creates a new set of uncertainties and associated risks, as well as a diverse and
complex variety of combinations and possible paths.
This may well be beyond the understanding of those
dealing with various management challenges. For
example, land-use change and urbanization, already
resulting in pollution, the sealing of surfaces and a
loss of forests and wetlands causes increased runoff,
resulting in a higher risk of ﬂooding, sedimentation
and eutrophication. Demographic changes, including population growth and changes in consumption
patterns and migration, frequently lead to increasing
demands for water and food. The growing pressures
on water often concentrate in coastal areas, where
climate change is expected to have the highest impact. These areas are already under high water stress
and increased pressure often results in the salinization of groundwater where rising water in the soil
brings diluted salts to the surface, which are not fully
ﬂushed away (WWAP, 2009). Growing energy consumption increasingly impacts on water, through biofuel production that requires signiﬁcant amounts of
water; thermal power plants that need huge amounts
of water for cooling, adding to the water temperature
increase caused by climate change; and biodiversity
and water chemistry arising from the acidiﬁcation
of rain due to the sulphur cycle. Finally, the state of
infrastructure such as dams and irrigation systems
can, if inadequate, lead to major risks of water waste,
which exacerbate water stress, as well as to increased
risks of major accidents. Both sets of risks can aggravate climate change impacts (UNECE, 2009).

140

CHAPTER 5

Society in general, and the engineering profession in
particular, ‘through a historical accumulation of experience, laws, engineering practices and regulations,
has deﬁned a narrower acceptable range of “expected” events to which it chooses to adapt – hence,
there is the 100-year ﬂoodplain for ﬂood insurance
purposes; criteria for the design of urban drainage
systems for smaller but more frequent events; and
dam safety considerations by designing spillways for
very low-probability ﬂoods, for example a 10,000year return period. These are societal judgments
made on the basis of many factors, including affordability, relative population vulnerability, and national
and regional economic beneﬁts. They are not deterministic criteria made on the basis of empirical or
simulation modelling. Deﬁning social risk tolerance
and service reliability is part of a “social contract” to
be determined through the political process coupled
with public participation’ (Stakhiv and Pietrowsky,
2009, p. 8), which constitutes an element of uncertainty in the Soft Path Approach.
Discounting, a method used to compress a stream of
future costs and beneﬁts into a single present value
amount, is an important concept, because it can have
a major effect on the outcome of the cost–beneﬁt calculation. A high discount rate will favour avoiding the
costs of adaptation now, whereas a low discount factor encourages immediate action. Setting the discount
rate is therefore basically deﬁning the social welfare
function across generations with substantial implications for the decisions taken. To deal with all the uncertainties, scenarios are developed that describe possible futures, depending on, among others, decisions
based on societal values. Based on the scenarios, models help to predict the effects of these possible futures
for hydrological conditions and help to identify vulnerabilities that water management measures would help
solve (UNECE, 2009).
5.1.4 Adaptive management
The complexity of water management, combined with
increased uncertainty, both through socio-economic
developments and climate change, makes the traditional command-and-control approach less effective.
An adaptive approach towards IWRM responds to this.
Adaptive management can generally be deﬁned as a
systematic process for improving management policies and practices by learning from the outcomes of
management strategies that have already been implemented (Pahl-Wostl et al., 2007). It is a continuous

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

process of adjustment that attempts to deal with the
increasingly rapid changes in our societies, economies,
climate and technologies. In essence, adaptive water
management is based on a series of feedback loops
being hard-wired into the system, which enable many
incremental adjustments to be made before a catastrophic problem manifests. It is learning to manage by
managing to learn.
Learning in water management encompasses the
range of ecological, economic and socio-political domains in testing the effectiveness of structural and
non-structural measures. The quality of the management process in this approach is essential, including
the realization that management strategies and goals
may have to be altered during the process (Pahl-Wostl
et al., 2007). Successful adaptive water management
includes some approaches in addition to overall water
management (Mysiak et al, 2010):
đ It builds on collaborative governance – a joint effort of government, society and science – to ensure
that measures will be effective and sustainable. Trust
and social capital are important in ensuring that the
problem-solving process takes place.
đ It is embedded in an ‘enabling environment’: a political, institutional and legal setting that enables
learning and does not hinder adaptive approaches
(UNECE, 2009).
đ It changes from water supply management to water demand management. The availability of water
resources is the baseline, not the demand for water.
Improving efficiency of water use will help ensure a
sustained supply of water to different uses in times
when resources become scarce.
đ It pays more attention to non-structural (‘softer’)
water management measures. Legal and policy
agreements help to promote more sustainable use
of water in all sectors while explicitly considering equity and poverty alleviation measures.
đ It recognizes adaptation in water management to
changing conditions such as energy and food prices,
demographic trends, migration ﬂows, changing
production and consumption patterns, and climate
change is a long-term continuous exercise, not a
one-off set of measures.
đ It bases the ﬁnancing of water management on
the valuation and pricing of water resources use
without impacting the most vulnerable groups in
a disproportional way nor unduly harming local
competitiveness.

WWDR4

Implementation of these recommendations is highly
demanding, and requires that managers overcome
the inertia of traditional approaches and resistance
from various actors. The major challenge for authoritative regulatory bodies at local and national levels,
however, is to develop a coordinated ‘vision of how to
implement the ideas, as well as the courage to withstand criticism and to share power with other actors’
(Timmerman and Bernardini, 2009, p. 2).

5.2 The importance of water institutions for
sustainable development
5.2.1 Institutions: The rules of the game
According to the Nobel economic laureate Douglass
North, ‘Institutions are the humanly devised constraints that structure political, economic and social
interaction’. They consist of both informal constraints
(sanctions, taboos, customs, traditions, and codes of
conduct) and formal rules (constitutions, laws, regulations, and property rights) (North, 1990, p. 97).
Institutions constitute the ‘rules of the game’, deﬁning roles and procedures for people, possessing of
permanence and stability, and determining what is
appropriate, legitimate and proper (see Chapter 25).
These ‘rules’ have evolved organically, responding to
history, geography, culture and politics, and reﬂecting
technical advances and the evolution of professional
practices and local capacity. Actors other than water
managers often dictate the rules of the game for water.
In most cases, they are established without water as
their central focus and lack recognition of its pivotal
importance.
Institutions underpin the management of water resources and the delivery of key services that sustain
health, welfare and economic growth. Global water
problems can be traced to a deﬁcit of governance
resulting from a lack of appropriate institutions at all
levels, and the chronic dysfunctionality of existing institutional arrangements (Lewis et al., 2005). Water
management institutions are part of the broader institutional framework of countries (see Chapters 11
and 25). The potency of this framework will encourage or hinder effective approaches to managing
water resources and its related services. Laws, policies, private and public entities, along with stakeholders outside the ‘water box’, can greatly inﬂuence how
water institutions behave and perform under normal
circumstances.

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

141

5.2.2 What institutions do, and why they matter
Water-related institutions function at different scales
ranging from the local community to the transnational
level, and oversee the allocation, distribution, management, planning, protection and regulation of water
resources and services. Institutions deﬁne roles and
procedures, which determine what is appropriate, legitimate and proper (see Chapter 25). In addition, traditional and contemporary social rules may be applied
to water use and management.
Informal water rights systems are not just ‘customary’,
‘traditional’ or ‘ancient’. On the contrary, they can form
a dynamic mix of rules, principles and organizational
forms that are highly relevant to contemporary problems. They combine local, national and global rules,
and often mix indigenous, colonial and contemporary
norms and rights. Local water rights exist in conditions of legal pluralism where rules and principles of
different origin and legitimization co-exist and interact
(Boelens, 2008).
Aﬂaj irrigation systems, widespread in many Middle
Eastern countries, are an example of one such informal
system for allocating water.1 Clientelism2 or even corruption can also be viewed as methods for determining
the allocation of water resources and services among
different sectors and groups. Informal systems can
sometimes be assimilated into the formal economy, as
in Paraguay, where small informal private drinking water
supply systems have been recognized and agreements
developed between local governments and small-scale
private water vendors. The outcome has been easier
control and monitoring of the pricing and quality of service (Phumpiu and Gustafsson, 2008).
In 2010, resolutions by the United Nations General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council conﬁrmed
that access to safe water and sanitation is a human
right (see Section 1.2.4). Member states are required
to ensure the progressive implementation of the right
to water and sanitation to everybody in their jurisdiction. It is hoped that this will contribute to accelerating much-needed progress in providing these
essential services to billions of people who do not
currently enjoy them. According to the measurements and standards of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), the reports of the WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme (JMP) for Water Supply and
Sanitation, and the Global Annual Assessment of
Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS) processes,

142

CHAPTER 5

884 million people still use unimproved sources for
drinking water and 2.6 billion people do not use improved sanitation (WHO/UNICEF, 2010). Measured
against the more precise and rigorous standards now
deﬁned under the right to water, these ﬁgures represent a signiﬁcant under-estimation. Some estimates
indicate that the number of people without access to
safe and reliable tap water in their homes is between
3 and 4 billion. The push to increase access to drinking water and sanitation to meet the expectations of
the right to water could become a major driver shaping the future development of water services.
5.2.3 Institutions ‘ﬁt for purpose’
The second edition of the World Water Development
Report (WWDR2) noted that poor access to water
resources and services is not the result principally
of water shortages, but of an ‘institutional resistance to change’ due to a ‘lack of appropriate institutions’ for managing and securing resources for building both human capacity and physical infrastructure’
(WWAP, 2006). For example, some countries, often
those with the greatest need, are unable to absorb
the current level of aid for sanitation and/or drinking water. These developing countries will need to
strengthen their national and subnational systems in
order to plan, implement and monitor the delivery
of sanitation and drinking water services, especially
for underserved populations (WHO/UN-Water, 2010).
The WHO/UN-Water GLAAS (2010) document reports that deﬁning appropriate institutional roles and
responsibilities remains a challenge for both sanitation and drinking water. Even where national strategies are well developed, government institutions are
well coordinated and adequate ﬁnancing is available,
progress in sanitation and drinking water may still
be limited by the lack of adequately trained, capable
staff and a work environment conducive to effective
outputs (WHO/UN-Water, 2010). The WWDR2 referred to confusion in water governance in many developing countries, citing ‘a lack of water institutions’
and ‘a display of fragmented institutional structures’
as issues requiring immediate attention. GLAAS 2010
recommends that ‘sound policies, allied to effective
institutions, are important for optimizing service delivery. Establishing clear roles and responsibilities for
the different institutions involved in sanitation and
drinking water is also important, if good progress is
to be made’ (WHO/UN-Water, 2010, p. 2).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

A recent business survey – in which ﬁrms chose between different types of possible constraints on doing business in the country concerned – showed the
constraints imposed by prevalent institutional systems
(Figure 5.1). Institutional and governance-related issues
such as bureaucratic performance and corruption control appear to rank higher than quality of infrastructure
in regions like sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.3 The
implication is that investment in water development
requires a combination of soft and hard measures,
with priority being given to institutional reform – with
emphasis on good governance, effective regulation,
strong operational capacity and control of corruption –
in many cases.

participation and accountability. Irrespective of their
type, institutions govern similar issues of resources allocation, quality protection, planning and so on.
Allocation is becoming a widespread issue, particularly
in countries such as those in the Middle East, which
have already developed easily accessible water, and
where additional water provision will come at a high
cost. Currently, many countries in the region are using
up to 90% of their water for irrigation, whereas agriculture is contributing less and less to GDP, and more
economically vibrant sectors often face severe water
constraints (Beaumont, 2005).
Effective institutions can reduce natural, economic,
technical and social uncertainties. For example, the
successful negotiation of tensions and conﬂicts over
shared waters will reduce uncertainties for the parties concerned and lead to more rational water use
and allocation. Effective water institutions fulﬁl several
purposes:

Countries show great variation in institutional design.
In some countries and regions, for example China, the
Middle East and North Africa, water institutions reﬂect
strong government steering, top-down management
and hierarchical control. Elsewhere, a greater diffusion of powers can be found among government, civil
society and markets, with varying levels of emphasis
on features such as transparency, multi-stakeholder

Deﬁne roles, rights and responsibilities at different
scales. ‘Institutional arrangements deﬁne who controls

FIGURE 5.1
Key constraints to doing business in several geographic and economic regions
Firms reporting constraint among top three (%)
60

50

40

30

20

10

0
OECD

Infrastructure

East Asia
NICs

Bureaucracy

East Asia
developing

Corruption

South
Asia

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Transition

Latin
America

Tax regulations

Note: The question posed to the ﬁrm was ‘Select among the above 14 constraints the ﬁve most problematic factors for doing business in your
country’.
Source: Kaufmann (2005, ﬁg. 2, p. 85).

WWDR4

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

143

the resource and the extent of a property regime’
(Ananda, et al., 2006). Institutions play a vital role in
establishing the working rules of rights and duties,
and in ﬁxing the relationships of multiple or co-users
to one another and to a speciﬁc natural resource. In
Kenya, the recent water sector reforms have clearly delineated the institutional arrangements for the
roles and responsibilities of agencies involved both
in service delivery and water basin management. The
reforms have, for example, encouraged a sector-wide
approach to planning (SWAp),4 which promotes good
practice for partnerships, conduct, investment planning, coordination, monitoring and decision-making
– all aimed at improved service delivery and accountability within and among sectors.
Determine restrictions and provide for mediation of
conﬂicts. Institutions set certain individual and collective restrictions to water use: who can use what water,
how much, when and for what purposes. A widening gap between water supply and demand intensiﬁes competition and conﬂicts between water users,
regions and economic sectors. This puts pressure on
institutions dealing with resource allocation and management, and heightens the importance of mechanisms which deal with conﬂicting interests through
economic incentives. The Mekong River Basin illustrates the complex relations between states and rivalry
among water institutions. Transboundary water conﬂicts have generally been contained in this basin, but
the growth of water scarcity due to environmental and
developmental factors could lead to major conﬂicts in
the future, driving the reform of regulatory and allocation mechanisms. In some instances, water conﬂicts
have accelerated institutional change.
Reduce transaction costs and stimulate investments.
Institutions underpin increased and more effective investments. Poor institutions pose increased investment
risk and affect the competitiveness of countries and
the performance of their ﬁrms. Effective institutions
lower transactions costs, namely the various costs incurred in making an economic exchange and taking
part in a market – costs such as those for search and
information, bargaining and decision-making, and policing and enforcement.
5.2.4 Water institutions: Current status and future
challenges
Water encompasses a wide range of sectors and uses
throughout its natural cycle, at different scales, and

144

CHAPTER 5

with no overall uniﬁed system of management or governance. Even if some coherence could be brought into
water management – in whatever sense this term is
used (e.g. from applying the IWRM paradigm) – important inﬂuences on water would continue to be exerted
from forces ‘outside the box’, such as national policies
on regional development, international trade, tourism,
housing, energy, agriculture and food security, environmental protection and so on. Due to these complexities, it is difficult for water institutions to adapt to current and future risks and uncertainties, and to develop
any kind of consistent approach.
The diverse structure of water management in dealing
with various resource and use/service-related issues
is reﬂected in the complexity and fragmentation of
the institutions that exist to govern and manage it. It
is rare to ﬁnd a ‘ministry of water’ (as in Bolivia, India
or Tanzania) dealing with all aspects of the sector. It
is more common to have separate ministries responsible for water resources, irrigation, environment, power,
transport, health, urban water supply, rural water, and
so on. Each of these subject areas impinges on water,
yet each typically has separate ministerial responsibility and administrative structures, with ﬁnancing usually
determined independently of other interested parties.
The ‘rules of the game’ for water management are set
in a diffuse institutional environment, where imminent
decisions to be taken in response to climate change
or environmental sustainability are heavily inﬂuenced
by the speciﬁc needs of other sectors, with water a
secondary consideration. Making coherent decisions
on such momentous issues, with the various tradeoffs they imply, will call for some institutional machinery linking decision-makers in key sectors with those
responsible for water management. A wider group of
stakeholders needs to be involved in the rule-setting
process (Figure 10.2).
While some countries have made progress toward effective water governance, the success of institutional
reform has been mixed: many countries have not overcome their shortcomings in governance, ﬁnancial and
capacity areas. For example, reforms in Ghana, India
and South Africa came as part of a wider move to economic reform, but have not been uniformly successful.
Some common features of institutional reforms are
the adoption of an IWRM framework, including water resources planning, the establishment of river

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

basin management authorities, the encouragement of
multi-stakeholder engagement, and the use of costeffectiveness, cost recovery and cost–beneﬁt analysis to determine investment priorities. Rights-based
approaches to water services and the inclusion of
integrity and accountability criteria are other recent
developments.
The subject matter of water management and policysetting is continuously being redeﬁned due to cultural,
economic, political, social and environmental changes.
These shifting forces pose various challenges for institutional reform, some of which are detailed here:
Integration. The institutions governing water in its
many facets need to be sufficiently comprehensive,
and the policies for water management need to be
coherent enough, to deal effectively with looming
problems. A case in point is climate change, which is a
major current driver of institutional change. Water will
be a primary medium through which climate change
impacts will be experienced by various sectors, and
the way the process is managed will shape sustainable
development and poverty reduction efforts. Changes
in water availability and demand will worsen existing stresses in sectors such as health, food production, sustainable energy and biodiversity, while water-related risks due to extreme events, such as ﬂash
ﬂoods, storm surge and landslides, are set to increase.
Effective institutions must therefore be able to accommodate the re-allocation of water in response to
changes in its availability. The institutional response
should include promotion of cost-effective conservation measures and efficiency enhancements under
effective water demand management practices. The
strengthening of local institutions and strengthening of
social networks is an integral part of successful adaptation (Box 5.1).
Institutions should be sufficiently ﬂexible and adaptable to account for uncertainties in both water supply and demand. A degree of formal recognition and
assimilation might be justiﬁed in the case of informal
water service providers, who typically deal with marginalized water users whose needs are not met by established formal supply networks.
Integrity, transparency and accountability. Attempts
to tackle mismanagement, corruption, bureaucratic
inertia and red tape can prove a major stimulus for
institutional change. Corruption is a core symptom of

WWDR4

poor governance, which distorts investment, increases
transactions costs and discourages innovation. Petty
corruption has a particular impact on the poor and
disempowered. This calls for, among other things, the
enforcement of regulations on the performance and
expenditure of service providers. In most developing countries, such regulation is either weak or absent.
Existing systems of monitoring, policing, sanctions and
incentives are not applied on a systematic basis and
are often derailed due to clientelism and corruption
(Box 5.2).
Capacity development and resources. The delegation
of responsibility to local water agencies should be accomplished by corresponding transfer of powers, tools
and resources – in short, capacity. Any delegation
should be based on careful analysis to help determine
the appropriate level for decentralization or centralization, in accordance with technical considerations and
economies of scale and scope. Because of the low proﬁle and unfashionable character of water management
and service agencies, their gradual loss of resources
and capacity has gone largely unnoticed. This trend
needs reversing if the agencies in question are to address the far-reaching changes required.

BOX 5.1
Adaptation to water stress in the Greater
Himalayan Region

Five case studies from the Greater Himalayan Region
looked at situations where people are responding to too
much water (ﬂoods, water logging) or to too little water
(drought, water stress). The regions examined were the
dry mountain valleys of Chitral in Pakistan; the middle hills
in Nepal; the ﬂood plains of Bihar, India in the Koshi basin;
the ﬂood plains of Brahmaputra in Assam in India; and the
hill areas of Yunnan, China.
Some of the key ﬁndings for adaptation comprised a mix
of strategies to develop diversiﬁcation of livelihoods and
to make use of and strengthen local institutions and social
networks. Cultural norms and rules affect people’s adaptive behaviour, and need to be considered, but they are
dynamic and can shift over time in response to different
needs. In addition, it was acknowledged that national institutions and policies strongly affect people’s ability to
adapt at the local level, but the national level is rarely informed by adaptation concerns and priorities.
Source: ICIMOD (2009); see also Chapter 25.

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

145

Generating adequate and sustainable funding. Many
water institutions in developing countries are weak
and under-ﬁnanced (Dinar and Saleth, 2005). New
funding is required for institutional capacity-building and adaptation, but it is equally important to use

BOX 5.2
Development of regulatory accounting in Latin
America

Manipulation of accounting is a serious concern in the
regulation of public utilities and regulators usually devote
considerable attention to the methods of accounting used
by the utilities they regulate. In general, a regulator cannot do an effective job if it does not have the authority to
deﬁne the accounting systems under its jurisdiction. When
water utilities were opened up to private investment in
the 1990s in Argentina, it became necessary to develop
a regulatory framework that would induce them to work
towards the objectives set forth by the State. The Aguas
Argentinas system was one of the ﬁrst experiences of regulatory accounting for water and sanitation service providers in the region. The following lessons were learned
about implementing this effective regulatory tool:
đƫƫƫ+ƫ0$!ƫ!40!*0ƫ,+//%(!Čƫ0$!ƫ,.+&!0ƫ/$+1( ƫ!ƫ,proached as a joint undertaking between the regulator
and the regulated entity, with dedicated, multidisciplinary teams on both ends.
đƫƫƫ+*0.%10+./ƫ0+ƫ0$!ƫ,.+&!0ƫ/$+1( ƫ!ƫ.+1#$0ƫ+*ƫ+. ƫ
as early as possible, including technical, operational,
commercial, administrative and information technology
personnel to ensure effective collaboration and support.
đƫƫƫ0ƫ/$+1( ƫ!ƫ1* !./0++ ƫ0$0ƫ0$!ƫ)+ %ü0%+*/ƫ0+ƫ%*"+.mation systems and procedures involved in the implementation of regulatory accounting take place in large,
existing companies, which limit discretional authority and
can increase the time it takes to implement changes.
đƫƫƫ*ƫ+. !.ƫ0+ƫ"+.!/!!ƫ1*%*0!* ! ƫ+*/!-1!*!/ƫ* ƫ$2!ƫ
time to make any necessary adjustments, the possible
effects of the project on the work culture in both the
utility company and the regulatory agency should be
taken into account.
Experience both at home and abroad indicates that
information asymmetry is also present in the regulation and oversight of publicly owned service providers.
Accordingly, once the Aguas Argentinas contract was revoked in 2006 and services were transferred to the largely
state-owned Agua y Saneamientos Argentinos (AySA) in
2006, the new regulatory framework stipulated that the
public company also had to implement a regulatory accounting system.
Sources: Jouravlev (2004) and Lentini (2009a,b).

146

CHAPTER 5

existing funding more efficiently. Most water funding
goes to infrastructure development and less is invested in operations and maintenance and developing
institutions and human capacities. Of the 11 reporting
countries in the 2009–2010 CSO and GLAAS country
surveys, the contribution of recurrent expenses, including salaries, non-salaries and urban subsidies, to total
expenditures for sanitation and drinking water ranged
anywhere from 13% to 78% (note that only internal
sources of ﬁnancing for government expenditure are
included) (WHO/UN-Water, 2010). Both public and private sector funding should be enhanced, if necessary,
through innovative funding approaches.
Conventional water planning is too rigid to meet the
challenges ahead, which require the development of
adaptive governance frameworks and institutions. Calls
have been made for more resilient institutions and approaches (GWP, 2009). In fact, the institutions that
govern the management and use of water are not immutable, and have the capacity to change in response
to circumstances, particularly crises. Many reforms are
born out of conﬂict (Box 5.3)
Institutional reforms may impose transitional costs of
their own, offsetting some of their expected beneﬁts.
In Kenya, for example, some stakeholders see institutional changes such as the introduction of sector-wide
approach to planning (SWAP) as potentially increasing bureaucracy and complexity and removing decision-making further from the grassroots level. There is
some concern regarding the potential for transaction
costs to rise with SWAP, and some non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) fear that SWAP may reduce their
funding levels. These institutional reforms may require
higher levels of transparency and higher governmentmonitoring capacity, both weak points in the sector at
present.
Institutions that develop in the water sector inevitably
reﬂect those in wider society. The privatization of water
assets in England and Wales, and Chile, and the growth
of markets for water in the latter, developed within a
political and legal context favourable to the transfer of
assets into private management and ownership. The
active use of water tariffs, and the use of water markets for allocating scarce supplies, is likely to be more
feasible in economies with widespread involvement of
private producers, than in countries with a strong ‘statist’ tradition. The precise balance of public and private
agencies in the management and delivery of water

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

services differs from country to country – but almost
always with the preponderance of the public sector –
reﬂecting a mix of political, ideological and practical
factors. It is important to underline that empirical evidence from developed economies reveals that there is
little justiﬁcation for a general presumption in favour of
either type of ownership, and case by case evaluation of
the various trade-offs is therefore in order (Renzetti and
Dupont, 2003; Vickers and Yarrow, 1988).
Against a background of increasing risk and uncertainty, there is an argument for allowing different
institutional models to coexist, which could increase
resilience and the potential for both policy and technological innovation.

5.3 Institutional knowledge and capacity
5.3.1 The importance of knowledge assimilation and
transfer
Water-related problems are commonly the result of
ineffective institutions and inadequate water management. To improve water management requires comprehensive skills and training in, for example, engineering

and infrastructure maintenance, ﬁnancial and institutional administration, and policy analysis. Another
valuable source of knowledge is experience gained by
local water professionals from hands-on management.
This local knowledge often goes unrecorded or even
unrecognized. Importantly, local managers are aware
of many risks and uncertainties related to the water
system on which they operate, and they are often the
ﬁrst to identify new issues and problems, as well as
their solutions. Local solutions are often workable as
they reﬂect local and indigenous practices and knowledge, and are aimed at meeting local priorities. Local
knowledge should be captured and communicated to
decision-makers at higher levels, to inform policy formulation at the national level. This also process allows
lessons learned to be widely applied, builds the capacity of local institutions and civil society, and empowers
local actors.
Commonly, capacity is deﬁned as ‘the ability or power
to do, or understand something’. UNDP deﬁnes capacity as the ability of individuals, groups, institutions
and organizations to identify and solve development

BOX 5.3
Water conﬂict as an agent of change

Many recent changes in the governance of water and river basins have occurred as an outcome of conﬂict. In Australia, longstanding conﬂicts between environmentalists and farmers in the Murray–Darling Basin form the historical backdrop to the
Landcare movement and to multi-stakeholder forums for managing water in its basin context. Over an even longer period,
competing demands of states have served as the basis for institutional development of the Murray–Darling Basin water management framework. Conﬂicting visions of catchment management (for example, more and less participatory models) have
shaped institutional approaches in New South Wales.
Conﬂict avoidance can itself be a driver for innovation in water governance. In South-East Asia, the spectre of resource-based
conﬂict between the countries sharing the Mekong River has been a strong driver for cooperation through the Mekong River
Commission, and an important justiﬁcation for official assistance to the Commission. The Se San issue is a case in point. The
impacts of the Yali Falls Dam in Viet Nam on downstream riparian communities in north-eastern Cambodia left indigenous
minorities from a less powerful country having to deal with the impact of water resource development by the government of
a neighbouring more powerful country. While not always able to deliver for local communities, such river commissions can
generate improvements and innovative methodological approaches, such as the recently published rapid basin-wide assessment tool.
In Thailand, conﬂict has arisen over the drafting of a national water law, leading to a more robust public discussion of water
legislation and governance issues such as water-pricing options and the creation of an inclusive national policy agenda. This
has slowed down reform, compared with the process in Lao People’s Democratic Republic and Viet Nam, whose water laws
were passed by their respective national assemblies in 1997 and 1998 without much public discussion. However, even though
there was limited public debate over the draft water law in Viet Nam, it went through more than 20 revisions and was extensively debated in the national assembly before eventually being passed.

Source: Boesen and Munk Ranvborg (2004). For more information see http://www.mrcmekong.org/news-and-events/news/innovative-tool-formekong-basin-wide-sustainable-hydropower-assessment-launched/

WWDR4

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

147

“Knowledge needs
to be multidisciplinary, based
on an understanding
of society and
nature, and able to
facilitate integrated
approaches.”

problems over time (UNDP, 1997). According to OECDDAC GOVNET (2006, p. 12), capacity-building means a
‘process whereby people, organisations and society as a
whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt and maintain
capacity over time’. Internationally, capacity-building, or
capacity development, is essential to meet the MDGs
(Pres, 2008). It implies funding and resourcing of managerial systems to enable institutions to make and implement policies that lead to the effective and sustainable use of water. The ability to continue acquiring new
knowledge is essential for improved performance and
adaptation to changing physical and social conditions.
The balancing of ‘community focus’ and the ‘technical
approach’ calls for strong intellectual leadership and
authority, and striking a balance between bottom-up
and top-down approaches. However, it is important
to keep in mind that an attitude focused on applying
knowledge is the most important element of capacity
development.
5.3.2 Transforming institutions to become more
effective
The water supply and sanitation sector has a low priority in many developing countries, where investments in
health and education are often prioritized. Furthermore,
‘since 1997 the proportion of development aid allocated to sanitation and drinking water fell from 8% to 5%,
while development aid allocated to health increased
from 7% to 11.5% and that for education remained
steady at around 7%’ (WHO/UN-Water, 2010, p. 15).

148

CHAPTER 5

However, under-investment in both infrastructure and
human resources leads to poor water management,
which then commonly leads to water-related diseases
(see Section 4.1). These diseases are among the worst
killers in developing countries, where the poorest segments of the population are often hit hardest (JønchClausen, 2004). The ‘impact of diarrhoeal disease on
children is greater than the combined impact of human immunodeﬁciency virus/acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome (HIV/AIDS), tuberculosis and malaria’ (WHO/UN-Water, 2010, p. 2). Therefore, there is a
great need to strengthen water-related institutions to
increase their effectiveness. Since the 1990s, capacity
development has become a favoured approach to this
end (OECD DAC GOVNET, 2006; Pres, 2008).
Capacity development demands a holistic approach
through which people, organizations and societies
continually mobilize, maintain, adapt and expand
their ability to manage their own sustainable development (Batz, 2007). Unfortunately, conventional methods of water management are often not sufficient to
deal with highly dynamic systems (Timmerman et al.,
2008). A transition from these conventional methods
toward management based on learning rather than
only control, and inclusion of the human dimension as
an integral part of the management system, is required.
It has therefore been suggested that IWRM should be
based on an adaptive water management (AWM) approach (see Section 5.1) – ‘a systematic process for
continually improving management policies and practices by learning from the outcomes of implemented
management strategies’ (Pahl-Wostl, 2007, p. 51). The
reform requirements are different for each institution, depending on its core functions and mandates.
Furthermore, each country and region has its speciﬁc characteristics and requirements with respect to
its water resources situation and institutional framework (Hamdy et al., 1998). This implies that there are
no generic solutions, and that problem-solving and
institutional arrangements must be tailored for each
country and region to meet its own speciﬁc needs and
conditions.
Water institutions are still largely technology and water
supply-driven. Conventional knowledge and capacity is commonly centred around disciplinary knowledge, based on technological know-how and natural
science. Much of the information required is physical,
pertaining to hydrology, biology, geology and other
biophysical disciplines (Chambers, 1997). This type of

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

conventional technocratic knowledge and capacity is
important, and will remain necessary for water agencies and decision-makers. However, to improve the effectiveness of these institutions, the emphasis has to
change from technological solutions to management
of processes and people, involving inclusive decisionmaking and bottom-up approaches (Tropp, 2007).

BOX 5.4
Enhancing adaptive capacity in the Mekong Basin

In 2000, the Mekong Delta faced its worst ﬂoods in 40
years. About 800 people died, 9 million were affected,
and the costs of damages reached over US$455 million.
Since then, a range of initiatives have been implemented
under the Flood Mitigation and Management Programme
(FMMP). These include ﬂood forecasting capacities, best
practice guidelines for integrated ﬂood risk management,
guidelines for integration of ﬂood preparedness plans in
district and provincial planning processes, ﬂood-probability mapping and land-use zoning, and an annual Mekong
ﬂood forum.
The FMMP’s 2009 Flood Report highlighted the implications of climate change speciﬁcally for ﬂood risk. Climate
change was also a key theme at the FMMP’s 2010 annual Mekong Flood Forum. The Forum promotes learning
across the Mekong basin. It provides governments and
others involved in the programme with the opportunity to
gather data on changes in ﬂow regimes and ﬂood risks at
different scales and to explore implications and responses
by sharing experiences. For example, the Asian Disaster
Preparedness Centre (ADPC) is providing lessons on integrating ﬂood risk management at district and provincial
scales across countries with decentralized disaster management systems facing similar challenges.
At a national level ADPC’s participation in Cambodia’s national Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) Forum, comprising
national NGOs and the Government Disaster Management
Committee, has been a source of learning on approaches
to DRR for both ADPC and the Mekong River Commission
(MRC). It has also acted as a channel for linking locallevel pilot schemes to national disaster risk management
(DRM) policy processes. The MRC also hosts many regional summits and exchange visits to promote information
sharing and learning across the basin. Increasingly, the
programme is promoting dialogue with civil society organizations and experts outside MRC. A Mekong panel on
climate change is due to be established under the Climate
Change Adaptation Initiative (CCAI) for continuous learning and reﬂection on climate change in the region.

Source: Mitchell et al. (2010).

WWDR4

Knowledge needs to be multi-disciplinary, based on an
understanding of society and nature, and able to facilitate integrated approaches.
The involvement and empowerment of all stakeholders
is therefore required to make water institutions more
effective. Coordination between institutions is necessary to achieve water resource management goals, as
is awareness-raising and education for all stakeholder
groups, from local communities to politicians. An example of an institution built on the involvement of all
stakeholders is the basin (or watershed) management
committee. Basin management committees are central to the IWRM approach, providing a forum where
stakeholder groups can communicate their views and
concerns regarding water resources management
within the basin (Jønch-Clausen, 2004; see Dourojeanni,
Jouravlev and Chávez, 2002 and Dourojeanni, 2001 for
region-speciﬁc examples and issues).

BOX 5.5
Political leadership as a driver for better water
management outcomes

In recent years there has been an increase in the number
of women appointed as water and environment ministers
in developing countries. This has been a major driver in
improving long-term water security and more equitable
access to water for domestic and productive purposes.
For example, water ministers such as Maria Mutagamba
of Uganda, and Buyelwa Sonjica (former Minister of
Water Affairs) and Edna Molewa (Minister of Water and
Environmental Affairs appointed in 2010) of South Africa
have used a form of affirmative action to improve access
through women’s empowerment in Africa. All three ministers have served as Chair of the African Ministers’ Council
on Water (AMCOW), and have been leading the effort
to bring more women into water management in Africa,
and indeed in other regions through the Women Leaders
for the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) programme of the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative
Council (WSSCC). In September 2010, AMCOW launched
its Strategy for Mainstreaming Gender in Africa’s Water
Sector, 2010–2014, which provides guidelines for affirmative action to get women involved in water and sanitation
management. In Lesotho, South Africa and Uganda, these
affirmative action programmes provide special bursaries
and incentives to train women for water and sanitation-related careers, including science and engineering.

Source: Brewster et al. (2006). For more information see
http://www.amcow.net

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

149

For basin management committees to be able to contribute to the decision-making process, there needs to
be a clear mandate outlining the roles and responsibility of the institution. Sufficient funding must also be allocated to allow the committee to ﬁll key positions and
to actively contribute to the management of the basin.
There is a need for a solid information base providing
up-to-date biophysical, societal, ﬁnancial and technical
information, which will provide the basis for monitoring, evaluation and decision-making. Finally, adequate
human capacity among all involved is essential to allow all stakeholders fair representation, and to enable
the committee to contribute meaningfully to management and decision-making at all levels.
Water professionals can serve as facilitators and
knowledge-brokers, able to engage with stakeholders
at all levels and build bridges between them. They can
assist local communities, user associations, businesses, local governments and other stakeholders in better articulating their concerns and priorities, as well as
sharing insights and experiences. They can also assist
in articulating demands. For example, in Namibia, one
central element of the capacity-building component
of the IWRM plan is for the government to establish
performance support teams. These are teams of water
professionals that provide hands-on support to local

authorities for such tasks as establishing water meter
replacement policies and assisting with leak detection
and repair, plumbing and general water reticulation
maintenance. This is undertaken in close cooperation
with the technical and administrative staff at the authority to ensure capacity development and ownership
(MAWF, 2010b). In Namibia, the concept of performance support teams is implemented as an integral
part of the IWRM plan. However, this concept can be
applied regardless of whether a country adopts IWRM.
The main focus of the support team is to provide
hands-on support to institutions and departments to
improve their capacity to do a better job.
While traditional technical knowledge and the capacity to manage water resources remains important in
the context of AWM, the ability of water institutions
and management actors to absorb, adopt and implement new forms of management is dependent upon
additional knowledge and capacities. In AWM, capacity development refers to the development of the
knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for management actors and professional organizations to increase
their adaptive capacity and create institutions that
are ﬂexible and responsive enough to support them
in the context of increasing risks and uncertainty (van
Scheltinga et al., 2009). Box 5.4 provides an example

BOX 5.6
Forum for integrated resource management (FIRM): An example from rural Namibia

The FIRM is an approach giving rural farmers living on communally managed farmlands a tool allowing them to be in charge
of their own development (Kruger et al., 2003). In the centre is a community-based organization (CBO) of rural farmers or a
water point committee taking the lead in organizing, planning and monitoring their own activities and development actions
while coordinating the interventions of their service providers. Service providers include traditional authorities, government
or private extension services, NGOs, other CBOs, and short or long-term projects or programmes. …
The key element of the FIRM approach is the collaborative planning, implementation and monitoring process led by the CBO
representing the community involved (Kambatuku, 2003). This usually takes the form of an annual or semi-annual meeting
to which all CBO members and associated service providers are invited. During the meeting, the vision, goals and objectives
of the community are reviewed and either reaffirmed or revised. Results obtained from formal or informal monitoring of the
previous year’s plans and activities are thoroughly discussed and lessons learned are extracted. This analysis serves as the basis for the next step of the annual meeting: operational planning for the coming year. During this process, the various service
providers commit themselves, within their mandate, to providing speciﬁc support to the community based on the community’s own agreed objectives. This approach ensures that services provided by mandated service providers and project partners contribute to the agreed needs and wishes of the CBO and the greater community. It also minimizes the amount of time
needed by communities to meet with their service providers, and further ensures ownership by communities of the interventions that take place in their area.

Source: Reproduced from Seely et al. (2007, p. 112).

150

CHAPTER 5

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

of good practice for enhancing the adaptive capacity
at different levels.
Gender-sensitive approaches in transforming institutions is another important key to success, as exempliﬁed in Africa (Box 5.6).
5.3.3 Information and communications systems
For water managers to be able to adapt to change or
to be prepared for uncertain future change, they need
access to new information, and they need the capacity to process the information and implement changes
based on their new knowledge (Pahl-Wostl, 2007).
Local managers having access to consistent, timely
and reliable information – in a format that is meaningful to them – empowers them to take part in decisionmaking, and to hold service providers and government
more accountable. Information and communication
systems (ICS) can be particularly useful to facilitating the sharing of information and knowledge at local,
river basin, national and to some extent international
levels. At the national level, it is essential to establish
sustainable ICS frameworks for capturing, storing and
disseminating data, information and knowledge to all
stakeholders in the water sector. This signiﬁcantly contributes to improved decision-making regarding water
resource management (MAWF, 2010a). At the community level, concrete steps towards sharing information
and knowledge, contributing to improved decisionmaking and resource management, can include creating dialogue platforms involving local stakeholders
and their assisting service organizations, (e.g. government institutions, extension services, NGOs and other
service providers). Box 5.6 presents an example of
such a platform – the Forum for Integrated Resource
Management (FIRM). The focus of such a communitydriven forum is to plan and make informed decisions
rather than dispute resolutions.
Scientiﬁc research – physical, technical or social – should
ideally contribute to improved water resources management. Scientists need to ‘disseminate results and communicate their ﬁndings in a way that can be understood
and readily implemented by policy-makers, politicians
and communities. At the same time, they must learn from
experiences gained through implementation by users at
all levels’ (Seely et al., 2008, p. 236). A range of information communication technology (ICT) tools exist to
communicate scientiﬁc knowledge effectively, including animations and role-plays. ‘Hot’ water issues can be
used to raise public awareness and understanding. The

WWDR4

“Local managers
having access to
consistent, timely and
reliable information
– in a format that is
meaningful to them
– empowers them to
take part in decisionmaking, and to hold
service providers and
government more
accountable.”
construction of the Øresund bridge between Denmark
and Sweden illustrates a successful application of ITC.
The project involved experts from many disciplines, who
had to work in partnership with different stakeholders, including the public. The establishment of an ICTbased real-time water information service allowed all
stakeholders to monitor the progress of the project and
results from different scenarios and participate proactively in the decision-making process (Velickov, 2007).
According to Seely et al. (2008), several key factors
contribute to making the connections necessary for facilitating application on all levels of research advances.
These include translation, information dissemination,
communication, communication platforms, boundary
organisations and leadership contributing to knowledge, motivation and capacity. Encouraging ‘research
brokers’ and science journalists to engage in interdisciplinary policy-making debates can facilitate this process.
An assessment of the roles of Danish science journalists and communicators in informing the public and
policy-makers shows that science communicators play
an important role in providing the public with a greater
and increased understanding of scientiﬁc knowledge,
and putting sciences in a broader social and democratic context of value to decision and policy-makers
(Hvidtfelt-Nielsen, 2010).

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

151

5.3.4 Knowledge and capacity development: An
ongoing process
‘Recent evaluations have demonstrated that waterrelated development projects are now decidedly more
effective and sustainable than before the mid-1990s
(World Bank, 2010). This can be attributed in large part
to stronger institutions, better governance, and better
technical and managerial competence in the developing countries whose capacity has been strengthened’
(Alaerts and Dickinson, 2009, p. 29).
With appropriate mentors providing hands-on experience, incremental capacity development can start

taking place almost instantaneously. However, it is important for individuals, organizations and institutions
to recognize that capacity development is an unending
process, as knowledge and the environment, natural, social and economic, in which water management
is taking place is constantly changing. A key element
of capacity development is instilling the concept of
continuous change and how to adapt to and deal with
evolving situations and conditions. Box 5.7 illustrates
how the development of knowledge and capacity is a
step-wise, ongoing process and touches upon several
elements previously described in this section.

BOX 5.7
Social learning and adaptive water resources management in the South Indian Lower Bhavani

The Lower Bhavani Project (LBP) has 84,000 ha as a command area located in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu. Among
others, the most signiﬁcant uncertainty factor is rainfall variability. The LBP suffers from water scarcity and high unpredictability, leaving the farmers to endure and adapt to frequent seasons without canal supply. The farmers have proved to be able
to learn and adapt over the years. The large-scale development of wells in the area shows how the farmers have successfully
managed to increase water availability to balance water scarcity during seasons without supply. The farmers have also acquired a capacity to swiftly adjust the cropping pattern to the highly unpredictable variability of seasonal canal water supply,
and also to entirely rainfed conditions.
The entire chain of system changes shows that social learning is taking place within the LBP system. The different actors have
together learned how to optimize the system within the limits of the technical infrastructure, the reservoir capacity and the
canal discharge capacity, and the variability in available supply decided by the erratic precipitation. The way farmers have
learned and been inspired by each other, like the beneﬁts from conjunctive groundwater use and the acceptance of irrigated
dry crops, are examples of social learning between actors at short timescales. On a long-term perspective, all the actors in
the LBP system have learned from the environmental responses and each other’s behaviour. Together they have contributed
to the alteration of governance structures and have developed new innovative practices without being bound and limited by
the original use of the existing technical infrastructure. All actors, thus, live with change, but few appear to remember what
caused the change in the system and why it happened.
The AWM analysis shows that the LBP system has, over the years, fulﬁlled the criteria of a complex adaptive system more and
more. Several changes have taken place and earlier mistakes or failures have been addressed in a stepwise way to reach the
present complex human-environment technological system. The system proves to have an adaptive capacity and farmers not
only cope in an ad hoc manner, but also have developed different adaptive strategies. To a large degree, the system fulﬁls the
requirement of an adaptive regime. Social learning takes place at both system level and at the individual farmer’s level. The
uncertainty factors have been considered in a stepwise way during the system change cycles and have been included in the
system design. The system has moved from a top-down project to a management system with multiple actors. Both farmers
and the authorities have learned over the years and now have better possibilities to interact.

Source: Adapted from Lannerstad and Molden (2009, pp. 26–27).

152

CHAPTER 5

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

Aﬂaj are traditional systems, sometimes with formal legal
status, setting traditional practices for allocating water between
different periods of time and between users. They contain a
process of users’ rights based on ownership or rental (see
Chapter 25).

2

Clientelism refers to a form of social organization common in
many regions and characterized by patron–client relationships.
In such places, relatively powerful and rich ‘patrons’ promise
to provide ‘clients’ with jobs, protection, infrastructure, and
other beneﬁts in exchange for votes and other forms of loyalty,
including labour.

3

4

It is acknowledged that there can be wide variations between
countries within a region. The results of the survey should be
perceived as relative, not suitable for regional comparison.
An approach whereby donors agree to pool their resources
to support a speciﬁc sector and follow common policies,
including the use of national government procedures for the
disbursement and accounting of aid funds.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Alaerts, G. J. and N. L. Dickinson (eds). Water for a Changing
World: Developing Local Knowledge and Capacity.
Proceedings of the International Symposium ‘Water
for a Changing World Developing Local Knowledge
and Capacity’, Delft, The Netherlands, 13–15 June 2007.
Abingdon, UK, Taylor & Francis.
Allan, J. A. 2000. The Middle East Water Question:
Hydropolitics and the Global Economy. London, IB Tauris.
ACCA (Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants).
2009. Water: The Next Carbon? London, ACCA.
Ananda, J., Crase, L. and Pagan, P. G. 2006. A preliminary
assessment of water institutions in India: An institutional
design perspective. Review of Policy Research, 1
July. http://business.highbeam.com/2032/article1G1-152886460/preliminary-assessment-water-institutionsindia-institutional
Bakker, M. H. N. 2007. Transboundary River Floods:
Vulnerability of Continents, International River Basins and
Countries. PhD thesis. Oreg., US, Oregon State University.
Batz, F. J. (ed.) 2007. Capacity Development in the Water
Sector: How GTZ Supports Sustainable Water Management
and Sanitation. International Water Policy Project.
Eschborn, Germany, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische
Zusammenarbeit (GTZ).
Beaumont, P. 2005. Water institutions in the Middle East. C.
Gopalakrishnan, C. Tortajada and A.K. Biswas (eds) Water
Institutions: Policies, Performance and Prospects. Berlin,
Springer.

WWDR4

Boelens, R. A. 2008. The Rules of the Game and the Game
of the Rules: Normalization and Resistance in Andean
Water Control. PhD thesis. Wageningen, The Netherlands,
Wageningen University.
Boesen, J. and H. Munk Ravnborg (eds). 2004. From Water
Wars to Water Riots? Lessons from Transboundary Water
Management. Danish Institute for International Studies
(DIIS) Working Paper no 2004/6. Copenhagen, DIIS.
http://www.diis.dk/graphics/Publications/WP2004/jbo_
hmr_water.pdf
Brewster, M., Herrmann, T. M., Bleisch, B. and Pearl, R. 2006.
A gender perspective on water resources and sanitation.
Wagadu, Vol. 3, pp. 1–23.
Brooks, D. B., Brandes, O. M. and Gurman, S. (eds) 2009.
Making the Most of What we Have: The Soft Path Approach
to Water Management. London, Earthscan.
Chambers, R. 1997. Whose Reality Counts? Putting the First
Last. London, Intermediate Technology Publications.
Chang, S. A. 2009. A watershed moment: Calculating the
risks of impending water shortages. The Investment
Professional, Vol. 2, No. 4. New York, New York Society of
Security Analysts. http://www.theinvestmentprofessional.
com/vol_2no_4/watershed-moment.html
CapNet, GWP and UNDP. 2005. Integrated Water Resources
Management Plans. Training Manual and Operational Guide.
Issued with the support of the Canadian International
Devlopment Agency (CIDA), within the framework of the
Partnership for African Waters Development (PAWD)
programme. http://www.cap-net.org/sites/cap-net.org/
ﬁles/Manual_english.pdf
Coetzee, H. 1995. Radioactivity and the leakage of
radioactive waste associated with Witwatersrand gold and
uranium mining. B. J. Merkel, S. Hurst, E. P. Löhnert and
W. Struckmeier (eds) Proceedings Uranium Mining and
Hydrogeology 1995, Freiberg, Germany: GeoCongress 1.
Köln, pp. 34–9.
Coetzee, H., Winde, F. and Wade, P. W. 2006. An Assessment
of Sources, Pathways, Mechanisms and Risks of Current
and Potential Future Pollution of Water and Sediments in
Gold-Mining Areas of the Wonderfonteinspruit Catchment.
WRC Report No. 1214/1/06. Pretoria, Water Research
Commission (WRC).
Dalcanale, F., Fontane, D. and Csapo, J. 2011. A general
framework for a collaborative water quality knowledge
and information network. Environmental Management, Vol.
47, No. 3, pp. 443–55.
De Stefano, L., Duncan, J., Dinar, S., Stahl, K. and Wolf, A.
2010. Mapping the Resilience of International River Basins
to Future Climate Change-induced Water Variability. World
Bank Water Sector Board Discussion Paper Series 15.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
Dourojeanni, A. 2001. Water Management at the River
Basin Level: Challenges in Latin America. LC/L.1583-P.
Santigo, Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/
xml/7/7797/Lcl.1583-P-I.pdf

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

153

Dourojeanni, A., Jouravlev, A. and Chávez, G. 2002. Gestión
del agua a nivel de cuencas: teoría y práctica. LC/L.1777-P.
Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
drni/publicaciones/xml/5/11195/lcl1777-P-E.pdf
Dinar, A. and Saleth, R. M. 2005. Can water institutions be
cured? A water institutions health index. Water Science
and Technology: Water Supply, Vol. 5, No. 6, pp. 17–40.
Emerton, L. and Bos, E. 2004. Value: Counting Ecosystems as
an Economic Part of Water. Gland, Switzerland/Cambridge,
UK, International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2009. Institutional
Arrangements for IWRM in Eastern Africa. Policy Brief 1.
Stockholm, GWP.
GWP-TAC (Global Water Partnership – Technical Advisory
Committee). 2000. Integrated Water Resources
Management. TAC Background Papers 4. Stockholm, GWPTAC. http://www.gwpforum.org/gwp/library/TACNO4.pdf
Hamdy, A., Abu-Zeid, M. and Lacirignola, C. 1998. Institutional
capacity building for water sector development. Water
International, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 126–33.
Hobbs, P., Oelofse, S. H. H. and Rascher, J. 2008.
Management of environmental impacts from coal mining
in the Upper Olifants River Catchment as a function of age
and scale. M. J. Patrick, J. Rascher and A. R. Turton (eds)
Reﬂections on Water in South Africa, Special Edition of the
International Journal of Water Resource Development, Vol.
24, No. 3, pp. 417–32.
Hvidtfelt-Nielsen, K. 2010. More than ‘mountain guides’
of science: a questionnaire survey of professional
science communication in Denmark. Journal of Science
Communication, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 1–10.
ICIMOD (International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development). 2009. Local Responses to Too Much
and Too Little Water in the Greater Himalayan Region.
Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
Jønch-Clausen, T. 2004. ‘Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM) and Water Efficiency Plans by 2005’
Why, What and How? Stockholm, GWP.
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century. LC/L.2169-P.
Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/9/19539/lcl2169i.pdf
Junk, W. J., Bayley, P. B. and Sparks, R. E. 1989. The ﬂood
pulse concept in river-ﬂoodplain systems. D.P. Dodge (ed.)
Proceedings of the International Large Rivers Symposium
(LARS), Canadian Special Publication of Fisheries and
Aquatic Sciences, No. 106, pp. 110–27.
Kambatuku, J. R. (ed.) 2003. FIRM, the Forum for Integrated
Resource Management: Putting Communities at the
Centre of their own Development Process. Windhoek,
Namibia, Namibia’s Programme to Combat Desertiﬁcation
(NAPCOD).
Kaufmann, D. 2005. Myths and realities of governance and
corruption. Global Competitiveness Report 2005–2006.
New York, World Economic Forum (WEF), pp. 81–98.

154

CHAPTER 5

Klop, P. and Wellington, F. 2008. Watching Water: A Guide to
Evaluating Corporate Risks in a Thirsty World. New York, JP
Morgan Global Equity Research.
Kruger, A. S., Gaseb, N., Klintenberg, P., Seely, M. K. and
Werner, W. 2003. Towards community-driven natural
resource management. N. Allsopp, A. R. Palmer, S. J. Milton,
K. P. Kirkman, G. I. H. Kerley, C. R. Hurt and C. J. Brown
(eds) Namibia: the FIRM Example. VIIth International
Rangelands Congress, Durban, South Africa, pp. 1757–9.
Lannerstad, M. and Molden, D. 2009. Adaptive Water
Resource Management in the South Indian Lower Bhavani
Project Command Area. IWMI Research Report 129.
Colombo, International Water Management Institute
(IWMI).
Lentini, E. 2009a. Regulatory accounting for drinking
water and sanitation services. The experience of the
Metropolitan Area of Buenos Aires. Circular of the Network
for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management
for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, No. 29. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/circulares/2/34862/
Carta29in.pdf
––––. 2009b. Regulatory accounting for drinking water and
sanitation services. The experience of the Metropolitan
Area of Buenos Aires. Circular of the Network for
Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management
for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, No. 30. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/circulares/1/36321/
Carta30in.pdf
Lewis, K., Lenton, R. and Wright, A. 2005. Health, Dignity,
and Development: What Will It Take? UN Millennium
Project. Stockholm/New York, Stockholm International
Water Institute (SIWI)/UN Millennium Project, pp. 64–6.
MAWF (Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry). 2010a.
Integrated Water Resources Management Plan for Namibia
Theme Report 4: The Formulation of Information and
Knowledge Systems. Windhoek, Namibia, MAWF.
––––. 2010b. Integrated Water Resources Management Plan
for Namibia – Theme Report 6: Integrated Framework for
Institutional Development and Human Resources Capacity
Building. Windhoek, Namibia, MAWF.
Mitchell, T., Ibrahim, M., Harris, K., Hedger, M., Polack, E.,
Ahmed, A., Hall, N., Hawrylyshyn, K., Nightingale, K.,
Onyango, M., Adow, M. and Mohammed, S. 2010. Climate
Smart Disaster Risk Management, Strengthening Climate
Resilience. Brighton, UK, Institute of Development Studies
(IDS).
Mysiak, J., Henriksen, H. J., Sullivan, C., Bromley, J. and
Pahl-Wostl, C. (eds) 2010. The Adaptive Water Resource
Management Handbook. London, Earthscan.
North, D. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and
Economic Performance. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
North, D. C. 1991. Institutions. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 97–112.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

OECD-DAC GOVNET (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development-Development Assistance
Committee Network on Governance). 2006. The Challenge
of Capacity Development: Working Towards Good Practice.
Paris, OECD Development Co-operation Directorate (DCD).

Seely, M., Klintenberg, P. and Shikongo, S., 2007. Evolutionary
process of mainstreaming desertiﬁcation policy: A
Namibian case study. C. King, H. Bigas and Z. Adeel (eds)
Desertiﬁcation and the International Policy Imperative.
Hamilton, Canada, United Nations University, pp. 107–115.

Pahl-Wostl, C. 2007. Transition towards adaptive
management of water facing climate and global change.
Water Resources Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 49–62.

Snaddon, C. D., Davies, B. R. and Wishart, M. J. 1999. A Global
Overview of Inter-Basin Water Transfer Schemes, with an
Appraisal of their Ecological, Socio-Economic and SocioPolitical Implications, and Recommendations for their
Management. Water Research Commission (WRC) Report
No. TT120/00. Pretoria, South Africa, WRC.

Pahl-Wostl, C., Sendzimir, J., Jeffrey, P., Aerts, J., Berkamp,
G. and Cross, K. 2007. Managing change toward adaptive
water management through social learning. Ecology and
Society, Vol. 12, No. 2, Art. 30.
Patterson, K. A. 2009. Case for integrating groundwater
and surface water management. D. Michel and A. Pandya
(eds) Climate Change, Hydropolitics, and Transboundary
Resources. Washington DC, Henry L. Stimson Center, pp.
63–72.
Phillips, D., Daoudy, M., McCaffrey, S., Öjendal, J. and Turton,
A. R. 2006. Transboundary Water Cooperation as a Tool
for Conﬂict Prevention and Broader Beneﬁt-Sharing.
Stockholm, Ministry for Foreign Affairs Expert Group on
Development Issues (EGDI).
Phillips, D. J. H., Allan, J. A., Claassen, M., Granit, J.,
Jägerskog, A., Kistin, E., Patrick, M. and Turton, A. R. 2008.
The Transcend-TB3 Project: A Methodology for the Transboundary Waters Opportunity Analysis (the TWO Analysis).
Prepared for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sweden.
http://www.siwi.org/documents/Resources/Reports/
Report23_TWO_Analysis.pdf
Phumpiu, P. and Gustafsson, J. E. 2008. When are
partnerships is a viable tool for development? Institutions
and partnerships for water and sanitation service in Latin
America. Journal of Water Resources Management, Vol. 4,
No. 3/4, pp. 304–10.
Pres, A. 2008. Capacity building: a possible approach to
improved water resources management. Water Resources
Development, Vol. 24, No. 1, pp. 123–9.
Puckridge, J. T., Sheldon, F., Boulton, A. J. and Walker, K.
F. 1993. The ﬂood pulse concept applied to rivers with
variable ﬂow regimes. B. R. Davies, J. H. O’Keefe and C. D
Snaddon (eds) A Synthesis of the Ecological Functioning,
Conservation and Management of South African River
Ecosystems. Water Research Commission Report No. TT
62/93. Pretoria, South Africa, Water Research Commission
(WRC).
Puri, S. and Aureli, A. (eds.) 2009. Atlas of Transboundary
Aquifers – Global Maps, Regional Cooperation
and Local Inventories. Paris, UNESCO-IHP ISARM
Programme, UNESCO. [CD only.] http://www.isarm.org/
publications/322
Renzetti, S. and Dupont, D. 2003. Ownership and
performance of water utilities. Greener Management
International, Issue 42.
Seely, M., Dirkx, E., Hager, C., Klintenberg, P., Roberts, C.
and von Oertzen, D. 2008. Advances in desertiﬁcation
and climate change research: Are they accessible for
application to enhance adaptive capacity? Global and
Planetary Change, Vol. 64, No. 3–4, pp. 236–43.

WWDR4

Stakhiv E. Z. and Pietrowsky, R. A. 2009. Adapting to
Climate Change in Water Resources and Water Services.
Perspectives on water and climate change adaptation 15.
Co-operative Programme on Water and Climate (CPWC),
the International Water Association (IWA), IUCN and the
World Water Council (WWC).
Stakhiv E. Z. and Steward, B. 2009. Needs for Climate
Information in Support of Decision-making in the Water Sector.
Draft White Paper. World Climate Conference 3, Geneva.
Tenner, E. 1996. Why Things Bite Back: Technology and the
Revenge of Unintended Consequences. New York, Knopf.
Timmerman, J. G., Pahl-Wostl, C. and Moltgen, J. (eds) 2007.
The Adaptiveness of IWRM: Analysing European IWRM
Research. London, IWA Publishing.
Timmerman, J. G. and Bernardini, F. 2009. Adapting to
Climate Change in Transboundary Water Management.
Perspectives on water and climate change adaptation
6. Co-operative Programme on Water and Climate
(CPWC), the International Water Association (IWA),
IUCN and the World Water Council (WWC). http://
www.worldwatercouncil.org/ﬁleadmin/wwc/Library/
Publications_and_reports/Climate_Change/PersPap_06._
Transboundary_Water_Management.pdf
Tropp, H. 2007. Water governance: Trends and needs for new
capacity development. Water Policy, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 19–30.
Turton, A. R. 2007. Can we Solve Tomorrow’s Problems
with Yesterday’s Experiences and Today’s Science? Des
Midgley Memorial Lecture presented at the 13th SANCIAHS
Symposium, 6 September 2007, Cape Town, South Africa.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1997.
Capacity Development. New York, UNDP.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
2009. Guidance on Water and Adaptation to Climate
Change. Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.org/env/water/
publications/documents/Guidance_water_climate.pdf
van Scheltinga, C. T., van Bers, C. and Hare, M. 2009.
Learning systems for adaptive water management:
Experiences with the development of opencourseware
and training of trainers. M. W. Blokland. G. J. Alaerts and J.
M. Kaspersma (eds) Capacity Development for Improved
Water Management. Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE
Institute for Water Education, pp. 45–60.
van Stokkom, H. T. C., Smits, A. J. M. and Leuven, R. S.
E. W. 2005. Flood Defense in the Netherlands – A
New Era, a New Approach. Water International, Vol.
30, No. 1, pp. 76–87. http://www.informaworld.
com/10.1080/02508060508691839

WATER MANAGEMENT, INSTITUTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT

155

Velickov, S. 2007. Knowledge Modelling for the Water Sector:
Transparent Management of our Aquatic Environment.
Discussion Draft Paper for the International Symposium
‘Water for a Changing World Enhancing Local Knowledge
and Capacity’, Wednesday, 13 June 2007, UNESCO-IHE
Institute for Water Education, Delft, The Netherlands.
Vickers, J. and Yarrow, G. 1988. Privatization: An Economic
Analysis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
Press Series on the Regulation of Economic Activity, No. 18.
Massachusetts, The MIT Press.
WCD (World Commission on Dams). 2000. Dams and
Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making.
London, Earthscan.
WHO (World Health Organization)/UN-Water. 2010. GLAAS
2010: UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water. Geneva, WHO.
WHO (World Health Organization)/UNICEF (United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-Water. Update. Geneva/New York, WHO/UNICEF.
Winde, F. 2009. Uranium Pollution of Water Resources in
Mined-out and Active Goldﬁelds of South Africa: A Case
Study in the Wonderfonteinspruit Catchment on Extent
and Sources of U-Contamination and Associated Health
Risks. Paper presented at the International Mine Water
Conference, 19–23 October 2009, Pretoria, South Africa.

156

CHAPTER 5

Winde, F. and Van Der Walt, I. J. 2004. The signiﬁcance of
groundwater-stream interactions and ﬂuctuating stream
chemistry on waterborne uranium contamination of
streams – a case study from a gold mining site in South
Africa. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 287, pp. 178–96.
Wolf, A. T., Natharius, J. A., Danielson, J. J., Ward, B. S. and
Pender, J. K. 1999. International river basins of the world.
International Journal of Water Resources Development, Vol.
15, No. 4, pp. 387–427.
OSU (Oregon State University). n.d. TFDD: Transboundary
Freshwater Dispute Database. Corvallis, Oreg., Department
of Geosciences, Oregon State University. http://www.
transboundarywaters.orst.edu
Wolff, G. and Gleick, P. H. 2002. The soft path for water. P.H.
Gleick (ed.) The World’s Water: The Biennial Report on
Freshwater Resources, 2002-2003. Washington DC, Island
Press, pp. 1–32.
World Bank. 2010. Cost Recovery in the Water Sector. Project
Concept Note. Unpublished. Washington DC, The World
Bank.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
––––. 2009. World Water Development Report 3: Water in a
Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

CHAPTER 6
From raw data to informed decisions

—
Author Mike Muller
Contributors Richard Connor, Engin Koncagül, James Winpenny
and Sisira Saddhamangala Withanachchi

WWDR4
©
Shutterstock/Photodiem

THE BEYOND
WATER
WATERRESOURCE:
MANAGEMENT,
DEMAND: WATER’S
VARIABILITY,
WATER
INSTITUTIONS
SOCIAL
DEMAND:
VULNERABILITY
AND
AND
WHAT
ENVIRONMENTAL
CAPACITY
DRIVES
AND
CONSUMPTION?
DEVELOPMENT
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFITS

157

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The absence of systematic data collection in most countries impedes regular reporting
on water resources and water-use trends. There is consequently a growing interest in and
demand for better and more accurate and consistent water data and accounting. This needs
to be translated into improved data availability and quality, more structured data acquisition
and better information about water. Unfortunately, there has been no major progress since
the third edition of the World Water Development Report in terms of observation methods,
networks and monitoring (see also ‘Bridging the observational gap’, Chapter 13 in that report).
Global programmes such as WWAP need to focus on core data items from which different
users can calculate indicators of speciﬁc interest to them. Technological advancements are
also making it easier to monitor and report on various dimensions of water resources. The
development and application of these new technologies should be made a priority.

6.1 Data, monitoring and the purpose of
indicators
The theme of this edition of the World Water
Development Report (WWDR) is uncertainty. This indicates a lack of adequate information on water resources
and water-use trends, or that available information is
not being used. Regardless of the enterprise in question, whether it is tending a household food garden,
managing the business of a multinational food company,
or guiding a national economy, successful risk management depends on the availability and collection of
sufficient information to properly characterize relevant
risks and uncertainties. Risk management for water
resources and their uses implies the monitoring of
water-related activities to obtain the data necessary
to generate the information required by interested
parties. Once sufficient data have been amassed, they
can be summarized in the form of indicators to address
speciﬁc areas of concern.
Since it was ﬁrst published in 2003, the WWDR has included a comprehensive collection of data and indicators about the various dimensions of water resources
and their uses. The WWDR has sought to update this
information in subsequent editions, and in this fourth
edition presents these data and indicators as part of
Volume One (Table 6.1).
Table 6.1 presents the indicators that have been developed by WWAP in cooperation with prominent
organizations (the members of UN-Water, NGOs, universities, etc). The list is categorized by major challenge areas that are central to the WWDR. Each indicator falls under one or more elements of the DPSIR
analytical framework – Driving force, Pressure, State,
Impact and Response. The indicator development
process is closely linked to WWAP’s overarching mandate of monitoring and reporting on water around
the world. WWDR indicators are systematically updated and revised to reach the ultimate goal: to develop a set of indicators that are accepted across the
entire UN system to monitor performance and track
changes, not only in the natural environment (such
as the hydrological cycle, the aquatic environment,
water quality, and water availability and use) but also
in the socio-economic and political environment of
the water world (such as in governance, water pricing
and valuation).
The goal has been to provide not just snapshots
of information, but an indication of how different

WWDR4

dimensions of water and its uses are changing over
time in different parts of the world. This effort is based
on the assumption that better management of limited water resources requires systematic monitoring
to determine whether the many and varied public and
private policy objectives set for the resource are being
achieved. But it also intends to help readers and users
of the WWDR to understand better the risks – and the
uncertainties – that characterize water resources.
Information about water is becoming increasingly important to the following groups:
đ National governments. Many countries want reliable
and objective information about the state of water
resources, their use and management, in order to
safeguard their water security as a matter of national survival. In particular, they seek information about
trends that may have an impact on them in the future. They often seek to understand their own situation by benchmarking it and making comparisons
with other countries and regions.
đ Multilateral organizations. Several multilateral organizations, such as the OECD, have set policy goals
including environmental objectives such as ‘decoupling environmental pressures from economic
growth’ (OECD, 2001, p. 11). The monitoring of parameters such as water-use trends play a key role
in achieving such objectives. Many other regional
and specialized organizations, ranging from the
European Union (EU) and African Union to the G8
have raised related issues.
Water issues are also raised by different sectors at all
levels, from local community to global multilateral organizations. Farmers, urban planners, drinking water and wastewater service companies, the disaster
management community, business and industry, and
environmentalists are all concerned by the current
situation:

đƫ The ability to produce sufficient food for growing
and increasingly affluent populations is a global
concern. Water is an essential resource for food production, therefore, it is important to remain advised
of the availability, sustainability and variability of
water supplies – whether from rainfall, abstraction
from rivers and lakes, or groundwater. The risk that
water-related events might affect local food production or prices is an increasingly important political
concern.

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

159

TABLE 6.1
United Nations World Water Development Report indicators

Topic

Level of
stress on the
resource

Governance

Indicator

Category in
cause–effect
approacha

Type of
indicatorb

Index of non-sustainable water use

Driving force,
Pressure, State

Key

Rural and urban population

Pressure, State

Basic

Relative water stress index

Pressure, State

Key

Sources of contemporary nitrogen loading

Pressure, State

Key

Impact of sediment trapping by large dams and reservoirs

Pressure

Key

Coefficient of variation for the climate moisture index

State

Key

Water re-use index

Pressure, State

Key

Access to information, participation and justice

Response

Developing

Assessing progress towards achieving the
integrated water resources management (IWRM) target

Response

Key

Percentage of urban population

Pressure, State

Key

Proportion of urban population living in slums

Pressure, State

Key

Total actual renewable water resources

State

Key

Total actual renewable water resources
per capita

State

Developing

Inﬂow from other countries as share of
total actual renewable water resources
(Dependency Ratio)

State

Developing

Proportion of total actual renewable
freshwater resources withdrawn:
MDG Water Indicator

State

Developing

Groundwater development stress

Pressure, State

Developing

Brackish/saline groundwater at shallow and intermediate depths

State

Key

Fragmentation and ﬂow regulation of rivers: dam Intensity

State, Impact

Key

Dissolved nitrogen (nitrates + nitrogen dioxide)

State

Key

Trends in catchment protection

State, Response

Key

Freshwater species population trends index

State

Key

Disability-adjusted life year

Impact

Key

Prevalence of stunting among children under age 5

Impact

Developing

Mortality rate of children under age 5

Impact

Developing

Access to improved drinking water

Impact

Key

Access to improved sanitation

Impact

Key

Settlements

State of the
resource

Ecosystems

Health

Note: An Indicator Proﬁle sheet with a detailed deﬁnition and explanation of how the indicator is computed (as well as data tables for some
indicators) is available for most indicators at http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/indicators/.
Exceptions are sub-indicators for ‘Total actual renewable water resources’.
a. The categories are based on the DPSIR (Driving force, Pressure, State, Impact, Response) framework. For details, see WWDR1 (ch. 3, pp. 32–47;
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001297/129726e.pdf#page=53) and WWDR2 (ch. 1, pp. 33–38;
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001454/145405e.pdf#page=21).
b. Basic indicators provide fundamental information and are well established and widely used; data are generally widely available for all
countries. Key indicators are well deﬁned and validated, have global coverage and are linked directly to policy goals. Developing indicators are
in a formative stage and may evolve into key indicators following reﬁnement of methodological issues or data development and testing.
Source: Compiled by E. Koncagül, S. Saddhamangala Withanachchi and L. Dubin.

160

CHAPTER 6

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

TABLE 6.1
United Nations World Water Development Report indicators (continued)

Topic

Food,
agriculture
and rural
livelihoods

Industry
and energy

Risk
assessment

Valuing and
charging for
the resource

Knowledge
base and
capacity

Indicator

Category in
cause–effect
approacha

Type of
indicatorb

Percentage of undernourished people

State

Key

Percentage of poor people living in rural areas

State

Key

Agriculture GDP as share of total GDP

State

Key

Irrigated land as a percentage of cultivated land

Pressure, State

Key

Agriculture water withdrawals as share of total water withdrawals

Pressure

Key

Extent of land salinized by irrigation

State

Key

Groundwater use as share of total irrigation

Pressure, State

Key

Trends in industrial water use

Pressure

Key

Water use by major sector

State

Key

Organic pollution emissions (biochemical oxygen demand)
by industrial sector

Impact

Key

Trends in ISO 14001 certiﬁcation

Response

Key

Electricity generation by energy source

State

Key

Total primary energy supply by source

State

Key

Carbon intensity of electricity generation

Impact

Key

Volume of desalinated water produced

Response

Key

Access to electricity

Pressure

Key

Capability for hydropower generation

State

Key

Mortality risk index

State

Key

Risk and policy assessment indicator

Response

Key

Climate vulnerability index

State

Key

Water sector share in total public spending

Response

Developing

Ratio of actual to desired level of public
investment in drinking water supply

Response

Developing

Ratio of actual to desired level of public
investment in basic sanitation

Response

Developing

Rate of operation and maintenance cost recovery for water
supply and sanitation

Driving force,
Response

Developing

Water and sanitation charges as percentage of various household Driving force,
income groups
Response

Developing

Knowledge index

Developing

State

Note: An Indicator Proﬁle sheet with a detailed deﬁnition and explanation of how the indicator is computed (as well as data tables for some
indicators) is available for most indicators at http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/indicators/.
Exceptions are sub-indicators for ‘Total actual renewable water resources’.
a. The categories are based on the DPSIR (Driving force, Pressure, State, Impact, Response) framework. For details, see WWDR1 (ch. 3, pp. 32–47;
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001297/129726e.pdf#page=53) and WWDR2 (ch. 1, pp. 33–38;
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001454/145405e.pdf#page=21).
b. Basic indicators provide fundamental information and are well established and widely used; data are generally widely available for all
countries. Key indicators are well deﬁned and validated, have global coverage and are linked directly to policy goals. Developing indicators are
in a formative stage and may evolve into key indicators following reﬁnement of methodological issues or data development and testing.
Source: Compiled by E. Koncagül, S. Saddhamangala Withanachchi and L. Dubin.

WWDR4

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

161

“The UN Statistical
Division continues
to support member
countries to develop
their physical water
accounts so as to
better understand
where their water
comes from and how
it is used.”

đƫ Similarly, population growth and increasing urbanization raises questions for government planners
about the availability of water resources to support
such developments and the wastewater impacts
they generate. Uncertainty about future pressures
on the resource affects water management, but
uncertain water availability may itself pose a risk to
economic activity and urban development.
đƫ At the community level, existing challenges of ensuring adequate supplies and avoiding undue impacts on water quality as a result of wastewater discharges are being supplemented by threats posed
by vulnerability to extreme weather events. These
are prompting a review of measures to build resilience to disasters such as ﬂoods.
đƫ Water has been identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant future risk
to business activities. Many large businesses are
seeking to understand better the challenges it poses
to their operations, including reputational risk. They
are also concerned about the availability of water
and the impact of their operations on the quality
of the resource. Absence of clear information may
inﬂuence their investment decisions or even lead to
curtailment of operations.
đƫ Environmental stakeholders recognize that water resources are an ecosystem in their own right, as well
as being essential to the health of other ecosystems.

162

CHAPTER 6

While both national and international law mandate
environmental protection, it is important to monitor
the status of aquatic ecosystems in order to assess
the effectiveness of such regulation.
đƫ Climate change has helped to focus attention on
water-related issues and has raised the levels of uncertainty about parameters such as water availability. These were previously considered as essentially
ﬁxed and statistically predictable based on historical
records. There is also concern that extreme weather
events will occur more frequently. This has highlighted the need to monitor water resource systems
more carefully to detect trends as early as possible
and support the development of effective responses.
As global approaches are developed to respond to
this global challenge, it is important to monitor both
the impacts on water resource systems of climate
change mitigation strategies and the effectiveness
of adaptation strategies.
Agreement on broad goals and management strategies, whether direct infrastructural interventions or
‘soft policy’ adaptive initiatives, is necessary for all
these different areas of activity. Once goals and strategies have been deﬁned, their effectiveness needs to be
monitored. This requires the deﬁnition of appropriate
indicators and the generation of adequate data. The
key objective is to reduce uncertainty about water resources and their use, thereby supporting the management of risks posed by the complex natural systems of
which they form a part.

6.2 Key indicators
A staggeringly extensive array of indicators have been
developed, or are proposed, to monitor the state, use
and management of water resources, for a wide range of
purposes. While the ﬁrst edition of the WWDR reported
on over 160 indicators, only 49 were covered in WWDR4.
This reduction occurred, in part, because of the difficulties
encountered in obtaining updated data for the indicators,
but also reﬂected consideration about their nature and
purpose. As two OECD experts recently commented,
Indicators are invariably developed to inform and
inﬂuence different societal, political, technical and
institutional processes ... a composite indicator developed by an environmental NGO will probably
have more success raising awareness among the
general public, than as a widely accepted information tool among government analysts. (Scrivens and
Iasiello, 2010, p. 9)

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Many sector-speciﬁc indicators have been proposed
and calculated. Aside from simple trends in water use,
the water-use efficiency of different sectors in terms
of output per unit of water can be a useful indicator.
Similarly, monitoring the proportion of treated domestic wastewater can help to understand the impact of
water use on the natural environment. But the focus on
climate change has also highlighted the importance of
selecting appropriate indicators. For example, in South
Africa, energy planning requires an informed trade-off
between carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and wateruse efficiency (Box 6.1).
At a broader societal level, there is the widely used
concept of national water stress (see Sections 3.1 and
4.6.1), which simply considers the amount of water
available to a country per person (Falkenmark et al.,
1989). At the other extreme, the water poverty index
proposed by Sullivan (2002) seeks to combine a wide
range of parameters, including available water resources, water use by three major sectors, four measures of
water quality, information about fertilizer and pesticide
use, environmental regulatory capacity, the number of
EIA guidelines and the percentage of threatened species. Data availability on key issues itself is a formal
component of the index.
Since the WWDR3 was published in 2009, a number
of important global processes that seek to identify
water resource issues and inform water-related policy
decisions have gained momentum. One example is
the collaborative exercise undertaken by the UN CEO
Water Mandate group, including the World Wildlife
Fund (WWF). It focused on encouraging its member
companies to develop a better understanding of how
their operations use water, both in their direct operations and in their supply chains. The Water Footprint
Network, a spinoff of research into the virtual water
trade between countries, also encourages companies
to know and reduce their water use and ‘footprint’.1
At the national level, FAO’s AQUASTAT2 collects statistics and data on water resources obtained from national sources. These are systematically reviewed to ensure consistency in deﬁnitions and between countries
sharing the same river basin. A comparative analysis
of available country water resources data is also carried out at regular intervals. On this basis, AQUASTAT
compiles and updates its best estimates of the main
elements of the water balance for each country. For
Africa, Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean,

WWDR4

AQUASTAT obtains water withdrawal values from
ministries or other governmental agencies at country
level, although some data gaps are ﬁlled using United
Nations (UN) data. Eurostat and OECD are valuable
sources of information for Europe, Australia, Japan,
New Zealand and Northern America, and are also used
to ﬁll data gaps.
The Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP)3 for Water
Supply and Sanitation (WHO/UNICEF) is the official UN mechanism tasked with monitoring progress

BOX 6.1
Informing trade-offs: Water for electricity in South
Africa

In most countries, economic activity and social stability depend on a sufficient and reliable supply of electrical power.
This is explicitly stated in South Africa’s National Water
Resource Strategy, which regards water use for electricity
generation as a matter of strategic importance. However,
the strategy speciﬁcally states that ‘Water use designated
as being of strategic importance will be subject to the same
efficiency criteria and water demand management requirements as is applied to other uses. Dry cooling of power stations should be applied where feasible when new generating capacity is built.’ (DWAF, 2004, p. 52)
Performance measured on the basis of the ‘water intensity’ of electricity generation, ﬁrst set as a target in 1970,
has been encouraging. Between 1980 and 2006, national
power utility ESKOM reported that it had decreased its
water use from 2.85 L per kWh to approximately 1.32 L
per kWh, largely by the use of dry cooling rather than
water cooling for its inland power stations. The water
consumption of its newest 4,000 megawatts Matimba
Power Station, which claims to be the largest direct-drycooled station in the world, is in the order of 0.1 L per kWh
(ESKOM, 2009).
Dry cooling carries not just a signiﬁcant cost penalty but
also has climate implications, since the hydrocarbon fuel
use and CO2 emissions of dry-cooled power stations are
greater than those of water-cooled ones. However, given
South Africa’s water stress, this trade-off was considered
as acceptable, and the use of a consistent indicator over
40 years has enabled performance to be tracked and
sustained. Current electricity planning foresees that the
total use of water will actually decline, even as electricity
production increases, as more efficient power stations and
renewables are brought into the generating mix over the
next decade.

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

163

towards the Millennium Development Goal relating to
drinking water and sanitation (MDG7, Target 7c). The
MDG indicators measure access to drinking water and
basic sanitation:

đƫ Proportion of population using an improved drink-

In fulﬁlling this mandate, JMP publishes updated estimates every two years on the use of various types of
drinking water sources and sanitation facilities at national, regional and global levels. Its success is largely
due to the attention paid to generating the base data
on which reporting is based.

ing water source
đƫ Proportion of population using an improved sanitation facility

These approaches all depend on the presence of sufficient, comparable and reliable raw data and processed

BOX 6.2
Australian water accounting standards

Australia is the driest inhabited continent and one of the highest per capita users of water in the world. Communities, irrigators, businesses and environmental groups are constantly debating the equitable distribution of water. Water is a fundamental resource and as competition for it increases, the need to fully and comparably account for how it is managed, maintained
and distributed to meet economic, social and environmental needs becomes increasingly important.
In response to these issues, the Council of Australian Governments incorporated a directive into the National Water Initiative
(2004) to develop water resource accounting. This would enable water information to be standardized, compared, reconciled
and aggregated. In 2006, a stocktaking report recommended the establishment of water accounting as a discipline, similar to
ﬁnancial accounting, to serve external users’ needs as well as the management requirements of water businesses.
Australia’s approach to water accounting is a systematic process of identifying, recognizing, quantifying, reporting, assuring
and publishing information about water, water rights or other claims to water, and obligations against that water. Unlike other
types of water resource accounting that currently exist internationally, the development of water accounting in Australia is
based on the principles of ﬁnancial accounting, not statistics, and focuses on the volumes of water rather than their economic
value. In addition, the potential audience is far greater due to the scalable size of the entity being reported on.
The role of issuing water accounting standards was given to the Bureau of Meteorology, which created an independent advisory board, the Water Accounting Standards Board, to assist in their development. Between 2007 and 2010, this board – with
signiﬁcant support and assistance from the accounting and hydrology industries – developed and successfully piloted the
Water Accounting Conceptual Framework (WACF) and the Exposure Draft of Australian Water Accounting Standard 1 (ED
AWAS 1). These documents together provide a principles-based approach to the preparation and presentation of General
Purpose Water Accounting Reports (GPWAR).
Water Accounting Reports aim to assist users in making and evaluating decisions about the allocation of water resources
by providing a comparable and reliable approach to reporting, while also giving water resource managers an opportunity to
demonstrate responsible stewardship of a public good. Furthermore, the production of reports is expected to instil public and
investor conﬁdence in how much water there is, who has the rights to it, and how it is being used.
As information about water resources is made more available, better decisions can be made on a broad range of water-related matters. For instance how to:
đƫƫƫ%/0.%10!ƫ0$!ƫ.!/+1.!
đƫƫƫ *2!/0ƫ%*ƫ!00!.ƫ-1*0%ü0%+*ƫ0!$*%-1!/ƫ+.ƫ%*"./0.101.!
đƫƫƫ!% !ƫ3$!.!ƫ,.%20!ƫ!*0!.,.%/!ƫ+1( ƫ(+0!ƫ*!3ƫ+,!.0%+*/ƫ0$0ƫ.!(5ƫ+*ƫ30!.
đƫƫƫ+,!ƫ3%0$ƫ*ƫ!4,* %*#ƫ+))1*%05ƫ*!! ƫ3$!*ƫ %0%+*(ƫ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ.!ƫ.!-1%.!
đƫƫƫ *2!/0ƫ%*ƫ+),*%!/ƫ!4,+/! ƫ0+ƫ/%#*%ü*0ƫ30!.ġ.!(0! ƫ+,!.0%*#ƫ.%/'
While signiﬁcant progress has been made in the development and adoption of water accounting over a short period of time,
the discipline is still in its infancy. In the end, it will be users who determine what information they require to be able to make
and evaluate decisions about the allocation of resources.
Note: For more information see www.bom.gov.au/water/wasb

164

CHAPTER 6

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

information about both water resources and their use.
In this area, too, there are encouraging developments.
The UN Statistical Division continues to support member countries to develop their physical water accounts
so as to better understand where their water comes
from and how it is used. Meanwhile, at the national level, Australia – which faces severe pressures from, and
difficult choices about, the management of its water
resources – is developing sophisticated water accounting systems to support decision-making (Box 6.2).
In 2007, stakeholders of WWAP sought to produce a
core group of indicators to address high-level information and policy objectives. In the light of the challenges faced, WWAP, as one of the three operational
programmes of the UN-Water consortium, engaged in
a systematic review of the different indicators required
as well as the data challenges that need to be addressed in order to guide its future work.
In August 2009, a WWAP-led UN-Water Task Force on
Indicators, Monitoring and Reporting (IMR) presented
its outputs to UN-Water.4 The Task Force’s overarching objective was to contribute to public information
and informed decision-making in the water and related
sectors, including sanitation, at global and national
levels, through improved monitoring and reporting. In
particular, it aimed to support international and national decision-makers and advance the implementation of internationally agreed-upon goals and targets
on water and sanitation.
This involved the development of a methodology for
monitoring, at regular intervals, the state of water resources and their use, as well as the impact of policy
and management interventions, including a set of
measurable indicators that support both national decision-makers and the international community. A set of
ﬁfteen indicators was proposed, with detailed descriptions and methodologies for each one.5
While these indicators do not allow for an in-depth
analysis of the issues, they serve their intended purpose of informing civil society of critical water issues at the global level. However, the IMR Task Force
noted that the development and use of indicators is a
dynamic process and that the proposed list is neither
ﬁnal nor exhaustive. Rather, it will evolve as knowledge
and data availability improve. A precondition for any
robust indicator is collection of accurate, timely and
consistent data at country level. Part of this ongoing

WWDR4

process will be the provision of technical assistance or
tools to facilitate this work.

6.3 State of data and information
The monitoring of water resources and their use represents an immense challenge, especially given the
renewable nature and general complexity of water
resources, the variability of their distribution in time
and space, and the different forms in which they appear. Furthermore, the diversity of monitoring objectives poses additional challenges. In addition, the data
required to populate the indicators are seldom systematically or reliably available at global, national, regional
or basin level.
The paucity of data is illustrated by Figure 6.1, which
summarizes data availability in the countries of the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
A particular challenge is maintaining a regular ﬂow of
comparable data that can be used to monitor trends in
different parameters over time. While data gaps have
often been patched by the use of models, the quality
of the information then becomes dependent on having
sufficient ﬁeld data to calibrate and ‘ground truth’ the
model.
A WWAP Expert Group on IMR considered the availability of data and the actions that could be taken to
enhance data ﬂow. One ﬁnding was the existence of
a limited set of key ‘data items’ needed to calculate a
wide range of different indicators. For example, one
key data item needed to calculate the values of many
national level indicators is the Total Actual Renewable
Water Resource (TARWR), whether at the basin, state,
national or regional level. In the past, the TARWR has

“Without actual use
data, improvements
in water productivity
cannot be tracked,
even if they are
substantial.”
FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

165

been calculated on the basis of information collected
over a 30-year period (the 1960–1990 period was a
widely used benchmark). Important indicators, such as
water scarcity (TARWR per capita) and water productivity (GDP per TARWR) are based on these measures.
However, the TARWR has not been routinely monitored and no methodology exists for its systematic
updating. So, while indicators such as national water
scarcity have changed over the past decade, these
changes have usually simply reﬂected changes in
underlying populations. Changes in water availability have not been systematically recorded and are not
generally reﬂected in global water scarcity data. The
general assumption was that hydrology is ‘stationary’
(see Chapters 5, 8 and 11).
However, concerns about climate change, one of the
factors that have led to the growing interest in water

indicators, have resulted in explicit recognition that the
‘stationary hydrology’ assumption can no longer be used
as the basis for high-level reviews of water availability.
This has focused attention on the limited availability of
global data on stream ﬂows, on which estimates of water resource availability need to be based. While there
are a great deal of available data on precipitation, which
can be measured by remote sensing, changes in runoff
to rivers or recharge of groundwater are much harder to
measure. In general, data availability is particularly poor
for groundwater and water quality.
Water-use data are often even more difficult to obtain
than data on the state of the resources themselves. As
an example, data are needed to assess the productivity
of water, in terms of GDP per unit of water used, to enable monitoring of the policy objective of decoupling
economic activity from resource use. Similarly, the efﬁciency of water use in different industrial processes

FIGURE 6.1
Dashboard of data availability in SADC countries
Surface and Infragroundwater structure

Water supply Water
sources and uses and
returns to
allocation
environment

Wastewater

Water
efficiency

Water
GDP
charges
(tariffs, taxes,
subsidles)

Water
ﬁnancing and
production
costs

Angola
Botswana
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Southern
Madagascar
Malawi
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Seychelles
South Africa
Swasiland
United Republic
of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Little information

Substantial information

Some but limited information

No response received

Source: SADC (2010, table 4, p. vii).

166

CHAPTER 6

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

may usefully be monitored to determine the efficacy of
water demand management programmes. In practice,
however, water use is often estimated using standard
assumptions of water consumption in speciﬁc industries. Without actual use data, improvements in water
productivity cannot be tracked, even if they are substantial. The impacts of technological progress may
thus be missed unless detailed surveys are carried out
into water use by speciﬁc sector. Similarly, the lack of
knowledge about water use in many sectors means
that opportunities and priorities to promote more efﬁcient use of water may not be identiﬁed.
These examples highlight the need for greater focus on
data generation to enable water managers to monitor
the trends of most concern to policy-makers.

6.4 Constraints on better monitoring and
reporting
6.4.1 Institutional and political constraints
Many institutional and political constraints inhibit better monitoring and reporting of information on water
resources and their use. Good management generates
good data; poor management is frequently a consequence of poor data, while also contributing to the
broader data gap.
Because of the relatively low value and wide distribution of water, its use, particularly in irrigation, is
usually not measured directly. From an operational
perspective, it is usually more important in conditions
of scarcity to decide on the priorities and proportionate shares for available water, rather than to measure
exact quantities. In many jurisdictions, water allocations are made at different levels of reliability for different classes of user to avoid detailed quantitative
measurements.
Furthermore, because the production of water is a
natural rather than a man-made process, there is little certainty in most situations about the initial supply.
This distinguishes it from other utility operations and
natural resource contexts. For example, in energy production the quantity of coal delivered from a mine to a
power station is known; similarly, the amount of electricity that ﬂows from the power station is measured
by the generating company whose survival depends
on measuring and billing its customers for the energy
supplied. With water resources, however, there is no
coal-burning or any other routine measurement of the
amount of water that ﬂows into the system.

WWDR4

In addition, because water resources are often shared
between a number of different political jurisdictions,
there is often a disincentive for upstream communities to share information about resource availability
and use with downstream jurisdictions, as the information may be used in disputes about the division of the
resource. It is also common for private companies to
withhold and avoid disclosure of information on water availability and use, alleging that these data are of
strategic importance for their business activities.
This phenomenon is best known in river basins shared
between countries (as with large basins such as the
Ganges and the Mekong); however, similar logic may
also apply in countries with federal systems of government in which water resource management lies in the

BOX 6.3
Water resource information for conﬂict prevention
in Central Asia

The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1989 created a number of difficult water resource management challenges
for the countries that emerged. Beforehand, the central
government had taken decisions about the use and sharing of water between regions; afterwards, such decisions
became the province of sovereign countries, which have
different criteria. As a result, the potential exists for conﬂict between them. This in turn has been identiﬁed as a
potential risk, and one that could aggravate existing conﬂicts in neighbouring countries. One simple response to
this, identiﬁed by the United States of America, proposes
the provision of better water resource information as the
ﬁrst essential step:
Provide benchmark data to improve water
management
The countries in Central and South Asia, regardless of
their level of development, lack publicly available access to consistent and comparable data on water supply, ﬂow and usage. This creates tension over the management of water by both upstream and downstream
countries. Providing basic technical information to all
countries is a constructive way for the United States to
help create a foundation for bona ﬁde discussion and
debate over water management. The United States
should support data-related activities speciﬁc to measuring and monitoring water ﬂow and volume for key
rivers and river basins. We should also promote technical partnerships in the region to monitor glaciers, track
shifts in monsoons, and model climatic changes across
a range of water ﬂow scenarios. (US Senate, 2011, p. 2)

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

167

hands of provincial or state administrations, which may
have similar motivations. The corollary is that where a
potential for conﬂict exists between neighbours, addressing the data challenge may constitute an important mechanism to manage disputes (Box 6.3).
6.4.2 Deﬁnitional issues: Performance measurement
challenges
A further constraint on improved monitoring and reporting is the lack of agreement on what should actually be monitored. For example, the establishment of
performance targets with effective measures is essential to achieving policy goals such as sustainable development and the MDGs, but there is often uncertainty
about what data items will best serve this purpose.
It is necessary to address the potential impacts of decisions needed within a cost–beneﬁt analysis. Criteria
will be needed to guide the selection of measures.
These will include considerations such as the value
of ecosystem services that make optimization more
complex, but also potentially more effective. Decisionsupport systems are needed that combine classical
cost–beneﬁt with participatory multi-criteria analyses,
addressing different levels of uncertainties.
To achieve a balanced allocation and the protection of
water resources, indicators should support carefully
designed and selected policy instruments. They may
include regulations (technical standards, performance
standards, etc.), quotas, access rules and allocation
procedures, as well as economic instruments (especially pricing mechanisms and payments for ecosystem
services).
While economic theory suggests that pricing policies
may be useful for achieving targets, in practice, prices
serve several conﬂicting purposes: ﬁnancing of water
service-related infrastructure, incentives for efficient
use of scarce resources, and fairness and distributional justice (see Chapter 10). Simply monitoring water
prices does not necessarily provide a useful indication of policy success, unless it is done in a manner
that reﬂects the real-life objectives of improved water
management.
6.4.3 Technical and ﬁnancial constraints
In addition to the political and institutional barriers
to the generation and reporting of water resource
availability and use information, there are also substantial technical and ﬁnancial constraints.

168

CHAPTER 6

Because water occurs in natural structures whose behaviour often varies from one season to the next, measuring simple parameters such as ﬂow can be extremely
expensive. The cost of a single river gauging station
for a medium-size river can easily exceed US$1 million,
and the costs of ongoing operation, maintenance and
reporting can be difficult to justify in poor countries
where such activities compete with basic water supply
for limited funds, yet bring no immediate beneﬁts.
One important yet underused resource is remote sensing. As yet, it has not resulted in a signiﬁcant ﬂow of
useful processed information about water and its use.
While the direct use of water by ﬁeld crops can now
be reliably assessed using remotely accessed data, it
is more difficult to determine the amount of water actually abstracted from rivers and dams to irrigate the
ﬁelds. This is because it is not yet possible to determine parameters such as the ﬂow of water in rivers
from remotely sensed information. This means that a
critical indicator cannot be assessed: the efficiency
with which abstracted water is delivered to the ﬁelds
and actually used for crop production.
It is also possible to remotely monitor water qualityrelated parameters, which would assist management
challenges such as eutrophication and the protection
of natural ecosystems such as wetlands on a systematic basis. Existing remote-sensing technologies have
a number of important applications; however, the relatively low priority accorded to water resource monitoring means that these are not applied.
While remote sensing is proving to be a useful tool, it
will never substitute the need to gather local information. Using remote sensing data without ground truth
may be risky and it would be ill-advised to suggest
that governments not spend on hydromet networks
in favour of remote sensing data. Remote sensing and
hydromet measuring networks are not mutually exclusive, and strengthening hydromet networks and services is a necessary condition for proper water resources
management, planning, design and operation.

6.5 Improving the ﬂow of data and
information
6.5.1 The emerging market for better data and
indicators
While WWAP’s mandate is to collate and report available information on the state of water resources and
their use at a global level, it has become apparent that

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

data constraints are limiting the programme’s ability to do this, speciﬁcally in relation to the systematic
monitoring of important trends. In order to carry out
its mandate effectively, it must therefore identify the
data requirements to enable the tracking of key policy
goals and emerging changes, and to support efforts to
implement monitoring systems that can generate the
data required.
The most effective driver of efforts to improve the ﬂow
of information about water would be demands for information on the part of policy-makers and decision-makers in the socio-economic sectors of activity. There are,
however, encouraging signs that more attention is being
paid to the need to generate better data ﬂows to support the monitoring of water resources and their use.
From a government perspective, economic policymakers now recognize that water as a resource has an
important inﬂuence on national economies, which is
largely unaccounted for. As a result, there is a growing interest in water accounting in parallel with broader
environmental accounting. The initiatives of the UN
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting for
Water (SEEAW) and Eurostat are particularly signiﬁcant in this regard, as are the recent efforts of OECD.
The importance of water resource data for national and
regional security is demonstrated by the example from
Central Asia, cited above. And as the business sector
turns its attention to managing the risks posed by water, it has found that the ‘data drought’ (IBM, 2009, p.
10) adds to existing uncertainties.
An important initiative from the perspective of business is the UN Global Compact CEO Water Mandate.
Established in 2007, it recognized that emerging crises
in water services and water resources posed a range
of risks to the private sector – as well as opportunities. It also recognized that current water management
practices are inadequate given the increasing materiality and importance of water as a resource. Mandate
members acknowledge that, in order to operate in a
more sustainable manner, they have a responsibility to
make water resources management a priority, and to
work with governments, UN agencies, NGOs and other
stakeholders to address this global water challenge.
They have also turned their attention to the challenge
of data availability. Linked to this, business leaders
at the World Economic Forum in 2009 issued a call
to action to raise awareness about water challenges.

WWDR4

“From a government
perspective, economic
policy-makers now
recognize that water
as a resource has an
important inﬂuence on
national economies,
which is largely
unaccounted for.”
Speciﬁcally, they pledged action to work on unifying
water data collection, management and disclosure approaches for business (Box 6.4).
There are many other initiatives underway. The
World Business Council on Sustainable Development
(WBCSD) has produced a ‘water tool’ to help business
to monitor its use of and impact on water more systematically. The Water Footprint Network similarly encourages businesses, their customers and other stakeholders to become more aware of the water content of
their products and operations (Hoekstra et al., 2011).
There is implicit competition between these different
approaches, with one focusing speciﬁcally on corporate water use while others seek to engage and understand the resource in its catchment context: ‘beyond
the factory fence’. However, both approaches to monitoring and evaluating the state of water resources and
their use are effective in that they depend on the availability of sufficient data to draw well-substantiated
conclusions.
The interest from governments and corporate water
users is also beginning to be complemented by an
interest from the broader public. Civil society organizations such as the World Resources Institute have included access to information about water resources in
their overall programme to promote greater public access to environmental information – a programme that
has traditionally focused on more contentious natural
resources such as minerals, land and forests.6

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

169

It would thus appear that, after many decades of decline, the market for water-related data may be growing and becoming demand-driven rather than supplydriven. This suggests that there are now signiﬁcant
opportunities for the global community of water practitioners, as well as water users and the much broader
community that has a stake in water, to make substantial improvements in the availability and quality
of information about the resource. Moreover, the new
focus on monitoring water resources is helping to raise
awareness among a broader community about the current limitations of available information.
6.5.2 Technological opportunity and data innovation
Technology is also making a contribution. One example is the development of techniques that enable
evapotranspiration from crops to be measured directly at a variety of scales, including by remote sensing
(Hellegers et al., 2009). New partnerships may also

play a role; for example, data about signal attenuation between mobile phone towers can help to make
accurate estimates of precipitation, which means that
telecommunications service providers can help to ﬁll
data gaps. Another potentially more signiﬁcant development is the deployment of the GRACE family of
satellites, which have enabled the application of remote gravimetric measurement to determine changes in the total water stock in speciﬁc geographical
areas. Although still only experimental and working
at a large scale, this technology has already demonstrated the potential to monitor changing groundwater reserves in large alluvial basins. This is of substantial policy interest given the dangers of depletion that
these resources face.
One pilot initiative of WWAP is a collaboration to produce a dynamic estimate of the basic data item, the
TARWR (Total Actual Renewable Water Resources). The

BOX 6.4
Data as a gateway to progress for sustainable water management

At the 2009 World Economic Forum (WEF), data and information was identiﬁed as a key area requiring more attention. Why
is the issue important?
Water security and pollution in water-stressed countries is a growing concern for many companies, especially in the power,
mining, food and beverage, and semi-conductor sectors. The last few years have seen a plethora of reports from business
associations, ﬁnancial analysts and companies on the strategic importance of water security. The UN Global Compact CEO
Water Mandate is a good example of this emerging trend.
Companies will increasingly be asked to provide details of their water-related risks to investors and their water-use efficiency
measures to the public. They will also be attracted to countries with sound water management policies. Water security risks
are difficult for businesses and investors to assess, due both to poor information about underlying supply conditions and inadequate and irregular reporting and disclosure practices by individual companies (Levinson et al., 2008).
Quantitative indicators make it possible to spot problems, track trends, identify leaders and laggards, and highlight best
management practices … What is shocking is how little water data is available on a methodologically consistent basis across
countries. Much of the existing water data has been collected without regard to cross-country comparisons. (Daniel C. Esty,
Director, Yale Center for Environmental Law and Policy, US, cited in WEF, 2009, p. 12)
There is also a need for better data at country level. A participative session on India concluded that one of the obstacles to
implementing potential solutions to the country’s water problems was the lack of understanding and awareness of the issue:
Participants strongly agreed that water security is already a critical issue for India as the problem becomes more visible, but
the sense of urgency has yet to percolate through to the general public and political leaders. Better quality of data and data
transparency through an independent authority or group may help provide further insight into the situation….
Data, Transparency and Analytics: The impact of the water problem will need to be quantiﬁed by different stakeholders so
that they can understand the extent of the problem. Additional analytics need to be produced by independent actors that
will help or pressure governments and other stakeholders into action (such as additional water metrics/index/benchmarking tools/water footprint). (WEF, 2009, p. 52)

170

CHAPTER 6

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

TARWR is used as a variable in many key indicators, but
is currently only available on a static basis, largely based
on estimates of river ﬂows for the period 1960–1990.
The key innovation is to base the estimate of available water on a combination of observed hydro-meteorological and surface elevation data and to produce
long-term moving averages. This approach will move
away from the constraints of ‘stationary hydrology’ and
permit the identiﬁcation of trends in TARWR. Although
the approach still has to be further developed, its observational basis and dynamic nature strongly indicate
that it could become the primary point of reference for
national water availability (Box 6.5).

As mentioned in Section 6.4.3, there are a number of
other areas in which remote sensing may be harnessed
to improve the quality of information about critical
water resource parameters, notably water quality and
environmental protection. Further work in these areas could also produce methodologies to enable the
systematic monitoring of global trends in, for example, eutrophication of water bodies and changes in
wetland extent. However, as mentioned earlier, using
remote sensing data without ground truth may be
risky and will never be a substitute for gathering local
information.

BOX 6.5
WWAP’s dynamic TARWR pilot initiative with CUNY and GWSP

WWAP’s pilot initiative is a collaboration with the City University of New York (CUNY) and the Global Water System Project
(GWSP) to produce a dynamic estimate of the basic data item, the TARWR (Total Actual Renewable Water Resources).
TARWR is the fundamental measure of water resource availability (in a country, river basin or region) and is used in many
indicators. It is deﬁned as the maximum theoretical amount of water actually available for the country (or other unit), calculated from:
đƫƫƫƫ+1.!/ƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ3%0$%*ƫƫ+1*0.5ƫ%0/!("
đƫƫƫƫ0!.ƫý+3%*#ƫ%*0+ƫƫ+1*0.5
đƫƫƫƫ0!.ƫý+3%*#ƫ+10ƫ+"ƫƫ+1*0.5ƫĨ0.!05ƫ+))%0)!*0/ĩ
đƫƫƫƫ2%(%(%05Čƫ !ü*! ƫ/ƫ0$!ƫ/1."!ƫ* ƫ#.+1* 30!.ƫ.!/+1.!ƫ2+(1)!ƫ.!*!3! ƫ!$ƫ5!.ƫ%*ƫ!$ƫ+1*0.5Čƫ)!*/ƫ0$!ƫ
amount of water theoretically available for use on a sustainable basis. In more speciﬁc terms, TARWR is the sum of:
External water resources entering the country
đƫƫƫƫ1."!ƫ30!.ƫ.1*+ûƫĨĩƫ2+(1)!/ƫ#!*!.0! ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ+1*0.5
đƫƫƫƫ.+1* 30!.ƫ.!$.#!ƫĨĩƫ0'%*#ƫ,(!ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ+1*0.5
Less:
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ2+(1)!ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ+1*0.5ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ0+0(ƫ.!/+1.!ƫ!û!0%2!(5ƫ/$.! ƫ/ƫ%0ƫ%*0!.0/ƫ* ƫý+3/ƫ0$.+1#$ƫ+0$ƫ0$!ƫ#.+1* 3ter and surface water systems; not to subtract this volume would result in its being counted twice (it is also referred to
as ‘overlap’).
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ2+(1)!ƫ0$0ƫý+3/ƫ0+ƫ +3*/0.!)ƫ+1*0.%!/ƫ/! ƫ+*ƫ"+.)(ƫ+.ƫ%*"+.)(ƫ#.!!)!*0/ƫ+.ƫ0.!0%!/
The WWAP Pilot Study on Indicators (PSI) is being undertaken at the CUNY by Charles Vörösmarty in partnership with the
Global Terrestrial Network for Hydrology (GTN-H) and GEO/IGWCO (Water Community of Practice), with support from the
US Army Corps of Engineers (USACE). The group has developed an innovative methodology for estimating country-level
TARWR. This approach is based on (but not limited to) a combination of hydro-meteorological and high-resolution (6 minute
river network and ESRI country boundaries) surface elevation data, which will allow the identiﬁcation of TARWR trends (e.g.
if certain countries are getting wetter or dryer) and variability (e.g. variation of water supply from one year to the next).
This ‘dynamic TARWR’ is used to produce an alternative set of countries’ per capita water availability. This data item will be
further developed. Given its observational basis and dynamic nature, it is hoped that it will eventually become the primary
point of reference, as it enables longer-term variations in water availability to be tracked over time. This will overcome some
of the current constraints imposed by the assumption of stationary hydrology, which is considered to be inappropriate in the
face of climate and related challenges
The present TARWR series is produced by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)’s AQUASTAT
programme (TARWR-FAO, 2003). It is computed on the basis of available country water resources data sheets and country
water balance computational spreadsheets. FAO refers to the data as the ‘Best Estimate’ and updates the data when further
information is provided.

WWDR4

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

171

6.5.3 Institutional responsibilities, constraints and
opportunities
While many organizations collaborate to produce water resource information, for many of them water is not
their primary focus. This can pose certain challenges.
The three key water resource agencies in the UN system are UNESCO, FAO and the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO), while the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) also has a growing
interest in water resources and water quality through its
Global Environment Monitoring System (GEMS) Water
Programme. WMO addresses basic hydrological data
through its science platform and the Global Runoff Data
Centre (a repository for the world’s river discharge data),
while the FAO’s AQUASTAT programme provides a platform for data on water resources and their use, which has
progressed substantially beyond the agricultural domain.
However, all three organizations already have substantial
general mandates: FAO has global oversight of food and
agriculture, UNESCO has a broad responsibility to support science, culture and education, and WMO’s global
remit is primarily to monitor the atmospheric dimensions
of weather and climate. While water resources may not
constitute a top priority for these organizations, they all
maintain substantial water programmes, an example of
which is FAO’s recent announcement of the establishment of a ‘water platform’ to coordinate water-related
activities across the organization. Other examples include
WMO’s Hydrology and Water Resources Programme and
UNESCO’s science-education-assessment ‘suite’ comprising its International Hydrological Programme (IHP), the
IHE Institute for Water Education and WWAP, in addition
to a network of regional hydrologists. As the coordination mechanism across the UN system, UN-Water can
play a key role in linking these various programmes, and
members of the aforementioned UN-Water Task Force
on Indicators, Monitoring and Reporting has begun work
on a Federated Water Monitoring System and Key Water
Indicators Portal.
A further challenge is that the surface ﬂow component
of the water cycle is largely local in character. As such,
it receives relatively little systematic attention from the
scientiﬁc community, which is engaged in global earth
observations. Thus, relatively few of the many programmes that together constitute the Global Climate
Observation System address water on a broad as opposed to a local basis. One exception is the Global
Water Systems Project (GWSP), although its resources
are signiﬁcantly smaller than those available for other
dimensions of weather and climate.

172

CHAPTER 6

However, these global approaches are complemented, if not fed in terms of data, by national level approaches, supported by emerging efforts to promote
national water accounting. These too reﬂect different approaches. For example, while the UN System
of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water
(SEEAW)’s model system seeks to address quantity
(and to a lesser extent, quality), a ﬁnancially based approach is being taken to water accounting in Australia,
although this faces signiﬁcant challenges to manage
the impacts of dramatic variability on the national
economy and society. As already indicated, similar diversity is apparent in the efforts of the business community focusing either on the speciﬁc water footprint
of individual business enterprises or the broader dynamics of water resources and their use ‘beyond the
factory fence’. This diversity of approaches could be
seen to reﬂect confusion. However, it should be understood as an important and encouraging indicator
of the renewed global interest in the state of water resources, their management and use.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

A review of the different approaches and their implications is
contained in Muller (forthcoming 2012).

2

See http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm

3

For more information see http://www.wssinfo.org/
about-the-jmp/introduction/

4

For more information see http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/indicators/
un-water-tf-on-imr/

5

For more information see http://www.unwater.org/indicators.html

6

For more information see http://www.accessinitiative.org/
tai-global-meeting-2008/node/1

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
DWAF (Department of Water Affairs and Forestry). 2004.
National Water Resource Strategy (1st edn), Pretoria, South
Africa, DWAF.
ESKOM. 2009. Reduction in Water Consumption. Sandton,
South Africa, ESKOM. http://www.eskom.co.za/c/
article/240/water-management/ (Accessed 20 October
2011).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Falkenmark, M., Lundqvist, J. and Widstrand, C. 1989. Macroscale water scarcity requires micro-scale approaches.
Natural Resources Forum, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 258–67.
Hellegers, P. J. G. J., Soppe, R., Perry, C. J. and Bastiaanssen,
W. G. M. 2009. Remote sensing and economic indicators
for supporting water resources management decisions.
Water Resource Management, 24 December.
Hoekstra, A. Y., Chapagain, A. K., Aldaya, M. M. and
Mekonnen, M. M. 2011. The Water Footprint Assessment
Manual: Setting the Global Standard. London, Earthscan.
IBM. 2009. Water: A Global Innovation Outlook Report.
Armonk, NY, IBM Corporation. http://www.ibm.com/ibm/.../
ibm_gio_water_report.pdf
Levinson, M., Lee, E., Chung, J., Huttner, M., Danely, C.,
McKnight, C. and Langlois, A. with Klop, P. and Wellington,
F. 2008. Watching Water: A Guide to Evaluating Corporate
Risks in a Thirsty World. New York, JP Morgan Securities Inc.
Muller, M. (forthcoming 2012). Water accounting, corporate
sustainability and the public interest. J. M. Godfrey and K.
Chalmers (eds) International Water Accounting: Effective
Management of a Scarce Resource. London, Edward Elgar.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2001. Environmental Strategy for the First
Decade of the 21st Century. Paris, OECD.

Scrivens, K. and Iasiello, B. 2010. Indicators of ‘Societal
Progress’: Lessons from International Experiences. OECD
Statistics Working Papers, 2010/4. Paris, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
Publishing. doi: 10.1787/5km4k7mq49jg-en.
Sullivan, C. 2002. Calculating a water poverty index. World
Development, Vol. 30, pp. 1195–210.
TARWR-FAO (Total Actual Renewable Water Resource –
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations).
2003. Review Of World Water Resources By Country. Water
Reports 23. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/005/
Y4473E/Y4473E00.HTM
US Senate. 2011. Avoiding Water Wars: Water Scarcity
and Central Asia’s Growing Importance for Stability in
Afghanistan and Pakistan. A majority staff report prepared
for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United
States Senate, 112th Congress, ﬁrst session 22 February
2011.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2009. World Economic
Forum Water Initiative. Managing Our Future Water
Needs for Agriculture, Industry, Human Health and
the Environment. Draft for Discussion at the World
Economic Forum Annual Meeting, Davos, January
2009. https://members.weforum.org/pdf/water/
WaterInitiativeFutureWaterNeeds.pdf

SADC (South African Development Community). 2010.
Economic Accounting of Water Use Project: Baseline Study
Report ACP-EU Water Facility, Grant No. 9ACP RPR 39–90.
SADC.

WWDR4

FROM RAW DATA TO INFORMED DECISIONS

173

CHAPTER 7
Regional challenges, global impacts

—
Authors Jane Barr, Simone Grego, Erum Hassan, Madiodio Niasse,
Walter Rast and Joana Talafré
Contributor Richard Connor

174

CHAPTER 30

STATUS, TRENDS
AND CHALLENGES
© Shutterstock/diak

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
For the ﬁrst time in the World Water Development Report series, this fourth edition reports
at a regional level on the status of water resources, their uses and management through the
introduction of ﬁve regional reports (in Part 3/Volume 2) and their respective summaries in
this chapter. The regional reports cover:
đŏŏŏ1.+,!ŏ* ŏ+.0$ŏ)!.%ŏ
đŏŏŏ/%ŏ* ŏ0$!ŏ%ü
đŏŏŏ 0%*ŏ)!.%ŏ* ŏ0$!ŏ.%!*
đŏŏŏ".%
đŏŏŏ.ŏ* ŏ!/0!.*ŏ/%ŏ.!#%+*
The delineation of the ﬁve regions follows the regional division of the United Nations regional
economic commissions (UNECE, UNECA, UNESCWA, UNECLAC and UNESCAP; maps
of the Member States are provided in the corresponding sections of this chapter), with
the exception of the reports on Africa and the Arab and Western Asia region. For these
two reports, it was decided (in agreement with UNECA and UNESCWA) that all the Arab
countries would be reported on in a broad Arab and Western Asia report, rather than having
some of them included in the Africa report and others in the Western Asia report. Each
regional report was prepared by the corresponding regional economic commission, with the
exception of the Africa report, which was prepared by WWAP in consultation with UN Water/
Africa, the African Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW) and UNECA.
The regional reports highlight the main issues the regions are facing today, and how they
have been changing over recent years. Each report lists the most important external drivers
for the region, analyzing the resulting pressures and effects the drivers have on water
resources, their uses and management. In line with the main theme of the WWDR4, the
principal risks and uncertainties and opportunities related to the regions are reported, as well
as geographic hotspots and sectoral issues of particular concern. Findings are supported
by speciﬁc examples. Response options are provided to help the decision-makers identify
solutions to their speciﬁc issues.
In this chapter a summary of each of the regional reports (Chapters 29 to 33) is provided.
The chapter closes with an examination of the inter-linkages between different regions and
global challenges, which describes how actions in one part of the world can create negative
impacts, as well as opportunities, in others.

7.1 Africa

Morocco, Sudan, South Sudan and Tunisia, which are
covered in Section 7.5, ‘Arab and Western Asia Region’.
In other words, the Africa region here more or less
corresponds to the political deﬁnition of sub-Saharan
Africa. This region has a total area of 24 million km2,

Map 7.1 shows the UNECA member countries; however, for the purposes of this chapter, the Africa region
comprises 46 countries and excludes the northernmost
countries of Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Libya, Mauritania,

MAP 7.1
UNECA Member States

ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR AFRICA

Azores

Algiers
Tunis M e

Rabat

Madeira Is.

TUNISIA

dite

Tripoli

MOROCCO

rranean

Sea

Canary Is.

Cairo

ALGER IA
LIBYA

Western
Sahara

E G YP T
Re
d
Se

Nouakchott MAURITANIA

a

N I GE R

Abidjan

P

ETHIOPIA

Abuja
CAMEROON Bangui

Juba

Yaoundé

Malabo

Addis Ababa
ECA HQ

SOUTH
SUDAN

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

UGANDA
Libreville

oT
Sã

ANGOLA

de n

Socotra

SO

EQUATORIAL
GUINEA

GABON

of A

DJIBOUTI
Djibouti

IA

NIGERIA

SAO TOME
AND PRINCIPE

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Gu l f

SUDAN

N'Djamena

M

Monrovia
LIBERIA

CÔTE
D'IVOIRE
Accra
NA

SIERRA
LEONE

BENIN
TO GO

Conakry
Freetown

G HA

GUINEA Bissau
GUINEA
BISSAU

O

Banjul

BURKINA Niamey
FASO
Ouagadougou

NG

Bamako

O

GAMBIA

om
é

SENEGAL

ERITREA
Asmara

Khartoum

CH AD

Dakar

or Lom
toé
No
vo

Praia

AL

M AL I

CAPE
VERDE

Mogadishu

KENYA

Kampala
DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC OF THE RWANDA

Nairobi

C
Kigali
CONGO
L. Victoria
Brazzaville
Bujumbura
BURUNDI
Pemba
Kinshasa
L. Tanganyika UNITED REPUBLIC Zanzibar
OF

TANZANIA

Luanda

INDIAN OCEAN
Victoria
SEYCHELLES

Dar es Salaam
Aldabra Is.

L. Malawi

AN G O L A

Lilongwe
MALAWI

Lusaka

UE

Windhoek Gaborone

AG
MAD

MOZ

NAMIBIA BOTSWANA

IQ

AM

B

Harare

ZIMBABWE

CA

ZAMBIA
St. Helena
Liberia
Libya
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Swaziland
Togo
Tunisia
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Moroni

AS

Members:
Algeria
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho

COMOROS

Pretoria

R

Antananarivo
MAURITIUS

Port Louis

Reunion

Maputo

Mbabane

SWAZILAND

Bloemfontein
Cape Town

SOUTH
AFRICA

Maseru

LESOTHO

Capital city
The boundaries and names shown and the designations
used on this map do not imply official endorsement or
acceptance by the United Nations.
Final boundary between the Republic of Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan has not yet been determined.

0
0

500

1000
500

1500

2000 km

1000 mi

Source: Economic Commission of Africa, Map No. 3975 Rev.8, November 2011. Department of Field Support, Cartographic Section, United
Nations.
Note: The region is divided into subregions as follows.
Northern: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia.
Sudano-Sahelian: Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Djibouti, Eritrea, Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan.
Gulf of Guinea: Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Togo.
Central: Angola, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equitorial Guinea, Gabon, Sao Tome and
Principe.
Eastern: Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania.
Southern: Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Indian Ocean Islands: Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles.

176

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

which represents about 18% of the world’s landmass
(FAO, 2008). Africa’s climate is inﬂuenced by the
equator, the two tropics and its two major deserts: the
Sahara in the northern hemisphere and the Kalahari
in the southern hemisphere. Rainfall distribution is extremely uneven, both spatially and temporally, which
has major implications for livelihoods and human wellbeing on the continent (FAO, 2005).
Water’s crucial role in accomplishing the continent’s
development goals is widely recognized. Africa faces
endemic poverty, food insecurity and pervasive underdevelopment, with almost all countries lacking the
human, economic and institutional capacities to effectively develop and manage their water resources
sustainably. Sub-Saharan Africa uses barely 5% of its
annual renewable freshwater. Yet access to improved
water supplies, in both urban and rural contexts, is still
the lowest in the world. Most countries do not take
full advantage of available arable lands for agricultural
production and irrigation expansion, and hydroelectricity is underdeveloped in most places. The Economic
Commission for Africa notes that the key issues in
Africa are ‘investing in the development of Africa’s potential water resources, reducing drastically the number of people without access to safe water and adequate sanitation, ensuring food security by expanding
irrigation areas and protecting the gains of economic
development by effectively managing droughts, ﬂoods
and desertiﬁcation’ (NEPAD, 2006, 2).
Africa Water Vision 2025 has been adopted by
African governments, the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and the African Union. This is evidence
of a new focus on water and, potentially, better-targeted investment and more efficient water management.
Africa Water Vision 2025 calls for enhanced institutional frameworks for the strategic adoption of the
principles of integrated water resources management
(IWRM). Most African countries have adopted IWRM
as the basis for water governance and management.
International water policy recommendations continue
to play an invaluable and decisive role.
7.1.1 The driving forces and pressures on water
resources
High population growth, poverty and underdevelopment are key drivers affecting how water is managed
in the region. The development of drinking water and
sanitation programmes and other water sector activities in Africa need to take into account the prevailing

WWDR4

demographic, economic, political and climatic environments and their impact on water resources and water
demands.
Demographics
Africa’s rising population is driving demand for water and
accelerating the degradation of water resources in many
countries. By mid-2011, Africa’s population (again excluding the northernmost states) was about 838 million and
its average natural rate of increase was 2.6% per annum,
compared to the world average of 1.2%. According to one
estimate, its population will grow to 1,245 million by 2025
and to 2,069 million by 2050 (PRB, 2011).
An estimated 61% of Africans live in rural areas, exceeding the world average of 50%, and the average
population density is 29 people per square kilometre. Urban population grew at 3.4% between 2005
and 2010, which is 1.1% faster than the rural population
growth rate (UNEP, 2010b). The urban slum population in sub-Saharan African countries is expected to
double to around 400 million by 2020, if governments
do not take immediate and radical action (UN-Habitat,
2005). However, since remaining ﬂexible is a survival
strategy, urban slum populations are highly mobile and
numbers are difficult to assess. It is clear, though, that
improvements are not keeping pace with the rapid
growth of sub-Saharan slum populations (UN-Habitat,
2010). This rapid and poorly managed growth of urban
areas, especially in peri-urban slums, has overwhelmed
most municipal water services and constitutes a major
challenge to water and sanitation development.
On the other hand, population growth is stabilizing:
there has been a progressive reduction in the growth
rate from about 2.8% in 1990–1995 to a projected value
of about 2.3% in 2010–2015 (FAO, 2005). This trend,
coupled with increasing economic growth, is likely to
contribute to increased socio-economic development,
including better water management and the provision
of water-related services.
Economic development and poverty
Sub-Saharan Africa is the world’s poorest and leastdeveloped region, with half its population living on less
than a dollar a day. About two-thirds of its countries
rank among the lowest in the Human Development
Index (FAO, 2008). Even when opportunities exist to
address outstanding water issues, deep and widespread poverty across the African region constrains
the ability of many cities and communities to provide

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

177

rainwater, with an estimated total average annual precipitation of 815 mm (FAO, 2008), but it is highly seasonal, unevenly distributed across the region (Table 7.1)
and there are frequent ﬂoods and droughts. The greatest amount of rainfall occurs along the equator, especially in the area from the Niger Delta to the Congo
River basin. The Sahara Desert has virtually no rainfall.
In western and central Africa, rainfall is exceptionally
variable and unpredictable.

proper water and sanitation services, sufficient water
for economic activities and to prevent water quality
from deteriorating (UNEP, 2010b).
Far-reaching economic reforms adopted across the
continent have begun to yield positive results in many
countries. Negative trends in gross domestic product (GDP) have given way to progressively increasing
growth, averaging around the mean ﬁgure for developing countries. Analysis by the Economist reveals that in
the ten years up to 2010, six of the world’s ten fastestgrowing economies were in sub-Saharan Africa (The
Economist, 2011). Nevertheless, average per capita GDP
growth in Africa remains far below all other regions.

At the continental level, renewable water resources constitute only about 20% of the total rainfall and represent
less than 9% of global renewable resources (FAO, 2005).
Internal renewable water resources per person in sub-Saharan Africa fell from an average of more than 16,500 m3
per inhabitant in 1960 to about 5,500 m3 per inhabitant
in 2005. This was largely as a result of population growth
(FAO, 2008). Groundwater represents 15% of total renewable resources, but an estimated 75% or more of the
African population uses groundwater as their main source
of drinking water (UNEP, 2010b). Because renewable
resources are in short supply, capturing and storing precipitation is important. More importantly, the low volumes
of renewable resources partly account for the endemic
drought in areas of the continent. Although lack of access
to water is mainly a function of economic scarcity (see
Section 4.6.1 and Figure 4.10), signiﬁcant variations both
between and within subregions also contribute to the low
average per capita water withdrawals of 247 m3 per year.
(FAO, 2005).

The economies of most African countries depend
largely on rainfed agriculture as the major driver of
economic growth. It represents about 20% of the region’s GDP, 60% of its workforce, 20% of its export
goods, and 90% of rural incomes. Agriculture is by far
the largest user of water, accounting for about 87% of
total water withdrawals (FAO, 2008). Investing in agriculture, and especially in irrigated farming, is at least
four times as effective at raising poor people’s incomes
as is investment in other sectors (UNEP, 2010b).
7.1.2 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
Hydrological variability
Africa’s climate is characterized by extremes, from a
humid equatorial climate at the equator, through tropical and semi-arid in the middle of the region, to an
arid climate towards the northern and southern fringes.
Sub-Saharan Africa has a relatively plentiful supply of

About 66% of Africa is arid or semi-arid and more than
300 of the 800 million people in sub-Saharan Africa

TABLE 7.1
Total and proportional renewable water resources in Africa’s subregions
Total water
resources
(km3/year) (2008)

Percentage of
internal water
resources of Africa

Central Africa

2 858.08

50.66

Eastern Africa

262.04

4.64

Western Indian Ocean Islands

345.95

6.13

Northern Africa

168.66

2.99

Southern Africa

691.35

12.25

Western Africa

1 315.28

23.32

Total Africa

5 641.36

100

Subregion

Source: UNEP (2010b, table 1.2, p. 15; original data from FAO AQUASTAT).

178

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

live in a water-scarce environment – meaning that they
have less than 1,000 m3 per capita (NEPAD, 2006).
Access to scarce water is exacerbated by increased
demand caused by growing populations, especially in
urban areas, and a trend towards higher living standards in some places. This is compounded by dwindling
supply and poor water management. These characteristics present signiﬁcant challenges to water provision
in Africa and contribute to food insecurity, poor health
and damaged ecosystem in many places, especially where rainfed agriculture is crucial to livelihoods
(UNEP, 2010b).
Access to drinking water and sanitation
Although water is intimately linked with African culture,
religion and society in myriad ways, modern African
societies have not sufficiently developed the adaptive
capacities they need to guarantee basic households for
water and other vital services. Often, water is carried
long distances, a burden borne mainly by women and
children. In urban and peri-urban areas, water is often
only available from vendors at an unfair price and the
quality is often poor. The urban slum population in
sub-Saharan African countries is expected to double,
rising from 200 million in 2005 to 400 million in 2020,

if governments do not take immediate and radical action (UN-Habitat, 2005).
The coverage of drinking water supply in sub-Saharan
Africa1 is barely 60%; the world average is about 87%.
Of the 884 million people in the world still using unimproved drinking water sources, 37% live in this region.
Provision of improved water sources in urban areas remained at 83% between 1990 and 2008. In rural areas,
it was at only 47% in 2008, although this represented
an 11% increase on 1990 ﬁgures, or 110 million more
people gaining access to improved water supplies
(WHO/UNICEF, 2010). Figure 7.1 gives a country-bycountry breakdown of the proportion of the population using improved drinking water sources.
Lack of sanitation facilities is an even greater challenge
to water management in Africa. Many water bodies and other sources are polluted with microbiological organisms from indiscriminate disposal of excreta,
impairing human health through waterborne diseases
such as diarrhoea, cholera, trachoma, schistosomiasis
and others. Water-related vector-borne diseases, such
as malaria, are also a major health concern. In sub-Saharan Africa, only 31% of the population uses improved

FIGURE 7.1
Use of improved drinking water sources (2008)

Use of improved drinking
water sources (%)
91-100%
76-90%
50-75%
<50%
No or insufficient data

Source: adapted from WHO/UNICEF (2010, ﬁg. 4, page 7).

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

179

“About 66% of Africa is
arid or semi-arid and
more than 300 of the
800 million people in
sub-Saharan Africa
live in a water-scarce
environment.”
sanitation facilities, with large differences between
urban coverage, which was about 44% in 2008, and
rural provision, which was 24%. Although the proportion of the population practising open defecation in
the region is declining, in absolute numbers, it increased from 188 million in 1990 to 224 million in 2008
(AMCOW, 2010).
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) for water are to ‘halve, by 2015, the proportion of people
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation’. It is estimated that only ﬁve countries
in sub-Saharan Africa have more than 75% of what is
needed to achieve the target for drinking water and
only two countries, Kenya and South Africa, have more
than 75% of what is needed to achieve the sanitation
target (WHO/UNICEF, 2009). The lack of safe water
and proper sanitation affects not only human health
and well-being, it hampers economic growth and security too.
Food insecurity
Between 2000 and 2007, 25.5% of the total population was undernourished and 30% of children under
ﬁve years old suffered from malnutrition. Between the
mid-1990s and 2008, undernourishment in sub-Saharan Africa increased from 200 million people to about
350 million to 400 million people (FAO, 2008). Climate
change and climate variability are likely to severely
compromise agricultural production and food security
in many African countries (Boko et al., 2007).
Since the mid-1960s, agricultural production has increased by an average of less than 2% annually, while

180

CHAPTER 7

the population has grown by about 3% (UNECA,
2006). Some 97% of the region’s croplands depend on
rainfed agriculture, which produces most of Africa’s
food (FAO, 2008). Africa needs to increase its agricultural output at a rate of 3.3% a year if it is to achieve
food security by 2025. Water is a key component of its
ability to feed its population because irrigated cropland accounts for only 20% of its irrigation potential. In
fact, in all but four countries in the region, less than 5%
of the cultivated area is irrigated – so there is considerable scope for expanding irrigation to increase food
security (UNEP, 2010b).
On the other hand, scenarios suggest that increasing
the area under irrigation by a factor of three would
only represent a 5% contribution to the increase in
food production needed by 2025 (UN Water/Africa,
2004). However, there is even greater scope for expanding rainfed agriculture, harvesting water runoff
and wisely using large untapped groundwater reserves
that exist in some areas (UNEP, 2010b).
Energy insecurity
Sub-Saharan Africa is the world’s largest consumer
of biomass energy, which includes wood, crop waste,
charcoal, manure, candles and kerosene (see Section
2.2 and Chapter 19). Biomass provides 15% of South
Africa’s energy consumption, 86% of energy consumption in the rest of sub-Saharan Africa, and more than
90% of the rural population’s energy consumption.
Overall, only one person in four in Africa has electricity.
Electricity provision is also often unreliable as a result
of a lack of investment, growing demand, conﬂict, unpredictable and variable climatic conditions and aging
equipment – all of which hampers economic activity. Hydropower supplies 32% of Africa’s energy, but
it is underdeveloped. Only 3% of its renewable water resources are exploited for hydroelectricity (UNEP,
2010b). UNEP’s Africa Water Atlas notes a number of
constraints to further hydro development, including
the unequal capacity of Africa’s subregions. For example, despite its enormous potential for hydroelectricity generation, the Central Africa subregion is the
least electriﬁed. The Africa Water Atlas also notes that
climate change will exacerbate rainfall variability and
could hinder hydropower potential in some areas.
Africa has enough hydropower potential to meet the
entire continent’s electricity needs – and boosting hydropower will stimulate the economy, improve human
welfare, help the move away from biomass, produce

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

less greenhouse gas than fossil fuels and provide a
reliable base load that could enable other renewable
energy resources. Developing this sector in an appropriate manner could prevent the environmental and
social impacts historically associated with large dam
developments (UNEP 2010b).
Financing for infrastructure and maintenance
Although there is a general recognition of the need
to boost ﬁnance for water infrastructure across Africa,
the amounts required can be difficult to determine.
One of the most serious recent regional efforts at
costing investment for water, sanitation and irrigation infrastructure is the Africa Infrastructure Country
Diagnostic (AICD) (Foster and Briceño-Garmendia,
2010). This study is unprecedented in its efforts to

BOX 7.1
Africa’s WSS investment needs

An annual investment of about US$22 billion (roughly
3.3% of Africa’s GDP) is the estimated requirement for
Africa to meet the water and sanitation MDGs. Projections
were built on a base scenario, which assumes the same
distribution across modalities as 2006 and applies in both
urban and rural areas
Water and sanitation spending needs, 2006–2015,
US$ billion per annum
Total
Investment
Maintenance
Water
17.2
11.5
5.7
Sanitation
5.4
3.9
1.4
Total
22.6
15.4
6.1
Capital investment needs were estimated at US$15 billion
a year – around 2.2% of the region’s GDP. Capital outlay
estimates, which include both new infrastructure and the
rehabilitation of existing assets, are based on minimum
acceptable asset standards. In addition, it is assumed
that access patterns (or relative prevalence of water and
sanitation modalities) remain broadly the same between
2006 and 2015 and that services are upgraded for only a
minimum number of customers.
Maintenance requirements stand at about US$6 billion per
annum (1.1% of GDP). Operation and maintenance of network and non-network services amount to 3% and 1.5% respectively of the replacement value of installed infrastructure. Rehabilitation estimates were based on a model that
takes into account the maintenance backlog of network
infrastructure in each country.
Source: Foster and Briceño-Garmendia (2010).

WWDR4

analyse both the condition of infrastructure and the
way to address the challenges of providing and ﬁnancing infrastructure services. The study estimates that
US$22 billion is needed annually by the water supply
and sanitation (WSS) sector to close the infrastructure
gap, meet the MDGs and achieve national targets in
Africa within ten years (see Box 7.1).
The AICD report also assessed the potential investment
needed for irrigation systems in Africa, reported to be
approximately US$18 billion for small-scale irrigation
systems and US$2.7 billion for large-scale systems over
a ﬁfty year investment horizon (Box 7.2).
Transboundary water management
Africa has about one-third of the world’s major international water basins – basins larger than 100,000 km2.
Virtually all sub-Saharan African countries, plus Egypt,
share at least one international water basin. Depending
on how they are delineated, there are between 63
(UNEP, 2010b) and 80 (UNECA, 2000) transboundary
river and lake basins on the African continent. Water
interdependency is accentuated by the fact that high
percentages of total ﬂows in downstream countries
originate outside their borders (UNECA, 2001). Often,
downstream countries are at a disadvantage in comparison with their upstream neighbours. Examples of
this occur in the Niger basin, the Juba–Shabelle basin
and the Okavango basin.
Another challenge facing transboundary water management is the lack of complete, reliable and consistent data about transboundary water resources, especially groundwater (Box 7.3). Thus, there is a potential
for conﬂict over these waters. Nevertheless, there
are also over 90 international water agreements that
were drawn up to help manage shared water basins
on the African continent (UNEP, 2010b). For example,
the 2000 Southern African Development Community
(SADC) Protocol on Shared Watercourses (SADC,
2008) promotes the setting up of shared watercourse
agreements. It also institutionalizes and enshrines
the principles of reasonable use and environmentally
sound resource development.
Another African model is the Nile Basin Initiative.
Formally launched in February 1999 by the Council
of Ministers of Water Affairs of the Nile Basin States,
it ‘seeks to develop the river in a cooperative manner,
share substantial socio-economic beneﬁts, and promote regional peace and security’ (UNEP, 2009, p. 50).

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

181

Climate change and extreme events
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) states with very high conﬁdence that ‘Climate
change will aggravate the water stress currently faced
by some countries, while some countries that currently do not experience water stress will become at risk
of water stress’ (Boko et al., 2007, p. 435). A growing body of evidence links unmitigated hydro-climatic variability to poor economic growth in developing
countries, especially in Africa. In most poor countries,

climate variability is high, infrastructure is poor and
GDP is correlated with rainfall.
Drought is the dominant climate risk in sub-Saharan
Africa. It destroys economic livelihoods and farmers’
food sources and has a signiﬁcant negative effect on
GDP growth in one-third of the countries. For example,
in Kenya, the drought associated with La Niña between
1998 and 2000 caused a 6% reduction in GDP. Floods
are also highly destructive to infrastructure, transport

BOX 7.2
Africa’s irrigation investment needs

Two categories of irrigation development were assessed looking at a ﬁfty year investment horizon:
đƫƫƫƫ .#!ġ/(!Čƫ )ġ/! ƫ%..%#0%+*ƫ0!#+.5ƫ3/ƫ//+%0! ƫ3%0$ƫ$5 .+,+3!.ƫ.!/!.2+%./ƫ% !*0%ü! ƫ5ƫƫ+),*%+*ƫ/01 5ƫ
for hydropower. This irrigation assumed a medium investment cost of US$3,000 per ha for on-farm development; US$0.25
per m3 for water delivery and conveyance; a proxy for canal operations and maintenance; and US$10 per ha for on-farm
operations and maintenance. Dam costs were not included because they are assumed to be fully justiﬁed and fully covered
by the hydropower schemes associated with the relevant dams.
đƫƫƫƫ)((ġ/(!ƫ%..%#0%+*ƫ3/ƫ/! ƫ+*ƫ/)((ƫ.!/!.2+%./Čƫ".)ƫ,+* /Čƫ0.! (!ƫ,1),/Čƫ* ƫ30!.ġ$.2!/0%*#ƫ/0.101.!/ƫ0$0ƫ+(lect local runoff. These assumed a ﬁve-year investment cycle, a medium investment cost of US$2,000 per ha for on-farm
investment, and US$80 per ha for operation and maintenance.
Crop prices, based on commodity-speciﬁc world prices for 2004–2006, were adjusted for country differences in price policy
and market transaction costs.
The estimates were based on a spatial analysis study that combined hydro-geographic and economic parameters to estimate
the potential investments needs for irrigation.

Small-scale irrigation

Large-scale irrigation
Increase in
irrigated area
(million ha)

Investment cost
($ million)
Average IRR (%)

Increase in
irrigated area
(million ha)

Investment cost
($ million)
Average IRR (%)

Sudano-Sahelian

0.26

508

14

1.26

4 391

33

Eastern

0.25

482

18

1.08

3 873

28

Gulf of Guinea

0.61

1 188

18

2.61

8 233

22

Central

0.00

4

12

0.30

881

29

Southern

0.23

458

16

0.19

413

13

Indian Ocean Islands

0.00

0.00

–

0.00

0.00

–

Total

1.35

2 640

17

5.44

17 790

26

Note:
Sudano-Sahelian: Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Niger, Senegal, South Sudan and Sudan
Eastern: Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda
Gulf of Guinea: Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Nigeria
Central: Cameroon and the Democratic Republic of Congo
Southern: Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zambia
Indian Ocean Islands: Madagascar
Source: Foster and Briceño-Garmendia (2010, table 15.2, p. 291); You (2008).

182

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

and goods and service ﬂows, and they can contaminate water supplies and cause epidemics of waterborne diseases such as cholera.

Groundwater resources in the Lake Chad basin

In the Mozambique ﬂoods of 2000, over 2 million people were affected, and damages were estimated at
20% of GDP (Brown and Hansen, 2008). Throughout
sub-Saharan Africa, the effect of these hydrological
extremes can be devastating, especially where there
is high dependence on agriculture and where infrastructure is deﬁcient. In the coming decades, when the
impact of climate change is likely to worsen, droughts
and ﬂoods associated with climate variability will
continue to ravage vulnerable communities in African
countries.

Lake Chad is one of the Sahel’s largest freshwater reservoirs, and a focal point for more than 3 million people – most of whom farm, herd animals and ﬁsh for a
living, and who live within a 200-km radius of the lake.
Seasonal, yearly and decadal rainfall is extremely variable across this region. The basin is fed by the Chari,
Logone and Komadougou Yobé rivers, but since the
mid-1960s, droughts, water diversions and irrigation
have led to a 75% drop in water ﬂows (see the ﬁgure).
Ecosystems have been unable to adapt fast enough, ﬁshing communities have had to move away and the quality
and coverage of dry-season grazing has declined.

Although African farmers have already developed
techniques to adapt to inherent weather variations,
these may not be sufficient to adapt to the combined
impacts of the interaction of multiple stresses at various levels caused by climate change and climate variability (Boko et al., 2007).
Data challenges
Insufficient, inconsistent and unreliable data about
water, water needs (from socio-economic indices)
and weather-related extreme events are among the
key challenges facing Africa as the continent tries
to manage its water resources (Young et al., 2009).
For example, economic planners factor assumptions
about demographic changes such as population
growth and urbanization, into national plans despite
high levels of uncertainty. This is especially evident in
instances where there are disputes over the results of
population censuses that arise out of ethnic, religious
or political considerations. The Africa Water Atlas
notes that, ‘Building on a foundation of detailed, consistent, accurate and available data is one of the central challenges for Africa’s water future’ (UNEP, 2010b,
p. 38). In the case of scientiﬁc information, for example, the sustainable use of the groundwater resources
that underlie the Lake Chad basin is hampered by a
lack of hydro-geological datasets (Box 7.3).
7.1.3 Response measures
Institutional, legal and planning responses
African Union initiatives – such as the African Ministers’
Council on Water (AMCOW), the African Water Facility,
the increasingly important African Development
Bank (AfDB) and the Rural Water and Sanitation
Initiative – all vividly testify to ongoing commitment to

WWDR4

BOX 7.3

Some 35 million people in the larger Lake Chad basin
have been affected to some degree. Water shortages
have caused the increased use of groundwater, although
some studies suggest that declining precipitation has
also affected water levels in the Quaternary aquifer that
underlies the Lake Chad basin. There is not enough information about the groundwater reserves, however, and
there is an urgent need to improve the availability and
completeness of hydro-geological datasets so policymakers can respond appropriately to the Lake Chad basin’s diminishing water resources (UNEP, 2010b).

Approximate extent of open water in Lake Chad
digitized from Landsat images, 1973–2010

Source: UNEP (2010b, p. 49)

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

183

water-related development. One of the most important events was the Second Extraordinary Session of
Heads of State and Governments of the African Union,
which was held in Sirte, Libya, in February 2004 and
dedicated to agriculture and water. Another important
event was the African Union Summit of Heads of State
on Water and Sanitation in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt in
July 2007. The Africa Water Week, under the auspices
of AMCOW, has added another impetus to information sharing and awareness of water resources development and management. However, there is an urgent
need for wider international cooperation to augment
regional and continent-wide efforts in line with the
ongoing collaboration with the European Union (EU).
Though in many instances, transboundary agreements
have been successful in addressing potential conﬂicts
over shared waters (Box 7.4).
African nations have also begun to seek ways to address transboundary water issues related to hydropower development, especially by fostering regional
integration through power pools such as the South
African Power Pool (SAPP) and the West African
Power Pool (WAPP). Using such pools, countries can
reduce their costs while maintaining their own power
supply, rely on mutual help when power systems
break down, enjoy social and environmental beneﬁts, and strengthen cross-border relationships (UNEP,
2010b).

BOX 7.4
Joint management of the Senegal River

Potential conﬂict was averted in the Senegal River basin
when a constructive compromise was reached on joint
management. This was made possible through the establishment of the Organization for the Development of the
Senegal River (OMVS) in 1972; through the adoption of
the Senegal River Charter in 2002; and by using a ﬁnancing mechanism to ensure the generation of revenues and
beneﬁts for the four basin countries.
Agreements in the Lake Chad basin have not been as inclusive because some riparians are not party to the 2008
legal agreement and strategic action programme for Lake
Chad. Within the transboundary agreements that are in
operation, it is still necessary to improve understanding
and clarify regional perspectives on international water
law principles.

184

CHAPTER 7

Africa-wide efforts are being taken to address the
uncertainty of climate change. African climate institutions – such as the African Centre of Meteorological
Applications for Development; the InterGovernmental Authority on Development’s (IGAD’s),
Climate Prediction and Applications Centre (ICPAC);
and the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) Drought Monitoring Centre – have worked on
the climate risk management approach in collaboration with the International Research Institute for
Climate and Society. They are building capacities for
its smooth integration into sectoral decision-making
processes such as agricultural production, food security, water resources management, health protection
and disaster risk management. These climate institutions also help to synchronize regional legal frameworks that protect and sustain shared water resources through a beneﬁt-sharing paradigm. And they can
arrange inter-basin water transfer schemes to save
dying water ecosystems like Lake Chad (see the ﬁgure in Box 7.3) or transfer water from water-rich basins to drier zones.
Concerted efforts at the regional, continental and international levels can help African countries to face the
challenging task of harnessing water resources for sustainable development in the face of climate variability
and change. It is therefore important to pool all human
and institutional resources in order to tackle common
challenges by improving the understanding of and
quantitative knowledge about the various sources of
uncertainty. It is also important to improve the way
this knowledge is communicated to water resources
managers and other stakeholders, and the way uncertainty is incorporated into water resources management decision-making (Hughes, 2008).
The challenges are not all infrastructural. They also include early-warning systems to help predict the onset
of and duration of rainfall seasons, intra-seasonal dry
spells, rainfall anomalies based on inter-hemispherical
teleconnections, and lead times on the impacts of El
Niño and La Niña.

7.2 Europe and North America
The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) region comprises the 56 countries of the
European Union; Western, Central and Eastern Europe;
the Caucasus; Central Asia; and North America, which
comprises the United States of America (USA) and
Canada (see Map 7.2).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Dams and diversions that were built to provide hydropower and irrigation and to manage ﬂoods have signiﬁcantly altered the region’s watersheds. While dams, weirs
and diversions provide water management services, they
have also changed hydrological regimes, interrupted river
and habitat continuity, disconnected rivers from adjacent
wetlands and ﬂoodplains, and changed erosion processes
and sediment transport. Most point-source pollution from
industrial and municipal effluent has been addressed in
the most developed countries, but discharges of untreated or insufficiently treated wastewaters continue to exert
pressures, especially in Eastern Europe, South-Eastern
Europe (SEE), the Caucasus and Central Asia.
Nutrients from agricultural runoff, however, are of
growing concern throughout the UNECE region.
Moreover, pressures from irrigated agriculture to extract water are rising, especially in more water scarce
parts of the region, as are demands to satisfy growing
urban needs. Meanwhile climate change is threatening available water resources and leading to increased
competition among users. Some parts of the region
are subject to ﬂoods and droughts, and climate change
is exacerbating these threats.
All the region’s nations except three island states share
water resources with at least one other country, and
transboundary watersheds cover more than 40% of the
European and Asian parts of the UNECE region (UNECE,
2007a). There are more than 100 transboundary rivers,
with a basin area over 1,000 km2 each, and over 100
transboundary groundwater aquifers (UNECE, 2011a).
This has led to strengthened bilateral and multilateral
cooperation and agreement on these shared waters.
There is a marked difference in the state of water quality and management between the countries of the
EU and North America, and those in Eastern Europe
and Central Asia. There is a long history of environmental legislation, including water management, in
the EU and North America, through Conventions and
Protocols, supplemented by regulations, recommendations and guidelines for action. Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia, as well as a number of new
EU countries, are still struggling to adequately manage
water provision and pollution.
7.2.1 The driving forces and pressures on water resources
Population, affluence and poverty
More than 1.2 billion people live in Europe and
North America, with the latter representing just over

WWDR4

one-third of the total. Between 1960 and 2000, Central
Asia (more than 120% population increase) and the
Caucasus (60% increase) have experienced considerably higher growth rates than other countries. For most
countries in Western and Central Europe, populations
are stable or declining (PRB, 2008). People are permanently or seasonally migrating from many Eastern
European countries to western cities where economic
prospects are better.
In North America, the population of the USA grew
by 9.7% between 2000 and 2010, and it is expected
to increase by more than 50% in the 60-year period
from 1990 to 2050 (US Census Bureau, n.d.). Total
water withdrawals in the USA grew between 1970 and
1980, declined by more than 9% between 1980 and
1985, and have been relatively constant since then
despite continued population growth (National Atlas
of the United States, 2011). In Canada, total water
withdrawals have been rising steadily (CEC, 2008).
In 24 European countries, total water abstraction decreased about 12% over the past 10–17 years, but oneﬁfth of Europe’s population (approximately 113 million inhabitants) still lives in water-stressed countries
(EEA, 2010).
European and North American populations also consume a considerable amount of virtual water embedded in imported food and products. According to one
calculation, each person in North America and Europe
(excluding former Soviet Union countries) consumes
at least 3 m3 per day of virtual water in imported food,
compared to 1.4 m3 per day in Asia and 1.1 m3 per day
in Africa (Zimmer and Renault, n.d.).
The per capita water used for food production in
Western Europe and North America has decreased
substantially in past decades (Renault, 2002).
Reductions in total water consumption are due to increased efficiency, economic factors, regulations and
increased awareness of the need to conserve water.
The economies of countries in transition in Europe
are still catching up, but with increasingly high living
standards, consumption is projected to rise.
The contribution made by primary production and heavy
industry to the economies of Western and Central Europe
and North America has fallen, while that of service industries and knowledge-based industries has risen. With this
has come a decline in point-source water pollution (UNEP,

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

185

2006b). Despite the marked transition to a post-industrial economy, demand for water is likely to remain high in
Eastern Europe, Central Asia and the Caucasus because
of the dependence on agriculture, mining and other

export commodities. The poor in lower-income countries
such as Armenia, Georgia, Uzbekistan, the Republic of
Moldova, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan are often unable to
afford basic domestic water services.

MAP 7.2
UNECE Member States
70 0

ka p p

°

d
20° Nor

10

° °

°

°

30 °

ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE

40

°

Members:

ICELAND

a
Wh

i te

NORWAY

°

Gulf of
Bo

Helsinki

Oslo

50

Stockholm

UNITED
KINGDOM

IRELAND
Dublin

DENMARK
Copenhagen

B

Riga
LATVIA

a

l

FED.

1 THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC
OF MACEDONIA

°

POLAND

Brussels
BELGIUM
GERMANY

Capital city

Luxembourg
Paris

ATLANTIC OCEAN

Bern

SLOVENIA

ic

Rome

Balearic Is.

Se

MONTENEGRO

a
Tirana

Sardinia
G

Str ibralta
ait
r
of G
ibraltar

M e
d

i

t

e

°

Black Sea
orus
sp

Ionian
Sea

Sicily

Baku
AZERBAIJAN
Yerevan

TURKEY

Sea
Athens
Nicosia

30 °

Crete

a

CYPRUS

e a
n

S e a

ISRAEL
0

10°

Ashgabat

Se

GEORGIA
T'bilisi

GREECE

The boundaries and names shown and the designations used
on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance
by the United Nations.

0°

TURKMENISTAN

Ankara

MALTA

Valletta

n

60 °
40 °

n

ARMENIA

1
Aegean

r

r

30

ALBANIA

Tyrrhenian
Sea

BULGARIA
Sofia
Skopje

a

Crimea

Bucharest

SERBIA

Sarajevo

at

ITALY

Corsica

Belgrade

Sea of
Azov

a

MONACO

ANDORRA

Madrid

Chisinau

ROMANIA

Zagreb

BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA

ri

SPAIN

Ad

PORTUGAL
Lisbon

CROATIA

MOLDOVA

i

Ljubljana
SAN
MARINO

REP. OF

Bratislava
Budapest
HUNGARY

sp

Geneva
ECE HQ

SLOVAKIA

Vienna
Vaduz AUSTRIA

Ca

°

Kyiv

UKRAINE

CZECH REP.

LIECHTENSTEIN

SWITZERLAND

Bay of
Biscay

Warsaw

Prague

LUXEMBOURG

FRANCE

40

Minsk

BELARUS

Berlin

NETHERLANDS

Moscow

LITHUANIA
Vilnius
RUSS.

Amsterdam

London

RUSSIAN
FEDERATION

a

r

Se

Skage

d
lan
f Fin

Tallinn
ESTONIA

rak

c

North
Sea

Gulf o

ti

°

Bo

30

FINLAND

KAZAKHSTAN

SWEDEN

thn

ia

Faroe Is.

Shetland
Is.

Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Moldova
Romania
Russian Federation
70 °
San Marino
Serbia and Montenegro
50 °
Slovakia
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
The former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
UZBEKISTAN
Uzbekistan

Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Canada
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Liechtenstein

Se

Norwegian
Sea

30

°

30

60 °

10

°

80

20
Reykjavik

20°

30 °

40 °

0

250

500
250

750

1000 km

500 mi

Source: Economic Commission for Europe, Map No. 3976 Rev. 11, November 2011. Department of Field Support, Cartographic Section, United Nations.
Note: North America members are listed but not shown on the map.
For the purposes of this chapter, the UNECE Member States are divided into the following groupings:
EU countries: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom.
Western Europe: Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Monaco, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom.
Western Europe EU-15 countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom.
Central and Eastern Europe: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey.
Central and Eastern Europe countries that became EU Member States in the course of the EU enlargement process: Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia.
Balkan countries (as a subgroup of Central and Eastern Europe): Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro, Serbia.
Mediterranean: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Cyprus, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Portugal, Serbia,
Slovenia, Spain, Turkey.
Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, Russian
Federation, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan.
The Caucasus: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia.
Central Asia: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan.
North America: Canada, United States of America.

186

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Climate change
Europe and North America make a disproportionately high contribution to climate change. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
states that ‘freshwater resources are vulnerable and
have the potential to be strongly impacted by climate
change’ (Bates et al., 2008, p. 135). High northern latitudes are expected to experience the most extreme
warming, increasing the risk for indigenous peoples in
the Arctic as snow and ice conditions change dramatically. The poorest and most vulnerable are likely to
suffer the most, since they have fewer resources with
which to cope.
Projections vary considerably across the UNECE region, but climate change is expected to bring higher
temperatures, drought, reduced water availability and
lower crop yields to Southern Europe, the Caucasus
and Central Asia. Hydropower potential and summer
tourism are also likely to be affected. In Central and
Eastern Europe, summer precipitation is projected to
decrease, causing higher water stress. While climate
change is likely to have positive effects in the short
term in Northern Europe, these are expected to be
outweighed by negative effects as climate change progresses (UNECE, 2009a).
North America is expected to experience warmer temperatures, increased rainfall, summertime droughts
and more intense and frequent extreme weather
events such as tornadoes and hurricanes. The risks and
uncertainties associated with climate change impacts
are discussed later.
Water and agriculture
Agricultural practice in the region has changed considerably over the past decades: mechanization, increased use of fertilizers and pesticides, farm specialization, growth of farm size, land drainage and
developments in animal husbandry have led to adverse
impacts on the aquatic environment with some speciﬁc subregional differentiation of water use and water
pollution. Water use for crop and animal production,
for example, in Central Asia, Greece, Italy, Portugal and
Spain, accounts for 50–60% of the total use. In other
countries, agriculture accounts for only around 20%,
while the bulk is used by manufacturing industries and
for cooling purposes.
Agrochemicals have had a detrimental effect on water resources throughout the region as nitrogen,

WWDR4

“European and North
American populations
also consume
a considerable
amount of virtual
water embedded in
imported food and
products.”
phosphorus and pesticides run into water courses.
In Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia,
these diffuse pressures are ‘widespread but moderate’ (UNECE, 2007a, 2011a). As the economy revives,
however, they will increase, threatening domestic and
transboundary waters as well as human health. In some
basins, particularly in Central Asia, irrigation has led to
soil salinization and high levels of mineral salt in water
bodies (Box 7.5).
Since the 1960s, land under irrigation has doubled in
Canada, and has increased by more than 50% in the
USA, with much of the growth in arid or semi-arid regions. In many parts, groundwater levels are declining
as withdrawals outweigh recharge (CEC, 2008). Since
the 1950s, nitrate loads from agricultural runoff have
increased enormously in the Mississippi River, which
drains more than 40% of the land mass of the USA’s
48 contiguous states (EPA, 2008).
The legal frameworks and best management practices
to reduce pollution from agriculture were established
some time ago in the EU and in North America. In EU
countries in the drainage basins of the Mediterranean
Sea, the eastern Atlantic Ocean, and the Black Sea,
implementation of these frameworks and practices is
lagging, and water quality is still suffering. High applications of both mineral and organic fertilizer are
used in the farming areas of Western Europe. Source
apportionment studies indicate that agriculture generally provides 50–80% of the total nitrogen load,
with wastewater providing most of the remainder
(EEA, 2005). Nitrogen application rates had increased

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

187

dramatically over past decades, but are now widely declining. However, it takes a long time for this to
translate into reduction in the concentration of nitrogen compounds in water bodies (UNECE, 2011a).
Water in the industrial and municipal sectors
Modern pollution abatement technologies have
stemmed the most egregious pollution from large
industrial processes in Western Europe and North
America. Recent concerns relate to modern chemicals,
including new pharmaceuticals and hormones. Pollution
from the great number of small and medium-sized
industries and small municipal wastewater treatment
plants in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia and
several of the new EU countries, which do not operate according to standards, are still important sources
of water pollution (Box 7.6). Despite assistance from
Western Europe, the impact of economic decline in the
1990s remains visible as wastewater treatment is still inadequate and waters continue to be polluted with heavy
metals, phosphorus, nitrogen and oil products (EEA,
2010). Mining has an impact more locally in SEE, in the
Caucasus and some areas in Northern Europe.

BOX 7.5
Agriculture and water use in Central Asia

In Central Asia, the agricultural sector accounts for
more than 90% of surface water extracted and 43%
of groundwater extracted, but it supports half the regional population. Irrigated agriculture and the entire
water-based sector contribute about 40% to 45% of
regional GDP (Stulina, 2009). Central Asia represents
50% of the total irrigated area of the regions of the
former Soviet Union, (FAO, 2011).
Agricultural water pollution, sedimentation and algae
blooms have had some serious and well-documented
impacts. These have included the loss of biodiversity,
the extinction of whole ecosystems, a deterioration
in drinking water quality, human health problems,
declining crop yields, poverty, unemployment, migration and the risk of conﬂict (Yessekin, et al. 2006).
Although many measures have been taken to address the situation, scarce ﬁnancial resources have led
to delays in implementing them. The importance of
stakeholder involvement in negotiating water allocation, especially in transboundary situations, has only
recently been recognized. The International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea is steering a process to improve
conditions.

188

CHAPTER 7

Infrastructural changes to water courses
Throughout the region, structural modiﬁcations to
watersheds have altered natural ﬂows, disrupted or
destroyed wildlife habitats and ecosystem services,
and disconnected rivers from their ﬂoodplains – and
so increasing the risk of ﬂoods in many places. Some
countries have plans to re-naturalize water courses. In
Western and Central Europe, partly because there the
degree to which water bodies have been modiﬁed has
been assessed, there is a higher awareness about the
issue and response measures have started to be taken
to address it. Considerable time and ﬁnancial resources are needed to restore, for example, rivers in the
Danube basin (see Box 30.5, ‘Hydromorphological alterations in the Danube Basin’, in Chapter 30). Current
economic conditions and prospects are delaying the
process.
The US Environmental Protection Agency is providing grants to some states to restore rivers and streams,
while there is a growing movement to remove dams
where the environmental and other costs outweigh the
beneﬁts (American Rivers, n.d.).
The Danube, in the basin of which courses of rivers have been changed for hydropower generation,
ﬂood defence and navigation since the sixteenth

BOX 7.6
Wastewater treatment infrastructure in the
Republic of Moldova

The 1990s economic downturn resulted in a huge decline in the operational capacity of Moldova’s municipal wastewater treatment plants. By 2010, only 24%
were still operating and only 4% of these were adhering to legal requirements for the disposal of wastewater. In rural areas, 70% of homes were not connected
to the sewerage system. As a result, an increasing
amount of untreated wastewater was discharged
into rivers. EU and other funds began supporting
an enormous assistance programme to rehabilitate
municipal infrastructure and improve rural sanitation. New wastewater treatment legislation, modelled
on EU laws and drawn up under the National Policy
Dialogue process came into force in October 2008,
replacing outdated Soviet-style law. Existing plants
can now be rehabilitated and new ones constructed
according to state-of-the-art treatment technology
(UNECE, 2011b).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

century, has hydropower impoundments along 30%
of its length. It is now subject to plans to improve
ecosystem quality in accordance with the Danube
River Protection Convention, which came into force
in 1998 and addresses hydropower as well as polluted discharges from agriculture, municipalities and
so forth (ICPDR, 2007). In Western Europe, the Water
Framework Directive has led to programmes to enhance and protect aquatic ecosystem services, and the
innovative Payment for Ecosystem Services approach
is being explored in the UNECE region (Wunder, 2005;
UNECE, 2005).
Table 7.2 summarizes the relative importance of these
various pressures on water resources over subregions
(UNECE, 2007a). As economies grow or revive, however, shifts in the relative importance of some of these
pressures will occur, especially in Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia.
7.2.2 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
The situations and places in which uncertainty and risk
are most evident in Europe and North America include
highly populated areas that are prone to ﬂooding and
drought. The projected impacts of climate change also
include increased risks of extreme hydrological events.
Uncertainty and risk can lead to conﬂict in conditions
where limited amounts of declining or increasingly polluted water resources are shared between sectors or

among different populations in situations that are also
changing, such as in burgeoning urban areas. A particular challenge for countries in Eastern Europe and
Central Asia is water use efficiency in irrigated agriculture. Finally, human health is at risk where water and
sanitation provision is inadequate.
Floods and drought
Overabstraction, water scarcity and drought have a
direct impact on citizens and economic sectors, and
large areas of Europe and North America are already
affected (Boxes 7.7 and 7.8). Climate change will
bring higher temperatures to the region, exacerbating
drought events.
Between 1976 and 2006 in the EU, both the area affected by drought and the number of people whose
lives were inﬂuenced doubled (Figure 7.2). These impacts can include declines in cereal and hydropower
production (as exempliﬁed by the situation in Russia
in 2010), and economic repercussions. Many Western
European countries have drawn up or are preparing
drought management plans (EC, 2009). To address the
impact of drought and water scarcity on human health,
UNECE and WHO/Europe have developed speciﬁc
guidance and recommendations, which include adaptation measures for drainage, sewerage and wastewater treatment (UNECE, 2009a).

TABLE 7.2
Main pressures on water resources in order of priority (from high to low)
Countries in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus
and Central Asia

EU-15 countries and North America

Pressures on water quality:
Municipal sewage treatment, non-sewer population,
old industrial installations, illegal wastewater
discharges, illegal disposal of household and
industrial wastes in river basins, tailing dams and
dangerous landﬁlls

Pressures on water quality:
Agricultural (especially nitrogen) and urban sources of pollution

Abstraction pressures:
Agricultural water use

Abstraction pressures:
Agricultural water use (particularly in Southern Europe and the
south-western USA), major urban centres

Hydromorphological alterations:
Hydropower dams, irrigation channels, river alterations

Hydromorphological alterations:
Hydropower dams, river alterations

Other pressures:
Agro-chemical pollution (becoming more severe),
mining and quarrying

Other pressures:
Selected industries discharging hazardous substances, mining
and quarrying

Source: Chapter 30.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

189

Floods have affected more than 3 million people in
the UNECE region since the beginning of the century, and the associated costs have increased rapidly. They have exposed people to various health hazards and caused deaths, displacement, and economic
losses. Contributing factors include population growth
in ﬂood-prone areas, deforestation and wetland loss.
Recognizing the beneﬁts of natural ﬂooding to ecosystems and the role of wetlands in ﬂood protection has
led to a shift towards an integrated approach to ﬂood
management in many European countries and in
North America. A number of transboundary watersheds have initiated integrated water management
plans (Roy et al., 2010; UNECE, 2009b).
Climate change and uncertainty and risk
The IPCC predicts with high conﬁdence that water
stress will increase in Central and Southern Europe,
and that by the 2070s, the number of people affected
will rise from 28 million to 44 million. Summer ﬂows
are likely to drop by up to 80% in Southern Europe and
some parts of Central and Eastern Europe. Europe’s
hydropower potential is expected to drop by an average of 6%, but rise by between 20% and 50% around
the Mediterranean by 2070 (Alcamo, et al. 2007).
In North America, the IPCC reports with high conﬁdence that the impact will include increased competition among users for over-allocated water resources.
Climate change will also stress the bi-national relationship over the shared Great Lakes2, where water
levels are likely to decline and population growth will

BOX 7.7
Uncertainty and risk on the North American prairies

In the prairies of Canada and parts of the United
States of America, water ﬂows are highly variable,
which is reﬂected in the occurrence of severe ﬂoods
and drought. The lack of predictability, exacerbated
by melting glaciers and snowpacks (as a result of
climate change), affects the economy and has led
to competition for water between agriculture, the
oil and gas industries and growing municipalities.
Watershed planning and management strategies have
been instituted to attempt to address the risks associated with the changing conditions, which include
a decline in water yield of 20 km3 between 1971 and
2004 in the Canadian Prairies (UNEP, 2007; Statistics
Canada, 2010).

190

CHAPTER 7

fuel demand (Field et al., 2007). Much uncertainty
exists about how national water management bodies
in the region can adapt to these changes, especially
where ﬁnancial and human capacities are constrained
by widespread poverty, as in Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia. In addition, climate mitigation measures may produce adverse side effects
for water management, heightening uncertainty and
risk (UNECE, 2009a). One example is the debate over
water for food production versus water for bio-energy
crops.
Water and human health
Some 120 million people in the European region do
not have access to safe drinking water. Even more
lack access to sanitation, resulting in the spread of
water-related diseases. In North America, native peoples are often ill-served by piped water and sanitation facilities. For example, over 10,000 homes on
reserves in Canada have no indoor plumbing, and the
water or sewer systems in one reserve in four are substandard (UNDESA, 2009).
Concerted international efforts to address waterrelated health matters in the region only began at
the end of the 1990s, culminating in the Protocol

BOX 7.8
Satisfying municipal water needs in drought-prone
regions

In dry years, there have been problems supplying sufﬁcient water to the 12 million people living in Istanbul
and the 4 million inhabitants of Ankara. As a result,
water has been rationed. In response to the IPCC’s
projection that demand in Istanbul will rise while supply falls, a number of remedial actions are being taken, from water saving campaigns to water transfers
from as much as 150 km away (Waterwiki.net, n.d.).
During the 2008 drought, Barcelona turned off civic
fountains and beachside showers and banned hosepipes and ﬁlling swimming pools. In the same year,
Cyprus applied emergency measures that included
cutting the water supply by 30% (EEA, 2007, 2010).
In a growing number of cities, such severe emergency restrictions became part of a consultative process
with stakeholders, a change that was also inﬂuenced by the requirements of the Aarhus Convention
(UNECE, 1998).

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

on Water and Health under the UNECE Water
Convention. This is dedicated to ensuring that everyone has adequate drinking water and sanitation. It
has resulted in increased efforts to attain, and move
beyond, the water-related MDGs (UNECE, 2010).
Basin organizations, such as those for the Rhine,
Meuse, Scheldt and Danube, also challenge the basin
countries to develop a more coordinated approach
and address the effects that pose the highest risk and
uncertainties to human health and water management, and to develop appropriate adaptation measures to new risks as they become better understood
(UNECE, 2011a).
7.2.3 Response measures
Institutional, legal and planning responses
Institutional and strategic responses to manage water
issues have a relatively long history in the region. In
North America, water governance was strengthened
in the 1970s with the passing of regulations such as
the Clean Water Act and the Safe Drinking Water Act
in the USA, and parallel legislation in Canada, including the Canada Water Act. In Canada, however, water governance is generally more decentralized and
fragmented as a result of the constitutional division of

powers between provincial and federal governments.
There were recent demands for a federal water policy
– a four-year project running from 2008 to 2012 to create a Water Security Framework (Norman et al., 2010).
There has been a recent devolution of water governance from federal to state levels in the USA, which has
led to an increase in local participation in water management (Norman and Bakker, 2005).
Water-related institutions in countries in transition are
still generally weak, with water competences spread
among institutions with weak enforcement capacities. Supported by the EU on many fronts, new EU
Member States have made better progress in building
new institutional structures in comparison with other
Eastern European countries, the Caucasus and Central
Asia (UNECE, 2010). The Water Framework Directive
(WFD), which was concluded in 2000 apart from some
more recent directives on standards and groundwater, is the most important piece of EU water legislation
(EC, 2000). Other directives with direct relevance to
water quality and its protection are the ones related
to urban wastewater treatment (1991), to control and
limit nitrate pollution from agriculture (1991), to regulate the quality of drinking water (1998), and to other

FIGURE 7.2
Number of people affected by selected extreme weather events in the UNECE region, 1970–2008

No. total affected people (millions)

9
8
7
6
5
4
Drought
3

Extreme
temperature

2
Flood
1
Storm
0
1970–1979

1980–1989

1990–1999

2000–2008

Note: At least one of the following criteria must be fulﬁlled: 10 or more people reported killed; 100 people reported affected; declaration of a
state of emergency; or call for international assistance.
Source: Produced in 2009 by the Italian National Institute for Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA) based on data from the EM-DAT
database by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) at the Catholic University of Louvain.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

191

areas related to water and health issues. The WFD
expands the scope of water protection to all waters,
and requires the achievement of a ‘good status’ for all
waters in EU countries by 2015. Apart from its effect
to improve water management in EU countries, the
application of principles of the WFD is of immense
importance to improving water management and cutting down pollution in countries at the Eastern border
of the EU (Belarus, the Republic of Moldova, Ukraine,
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia).
The use of transboundary waters, and their protection,
is governed by the 1992 UNECE Water Convention.
This requires parties to enter into speciﬁc bilateral or
multilateral agreements and to create joint institutions.
The EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) has accelerated and deepened a historical process of transboundary water management across the EU’s 40 international river basins, exempliﬁed in the Danube and Rhine
basins (EC, 2008).
Canada and the USA have been leaders in the bilateral management of shared waters, through the
International Joint Commission in particular. As a result, the status of many watercourses in the regions
has been considerably improved, and there are far
fewer disputes over shared waters (UNECE, 2009c).
Addressing transboundary groundwater issues remains
an exception, as the work of many joint bodies in the
area of transboundary groundwaters is still insufficient,
except perhaps in some parts of Western Europe.

2010a). Per capita availability here is the lowest in the
world (ESCAP, ADB and UNDP, 2010).
The region includes the Russian Federation, India and
China, three of the ﬁve BRICS countries, with their increasing water demands to support their burgeoning
economic development. Growing populations, rapid
urbanization, industrialization, economic development
and climate change continue to put pressure on the
region’s freshwater resources, exacerbating already
difficult conditions. The Asia-Paciﬁc’s socio-economic
development pattern previously relied primarily on
cheap natural and human resources. The consequences have been two parallel economies: rapid advances
in economic performance alongside persisting poverty
and environmental degradation.
Between 1990 and 2008, signiﬁcant achievements
were made in meeting the MDG on access to safe
drinking water. But progress has generally been slower
in providing improved sanitation, except in North-East
and South-East Asia. About 480 million people still
lacked access to improved water resources in 2008,
while 1.9 billion still lacked access to improved sanitation.4 Even when access is established, natural disasters and functionality levels can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
whether or not drinking water and sanitation systems
can continue to respond to the region’s needs. The
Asia-Paciﬁc is highly vulnerable to extreme events and
climate change is expected to increase climate variability and the magnitude and frequency of ﬂoods and
droughts.

7.3 Asia-Paciﬁc
For the purposes of this chapter, the Asia-Paciﬁc region3 comprises the 55 member states of ESCAP in ﬁve
subregions: Central Asia, North-East Asia, Oceania and
the Paciﬁc, South Asia, and South-East Asia (see Map
7.3 for the ESCAP Member Countries). The region is extremely diverse, with seven of the world’s most populous countries and many of its smallest nations, several
of which are located in the Paciﬁc (ESCAP, 2011).
The Asia-Paciﬁc is home to 60% of the world’s population
but it has only 36% of its water resources (APWF, 2009).
Nevertheless, this represents the world’s largest share of
renewable freshwater resources, with an annual average
of 21,135 billion m3. Given its large population and economic growth, its water withdrawal rate is also high, averaging about 11% of its total renewable water resources,
which is on par with European rates, and ranks it second
in the world after the water-scarce Middle East (ESCAP,

192

CHAPTER 7

Water availability, allocation and quality remain major
issues. Irrigated agriculture is the biggest water user.
Some countries, such as Cambodia and Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, use less than 1% of their total
available water resources, while others have withdrawn
signiﬁcant quantities of their total combined surface
water and groundwater – in one case leading to the
disaster at the Aral Sea. Population growth, growing
water consumption rates, environmental degradation,
damaging agricultural activities, poor catchment area
management, industrialization, and groundwater overuse are causing a deterioration in water quality.
7.3.1 The driving forces and pressures on water
resources
The Asia-Paciﬁc region is extremely dynamic, undergoing rapid urbanization, economic growth, industrialization, and extensive agricultural development. Although

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

these are desirable trends in many ways, they also represent drivers that are affecting the region’s capacity
to meet its socio-economic water development needs.

population growth rates remain high in some areas. Food security is an important issue since about
two-thirds of the world’s hungry people live in Asia
(APWF, 2009). Internal migration and urbanization are driving the rise in the number of megacities
(ESCAP, 2011). The region has some of the world’s
fastest-growing cities and between 2010 and 2025
a predicted 700 million people were added to the
growing numbers requiring municipal water services
(ESCAP, 2010a).

Demographics
Between 1987 and 2007, the region’s population
grew from just under 3 billion to about 4 billion people (UNEP, 2007). Average population density, at 111
people per km2, is the highest in the world (UNEP,
2011). The demographic transition is taking place in
all countries, but at different times and at a different
pace. Although fertility rates have declined steadily,

MAP 7.3
UNESCAP Member States
120°

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMISSION
FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

135°

150°

165°

180°

165°

150°
Anchorage

135°
60°

RUSSIAN
FEDERATION

UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA

Bering Sea

Sea of Okhotsk

Moscow
Astana

Sakhalin

KAZAKHSTAN

S
KI l
PA I s

si a

nG

ul f

Gu

Karachi

Re

lf of
O

m an

MYANMAR

75°

.
Is

SINGAPORE

PACIFIC

30°

R

Isl

an

ds

Saipan
Hagåtña

15°

Guam

Koror

MARSHALL
ISLANDS

Palikir

PALAU

Majuro

FEDERATED STATES
OF MICRONESIA

Sulawesi

Surabaya

iian

Northern
Mariana
Islands

Philippine
Sea

PAPUA
NEW GUINEA

I N D O N E S I A
Java

OCEAN

Hawa

Jakarta
Bogor

NORTH

Dili

Port Moresby

TIMOR- Arafura Sea
LESTE

Tarawa
NAURU

Northern Line
Islands

Gilbert Is.

K I R I B A T I

Yaren

SOLOMON
ISLANDS

Phoenix Is.

Apia

Coral Sea
VANUATU
New
Caledonia

American
Samoa

otu

Arc

Papeete

Niue

Suva

So

Alofi

Avarua
Tu
bu
ai Is
ok
.
Isl
and
s

Nuku'alofa

Nouméa

Tuam

Pago Pago

FIJI

Port-Vila

0°

Marquesas
Is.

French
Polynesia

Tokelau Is.

Funafuti
SAMOA

AUSTRALIA

Equator

Southern Line
Islands

TUVALU

Honiara

cie

hip

el

15°

ag

o

ty I
s.

Co

TONGA

Pitcairn
30°

Perth

SOUTH

Sydney

Canberra
Melbourne

Tasman Sea

ESCAP Headquarters or regional centres

PACIFIC

OCEAN

Auckland
North Island

NEW ZEALAND
Wellington

Tasmania
The boundaries and names shown and the designations used
on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance
by the United Nations.

45°
South Island

Dotted line represents approximately the Line of Control
in Jammu and Kashmir agreed upon by India and Pakistan.
The final status of Jammu and Kashmir has not yet been
agreed upon by the parties.

Guam
Hong Kong, China
Macao, China
New Caledonia
Niue
60°

Taiwan

M Hong Kong, China
ac a
o, China

Bay of
Bengal

Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Pakistan
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Republic of Korea
Russian Federation
Samoa
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Tajikistan
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Viet Nam

Honshu
Chiba

Luzon
Manila
PHILIPPINES

a
er
at

45°

East
China
Sea

Guangzhou

Hanoi
Vientiane

Hyderabad Naypyitaw

Associate members:

60°
30°

45°

JAPAN

Tokyo

Osaka
Shikoku
Kyushu

THAILAND
South China
Bangkok
A VIET NAM
DI
ESCAP HQ
Sea
BO
CAM nh
e
Colombo
Mindanao
mP
Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte
BRUNEI
Phno
SRI LANKA
DARUSSALAM Bandar Seri Begawan
MALDIVES Male
Celebes
Kuala Lumpur
MALAYSIA
Sea
S

Afghanistan
Armenia
Australia
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
France
Georgia
India
Indonesia
Islamic Republic of Iran
Japan
Kazakhstan
Kiribati
Kyrgyzstan
Lao People's Democratic Republic
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Myanmar
American Samoa
Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands
Cook Islands
French Polynesia

LAO
P.D.R.

um

45°

Wuhan

Dhaka

BANGLADESH

ea
dS

30°

Members:

u
ph

REP. OF
KOREA
Shanghai

BHUTAN

INDIA

Arabian Sea

15°

m

Seoul

Incheon

New Delhi

Mumbai
15°

Beijing

C H I N A

du
an

NEPAL

PEOPLE'S
P'yongyang DEM.
REP. OF KOREA

ky
uI
s.

Per

IRAN

r

Hokkaido

yu

M

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF

30°

TAJIKISTAN
Dushanbe
Jammu
AN
ST
and
NI A
Kashmir
H Kabul

ds

Sapporo

AN

thm

NIS
T

Tehran

IA

Ka

Ashgabat
EN

Mediterranean
Sea

0°

Ku

Vladivostok

Almaty

UZBE
KI Tashkent
ST
Bishkek KYRGYZSTAN
AN
TURKME

Th
i

Baku

T
a-m AN
a-b ad

Yerevan
TURKEY

MONGOLIA

Caspian
Sea

AZERBAIJAN

AR

Ankara

IA

T'bilisi

Islan

il

GEO
RG

Black Sea

Istanbul

AF
G

45°

Aleutian

Ulaanbaatar

0

1000

2000

3000 km

Final boundary between the Republic of Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan has not yet been determined.

0
90°

105°

120°

135°

150°

165°

180°

1000
165°

2000 mi
150°

60°
135°

Source: Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc, Map No. 3974 Rev. 17, November 2011. Department of Field Support, Cartographic
Section, United Nations.
Note: The ESCAP Members States in the Asia-Paciﬁc subregions are as follows.
North-East Asia: China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Japan, Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation.
Central Asia and the Caucasus: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan.
South-East Asia: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Viet Nam.
South and South-West Asia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Turkey.
The Paciﬁc: American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

193

“Food security is an
important issue since
about two-thirds of
the world’s hungry
people live in Asia.”

Economic development
Since 2000, the Asia-Paciﬁc’s GDP growth rate has
surpassed 5% (UNEP, 2007). Industrial activity, often
shifting from other regions, continues to grow. It is accompanied by the intensive use of resources that exert
considerable pressure on aquatic ecosystems, which
continue to deteriorate. In late 2008, the global food,
fuel and ﬁnancial crisis pushed millions of people below the poverty line in the recession that followed, but
by 2010, rapid growth resumed in China and India and
in some other countries. In 2010, ESCAP noted that
‘enhanced incomes facilitate investments in muchneeded technological change, infrastructure and job
creation; however, current economic growth patterns
increase the stress on limited resources and competition for access to them’ (ESCAP, 2010a, p. 3).
Agriculture consumes an average of about 80% of the
region’s renewable water resources, but it is faced with
the challenge of increasing food production in degraded ecosystems (APWF, 2009). In addition, the irrigation sector is generally inefficient, and demand-management mechanisms are ineffective where they exist.
Water quality also suffers from the impacts of industrial development, urbanization and agricultural intensiﬁcation (APWF, 2007).
Water conﬂicts
Water competition has led to increased water conﬂicts in the region, particularly over the past two decades. Conﬂicts within countries have dominated since
1990, with more than 120,000 water-related disputes
in China alone during this period.5 Water management
efforts and resources in India often focus on ‘conﬂict
management’ between different states. Direct conﬂict
most commonly arises at the local level, and is often

194

CHAPTER 7

based on the construction of an ‘ill-thought-out’ dam,
ambiguous water withdrawal rights or deteriorating
water quality.
The allocation of increasingly scarce water resources,
however, is the principal cause of water conﬂicts, with
the most important challenge in the region’s socioeconomic development being to balance different water uses and to manage their economic, social and environmental impacts. In water-stressed countries, there
are competing demands for water for urban, industrial,
agriculture and ecosystems upon which livelihoods depend. In addition, water disputes arise over inter-basin
water transfers, which have environmental, social and
ﬁnancial challenges (ESCAP, 2010a).
7.3.2 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
Hotspots
The many threats to water resources in the Asia-Paciﬁc
region reveal a complex picture and raise many concerns. To better prioritise regional action, ESCAP has
identiﬁed ‘hotspots’ where there are multiple challenges. The hotspots are countries, areas or ecosystems that have overlapping challenges such as poor
access to water and sanitation, limited water availability, deteriorating water quality, and increased exposure
to climate change and water-related disasters. In the
summer of 2010, for example, approximately one-ﬁfth
of Pakistan was inundated, affecting more than
20 million people in the ﬂooded areas along the length
of the River Indus. Flooding also destroyed more than
1.6 million acres of crops (Guha-Sapir, et al., 2011).
South-East Asian countries in particular are at a development crossroads (Figure 7.3). Although high economic growth rates provide ﬁnances for better water
resources management, many current development
priorities ignore the risks from natural disasters, climate change, and poor household water and sanitation access. For example, India is in danger of being
ill-prepared for natural disasters and climate change,
while unsustainable water-use patterns are evident in
Pakistan and Uzbekistan. Basic access to sanitation remains a major concern for Bangladesh.
Areas of concern include some of Asia’s major breadbaskets, such India’s Punjab and the North China Plain.
Water tables in these areas are falling by 2 m to 3 m
a year, with serious impacts on agriculture and food
security. Tropical deltas, where water productivity for
food production is already low, are degrading and are
at risk from sea-level rises. Food security is a challenge

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

for many areas in the Asia-Paciﬁc region – 65% of the
world’s undernourished people are concentrated in
seven countries, ﬁve of which are in the Asia-Paciﬁc region: India, Pakistan, China, Bangladesh and Indonesia
(APWF, 2009).
Both high and low water-user groups are at risk of
water scarcity because water endowment alone does
not guarantee a sustainable water supply to support
socio-economic development. Water scarcity can occur even in countries with rich renewable resources if it
is not properly conserved, used and distributed among

households, farms, industry and the environment
(ESCAP, 2010a).
The ecological carrying capacity of the Asia-Paciﬁc
region is also affected by deteriorating water quality, with even relatively water-rich countries (such as
Malaysia, Indonesia, Bhutan and Papua New Guinea)
facing urban water supply and quality constraints.
Domestic sewage is a particular concern because
it affects ecosystems near densely populated areas.
Approximately 150 to 250 million m3 per day of untreated wastewater from urban areas is discharged

FIGURE 7.3
Asia-Paciﬁc water hotspots

Compound hotspot in 6 categories

Compound hotspots
1

2

3

4

Cambodia
x

Indonesia
Lao PDR

x

Papua New Guinea
Philippines

x

India

x

x
x

Myanmar
Uzbekistan

x
x

x

China
Malaysia

x
x

7

8

9

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

6

x

6

x

x

6

x

x

6

x

x

5

x

x

5

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

4

x

x

4
4

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

4
x

x

x

x
x

x

3

x

3

x

3

Mongolia

x

x

x

3

Nepal

x

x

x

3

x

x

3

x

x

4
4

x

Maldives

Paciﬁc Islands

x

No data or not a hotspot

5

x
x

Viet Nam

Compound hotspot in 1 or 2 categories

5

x

x

Compound hotspot in 3 or 4 categories

6
x

x

x

Kazakhstan

x

x

Timor-Leste
Afghanistan

10 Total

x

x

Bangladesh

Pakistan

6

x

Thailand

Compound hotspot in 5 categories

5

DPRK

x

x

Kyrgyzstan

x

x

2

Tajikistan

x

x

2

Turkmenistan

x

x

2

2 High water utilization

x

1

3 Deteriorating water quality
4 Poor water quality and low water endowment

Australia

2

Legend
1 Increasing water scarcity threat

Azerbaijan

x

1

Bhutan

x

1

5 Flood-prone countries

Georgia

x

1

6 Cyclone-prone countries

1

7 Drought-prone countries

Iran

x

Republic of Korea

x

Sri Lanka
Prevalence
(countries affected)

1
x

1

8 Elevated ecosystem/Climate change risk
9 Poor access to drinking water
10 Poor access to sanitation

6

2

5

14 15 13 17 19

4

12

Sources: ESCAP (2006, 2010a); Dilley, et al. (2005); FAO AQUASTAT database (accessed 2010).

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

195

into open water bodies or leached into the subsoil.6
This has consequences ranging from poor human
health and increased infant mortality, to widespread
environmental degradation. Degraded watercourses
in cities exist because of demands on land, a lack of
proper sanitation, insufficient drainage, or simply a
lack of appreciation of their economic, environmental
and ecological values.
Access to drinking water and sanitation
There is unequal access to drinking water and sanitation services throughout the Asia-Paciﬁc region. This
includes stark contrasts between urban and rural areas,
and between rich and poor households – with sanitation being the most striking disparity. Even if adequate
access to water and sanitation systems is established,
the built facilities must be ﬁnancially sustainable, functional, reliable, affordable, responsive to needs, socially
acceptable for both genders, and appropriate for children and adults. Many social programmes are providing sanitation facilities that may be incompatible with
the needs of women, for example, including lack of
segregated toilets in schools, which can directly affect
how frequently girls attend school.
The proportion of the region’s population that has access to an improved drinking water source increased
from 73% to 88% between 1990 and 2008 – that’s an
increase of 1.2 billion people (ESCAP, 2010a). China
and India together account for a 47% share of the 1.8
billion people globally who gained access to improved
drinking water sources over this period. Since 1990,
510 million people in East Asia, 137 million in South
Asia, and 115 million in South-East Asia gained access
to piped water connections on their premises (WHO–
UNICEF, 2010).
However, the situation regarding access to sanitation
is much less encouraging. Of the 2.6 billion people
who do not use improved sanitation facilities, 72% live
in Asia (WHO–UNICEF, 2010). Rapid progress in improved sanitation occurred in North-East Asia, with a
12% increase in access between 1990 and 2008, and in
South-East Asia, with a 22% increase. In contrast, the
situation in South Asia and South-West Asia is a concern. Although the number of people with sanitation
access doubled since 1990, the 2008 average coverage was still only 38%, with the number without access
actually higher than in 2005. Some 64% of the world
population that defecate in the open live in South Asia.
This is despite the fact that the practice decreased

196

CHAPTER 7

most in this area, down from 66% in 1990 to 44% in
2008 (WHO–UNICEF, 2010). In India alone, 638 million
people still defecate in the open.
Climate change and extreme events
The Asia-Paciﬁc is the world’s most vulnerable region with respect to natural disasters, which undermine economic development to varying degrees.
Much economic growth is generated in coastal and
ﬂood-prone areas, which are especially vulnerable to
typhoons and rainstorms. Increased climate variability and extreme weather conditions are expected to
severely affect the region, with ﬂoods and droughts
predicted to increase in both magnitude and frequency. Excluding those affected by tsunamis, an annual
average of 20,451 people were killed by water-related
disasters in the region between 2000 and 2009. The
annual global average for the same period was 23,651
(CRED, 2009).
The Paciﬁc’s small island developing states (SIDS) are
particularly vulnerable to environmental natural hazards such as tropical cyclones, typhoons and earthquakes turning into disasters. One major tsunami or
tropical cyclone can negate years of development effort. Climate change will further exacerbate the vulnerability of SIDS (and other low-lying coastal areas) with
anticipated sea-level rise and the risk of storm surge
and beach erosion.
The structure of gender relations is part of the social
and cultural context that shapes a community’s ability
to prepare for, cope with, and recover from disasters.
For example, in many Paciﬁc islands men are responsible for activities related to the ocean and women for
land-based ones. These roles are reﬂected in the way
they prepare for an approaching hazard – men secure
the physical structures, such as canoes, and women secure the food and families. These different roles need
to be taken into account when addressing risk reduction equitably (Herrmann et al., 2005).
These observations about risk and uncertainty raise the
issue of the sustainability of water supply and sanitation systems. Achievements in providing basic infrastructure, for example, should not only be assessed
against a one-time coverage target. It is also important
to ensure that what is built is functional, reliable, affordable, responsive to needs, and ﬁnancially sustainable. The available information, however, suggests a
regression in achievements, with many systems in the

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

region functioning ineffectively, mostly as a result of
a limited capacity to manage these systems and poor
ﬁnancial management.
7.3.3 Response measures
Institutional, legal and planning responses
The Asia-Paciﬁc region has increasingly applied integrated water resources management (IWRM) principles in policies, strategies, plans and legal frameworks
for water resources management throughout the region. Their actual implementation ‘on the ground’ has
proven complicated, however, because of the need to
involve water stakeholders at all levels of governance
and civil society, and to establish a culture of inclusive
consultation processes.
Various efforts are being made in the Asia-Paciﬁc
region to facilitate a sustained ﬂow of ecosystem services (see Box 2.2 in Section 2.5). Innovative policies
to support payment for ecosystem services are being
established, or are under consideration, with examples in Viet Nam, Indonesia, the Philippines and Sri
Lanka. Promoting household water security, recognizing the need to adapt to climate change threats,
and initiating a ‘wastewater revolution’ are proposed
priorities for regional cooperation, and are fundamental to unblocking the developmental difficulties
attributable to poor water resources management in
many countries in the region. Some countries have
introduced a speciﬁc policy to prioritize sanitation in
their national development plans. Examples include
Thailand’s Rural Environmental Sanitation Programme,
which has been incorporated into its national economic and social development plans over the last 40
years, and the Total Sanitation Campaigns introduced
in West Bengal and other locations in South Asian
countries (CSD, 2008).
The Asia-Paciﬁc region is attempting to reverse unsustainable consumption and production patterns by
embarking on a greener development path. China, for
example, is currently among the world’s top exporters of green technology. ‘Green Growth’ was adopted
at the 5th Ministerial Conference on Environment and
Development in Asia and the Paciﬁc in March 2005. It
is the key regional strategy for inclusive and sustainable development, has emerged as a promising approach for pursuing greener development goals (also
see Chapter 1 and Chapter 4). If put into operation
in water resources management, Green Growth has
the potential to address the development dilemma of

WWDR4

“Governments need to
facilitate the creation
of market conditions
for developing
sustainable and
eco-efficient water
infrastructure for
better provision of
water services.”

providing basic water and sanitation services to all and
sustaining economic growth, while also ensuring environmental sustainability.
Infrastructure responses
Water infrastructure in the Asia-Paciﬁc region is shifting from predominantly short-term beneﬁt planning
and development, to a more strategic and long-term
beneﬁt planning concept that also addresses ecological efficiency in economic development. Governments
need to facilitate the creation of market conditions
for developing sustainable and eco-efficient water
infrastructure for better provision of water services.
This goal is envisaged for the region in three different contexts. The ﬁrst is as a component of eco-city
development programmes for addressing urbanization challenges. Possible eco-efficient infrastructure
solutions in this context include urban river rehabilitation, modular water treatment design, integrated
storm-water management, decentralized wastewater
treatment, and water re-use and recycling. The second context focuses on rural areas, where the distance
from urban centres makes traditional infrastructure
expensive and inefficient. Modern irrigation systems,
decentralized drinking water and sanitation services,
water reuse and recycling, and rainwater harvesting
are some promising solutions in the rural context. The
third context relates to the urgent need to clean the
region’s waterways through a ‘wastewater revolution’.

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

197

Treating wastewater for re-use is an essential consideration. Centralized wastewater treatment typically
requires a large area, substantial funding and technical
knowledge for sustained operation and maintenance.
In some places, current technology for small, compact
wastewater treatment plants has improved, offering
advantages over larger, centralized systems.

Nonetheless, there has been an increase in the contribution of water to social and economic development. Although isolated advances can be observed in
water management institutions, various countries have
undertaken ambitious water management reforms,
perhaps most notably Brazil and Mexico, but also, for
example, Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Peru.

Water resources management in the Asia-Paciﬁc region appears to be shifting from a supply-oriented
approach to a more demand-management approach.
Large savings in water, energy and ﬁnancial resources
are expected as a result of increased efficiency and reduced consumption in the region. Continuing challenges facing the demand-management approach include
evaluation of availability and demand in watersheds,
possible reallocation or storage expansion in existing reservoirs, balancing equity and efficiency in water
use, inadequate legislative and institutional frameworks, and the rising ﬁnancial burden of aging water
infrastructures.

The main issues in water management facing the
countries of the region have not changed signiﬁcantly in the recent past (see Box 7.11). There has been a
widespread inability to establish institutions that are
able to deal with water management issues under
conditions of increasing scarcity and conﬂict. The reasons for this lack of improvement include weak management institutions, insufficient operational capacity,
informality, absence of self-ﬁnancing and consequent
dependence on ﬂuctuating political support, and lack
of reliable information in most areas of water management, including on the resource itself and its uses,
users and future needs.

Although the implementation of demand-management
measures has been uneven across the region, interest
in improving water-use efficiency continues to grow.
Household water security, Green Growth, wastewater
concerns and adaptations to climate change are driving this interest. Singapore, for example, reduced its
urban domestic water demands from 176 L per capita
per day in 1994, to 157 L per capita per day in 2007
(Kiang, n.d.). Leak detection programmes in Bangkok
and Manila have lowered estimated unaccounted-for
water, allowing new infrastructure development to
be postponed (WWAP, 2009, Chapter 9). Since 2008,
Sydney Water in Australia has offered a dual reticulation service where houses in the Hoxton Park area are
given two water supplies – one for drinking water, and
the other a recycled supply for general use (Sydney
Water, 2011).

Contrasts abound, however, and these are not only due
to variations in climate and hydrology or to the scale
at which water management must operate (Brazil has
100,000 times the area of Dominica, for example) but
equally or more so are due to differences in the nature
and effectiveness of institutional systems, dissimilarities in the distribution and demographic structure of
the population, and sizeable variations in levels of income. Impressive advances have been made in some
countries in speciﬁc water management activities; for
example, the high level of development of urban water
supply and sewerage services in Chile.

7.4 Latin America and the Caribbean
There is a long tradition of water management in
the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean
(LAC) (see Map 7.4), but with marked contrasts in
its effectiveness among both countries and sectors.
Commonalities among the countries can be seen in
the advances that have been made. However, these advances have not always had the same pace and have
not yet resulted in universal increases in water use efﬁciency or in any overall improvement in the levels of
water quality.

198

CHAPTER 7

7.4.1 The driving forces and pressures on water
resources
Water management in LAC has always had to confront
not just drivers arising within the ‘water box’, but also
external drivers affecting both water management and
the resource itself. The more signiﬁcant external drivers include economic events, such as changing domestic policies, international ﬁnancial crises (such as that
in 2008–2009) and political instability; more subtle
changes are produced by external inﬂuences related to
gradual economic and social change. Extreme climatic
events, especially hurricanes in the Caribbean, have
long had a negative inﬂuence on water management.
Recently, new uncertainties related to global climate
change have been added to this list.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

MAP 7.4
UNECLAC Member States

110

°

100

80°

90

°

°

ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

30

30 °

°

Nassau

Gu l f o f M exi co

BAHAMAS

La Habana

Turks and
Caicos Is.

CUBA

MEXICO
Kingston

Tegucigalpa

e

ing
o

°

SAINT LUCIA
BARBADOS
SAINT VINCENT AND
THE GRENADINES

Port of Spain

TRINIDAD AND
TOBAGO

Caracas

PANAMA
Panamá

10

town
rge
eo

°

SURINAME

GUYAN

Santa Fé
de Bogotá

Paramaribo

French Guiana
Cayenne

A

COLOMBIA

Equator

G

VENEZUELA

Medellín

0°

20

ANTIGUA AND
BARBUDA
Montserrat
Guadeloupe
DOMINICA Martinique

Netherlands
Aruba Antilles
GRENADA

NICARAGUA

ad R
or

V tish

SAINT KITTS
AND NEVIS

om

C a r i b b ean S e a

Managua

DO
VA l v
AL Sa
San José
EL S San
COSTA RICA

10 °

D
to
San
c
rin
u-P
t- a
Por

HONDURAS

Guatemala

GUATEMALA

HAITI

JAMAICA

BELIZE
Belmopan

Pu
er

Mexico

US
Br
i

Cayman Is.

20 °

ATLANTIC OCEAN

DOMINICAN
ico
REPUBLIC to R rgin Isi.rgin Is.
i
V

Quito

ECUADOR

Galapagos Is.

Guayaquil

0°

Belém

Manaus

Recife

PERU

B R A Z I L

Lima

10 °

10

°

PACIFIC OCEAN
Brasília

La Paz

BOLIVIA
Sucre

PA
RA

20 °

20

°

G

São Paulo
Rio de Janeiro

UA

90 °

Asunción

Isla San Félix

Y

100 °

Isla San Ambrosio

Associate members:
Aruba
British Virgin Islands
Montserrat

Netherlands Antilles
Puerto Rico
United States Virgin Islands

Buenos Aires

EN

TI

A

30

°

URUGUAY
Montevideo

ARG

C H I L
E

Honduras
30°
Italy
Jamaica
Islas
Mexico
Juan Fernãndez
Netherlands
Santiago
Nicaragua
ECLAC HQ
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Portugal
Saint Kitts and Nevis
40°
Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines
Spain
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
United Kingdom
United States of America
Uruguay
Venezuela
50 °

N

Members:
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
France
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti

70°

°

°

°

The boundaries and names shown and the designations used
on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance
by the United Nations.

Falkland Islands
(Malvinas) *

*A dispute exists between the Governments of Argentina and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over
the Falkland Islands (Malvinas).

0

80 °

40

40

50

Capital city

60

°

0

500

1000
500

1500

2000 km

1000 mi

Source: Economic and Social Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Map No. 3977 Rev. 4, May 2011. Department of Field Support,
Cartographic Section, United Nations.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter, the following ECLAC members are not considered part of the LAC region: Canada, France, Italy, Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom and United States of America. In addition, for the purposes of the chapter, only Aruba, British Virgin Islands and
Cayman Islands are considered associate members of ECLAC.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

199

Demographic change
More than 8% of the world’s population lives in LAC –
some 581 million people – with half of them in Brazil and
Mexico (UNEP, 2007). The region is going through a period of rapid demographic change. Following the great
migration to the cities in the 1960s and 1970s, the main
characteristic of the current demographic situation is a
rapid decline in birth rates resulting in a slowing in the
rate of population growth – currently 1.3% for the region
as a whole, which is expected to fall to less than 0.5%
by 2050. If current trends continue, the population will
even begin to fall absolutely in some countries, notably
Cuba and Uruguay (CELADE, 2007). In contrast, annual
population growth is still above 2% in several Central
American countries. Increasing population will continue
to contribute to rising demands for water throughout
the region (UNEP, 2010a).
The decline in birth rates also means that, even if
the total national population remains stable, many
regions will lose population, especially those more
rural and isolated. Smaller populations tend to mean
reduced human and ﬁnancial resources to support the operation and maintenance of infrastructure. This is particularly important where management responsibilities are decentralized. In the case
of water supply and sewerage it can also mean that

facilities may end up over-designed, hampering
their operations. This can pose difficult questions in
countries still expanding their water and sewerage
infrastructure.
Latin America and the Caribbean is the world’s most
urbanized developing region; more than 80% of the
population live in towns and cities (ECLAC, 2010a)
(Figure 7.4). The urban population has tripled over the
past 40 years and is expected to grow to 609 million
by 2030. There are many cities with more than 1 million inhabitants, and in some countries, a high concentration in just one or two large cities (UNEP, 2010a).
A recent trend has been the growth of population in
medium-sized and small cities. There has also been
recently an increasing settlement of what has historically been sparsely populated land, particularly in the
Amazon and Orinoco river basins.
Economic development
Economic and social changes have obvious consequences for water use and the demands placed on
the resource. The inﬂuence of these changes goes
beyond the short-term effect of global ﬁnancial crises, and beyond national economic unrest such as
the so-called Mexico peso crisis of 1994 or the collapse of the Argentinean economy in 2001 (Klein and

FIGURE 7.4
Increase in urban populations between 1970 and 2010

100
Rural Caribbean
90
Rural Mesoamerica
70

(Per cent)

Rural South America
60

Urban Caribbean

50

Urban Mesoamerica

40

Urban South America

30
20
10
0
1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Source: UNEP (2010a, p. 28, with statistics from the CEPAL STAT database [http://www.pnuma.org/geo/geoalc3/ing/graﬁcosEn.php]).

200

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Coutiño, 1996). Such events may hamper or interrupt
the development of ongoing programmes, but they
rarely have long-term effects. Far more important are
the new demands for water arising from long-term
changes in both LAC societies and the global economy. This is particularly the case with such apparently
disparate changes in demands as that for tourism
in the Caribbean and that for energy almost everywhere, both of which tend to be closely related to
rising per capita income within the region and in the
rest of the world (OECD, 2009). Sometimes these increasing demands for goods and services from water
resource development produce conﬂicts which can
pose serious problems for water management agencies. There are a number of examples, particularly
regarding the construction of large hydroelectricity
generating plants: the global controversy surrounding
the decision of the Brazilian government to approve
the construction of the Belo Monte Dam on the Xingu
tributary of the Amazon is one such example, and the
proposed construction of plants in the Río Baker in
Chile is another.
As per capita incomes increase and the middle class
grows, poverty levels have dropped in the region. In
many countries, half the population has incomes 1.8
times above the poverty level, and in Uruguay, Chile
and Costa Rica it is almost two-thirds (ECLAC, 2009).
However, poverty remains an unresolved issue in all
Latin America and most of the Caribbean. Although
average poverty rates have fallen steadily over the past
20 years, an estimated 30% of the population of the
region, or some 177 million people, still live in poverty,
and 12% are considered extremely poor7 (ECLAC, 2011).
Decisions regarding water management and allocation
have a role to play in poverty reduction through both
the provision of public utility services and the creation
of favourable conditions for economic development, as
many economic activities, such as agriculture, mining
and electricity generation, depend on water.
One result of the emergence of a larger middle class
has been increasing demands to give more emphasis
to the resolution of environmental conﬂicts. Examples
include the cited opposition to dam construction, the
acceptance of tariff increases to ﬁnance the ambitious programme of urban wastewater treatment in
Chile (by the end of 2010 almost 87% of urban sewage
was receiving treatment [SISS, 2011]), and the decontamination plan of the Matanza-Riachuelo basin in
Argentina.

WWDR4

“One result of the
emergence of a larger
middle class has been
increasing demands
to give more emphasis
to the resolution
of environmental
conﬂicts.”

With the exceptions of Mexico and some of the small
countries of Central America, the countries of the
region base much of their economy on the export of
natural resources. The global demand for these products has increased notably in recent years. Moreover,
much of the production of these goods is ﬁnanced
by external capital and many of the facilities are
foreign-owned. The result is that the major engine of
economic growth in the region with heavy demands
on the water resources is subject to many factors
outside the direct control of the governments of the
countries of the region.
For water management, this dependence on many
natural resource-based activities is complicated by
their location. The expansion of copper and gold mining in Chile and Peru has mainly occurred in arid areas and has led to competition for scarce water with
both export agriculture and the needs of the indigenous population. Tourism demand has increased
water stress on many Caribbean Islands (Box 7.9).
Coffee production uses large quantities of water
and its processing can seriously affect water quality.
Similar issues arise with many other natural resources. One potential future demand for irrigation could
come from the production of biofuels, although in
Brazil, the only current signiﬁcant producer, sugar
cane production is rainfed and only 3.5% irrigation
demand is for biofuel production (de Fraiture et al.,
2008).

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

201

The uncertainty in the level and nature of demands of
the global market and their changing nature have always complicated water management in LAC as local
economies expand, contract and adjust according to
the ﬂuctuations of the global economy and so change
the environment in which management decisions must
be taken and policies applied.
Water availability and use
The annual average availability of water per capita in
the region amounts to about 7,200 m3. However, it is
only 2,466 m3 per person in the Caribbean. The Lesser
Antilles, where rainwater is the primary water source,
suffers the most acute water stress (UNEP, 2010a).
In continental Latin America, overall demand on
water resources remains low and spatially concentrated. Water withdrawals are estimated to be about
1% of available water, but they are much higher in
the Caribbean – even in the mainland region,8 they
are equivalent to 14% of the available water (ECLAC,
2010a). Population concentrations, however, do
not always coincide with plentiful water sources.
Approximately one-third of the population in the region lives in arid and semi-arid areas. Northern Mexico,
North-eastern Brazil, coastal Peru and northern Chile,

BOX 7.9
Water management in Barbados

Barbados, with a population of about 290,000, is one
of the world’s most densely populated countries. It is
a drought-prone island, almost entirely dependent on
groundwater, and the available water supply is less
than 390 m3 per person per year. It is a country living
under conditions of absolute water scarcity.
Universal water metering, via a variable tariff based
on consumption, has been introduced, but the tariff
was set too low. Some fairly successful water efficiency methods have been introduced but water consumption has increased with rising living standards.
Tourism, which is very important to the economy of
the island, is an especially large water user. Overall,
water management has worked well although the
water authority has suffered from poor management.
Recently, Barbados received a loan from the InterAmerican Development Bank to improve the water
authority’s efficiency, coastal zone management and
climate change adaptation (IDB, 2009).

Source: BWA (2009).

202

CHAPTER 7

among other areas, have great difficulty meeting their
water needs. Population growth, expanded industrial
activity, especially mining in Andean countries, and
high irrigation demand have led to a ten-fold increase
in total water extraction in the last century. Between
1990 and 2004, extraction grew by 76% (UNEP, 2010a).
By the mid-2000s, it amounted to some 263 km3 per
year, with Mexico and Brazil together accounting for
just over half that amount (UNEP, 2007).
7.4.2 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
The most signiﬁcant risks and uncertainties facing water management in LAC are likely to stem from
đ the impact of global economic events;
đ continuing growth in domestic water use with increasing urbanization and rising living standards;
đ the consequent need to improve the quality and extend the provision of water and sanitation services,
especially to urban and peri-urban areas; and
đ the impacts of climate change, especially on extreme events that affect water.
The effectiveness of improvements in water resources
management, services and infrastructure, associated
investments, and the relevant legislation and organization are very dependent on macroeconomic policies and the environment they create. ’Macroeconomic
policy has a pervasive inﬂuence on the structure of
incentives and performance in the entire water sector’
(Donoso and Melo, 2004, p. 4). Unfavourable macroeconomic context erodes even the best water management policies, which has been evident in the countries
of the region. For example, high rates of inﬂation can
destroy attempts to develop effective charging systems for water use or to protect water quality. Similarly,
in the long run, no water policies can be sufficient to
compensate for the problems affecting sustainable
water use, reﬂected in the lack of maintenance of infrastructure caused by economic stagnation or in underinvestment in expansion because of macroeconomic
instability.
Conversely, successful macroeconomic policies leading to high rates of growth, as in Chile in the 1990s
and in Argentina and Peru more recently, also impose challenges to water managers as new demands
can emerge rapidly. Traditional polices often prove
unable to resolve the problems created by the new
economic environment and innovative institutional approaches can be required as water management becomes more complex. This can be especially

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

critical in smaller countries where limited resources available, particularly those of professional and
technical staff, meaning that institutional change
can only come slowly.
Future demands and competition for water
As economic growth continues in the region and
global demands for its mining, agricultural and energy resources increase, consequently so will the
demand for water. For example, water use for energy
can be expected to rise throughout the region in line
with economic growth. Hydropower produces 53% of
the region’s electricity, and installed capacity grew by
7% between 2005 and 2008. Hydropower is expected
to provide a signiﬁcant proportion of the new energy
demand (UNEP, 2010a). Balancing current and future
water demands between competing uses (including
ecosystems and their services) will become an issue.
International demand has led to a 56% increase in
mineral extraction in recent years, and despite the
current slowdown in the global economy, it can be

BOX 7.10
Competition for water in the Copiapo Valley

The Copiapo Valley in Northern Chile is an example of the conﬂicts that can arise from large-scale
investments to serve global markets in areas where
water is scarce. The region is the site of an increasing number of copper and other mines (which are
even considering seawater desalination to meet their
future demands), but it also produces large volumes
of export crops, particularly table grapes – all in addition to the water needed for human supply which
is also on the rise. The valley’s surface waters have
long been committed and there is increasing competition for groundwater among the fruit farmers. Wells
are dug ever deeper and extraction rates exceed recharge. Chile’s generally high level of governance of
water user organizations and the operation of water
markets have not prevented the problem. The trading
of water rights has had little inﬂuence in relieving the
water use conﬂicts in the valley. The form in which
groundwater rights are deﬁned, lack of controls and
the impossibility to reach consensus on the measures
to be adopted and to effectively implement them
(‘free-riding’) have contributed to the current state of
over-exploitation of water resources.

Sources: Personal communications in 2011 in Santiago, Chile with
Michael Hantke-Domas and Humberto Peña.

WWDR4

expected to continue to expand. Signiﬁcant volumes
of water are required for extraction, especially for
precious metals, copper and nickel. Toxic waste and
effluents from mining can run into water bodies, and
this is one of the region’s main sources of water pollution, as well as posing health and safety risks for local populations (Miranda and Sauer, 2010).
Agricultural demands will also increase. Around 14%
of the region’s cultivated area is under irrigation (FAO,
2011) and irrigation has expanded steadily since the
1960s. Given the intention of a number of countries in
the region to play a major role in satisfying increased
global demands for food and biofuels, irrigation will
need to become more water-efficient.
On the whole, the region is doing well in providing improved water and sanitation for its urban populations,
but is doing much less well for its rural populations.
However, many cities still have substandard drinking water supplies and sewerage networks. Growing
urban populations, especially in medium-sized cities, adds to the risk of not meeting water supply and
sanitation needs. Expanding urban areas also not only
require more water for domestic supply, but also are
likely to expand onto ﬂoodplains and into catchment
areas. These increasing demands can create signiﬁcant
risks for water management in dealing with local water
scarcities and conﬂicts among water users (Box 7.10).
Climate change and extreme events
Many parts of LAC have always been subject to a variety of extreme weather events such as ﬂoods and
droughts, especially climate variability related to the El
Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon. The
frequency, duration and intensity of extreme weather events are expected to rise with climate change,
increasing the need for risk management. Figure 7.5
shows that these events have already increased since
the 1970s.
Flash ﬂoods and droughts affect the productivity of
water ecosystems, living conditions and human welfare in both ﬂood-prone areas and arid regions (IPCC,
2007). Urban ﬂooding is a perennial problem in the
region. For example, ﬂoods occur in most cities in the
La Plata basin. The lack of storm sewers in many cities
exacerbates the problem. In some densely populated
cities, such as Caracas and Rio de Janeiro, where much
housing is located on steep slopes, landslides worsen
the impact of ﬂoods.

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

203

The region’s glaciers are already receding because of
climate change. Glacier retreat affects the water supply of an estimated 30 million people in the region
(UNEP, 2010a). Some 60% of Quito’s (Ecuador) and
30% of La Paz’s (Bolivia) water comes from glaciers.
Glaciers in Peru have lost 7 billion m3 of water – a
quantity that could supply Lima for 10 years. Droughts
already occur regularly, and between 2000 and 2005
they caused serious economic losses and affected 1.23
million people (UNEP, 2010a).
The number of people living in already water-stressed
watersheds in the absence of climate change is estimated at 22 million. The IPCC (2008) expects that with
climate change, this number will increase to between
12 and 81 million in the 2020s and to between 79 and
178 million in the 2050s. Models also project an increase in the number of people at risk of malaria and
dengue due to changes in the geographical limits of
transmission.
Climate change is likely to damage the important tourism industry of the Caribbean islands (UNEP, 2007).
Sea level rise is also predicted to start affecting small
island states, as well as continental coastal areas and
river regimes, contributing to the deterioration in the
quality, quantity and availability of water (ECLAC,
2010b). Climate change is expected to have adverse

repercussions on the Pantanal, one of the world’s largest wetlands, which stores water and regulates ﬂows in
the Paraguay River and its tributaries, helping mitigate
droughts and ﬂoods (Roy, Barr and Venema, 2010).
The region’s poorest countries in Central America, the
Caribbean and the Andean region, with relatively weak
water management capacities, will be at the highest
risk from the effects of climate change and extreme
events. The most serious example is Haiti, which is
particularly vulnerable to extreme events because of
deforestation, difficult topography, poverty and a lack
of public infrastructure (ECLAC, 2010a).
Inadequate hydrological and meteorological observation networks hamper response to extreme events.
On the positive side, lessons learned from adapting
to the consequences of, for example, ENSO events in
the region (e.g. in Peru) and the cycle of droughts and
wet years in the drought polygon of North-eastern
Brazil, have led to technological innovations that are
applicable to water management in the face of climate
change, and these have also led to increased human
capacity (NOAA, n.d.). Extreme events would seem to
bring only costs, as lives are lost and water and other
infrastructure is damaged or destroyed. However, if
water infrastructure resists serious damage or can
be restored quickly, then the key role of water and

FIGURE 7.5
Frequency of hydrometeorological events, 1970–2007

500
Forest ﬁres
450

Extreme
temperatures

400

Number of events

Drought
350
Landslides
300
Storms
250
Floods
200
150
100
50
0
1970–1979

1980–1989

1990–1999

2000–2007

Source: UNEP (2010a, p. 40, with statistics from the CEPAL STAT database [http://www.pnuma.org/geo/geoalc3/ing/graﬁcosEn.php]).

204

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

water-related services is likely to win in public perception and will raise its inﬂuence within government.
Access to drinking water and sanitation
Over the past two decades there has been a slow but
steady increase in most countries of LAC in the provision of both water supply and sanitation. By 2008, improved water supply was available to 97% of the urban
population and 80% of the rural population (86% and
55% in the case of sanitation), more than meeting the
MDGs at the regional level (WHO and UNICEF, 2010).
These aggregate statistics, however, hide signiﬁcant
variations in the quality of the services. In many countries, the water supply and sanitation services are
plagued by what has been deﬁned as a vicious circle
of low quality. Political interference, poor management and low tariffs all conspire to produce low quality
services, and poor maintenance leads to interruptions
in supply and low pressure, both of which can produce contamination within the system or the release of
untreated wastewaters from sewage treatment plants
(Corrales, 2004).
There remain large variations in access to services within
countries. For example, in Central and Southern Mexico,
Honduras and Nicaragua, there are many municipalities where less than 10% of the population have access
to drinking water. In sanitation, the deﬁnition of what
improved sanitation comprises is very general so that
the published statistics provide little guidance to the
real situation in many countries of the region (ECLAC,
2010a). It is estimated that almost 40 million people still
lack even minimal access to secure water, and some 120
lack access to sanitation. In some areas, the cost of water is rising as a result of inefficient service provision, increasing demand and ever more intractable accessibility
issues. Often, the poorest and most vulnerable people
end up paying the most for water, as they depend on
expensive but often poor-quality water purchased from
tank trucks (UNEP, 2010a).
Undeniably, there has been improvement in most countries, but this in turn has brought to the fore other issues. It is estimated, for the region as a whole, that at
best only 28% of sewage is treated before discharge,
leading to serious contamination of water courses, including the sea, from both sewage outfalls and industrial discharges from urban areas (Lentini, 2008). The
principal exception is Chile, where wastewater treatment will soon be universal (Box 7.11). Too often the political and technical complexity of introducing measures

WWDR4

to control pollution has produced mixed results. For
example, it is not clear that the introduction of charges
for wastewater discharges in Colombia has been the determining factor in reducing water pollution.
There remain many problems to be resolved, including
the recurring issue of under-ﬁnancing water supply and
sanitation services so that any gains in provision are
negated, or at least reduced, by lack of maintenance,
through the low levels of operating efficiency and the
failure to adequately ensure sustainable ﬁnancing. Lack
of maintenance leads to large losses in piped water
systems; for example, in Cuba the government estimates losses in distribution to amount to at least half of
the water leaving the treatment plants (Business News
America, 2010). Even in Chile, few systems have unaccounted for water under 30% (SISS, 2011).
7.4.3 Response measures
Institutional, legal and planning responses
The greatest challenge for water management in LAC
is to continue to improve overall governance, a fact
which governments are aware of (Comunidad Andina
de Naciones, 2010). Responding to these challenges requires institutional arrangements for effectively

BOX 7.11
Investment in sanitary infrastructure in Chile

High levels of investment are a major factor in Chile’s success in providing superior water and sanitation services
to the urban population. Between 1999 and 2008, Chile
invested more than US$2.8 billion in the water supply and
sanitation sector, in addition to millions in controlling industrial pollution and building dedicated storm-drainage
networks. An important impetus was the government decision to protect its export of agricultural products.
The main factors explaining the success of the reforms are
(i) the creation of solid and high quality institutions with
a long-term vision; (ii) discipline in criteria for investing
ﬁscal resources; (iii) that the sector has always been managed responsibly and given high effective priority; (iv)
that reforms were the result of a broad consensus built
up at both the political and the professional level; and (v)
the strategy of gradual change was governed by realistic
and pragmatic judgment and a concern for ensuring overall coherence and keeping sight of the country’s actual
capacities.

Source: Valenzuela and Jouravlev (2007).

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

205

protecting public interest; deﬁning and enforcing water
use rights and discharge permits; setting standards,
control and inspection mechanisms; and mobilizing
signiﬁcant ﬁnancial resources.
If water management is to respond to the many needs
for improvement, governments must establish a clear
separation of policy and regulatory activities from dayto-day operations, improve incentives for efficiency,
promote management training, adopt greater transparency in decision-making, and develop better systems for conﬂict resolution through a clear framework,
increasing the participation of stakeholders in management decisions.

206

adopted in some countries (e.g. some provinces of
Argentina, Nicaragua, Honduras, Peru, Uruguay and
Venezuela) and several others have reformed their
water laws (e.g. Chile and Mexico). Common tendencies include explicit adoption of the integrated water
resource management paradigm, improvements in water governance, creation of water authorities and river
basin organizations, and attention to public or water
users participation, water resources planning and economic instruments. This, although in the early stages
of implementation, is a major change in how some
countries in the region manage their water resources.

The magnitude of the challenge should not deter water
managers and decision-makers from confronting them
and making every effort to further strengthen water
management within the social and economic sectors that depend upon it. A few countries have undertaken large-scale reforms in their water management
institutions, notably Mexico, Chile and Brazil. In some
instances, however, there remain problems with implementation, as in Brazil, where charges for bulk water and user fees are not being collected on a regular
basis (Benjamín, Marques and Tinker, 2005). In other
countries, institutions often do not have the capacity
to succeed in undertaking major reform or consensus
in this ﬁeld continues to be elusive.

Virtually all countries have reformed the water supply and sanitation sector, with emphasis on institutional separation of the functions of sectoral policymaking, economic regulation and service provision;
extension of the decentralization process; an interest
in private participation, although this trend was later
reversed with the exit of large international private
operators from most countries and renationalization
of many services; formulation of speciﬁc regulatory
frameworks; and the requirement that services should
move towards being self-ﬁnancing and that subsidy
arrangements should be set up for low-income groups.
Unfortunately, in many cases, reforms have failed to
take account of the structural limitations of national
economies as well as of sound principles in the area
of public interest, economics of service provision and

There have been a number of interesting experiences
in the region over the past few decades in the establishment of water institutions outside sectoral ministries. For example, in Mexico water resources are managed by the National Water Commission (CONAGUA);
and Brazil recently set up the National Water Agency
(ANA) with the principal objective of overcoming traditional conﬂicts and limitations imposed by a system
in which, until recently, water had been the responsibility of functional ministries. Other examples of institutions that are not directly linked to the functional
aspects of water allocation and management include
the Ministry of Environment, Housing and Territorial
Development in Colombia; the Water Resources
Authority in Jamaica; the Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources in Venezuela; and the General Water
Directorate of the Ministry of Public Works in Chile.
Reform of water laws is being discussed in most countries, but in practice, innovations are slow to materialize under real-world conditions (Solanes and Jouravlev,
2006). In recent years, new water legislation has been

“As for private sector
participation, regional
experience indicates
that it is not the
magic formula for
addressing the multiple
problems that affect
the provision of water
supply and sanitation
services.”

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

public utility regulation, and so have not met expectations. Some countries have recognized the right to
water (Bolivia and Ecuador) or have set up mechanisms that improve the affordability of water services
creating subsidies for the poor (Argentine, Chile and
Colombia). As for private sector participation, regional
experience indicates that it is not the magic formula
for addressing the multiple problems that affect the
provision of water supply and sanitation services.

These initiatives show that it is possible to reach a basic consensus on what should be done so that proposals can be made to governments for reform in water
management. It is a mistake to think that complex
problems can be solved only by top-down initiatives or
through the creation of new organizations and extrapolating from the experience of effective legislation and
organizational structures that were achieved elsewhere
only after a signiﬁcant effort of coordination.

The LAC region has 61 basins and 73 aquifers that cross
national borders (UNESCO, 2010). Many countries have
entered into transboundary water agreements, especially for hydropower development. Many political
obstacles remain to wider cooperation in the management of international basins and there are some
examples of potential conﬂict. Increasingly, bilateral
and multilateral treaties do incorporate environmental
concerns, including integrated water resources management or sustainability goals, but any application
of such agreements is still in its infancy (Roy, Barr and
Venema, 2010). One example of international cooperation at least in research is the studies undertaken on
the Guarani aquifer (Box 7.12).

It is not sufficient to have reform proposals that are
drafted only by experts: it is essential that any proposals
have the widest public support if reform is to be placed
on the political agenda. Water experts can inform the
process towards building a consensus on the direction
to be followed. If such a consensus does not exist, no
true climate of conﬁdence can be created for change
and any proposed reform, or even adopted legislation,
will never produce results. The challenge is to open water management to society as a whole. In doing so the
water sector can build on its previous achievements to
continue to make sustainable contributions to the betterment of society in all countries of the LAC region.

7.5 Arab and Western Asia region

BOX 7.12
The Guarani Aquifer System (GAS) project:
Managing transboundary groundwaters

The Guarani aquifer is shared by Argentina, Brazil,
Paraguay and Uruguay. It extends over 1.2 million km2 and
some 15 million people live in the area overlying it. The
four countries with the support of the World Bank cooperated in a study of current uses between 2003 and 2007.
The aquifer is thought to contain about 40,000 km3 of
freshwater. Current exploitation is relatively modest, but
demand is growing amid fears of over-pumping.
In August 2010, the presidents of the four countries
signed an agreement for cooperation on extending knowledge of the aquifer and on identifying critical areas, which
is noteworthy because agreements on transboundary aquifer systems are rare. The four countries have committed
themselves generally to ‘promote the conservation and
environmental protection of the Guarani Aquifer System
so as to ensure multiple, reasonable, sustainable, and equitable use of its water resources’ (Article 4 of the Guarani
Aquifer Agreement).

WWDR4

The 22 countries of the Arab region, including the 14
members of the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) (see Map 7.5)
include some of the most water scarce countries in
the world. At least 12 of these countries suffer ‘absolute’
water scarcity because they have less than 500 m3 of
renewable water resources available per capita per
year (see Chapter 33). Even the Arab countries that
are relatively better endowed with water resources are
often highly underdeveloped countries or countries in
crisis. Several social, political and economic drivers have
exacerbated this water scarcity, increasing the risk and
uncertainty associated with water quantity and quality
issues.
Rural development and food security policies further
complicate regional water resources issues. Striving
to address these regional challenges in a coordinated manner, Arab Governments established the Arab
Ministerial Water Council (AMWC) under the auspices
of the League of Arab States (LAS). The AMWC has
responded to requests arising from the January 2009
Arab Economic and Social Summit in Kuwait to prepare an Arab strategy to assist the region in addressing current and future regional water scarcity and
sustainable development challenges. The resulting

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

207

Arab Water Security Strategy (2010–2030) proposes
measures to respond to these challenges, including
implementing projects directed at water use efficiency, non-conventional water resources, climate change,
integrated water resources management (IWRM), and
water security. Risk reduction at the national level is
being sought in developing water sector strategies,
incorporating water issues into national development
plans, pursuing institutional and legal reforms, and addressing uncertainties related to the management of
shared water resources.

consumption patterns, regional conﬂicts and governance constraints. These drivers have increased the
pressures on already scarce freshwater resources, increasing the risks associated with water quantity and
quality issues, the sustainable management of shared
resources, and the uncertainties of policies promoting
rural development and food security.
Demographics and socio-economic development
The Arab region has experienced a population increase
of approximately 43% in over the past two decades.
The total estimated population in 2010 was more than
359 million, and it is expected to reach 461 million
by 2025 (ESCWA, 2009b). Over 55% of the population lives in urban areas, with rural to urban migration
trends being observed in Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco,

7.5.1 The driving forces and pressures on water
resources
The key drivers affecting the Arab region’s water resources are population growth and migration, growing

MAP 7.5
UNESCWA Member States
40°

35

°

Medite

Beiirut
B

Ale xa nd ria

Sea
IS RA EL
Por t
Sai d

30

°
Cairo

Sue z

50°

60 °

55°

N

ISTA
TURKMEN

70 °

65 °

 

Halab

LEBA
ANON

rranean

45°

TURKEY
T

ECONOMIC AND
SOCIAL COMMISSION
FOR WESTERN
ASIA
CYPR
RU
US
S

SYRIAN
ARAB REP.
A

35 °

 


AFGHAN

Trip oli

Damascus

" 

BL IC OF
ISL AM IC RE PU

IRAQ



JORDAN

IS T A N

IR AN

30 °



Al 'Aqaba h

Kuwait
  

Persi an
Gulf

 

EGYPT

25

°

P A K IS T

KUWAIT

 



QATAR

Medina

 

BAHRAIN


Doha

Riyadh

Ho

rmuz

OMAN

25 °

Dub ayy

Gulf of
Oman
Abu Dhabi
Muscat

Arabian

Mecca

Jeddah

Sea
20 °

Re

°

of

AN

UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES

SAUDI ARABIA
20

Str
.

L IB Y A

d

OMAN

Se
a

SUDAN

15

°

 

ERI TRE A

Khartoum

Sanaa

YEMEN

!
Al Hudaydah

ET HIO PIA

10

°

25

°

SO UT H SU DA
N

35°

40°

DJIBOUTI

Gulf

de
of A

n




45°

50°

15 °



        
       
0

SOMALIA

Palestine
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sudan
Syrian Arab Republic
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

      !  
         
  "#  

 

Aden

Members:
Bahrain
Egypt
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Oman

55°

0

200
100

400
200

600
300

400

800 km
500 mi

Source: Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Map No. 3978 Rev. 11, December 2011. Department of Field Support, Cartographic Section,
United Nations.
Note: For the purposes of this chapter, the countries of the Arab region are identiﬁed as those that are members of the League of Arab States: Algeria,
Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen.
Sources: Foster et al. (2006); Guarani Aquifer Agreement (2010).

208

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

the Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia (UNDESA, 2007).
This urban migration can be attributed mainly to reduced incomes and employment opportunities in the
agricultural sector, combined with a burgeoning youth
demographic. Arab governments have tried to slow
this trend with rural livelihood policies that link agricultural production and rural development, even though
this link resulted in a skewed allocation of scarce water
resources to the agricultural sector throughout much
of the region. Urban area water demands have also
increased because of migration associated with economic development, and inﬂuxes of people displaced
by regional conﬂicts. In addition to being concentrated
along coastlines, urbanization is promoting settlement
in reclaimed deserts, along expanded coastlines and
urban peripheries. This has increased public and private sector investment in non-conventional water resources, particularly desalination, to ensure adequate
freshwater resources.
Water consumption in ESCWA member countries is
largely tied to GDP (Figure 7.6), although this is mainly
a consequence of their heavy reliance on desalination.
Water consumption in other parts of the Arab region is

largely tied to agricultural activities, which contribute
only marginally to their GDP. Freshwater consumption
in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries continues to increase as a result of high incomes, comfortable lifestyles, real-estate development, the availability
of energy for desalination, and growth in the tourism
industry. In contrast, regional agricultural water consumption is characterized by low productivity, and has
been signiﬁcantly affected by droughts in recent years.
Regional conﬂicts and displaced persons
Cyclical conﬂict has characterized the Arab region for
decades, generating large numbers of internally displaced persons. It has also caused increased regional
migration and has strained water resources and services in areas receiving the displaced populations. The
ESCWA region contains 36% of the world’s displaced
persons (ESCWA 2009d). Examples include 2 million
Iraqi refugees in Jordan and Syria, Somalis in Yemen,
Palestinians in refugee camps, and migrant workers
and Libyans ﬂeeing Libya for Egypt and Tunisia during
the uprising which led to the regime change. Violent
conﬂicts have destroyed water infrastructure at different times in Beirut, Kuwait and Lebanon, necessitating

FIGURE 7.6
Domestic water consumption relative to GDP per capita in the UNESCWA region
GDP per capita ($PPP)
$80,000

Qatar

$70,000

$60,000

UAE

$50,000

$40,000

Kuwait
Bahrain

$30,000

Saudi Arabia

Oman
$20,000

$10,000

Lebanon

Jordan
Sudan

Yemen
0

Iraq

Egypt

$0

Palestine Syria
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Domestic water consumption (litres/capita/day)

Source: ESCWA (2009c, p. 7).

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

209

the rehabilitation of damaged systems, instead of expanding water delivery.
The management of freshwater resources is further
complicated by the fact that many major rivers in the
Region are transboundary. The rivers in this category
include the Tigris, the Euphrates, the Orontes (or AliAssi), the Jordan (including the Yarmouk), the Nile and
the Senegal. Lake Chad too is transboundary, sometimes leading to political conﬂict between riparian
neighbours. An estimated 66% of the Arab region’s
available surface freshwater originates outside the region. Subnational and local-level water conﬂicts can
also exist between administrative districts, communities and tribes (Box 7.13).
At the same time, however, the ‘Arab Spring’ that started sweeping through the region in December 2010 can
offer opportunities to revisit water governance structures and facilitate greater consultation at the community level. Soon after the respective regime changes,
government officials in Tunisia and Egypt, for example,
engaged with the issue, fostering greater public participation at the local level in planning and decisionmaking for the water sector.

BOX 7.13
Water conﬂicts in Yemen

Sana’a and Taiz in Yemen suffer from acute water scarcity – access to water has become a survival issue, and a
cause of conﬂict. Some researchers believe that between
70% and 80% of the country’s rural conﬂicts are about
water. The situation is affected by a growing population,
poor water management, illegal well drilling, a lack of law
enforcement, a dependence on secure energy to deliver
water, competition for water between urban and rural users, an inﬂux of Somali refugees to Yemen, and unsustainable water allocations involving water use for agriculture,
including qat (a mild narcotic plant popular in the area
and which requires ﬁve times as much water as, for example, grapes).
Exacerbating the conﬂict is the fact that Yemen is one of
the world’s most water-scarce countries, with an annual
per capita water availability of only 125 m3, compared to
the global average of 2,500 m3. With their current usage
rates, experts predict Sana’s wells will run dry by 2015
(Kasinof, 2009).

210

CHAPTER 7

7.5.2 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
Water scarcity
Nearly all Arab countries suffer from water scarcity,
with water consumption in the Arab region signiﬁcantly exceeding total renewable water supplies. Nearly all
Arab countries can be characterized as water-scarce,
while those formally endowed with rich water resources have seen their total annual per capita share of
renewable water resources drop by half over the past
four decades as their populations increase (Figure 7.7).
This declining trend presents the most signiﬁcant challenge to the water sector in the Arab region.
Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Sudan derive 70%
of their freshwater from perennial rivers. Surface water is the primary source in Oman, Saudi Arabia, the
Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab Emirates (UAE)
and Yemen. These countries also have intermittent rivers (wadis) whose seasonal ﬂoods might be used to
recharge aquifers. Other Arab countries obtain at least
one-third of their total conventional water supply from
groundwater, the extraction of which has increased to
the extent that it threatens the sustainability of many
national and shared aquifers, thereby increasing the
risk of conﬂict.
The region’s non-renewable shared aquifers, or ‘fossil’
aquifers that are being increasingly exploited include
the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer, shared by Chad, Egypt
and Libya; the North-Western Sahara Aquifer System
shared by Algeria, Libya and Tunisia; and the Basalt
Aquifer underlying Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
Water quality
The degree to which governments consider water quality a problem depends on differences in freshwater
regimes and water scarcity conditions. Saltwater intrusion from over-pumping groundwater makes a major
challenge of managing coastal aquifers, such as those
along Egypt’s northern coast, those along Lebanon’s
coast, those in the Gaza Strip, and the aquifers around
several eastern Arabian Gulf coastal cities.
Expected rises in sea level will further increase stresses
on coastal aquifers and river outlets, including the Nile
Delta and at the Shatt Al-Arab. Pesticides and fertilizers from agricultural runoff, post-harvest processes,
garment production, and domestic sewage are also
contaminating surface water and groundwater in many
areas. Impacts include eutrophication and ﬁsh kills in
Lebanon, declining ﬁsh stocks in Lake Tunis (Harbridge

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

et al., 2007), and negative aquaculture effects in
the Egyptian Delta, thereby increasing food security risks. Pollution from oil production is a problem
in some areas, although this is associated primarily
with marine ecosystems. Rapid population growth in
the Arab region, combined with migration pressures,
inadequate urban planning and regulation enforcement, and large numbers of people living close to,
or at, the poverty line, exacerbate the difficulties in
protecting municipal water sources from contamination. Bifurcated water governance structures at the
inter-ministerial level, and overlapping jurisdictional
mandates between ministries and municipalities further complicate the situation.
Food security
Agriculture is a primary source of water stress in the
Arab region. It accounts for more than 70% of the
total water demand in most ESCWA countries. In
Iraq, Oman, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen,

agriculture accounts for more than 90% of water use.
Nevertheless, the region is unable to produce sufficient
food to feed its populations, with ESCWA members
importing 40% to 50% of their total cereal consumption. And the situation seems likely to worsen – studies
predict climate change will cause a decline of as much
as 25% in agricultural productivity in most countries in
the region by 2080 (Cline, 2007).
Price increases in the global cereal market over the
past few years, combined with unstable supply, also
threaten food security, particularly since some countries are buying half or more of their cereal crops from
abroad. The existing social structure also increases
food supply vulnerability. In some countries, there
is a concentration of wealth at the top, against the
background where the majority of the population is
clustered around or below the poverty line. Increased
drought frequency, dependency on food imports
and population growth leave the Arab region highly

FIGURE 7.7
Decline in renewable water resources in the Arab region per capita

m3 per person per year

Mauritania

9,000

Iraq
Comoros

8,000

Somalia
Sudan*

7,000

Lebanon
Morocco

6,000

Syria
Egypt

5,000

Oman
Tunisia

4,000

Djibouti
Algeria

3,000

Palestine
Jordan
Bahrain

2,000

Libya
Yemen

1,000

Saudi Arabia
Qatar

0

UAE
1977

1987

1997

2009
Kuwait

Note: *Area covering South Sudan and Sudan.
Source: FAO AQUASTAT.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

211

vulnerable to food insecurity. And in some countries,
such as Egypt and Sudan, some are considering growing crops for more proﬁtable commercial biofuels that
will compete with food crops for the scarce water resources (ESCWA, 2009e).
As such, food security in the region has not been
achieved at the national or regional level through food
self-sufficiency. Subsidies and guaranteed price supports were used initially in some countries (including
Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia) to encourage food
production. Subsequent initiatives to promote cereal
production included greater investment in irrigation
networks, increasing the capacity of reservoirs, and
more pumping of groundwater. Intra-regional agricultural trade was encouraged through the Greater Arab
Free Trade Agreement. As a result, there has been a
shift in Arab food self-sufficiency policies towards a
broader concept of food security, with governments
that have the available ﬁnancial resources able to pursue alternative measures within the global marketplace
to achieve their food needs. Still others are re-examining their development and trade policies.
For instance, some countries are acquiring long-term
leases on land outside their borders for food production, thereby increasing their imports of virtual water
as a means to increase food security in face of growing water scarcity. Agribusiness ﬁrms and investment
funds are leading this trend. Such land deals have
become both popular and signiﬁcant, with nearly 2.5
million ha of approved land allocations being made
in African countries since 2004 (excluding allocations
of less than 1,000 ha [Cotula et al., 2009]), which includes investments made by Arab countries. Although
some aspects of this are controversial, this action provides some Arab countries with a relatively stable food
supply, while providing host countries with infrastructure investments and potential economic returns.
Climate change and extreme events
The Arab region is particularly sensitive to the effects
of climate change, particularly because it already suffers from extreme climate variability and water scarcity. Small changes in climatic patterns can result in
dramatic ground-level impacts. Although the impacts
remain uncertain, the expected consequences of climate change include increased soil temperatures and
aridity, shifts in seasonal rainfall patterns (already
being experienced in some rainfed agricultural areas
such as the Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia), reduced

212

CHAPTER 7

groundwater recharge rates, more frequent extreme
weather events, including ﬂoods and droughts, reduced snowfall and snow-melt in some mountainous
regions, and increased sea levels and water salinity in
coastal aquifers. Droughts have already occurred more
frequently in Algeria, Morocco, Syrian Arab Republic,
Somalia and Tunisia over the past 20 to 40 years.
Larger populations, higher standards of living, and the
associated increase in demand for water have contributed to the region’s vulnerability to drought (ESCWA,
2005). The drought cycle in Morocco, for example
changed from an average of one year of drought
in every ﬁve before 1990 to one year of drought in
every two between 1990 and 2000 (Karrou, 2002). In
2011, the Horn of Africa experienced one of the worst
droughts in decades. Drought vulnerability is particularly signiﬁcant in Arab countries that depend signiﬁcantly on rainfed agriculture as a major economic
activity. Drought also contributes to increased land
degradation and desertiﬁcation. Vulnerability to ﬂoods
in the region has also increased as a result of rapid,
often haphazard development in high risk areas such
as wadis. Lax building codes and weak regulation and
enforcement have played a part too, resulting in buildings and infrastructure that is not equipped to withstand major ﬂood events.
Data and information
Lack of consistent and credible water resources data
and information is hindering informed decision-making
in the Arab region. It also is preventing the development of coherent and cooperative policy frameworks
for shared water resources management and for assessing changes and progress. Some efforts have been
made to increase the water resources knowledge base
in the Arab region, including inter-governmental processes related to statistical reporting at the regional
and global levels. Other processes have been established through regional reporting mechanisms or as
academic initiatives.
Nevertheless, the difficulty of narrowing the gaps in
the knowledge base rests to a large degree with political sensitivities and the national security concerns that
are sometimes tied to this information. The result is
that a patchwork of information and data from different sources is being used by the research and professional community, while official data often remains a
resource that’s sometimes difficult to obtain from governmental institutions.

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

7.5.3 Response measures
Institutional, legal and planning responses
Recognizing the need for a common approach to improving water resources management and achieving
sustainable development in the Arab Region, the
AMWC adopted the Arab Water Security Strategy in
the Arab Region to Meet the Challenges and Future
Needs of Sustainable Development (2010–2030) in
2011. Among its components, the strategy identiﬁes priorities for action at the regional level focusing on the following: (1) socio-economic development priorities (including access to water supply
and sanitation, and water for agriculture), ﬁnance
and investment, technology, non-conventional water
resources and IWRM; (2) political priorities that include managing shared water resources and protecting Arab water rights; and (3) institutional priorities
associated with capacity building, awareness raising,
research, and participatory approaches that involve
civil society.
Regional institutions and initiatives have also been
launched in the Arab region to respond to these priorities. These include the Arab Ministerial Water Council,
whose ﬁrst ministerial session was hosted by Algeria in
June 2009. The Ministerial Council is an inter-governmental council established within the framework of the
League of Arab States. It is supported by an Executive
Bureau, a Technical Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee and
a Technical Secretariat. Another example is the Arab
Countries Water Utilities Association (ACWUA), which
focuses on dialogue and capacity-building for water
supply and sanitation. These institutions, among others, coordinate several regional water initiatives in the
Arab region focused on climate change, shared water
resources, integrated water resources management,
MDGs and so forth.
At the national level, different ministries and authorities in the Arab region have the responsibility of managing water resources and delivering water services.
Although only a few joint committees or units exist to support shared water resources, efforts have
been enacted or are underway to improve institutional and legal frameworks in the water sector, including an increased incorporation of issues previously
limited to IWRM planning. Institutions for addressing various issues associated with these goals have
been established in Morocco (Makboul, 2009), Egypt,
Yemen, Jordan, Palestine and Lebanon. The range
of the various mechanisms include decentralization,

WWDR4

private-public partnerships, public utility performance
indicators, the integration of water resources management into development planning, groundwater management, infrastructure management, and sanitation
and water resources management.
To strengthen resilience and preparedness regarding food security, some Arab countries have sought
to ensure food security through trade, investment
and contractual arrangements with other countries.
Long-term leasing of agricultural lands in other countries has emerged as a tool for overcoming domestic
agricultural production problems arising from water,
land, energy and technological constraints, resulting in reduced food security risk. The host countries,
in turn, can secure investments over an agreed time
horizon allowing for the development of transport,
water and energy infrastructure in the leased areas,
as well as enhanced primary and secondary agro-industries. Areas targeted by the Arab region for future
investment include Egypt, Sudan, Turkey, Ethiopia,
Philippines and Brazil. The private sector and private
investment ﬁrms also are involved. Putting such efforts into operation, however, has proven controversial, especially where indigenous communities and

“To strengthen
resilience and
preparedness
regarding food
security, some Arab
countries have
sought to ensure
food security through
trade, investment
and contractual
arrangements with
other countries.”
REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

213

pastoralists have traditionally used the leased lands.
Chapter 33 provides further details on this topic.
In efforts to increase resilience to climate change adaptation and improve disaster preparedness, the Arab
Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change (2007)
expressed commitment to focus more on climate
change adaptation and mitigation. It was followed by
the drafting of a climate change action plan in the region. At the same time, Arab countries have worked
to assess the effects of climate change on natural water resources as a means of informing their national
adaptation plans and communications to the InterGovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). A uniﬁed assessment was launched by the League of Arab
States (LAS) and UN organizations serving the region
under the Regional Initiative for the Assessment of
the Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources
and Socio-Economic Vulnerability in the Arab Region,
being reported to the AMWC and the UN Regional
Coordination Mechanism.
Risk and uncertainty related to climate change and
extreme weather events have also facilitated national and regional efforts directed at reducing disaster
risk, planning and preparedness. The Arab Strategy
for Disaster Risk Reduction for 2010–2015, adopted in
2010 by the Council of Arab Ministers Responsible for
the Environment (CAMRE) and supported by the UN
International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR)
and regional partners, focuses on national disaster inventories and capacity-building directed at improving
land use planning, regulatory frameworks, ﬁnancing
and access to user-friendly information and communications tools.
Infrastructure responses
All Arab countries have pursued supply-side approaches to address increasing water demands. This
has included dam building, desalinisation and water
reuse, reservoirs, and new technologies to improve the
efficiency of traditional and non-conventional methods such as water harvesting. Although large dams
can have important negative environmental and social
impacts, they also help reduce the uncertainty and risk
related to ﬂoods and climatic variability.
A number of Arab countries have increased their total
dam capacity. Egypt is at the forefront of this with a
capacity of at least 169 km3 added since 2003. Total
dam capacity in Iraq for water supply nearly tripled

214

CHAPTER 7

between 1990 and 2000, from 50.2 km3 to 139.7 km3,
while the Syrian Arab Republic increased its capacity from 15.85 km3 in 1994 to 19.65 km3 in 2007. Dams
have also worked to counter the damage associated
with ﬂood events. The Sinai and Aswan dams effectively stored water during the 2010 ﬂood, for example,
protecting Ne’ama Bay, Nuweiba’a and Dahab in Egypt
from ﬂoods (Government of Egypt, 2010), while also
raising the groundwater table and preventing coastal
saltwater intrusion.
One other approach being used by Arab countries to
address water-associated risk and uncertainty is better
management of aquifer recharge, as a means of both
countering saltwater intrusion into coastal aquifers
(particularly along the Mediterranean and Arabian Gulf
coastlines), and for storing excess desalination-produced water as a buffer for future water demands or
desalination plant failures in the GCC countries.
Arabian Gulf countries rely heavily on desalination for
freshwater resources. Saudi Arabia currently has the
world’s greatest desalination capacity, followed by
the UAE as the second largest producer. Jointly, they
produce more than 30% of global freshwater production (ESCWA, 2009c). Desalination capacity also is
supplying a growing share of freshwater in Algeria,
Egypt, Iraq and Jordan. Co-generation, where power
and desalinated water are produced at joint facilities is
expanding in the Gulf region (Zawya, 2011), although
this is not a cost-effective solution in energy-poor
countries. Jordan, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and the UAE
are advancing nuclear desalination prospects. Small
household-level desalination units are being used
by about 100,000 households in the Gaza Strip as a
secondary drinking water source (World Bank, 2009),
although health problems arose when the ﬁlters were
overused because replacements could not be found.
The reuse of treated wastewater currently accounts
for about 15% to 35% of total water resources produced from non-conventional sources in Egypt, Iraq,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, and the UAE.
Rainwater harvesting has expanded in the Arab region, and water harvesting through forest condensation is being increasingly considered. Other innovative
approaches include fog harvesting and cloud seeding. Advanced remote sensing techniques (Shaban,
2009) have facilitated the identiﬁcation of underwater springs in the region, although this approach
could cause territorial disputes over shared sea and

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

submarine resources. The Arab and Western Asia
Regional Report provides further details on non-conventional water sources in the Arab region.
In the face of inherent water scarcity, coupled with
rising populations and water use, demand-side management is another strategy to address the risks
associated with water scarcity in the region. These
actions include reducing water consumption, increasing water use efficiency, and adopting new types of
regulations such as permits and tariffs for improved
water services.
Despite these various risks and uncertainties, water is at the core of Arab culture and consciousness.
Nevertheless, the Arab region faces continuing water
scarcity, population growth, food security, climate
change, extreme weather events, and existing and
potential new conﬂicts over shared water resources. These factors, individually and collectively, will
continue to inﬂuence the ability of Arab countries to
manage the region’s surface water and groundwater
resources.

7.6 Regional–global links: Impacts and
challenges
7.6.1 Linking the regional to the global
On a global scale, human activity, climate variability and other external pressures have taken their toll
on both the availability and the quality of water. They
have also weakened the ability of aquatic ecosystems
to perform essential functions which support sustainable development (UNEP, 2006a). Over the last two
decades, there has been international recognition that
there is a need for a more sustainable use of water
resources.
As demonstrated in Chapter 9, the global picture is
composed of a number of inter-related environmental,
economic, political, technological and social drivers. In
order to understand the complex relationship between
regional water challenges and global water problems,
it is necessary to examine how regional challenges are
linked to global water problems. Water challenges do
not occur in a vacuum – through a series of interconnected webs they affect diverse countries and communities in many ways. The negative effects of the environmental degradation of water supply and excessive
water withdrawals are borne not just by the regions in
which such activities occur – their impact can be felt
worldwide. Yet international cooperation through trade

WWDR4

and other means can help to alleviate local pressures
in areas of water scarcity by focusing water intensive
activities in areas of greater water abundance and
sharing those beneﬁts with regions that may not have
the water resources necessary to meet all the basic
needs of their increasing populations (see Chapter 1).
This interconnectedness will be demonstrated in this
section by examining regional threats and their global
outcomes, by looking at the ways in which economic
and trade policies have inﬂuenced regional water management, and by considering a number of governance
challenges.
Commitments to address water scarcity and shortages
are made at international level, but the gap between
these international objectives and the reality on the
ground seems more and more evident. This stresses
the need for a regional focus. For instance, a variety of
global instruments addressing water issues have been
established over the last decade: the United Nations
General Assembly and the Human Rights Council of
the United Nations recognized in July and September
2010, respectively, the right to water and sanitation
as a human right (see Section 1.2.4); the G8 endorsed
the Evian Action Plan; the World Economic Forum endorsed the Water Initiative in 2010, which encourages
public private partnerships to work towards for a more
water secure world; and a host of other initiatives have
also been set up, including the World Water Council
and the World Water Forum.
However, on the ground, many countries are becoming more water insecure, disparity of access is increasing, and all too often water administrators lack operational capacities and are becoming less coordinated
in their efforts to address the water issue. Throughout
the world, billions of people live in countries that do
not have the water resources to meet their basic needs.
Because much of the expected population growth will
occur in regions that are increasingly unable to grow
their own food, there will be more pressure on neighbouring countries and other regions that are better
endowed with land and water. This is likely to create
a very particular dynamic of inter-regional dependency, and a fragile balance between the ‘haves’ and the
‘have nots’ will need to be maintained.
When looking at the very tangible example of transboundary basins, which provide the bulk of water resources for drinking, sanitation, agriculture and industry, one notes that only 40% of transboundary basins

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

215

“Poorly regulated
foreign investments
in lands that could
be otherwise used to
feed local populations,
could potentially
have devastating
consequences on the
fragile state of food
security at the national
level.”
actually have even one agreement in place to govern
the way the basin is used and managed (De Stefano et
al., 2010). This is particularly worrisome as Africa has
been identiﬁed by the IPCC as one of the continents
that is most vulnerable to water stress, and which has
increasing levels of desertiﬁcation (IPCC, 2007). Unless
these issues are addressed at the regional level, global
commitments simply cannot be fulﬁlled.
The case of large land acquisitions
When addressing regional issues it becomes clear that
policies and actions implemented in one geographic
area have repercussions in other places. For instance,
in efforts to conserve their scarce water resources, a
number of countries are investing in agriculture abroad
(Box 7.14). There are three main sources of law that
govern foreign investment in agriculture: domestic law,
international investment contracts, and international
investment agreements, or IIAs. The interplay between
them determines the extent to which international law
will prevail over domestic law in any given instance
and provide additional rights and remedies to foreign
investors. In developed states, the domestic law provides a broad base that protects domestic stakeholders and governments and sets obligations for all investors. When this is not the case, as in many developing
states, a weak or incomplete domestic legal base on

216

CHAPTER 7

social, economic or environmental issues can allow international contracts and treaties to enjoy much more
liberal rights and entitlements. This is particularly relevant to foreign investments in agriculture, where domestic land tenure rights, water rights, environmental
management regimes relating to chemicals, labour law
on farms and so on can be weak or absent (Mann and
Smaller, 2010). Saudi Arabia, one of the Middle East’s
largest cereal growers announced it would cut cereal
production by 12% a year to reduce the unsustainable
use of groundwater. In order to protect its water and
food security, the Saudi government issued incentives
to Saudi corporations to lease large tracts of land in
Africa for agricultural production. By investing in Africa
to produce its staple crops, Saudi Arabia is saving the
equivalent of hundreds of millions of gallons of water
per year and reducing the rate of depletion of its fossil aquifers. Saudi investors have already leased land
in Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia and Kenya. India is growing
maize, sugarcane, lentils, and rice in Ethiopia, Kenya,
Madagascar, Senegal and Mozambique to feed its domestic market, while European ﬁrms are seeking 3.9
million ha of African land to meet their 10% biofuel target by 2015 (Cotula et al., 2009).
This clearly demonstrates how policies enacted in
one region have an impact on others through water.
But there may be unforeseen negative consequences
in many of the African states where these transactions are taking place. For instance, countries such
as Ethiopia, where India has purchased 1 million ha of
land, is one of the most food insecure countries in the
world. Poorly regulated foreign investments in lands
that could be otherwise used to feed local populations, could potentially have devastating consequences on the fragile state of food security at the national
level. Other consequences include the displacement of
populations, the dispossession of land, potential conﬂicts and instability as various groups are uprooted.
There are also considerable negative environmental
consequences as large-scale industrial agriculture requires fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and large-scale
transport, storage and distribution. Many of the states
where such activities are taking place also have weak
governance structures, with little legal protection for
local communities and no beneﬁt sharing mechanisms
As a recent World Bank report notes, such agro-investments have deprived local people, particularly the
most vulnerable, of their rights without providing appropriate compensation, while neglecting environmental and social safeguards (Deininger et al., 2010), and

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

BOX 7.14
Water dimensions of the surge in transnational land acquisitions

The current surge in large-scale transnational land acquisitions (also known as ‘land grabs’) results in fact from several drivers
that have been accumulating for decades: the increase in population, coupled with changes in consumption habits, the stagnation of investment in and reduced aid to agriculture, reforms and structural adjustment programmes, and, more recently,
the increase of land areas devoted to biofuel crops, often at the expense of food crops. Land degradation and water resource
depletion have also constrained the ability of the agriculture sector to cope with the escalating demand for food. These drivers have increased the dependency of many developing countries on food imports and made small farmers – and, more generally, the rural and urban poor – more vulnerable than they had been to international food price ﬂuctuations. More immediate triggers of land grabs were the food price hike in 2008, the oil price hikes during 2007–2008, and unfavourable weather
conditions experienced in key cereal producing countries at around this time.
As there is currently no regulating or monitoring mechanism for these deals, the acreage of transnational land acquisitions is
subject to great variability according to source and date, ranging from 15–20 million ha in 2009 (aggregate of the land deals
listed in von Braun and Meinzen-Dick [2009]) to more than 70 million in 2012 Land Matrix Project data quoted in Anseeuw et
al. [2012]). The database of the Matrix contains more than 2,000 deals, of which approximately half, totalling some 70 million
ha, have been cross-checked. Africa consistently appears to be the prime target for these deals, with sub-Saharan Africa accounting for two-thirds of their acreage.
Some of the most active investors in large-scale transnational land acquisitions are oil-rich but food-insecure Gulf states,
land-scarce, populous Asian countries, and developed countries. Non-state investors include Western food producing, processing and exporting companies – new actors attracted by biofuel demand and opportunities related to investment funds.
While the drivers behind land acquisitions have been discussed at length in the recent literature, the importance of access to
water (in particular for irrigation) in driving the transnational search for land has not received adequate attention.
For China and India, water scarcity constrains the possibilities of responding to the growing food demand and therefore food security
challenges through increasing domestic agricultural production, so alternatives must be explored. The land available for agriculture is
also closing in these countries. Because of rapidly depleting fossil groundwater resources, Saudi Arabia had to reduce wheat production, leading to resumption of wheat imports in 2007 (Cotula et al., 2009; Smaller and Mann, 2009; Woertz, 2009); at around the
same time (in 2008), an agricultural fund was established to promote agriculture investment abroad (Smaller and Mann, 2009).
Because of the growing unreliability of rainfed agriculture and growing freshwater scarcity, investors’ crops often need irrigation, so a secure supply of water is a key aspect of the decision whether or not to invest. Agriculture trade specialists have
long recognized the notion of trade in virtual water. Today, investment in water rights in foreign states through the purchase
or lease of land with associated water rights and access is a critical motivation and part of the new process of securing longterm farming investments.
Nevertheless, water is typically not explicitly mentioned in the disclosed land deals. In the few cases where water is referred to,
the amount of permitted water withdrawals is not speciﬁed. Evans (2009) quotes the Chief Executive Officer of Nestlé as saying, ‘with the land comes the right to withdraw the water linked to it, in most countries essentially a freebie that increasingly
could be the most valuable part of the deal. And, because this water has no price, the investors can take it over virtually free.’
The consequences of this trend is harmful for the rural poor when they are forced to compete for scarcer water with actors who
are more ﬁnancially powerful and technically better equipped. Potential inter-state tensions and conﬂicts, especially in transboundary basins, are also a cause for concern. The current pace of land acquisitions and the related concessions of water rights
to investors carry great threats to transboundary cooperation in many river systems, such as the Nile, Niger and Senegal basins.
In this context, approaching lack of land access and tenure insecurity in isolation from water rights is anachronistic – traditional solutions conﬁned to the land sector are in many settings no longer effective. Water and land have become key strategic resources,
more interlinked than ever before, so an integrated management approach to respond to the challenges of these resources’ degradation and depletion is likely to be more effective than considering them in isolation. It is also imperative that investors take into
account the possible impacts of these projects from the early planning stages on and incorporate appropriate measures.

Source: Madiodio Niasse (International Land Coalition Secretariat), Praveen Jha (University of Delhi), Rudolph Cleveringa (IFAD) and Michael
Taylor (International Land Coalition Secretariat).

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

217

proposes principles for responsible agro-investments
for fostering mutual beneﬁts from agricultural investments abroad.
Similarly, the People’s Republic of China has invested heavily in land in Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia,
Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of Congo,
among others, to fulﬁl its biofuel policy. By 2020 the
Chinese government anticipates that 15% of China’s
transport energy needs will be met by biofuels. As part
of a massive plan to reduce greenhouse gases, China
will replace 12 million tons of oil with 2 million tons of
biodiesel and 10 million tons of bioethanol each year
(Kraus, 2009). Despite the positive goal of investing
in ‘green and clean’ energy, China’s interventions have
succumbed to negative externalities such as deforestation, biodiversity threats caused by monocultures,
increased food prices and decreased food stocks (the
International Monetary Fund estimates that that the
increased demand for biofuels accounted for 70% of
increased maize prices and 40% of soya bean prices
between 2006 and 2008). The interventions have also
caused population displacement, as land is converted
into plantations, and water scarcity because water is
a major input for growing primary biofuel commodities (Kraus, 2009). The amount of water required for
biofuel plantations could be particularly devastating
to regions such as West Africa, where water is already
scarce (UNCTAD XII, 2008). For example, 1 L of ethanol from sugarcane requires 18.4 L of water and 1.52 m2
of land (Periera and Ortega, 2010).
7.6.2 Regional threats and global outcomes
Weather-induced regional natural disasters and global
impacts
The impacts of natural disasters are being felt more
deeply in most regions of the world (see Section 4.4
and Chapter 27). Of all the natural and anthropogenic
adversities, water-related natural disasters are the most
recurrent, and pose the most serious impediments to
achieving human security and sustainable socio-economic development (Adikari andYoshitani, 2009).
The factors that are thought to have contributed to the
more severe impacts of water-related disasters include
natural pressures, such as climate variability; management pressures, such as the lack of appropriate organizational systems and inappropriate land management;
and social pressures, such as an escalation of population and settlement in high-risk areas, particularly by
vulnerable populations (Adikari and Yoshitani, 2009).

218

CHAPTER 7

Droughts, in addition to causing decreased access to
water for particular communities, have signiﬁcantly affected agricultural production – which has contributed
to soaring food prices and food shortages (Krugman,
2011). For example, the cost of wheat almost doubled
between the summer of 2010 and the summer of 2011
as a result of a sharp decrease in world production.
According to the US Department of Agriculture, the
bulk of this drop in wheat production can be attributed
to Russia and Central Asia, which experienced record
drought and heat in the summer of 2010 (Krugman,
2010). Fires in Russia and the ensuing decision to temporarily halt wheat exports led to sharp and rapid price
hikes around the world (Hernandez, 2010). Increasing
the price of a commodity like wheat does not merely
affect its by-products and related foodstuffs. These
increases have other major socio-political impacts, and
can lead to far-reaching consequences such as food
riots and political instability.
For instance, in Egypt the price of wheat is now 30%
higher than it was in 2010 (Biello, 2011). Egypt consumes a great deal of wheat and rising bread costs
coupled with other socio-political issues, resulted in
considerable political instability and civil unrest. The
relationship between food prices and political unrest
in Egypt did not go unnoticed by other Middle Eastern
countries – Algeria, Jordan, Libya, Morocco, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey, Qatar and Yemen have all been purchasing larger supplies of wheat on the world market
to limit soaring prices. This clearly demonstrates the
link between drought-based food shortages and larger
socio-political impacts.
Similarly, ﬂoods can have devastating effects on safe
water supplies and have global impacts that go far beyond the regional scope. Floods, as the IPCC has concluded, are projected to increase in magnitude as a result of global warming and its effect on the hydrological
cycle (IPCC, 2007). These are predicted to affect crop
yields and livestock beyond the impacts of mean climate change. The number of people vulnerable to ﬂood
disasters worldwide is expected to mushroom to two
billion by 2050 as a result of climate change, deforestation, rising sea levels and population growth in ﬂoodprone lands (Adikari and Yoshitani, 2009).
As was seen in the case of drought, the damage
caused by ﬂoods has worldwide consequences. For
instance, in the January 2011 ﬂoods in Australia, over
900,000 km2 of Queensland was ﬂooded. That the

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

ﬂoods had devastating effects on the socio-economic
structures of Australia was to be anticipated, but what
was surprising was the effect they had on a number
of emerging economies too. Queensland is the biggest hub for Australia’s coal exports and produces 28%
of the world’s total traded coal. In particular, Australia
produces metallurgical coal on which 70% of steel
production worldwide is dependent. Japan, India,
China, Taiwan and South Korea were all affected by
water damage in Queensland because their economic
growth is heavily reliant on coal. Such consequences
are not restricted to merely economic output, they
also have an impact on livelihoods and infrastructural
development.
7.6.3 Conﬂict, competition and cooperation
Water shortages can cause conﬂicts of varying intensities and scales. Although conﬂicts may appear localized, they present challenges to the broader context of
peace and security. The multifaceted effects of conﬂict, such as displacement, mass migration, disruption
to livelihoods, social breakdown, violence, health risks
and human casualties, all have ripple effects that are
felt throughout the global context. Conﬂict over water
resources can also turn into, or fuel, ethnic conﬂicts.
Because ethnic conﬂict is most commonly fuelled by
collective fears for the future (Lake and Rothchild,
1998), it is easy to see how water scarcity could play to
such fears.
Water has never been the sole cause of a major war,
but nation states as we know them have also never experienced the kind of water shortages that are anticipated. Although there may have not been an outright
war over water, it has still, historically, caused sufficient
violence and conﬂict within and among states to warrant attention (Postel and Wolf, 2001). Where water is
scarce, it can be viewed and interpreted as a security
threat (Gleick, 1993).
When examining the case of Pakistan and India for
instance, it is clear that water can be a potentially divisive issue in a context where the two countries are
otherwise pursuing cooperative talks and negotiations.
For instance, in order to feed its booming growth, expanding population and soaring energy needs, India
is building numerous multipurpose dams. Currently it
is at various stages of executing 33 projects that are
raising concerns in Pakistan. The most controversial
project, the 330 megawatt dam on the Kinshanganga
River has sparked a reaction in the Pakistan. Although

WWDR4

studies indicate that no single dam along the waters
regulated by the Indus Water Treaty can stop or reduce water supply to Pakistan, the cumulative effect
of all the dams can give India the ability to limit water
supply to Pakistan at crucial moments during growing season, according to the US Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations in 2011. It is important to note however, that this Senate Committee Report is contested
by Indian government officials.
In today’s global security context, no region is truly immune to conﬂict or strife in another. Despite political
tensions however, nations have managed to successfully cooperate on water. For instance, India and Pakistan,
despite ﬁghting wars in 1965 and 1971 and facing
cross-border confrontation in 2001–2002, have managed to adhere to the water commitments embedded
in the Indus Waters Treaty (1960). Thus, collaboration
on water issues is possible, and offers potential for cooperation between states. There is also a long tradition
of successful cooperation in the ﬁeld of transboundary
water resources in Latin America (Querol, 2002).
Economic and trade policy impacts on regional water
management
Economic and trade policies play a crucial role in promoting the sustainable use of water resources. The
question that arises is what sort of policies are best
suited to ensuring sustainable outcomes at national,
regional and global levels. There is a tendency towards
protectionist policies that protect national or regional
resources, particularly as water becomes scarcer and
more valuable. Protectionism argues that use of economic instruments and the market mechanism risks
having water resources diverted to regions that have
more economic prowess, leaving the vulnerable further
marginalized. However, enacting protectionist policies
can also foster a climate of inequality where waterpoor regions cannot afford products that have high
water footprints.
Policy-makers have to be cognizant that neither the
market-based nor the exclusive reliance on commandand-control approaches can be a ‘one-size-ﬁts-all’
approach. After all, what may seem like a beneﬁcial intervention in one place, may have unintended
consequences in others, given the complexity of the
links between countries and regions. As some theorists suggest, resource scarcity in one region can have
signiﬁcant indirect effects on the international community. For instance, it can encourage powerful groups

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

219

to capture vulnerable resources and force marginal
groups to migrate to ecologically sensitive areas. This
can lead to regional power struggles and instability
within the international community, which could possibly provide elements for broader intra-state and interstate conﬂict (Homer-Dixon, 1994).
In Chile, the existence of secure property rights in water appears to have made a noticeable contribution
to the growth in the value of agricultural production
(Lee and Jouravlev, 1998). The introduction of water
markets coincided with a major increase in agricultural
production and productivity. The inﬂuence of water markets, however, cannot be fully separated from
the effects of economic stability and other economic reforms, especially trade liberalization and secure
land rights. Trading does appear, however, to have

“Countries have
also subscribed to
international processes
to harmonize
perspectives and
approaches to
particular uses of
water. Despite this,
one of the major
challenges is that
countries attach
different valuation
to water and do not
approach the resource
with a common
understanding.”
220

CHAPTER 7

succeeded in reallocating – with little conﬂict – water rights to higher value uses such as export-oriented
agriculture, urban water supply and mining (Donoso,
2003).
There are useful reasons for incorporating the positive aspects of the market-based mechanisms when
considering water resources. For instance, one of the
reasons for water resource depletion is that water has
been generally undervalued as a resource. It is thus
important to place a value on it. Whether earmarking it as a commodity is the best way to place a value
on it, is subject to debate. However, whether through
norms or values, water resources must be valued for
their worth, otherwise the trend of degradation will
ensue. As highlighted in the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, the heterogeneous nature of water makes
it neither a public good nor private good, and it should
not be treated uni-dimensionally (MES, 2005).
When attempting to make choices about how to place
value on water resources in particular regions (in order to contextualize trade and economic policy), it
may be useful to couch decision-making within the
rights-based approach that the UN has adopted (see
Section 1.2.4 about water and sanitation as a human
right). Despite varying trends on how to treat water resources in different regions, the rights-based approach
can provide a baseline where the protection of water
rights, particularly of the most vulnerable, underpins
other enterprises, legislation and policies governing
transactions.
7.6.4 Governance challenges
‘Water governance refers to the range of political, social, economic and administrative systems that are in
place to regulate development and management of
water resources and provisions of water services at different levels’ (GWP, 2003, p. 7). Although many initiatives have been established to address the weaknesses in water governance, there remains a large chasm
between regional governance and global governance
structures.
In many ways, national structures are unable to address regional water resources issues, some of which
may have global impacts. Regional and global mechanisms intervene when local- or national-level structures
are insufficient to address water problems. Countries
have also subscribed to international processes to harmonize perspectives and approaches to particular uses

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

of water. Despite this, one of the major challenges is
that countries attach different valuation to water and
do not approach the resource with a common understanding (Langridge, 2008) (see Chapter 10). There
are therefore challenges involved in transposing a governance structure that works in one region to another region – and harmonizing water policy objectives
remains an elusive goal. As water is so closely linked
to society, economy and the environment, there are
no simple or easy answers that would ensure proper
governance irrespectively. Although governance may
be expressed in different organizational systems and
its formal content arranged differently (such as laws
and institutional arrangements), designing the governance system for a society must consider the natural conditions, power structures, and needs that are
speciﬁc to that society.
Because international governance is driven by national
member states, it is not surprising that it is often fragmented. Yet positive examples exist where different
elements of individual systems can be replicated. For
instance, the USA, France and Australia have developed highly sophisticated and resilient regimes for
integrated river basin management (Shah et al., 2001).
Many developed countries address the natural variability in terms of supply-side infrastructure to assure
reliable supply and reduce risks. Although developing
countries may not be able to import these structures
because of their differing realities (for instance supplyside solutions alone may not be adequate to address
the ever increasing demands from demographic, economic and climatic pressures), these countries may
replicate other aspects such as waste-water treatment
and water recycling and may promote demand management measures to counter the challenges of inadequate supply (UN-Water, 2008). Chapter 14 highlights
other such instances where various elements of differing systems can be adopted by water managers, and
adapted to particular contexts.
The needs of particular constituencies have to be at
the heart of any effective regional governance mechanism. Although what has worked in one region may
not necessarily work as effectively in another – such as
in the case of the ‘user pays’ principle, which was successfully enforced in Australia, but abandoned in the
Solomon Islands where it was determined that it was
not sustainably viable because of major differences
in political structures, national priorities, living standards, technical capacities, ﬁnancial and infrastructural

WWDR4

growth and change management competency (Shah
et al., 2001). But common aspects of different systems
can be explored (see Chapter 14).
Despite the variations that may occur in regional governance frameworks, there are also commonalities.
These could support the basis of effective structures,
and would include:
đ Improved technical systems for water management
đ Strengthened local managers
đ Efficient resource management at the local level
đ Improved horizontal and vertical coordination between different levels of authorities
đ Improved information and monitoring systems
đ Consensus-building, especially in professional
groups, enhanced public participation in knowledge
management of water resources
đ The promotion of both regional and international
cooperation
These improvements may be administered and implemented in different ways, but could yield to strengthened governance structures across different regions.
One of the challenges of strengthening governance
structures is ﬁnancing – this applies at both the international and the national levels. The resources may
simply not be available for giving an overhaul to inefﬁcient or underdeveloped administrative systems. As
water scarcity becomes a pressing issue, synergies will
have to be sought in different sectors. Water will not
only have to be addressed by sustainable development
or poverty alleviation schemes, but will have to be integrated more substantially into international cooperation, diplomacy, security and migration efforts.
Water law and science cannot be discrete areas of
research and expertise. They must be integrated into
areas which may seem unrelated – areas such as
education, urban planning and social development.
Addressing water shortages in the future has to integrate new levels of cross-sectoral and cross-regional
thinking and coordination and should include a longterm vision.

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

221

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

See http://www.who.int/about/regions/afro/en/index.html for
the WHO’s deﬁnition of northern Africa and sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA). SSA excludes Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.

2

This situation is further complicated by the fact that minimum
water levels are ﬁxed to account for navigation.

3

The terms ‘Asia and the Paciﬁc’ and ‘ESCAP region’ refer to the
group of members and associate members of the Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc.

4

Calculation by ESCAP staff based on the Joint Monitoring
Programme 2010 report, accessed on 10 May 2010 at
http://www.wssinfo.org/datamining/introduction.html

5

For the purpose of this analysis, conﬂict is not limited to armed
conﬂict, but includes all water-related disputes necessitating
mediation. Whether violent or not, these disputes have
threatened the stability of the socio-economic development
process in the region.

6

Calculation by ESCAP based on data from UNEP (2002).

7

The UNEP ﬁgures are based on ECLAC (2009), which
deﬁnes ‘extremely poor’ as unable to meet basic nutritional
requirements, even if all money is spent on food.

8

Caribbean countries in Central America and South America:
Suriname, Guyana, French Guiana and Belize.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Adikari, Y. and Yoshitani, J. 2009. Global Trends in WaterRelated Disasters: An Insight for Policy-makers. An Insight
report for the United Nations World Water Assessment
Program side papers series. Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
Alcamo, J. et al. 2007. Europe. M.L. Parry et al. (eds), Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
New York, Cambridge University Press, pp. 541–80.
AMCOW (African Ministers’ Council on Water). A Snapshot
of Drinking Water and Sanitation in Africa – 2010 Update:
A Regional Perspective Based on New Data from the
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water
and Sanitation. Prepared for AMCOW as a contribution
to Third Africa Water Week Addis Ababa, Ethiopia 22–26
November, 2010. http://www.childinfo.org/ﬁles/Africa_
AMCOW_Snapshot_2010_English_ﬁnal.pdf

222

APWF (Asia Paciﬁc Water Forum). 2009. Regional
Document: Asia Paciﬁc. 5th World Water Forum.
http://www.apwf.org/archive/documents/ap_regional_
document_ﬁnal.pdf
––––. 2007. Policy brief for the 1st Asia Paciﬁc Water Forum
in Beppu, Japan. http://www.apwf.org/archive/documents/
summit/Policy_Brief_2007_080124.pdf
BWA (Barbados Water Authority). 2009. InterAmerican
Development Bank, IDB, conﬁrms strong support for
Barbados and announces new Country Strategy. Press
release, 26 November. Water for Life,
http://www.barbadoswater.net
Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. P.
(eds). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva,
IPCC Secretariat.
Benjamín, A. H., Marques, C. L. and Tinker, C. 2005.The Water
Giant Awakes: An Overview of Water Law in Brazil. Texas
Law Review, Vol. 83, No. 7 2185–244.
Biello, David. 2011 Are High Food Prices Fuelling the
Revolution in Egypt? Scientiﬁc American, 1 February,
2011. http://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/observations/
2011/02/01/are-high-food-prices-fueling-revolutionin-egypt/
Boko, M. et al. Africa. 2007. M. L. Parry et al. (eds), Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge UK, Cambridge University Press, pp. 433–67.
von Braun, J. and Meinzen-Dick, R. 2009. ‘Land Grabbing’
by Foreign Investors in Developing Countries: Risks and
Opportunities. IFPRI Policy Brief 13 (April). Washington DC,
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
Brown, C. and Hansen, J. W. 2008. Agricultural Water
Management and Climate Risk. Report to the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. International Research Institute
for Climate and Society Technical Report No. 08-01,
Palisades, New York, IRI. http://portal.iri.columbia.edu/
portal/server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_5280_2210_0_0_18/
IRI-Tech-Rep-08-01.pdf
Business News Americas. 2010. INRH to repair water
network over 10–15 years – Cuba. 12 January http://www.
bnamericas.com.
CEC (Commission for Environmental Cooperation).
2008. The North American Mosaic: An Overview of
Key Environmental Issues. Water Quantity and Use.
Montreal, Quebec, CEC Secretariat. http://www.cec.org/
Storage/32/2366_SOE_WaterQuantity_en.pdf
CELADE (Latin American and Caribbean Demographic
Centre). 2007. Proyección de Población. Observatorio
Demográﬁco No. 3, LC7G.2348-P. Santiago, CELADE.

American Rivers. n.d. American Rivers Home Page.
http://www.americanrivers.org (accessed 28 March, 2011).

Chile, Dirección General de Aguas. 2008. Ministro
Bitar anuncia 99 por ciento de tratamiento de aguas
servidas al bicentenario. http://www.dga.cl/index2.
php?option=content&do_pdf=1&id=1306

Anseeuw, W., Alden Wily, L., Cotula, L. and Taylor, M. 2012
(forthcoming). Land Rights and the Rush for Land: Findings
of the Global Commercial Pressures on Land Research
Project. Rome, International Land Coalition (ILC).

Cline, W. 2007. Global Warming and Agriculture: Impact
Estimates by Country. Washington DC, Center for Global
Development and Peterson Institute for International
Economics.

CHAPTER 7

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Comunidad Andina de Naciones. 2010. El Agua de los Andes:
un recurso clave para el desarrollo e integraciòn de la
region. Lima, Secretaría General de la Comunidad Andina.
http://www.comunidadandina.org/public/libro_120.htm

––––. 2010a. Millennium Development Goals, Advances in
Environmentally Sustainable Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Santiago, ECLAC. http://www.un.org/
regionalcommissions/MDGs/eclac_mdgs09.pdf

Corrales, M. E. 2004. Gobernabilidad de los servicios de agua
potable y saneamiento en América Latina. Rega, Vol. 1, No.
1, pp. 47–58.

––––. 2010b. Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the
Caribbean, 2009. Santiago, ECLAC.

Cotula, L., Vermeulen, S., Leonard, R. and Keeley, J. 2009.
Land Grab or Development Opportunity? Agricultural
Investment and International Land Deals in Africa.
London/Rome, IIED/FAO/IFAD.
CRED (Center for Research on the Epidemiology of
Disasters) 2009. EM-DAT: The International Disaster
Database. Brussels, CRED. http://www.emdat.be
CSD (United Nations Commission on Sustainable
Development). 2008. Water and Sanitation: Progress on
the Implementation of the decisions of the Commission at
its 13th session. Prepared for CSD, 16th session held in New
York, 5–6 May, 2008.
Deininger, K. et al. 2010. Rising Global Interest in Farmland:
Can it Yield Sustainable and Equitable Beneﬁts?
Washington DC, The World Bank. http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/INTARD/Resources/ESW_Sept7_ﬁnal_ﬁnal.
pdf
De Stefano, L., Duncan, J., Dinar, S. Stahl, K. and Wolf, A.
2010. Mapping the Resilience of International River Basins
to Future Climate Change-Induced Water Variability. World
Bank Water Sector Board Discussion Paper Series No. 15.
Washington DC, The World Bank.
Dilley, M., Chen, R. S., Deichmann, U., Lerner-Lam, A. L.,
Arnold, M. et al. 2005. Natural Disaster Hotspots: Global
Risk Analysis. Synthesis Report. Washington DC, The World
Bank. http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/hazards/hotspots/
synthesisreport.pdf
Donoso, G. 2003. Mercados de agua: estudio de caso del
Código de Aguas de Chile de 1981. Santiago, Pontiﬁcia
Universidad Católica de Chile.
Donoso, G. and Melo, O. 2004. Water Institutional Reform:
Its Relationship with the Institutional and Macroeconomic
Environment. Santiago, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de
Chile.
EC (European Commission). 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October
establishing a framework for the Community action in the
ﬁeld of water policy. Official Journal L327, 22/12/2000 P.
0001-0073.
––––. 2008. Water Note 1: Joining Forces for Europe’s
Shared Waters: Coordination in International River Basin
Districts. Water Notes on the Implementation of the Water
Framework Directive. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
water/participation/pdf/waternotes/water_note1_joining_
forces.pdf
––––. 2009. The 1st River Basin Management Plans for 20092015. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/participation/
map_mc/map.htm

––––. 2011. Social Panorama. Santiago, ECLAC.
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2005. Source
Apprtionment and Phosphorus Inputs into the Aquatic
Environment. EEA Report No. 7. Copenhagen, EEA.
––––. 2007. Europe’s Environment: The Fourth Assessment.
State of the Environment Report. Copenhagen,
EEA. http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/
state_of_environment_report_2007_1
––––. 2010. The European Environment – State and Outlook
2010. Denmark, EEA. http://www.eea.europa.eu/soer
EPA (The US Environmental Protection Agency). 2008.
Home Page. http://www.epa.gov/roe/index.htm (Accessed
19 November 2010.)
ESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
Asia and the Paciﬁc). 2006. State of Environment in Asia
and the Paciﬁc 2005 Synthesis. Bangkok, ESCAP.
http://www.unescap.org/esd/environment/soe/2005/
download/SOE%202005%20Synthesis.pdf
––––. 2010a. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Paciﬁc,
2009. Bangkok, ESCAP.
––––. 2010b Preview: Green Growth, Resources and
Resilience: Environmental sustainability in Asia and the
Paciﬁc. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.unescap.org/esd/
environment/ﬂagpubs/GGRAP/documents/Green%20
Growth-16Sept%20(Final).pdf
––––. 2011. Population Dynamics: Social Development in AsiaPaciﬁc. http://actionbias.com/issue/population-dynamics
ESCAP, ADB (Asian Development Bank) and UNDP (United
Nations Development Programme). 2010. Achieving
the Millennium Development Goals in an Era of Global
Uncertainty. Asia-Paciﬁc Regional Report. Bangkok, ESCAP,
ADB and UNDP. http://content.undp.org/go/cms-service/
stream/asset/?asset_id=2269033
ESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Western Asia). 2005. ESCWA Water Development
Report 1: Vulnerability of the Region to Socio-Economic
Drought. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2005/9. New York, ESCWA.
http://www.escwa.un.org/information/publications/edit/
upload/sdpd-05-9-e.pdf
––––. 2009a. Compendium of Environmental Statistics in the
ESCWA Region, 2008–2009. 2nd Issue. New York, ESCWA.
http://www.escwa.un.org/information/pubaction.
asp?PubID=653
––––. 2009b. The Demographic Proﬁle of the Arab
Countries. E/ESCWA/SDD/2009/Technical Paper9. New
York, ESCWA. http://www.escwa.un.org/information/
publications/edit/upload/sdd-09-TP9.pdf

ECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean). 2009. Social Panorama.
Santiago, ECLAC.

WWDR4

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

223

––––. 2009c. ESCWA Water Development Report 3: Role
of Desalination in Addressing Water Scarcity. E/ESCWA/
SDPD/2009/4, New York, ESCWA. http://www.escwa.
un.org/information/publications/edit/upload/sdpd-09-4.
pdf
––––. 2009d. Trends and Impacts in Conﬂict Settings: The
Socio-Economic Impact of Conﬂict-Driven Displacement
in the ESCWA Region. Issue 1. E/ESCWA/ECRI/2009/2.
New York, ESCWA. http://www.escwa.un.org/information/
publications/edit/upload/ecri-09-2.pdf
––––. 2009e. Increasing the competitiveness of small
and medium-sized enterprises through the use of
environmentally sound technologies: Assessing the
potential for the development of second-generation
biofuels in the ESCWA region. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2009/5.
New York, ESCWA.
Evans, A. 2009. Managing scarcity: The institutional
dimensions. Global Dashboard, 25 August.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2005. Irrigation in Africa in Figures: AQUASTAT
Survey – 2005. FAO Water Report No. 29, Rome, FAO.
ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/aglw/docs/wr29_eng.pdf
––––. 2008. Mapping poverty, water and agriculture in subSaharan Africa. Faurès, J.-M. and Santini, G. (eds), Water
and the Rural Poor: Interventions for Improving Livelihoods
in sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, FAO. ftp://ftp.fao.org/
docrep/fao/010/i0132e/i0132e03a.pdf
––––. 2011. General Summary for the Countries of the Former
Soviet Union. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/
aquastat/regions/fussr/index5.stm (accessed March 31,
2011).
Field, C. B. et al. 2007. North America. M.L. Parry et al.
(eds), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. New York, Cambridge University Press,
pp. 617–52.
Foster, V. and C. Briceño-Garmendia (eds). 2010. Africa’s
Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation. Africa
Infrastructure Country Diagnostic (AICD). Washington
DC, The World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.
org/INTAFRICA/Resources/aicd_overview_english_noembargo.pdf
Foster, S., Kemper, K., Garduño, H., Hirata, R. and Nanni, M.
2006. The Guarani Aquifer Initiative for Transboundary
Groundwater Management. Washington DC, The World
Bank.
de Fraiture, C., Giordano, M. and Liao, Y. 2008. Biofuels
and implications for agricultural water use: Blue impacts
of green energy. Water Policy, Vol. 10, Supplement 1, pp.
67–81.
Gleick, P. 1993. Water and conﬂict freshwater resources and
international security. International Security, Vol. 18, No. 1,
pp. 79–112.
Government of Egypt. 2010. Mubarak receives report on
facing ﬂoods in future. ReliefWeb, 13 February.
http://www.reliefweb.int/node/345133

224

CHAPTER 7

Guarani Aquifer Agreement. 2010. International Water Law
Project. http://www.internationalwaterlaw.org/documents/
regionaldocs/Guarani_Aquifer_Agreement-English.pdf
Guha-Sapir, D. et al. 2011. Annual Disaster Statistical Review
2010: The Numbers and Trends. Brussels, CRED.
http://www.undp.org.cu/crmi/docs/credannualdisstats2010-rt-2011-en.pdf http://www.
globalwaterintel.com/archive/9/9/analysis/world-waterprices-rise-by-67.html.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2003. Effective Water
Governance, Peter Rogers and Alan W. Hall, GWP Technical
Committee Background Papers No. 7.
Harbridge, W. et al. 2007. Sedimentation in the Lake of
Tunis: A lagoon strongly inﬂuenced by man. Environmental
Geology, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 215–25.
Herrmann, T. M., Ronneberg, E., Brewster, M. and Dengo,
M.. Social and economic aspects of disaster reduction,
vulnerability and risk management in small island
developing states. Small Island Habitats, pp. 231–33
http://www.sidsnet.org/docshare/other/20050126112910_
Disaster_Reduction_and_Small_Islands.pdf
Hernandez, M. A., Robles, M. and Torero, M. 2010. Fires in
Russia, Wheat Production, and Volatile Markets: Reasons to
Panic? 2010 International Food Policy Research Institute, 6
August. http://www.ifpri.org/sites/default/ﬁles/wheat.pdf
Homer-Dixon, T. 1994. Environmental scarcities and violent
conﬂict: Evidence from cases. International Security, Vol. 19,
No. 1, pp. 5–40.
Hughes, D. 2008. Identiﬁcation, estimation, quantiﬁcation
and incorporation of risk and uncertainty in water
resources management tools in South Africa. IWR Water
Resource Assessment Uncertainty Analysis. Project
Inception Report. Grahamstown, South Africa, Rhodes
University. http://www.ru.ac.za/static/institutes/iwr/
uncertainty
ICPDR (International Commission for the Protection of the
Danube River). 2007. Issue Paper on Hydromorphological
Alterations in the Danube River Basin. IC/WD/265,
document version, 12. Vienna, ICDPR. www.icpdr.org/
icpdr-ﬁles/14717
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2009. IDB conﬁrms
strong support for Barbados and announces new Country
Strategy. Press Release, Washington DC, IDB, 26 November.
Indus Waters Treaty. 1960. http://siteresources.worldbank.
org/SOUTHASIAEXT/Resources/223546-1171996340255/
BagliharSummary.pdf
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der
Linden and C. E. Hanson (eds), Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge,
UK, Cambridge University Press. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/
assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-intro.pdf
––––. 2008. Climate Change and Water. IPCC Technical Paper
IV. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/technical-papers/climatechange-water-en.pdf

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

Karrou, M. 2002. Climatic Change and Drought Mitigation:
Case of Morocco, INRA, Rabat, Morocco. Presented at
the ﬁrst CLIMAGRImed Workshop, FAO, Rome, 25–27
September. http://www.fao.org/sd/climagrimed/pdf/
ws01_38.pdf
Kasinof, S. 2009. At heart of Yemen’s conﬂicts: Water crisis.
The Christian Science Monitor, 5 November. http://www.
csmonitor.com/World/Middle-East/2009/1105/p06s13wome.html
Kiang, T. T. n.d. Singapore’s experience in water demand
management. http://www.iwra.org/congress/2008/
resource/authors/abs461_article.pdf
Klein, L. R. and Coutiño, A. 1996. The Mexican Financial
Crisis of December 1994 and lessons to be learned. Open
Economics Review, Vol. 7, pp. 501–510.
Kraus, M. 2009. Fuelling New Problems: The Impact of
China’s Biodiesel Policies. Asia Paper: Brussels Institute of
Contemporary China Studies. Brussels, BICCS.
Krugman, P. 2011. Droughts, ﬂoods and food. New York
Times, 9 February. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/07/
opinion/07krugman.html
Lake, D. and Rothchild, D. (eds). 1998. The International
Spread of Ethnic Conﬂict. Princeton, NJ and Chichester, UK,
Princeton University Press.
Langridge, R. 2008. Developing global institutions for
governing water. Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 61,
No. 2.
Lee, T. and Jouravlev, A. 1998. Prices, Property and Markets
in Water Allocation. LC/L.1097. Santiago, United Nations
Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/
xml/4/4704/lcl1097i.pdf
Lentini, E. 2008. Servicios de agua potable y saneamiento:
lecciones de experiencias relevantes. Document presented
at the regional conference on Políticas para servicios de
agua potable y alcantarillado económicamente eﬁcientes,
ambientalmente sustentables y socialmente equitativos.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC), Santiago, Chile, 22–24 September
2008.
Lloret, P. 2009. Water Protection Fund (FONAG). Circular
of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water
Resource Management for Sustainable Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 29. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/
circulares/2/34862/Carta29in.pdf
Makboul, M., 2009. Loi 10-95 sur l’eau: Acquis et
perspectives. UNESCO Country Office in Rabat, Cluster
Office for the Maghreb, L’Etat des Ressources en Eau au
Maghreb en 2009, Rabat, UNESCO, pp. 47–59.
Mann, H. and Smaller, C. 2010. Foreign land purchases for
agriculture: What impact on sustainable development?
Sustainable Development Innovation Briefs, Issue 8.
http://www.un.org/esa/dsd/resources/res_pdfs/
publications/ib/no8.pdf

WWDR4

MES (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-being: Policy Responses, Volume 3.
Chopra, K. R. et al. (eds). Washington DC and London,
Island Press.
Miranda, M. and Sauer, A. 2010. Mine the Gap: Connecting
Water Risks and Disclosure in the Mining Sector. World
Resources Institute Working Paper (WRI). Washington DC,
WRI. http://pdf.wri.org/working_papers/mine_the_gap.pdf
National Atlas of the United States. 2011. Water Use in the
United States. http://www.nationalatlas.gov/articles/
water/a_wateruse.html (Accessed 7 May 2011.)
NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2006.
Water in Africa: Management Options to Enhance Survival
and Growth. Addis Ababa, United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa (UNECA). http://www.uneca.org/
awich/nepadwater.pdf
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration).
n.d. El Niño Theme Page. http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tao/
elnino/impacts.html (Accessed 9 November 2010.)
Norman, E. and Bakker, K. 2005. Drivers and Barriers of
Cooperation in Transboundary Water Governance: A Case
Study of Western Canada and the United States. A report
presented to the Walter and Duncan Gordon Foundation,
November 8. http://www.watergovernance.ca/PDF/
Gordon_Foundation_Transboundary_Report.pdf
Norman, E., Bakker, K., Cook, C., Dunn, G. and Allen, D. 2010.
Water Security: A Primer. Program on Water Governance.
Vancouver, BC, University of British Columbia.
http://www.watergovernance.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2010/04/WaterSecurityPrimer20101.pdf
OECD (Organisation for Economic Development and Cooperation). 2009. Fact Book, 2009. Paris, OECD.
Pereira, C. L. and Ortega, E. 2010. Sustainability assessment
of large-scale ethanol production from sugarcane. Journal
of Cleaner Production, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 78–82.
Postel, S. and Wolf, A. 2001. Dehydrating Conﬂict. Foreign
Policy, 1 September.
PRB (Population Reference Bureau). 2011. World Population
Data Sheet: The World at 7 Billion. Washington DC, PRB.
http://www.prb.org/pdf11/2011population-data-sheet_eng.pdf
––––. 2008. World Population Growth, 1950–2050.
http://www.prb.org/Educators/TeachersGuides/
HumanPopulation/PopulationGrowth.aspx (Accessed 31
March 2011.)
Querol, M. 2003. Estudio sobre los convenios y acuerdos
de cooperación entre los países de América Latina y el
Caribe, en relación con sistemas hídricos y cuerpos de
agua transfronterizos. LC/L.2002-P. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/
xml/2/13672/lcl2002e.pdf
Renault, D. 2002. Value of Virtual Water in Food: Principles
and Virtues. Paper presented at the UNESCO–IHE
Workshop on Virtual Water Trade, 12–13 December. Delft,
The Netherlands. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/docs/
VirtualWater.pdf

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

225

Roy, D., Barr, J. and Venema, D. H. 2010. Ecosystem
Approaches in Transboundary Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM): A Review of Transboundary River
Basins. International Institute for Sustainable Development
and United Nations Environment Programme.
SADC (Shared Watercourse Systems in the Southern African
Development Community Region). 2008. SADC Revised
Protocol on Shared Watercourses.
http://www.sadc.int/index/browse/page/159
Shaban, A. 2009. Monitoring Groundwater Discharge in the
Coastal Zone of Lebanon Using Remotely Sensed Data.
Presented at Stockholm World Water Week, 16–22 August.
Shah, T, Makin, I. and Sakthiradivel, R. 2001. Limits to
Leapfrogging: Issues in transposing successful river basin
management institutions in the developing world. C. L.
Abernathy (ed.) Intersectoral Management of River Basins.
Colombo, IWMI–DSE.
SISS (Superintendencia de Servicios Sanitarios). 2011.
Informe de Gestión del Sector Sanitario 2010. Santiago,
SISS. http://www.siss.gob.cl/577/articles-8333_recurso_1.
pdf
Smaller, C. and Mann, H. 2009. A Thirst for Distant Lands.
Foreign Investment in Agricultural Land and Water.
Winnipeg, Canada, International Institute for Sustainable
Development (IISD).
Statistics Canada. 2010. Human Activity and the Environment:
Freshwater Supply and Demand in Canada 2010. Ottawa,
ON, Statistics Canada.
Stoltman, J., Lidstone, J. and Dechano, L. (eds). 2004.
International Perspectives on Natural Disasters: Occurrence,
Mitigation and Consequences. Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Stulina, G. 2009. Climate Change and Adaptation to it in the
Water and Land Management of Central Asia. CACENA and
Global Water Partnership.
Sydney Water. 2011. Hoxton Park Recycled Water Scheme.
http://www.sydneywater.com.au/Majorprojects/
SouthWest/HoxtonPark (Accessed 14 October 2011.)
The Economist online. 2011. Africa’s impressive growth. The
Economist online, 6 January. http://www.economist.com/
blogs/dailychart/2011/01/daily_chart
United Nations (UN). 2009. State of the World’s Indigenous
Peoples. New York: United Nations, Department of
Economic and Social Affairs. http://www.un.org/esa/
socdev/unpﬁi/documents/SOWIP_web.pdf.
UNCTAD XII (United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development). 2008. Biofuels Development in Africa:
Supporting Rural Development or Strengthening Corporate
Control? UNCTAD XII Workshop held in Accra, Ghana 12
May. https://ﬁles.pbworks.com/download/qbexQtTcy3/
np-net/12638865/ACORD%20et%20al%20(2008)%20
Biofuels%20in%20Africa%20Rural%20Development%20
or%20Corporate%20control.pdf?ld=1
UNDESA (UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs).
2007. World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision,
Highlights. ESA/P/WP.202. New York: United Nations.
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wpp2006/
WPP2006_Highlights_rev.pdf

226

CHAPTER 7

––––. 2010. State of the World’s Indigenous Peoples. New York,
United Nations. http://www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpﬁi/
documents/SOWIP_web.pdf
UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa).
2000. Transboundary River/Lake Basin Water Development
in Africa: Prospects, Problems, and Achievements. Addis
Ababa, UNECA. http://www.uneca.org/awich/Reports/
Transboundary_v2.pdf
––––. 2001 State of the Environment in Africa. Addis Ababa,
UNECA. http://www.uneca.org/water/State_Environ_Afri.pdf.
––––. 2006 African Water Development Report. Addis Ababa,
UN Water/Africa and UNECA. http://www.uneca.org/awich/
AWDR_2006.htm
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
1998. Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public
Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in
Environmental Matters. Aarhus, Denmark, 25 June.
http://www.unece.org/env/pp
––––. 2005. Seminar on Environmental Services and Financing
for the Protection and Sustainable Use of Ecosystems.
Geneva, 10–11 October. http://www.unece.org/env/water/
meetings/payment_ecosystems/seminar.htm
––––. 2007a. Our Waters: Joining Hands Across Borders –
First Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and
Groundwaters. New York and Geneva, UNECE.http://www.
unece.org/env/water/publications/pub76.htm
––––. 2007b. Recommendations on Payments for Ecosystem
Services in Integrated Water Resources Management. New
York and Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.org/index.
php?id=11663
––––. 2009a. Guidance on Water and Adaptation to Climate
Change. New York and Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.
org/env/water/publications/documents/Guidance_water_
climate.pdf
––––. 2009b. Transboundary Flood Risk Management:
Experiences from the UNECE Region. New York and
Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.org/env/water/mop5/
Transboundary_Flood_Risk_Managment.pdf
––––. 2009c. Capacity for Water Cooperation in Eastern
Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia. River Basin
Commissions and Other Institutions for Transboundary
Water Cooperation. New York and Geneva, UNECE.
http://unece.org/env/water/documents/CWC_publication_
joint_bodies.pdf
––––. 2010. The MDGs in Europe and Central Asia: Achievements,
Challenges and the Way Forward. Prepared by UNECE in
collaboration with UNDP, ILO, FAO, WFP, UNESCO and other
partners. New York and Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.
org/commission/MDGs/2010_MDG.pdf
––––. 2011a. Second Assessment of Transboundary Rivers,
Lakes and Groundwaters. New York and Geneva, UNECE.
http://www.unece.org/?id=26343
––––. 2011b. Setting Targets and Target Dates to Achieve
Sustainable Water Management and Reduce Water-Related
Diseases in the Republic of Moldova. Report prepared in
collaboration with the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation and the Government of the Republic of
Moldova. http://www.unece.org/index.php?id=26819

STATUS, TRENDS AND CHALLENGES

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2006a.
Challenges to International Waters: Regional Assessments in
a Global Perspective. Global International Waters Assessment
(GIWA) project. Nairobi, UNEP in collaboration with GEF, the
University of Kalmar and the Municipality of Kalmar, Sweden,
and the Governments of Sweden, Finland, and Norway.
––––. 2006b. Environmental Indicators for North America.
Nairobi and Washington DC, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/
pdf/NA_Indicators_FullVersion.pdf http://www.unep.org/
dewa/giwa/publications/ﬁnalreport/giwa_ﬁnal_report.pdf
––––. 2007. Global Environment Outlook 4. http://www.unep.
org/geo/geo4.asp (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2009. Assessment of Transboundary Freshwater
Vulnerability in Africa to Climate Change. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/dewa/Portals/67/pdf/Assessment_
of_Transboundary_Freshwater_Vulnerability_revised.pdf
––––. 2010a. Global Envvironment Outlook: Latin America
and the Caribbean (GEO LAC) 3. Panama City, United
Nations Environment Programme, Regional Office for Latin
America and the Caribbean.
http://www.unep.org/pdf/GEOLAC_3_ENGLISH.pdf
––––. 2010b. Africa Water Atlas. Nairobi: United Nations
Environment Programme, Division of Early Warning and
Assessment (DEWA), 2010.
http://na.unep.net/atlas/africaWater/book.php.
––––. 2011. GEO Data Portal. 2011. http://geodata.grid.unep.ch/.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization). 2010. Aspectos Socioeconómicos,
Ambientales y Climáticos de los Sistemas Acuíferos
Transfronterizos de las Américas. ISARM Americas Series
No 3. Montevideo/Washington DC, UNESCO-IHP/OAS.
http://www.oas.org/dsd/WaterResources/projects/ISARM/
Publications/ISARMAmericasLibro3(spa).pdf
UNESCO-WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme).
2006. La Plata Basin Case Study, Final Report. WWDR2.
Paris, UNESCO Publishing. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/
natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/case-studies/
UN-Habitat. 2005. Financing Urban Shelter: Global Report on
Human Settlements 2005. London and Nairobi, Earthscan
and UN-Habitat. http://www.unhabitat.org/content.asp?ty
peid=19&catid=555&cid=5369
UN-Habitat. 2010. The State of African Cities 2010:
Governance, Inequality and Urban Land Markets. Nairobi,
UN-Habitat and UNEP.
UN Water/Africa and AMCOW (African Ministers’ Council on
Water). 2004. Outcomes and Recommendations of the
Pan-African Implementation and Partnership Conference
on Water (PANAFCON). Presented in Addis Ababa, 8–13
December, 2003. UN Water/Africa and AMCOW.
http://www.uneca.org/eca_resources/publications/sdd/
panafcon%20outcomes.pdf
––––. 2008. Status Report on Integrated Water Resources
Management and Water Efficiency Plans. UN-Water.
http://www.unwater.org/downloads/UNW_Status_Report_
IWRM.pdf
US Census Bureau. n.d. Population Proﬁle of the United
States. http://www.census.gov/population/www/popproﬁle/natproj.html (Accessed 31 March 2011).

WWDR4

United States Senate. 2011. Avoiding Water Wars: Water
Scarcity and Central Asia’s Growing Importance for Stability
in Afghanistan and Pakistan. A report prepared for the
use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States
Senate. Washington DC, US Government Printing Office.
Valenzuela, S. and Jouravlev, A. 2007. Servicios urbanos
de agua potable y alcantarillado en Chile: factores
determinantes del desempeño. LC/L.2727-P. Santiago,
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/0/28650/lcl2727e.pdf
Waterwiki.net. 2009. Facing Water Challenges in Istanbul.
http://waterwiki.net/index.php/Facing_Water_Challenges_
in_Istanbul (accessed 7 May 2011).
WHO (World Health Organization)/UNICEF (United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-water: 2010 Update. Joint Monitoring Programme
for Water Supply and Sanitation. Geneva/New York, WHO/
UNICEF. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
publications/9789241563956/en/index.html
Woertz, E. 2009. Gulf food security needs delicate
diplomacy. Financial Times, 4 March. http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/d916f8e2-08d8-11de-b8b0-0000779fd2ac.
html#axzz1BJ6wr0YH
World Bank. 2009. Assessment of Restrictions on Palestinian
Water Sector Development: West Bank and Gaza. Report
No. 47657-GZ, Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://pwa.ps/Portals/_PWA/08da47ac-f807-466f-a480073fb23b53b6.pdf
Wunder, Sven. 2005. Payments for Environmental Services:
Some Nuts and Bolts . Center for International Forestry
Research (CIFOR) Occasional Paper No. 42, Bogor Barat,
Indonesia, CIFOR. http://www.cifor.cgiar.org/publications/
pdf_ﬁles/OccPapers/OP-42.pdf
Yessekin, B. et al. 2006. Implementing the UN Millennium
Development Goals in Central Asia and the South Caucasus:
Goal 7: Ensure Environmental Sustainability, Conserving
Ecosystems of Inland Water Bodies in Central Asia and
the South Caucasus. Almaty, Kazakhstan and Tashkent,
Uzbekistan, The Central Asian Regional Ecological Center
and the Global Water Partnership for Central Asia and
Caucasus. http://www.cawater-info.net/library/eng/gwp/
ecosystem_e.pdf.
You, L. Z. 2008. Irrigation Investment Needs in Sub-Saharan
Africa. Background Paper 9, Africa Infrastructure Country
Diagnostic. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Young, C., Jacobi, S. and Andah, K. 2009. Deriving Optimal
Information from Inadequate Data Collection Networks for
Water Allocation in Ghana. Proceedings of a Symposium
held on the island of Capri, Italy on 13–16 October, 2008,
under the auspices of the International Association of
Hydrological Sciences (IAHS) and UNESCO.
Zawya. 2011. MARAFIQ - Yanbu Power and Desalination Plant
- Phase 2. Projects Monitor, 29 April.
Zimmer, D. and Renault, D. n.d Virtual Water in Food
Production and Global Trade: Review of Methodological
Issues and Preliminary Results. Rome, FAO Water.

REGIONAL CHALLENGES, GLOBAL IMPACTS

227

PART 2

Introduction
8.

Working under uncertainty and managing risk

9.

Understanding uncertainty and risks associated with key drivers

10. Unvalued water leads to an uncertain future
11. Transforming water management institutions to deal with change
12. Investment and ﬁnancing in water for a more sustainable future
13. Responses to risk and uncertainty from a water management
perspective
14. Responses to risks and uncertainties from out of the water box

Managing Water
under Uncertainty
and Risk
—

© Philippe Bourseiller

INTRODUCTION

—
Author Daniel P. Loucks

© Philippe Bourseiller

Acting in an environment of uncertain
change
The world is undergoing considerable change. Political
and social systems are transforming in ways that are
not always predictable, producing a variety of impacts.
Technology is evolving and living standards, consumption patterns and life expectancies are all changing. Human populations are growing and increasingly
moving to expanding urban areas while agriculture is
expanding to feed them. Consequently, land use and
cover is altering, as is the climate. The rates at which
these changes occur are in many cases increasing,
while their long-term impacts often remain uncertain.
Discontinuities are possible and tipping points can exist beyond which change is irreversible. These changes
can impact regional water cycles in ways that alter the
quality, distribution and quantity of freshwater supply
and demand.
Changes in daily lives, lifestyles, technology and environment will likely continue at an accelerated rate.
Each day can bring new risks, uncertainties and opportunities. Humans experience more stress when expected to accomplish more of everything faster, more
efficiently and with fewer resources. Change is a fact
of life for everyone and everything that lives. Seasons
change, people change, goals and emotions change,
businesses change, and in part because of changing
lifestyles and technology, so does the supply and quality of water available to meet the demands that result
from these changes (see, for example, Jackson et al.,
2001; Kates and Clark, 1996; Marien, 2002; Ostrom,
1990; Tansey and O’Riordan, 1999).
How can water managers plan for and adapt to increasingly uncertain future water resource conditions? How
can water users plan for and adapt to the uncertainty
of future water supply and quality? How can the people
who create, regulate and adapt governance structures
from local to global levels, within which we all operate
and interact, meet the needs of all users living now and
those who will live in the future? This includes the needs
of our environment and the underprivileged and voiceless. How can society work together to increase levels
of sustainability given uncertain future change (Vincent,
2007; Watkins and McKinney, 1997)?
Adapting to change presents an opportunity. What
has happened in the past cannot be changed, but
the future can be inﬂuenced by the decisions being
made now. Water is a primary medium through which

WWDR4

changes in human activity and the climate interact
with the Earth’s surface, its ecosystems and its people.
It is through water and its quality that people will feel
the impact of change most strongly. Without proper
adaptation or planning for change, hundreds of millions of people will be at greater risk of hunger, poor
health, energy shortage and poverty, water scarcity
and pollution, and/or ﬂooding (Anderies et al., 2004;
Folke et al., 2002; Ganoulis, 2004; Holling et al., 2002;
Lu, 2009; NRC, 1983; Pahl-Wostl et al., 2007).
Many people are concerned about the environment,
but most tend not to take or advocate environmental
action. Often the costs of possible remedial actions are
deemed to be near term, whereas the beneﬁts can be
perceived to be further in the future. Another reason
for inaction is uncertainty in determining the relative
merits of different actions. Effective public policymaking requires that professionals work to clearly
communicate the uncertainties surrounding alternative futures, how those uncertainties can be reduced,
and which actions can provide the best assurance of
desired outcomes in the face of those uncertainties
(Cabinet Office Strategy Unit, 2002).
Uncertainty about the future is not an excuse for inaction. Decisions on water infrastructure investments,
operation and management need to be made in the
near term if beneﬁts are to be obtained in the long
term, that is, in the future. Waiting decades for more
precise knowledge is not a feasible or acceptable excuse for inaction. Decisions regarding water infrastructure investments and operation are needed before the
beneﬁts of their services can be obtained, and hence
such decisions will undoubtedly be based on uncertain data and assumptions. Exact knowledge about
futures will never be available. All who impact water availability, how it is managed, and how it is used,
even indirectly, need to make decisions based on nonprecise information available at that time (Cosgrove
and Rijsberman, 2000; Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1990;
Morgan and Henrion, 1990).
Increased interaction among the interested public
and scientists and policy-makers enables improvement in decision-making processes. This interaction
needs to question and expand the range of policies that are proposed, debated and implemented.
Participants need to help inform policy-makers and
the public, and the public needs to make inaction
unacceptable. Stakeholders can offer new ideas for

INTRODUCTION

231

political debate about how society and nature can
be organized. They can test and explore all ideas to
assess their relative merits. All stakeholders should
visualize alternative futures, develop alternative policies for meeting the futures they like, and assess
their likely impacts and uncertainties (NRC, 1996;
Wildavsky and Dake, 1990).

đƫ Manage existing and build and operate new water

What is known now or what can be assumed now? It is
important to:

‘Impacts thinking’ relies on the ability to predict the
impacts of decisions. Current practice places great
faith in the ability of analysts to predict the speciﬁc impacts of alternative decisions, which drive, or at least
inﬂuence, change adaptation activities. This is reactive
‘impacts thinking’; the problem is that the assumptions
made and the impact topics selected by analysts can
be too narrow, and are often uncertain. This is reﬂected in the estimated impacts or outcomes. ‘Adaptation
thinking’ acknowledges the inherent uncertainty associated with model-based impact predictions and treats
economic, social and ecosystems as dynamic entities
that will likely differ from current and past states for
multiple reasons. This approach promotes ﬂexibility
and continuous scenario development and analyses
(Alcamo et al., 2000; van Notten, 2005).

đƫ Recognize that decision-makers in governments, the
private sector and civil society, and all of us individually, deal with multiple issues involving risk and uncertainty. Particular decisions may or may not have
been inﬂuenced by considerations of water, even
though they may have an impact on water.
đƫ Be aware of and understand the broader picture
and what is happening in other sectors of the
economy and society, so as to help inform the
people making decisions in those sectors of their
impacts on water, and of the impacts of water on
them. Coordinated and synergistic management in
related domains improves overall outcomes. After
all, these sectors and domains are subject to the
same or similar uncertainties that challenge water
managers and users, and are continually engaging
in risk management.
đƫ Accept that change will continue into the future,
and that much of it is largely beyond society’s
control. Consequently, approaches to water
management should be adaptive, responsive and
anticipatory.
đƫ Approach sustainable water management as a journey along an adaptation pathway, rather than an
arrival at a destination.
đƫ Favour adaptation decisions that are robust to
uncertainty in economic, social and ecosystem
domains.
đƫ Track emerging patterns and associated responses
by strengthening monitoring networks and freshwater indicators.
đƫ Shift from ‘impacts thinking’ to ‘adaptation thinking’,
and adopt strategies that have a good chance of resulting in minimal, if any, regrets.
đƫ Build change adaptation into all hierarchies of water
resources management, from national to river basin
and local actions.
đƫ Secure environmental ﬂows as one of the core objectives of water resources management to achieve
balanced beneﬁts for all.

232

infrastructures in climate-smart ways.
đƫ Include ‘natural infrastructures’ (e.g. wetlands,
ﬂoodplains) in response options and employ them
wherever feasible.
đƫ Improve freshwater ecosystem connectivity and
integrity.

Uncertainty constrains our ability to precisely qualify
and quantify the risks associated with different management actions. The precautionary principle suggests that the greater the uncertainty (i.e. the less our
capacity to precisely deﬁne or quantify risk) and the
more catastrophic the possible outcome, the more
cautious and ‘reversible’ the management actions
should be (UNESCO, 2005). Although future research
may help reduce some uncertainties, it may also uncover new uncertainties, which in fact increases our
knowledge about what is uncertain and perhaps the
range of that uncertainty. Uncertainty impairs future
projections, and some of this uncertainty includes lack
of conﬁdence about what is uncertain. Surprises and
unpredictable shifts in societal goals and needs are
by their nature uncertain and as such cannot be
accurately predicted.
Water planners, managers and users, and anyone who
in any way impacts on the quantity, quality, distribution and use of water, can actively address uncertainty. Not all uncertainties can be reduced by
further research, and even where reduction is possible it comes at a cost. Science can help articulate
where and how to reduce uncertainty and under what
conditions it cannot be reduced. There are limits to

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

scientiﬁc knowledge and the role of scientists in
decision-making.
The need to consider risk and uncertainty was acknowledged in the closing chapter of the third edition of the World Water Development Report (WWAP,
2009), with an emphasis on the consequences of
inaction. Risk and uncertainty have long been a routine challenge for people managing and using water
across all economic sectors and regions of the world.
What is new is the recognition of the nonstationarity of hydrological processes, brought on by climate
change, accelerated and unpredictable societal and
economic development, and demographic dynamics (Koutsoyiannis, 2006; Milly et al., 2008). This has
increased uncertainty and the associated risks, and
made the task of risk management more complex and
integral to decision-making.
Part 1 describes the national and global challenges of
meeting planetary socio-economic objectives. What
futures are possible? This second part of this report
discusses the concepts and consequences of making
decisions under risk and uncertainty, and how these
can be factored into the decision-making process that
impacts water resources. Water, being an input to all
economic activities and life itself, is impacted by decisions made in a wide range of sectors or domains,
themselves often having no direct involvement with
water. Decision-makers also face multiple risks and
uncertainties. Decisions are made and risk is managed
in different ways in each sector or domain. Providing
decision-makers with tools that show the broader
water resource consequences of various decisions
(actions, inaction) can substantially contribute to
better overall resource management and reduced
threats and adverse impacts (Bier et al., 1999).
Given uncertain future climates and land-use changes
that alter water ﬂows and storage, water managers are
now asking: What level of protection is provided by
the particular design of a levee or ﬂood storage capacity in a reservoir? What protection against droughts
is provided by speciﬁed active storage capacities in
reservoirs together with particular operating policies?
Exactly where is the 100-year ﬂoodplain boundary
for the purposes of ﬂoodplain land-use zoning, and
possibly insurance? Those responsible for making or
inﬂuencing policy and investments are asking: Which
among the various priorities are the most important
if trade-offs become necessary? What measures can

WWDR4

be taken to reduce risks? How much uncertainty can
be incorporated into decisions, taking into account climate change and plausible social, economic, ﬁnancial,
cultural and environmental futures?
Part 2 discusses ways of analysing and responding to
some of the challenges and risks. It concludes with
examples of how both water management and socioeconomic policy are already being used to address uncertainty and associated risks.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Alcamo, J., Henrichs, T. and Röschm, T. 2000. World Water
in 2025: Global modeling and scenario analysis for the
World Commission on Water for the 21st Century. University
of Kassel, Germany, Center for Environmental Systems
Research.
Anderies, J. M., Janssen, M. A. and Ostrom, E. 2004. A
framework to analyze the robustness of social-ecological
systems from an institutional perspective. Ecology and
Society, Vol. 9, No. 1, p. 18.
Bier, V. M., Haimes, Y. Y., Lambert, J. H., Matalas, N. C. and
Zimmerman, R. 1999. A survey of approaches for assessing
and managing the risk of extremes. Risk Analysis, Vol. 19,
No. 1, pp. 83–94.
Cabinet Office Strategy Unit. 2002. Risk: Improving
Government’s Capability to Handle Risk and Uncertainty.
London, HM Government Cabinet Office Strategy Unit.
http://www.strategy.gov.uk/2002/risk/risk/home.html
Cosgrove, W. and Rijsberman, F. 2000. World Water Vision:
Making Water Everybody’s Business. London, Earthscan.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling,
C. S. and Walker, B. 2002. Resilience and sustainable
development: building adaptive capacity in a world
of transformations. AMBIO: A Journal of the Human
Environment, Vol. 31, No. 5, pp. 437–40.
Funtowicz, S. O. and Ravetz, J. R. 1990. Uncertainty and
Quality in Science for Policy. Dordrecht, The Netherlands,
Kluwer.
Ganoulis, J. 2004. Integrated risk analysis for sustainable
water resources management. I. Linkov and A. B. Ramadan
(eds) Comparative Risk Assessment and Environmental
Decision Making. (NATO Science Series 38). Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, Springer.
Holling, C. C., Gunderson, L. and Ludwig, D. 2002. In quest
of a theory of adaptive change. L.H. Gunderson and C.S.
Holling (eds) Panarchy: Understanding Transformations
in Human and Natural Systems. Washington DC, Island
Press, pp. 3–22. http://www.resilience.osu.edu/CFR-site/
enterpriseresilience.htm

INTRODUCTION

233

Jackson, R. B., Carpenter, S. R., Dahm, C. N., McKnight, D. M.,
Naiman, R. J., Postel, S. L. and Running, S. W. 2001. Water
in a changing world. Ecological Applications, Vol. 11, No. 4,
pp. 1027–45.

Pahl-Wostl, C., Sendzimir, J., Jeffrey, P., Aerts, J., Berkamp,
G. and Cross. K. 2007. Managing change toward adaptive
water management through social learning. Ecology and
Society, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 30.

Kates, R. W. and Clark, W. C. 1996. Environmental surprise:
expecting the unexpected. Environment, Vol. 38, No. 2, pp.
6–11, 28–34.

Tansey, J. and O’Riordan, T. 1999. Cultural theory and risk: a
review. Health, Risk and Society, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 71–90.

Koutsoyiannis, D. 2006. Nonstationarity versus scaling in
hydrology. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 324, pp. 239–54.
Lu, Z. 2009. Applying Climate Information for Adaptation
Decision-Making: A Guidance and Resource Document.
New York, National Communications Support Programme.
Marien, M. 2002. Futures studies in the 21st century: a realitybased view. Futures, Vol. 34, pp. 261–81.
Milly, P. C. D., Betancourt, J., Falkenmark, M., Hirsch, R. M.,
Kundzewicz, Z. W., Lettenmaier, D. P. and Stouffer, R. J.
2008. Stationarity is dead: whither water management?
Science, Vol. 319, No. 5863, pp. 573–74.
Morgan, M. G. and Henrion, M. 1990. Uncertainty: A Guide to
Dealing with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy
Analysis. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
NRC (National Research Council). 1983. Risk Assessment
in the Federal Government: Managing the Process.
Washington DC, National Academies Press.
––––. 1996. Understanding Risk: Informing Decisions in a
Democratic Society. Washington DC, National Academies
Press.

UNESCO (United Nations Economic, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization). 2005. The Precautionary Principle. Paris,
UNESCO World Commission on the Ethics of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge (COMEST).
van Notten, P. W.F . 2005. Writing on the Wall: Scenario
Development in Times of Discontinuity. Boca Raton, FL,
Dissertation.com.
Vincent, K. 2007. Uncertainty in adaptive capacity and
importance of scale. Global Environmental Change,
Vol. 17, pp. 12–24.
Watkins, D. W. and McKinney, D. C. 1997. Finding robust
solutions to water resources problems. Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management, Vol. 123, No. 1, pp.
49–58.
Wildavsky, A. and Dake, K. 1990. Theories of risk perception:
who fears what and why? Daedalus, Vol. 119, No. 4, pp.
41–60.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.

Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: the Evolution of
Institutions for Collective Action. New York, Cambridge
University Press.

234

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 8
Working under uncertainty
and managing risk

—
Authors David Coates, Daniel P. Loucks, Jeroen Aerts and Susan van ‘t Klooster
Contributors Uri Shamir and William J. Cosgrove

© Philippe Bourseiller

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Water managers and users are accustomed to working with – and making decisions under
conditions of – risk and uncertainty. The predictability of water supplies derived from
watersheds depends in part on nature, but precipitation, which typically becomes stream
or river ﬂow or inﬁltrates into a groundwater aquifer, is variable in character. The demands
of water users can also vary and depend on uncertain population size and distribution, as
well as on unpredictable weather and changing social and economic conditions. Costs and
beneﬁts of water treatment, distribution and use are always subject to uncertain market (and
other) conditions. Technologies evolve and can offer new solutions, some as yet unknown
or unimagined. Communities, corporations and irrigators, to mention a few users whose
economic and social welfare depend on reliable supplies and qualities of water, have hedged
their exposure to possible shortages and pollution, even prior to awareness that such
uncertainties and risks are increasing due to changes in climate, population increases, lifestyle
shifts and watershed conditions.
Water is vital for the production of almost everything. An average car tyre requires about
2 m3 of water to manufacture; a ton of steel calls for 237 m3; an egg requires about 0.5 m3;
and a single 200 mm semiconductor that powers a computer requires 28 m3 of ultrapure
water. As ‘water footprints’ grow, individuals, companies and entire cities will need to face the
threat that there may soon not be sufficient water to meet all demands, both off and within
watercourses (Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2008).
Some people may feel that water scarcity is not yet a cause for concern; after all, the world
is covered with water. However, 97.5% of the planet’s water is saltwater. The remaining 2.5%,
of which only a fraction is accessible surface or groundwater, is used for essential functions,
such as sustaining life, growing food, supporting various economic activities and ecological
processes, producing energy, transporting cargo and assimilating wastes (Kumma et al.,
2010; Palmer et al., 2008; UN-Water, 2006).
Uncertainties are exacerbated by the paucity or complete lack of reliable data on both supply
and demand. In any region, no one can predict when and to what extent droughts or ﬂoods
will occur. Both droughts and ﬂoods provide the potential for damage, in other words, risks;
both create uncertainties regarding what action to take and when (Berstein, 1998; Brugnach
et al., 2008; Giles, 2002; Hoffmann-Riem and Wynne, 2002; Kasperson et al., 2003; Rayner,
1992; Slovic et al., 2004; Tversky and Kahneman, 1974).

8.1 Concepts of uncertainty and risk
8.1.1 Some deﬁnitions
Risk commonly refers to an adverse event or the consequence of a decision. (see Section 8.1.2; see also
Aven, 2003; Bedfore and Cooke, 2001; Cooke, 2009;
Covello and Mumpower, 2001; Kaplan and Garrick, 1981;
Kasperson et al., 1988; Mays, 1996; Slovic, 1992; Yoe, 1996).
Uncertainty is often used in connection with the term
risk (sometimes even interchangeably). The most
widely held meaning of uncertainty refers to a state
of mind characterized by doubt, based on a lack of
knowledge about what currently exists or what will or
will not happen in the future. It is the opposite of certainty, which is a conviction about a particular situation
(Bogardi and Kundzewicz, 2002; Morgan and Henrion,
1990; Pindyk, 2007).
Conﬁdence level or interval applies to a population
sampling, where variation or differences of opinion exist. Suppose a study needed to ascertain the percentage
of homeowners on a ﬂoodplain who believe they will be
safe from ﬂoods for the next 10 years, or the percentage
of simulated ﬂoodplain development scenarios in which
no ﬂood occurred over a 10-year period. Depending in
part on the sample size compared to the population
size, that is, the number of people who could have been
asked that question or the number of scenarios that
could be simulated, a conﬁdence level and interval can
be determined. If the results in both cases were 85%,
the results might be stated as ‘We are 95% conﬁdent
that 85% of those living on the ﬂoodplain think they will
be able to avoid any ﬂood damage in the next 10 years,
with a margin of error of plus or minus 3%.’ In other
words one can be 95% sure that between 82 and 88% of
the population believe they will stay dry over that tenyear period (Berger, 1985; Coles, 2001).

have the water they need or want, or freedom from
water hazards (i.e. ﬂoods or droughts or pollution). No
one can fully depend on the recreational use of water
in storage or in rivers or streams. No one dependent
on hydropower can be assured of its reliable supply. In
fact, nobody dependent on any energy type can be
assured of its reliable supply, in part because of the
uncertainty of needed water. This is the rationale behind the balanced development of water and energy
options.
Knowledge in dealing with risks and uncertainties often comes from past experiences, observations and
records. However, these are no longer adequate indicators of the risks and uncertainties faced by future
water planners, managers, users and policy-makers,
due to uncertainties generated by future changes in
population growth and spatial distribution, water consumption patterns, socio-economic development, and
climate variability and change. It is therefore crucial
to understand the sources of uncertainty and learn
how to analyse, internalize and cope with the risks that
arise due to these uncertainties.
8.1.3 Understanding sources and types of uncertainty
Uncertainty can result from variability of an underlying process or incomplete knowledge of that process.
Decision-makers are often required to make decisions,
sometimes having considerable consequences and involving considerable expenditures of money, without
knowing with adequate certainty the extent of those
possible consequences and expenditures (Knight, 1921).
Sources of uncertainty related to water systems and
their management include lack of data or random and
systematic errors in data acquisition, recording and
storage, inability to predict future processes that determine future supply and demand, and uncertainty
about the various natural or physical processes of the
water cycle.

8.1.2 Risk and uncertainty in water
It is impossible to fully predict how well any water resource system will perform in the future. Such systems are subject to changing and uncertain inputs, and
serve changing and uncertain demands. Risk and uncertainty characterize much of what water managers
and socio-economic policy-makers must deal with. The
more they understand these uncertainties and risks,
the more effectively they can plan, design and manage
water systems to reduce them.

Another source of uncertainty is social uncertainty.
Human behaviour is unpredictable and, therefore, the
behaviour of individuals, society and its institutions
is also uncertain, as is, for example, market behaviour.
Technical innovations, their perception and use, and
their impact on our environment are also often unpredictable, and thus uncertain.

Those who depend on water supplies or services provided by water cannot be certain that they will always

Uncertainty about the value of empirical quantities can
also arise from imprecise use of language describing

WWDR4

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

237

“Risk perception and
tolerance depend on
a person’s likelihood
of harm, control
over harm, extent
of harm or hazard,
voluntariness of
exposure to possible
harm, and trust in
the sources of risk
information.”
information, and disagreement among different experts about how to interpret available evidence.
Finally, there is ignorance. Some aspects of hydrological systems are still not understood and some of these
aspects are even unknown, so the question of what
is not understood is itself not well understood. This
makes it hard even to ask the right questions. These
are the ‘unknown unknowns’. Things we know we do
not know may often be addressed and sometimes better understood through research. Things that we do
not even recognize we do not know are only revealed
by adopting an always-questioning attitude towards
what we hear and see and measure and analyse
(Walker et al., 2003).
8.1.4 Estimating the extent and duration of
uncertainty
Changes in populations and their distribution on Earth,
their lifestyles and their institutions, together with
changes in the climate will undoubtedly change the
water environment over the coming decades and centuries. The question is how. Uncertainties of supply
and demand both in the short and long term will likely
remain. While observations and analyses can reduce
these uncertainties, in most cases, no single piece of
evidence or experimental result can provide deﬁnitive

238

CHAPTER 8

answers to eliminate these uncertainties. In fact just
the opposite is likely to happen over time. Decisionmakers, planners responsible for making recommendations to decision-makers, and researchers predicting
the likely future impacts of possible decisions are facing
increasing uncertainties the further one looks into the
future. Nevertheless, everyone making decisions that
will impact future events needs informed judgments
about plausible futures, even though they are uncertain. Probabilistic estimates of key quantities can all be
useful to planning and assessment activities, such as
the various extents to which it is drier or wetter or hotter or colder than usual due to the increase of atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases; or estimates
of the various heights of sea level rise as the average
temperature of the Earth increases; or of various increases in demands for food in response to population
and lifestyle changes, which in turn will impact demands
for irrigation water and water use efficiency. Analysts
seek to incorporate probabilistic descriptions into their
models and analyses, usually by performing multiple
simulations on fast computers, each simulation using a
different input scenario or set of assumptions about the
design and/or operation of the system being simulated.
The results of these analyses can be presented along
with their probabilities. Designs or policies that yield results acceptable to stakeholders across a wide range of
model inputs are considered robust to changes in future
conditions. Some of the tools used to identify such policies are described later in this chapter.
8.1.5 Understanding risk
Risk and its various descriptions are highly inﬂuenced by
individual and social perceptions. Risk perception and
tolerance depend on a person’s likelihood of harm, control over harm, extent of harm or hazard, voluntariness
of exposure to possible harm, and trust in the sources of
risk information. As risk perceptions can affect collective
and individual choices, decisions may beneﬁt from making risk more explicit. Examples of current water-related
risks are water scarcity, quality degradation, loss of ecosystem services and extreme hazardous events, which
in turn may be inﬂuenced by socio-economic developments and decisions (Ganoulis, 1994).
Awareness of risks and the importance placed on them
depends in part on time horizons. This is an issue for
climate change, because changes are expected to
occur over decades rather than years. Society has a
problem with deciding what to do about events whose
probabilities of occurring are very low but will provoke

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

severe consequences if they do happen, such as the
collapse of a dam or the occurrence of a one-in-athousand-year ﬂood or a catastrophic water-related
epidemic. These problems have given rise to criteria
like the precautionary principle and the concept of
safe minimum standards, which will be discussed later.
However, concern for the extreme consequences of
low probability events to the exclusion of dealing with
much more common variations with much higher
probabilities is not desirable.
8.1.6 Model uncertainty
Any model of a social or natural system is a simpliﬁed
approximation of that system. Models are used to better understand such systems and estimate the possible
impacts of various decisions affecting those systems.
In general, the most preferred and useful model is the
most simple and understandable one that provides
the needed or desired information with the needed
or desired accuracy. The choice of model used for any
analysis will depend in part on the available scientiﬁc knowledge and data, and the intended use of the
model output. In this sense, the choice of a model is
subjective and pragmatic.
Uncertainty about the functional form of (the assumptions built into) a model can arise just as can uncertainty about the quality of its input data. Both can lead
to disagreements among different experts about how
to interpret the model output. A fundamental problem
and potential source of uncertainty is that the people
who perform analyses are often not clear about the
objectives and decision rules that they should assume
and incorporate within their models. In such cases it
makes sense for model operators to provide a range of
options to the stakeholders and decision-makers, each
representing a different mix of various objectives.
8.1.7 Thresholds and tipping points
The term ‘tipping point’ commonly refers to a critical threshold at which a relatively small perturbation
can qualitatively alter, perhaps irreversibly, the state
or development of a system (Brugnach et al., 2003;
Gladwell, 2000; Lenton et al., 2008; Keller et al., 2008;
Walker and Meyers, 2004). Tipping points related to
changes in Atlantic thermohaline circulations, the dieback and loss of Amazon rainforest, and the melting of
the Greenland ice sheet have received recent attention
in the press. In each case, scientists believe that there
is a chance that the gradual changes that take place in

WWDR4

the state of these systems over time will at some point
in the processes become irreversible. This can have
long-term consequences for those systems.
The deﬁnition of tipping point could in principle be applied in other situations at any time, for example, decisions made with respect to governance of countries, or
with respect to military actions. More common examples of tipping points apply to structures made by
engineers. Metal fatigue is a well-known phenomenon,
associated with aircraft. With increased use aircraft
begin to exhibit cracks in the wing and tail structures.
Periodic inspections provide a way to monitor these
cracks and prevent them from reaching a tipping point,
which can result in entire wing failure or control failure
due to loss of tail components.

BOX 8.1
Dutch Delta Approach

In 2007, the government of the Netherlands implemented
a study of the impacts of sea level rise as a result of expected climate change in combination with land subsidence, urbanization and increasing peak discharges of
major rivers. Their goal was to determine how best to
make the country resilient to worst-case climate change
conditions. Problems surrounding the upkeep of long-term
livelihoods in fragile deltas under climate change, urbanization and land subsidence are universal, but strategies to
cope with them require tailoring to local circumstances.
The national Delta Commission oversaw the study, members of which included renowned scientists (not only in the
ﬁeld of water, but also food, spatial planning and climate),
as well as representatives from the ﬁnance sector and private contractors. All interests were represented. Their tasks
included exploring where present policies are inadequate
to cope with worst case (climate) change, identifying what
and when ‘tipping points’ may apply, that is, the point at
which certain policies or measures become technically
impossible, ﬁnancially unaffordable or socially unacceptable; developing a future vision about where Delta people would wish to live in 2100; deriving strategies starting from the tipping points for how to realize the desired
vision or move towards it; ensuring ﬂexibility to be able
to adjust to slower or faster changes or changed values of
future generations, starting with no-regret measures; and
ensuring long-term implementation through a Delta Fund,
a Delta Commissioner and a Delta Law. Within three years
the Dutch Government had a vision to make the country
climate resilient, passed a Delta Law in Parliament, created
a Delta Fund, appointed a Delta Commissioner and agreed
on a Delta Implementation Plan.
Source: Policy Research Corporation (2009).

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

239

Box 8.1 refers to tipping points that some may consider
as ‘branching points’ in scenarios. They would argue
these branching points or decision points are not tipping points in a strict scientiﬁc sense.

perfect knowledge of complex systems, which would
permit the credible calculation of probabilities of various outcomes, rarely exists. Likewise, the full range of
potential outcomes is usually not known.

8.1.8 Nonstationarity
Water resources management, water infrastructure
planning and design rely on an understanding of the
water cycle and hydraulics as they apply to particular
sites. For the purposes of planning and design, engineers have typically assumed that the hydrological
processes in a particular watershed or basin could be
described by probability distributions that were not
changing over time; that is, the historical statistical
characteristics of those processes were assumed essentially constant over time, or stationary. The more
these extreme events happen due to changes in the
Earth’s climate or from unpredictable human behaviour, the more challenging it is to plan and manage
water. The question is how best to include these nonstationarity considerations of both water supply and
demand in water planning and management. Because
of this, water resources planners and managers must
apply a signiﬁcant amount of judgment in their analyses, due to changes in land use, urbanization, and the
impacts of a changing climate that inﬂuence future
precipitation, evaporation, groundwater inﬁltration,
surface runoff and channel ﬂow (Aerts et al., 2011;
Block and Brown, 2009; Folke et al., 2004; Hamilton
and Keim, 2009; Holling, 1986).

Reliability indicates the probability of one or more
performance indicator values being considered satisfactory. The concept depends on a threshold value
that separates satisfactory and unsatisfactory values
of each indicator or measure of performance. There
can be various levels of reliability associated with
multiple threshold levels (Duckstein and Parent, 1994;
Hashimoto et al., 1982; Plate and Duckstein, 1988).

The more these extreme events happen due to changes in the Earth’s climate or from unpredictable human
behaviour, the more challenging it is to plan and manage water. Understanding the changes taking place
in river and aquifer systems constitutes an important
challenge for water managers. The question is how
best to include these nonstationarity considerations of
both water supply and demand in water planning and
management.

Surprise occurs when there is an abrupt or discontinuous change in a physical or socio-economic system
that is unexpected.

8.1.9 Other key concepts
Lack of knowing what is unknown is an extreme state
of uncertainty. Many of the deﬁning events, technological developments and scientiﬁc discoveries of recent
times were unknowable and even unimaginable a few
decades ago.
Indeterminacy is the uncertainty that comes from
not fully understanding the performance characteristics of complex systems. It arises because complete or

240

CHAPTER 8

Robustness indicates how well a system performs over
a range of possible input scenarios pertaining to what
is uncertain (Hashimoto et al., 1982).
Resilience is a measure of the ability to adapt to changes and recover from disturbances, while providing options for future developments (Fiering, 1982, Hashimoto
et al., 1982; Holling, 1973; Walker et al., 2004).
Regret is a measure of an unsatisfactory state resulting from a decision. Systems can be designed and operated to minimize the maximum (worst) regret that
could occur or maximize the minimum (worst) level of
performance. Both minimax and maximin objectives
attempt to reduce the most extreme risks or consequences of failure.

Vulnerability is an important measure, along with reliability, associated with any performance indicator. Its
various forms (expected, maximum, conﬁdence level)
indicate the consequences of a failure, should a failure
occur (Hashimoto et al., 1982; Heltberg et al., 2009).

8.2 How uncertainty and risk affect
decision-making
It is common for decision-makers dealing with water to
have to make choices without knowing with certainty
the outcome of their decisions. This uncertainty of outcome and the decision-makers’ attitudes towards risk
invariably impact their decisions (Walker et al., 2003).
For example, a farmer must make planting decisions
without knowing how much rain will be available, and

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

its distribution over the growing season. The outcome
of his planting decisions will be unknown until the time
of harvest. Alternatively, an expanding ﬁrm wants to
construct a new building and must choose a location. New Orleans is a location which poses signiﬁcant rewards, but the company is uncertain if weather
(e.g. hurricanes) will strike and result in a large loss.
In another example, the price a potential homeowner
is willing to pay for a house may depend on the risk
of it being ﬂooded. Whether the house is going to be
ﬂooded is uncertain, but if it is built on a ﬂoodplain the
risk exists. That risk may be mitigated in part by ﬂoodprooﬁng or by purchasing ﬂood insurance to recover
the economic loss.
The decisions people make under uncertainty also depend on their attitude towards risk. For example, if a
mayor of a town is face with the choice of increasing
the level of protection of a levee, which could reduce
ﬂood damage considerably, or spending that money on
road maintenance, that mayor must consider the likelihood of a ﬂood occurrence as opposed to generating,
perhaps, more immediate and continuing public appreciation and support by improving the condition of the
town’s roads. If the mayor opts for road maintenance
and a ﬂood does occur, resulting in damage, public appreciation and support will disappear. If the mayor is

BOX 8.2
Queensland, Australia, warned of ﬂoodplain risks

The interim ﬂood inquiry report into the January 2011 statewide ﬂooding disasters, entitled Understanding Floods:
Questions and Answers, by the Queensland Floods Science,
Engineering and Technical Panel, calls for a new test of
what constitutes appropriate development. The report says
that ﬂood-risk planning should consider ‘a combination of
the chance of a ﬂood occurring and the consequences of
the ﬂood for people, property and infrastructure’.
‘It is estimated that ﬂooding so far this year (August, 2011)
has caused AUS$2 billion damage to local government
infrastructure in Queensland, with total damage to public
infrastructure likely to reach AUS$6 billion. Damage to the
Australian economy from ﬂooding, in New South Wales
and Victoria will top AUS$30 billion. … There were 37
deaths, 35 in this state.’ This shows that ﬂooding of some
locations may have signiﬁcant economic and social consequences for a much wider region.

Source: Hoffman (2011).

WWDR4

risk averse, even though the probability of a ﬂood may
be low, he or she may not wish to take the risk of incurring a large loss and lose public support, as a result of
lack of adequate ﬂood protection (see Box 8.2).
Different people perceive risk differently, depending
on the context or environment in which the decisions
are made. Managers do not always consider the risks
as inherent to the situation, and avoid accepting risk
by considering it as subject to control. Many believe
that by using their skills they can reduce risk. Others
rely more on their subjective judgments than on mathematically based analyses. The more catastrophic the
consequences of making the wrong decision, the less
likely managers will make decisions that accept risks
explicitly.
When faced with a problem or decision that involves
risk, managers can either accept the risk or attempt to
reduce it before making the decision. Ways of reducing risk include conducting further analyses and collecting more information. In some cases, such as for
hedging against incurring ﬂood damage, it might be
possible to buy insurance. This transfers some of the
risk to a third party, reducing the consequences of a
risk. It might also be possible to carry out pilot studies before making major infrastructure decisions, for
example, advanced desalination or wastewater treatment technology, or letting the supplier take part of
the risk and making this clear in the purchase contract.
Finally, the decision once made can include provisions
for future modiﬁcations, if possible, or if not it should
be sufficiently robust for a range of future conditions
(Alerts et al., 2008; Burton, 1996; Callaway et al., 2008;
Dessai and van der Sluijs, 2007; DETR, 2000; Elshayeb,
2005; Liu et al., 2000; Lofstedt, 2003; Miller and Yates,
2006; NRC, 2000; UNDP, 2004; van Aalst et al., 2007;
UNDRO, 1991).
8.2.1 Approaches to inform decision-making under
risk and uncertainty
When sufficient information is available to determine
probabilities of decision outcomes and evaluate the
consequences, decision-making can be based on risk
analysis. Decision-making may be assisted by the use
of a wide variety of analytical tools and techniques,
varying from the simple to the sophisticated (Downing
et al., 1999; Frederick et al., 1997; Green et al., 2000;
Hobbs, 1997; Karamouz et al., 2003; Li et al., 2009;
Loucks and van Beek, 2005; NOAA, 2009; Simonovic,
2008; Willows and Connell, 2003). The result is either

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

241

BOX 8.3
US Corps of Engineering risk analysis

Risk analysis has been used and is applicable to a wide range
of decision problems within the US Army Corps of Engineers.
Risk analysis is not only for extreme or low-probability events,
but also for any situation in which there is a range of possibilities. Ongoing examples of the use of risk analysis include:
đƫƫƫ4)%*0%+*ƫ+"ƫ!+*+)%ƫ!*!ü0/ƫ+"ƫ.!$%(%00%+*ƫ+"ƫ
the levees along various rivers and lakes, taking into account uncertainties of storms, river or lake stages and
levee performances.
đƫƫƫ+),.%/+*ƫ+"ƫ(0!.*0%2!ƫ.!$%(%00%+*ƫ,(*/ƫ"+.ƫ$5dropower generators/turbines, making use of probabilities of failure of generators and turbines and maintenance and rehabilitation costs.
đƫƫƫ4)%*0%+*ƫ+"ƫ*2%#0%+*ƫ%),.+2!)!*0ƫ,(*/ƫ"+.ƫ,+.tions of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway based on minimizing delays to barge traffic and incorporating uncertainty in tow trips and travel time.
đƫƫƫ(++ ƫ)#!ƫ//!//)!*0/ƫ1/%*#ƫƫ/+"03.!ƫ/5/0!)ƫ
for performing an integrated hydrological and economic analysis during the formulation and evaluation
of ﬂood damage reduction plans. This embodies riskbased analysis procedures to quantify uncertainty in
discharge-exceedance probability, stage-discharge and
stage-damage functions. These approaches have been
used in the Louisville, New Orleans, Mobile, Fort Worth,
Galveston, Honolulu, Kansas City, Los Angeles, Omaha,
Portland, San Francisco, Savannah, St. Louis and
St. Paul districts among others.

8.2.2 Strategies for dealing with uncertainty
The importance of reducing the structural vulnerability of (water) systems has gained increasing attention
during the last few years. The development of water
management strategies and infrastructure with high
levels of ﬂexibility – or robustness – will almost certainly contribute to system resilience, including recoveries from the unexpected. However, the question remains of how to evaluate the appropriateness of such
strategies. Traditionally, this has been done through
risk management on the basis of historical data and
statistical analysis, with strategies selected using, for
example, a cost–beneﬁt–risk analysis. Other decisionsupport tools are required when risks cannot be quantiﬁed or isolated, as in cases where the many factors
described in Chapter 1 interact.

Source: Males (2002, pp. 3–4).

1. Adaptive strategies: Choose strategies that can be
modiﬁed to achieve better performance as one
learns more about the issues at hand, and how the
future is unfolding. These adaptive strategies can
be responsive to new goals or objectives of system
performance as well as changing inputs over time.
2. Robust strategies: Identify the range of future circumstances, and then seek to identify approaches
that will work reasonably well across that range. This
strategy applies especially to decisions that cannot
easily or cost-effectively be modiﬁed in the future.

a beneﬁt–cost–risk analysis (or simply a cost–risk
analysis), or a reliability analysis, depending on the
purpose of the modelling exercise. Any risk analysis
should provide estimates of the level of conﬁdence
that a particular performance measure or criterion will
be met (Box 8.3).
Informed decision-making is increasingly becoming
a bottom-up process. Where risks and uncertainties
prevail the experts have no monopoly on what might
happen in the future or what might be sustainable.
Everyone’s opinion is needed, especially the impacted
stakeholders, who can determine the success or failure
of any decision. Integrated water resources planning
and management (IWRM), by deﬁnition, involves the
participation of all interested stakeholders. Interactive
decision-support models have been developed and
successfully used to facilitate stakeholder participation.
The purpose of such modelling tools is to help achieve,

242

if possible, a shared vision of how a particular water
resource system functions, and the likely impact of any
decisions on system performance.

CHAPTER 8

In complex water management problems where climate is a factor, many years or decades may pass
during which understanding of the problem may increase, but so might the uncertainty. This applies even
more to socio-economic and behavioural uncertainties.
There are two decision-making/management strategies that may help inform decision-makers:

Adaptive strategies are based on the assumption
that the future impacts of any decision taken now are
unknown. In such cases, one could engage in further
research to better understand the potential results of
any decision, and make a decision following successfully completion of the research. However, in the intervening time, opportunities for increased economic
and environmental beneﬁts or reduced costs or damages may have been missed. Alternatively, a decision
can be made now, based on the best judgment and

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

knowledge at hand, followed by monitoring of the
results to see if the decision was correct, or requires
further adjustments in the future. The latter is termed
‘adaptive decision-making’. Monitoring is critical to the
success of adaptive strategies. They work best when
the decision timescales are well matched to the changes being observed (Box 8.4).
Alternatively, a robust strategy performs well over a
wide range of future scenarios. It is especially appropriate when adaptive strategies cannot be easily

“Adaptive strategies
are based on the
assumption that the
future impacts of any
decision taken now are
unknown.”

BOX 8.4
Adaptive strategies for responding to drought and
ﬂood in South Asia
‘Floods and drought are fundamental challenges throughout South Asia, and their impact is heavily inﬂuenced by
larger water management issues. Current responses to
both ﬂoods and drought are dominated by humanitarian relief, without concurrent development of long-term
adaptive mechanisms with functioning institutional support. In the current era of globalization and … of global
climate change, global and regional searches for effective
climate change response strategies are taking place.
‘Effective small-scale, innovative local coping strategies
that are inﬂuenced by a range of economic, demographic
and social factors do exist, and these need to be given attention, but up-scaling these to a higher level is difficult.
The lack of information ﬂow in both directions is a key
problem. Despite an expanding network in this ﬁeld, few
have solid ﬁeld level strategies and few local groups have
links to regional and global debates.
‘[An Adaptive Strategies project was initiated in India in
an] attempt to reconcile differences in perceptions of and
responses to extreme weather events in the context of
climatic and social change. The project was designed to
document and ﬂesh out concepts and opportunities for
more effective approaches to water management and
ﬂood and drought mitigation through an integrated set of
studies in four ﬁeld locations: two drought affected areas
in the arid regions of Rajasthan and Gujarat (India) and
two ﬂood affected areas along the Rohini and Bagmati
River basins across the India-Nepal border.’
The studies identiﬁed existing coping strategies of communities in drought and ﬂood affected areas and suggested patterns of social and economic change that inﬂuence the vulnerability of livelihoods to drought and ﬂood
conditions and the opportunities for reducing the risks of
damage and hardship during such events in those areas.

Source: Reproduced from ISET (2010).

WWDR4

implemented, such as for establishing the capacity
of a reservoir or ﬂood control structure intended to
last a long time. A robust strategy contrasts with an
optimum design strategy, whose performance may
degrade rapidly under different assumptions regarding inputs and parameter values. Such a strategy may
result in slightly less than optimal performance so
as to improve performance if unlikely events actually
happen.
In contrast to a robust design, whose performance will
be satisfactory under a range of future possible scenarios, a resilient system is one in which failure or an
unsatisfactory state are quickly remedied (i.e. the system can recover or enter a satisfactory state relatively
quickly). One deﬁnition of resiliency is the probability of becoming satisfactory over a set period of time,
given an unsatisfactory state. A resilient system can
recover speedily from a failure state. Often design and
operation options are available to make a system more
robust and resilient, and hence less vulnerable.
Risk-adverse decisions may often reﬂect a minimax regret criterion for determining which of many possible
alternative decisions is ‘best.’ Deciding on the alternative that minimizes the maximum regret, or ‘risk’ that
could result from the decision, satisﬁes this criterion.
Consequences of decisions depend on unknown outcomes. For example, deciding to drill a water supply
well entails a cost that will be wasted if water is not
present, but will bring major beneﬁts if it is.
Additional information related to adaptive and robust policies applied to the management of water and
aquatic ecosystems can be found in Blumenfeld et al.
(2009); Carpenter, Brock and Hanson (1999); Chen et
al. (2009); Folkes et al (2002), MA (2005); Sanders

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

243

and Lewis (2003); Stuip et al. (2002); Tallis et al.
(2008); and Le Quesne and Matthews (2009, 2010).
8.2.3 Scenario analysis
Scenarios are an appropriate and tested approach for
dealing with uncertainty for many reasons:
Need for a long-term view. To analyse water issues
in the context of sustainable development requires a
long-term view that takes into account the slow unfolding of some of the hydrological and social processes involved, and allows for the necessary time for
waterworks investments to yield their beneﬁts.
High uncertainty about the system. In situations
where it is difficult to assign probabilities to possible
events or future outcomes, for whatever reason, one
can still generate possible scenarios of what could
plausibly happen in the future that would have an impact on the performance of the system being planned,
designed, or operated. Even though the probability
of any created scenario actually happening will likely
be 0, such a set of possible scenarios helps planners,
designers and operators to learn how their system will
likely perform under a range of possible futures. These
future scenarios will typically include both uncontrolled natural events, as well as human decisions. The
future behaviour of people and institutions is as much
a part of a scenario as is, for example, the climate.
Need to include non-quantiﬁable factors. To understand system impacts associated with any of the generated scenarios, each scenario is usually simulated
over time, and various indicator values are computed for each time period simulated. These indicators
will inevitably include qualitative as well as quantitative values. Both qualitative and quantitative simulations may be appropriate to capture and evaluate as
best as possible the cultural and political impacts that
one might expect from the particular system being
considered.
Need scenarios that provide integration, breadth and
perspective. Water systems serve numerous agricultural, domestic and industrial demands, as well as
demands for in-stream recreational as well as environmental ﬂows. They are impacted by changes in land
use, human lifestyles, economic and social conditions,
political decisions and the need for energy. Scenario
development must capture all of this interdependency and complexity among system components,

244

CHAPTER 8

as appropriate. It must also provide a perspective
that covers the interests and concerns of stakeholders at the local, regional and national levels, again as
appropriate.
Need to organize understanding for decisionmaking. The use of scenarios and associated simulation models addresses the need to simulate decisionmaking and stakeholder participation. Ideally, such
simulations will be interactive involving potential
planners and decision-makers, as well as stakeholders, making decisions in response to events taking
place in the simulations. Alternatively, decision rules
can be deﬁned that will serve to make the decisions in
a simulation run, but it is preferable if there is interaction between the simulation models and participants
during the simulation. This allows more attention to be
focused on cause and effect, on when decisions need
to be made, and on what constitutes a branching point,
where human actions can signiﬁcantly affect the future. Such simulations should aim for a shared vision of
how a system may perform, among stakeholders who
may hold different points of view as to how they wish
it to perform.
Change, discontinuities, ‘wild cards’, potential surprise and other altered conditions, whose probability
may be assumed to be very low, are often ignored and
omitted even though their impact could be great (see,
e.g., Marien, 2002; Rahmstorf and Ganopolski, 1999;
van Notten, 2005, 2006).
One way to make this class of uncertainties operational is through surprise scenarios. Different methods have been proposed, such as ‘historical analogy’
or ‘surprise theory’, in which underlying principles of
surprise are studied systematically by ‘thinking the unthinkable’ – imagining unlikely future events followed
by the construction of plausible scenarios that could
be associated with them.
8.2.4 Backcasting
Backcasting is an alternative scenario approach for the
exploration of alternative futures. It aims to circumvent
the tendency of treating the future as an incremental
continuation of the past, and to provide as much information as possible on future uncertainties. Instead
of taking the present as the starting point, backcasting starts with the articulation of one or more desired
(or even undesired) futures and then tries to identify
possible actions that lead to them and bottlenecks that

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

would hinder or prevent reaching them. Backcasting is
an iterative process in which future visions and policy interventions are (re)adjusted (see also Figure 8.1).
Iteration is usually required to resolve internal inconsistencies and mitigate adverse economic, social and
environmental impacts that are revealed in the course
of the analysis. The main results of backcasting studies are generally alternative images of the future,
thoroughly analysed in terms of their feasibility and
consequences.

Over the years, backcasting has been applied regularly
in the development of climate-mitigation strategies
(for the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions). For
water management discussions, backcasting is a relatively new approach. The World Water Vision of the
World Water Council (Cosgrove and Rijsberman, 2000)
was a qualitative backcast scenario using elements of
three other scenarios. Backcasting was recently used
to develop adaptation strategies to ‘climate proof’ the
Netherlands.

A backcasting exercise generally follows four different
steps. The ﬁrst step is a creative process of deﬁning a
desired (or undesired) future (or futures). The next
step works backwards from that deﬁned future to
identify strategies, measures, policies and programmes
that will connect the future to the present. This creative
phase is then followed by an evaluation of assumptions underlying these futures in terms of feasibility,
and the consequences of alternative images of the
future, reﬂecting on the implications of the long-term
perspective for short-term policy-making. After
identifying policy interventions, actions and events
needed to realize (or avoid the realization of) the (un)
desired future, the original future vision is generally
adjusted.

8.2.5 Institutional decision-making principles
and paradigms
Today decisions are being made under conditions of
risk and uncertainty where the probabilities are nonstationary. Their values are unknown and incapable of
being estimated based on the current state of modelling. This makes the estimation of risks of adverse impacts virtually a meaningless exercise for the purposes
of water management and water use. Hence when
dealing with nonstationarities, a substantially different water management approach seems appropriate,
yet one based on a foundation of existing principles
and evaluation techniques. This approach, essentially
an adaptation of existing proven principles and techniques, has been termed ‘robust decision-making’: a

FIGURE 8.1
Backcasting versus forecasting scenarios

Future 1

Future
vision

Future 2

Future 3

Present

Future

Present

Future

The forecasting scenario process:

The backcasting scenario process:

đƫ Identiﬁcation of drivers
đƫ Formulation of narrative storylines
đƫ Fleshing out of storylines
đƫ Identiﬁcation of robust solutions

đƫ Formulation of (un)desirable future(s)
đƫ Identiﬁcation of policy interventions, actions and events
đƫ Evaluation in terms of feasibility
đƫ Adjusting original future(s)

Source: van ‘t Klooster et al. (2011).

WWDR4

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

245

process designed to accommodate uncertain scenarios
with evaluation and project justiﬁcation principles that
focus less on optimal outcomes and more on producing robust solutions.

A major question for planners and engineers should be:
Is there a better way to plan and design and operate
sustainable, reliable, resilient and non-vulnerable water
resources systems in the face of this nonstationarity?

Planning the design and operation of water resources
infrastructure, whose life extends decades into the future, is a challenge for several reasons, especially if the
design cannot easily or inexpensively be changed once
built, such as a reservoir. One reason is the change nature of hydrology, and the uncertain nature of those
changes. What will constitute hydrology in the next 50
to 100 years is simply unknown. Again, we can guess
using hydrological scenarios. It is likely that the changes over the next decade or two will not be signiﬁcant,
which will enable historical records to be of assistance in
predicting future scenarios. Another reason is that the
future beneﬁts and costs derived from the infrastructure
project or system being considered are negligible when
discounted to the present, but not so for those living
some 50 or 100 years from now. Clearly, there is a need
for evaluation criteria that consider the value of sustainable systems now and on into the future. This needs to
be responsive to the interest rates used in any beneﬁt/
cost analysis, performed at any time by future users of
the system, as well as to the level of risk and uncertainty,
even if the latter cannot be quantiﬁed. (Bardhan, 1993;
Hall, 2003; Keeny and Raiffa, 1993)

If the assumption of stationarity is no longer justiﬁed, a replacement strategy is needed to meet planning and design requirements. If a consensus is then
reached among scientists and engineers on the best
replacement, it must be accepted and implemented in
government water management agencies.

8.2.6 Acknowledging the need to adapt design
procedures
There is no doubt that recent years have witnessed
changes in land use, water consumption and global
climate, while uncertain future changes and rates of
change give real cause for concern. Water management agencies should be as troubled by this as scientists, and need to work towards improved methods of
assessment, so as to better incorporate the uncertainty
introduced by lack of stationarity in future conditions.

Water management agencies with issues and policy
matters need to participate in the development of
alternate methodologies that incorporate nonstationarity, so as to make water resource projects more
adaptable, sustainable and robust. Participation in any
improved planning and design methodology that takes
into account the nonstationarity of hydrological, as
well as social processes, will help in its implementation
within the agency bureaucracy. This may entail new
legislation and authorization.
It may be easier to implement new methodologies into
the planning and design of new projects than into the
operating rules of existing projects, as these are often
speciﬁed by law and may be harder to change. To enable operating rules to take into account nonstationarity, it may be necessary to determine whether or not to
develop and adopt new operation plans. Model studies of potential changes resulting from nonstationary
might suggest the need for increased ﬂexibility, so as
to adaptively manage operations to increase system
performance with respect to various criteria.
Institutions involved in implementing any planning
model are obligated to achieve some level of consensus on exactly what parameters will be impacted by nonstationarity, and what range of variation
can be expected on a regional basis. The method of

“The results from quantitative and qualitative
analyses, based on science and economic
principles, are often considered less relevant
than political factors, emotion, religious beliefs
and just gut feelings based on intuition.”
246

CHAPTER 8

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

implementation must be consistent and reproducible.
Changes in established procedures are never easy in
large governmental institutions. Considerable study
and collaboration and communication among all interested stakeholders should be expected before a
change can be implemented.
Until consensus on a new methodology is reached,
agencies will continue to use existing procedures, even
though the uncertainty associated with these procedures is increased due to potential impacts of changes
in climate variability and land use. In addition, there is
always less risk of being criticized if established procedures are used, even if they may be inferior to others.
It is unlikely that water management agencies will
want to modify existing water management operations
without a convincing argument that there is a better
way that leads to better results, however measured.
Considerable study of alternative methods is needed.
The ultimate solution will surely involve a multidisciplinary approach to understanding the science
and the development of guidelines and regulations that
integrates the relevant science into water resources
planning approaches and activities (Baggett et al.,
2006; Frederick and Major, 1997; Palmer et al., 2008;
Wardekker et al, 2008).
8.2.7 Behavioural decision theory
Most important real-world decision problems are determined by more than one decision-maker. Decisions are
worked out and implemented through government, private sector and civil society organizations. The results
from quantitative and qualitative analyses, based on
science and economic principles, are often considered
less relevant than political factors, emotion, religious beliefs and just gut feelings based on intuition. One of the
more important aspects of decision-making under uncertainty concerns the processes by which organizational structure inﬂuences the success of an organization in
coping with uncertainty, and the strategies they adopt
to make themselves less susceptible to failure.
These factors are discussed extensively within the ‘behavioural decision theory’ or risk-related decision-making literature. In contrast to decision analysis, which
outlines how decisions should be made in the face of
uncertainty, behavioural decision theory describes how
people actually make decisions when not inﬂuenced
or supported by analytical procedures such as decision or beneﬁt-cost-risk analyses. It describes how

WWDR4

rational and emotional parts of the human psyche interact in decision-making (Camerer and Weber, 1992;
Loewenstein and Cohen, 2008; Marris et al., 1997; Wolt
and Peterson, 2000).
8.2.8 Precautionary principle
In the presence of uncertainty, many actions and decisions taken to achieve increased economic, environmental and social beneﬁts will have impacts that one
cannot now predict. Actions may be needed to reduce
these risks if there is a chance that any of these impacts will be harmful to people or the environment in
the future, the precautionary principle places on those
proposing such actions the burden of proving that the
proposed decisions, including those needed to protect
people and the environment from future harm, will not
be harmful to anyone or anything in the future. This
introduces a condition to be met before such decisions
can be made and places the responsibility for meeting this condition on decision-makers. This principle
comes from the belief that there is a social obligation
to protect people and their environment from damages that could result from any decision being considered. Following this principle, decisions to proceed
with a project or programme can only be taken once
evidence is available that no harm, especially irreversible harm, will result (UNESCO, 2005).
8.2.9 Diversiﬁcation
Other strategies for enhancing robust decision-making
under uncertainty accept that the future is unpredictable and aim at developing methods and measures
that build on existing knowledge. The more diverse the
current water system is, the more resilient it should be
to unexpected events.
There are several steps required to diversify water
management decisions and investments. The ﬁrst step
is to assess possible interventions and their related
costs. Consider, for example, a semi-arid area that is
largely dependent on water for its main economic activity: rainfed agriculture. As the economy depends on
the success of rainfed crops, the challenge for a water
manager is to develop new drought mitigation measures, such as increasing storage capacity of surface
water, increasing groundwater capacity, and devising irrigation schemes for local farming communities.
Water managers inform decision-makers, who can also
play an active role by introducing water pricing policies, subsidies or other ﬁnancial mechanisms, or by
deciding on a different development strategy, among

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

247

others. The choice of which measures to invest in depends on available budget, acceptance by the public
(voters and tax payers) and major user groups, and
geographical conditions. The cost-effectiveness of
each measure will depend on how trends such as climate change or future economic conditions determine
the effectiveness of each measure, and hence the success of combinations of measures.
Investment diversiﬁcation – in analogy with portfolios
in the stock market – can reduce the risk of the total
portfolio of water measures if a country can afford
it. Uncorrelated (or partly-uncorrelated) investments
in water management measures that aim to achieve
similar returns can result in different effects under the
same future trends. For example, investing in sustainable irrigation may have a profound effect on the
volume of water saved, but is only viable if water and
ﬁnancing is available. Water pricing aims at achieving
the same water savings, but only works if the public
accepts it. A third investment that increases subsurface water storage capacity will probably increase the
water saved through the decreased effect of evaporation, but its long-term success also depends on the
level of maintenance to prevent failures.
The key is to ﬁnd mixes of the three investments that
will result not only in the highest possible returns (cost–
beneﬁt analysis) in terms of water availability, but also
a mix of water management investments that is capable of absorbing unexpected events; in other words,
a mix that values uncertainty as part of the decisionmaking process (Brown and Carriquiry, 2007; Figge,
2004; Johansson et al., 2002; Perrot-Maitre, 2006).
8.2.10 Long-term versus short-term decisions
Depending on the timeframe and scope of an issue
and the political time horizon, different uncertainties
can have different relevancies to the decision-making
process. The timeframe is of critical importance when
looking at ambiguous information or irreversibilities.
Long-term decisions are associated with capital investments in infrastructure projects that involve substantial ﬁxed costs (costs that are independent of the scale
or capacity of the project), and that require payment
before the project can begin. Long-term investment
decisions pertain to infrastructure design or land-use
policy expected to exist over a long period. In many
cases, it is difficult to reverse such decisions once implemented. For example, decisions to build reservoirs
are easier to make than to reverse once the reservoirs

248

CHAPTER 8

exist. The challenge of long-term decision-making is to
adequately consider future impacts given the uncertainty of future supply and demand conditions.
Consider decisions with respect to protecting from
ﬂoods or reducing ﬂood damage. The design of dykes
or levies along the Mississippi River in the United States
of America or along the coast of the Netherlands constitute examples of long-term decisions. No one can
predict the degree of protection required for the future, even if such analyses are based on past hydrological events or future projections inﬂuenced by current
knowledge of climate change. Hence, no matter what
design is chosen there is a risk of failure. Questions that
plague anyone making long-term decisions include
what levels of risk are acceptable, and just how much
more money, if any, should be spent on designs that reduce the costs of infrastructure expansion in the future,
should future conditions warrant. Capacity-expansion
models that include future uncertainties can provide
guidance for making such decisions, but their results
are also uncertain. Compared to long-term decisions,
short-term decisions are much easier to make as their
impacts are much more predictable. Short-term decisions typically involve changes in operating policies,
whose performance depends on the long-term decisions made. For example, the proportion of storage in a
reservoir that should be allocated to ﬂood storage and
the various beneﬁcial purposes water serves (agricultural, domestic and industrial water supplies, hydropower,
recreation, environment) – some of which are complementary, while others compete. These decisions may be
inﬂuenced by recent hydrological and economic events
or conditions, and in the case of farmers, forecast future
crop market prices.
As with long-term decisions, short-term decisions
made in uncertain environments also pose risks. But
unlike many long-term risks, short-term risks are often
more manageable and reducible. All those who face
risks learn to live with or manage such risks. One approach to reduce individual risks is through insurance.
Insurance is not always available, but when it is it can
serve to reduce the economic consequences of ﬂood
events, or droughts leading to crop failures or famine, or disease brought on by excessive pollution. It
serves as a way to mitigate the risks of economic loss.
The problem for insurance companies is to determine
their risks under changing climates – changes that are
themselves not predictable. Index insurance avoids the
need to make judgments on actual losses, say due to

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

climate variability or human failure – a difficult task –
as index insurance payments are made based on an independent indicator or measure that is correlated with
outcomes, but not inﬂuenced by the insured individual
(Brown and Carriquiry, 2007).
8.2.11 Policy uncertainty
The outcomes of any long term or short-term decisions depend in part on external factors. One such factor,
which can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the success or
effectiveness of any decision, is the set of policies or rules
and regulations or laws established by public agencies.
Changes in broader public policy can have substantial
consequences on the potential effectiveness of a pollution control policy, or the success of a cascade of hydropower reservoirs in meeting energy targets or reducing
damages resulting from ﬂoods. This source of uncertainty
can be just as signiﬁcant as the uncertainty resulting from
natural events (Camerer and Weber, 1992).
8.2.12 Necessity and uncertainty of monitored data
As discussed in Chapter 6 of this report and Chapter 13
of WWDR3, there is a real need to commence global,
systematic monitoring of the world’s water resource
systems and land-use patterns. Many signals suggest
that climate is changing the rate, if not the nature, of
hydrological processes taking place today in many
regions. More research is needed to fully understand
these events, their causes and the directions and rates
of change. Improved hydrological and climate modelling and downscaling methods are badly needed by
water resource planners and managers, who are facing
problems that often need solving at sub-basin scales –
spatial scales much smaller than those considered by
global and even regional climate models.
But in addition to the need for more research on climate
modelling, there is a need to learn more from the hydrological data recorded over the past century. During
this period, humans had a major impact on land use
and discharged a signiﬁcant quantity of greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. Global CO2 concentrations
in the atmosphere increased by about 35% compared
to levels at the beginning of the industrial revolution.
This increase and the accompanying warming is highly
likely to have had a measurable impact on the water
cycle, which should be possible to detect by studying
the hydrological records. As with climate and land cover
changes, there is a need to monitor and better understand hydrological changes (e.g. soil moisture, frozen
ground, nutrient dynamics, algal dynamics). Improved

WWDR4

“Unlike many longterm risks, short-term
risks are often more
manageable and
reducible.”
decision-making relies not only on better ways of modelling land-water-atmospheric interactions and the climate and its impacts at basin and watershed scales, but
also continued monitoring and analyses of hydrological records (Murdoch et al., 2000; Naiman and Turner,
2000; Vörösmarty et al., 2000).
Monitoring and measuring are the only ways to determine the nature of changes occurring in the watersheds. This involves keeping records, decade after
decade, and analysing those records. The fact that
the probability distributions of water ﬂows, storage
volumes and their qualities and uses over space and
time, are non-stationary increases the importance of
continued monitoring, data management and analyses.
Informed decision-making depends on observations
of the systems being managed, understanding what
those observations are telling us, and acting on this
knowledge – continuously.

8.3 Using ecosystems to manage
uncertainty and risk
History shows that pressures on water resources decrease ecosystem resilience and thereby increase
ecosystem-related risks and uncertainties – reducing those pressures reduces this risk and uncertainty. Ecosystems can serve to reduce uncertainty, help
manage risk, and achieve increased beneﬁts from
water security and water quality enhancement, recreation, hydropower, navigation, wildlife and ﬂood control.
Ecosystems include all the components involved in the
water cycle, including land cover (vegetation) and soil
functions in watersheds, wetlands and ﬂoodplains.
Ecosystems are used widely and have demonstrated
their utility, particularly in reducing uncertainty associated with water quality, water extremes (drought and
ﬂoods) and storage-related needs. Hard engineering
approaches (see Chapter 5) have successfully reduced

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

249

risks in rich nations, but at considerable capital and
maintenance (and sometimes environmental) cost.
Not all developing countries have the ﬁnancial capital
to adopt the same strategy. But as risks or priorities
change (e.g. through climate change or urban expansion), physical infrastructure can be difficult and certainly expensive to modify or remove. This can limit
adaptation options under changing conditions, and
thereby increases risk. The use of built and natural infrastructure options should be considered together in
order to manage medium to long-term risk.
History also shows that many risks associated with water arise through management that is blind to the ecosystem changes it drives, and their consequences for
humans. Ecosystems are central to sustaining the water cycle, therefore, understanding this role provides a
tool to assess how risks are generated and transferred.
An inclusive, holistic and participatory approach to
water policy and management permits identiﬁcation of the full range of ecosystem services involved,
where the risks are, who is vulnerable to them and why.
Improved information can reduce, but never eliminate,
uncertainty. A new paradigm is required and is already
emerging (as indicated in Section 2.5), which shifts
from regarding the ecosystem (environment) as an unfortunate but necessary cost of development to being
an integral part of development solutions (Box 8.5).

Reducing the direct human demand for water will also
reduce pressures on water, and thereby increase the
sustainability of ecosystems, the delivery of ecosystem
beneﬁts, and therefore reduce risk. Other sections of
this report address opportunities to reduce water footprints, including improving water use efficiency. At the
implementation level, water managers may be called
upon to actively manage various elements of the ecosystem and/or to inform those who have that responsibility. Identifying opportunities to proactively manage ecosystems to reduce uncertainty and manage risk
involves a three-step process:
1. Identify the water management objectives as opposed to focusing on infrastructure (e.g. objectives
are water storage or clean water, not dams or treatment plants).
2. Explore what ecosystems offer in terms of meeting
the identiﬁed management objective(s) (e.g. storing
water, reducing pollution), including through their
conservation and/or restoration.
3. Reduce the uncertainties and risks involved in decisions by considering all ecosystem services directly
involved or potentially impacted by various management options. This includes valuing multiple cobeneﬁts, and examining trade-offs between them to
determine desirable courses of action.

BOX 8.5
Changing paradigms for water management

Traditional approaches were aware that water management impacted ecosystems, but
proceeded on the assumption that water use
(for humans) was more important than the
ecosystem (environment). The values of the
full suite of beneﬁts (services) provided by
the ecosystem were therefore not included
in decision-making. The result is increased
overall risk with the ecosystem and its needs
perceived as in conﬂict with human needs.

Old approaches

– water use and built
infrastructure

250

CHAPTER 8

Water management goals

impacts

Ecosystems/
biodiversity
(unfortunate but a
necessary ’cost’; in reality
increases risks )

New paradigm

In the ‘new paradigm’ ecosystems are managed (together with built infrastructure) to
achieve a water management goal of delivery
of the full suite of required ecosystem services (including water quantity and quality),
thereby reducing overall system risks. The
ecosystem is seen not as a problem, but as a
solution.

Water management

Water management

Water for direct
human use

manages

Ecosystems/
biodiversity
– and built infrastructure

sustains

Management goals

Ecosystems
services
(reduced risk)

Other ecosystems
services
underpinned
by water

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Ecosystem-based approaches harness the capacity of
ecosystems as water infrastructure to improve resilience
and deliver multiple water-related beneﬁts more sustainably and often cost-effectively, thereby addressing
risk. The term ‘ecosystem’ (or ‘natural’) infrastructure
(see discussion in Section 5.1 concerning ‘soft infrastructure’) reﬂects an acknowledgement that the water-related services provided by ecosystems are analogous
and complementary to those provided by conventional,
engineered water infrastructure. Capital and operating
costs of physical infrastructure should reﬂect the costs
of lost ecosystem services. For example, the costs of
drinking water treatment reﬂect this cost of ecosystem
degradation (loss of clean water as an ecosystem service). There is a compelling cost–beneﬁt case for public
and/or private investment in green infrastructure, in part
because of its signiﬁcant potential as a means of adaptation to climate change (TEEB, 2009).
The global consequences of heavy reliance on hard-engineering solutions are beginning to be better understood in risk management terms. For example, Batker
et al. (2010) present a convincing case study of the
Mississippi Delta, where ecosystem restoration options
offer signiﬁcant economic gains to address the problem of risk increase in the delta, in particular disaster
risk brought about by historical hard-engineered water

BOX 8.6
Rethinking physical infrastructure approaches

Vörösmarty et al. (2010) have presented human water security and biodiversity perspectives within the same spatial accounting framework. They used data depicting 23
stressors (drivers), grouped into four major themes representing environmental impact: catchment disturbance,
pollution, water resource development and biotic factors.
The results show that nearly 80% of the world’s population is exposed to high levels of threat to water security,
based on year-2000 ﬁgures, implying a much greater
level of risk than indicated by previous assessments.
Developing countries, in particular, need to reduce water
risk. In addition to ‘hard’ engineering solutions as well as
when a lack of adequate levels of ﬁnancial resources impedes appropriate infrastructure development, a sensible
option is to employ ecosystem-based solutions, wherever possible. This also reduces medium-term risks and
minimizes the possible need to eventually dismantle much
of the physical infrastructure used to achieve sustainable
balanced outcomes, once wealthy.

WWDR4

management approaches (see Box 2.3 in Section 2.5).
The policy of wholesale hard (physical) engineering
approaches to water risk reduction has been debated
between and among engineers and environmentalists
for at least two decades. This discussion is increasingly
subject to more rigorous science enabling the emergence of a less emotive, more impartial and balanced
strategy towards risk (Box 8.6).
Demonstrations of the pitfalls of ecosystem-blind approaches make for a convincing case in themselves.
But ecosystem solutions for dealing with uncertainty
and risk are best demonstrated through practice, and
there is currently a wholesale shift towards this approach. Some stakeholders in the business sector
are leading by example (Box 8.7). For example, the
World Resources Institute (WRI), working in conjunction with the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD), has developed the ‘Corporate

BOX 8.7
Ecosystem solutions for water quality risks

The use of natural infrastructure to protect water supplies,
particularly drinking water for cities, is already widespread. For example, the Water Producer Programme, developed by the Brazilian National Water Agency, provides
compensation to farmers to safeguard critical headwaters
that supply water to 9 million people in the São Paulo
metropolitan region. Success has spawned similar approaches in other regions of Brazil (Nature Conservancy,
2010). Likewise, the páramo grassland of Chingaza
National Park, in the Colombian Andes, plays a crucial
role in maintaining water supplies for 8 million people in
the capital city, Bogotá, Colombia. An innovative public/private partnership has set up an environmental trust
fund through which payments from the water company
are transferred for managing the páramo sustainably, potentially saving the water company around US$4 million
per year (Forslund et al., 2009). Box 21.5 in Chapter 21
describes how the potential for contamination by diffuse
or point-source pollution, which represented a serious
commercial risk to bottled water production, was dealt
with by Nestlé S.A., France. A key mechanism for implementing these approaches is payments for ecosystem service schemes, whereby the users of a service (e.g. clean
water) pay others to sustain its delivery. In 2006, the
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes adopted recommendations on payments for ecosystem services (PES) as
a part of integrated water resource management (IWRM)
(UNECE, 2007).

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

251

Ecosystem Services Review’, which helps companies to
identify and measure the risks and opportunities arising from their impact and dependence on ecosystem
services (WRI, Meridian Institute and WBCSD, 2008),
within which water plays a prominent role. WBCSD
(2011) also makes the case for ecosystem valuation as
an integral part of business planning and corporate
decision-making. There is a need to upscale such approaches across all relevant business activities.
The use or restoration of ecosystem infrastructure to sustain or improve water quality is already a

widespread practice with a proven track record
(Box 8.7). Using ecosystem infrastructure to manage
risks associated with ﬂooding is another area in which
interest, practice and demonstrated feasibility are
rapidly developing. Flood management also demonstrates clearly that water management involves risk
transfer (Box 8.8).
Another relevant example is the successful experience
of the Water Protection Fund (FONAG) in Ecuador,
which is a water trust fund created to protect the watersheds that supply water to the Metropolitan District

BOX 8.8
Ecosystems and ﬂood risk reduction

Catastrophic ﬂooding is emerging as one of the most signiﬁcant sources of increasing vulnerability due to three main factors:
increasing human populations and infrastructure development in high ﬂood risk areas (particularly megacities in developing
countries); loss of wetlands services that regulate water ﬂows; and most probably the increasing frequency and severity of
extreme weather events under climate change.
Most modern ﬂood management plans now include the use of ﬂoodplains and wetlands. Key services of these lands include
their ability to rapidly absorb and slowly release (regulate) water, and to increase ecosystems resilience by regulating sediment transfer. These services alone account for some of the highest land/nature values thus far calculated, for example,
US$33,000 per ha of wetlands for hurricane risk reduction in the United States of America (Costanza et al. 2008).
Potential damage from storms, coastal and inland ﬂooding and landslides can be considerably reduced by a combination
of careful land-use planning and maintaining/restoring ecosystems to enhance buffering capacity. For example, a Viet Nam
report (Tallis et al., 2008) shows that planting and protecting nearly 12,000 ha of mangroves cost US$1.1 million, but saved
annual expenditures on dyke maintenance of US$7.3 million. Similarly, according to Emerton and Kekulandala (2003), the
Muthurajawela Marsh, a coastal wetland in a densely populated area in North Sri Lanka, provides several more visible ecosystem services (agriculture, ﬁshing and ﬁrewood), which directly contribute to local incomes (total value: US$150 per ha and
per year), but the most substantial beneﬁts, which accrue to a wider population are related to ﬂood attenuation (US$1,907
per ha) and industrial and domestic wastewater treatment (US$654 per ha).
However, the economic arguments for natural infrastructure are not always clear-cut. In the case of the Maple River
Watershed, US, Shultz and Leitch (2001) stated that ecosystem restoration delivered insufficient risk reduction.
China runs one of the largest payments for ecosystem services schemes worldwide: the Grain-to-Greens Programme to tackle
soil erosion. Soil erosion is believed to be a principal cause of the extreme ﬂooding that took place in 1998. Planting trees or
maintaining pasture has restored 9 million ha of cropland on steep slopes. In addition to ﬂood risk reduction, co-beneﬁts include wildlife conservation, including positive impacts on Giant Panda habitats (Chen et al., 2009).
Managed risk transfer can be a solution to overall risk management. For example, London is very vulnerable to ﬂooding, and
its physical ﬂood protection infrastructure is ageing rapidly. But ﬂood risk managers are now committed to creating space
for ﬂoodwater where possible through river restoration activities, for example, the London Rivers Action Plan (RRC, 2009).
Dykes have historically been used in the upper catchment to protect agriculture, which has in effect diverted water more
quickly towards London, increasing risks there. Based on the unsurprising fact that crops, livestock and agriculture infrastructure are less valuable than national monuments, major ﬁnancial centres and high-priced housing, and the high population densities there, part of the ﬂood management strategy now includes removing dykes, thereby restoring wetlands, and
compensating farmers for their increased risks. Massive infrastructure maintenance costs and ﬂood insurance premiums for
city inhabitants are reduced in the process. Agricultural productivity is not signiﬁcantly affected, and indeed could increase,
except during the occasional extreme ﬂood – providing evidence that restoring ﬂoodplains does not necessarily result in signiﬁcant losses in longer-term agricultural output. The issue is clearly one of risk, not productivity, and the solution is to compensate where increased risk exposure occurs, thereby increasing overall beneﬁts.

252

CHAPTER 8

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

of Quito and surrounding areas, seeking to ensure
the medium- and long-term availability of water
(Box 8.9). FONAG’s achievements have led to the
creation of similar funds in other areas of Ecuador
(Ambato, Riobamba, Cuenca, Loja and Espíndola) and
elsewhere (Colombia and Peru) (Lloret, 2009).
Water-related ecosystem infrastructure involves all
biological/ecological components of the water cycle,
and is not limited to managing surface and groundwater water availability and quality. Examples of the role
of forests in sustaining regional water balance, including avoiding tipping points, are provided in Chapter
4, Section 4.3. The role of land cover (vegetation) and
soils in reducing hydrological risk illustrates the need
to rethink water storage in ecosystem terms (Box 8.10).
Increasing uncertainty in water management is the result of less than optimal understanding of ecosystem
functions and their impacts on ecosystem services in
conjunction with serious gaps in data and monitoring.
The historical focus of nature/environment interests

BOX 8.9
Lessons learned in the implementation and
operation of the Water Protection Fund (FONAG,
Ecuador)

and science on ‘conservation’ has contributed to this
uncertainty. The objective is important in itself but the
inﬂuence of conservation interests on water policy

BOX 8.10
Rethinking water storage: Restoring soil
functionality

Soil moisture is a major component of the water cycle. It
contributes to groundwater and maintains surface vegetation and soil health. Soil ecosystems are biodiversity rich
and support important and inter-dependent ecosystem
services, including nutrient cycling, carbon storage, erosion regulation, water cycling and puriﬁcation and in particular all agricultural production.
Loss of water degrades soil and drives desertiﬁcation
(see Section 4.5 and the CAR on Desertiﬁcation, Land
Degradation and Drought). Apart from changing rainfall
patterns, the major cause of soil degradation is land-use
practice, in particular soil disturbance (excessive tillage), pollution and loss of land cover (vegetation). Loss
of soil moisture is a major risk challenge for agriculture
and restoring water retention in soils is a key to sustainable agriculture. The Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture (Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture, 2007) concluded that
improving rainfed agriculture, including rehabilitating degraded lands, is a major opportunity to increase agricultural
production and achieve global food security. This issue is
largely about managing moisture in soil ecosystems.

đƫƫƫ$!ƫü**%(ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ+"ƫƫ.!ƫ,.+2% ! ƫ5ƫ %rect users of water, part of whose payments goes towards the protection of water sources. The trust fund is
fed by locally generated funds and is not dependent on
foreign or government capital.
đƫƫƫ%2!*ƫ0$!ƫ3!'ƫ#+2!.**!ƫ+"ƫ*01.(ƫ.!/+1.!/Čƫ,.ticularly water, the availability of long-term ﬁnancial
instruments is a guarantee that interventions and programmes to protect water resources are sustainable.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ#.!0!/0ƫ%),0ƫ%/ƫ$%!2! ƫ5ƫ/1/0%*! ƫ* ƫ(+*#ġ
term programmes; thus a trust fund represents a way of
achieving high-impact intervention.
đƫƫƫ%2!*ƫ0$0ƫ0$!ƫ1* Ě/ƫ,(*/ƫ.!ƫ !2!(+,! ƫ%*ƫƫ,.0%%pative way, they are always viewed as complementary
to ﬁnancing, resulting in the strong engagement of actors with the actions being taken.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ.1(!/ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ1* ƫ(!.(5ƫ/,!%"5ƫ0$!ƫ !/0%*0%+*ƫ+"ƫ
investments and the maximum amounts that can be assigned to administration, current spending and other
expenses, thus safeguarding the quantity and quality of
investments.

Conservation agriculture addresses soil water risks with
three principles: minimal soil disturbance, permanent
soil cover and crop rotation. Agricultural beneﬁts include
organic matter increase, in-soil water conservation and
improvement of soil structure, and thus the rooting zone.
Other enhanced ecosystem services include regulated
soil erosion (reducing road, dam and hydroelectric power
plant maintenance costs), water quality, air quality, carbon
sequestration, biodiversity/nature beneﬁts, and regulated water availability (including ﬂood-risk reduction).
Conservation agriculture holds tremendous potential for
all sizes of farms, agro-ecological systems and zones.
Using ecosystem-based management, it delivers proﬁtable and sustainable agricultural production and greatly
improved environmental beneﬁts, including ﬂood-risk
reduction and regulated soil erosion. The approach is being adopted on a large scale, for example, in Brazil and
Canada. It is also widely used to address water risks for
food security in dryland areas where its multiple beneﬁts
offer signiﬁcant advantages over high risk and capital-intensive irrigation options.

Source: Lloret (2009, p. 6, Lessons Learned, with minor
modiﬁcation).

For further reading on conservation agriculture see the FAO
website: http://www.fao.org/ag/ca/index.html.

WWDR4

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

253

(and hence in turn on nature conservation) is erratic and limited in areas where development priorities
dominate, especially where water resources are limited. The past two decades have, however, brought a
visible and welcome shift towards nature conservation
interests, proposing solutions to water problems. Most
major, international nature-based NGOs, for example, now see nature in a broader development context. This is particularly so for biodiversity, which as a
topic has gravitated towards the central role it plays
in delivering ecosystem services. But the science associated with this shift is lagging. Trends in species,
populations and habitats remain the cornerstone of
biodiversity monitoring, although they are increasingly used as proxies for ecosystem change. Limited data
availability for the condition and extent of wetlands
continues to constrain science – an important gap
considering their hydrological functions. Advances
have been made in the monitoring of desertiﬁcation
(a process driven principally by water availability) and
its impacts on desert ecosystem services and the wellbeing of affected communities (e.g. UNCCD, 2011),
but water quality data remain patchy at best. But the
biggest gap in information relates to the continuing
difficulties encountered in direct monitoring of many
relevant ecosystem services. The most advanced ecosystem service monitoring areas remain conﬁned to
the direct beneﬁts people receive, such as food and
hydropower. Signiﬁcant gaps exist in other key services, in particular nutrient cycling, sediment transfer
and deposition (land formation, coastal erosion regulation), water regulation (including the role of evapotranspiration), and the capacity to tease out ecosystem inﬂuences within data on the economic and
human impacts of water-related disasters (drought
and ﬂood mitigation services). Attempts to make the
relevant connections between water, ecosystems and
people are improving, but it remains essentially a
process of storyline building, based on case studies
and limited global data. The importance of the topic
merits better resources to underpin the monitoring
and improve understanding, and to reduce the current
over-dependency on complicated, and occasionally
controversial, science.
One characteristic of ecosystem infrastructure solutions is that they offer less opportunity for corruption. In the harsh realities of water management, this is
likely a major reason why they have not been adopted more widely. But they are increasingly becoming
part of the water management dialogue. Practitioners
need to strengthen, in particular, the rigour of their

254

CHAPTER 8

economic assessments. Promoting ecosystem infrastructure as a panacea for managing all water risks
must be avoided. It is best placed among a suite of options (including hard-engineered solutions) to address
risk on a case-by-case basis, then assessed through
transparent and participatory means, where better information reduces uncertainty. Such an approach will
enable the most cost-effective, holistic and sustainable risk management strategies to emerge. Current
evidence suggests that under these conditions ecosystem-based approaches will increasingly become the
foundation of water security.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Aerts, J., Botzen, W., Bowman, M., Ward, P. and Dircke, P.
2011. Climate Adaptation and Flood Risk in Coastal Cities.
Oxford/New York, Earthscan.
Aerts, J. C. J. H., W. Botzen, W., van der Veen, A., Krywkow,
J. and Werners, S. 2008. Dealing with uncertainty in ﬂood
management through diversiﬁcation. Ecology and Society,
Vol. 13, No. 1, p. 41.
Aven, T. 2003. Foundations of Risk Analysis: A Knowledge and
Decision-oriented Perspective. Chichester, UK, John Wiley.
Baggett, S., Jeffrey, P. and Jefferson, B. 2006. Risk
perception in participatory planning for water reuse.
Desalination, Vol. 187, No. 1–3, pp. 149–158.
Bardhan, P. 1993. Analytics of the institutions of informal
cooperation in rural development. World Development, Vol.
21, No. 4, pp. 633–39.
Batker, D., de la Torre, I., Costanza, R., Swedeen, P., Day,
J., Boumans, R. and Bagstad, K. 2010. Gaining Ground
– Wetlands, Hurricanes and the Economy: The Value of
Restoring the Mississippi River Delta. Tacoma, Washington
DC, Earth Economics. http://www.eartheconomics.org/
Page12.aspx.
Bedford, T. and Cooke, R. 2001. Probabilistic Risk Analysis:
Foundations and Methods. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
Berger, J. B. 1985. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian
Analysis. New York, Springer.
Berstein, P. L. 1998. Against the Gods: the Remarkable Story
of Risk. Chichester, UK, John Wiley.
Block, P. and Brown, C. 2009. Does climate matter?
Evaluating the effects of climate change on future
Ethiopian hydropower, planning for an uncertain future –
monitoring, integration, and adaption. R. M. T. Webb and
D. J. Semmens (eds) Proceedings of the Third Interagency
Conference on Research in the Watersheds: United States
Geological Survey Investigations Report 2009-5049.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Blumenfeld, S., Lu, C., Christophersen, T. and Coates, D.
2009. Water, Wetlands and Forests. A Review of Ecological,
Economic and Policy Linkages. CBD Technical Series No. 47.
Montreal/Gland, Switzerland, Secretariat of the Convention
on Biological Diversity and Secretariat of the Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands.
Bogardi J. J. and Kundzewic, Z. W. (eds) 2002. Risk,
Reliability, Uncertainty, and Robustness of Water Resources
Systems. UNESCO International Hydrology Series.
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Brown, C. and Carriquiry, M. 2007. Managing hydroclimatological risk to water supply with option contracts and
reservoir index insurance. Water Resources Research, Vol. 43,
W11423.
Brugnach, M., Bolte, J. and Bradshaw, G. A. 2003.
Determining the signiﬁcance of threshold values
uncertainty in rule-based classiﬁcation models. Ecological
Modelling, Vol. 160, No. 1–2, pp. 63–76.
Brugnach, M., Dewulf, A., Pahl-Wostl, C. and Taillieu, T. 2008.
Toward a relational concept of uncertainty: about knowing
too little, knowing too differently, and accepting not to
know. Ecology and Society, Vol. 13, No. 2, p. 30.
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss2/art30/
Burton, I. 1996. The growth of adaptation capacity: practice
and policy. J. Smith, N. Bhatti, G. Menzhulin, R. Benioff, M.
I. Budyko, M. Campos, B. Jallow and F. Rijsberman (eds)
Adapting to Climate Change: An International Perspective.
New York, Springer-Verlag, pp. 55–67.
Callaway, J. M., Louw, D. B. and Hellmuth, M. E. 2008.
Beneﬁts and costs of measures for coping with water and
climate change: Berg River Basin, South Africa. F. Ludwig,
P. Kabat, H. van Schaik, and M. van der Valk (eds) Climate
Change Adaptation in the Water Sector. London, Earthscan,
pp. 191–212.
Camerer, C. and Weber, M. 1992. Recent developments in
modelling preferences: uncertainty and ambiguity. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 325–70.
Carpenter, S., Brock, W. and Hanson, P. 1999. Ecological
and social dynamics in simple models of ecosystem
management. Conservation Ecology, Vol. 3, No. 2, p. 4.
http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss2/art4/
Chen, X. D., Lupi, F., He, G. M. and Liu, J. G. 2009. Linking
social norms to efficient conservation investment in
payments for ecosystem services. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America (PNAS), Vol. 106, pp. 11812–17.
Coles, S. 2001. An Introduction to Statistical Modeling of
Extreme Values. Springer Series in Statistics. London,
Springer-Verlag.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Cooke, R. M. 2009. A brief history of quantitative risk
assessment. Resources, Vol. 172. Washington DC,
Resources for the Future.

WWDR4

Cosgrove, W. and Rijsberman, F. 2000. World Water Vision:
Making Water Everybody’s Business. London, Earthscan.
Costanza, R., Pérez-Maqueo, O. M., Martínez, M. L., Sutton, P.,
Anderson, S. J and Mulder, K. 2008. The value of wetlands
for hurricane protection, Ambio, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 241–248.
Covello, V. T. and Mumpower, J. 2001. Risk analysis and risk
management: an historical perspective. S. Gerrard, R.K.
Turner, I. Bateman (eds) Environmental risk planning and
management. Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar.
Dessai, S. and van der Sluijs, J. P. 2007. Uncertainty and
Climate Change Adaptation – a Scoping Study. Report
NWS-E-2007-198. Department of Science Technology and
Society, Copernicus Institute, Utrecht University.
DETR. 2000. Guidelines for Environmental Risk Assessment
and Management – Revised Departmental Guidance.
Prepared by the Institute for Environment and Health.
London, The Stationery Office.
Downing, T. E., Olsthoorn, X. and Tol, R. S. J. 1999. Climate,
Change and Risk. London, Routledge.
Duckstein, L. and Parent, E. 1994. Systems engineering of
natural resources under changing physical conditions:
a framework for reliability and risk. L. Duckstein and E.
Parent (eds) Natural Resources Management. Dordrecht,
The Netherlands, Kluwer.
Elshayeb Y. 2005. Overcoming uncertainties in risk analysis:
trade-offs among methods of uncertainty analysis.
I. Linkov and A. B. Ramadan (eds) Comparative Risk
Assessment and Environmental Decision Making. NATO
Science Series 38. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer.
Emerton, L. and Kekulandala, L. D. C. B. 2003. Assessment of
the Economic Value of Muthurajawela Wetland. Occ. Pap.
Sri Lanka, International Union for Conservation of Nature
(IUCN).
Fiering, M. B. 1982. Estimates of resilience indices by
simulation. Wat. Resour. Res., Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 41–50.
Figge, F. 2004. Managing Biodiversity Correctly – Efficient
Portfolio Management as an Effective Way of Protecting
Species. Cologne, Germany: Gerling.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson L., Holling,
C. S. and Walker, B. 2002. Resilience and Sustainable
Development: Building Adaptive Capacity in a World of
Transformations. Scientiﬁc Background Paper on Resilience
for the process of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development on behalf of the Environmental Advisory
Council to the Swedish Government. Interdisciplinary
Center of Natural Resources and Environmental Research,
Stockholm University, Sweden.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Elmqvist,
T., Gunderson, L. and Holling, C. S. 2004, Regime shifts,
resilience and biodiversity in ecosystem management.
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, Vol.
35, pp. 557–81.
Forslund, A., Malm Renöfält, B., Barchiesi, S., Cross, K.,
Davidson, S., Farrell, T., Korsgaard, L., Krchnak, K., McClain,
M., Meijer, K. and Smith, M. 2009. Securing Water for
Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: The Importance of
Environmental Flows. Swedish Water House Report 24.
Stockholm, Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI).

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

255

http://www.siwi.org/documents/Resources/Reports/
Report24_E-Flows-low-res.pdf
Frederick, K.D. and Major, D.C. 1997. Climate change and
water resources. Climatic Change, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 7–23.
Frederick, K. D., Major, D. C. and Stakhiv, E. Z. 1997. Water
resources planning principles and evaluation criteria
for climate change: summary and conclusions. Climatic
Change, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 291–313.
Ganoulis. J. G. 1994. Engineering Risk Analysis of Water
Pollution. New York, VCH.
Giles, J. 2002. Scientiﬁc uncertainty: when doubt is a sure
thing. Nature, Vol. 418, pp. 476–78.
Gladwell, M. 2000, The Tipping Point: How Little Things Can
Make a Big Difference. New York, Little Brown.
Green, C., Nicholls, R. and Johnson, C. 2000. Climate
Change Adaptation: A Framework for Analysis and
Decision-making in the Face of Risks and Uncertainties.
NCRAOA Report 24. London, Environment Agency.
Hall, K. 2003. An old problem in a new form. International
Water Power and Dam Construction 2003. London, Global
Trade Media, pp. 28–31.
Hamilton, L. C. and Keim, B. D. 2009. Regional variation in
perceptions about climate change, Int. J. Climatol., Vol.
29, No. 15, pp. 2348–2352. http://pubpages.unh.edu/~lch/
Hamilton_climate_perception.pdf

Johansson R. C., Tsur, Y., Roe, T. L., Doukkali, R. and Dinar,
A. 2002. Pricing irrigation water: a review of theory and
practice. Water Policy, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 173–99.
Kaplan, S. and Garrick, B. J. 1981. On the quantitative
deﬁnition of risk. Risk Analysis, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 11–27.
Karamouz, M., Szidarovszky, F. and Zahraie, B. 2003. Water
Resources Systems Analysis. Boca Raton, FL, Lewis
Publishers.
Kasperson J. X., Kasperson, R. E., Pidgeon, N., Slovic, P. 2003.
The social ampliﬁcation of risk: assessing ﬁfteen years of
research and theory. N. Pidgeon, R. E. Kasperson, P. Slovic
(eds) The Social Ampliﬁcation of Risk. Cambridge, UK,
Cambridge University Press.
Kasperson, R. E., Renn, O., Slovic, P., Brown, H., Emel, J.,
Goble, R., Kasperson, J. X. and Ratick, S. 1988. The social
ampliﬁcation of risk: a conceptual framework. Risk Analysis,
Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 177–87.
Keeney, R. L. and Raiffa, H. 1993. Decisions with Multiple
Objectives. Cambridge, UK/New York, Cambridge
University Press.

Hashimoto, T., Loucks, D. P. and Stedinger, J. R. 1982.
Robustness of water resource systems. Water Resources
Research, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 21–26.

Keller, K., Yohe, G. and Schlesinger, M. 2008. Managing the
risks of climate thresholds: uncertainties and information
needs. Climatic Change, Vol. 91, pp. 5–10.

Hashimoto, T., Stedinger, J. R. and Loucks. D. P. 1982.
Reliability, resiliency, and vulnerability criteria for
water resource system performance evaluation. Water
Resources Research, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 14–20.

van ‘t Klooster, S., Pauw, P. and Aerts, J. C. J. H. 2011. Dealing
with uncertainty through (participatory-) backcasting. J. C.
J. H. Aerts, W. Botzen, Ph. Ward (eds) Climate Adaptation
and Flood Risk in Coastal Cities. Abingdon, UK, Earthscan.

Heltberg, R., Siegel, P. B. and Jorgensen, S. L. 2009.
Addressing human vulnerability to climate change:
toward a ‘no-regrets’ approach. Global Environmental
Change, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 89–99.

Knight, F. H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Proﬁt. Boston, MA,
Hart, Schaffner & Marx/Houghton Mifflin Company.

Hobbs, B. F. 1997. Bayesian methods for analysing climate
change and water resource uncertainties. Journal of
Environmental Management, Vol. 49, No. 1, pp. 53–72.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Chapagain, A. L. 2008. Globalization of
Water: Sharing the Planet’s Freshwater Resources. Oxford,
UK, Blackwell Publishing.
Hoffman, B. 2011. Queensland warned of ﬂood plain
risk. Sunshine Coast Daily, 1 August 2011. http://
www.sunshinecoastdaily.com.au/story/2011/08/01/
we-develop-our-own-risk-expert/
Hoffmann-Riem, H. and Wynne, B. 2002. In risk assessment,
one has to admit ignorance. Nature, Vol. 416, p. 123.
Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological
systems. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics,
Vol. 4, pp. 1–23.
Holling, C. M. 1986. The resilience of terrestrial ecosystems:
local surprise and global change. W. C. Clark and R. E.
Munn (eds) Sustainable Development of the Biosphere.
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, pp. 292–317.

256

ISET (Institute for Social and Environmental Transition).
2010. Adaptive Strategies for Responding to Drought
and Flood in South Asia. Website. Boulder, Colo., ISET
International and ISET Nepal. http://www.i-s-e-t.org/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=44&Ite
mid=49

CHAPTER 8

Kummu, M., Ward, P.J. de Moel, H. and Varis, O. 2010, Is
physical water scarcity a new phenomenon? Global
assessment of water shortage over the last two millennia.
Environ. Res. Lett., Vol. 5 (July–September).
Lenton, T. M., Held, H., Kriegler, E., Hall, J. W., Lucht, W.,
Rahmstorf, S. and Schellnhube, H. J. 2008. Tipping
elements in the Earth’s climate system. PNAS, Vol. 105,
No. 6, pp. 1786–93.
Le Quesne, T. and Matthews, J. 2009. Adapting Water
Management: A Primer on Coping with Climate Change.
(WWF Water Security Series No. 3). Washington DC,
World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
http://assets.wwf.org.uk/downloads/water_management.pdf
––––. 2010. Flowing Forward: Freshwater Ecosystem
Adaptation to Climate Change in Water Resources
Management and Biodiversity Conservation. Working Note
#28. Washington DC, World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).
http://assets.panda.org/downloads/ﬂowing_forward_
freshwater_ecosystem_adaptation_to_climate_change.pdf
Li, Y. P., Huang, G. H. and Nie, S. L. 2009. Water resources
management and planning under uncertainty: an inexact
multistage joint-probabilistic programming method. Water
Resources Management, Vol. 23, pp. 2515–38.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Liu, A., Sty, T. and Goodrich, J. A. 2000. Land use as a
mitigation strategy for the water-quality impacts of global
warming: a scenario analysis on two watersheds in the
Ohio River Basin. Environmental Engineering and Policy,
Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 65–76.
Lloret, P. 2009. Water Protection Fund (FONAG). Circular
of the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water
Resource Management for Sustainable Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean, No. 29. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/
circulares/2/34862/Carta29in.pdf
Loewenstein, G., Rick, S. and Cohen, J. D. 2008.
Neuroeconomics. Annu. Rev. Psychol., Vol. 59, pp. 647–72.
Lofstedt, R. E. 2003. A European perspective on the NRC
‘Red Book,’ risk assessment in the Federal Government:
managing the process. Human and Ecological Risk
Assessment, Vol. 9, No. 5, pp. 1327–35.
Loucks, D. P. and van Beek, E. 2005. Water Resources
Systems Planning and Management. Paris, UNESCO.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis.
Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI).
Males, R. M. 2002. Beyond Expected Value: Making Decisions
Under Risk and Uncertainty. Alexandria, Va., US Army
Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water Resources.
http://www.iwr.usace.army.mil/docs/iwrreports/02r4bey_
exp_val.pdf
Marien, M. 2002. Futures studies in the 21st century: a realitybased view. Futures, Vol. 34, pp. 261–81.
Marris, C., Langford, I., Saunderson, T. and O’Riordan, T. 1997.
Exploring the ‘psychometric paradigm’: comparisons
between aggregate and individual analyses. Risk Analysis,
Vol. 22, No. 4, pp. 665–9.
Martin, R. 2002. The Responsibility Virus: How Control Freaks,
Shrinking Violets – and the Rest of us – Can Harness the
Power of True Partnership. New York, Basic Books.
Mays, L. W. 1996. The role of risk analysis in water resources
engineering. Water Resources Update, Vol. 103, pp. 8–11.
Miller, K. and Yates, D. 2006. Climate Change and Water
Resources: A Primer for Municipal Water Providers. Denver,
CO, Awwa Research Foundation (AwwaRF)/University
Cooperation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR).
Morgan, M. G. and Henrion, M. 1990. Uncertainty: A Guide to
Dealing with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy
Analysis. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press.
Murdoch, P. S., Baron, J. S. and Miller T. L. 2000. Potential effects
of climate change on surface-water quality in North America.
J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc., Vol. 36, No. 2, pp. 347–66.
Naiman, R. J. and Turner, M. G. 2000. A future perspective
on North America’s freshwater ecosystems. Ecological
Applications, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 958–70.
Nature Conservancy. 2010. South America: Creating
Water Funds for People and Nature. Website. Arlington,
Va., The Nature Conservancy. http://www.nature.org/
wherewework/southamerica/misc/art26470.html

WWDR4

NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration).
2009. Restoration Economics: Risk and Uncertainty in
Environmental Restoration Programs. Washington DC, US
Department of Commerce.
NRC (National Research Council). 2000. Risk Analysis
and Uncertainty in Flood Damage Reduction Studies
Committee on Risk-Based Analysis for Flood Damage
Reduction. Washington DC, National Academies Press.
Palmer, M. A, Reidy Liermann, C. A., Nilsson, C., Flörke, M.,
Alcamo, J., Lake, P. S. and Bond, N. 2008. Climate change
and the world’s river basins: anticipating management
options. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 6,
pp. 81–9.
Perrot-Maître, D. 2006. The Vittel Payments for Ecosystem
Services: a ‘Perfect’ PES Case? London, International
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
Pindyk, R. S. 2007. Uncertainty in environmental economics.
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, Vol. 1, No. 1,
pp. 45–65.
Plate, E. J. and Duckstein, L. 1988. Reliability based design
concepts in hydraulic engineering. Wat. Resour. Bull., Vol.
24, pp. 234–45.
Policy Research Corporation. 2009. Netherlands.
Brussels, European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/
maritimeaffairs/climate_change/netherlands_en.pdf
Rahmstorf, S. and Ganopolski, A. 1999. Long-term global
warming scenarios computed with an efficient coupled
climate model, Climatic Change, Vol. 43, pp. 353–67.
Rayner, S. 1992. Cultural theory and risk analysis. S. Krimsky
and D. Golding (eds) Social Theories of Risk. Westport,
Conn., Praeger.
RRC (River Restoration Centre). 2009. The London River
Action Plan. London, RRC.
Saunders, J. F. and Lewis, W. M. 2003. Implications of
climatic variability for regulatory low ﬂows in the South
Platte River basin, Colorado. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc.,
Vol. 39, pp. 33–45.
Shultz, S. D. and Leitch, J. A. 2001. The Feasibility Of Wetland
Restoration To Reduce Flooding In The Red River Valley: A
Case Study Of The Maple River Watershed, North Dakota.
Agribusiness & Applied Economics Report No. 23597.
North Dakota State University, Department of Agribusiness
and Applied Economics.
Simonovic, S. P. 2008. Managing Water Resources: Methods
and Tools for a Systems Approach. London, Earthscan.
Slovic, P. 1992. Perception of risk: reﬂections on the
psychometric paradigm. S. Krimsky and D. Golding (eds)
Social theories of risk. New York, Praeger, pp. 117–52.
Slovic, P., Finucane, M, Peters, E. and MacGregor, D. G. 2004.
Risk as analysis and risk as feelings: some thoughts about
affect, reason, risk, and rationality. Risk Analysis, Vol. 24,
No. 2.
Stuip, M. A. M, Baker, C. J. and Oosterberg, W. 2002.
The Socio-economics of Wetlands. Wageningen, The
Netherlands, Wetlands International and the Dutch
Institute for Inland Water Management and Waste Water
Treatment (RIZA).

WORKING UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND MANAGING RISK

257

Tallis, H., Kareiva, P., Marvier, M. and Chang, A. 2008. An
ecosystem services framework to support both practical
conservation and economic development. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America (PNAS), Vol. 105, No. 28, pp. 9457–64.
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems & Biodiversity), 2009.
TEEB Climate Issues Update. Geneva, United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP).
http://www.teebweb.org/InformationMaterial/
TEEBReports/tabid/1278/language/en-US/Default.aspx.
Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. 1974. Judgment under
uncertainty: heuristics and biases. Science, Vol. 85, pp.
1124–31.
UNCCD (United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertiﬁcation). 2011. Scientiﬁc Review of the UNCCD
Provisionally Accepted Set of Impact Indicators to Measure
the Implementation of Strategic Objectives 1, 2 and 3.
White-Paper – Version 1, Unpublished draft. New York,
UNDP Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery.
––––. 2004. Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for
Development. New York, UNDP Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery.
UNDRO (United Nations Disaster Relief Organization).
1991. Mitigation of Natural Disasters: Phenomena, Effects,
and Options. A Manual for Policy Makers and Planners.
New York, United Nations, Office of the Disaster Relief
Coordinator.

Vörösmarty C. J., McIntyre, P. B., Gessner, M. O., Dudgeon, D.,
Prusevich, A., Green, P., Glidden, S., Bunn, S. E., Sullivan,
C. A., Reidy Liermann, C. and Davies, P. M. 2010. Global
threats to human water security and river biodiversity.
Nature, Vol. 467, pp. 555–61.
Walker, B., Holling, C. S., Carpenter, S. R. and Kinzig, A. 2004.
Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social–
ecological systems. Ecology and Society, Vol. 9, No. 2, p. 5.
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art5/
Walker, B. and Meyers, J. A. 2004. Thresholds in ecological
and social-ecological systems: a developing database.
Ecology and Society, Vol. 9, No. 2, p. 3.
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/iss2/art3.
Walker, W. E., Harremoës, P., Rotmans, J., van der Sluijs, J.P.,
van Asselt, M. B. A., Janssen, P. H. M. and von Krauss, M.
P. K. 2003. Deﬁning uncertainty: a conceptual basis for
uncertainty management in model based decision support.
Integrated Assessment, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 5–17.
Wardekker, J. A., van der Sluijs, J. P., Janssen, P. H. M.,
Kloprogge, P. and Petersen, A. C. 2008. Uncertainty
Communication in environmental assessments: views from
the Dutch science-policy interface. Environmental Science
& Policy, Vol. 11, No. 7, pp. 627–641.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2008.05.005

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
2007. Recommendations on Payments for Ecosystem
Services in Integrated Water Management. New York/
Geneva, United Nations. http://www.unece.org/index.
php?id=11663

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable
Development). 2011. Guide to Corporate Ecosystem
Valuation: A framework for improving corporate decisionmaking. Geneva, WBCSD.

UNESCO (United Nations Economic, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization). 2005. The Precautionary Principle. Paris,
UNESCO World Commission on the Ethics of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge (COMEST).

Willows, R. I. and Connell, R. K. (eds) 2003. Climate
adaptation: Risk, uncertainty and decision-making. UKCIP
Technical Report. Oxford, UK Climate Impacts Programme
(UKCIP).

UN-Water. 2006. Coping with Water Scarcity: A Strategic
Issue and Priority for System-wide Action. UN-Water
Thematic Initiatives. Geneva, UN-Water.

Wolt, J. D. and Peterson, R. K. D. 2000. Agricultural
biotechnology and societal decision-making: the role of
risk analysis. AgBioForum, Vol. 3, No. 1.
http://www.wbcsd.org/DocRoot/iv9e2wIURXHjP8in0RVN/
WBCSD_Guide_CEV_April_2011.pdf

van Aalst, M., Hellmuth, M. and Ponzi, D. 2007. Come Rain or
Shine: Integrating Climate Risk Management into African
Development Bank Group Operations. Tunis, Tunisia,
African Development Bank.
van Notten, P. W. F. 2005. Writing on the Wall. Scenario
Development in Times of Discontinuity, Boca Raton, FL,
Dissertation.com.
––––. 2006. Scenario development: a typology of approaches.
Think Scenarios, Rethink Education. Paris, OECD.
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/27/38/37246431.pdf

258

Vörösmarty, C. J., Green, P., Salisbury, J. and Lammers, R. B.
2000, Global water resources: vulnerability from climate
change and population growth, Science, Vol. 289, No. 5477,
pp. 284–8.

CHAPTER 8

WRI (Water Resources Institute), Meridian Institute and
WBCSD. 2008. Corporate Ecosystem Services Review:
Guidelines for Identifying Business Risks and Opportunities
Arising from Ecosystem Change. Geneva, WRI/WBCSD/
Meridian Institute.
http://pdf.wri.org/corporate_ecosystem_services_review.pdf
Yoe, C. E. 1996. An introduction to risk and uncertainty in
the evaluation of environmental investments. IWR Report
96-R-8, prepared for the US Army Corps of Engineers.
Alexandria, VA, Institute for Water Resources.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 9
Understanding uncertainty
and risks associated with key drivers

—
Authors Catherine Cosgrove, William J. Cosgrove, Erum Hassan and Joana Talafré
Contributors Richard Connor and Gilberto Gallopín

© Shutterstock/Thor Jorgen Udvang

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Managing water is managing risks old and new. Water management has always included
managing risk and a signiﬁcant body of knowledge exists about the management of the
water cycle and its physical processes. Water management is also a cross-sectoral activity in
which water managers are responsible for meeting the requirements of different economic
sectors and the environment while caring for equity issues. This is not an easy task. The
water system is dynamic and is characterized by large spatial and temporal variability in
precipitation and runoff, with water-related risks such as ﬂoods and droughts. The allocation
frameworks that regulate the distribution of water among different uses do not always reﬂect
physical realities including the inherent variability in resource availability. Moreover, dynamics
within sectors often create new and unexpected demands on water resources, increasing
stress on its capacity to supply water for society and the environment.
The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is currently undertaking
a project to develop potential scenarios for the world’s water resources and their use up
to 2050. The last global water scenarios were published over ten years ago (Cosgrove and
Rijsberman, 2000), and although they took into account most uncertainties and risks known
at that time, they did not consider climate change. Furthermore, demography, technology,
politics, societal values, governance and law are demonstrating accelerating trends or
disruptions. Linkages are being made with other scenario processes being undertaken at the
global level, such as new global environment scenarios (Global Environment Outlook 4) and
the new Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios on climate change.
This chapter reﬂects ﬁndings to date.1

9.1 Possible evolution of key drivers
Traditionally, analysis of past climate coupled with
stochastic analysis has provided a fairly reliable basis
for examining the water cycle with its hydrological
extremes. Historical climatic and hydrological information often forms the starting point for water managers
and extrapolations of the past are routinely conducted in order to simulate future hydrological conditions.
However, projected pressures on water resources lie
outside the control of water managers. These can signiﬁcantly affect the balance between water demand
and supply – sometimes in uncertain ways – and thus
create new risks for water managers and users. Such
increasing uncertainties and risks necessitate a different approach to water management strategies.
The ﬁrst phase of the WWAP World Water Scenarios
Project has undertaken research on ten drivers of
change. The relevance of each of these drivers varies
in different regions of the world.
Water stress and sustainability are functions of the
available water resources and their withdrawal and
consumption. Both resources and consumption are
variables that depend on many factors. Drivers that
directly impinge upon water stress and sustainability
are the ecosystem, agriculture, infrastructure, technology, demographics and economy. The ultimate drivers, governance, politics, ethics and society (values and
equity), climate change and security exert their effect
mostly through their impacts upon the proximate drivers. Experts in each of the ﬁelds covered by the drivers were asked to read one of the ten research reports
and give their views about the future developments
that were identiﬁed. Some participated in an exercise
where they were asked to identify the relative importance of the developments and when it was likely they
would occur. Others completed a survey in which they
indicated which developments were more likely to occur, and when. The following text highlights developments considered most important or likely to occur.
9.1.1 Water resources: Surface water, groundwater and
ecosystems
Any study of strategy, planning, design, operation and
management of water resources systems must take
as its basis variability of quantity and quality in water
sources and supply systems. The new dimension that
now must be considered is the importance of these
possible variables and the uncertainty of the limits of
their variability.

WWDR4

Expert survey participants in the WWAP World Water
Scenarios Project ranked increases in water productivity in agriculture as the most important development
affecting water. Water productivity for food production increased by nearly 100% between 1961 and 2001.
Participants estimated that it would likely increase
another 100% by 2040. They further estimated that
rainfed agriculture globally will likely yield an average
of 3.5 tonnes per ha of grain by around 2040.
The second most important development affecting water was the percentage of land area subject to
droughts. The participants estimated that this could
increase by at least 50% for extreme events, 40% for
severe droughts and 30% for moderate ones by the
2040s.2 Water availability issues were among the most
likely developments to occur before 2050.
The participants considered global water withdrawals likely to increase by 50% from 2000 levels before
2020, with a probable 10% reduction in annual mean
streamﬂows by 2030 in most of the populated areas
of the world. By the beginning of the 2030s, groundwater recharge rates could be reduced by 20% in areas
already suffering from water stress in 2010. The participants further considered that global agricultural trade
by 2020 could contain the virtual water equivalent to
20% of the total water withdrawn globally for food
production.
Solutions for the monitoring and management of water availability were seen as unlikely to occur in the
short term. Conjunctive groundwater and surface water management were seen as unlikely to occur almost
everywhere before the 2040s. This was also the case
for management of withdrawals from aquifers to ensure they do not exceed the mean recharge rates of
the previous decade.
The participants predicted that the Paciﬁc Decadal, El
Niño-Southern and North Atlantic Oscillations would
likely be understood by the 2020s, and hence included
in climate forecasting models. Recognition of the context of non-stationary climates and hydrological and
anthropogenic forcing in all water management planning and operations was seen as likely to follow at the
beginning of the 2030s.
Desalination was not viewed as a likely solution to water availability before the end of the 2040s. It was considered likely that desalination could produce 25% of

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

261

“The survey participants
expected that a strong,
effective universally
binding international
agreement to combat
climate change would
likely be in place by
2040; this was viewed
as an event of high
importance.”
the drinking water for cities by the end of the 2040s,
and 5% of water used for food production by the middle of the century. The slow adoption rate of desalination technologies was also reﬂected in responses
to the consultations on Agriculture, Economy and
Technology.
The loss of species diversity was viewed as both important and likely to occur by the beginning of the
2030s. Diversity of freshwater biological species could
be signiﬁcantly reduced as early as the beginning
of the 2020s, and was seen as likely by 2030 due to
higher temperatures, reduced ﬂows, atmospheric carbon dioxide and increased nitrogen caused by climate
change. Organisms with strong adaptive capacity to
extreme environmental variability could also increasingly dominate ecosystems by the beginning of that
decade. The implementation of appropriate countermeasures to limit biodiversity and loss and reduce the
rate of loss by 50% was seen as likely to occur by the
beginning of the 2040s. However, the participants
considered it unlikely that the presence and spread of
water-borne invasive alien species could be brought
under control before 2050.
9.1.2 Agriculture
The most important development related to water
resources according to participants was increasing
water withdrawals for agriculture. Withdrawals were
seen as likely to increase from the current level of

262

CHAPTER 9

approximately 3100 billion m3 to 4500 billion m3 per
year by 2020, or more likely, 2030. In several regions
of the world – South Asia, Latin America and Africa, in
particular, sub-Saharan Africa – availability of water
in these volumes is not physically possible. In other
regions, the signiﬁcant investment in infrastructure
required for storage is not economically possible for
many countries concerned.
The second most important ranked development was
deforestation. Regions might seek to increase their
agricultural areas by continuing to expand deforestation, albeit more slowly. Participants viewed this
development as more likely to occur than the slowing
of expansion of agricultural lands as a result of ecological concerns.
Looking at probable developments, the probability was
seen that fertilizer prices would continue to track energy prices. If energy prices continue to rise, the cost of
produce will also rise unless offset by other measures.
Another probability was that investments in infrastructure would improve the production potential of rainfed farming (e.g. by improving rainwater collection and
storage systems) by 2020. Such a development would
make more efficient use of available land and water.
9.1.3 Climate change and variability
Climate change will affect the hydrological cycle
and hence the availability of water for its users. It is
expected that extreme water-related events such
as ﬂoods and droughts will occur more frequently and with greater intensity (Bates et al., 2008).
Extrapolations using historical data are no longer valid
for these events – as for the hydrological cycle as a
whole – which increases uncertainty about the future.
Furthermore, the spatial resolution of global climate
change models is relatively coarse. As a result, conversion to the more detailed scale necessary for water
managers can prove difficult. The problem is compounded by the fact that these projections are not
available at the jurisdictional level (state and local), or
at the river basin level where much of water resources
planning takes place.
The important developments for this driver are related
to water availability. The survey participants estimated
that the number of people at risk from water stress
was likely to reach 1.7 billion before 2030 (before 2020
at the earliest), and 2.0 billion by the beginning of the
2030s. This number was not likely to reach 3.2 billion

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

before 2050. This is roughly consistent with, though
possibly slightly ahead of, the IPCC SRES scenarios
(Nakicenovic, 2000).

see the integration of funding for climate change adaptation into funding for adaptive water management – a
priority for water-reliant socio-economic sectors.

Another important development was the increase in
delta land vulnerable to serious ﬂooding. This could
expand by 50% and was seen as likely to occur by the
beginning of the 2040s.

9.1.4 Infrastructure
Aging water infrastructure, lack of data and deteriorating monitoring networks represent major risks for the
future in nearly all regions.

These events could have a signiﬁcant impact on agriculture. Inter-annual freshwater shortages combined
with ﬂooding were seen as likely to reduce total global
crop yields by 10% by the 2040s.

Survey participants viewed access to potable water
and appropriate sanitation facilities as the most important developments in this regard. They considered
that 90% of the global population would likely have
reasonable access to a reliable source of safe drinking
water by the beginning of the 2040s. Their view that
the beginning of the 2030s would see the routine use
of nanoﬁlters in the treatment of potable water in over
30 countries may also have inﬂuenced this appraisal.
The technology survey provided a similar time horizon
for the roll out of this technology: it was considered
likely that economically viable nanotechnology (such
as carbon nanotubes) could yield new and effective
membranes and catalysts useful in desalination and
pollution control by 2030. The participants further
considered that 90% of the global population would
most likely have reasonable access to appropriate sanitation facilities towards the end of the 2040s.

Another important development was the potential
for a worldwide rise in living standards and population growth to greatly increase the demand for energy, causing a 20% increase in GHG emissions. This
was considered likely by the beginning of the 2030s.
Alternative energy technologies and solutions were
likely to emerge more signiﬁcantly around this time.
Battery-powered electric cars could have a 30% share
of the world automobile market by the 2030s. Wind
power could generate 20% of the world electricity
demand towards the end of the same decade. By the
2040s, 30% of the world power consumption could be
connected to ‘smart’ power grids, while hydrogen fuel
cells could power 20% of the world automobile market
during the same decade. Carbon capture and storage
could be used in 50% of all new fossil power plants,
most likely after 2050, with existing plants being retroﬁtted or closed.
The survey participants expected that a strong, effective universally binding international agreement
to combat climate change would likely be in place by
2040; this was viewed as an event of high importance.
The positive development with earliest likelihood of
occurring is an extensive well-planned and ﬁnanced
multi-national campaign to support public education on
the facts, causes, effects and costs of climate change,
by the beginning of the 2020s. Increased public information and knowledge transfer about climate-related
issues are likely to occur after this. For example, indisputable global precipitation and temperature changes
could be reported publicly in the 2020s, with effective
international coordination in place covering activities in
climate analysis, mitigation and adaptation, and continual exchange of related up-to-date data, knowledge
and experience by the 2030s. The 2030s will also likely

WWDR4

A second important development was the annual inspection of all dams and dykes over 50 years old, and
all those with signiﬁcant risks from hazards for structural soundness. This was estimated most likely to
begin in the 2030s. The development of emergency
evacuation plans with clear implementation responsibility for these dams and dykes was also considered
most likely to occur in the 2030s. This is particularly
relevant as the increased siltation of dams due to climate change and deforestation could shorten the estimated remaining lifetime of a signiﬁcant number of
large dams by 30%. This development was also viewed
as important and most likely to occur within the same
timeframe as the previous developments.
Investments in infrastructure were considered also to
be of importance. Income for water services (tariffs,
taxes and transfers) covering all operating costs and
depreciation of infrastructure globally were considered
likely to occur at the beginning of the 2040s. This was
also the case for the write-off of external debt of lowincome countries, freeing funds for investment in water
infrastructure.

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

263

Inland navigation needs would continue to inﬂuence
river operations and ﬂow allocations. The 2020s would
likely see national water planning taking into account
the need to provide appropriate environmental ﬂows
in the regulation of water infrastructure.

9.1.6 Demography
Population dynamics including growth, age distribution, urbanization and migration lead to increased
pressures on freshwater resources through greater demand for water and higher pollution levels.

With the the beginning of the 2030s would likely come
robots to remotely and reliably mend underground
pipes in at least ten countries, and the use of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) sensor
networks to monitor hazardous incidents in water systems. Participants also estimated that remote sensing
technologies and GPS could be used to supplement
local water resource monitoring systems and other
technologies, by the 2030s, to identify, map and explore underground infrastructures whose location was
unknown or forgotten.

Unsurprisingly, overall world population size ﬁgured
as an important issue for developments in this section. Survey participants felt that the world population could reach 7.9 billion by 2034, 9.15 billion at the
beginning of the 2050s, and 10.46 billion beyond 2050.
This is in keeping with the UN Population Division’s
2008 Revision medium variant, which estimated a
population of 9.1 billion by 2050 (UNDESA, 2009).

9.1.5 Technology
Survey participants expected most of the largest water
consumers using products to conserve water between
2020 and 2030. These include pressure-reducing
valves, horizontal-axis clothes washers, water-efficient
dishwashers, grey-water recycling systems, low-ﬂush
tank toilets and low-ﬂow or waterless urinals.
Inexpensive technologies for water desalination in
large volumes, enabling nearly everyone within
100 miles (160 km) of coastlines to have water for
their drinking and industrial water needs, were considered likely by 2020 with increasing likelihood by
2030. This was linked to economically viable nanotechnology (such as carbon nanotubes), which could
yield new and effective membranes and catalysts
useful in desalination and pollution control by removing heavy metal and other dissolved pollutants from
water. Participants saw this as likely between 2020
and 2030. These dates probably reﬂect an appreciation of the delays in adopting and building systems
with the new technology.
The widespread adoption of a well-known technology,
rainwater harvesting, combined with new, simple and
cheap ways of purifying the collected water was also
considered likely between 2020 and 2030. The same
likelihood was accorded to the use of affordable technology by agriculturists to capture real-time data on
their crops and soil moisture, enabling them to make
informed decisions on efficient irrigation schedules.
Both would help increase the efficiency of land and
water use.

264

CHAPTER 9

Population growth could overwhelm past gains in water and sanitation accessibility. Participants (mainly demographers) considered that by the 2030s, population
growth in the majority of developing countries could
reduce the percentage of those with improved access
to water supply and sanitation achieved since 1990
by 10%.
Education and employment of women was seen as a
development inﬂuencing fertility, particularly in least
developed countries. By the 2030s, the rise in levels of
women’s education and employment in a majority of
least developed countries could cause a signiﬁcant decline in fertility levels.
Efforts to reduce mortality in least developed countries
were considered as developments with the earliest
likelihood. In the group of 58 countries for which HIV/
AIDS prevalence is above 1% and/or whose HIV population exceeds 500,000, most could achieve anti-retroviral treatment coverage for people living with HIV/AIDS
of 60% or more by the 2020s. In the same decade the
number of interventions to prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV in these countries could reach an
average of 60%. The coverage level for both interventions was 36% in 2007.
The combined global deaths per year from diarrhoeal
diseases and malaria could decrease to 1.54 million or
less before 2030 (compared to 2.53 million in 2008),
and to 710,000 or less before 2040.
The infant mortality rate was seen as likely to drop.
The average estimated mortality rate in 2005–2010 in
less developed countries was 78 deaths per 1,000 live
births.3 By 2030 the rate was projected to drop in 60

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

developing countries to 45 deaths per 1,000 live births.
Expected successes in overcoming these challenges
could explain why participants estimated that all developing countries have a life expectancy of 70 years
or more by the 2040s.
Developments that could diminish longevity were seen
as possible. By the 2030s, the worsening of the epidemiological environment with regards to the spread of
pandemics, re-emerging pathogens and the evolution
of drug-resistant diseases could prevent the average
world life expectancy from growing above 75.5 years.
By the late 2030s, delayed impacts of obesity could act
against increasing life expectancy beyond 75.5 years.
Growth in urban population was also deemed important. By the end of the 2030s 70% of the world population was seen as likely to become urban. The proportion of the world population living in slums was likely
to decrease just to 25% by the end of the 2040s, from
33% today.
The proportion of world population living in coastal
areas could reach 75% in the 2030s, increasing from
60% in 2010. The number of migrants due to the impacts of climate change was likely to reach 250 million
in the 2040s. Migration following natural disasters and
conﬂict-based events often occurs principally to coastal urban areas, including large peri-urban slums with
little or no access to basic services and increased risk
exposure to disease and epidemics.
9.1.7 Economy and security
Survey participants on the economy and security gave almost equal importance to two possible
developments.
First, the demand for water in developing countries could increase by 50% over current 2011 levels.
Participants considered this likely to happen between
2020 and 2030. This reinforces the issues raised by the
participants who reviewed agricultural developments.
Second, over 40% of countries could experience severe
freshwater scarcity by 2020. This would occur mostly in low-income countries or regions in sub-Saharan
Africa and Asia. It was considered more likely that unequal access to water would create new economic polarities, between 2020 and 2030. Such economic polarities would increase the dangers of political unrest
and consequent conﬂict.

WWDR4

“A water footprint
measure will likely be
available and published
widely on an annual
basis between 2020
and 2030.”
A water footprint measure will likely be available and
published widely on an annual basis between 2020
and 2030 (e.g. in 2030 the ecological footprint is expected to be around twice the size of the Earth’s surface). Such a tool would provide useful information
to decision-makers, although the question remains
as to whether they will have the resources and will to
respond appropriately. Several types of cost-effective
desalination or other technologies could be widely
available and increase safe water supply by 20% globally between 2020 and 2030. This applies to drinking
water and water for industrial use, but desalinated water will probably remain prohibitively expensive except
for high value crops or new, more intense types of
food production.
9.1.8 Governance
Many survey participants saw the failure of urban
water supply infrastructure in many cities as important (underscoring the need to upgrade urban water
systems). This could happen in more than two-dozen
major cities by 2030. That this item appears so high in
a review on governance indicates that participants feel
that urban water system governance is badly in need
of attention.
‘The development of online forums on water issues
including local government and civil society was also
considered important, reducing the asymmetry of information between user, provider and policy-maker.
Networked coordination at the national level to share
information and best practices between local water
agencies was similarly viewed as important and likely
to be achieved in at least 95% of countries between
2020 and 2030. Clearly, public consultation and information sharing are considered key factors with a fair
degree of likelihood.

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

265

The adoption of an international convention speciﬁcally dedicated to groundwater was considered important, reﬂecting the lack of attention to groundwater in
the past. Yet while participants thought it important,
it was considered likely to occur only by 2030, probably reﬂecting the delays in ratiﬁcation of the 1997
United Nations Convention on Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses (which has received 24
ratiﬁcations as of October 2011).
9.1.9 Politics
The survey participants on politics had similar views on
the importance of establishing and following transparency and participation procedures in matters of
water governance. However, they saw little likelihood
that this would take place in at least 120 countries by
2020–2030. They also saw as important the number
of people living in insecure or unstable countries that
run a signiﬁcant risk of collapse. Two billion people
were living in such conditions in 2010, according to the
Failed States Index 2010 – a collaborative between the
Fund for Peace and Foreign Policy that uses 12 indicators of state cohesion and performance to assess the
vulnerability of 177 states.4 That this could be reduced
to less than 1 billion people by 2030 was viewed as
unlikely. As noted earlier, water (and related food and
energy) scarcity could have a major negative impact
on achieving this objective. In fact, participants saw a
much greater likelihood that social instability and violence could spread to most states faced with chronic
water scarcity.
Politics respondents considered that resistance within
government and from vested interests could keep
governments from becoming more participatory, ﬂexible and transparent, leading to further mistrust and/
or increased activism. The group thought it likely that
at least 100 countries would fall into this category between 2020 and 2030. They thought it almost as likely
that most people could agree upon the interconnectedness of living systems. Participants felt that while
the population at large might eventually agree upon
action to be taken, governments as presently constituted would be unable to respond.
9.1.10 Ethics and culture
The survey group on ethics and culture considered a
shift in human values, whereby people agree that the
present has an obligation to preserve opportunities
for the future, as an important development. This was
deemed likely within the 2020–2030 timeframe. This

266

CHAPTER 9

development is related to recognition of the interconnectedness of living systems, which was considered
to have about the same probability by survey participants in the politics group. Such shifts in public perception can provide opportunities for improved water
management.
The deepening of current inequalities in access to water in poor countries caused by increasing water scarcity was also ranked as important by this group, and
deemed likely to occur in the 2020–2030 period.
The acknowledgement of access to safe water as a
basic human right by most countries in the world also
was considered important. However, despite international recognition, the survey participants considered
that respect of the right was likely to occur closer to
2030. Of similar importance was the development of
water-related anti-poverty strategies including employment of poor people at water points, in irrigation
and in food production. The participants considered
that these strategies could be in place in at least 30
countries within the same timeframe. Knowledge sharing was considered likely, with the emergence of collaborative international research and development on
the ethical uses of water probable within the 2020–
2030 timeframe.

9.2 Responding to the challenges: The past
is a poor guide to an uncertain future
Water managers work in an uncertain world. Their ﬁrst
priority is to ensure the security of water supplies.
These depend on geophysical parameters that dictate
water availability (precipitation, runoff, inﬁltration),
and the determinants of human activities that affect
the quality and natural ﬂow of water (e.g. how land use
affects storm water runoff), as well as its distribution
in space and time. Until recently, the analysis of historical data coupled with stochastic5 analysis has provided
a good basis for examining extremes and sensitivities of water supplies and their robustness, resilience
and reliability under past climate variability. For water
managers this is the starting point for any realistic
analysis, conducted routinely in most managed systems. However, the likelihood of increased variability of
future water supply, as a result of climate change, will
make analyses based on historical data less reliable.
There is also greater uncertainty on the demand side
due to an increase in the number and complexity of
choices, which are outgrowing managers’ abilities to

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

agreement on solutions and their implement can
stretch to decades, especially for issues with a regional or international dimension. The pace of change
reduces the time available for recognizing the problem and agreeing and implementing the right decision at the right time. Decision-makers ‘outside the
water box’ are themselves affected by the uncertainty of how shaping forces will evolve. Water managers can only inform their decisions and manage with
the available tools. In this context, it is important to
develop relevant information as close as possible to
the geographic scale at which they work. Figure 9.1
illustrates the multiplicity of drivers and the complex
interactions between them.

assimilate and analyse data and make decisions. As an
example, there are difficulties in predicting the demand for speciﬁc goods and services, including energy,
which affect water through production, transport or
disposal. These create new uncertainties and associated risks for water managers.
Technological development can address these challenges, but not always. The development of new technologies can help address issues of water production and quality and thus reduce risks, but narrowly
targeted technological development that does not
take into account impacts on water can worsen existing risks (e.g. the ﬁrst, current generation of biofuel
technologies).

9.2.1 Scenario analysis
Scenario analysis is a planning tool for assessing responses to a potentially very different future, depending on how key drivers develop and interact.
There are myriad drivers that determine the future
situation; therefore, it is rarely possible to consider
all of them simultaneously (ten have been discussed

Water managers are aware of the existing and potential vulnerabilities within the systems in which
they operate. However, the gathering speed of forces
outside their control pose challenges to water management and affect the ﬁnancial and institutional
resources available to meet them. The timescale for

FIGURE 9.1
Key drivers and causal links affecting water stress and sustainability and human well-being

Water
đƫ stress
đƫ sustainability

Water consumption and
withdrawal
Technology
đƫ water
đƫ energy

Economy
(including water
infrastructure)

Population size
and growth (water
needs/demand)

Ecosystems and
land use (including
agriculture)

Water resources

Well-being,
poverty,
equity

Politics and governance
(including security)

Values changes
đƫ lifestyles and
consumption patterns
đƫ solidarity

Climate change

Source: Gallopíin (2012, ﬁg. 2, p. 8).

WWDR4

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

267

“The timescale for
agreement on
solutions and their
implement can stretch
to decades, especially
for issues with a
regional or international
dimension. The pace
of change reduces
the time available
for recognizing the
problem and agreeing
and implementing the
right decision at the
right time.”
earlier). Consequently, scenario analysis takes a
limited number of drivers at a time, and assesses
their combined inﬂuence on the variables likely to
be of particular signiﬁcance for shaping the future
(e.g. population growth and distribution, size of agriculture, and the amount of water used). Sensitivity
analysis is undertaken for drivers not included explicitly, to conﬁrm the validity of the scenarios that have
been generated. These projections may then be used
in the evaluation of policy and planning responses, to
maximize beneﬁts and/or minimize losses in achieving the desired state.
World Water Scenarios Project
The major focus of the World Water Scenarios Project6
is future water availability and its impacts on human
well-being, including the health of ecosystems that
provide life support. The principal causal links needed
to build the logic (or plot) of the scenarios have been
tentatively identiﬁed. As shown in Figure 9.1, water

268

CHAPTER 9

stress and sustainability (top oval) are functions of the
available water resources and their withdrawal and
consumption. In turn, both resources and consumption are variables that depend on many factors (only
the most relevant are shown). The main drivers are
arranged in a sequence from top to bottom showing
the proximate drivers (top row of boxes) that directly
impinge upon water stress and sustainability, and the
ultimate drivers (bottom row of boxes) that exert their
effect, mostly through their impacts upon the proximate drivers. Arrows indicate causal inﬂuences from
and between drivers. In some cases there is reciprocal
(feedback) causality between drivers. The next phase
of the Scenarios Project will entail developing scenarios and scenario-development tools that can be used
by decision-makers.

9.3 Peering into possible futures
Section 9.1 highlighted some of the most important
trends likely to affect water and its key drivers over the
next forty years, and offered insight on the pressures,
uncertainties and risks these create for water resources
uses and management. Section 9.2 demonstrated the
complexity of the interlinkages between these drivers
of change. These will be qualitatively and quantitatively analysed using models as WWAP’s World Water
Scenarios Project moves ahead.
Even without the beneﬁt of the systematic and analytical approach employed in the World Water Scenarios
project, it is useful to consider how certain drivers
could interact with each other, and how the trends cumulate in order to examine possible futures for water
resources. A set of possible future outcomes are examined here in terms of the positive and negative pressures they are most likely to generate, and the types
of uncertainties and risks their evolution may produce,
both regionally and globally.
Contemporary crises (food, energy, poverty, health,
economy, environmental degradation, climate change)
are the result of a combination of various unanticipated pressures or drivers. While reﬂecting upon
these crises and searching for possible solutions, it is
also important to try to ﬁnd ways to avoid future crises. This section provides a superﬁcial exploration of
some of the possible outcomes resulting from combinations of the various trends discussed in Section 9.1,
and analyses the short and long-term risks involved
in each situation. The three scenarios examined below
relate to: how we can feed the world population, how

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

the evolution of technology might help, and the role
of policies in encouraging a transition to a sustainable
economy.
9.3.1 Feeding or not feeding 9 billion people
One possible future aims to analyse the impacts on
water of a policy status quo, or to describe what might
happen in the absence of any intervention.
The global population is likely to reach 9.1 billion in
2050, if not sooner. While this alone has potentially
dire consequences in terms of pressures on natural
resources, especially water, a deeper look at demographic trends provides a more concrete portrait of
life in 2050. According to the UN Population Division
(2010 revision), (UNDESA, 2009) 68% of these 9 billion people will reside in urban settings. At least 32%
of the total world population will be under 24 years of
age, and on average, people will live longer lives (75.5
years) (UNDESA, 2009). As mentioned in Section 9.1,
population growth alone could reduce the percentage
of those with improved access to water supply and
sanitation by 10%.
Growth in food demand resulting from population
growth and changes in nutritional habits, hand in hand
with increased urbanization, will likely lead to a multiplied increase in water demand. Other impacts of
human settlements will also increase with encroachment on fragile or marginal lands, deforestation and
pollution. Most climate change scenarios predict that
increasing variability and unpredictability will seriously affect global water availability. As seen in Section
9.1, water availability is expected to decrease in many
regions (groundwater recharge, streamﬂow, rainfall).
Yet future global agricultural water consumption alone
(including both rainfed and irrigated agriculture) is
estimated to increase by about 19% by 2050, and will
be even greater in the absence of any technological
progress or policy intervention (see Chapter 2). In fact,
current trends show that water withdrawals are expected to increase by at least 25% in developing countries (UNEP, 2007).
Natural resources and ecosystems that form the basis
of livelihoods are increasingly under pressure from
highly intensiﬁed and often unsustainable use. For example, 60% of the world’s 227 largest rivers are moderately to greatly fragmented by dams or diversions
(UNEP, 2007), and the rate of dam construction is
increasing worldwide. Deforestation for energy supply

WWDR4

and agricultural expansion is leading to soil erosion
and declining soil fertility, as well as siltation in many
water bodies and reservoirs (reducing the efficiency
of dams). As cleared land retains less water, aquifer
replenishment decreases and water loss through runoff increases. Paradoxically, land clearing for agriculture does not always lead to signiﬁcant or proportionate yield increase, particularly in the long term, as soil
fertility rapidly declines and cropping becomes more
labour-intensive (see e.g. Gibbons, et al, 2009; Juo et
al., 1995).
While agriculture continues to use at least 70% of water
resources globally, other economic sectors will continue to compete for water resources, and some intensely,
without an explicit mechanism for allocation decisionmaking. In most cases, water will continue to remain
an afterthought of economic and sectoral policy. As
industry develops, particularly in emerging countries
and countries actively pursuing non-agricultural diversiﬁcation schemes, various sectors present the potential
for signiﬁcant increases in water use. Decisions about
allocations between sectors are usually not subject to
speciﬁc regulations, although some countries explicitly
recognize drinking water as a priority.
Pressures on natural resources and the increasing interconnection between national economies mean that
the world is likely to continue to grapple with periodical crises, such as the recent food and ﬁnancial crises,
and the impending energy crisis. To add to uncertainty,
these complex situations are closely linked, for example,
the price of food is closely linked to the price of energy
through the costs of transport and fertilizers. Singlemarket perturbations, caused by political (e.g. conﬂict in
oil-producing countries) or climatic extremes (drought
in crop-producing countries) are difficult to predict and
have far-reaching and often long-lasting consequences
well beyond traditional sectoral boundaries.
Responses to these crises can also have negative impacts on water resources and management, because
they inadvertently create a bias towards a given solution focused on a particular water user; more often
than not, an intensive water user. For example, attempts to pre-empt an energy crisis through production of biofuels or by tapping into harder to reach, and
more water intensive, fossil fuel deposits (oil sands,
shale gas) could have negative impacts by diverting
land and water from food production, and by creating
a more lucrative competing sector. For example, water

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

269

used for cooling power plants in the United States of
America represents 40% of the country’s industrial water use. This ﬁgure is expected to reach 30% in China
in 2030.7 Increased energy production using current
technology, at current levels of efficiency, is therefore
likely to exert multiplied pressures on scarce water
resources.
In the absence of technological improvements or
policy interventions, economic polarities will increase
between water-rich and water-poor countries, as well
as between sectors or regions within countries. This
would mean higher numbers of people with higher needs competing for less water, of lesser quality.
Because allocation will inevitably go to the highest
paying sector, region or country, this may result in an
increasingly signiﬁcant portion of people not being
able to satisfy their basic needs for food, energy, water and sanitation. This would not be mere stagnation,
but would likely take the form of a distinctly regressive
trend compared to current conditions.
More importantly, this possible outcome represents a
high degree of risk and uncertainty. This is because the
underlying links between the various drivers are not
well understood or are not considered as part of decision-making, and because the long-term impacts on
water of key sectoral decisions are being largely ignored.
Therefore, this possible future remains highly volatile,
with water – despite being an asset for all economic
sectors – severely impacted regardless of the outcome
or evolution of any single driver. Paradoxically, while this
future outcome represents the highest risk for society
overall in the long term and the highest degree of uncertainty regarding future water availability and management, it also represents a future in which individuals,
governments and the private sector are the least riskaverse in their daily decisions, focusing on short-term
beneﬁts rather than long-term potential.
9.3.2 Technological evolution and greater awareness
for a greener economy
A second possible future would be determined by the
evolution of current technology development trends,
highlighted brieﬂy in the previous section. This outcome assumes that technology development is almost
exclusively a product of private sector mobilization,
responding to existing levels of awareness, market
conditions and existing pressures for increasing proﬁt
margins in developed countries. The technologies considered here are not necessarily applicable uniquely to

270

CHAPTER 9

water management activities (e.g. ﬁltration technologies), but also to water-using sectors (e.g. agriculture,
energy). However, they are all assumed to have the
effect of reducing water demand and waste or improving water management.
Among the key anticipated and most likely developments over the next decades is desalination, which
has the potential to increase water availability, and
would become more efficient and more affordable.
Although slow in terms of operationalization, desalination shows potential for providing drinking water in
coastal regions within the next 50 years. However, no
projections are available for the potential negative impacts of the technology, which at the present moment
result in ever-decreasing efficiency because of pollution discharge and over-salinization of the immediate
ecosystem. If left unchecked, this technology could
have high positive impacts on water supply, but negative impacts on marine and coastal environments from
by-products (brine) or excessive intake (WWF, 2007).
Desalination uses high levels of energy, raising the issue of yet another trade-off between water supply and
energy production. Solar-powered desalination plants,
currently being tested in some countries (e.g. Saudi
Arabia), might provide a more suitable avenue in sunrich countries.
A more promising trend, one with fewer trade-offs, but
slower private sector mobilization, encompasses various technologies applicable to agricultural water uses
and which, combined, could lead to signiﬁcant water
conservation in the most important water-using sector.
The further dissemination of water-harvesting technologies, efficient irrigation (e.g. drip irrigation), as well
as technologies for the re-use of grey water in peri-urban agriculture could also lead to an increase in water
availability for food production. The development of
sustainable urban agriculture could also provide resilient avenues for ensuring local food supply. Already,
the FAO estimates that 70% of urban households in
developing countries participate in agricultural activities (FAO, 2010). The development of bio-fertilization
techniques would also increase water use efficiency by
promoting higher nutrient absorption and crop growth
rates. Increases in on-farm efficiency, brought about by
the timely availability of agro-climatic information (to
help deal with increasing climate and rainfall variability), early warning systems and mechanization, which is
still lagging behind in many countries, could also lead
to an overall increase in water use efficiency.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

There is a risk that the response of producers to the
evolution of these proﬁtable technologies could offset
(or even nullify) any gains in water use efficiency; for
example, if producers continue to expand agricultural
land into marginal or fragile areas (such as wetlands,
slopes or forests), resulting in an accelerating rate of
deforestation and soil erosion. Nevertheless, the combination of these technological developments would
mean an increase in water requirements for agriculture of close to 20–25% (see Chapter 2), rather than an
agricultural water requirement increase of 70–90% (as
described in Section 9.2.1).
Further technology developments applicable to urban
water production and waste handling that are likely
to increase due to sheer urban population growth are
also expected to contribute to reducing absolute water
withdrawals and waste. For example, the development
of nanotechnology, cited as one of the most probable anticipated technologies in Section 9.2.1, will help
reduce pollution and accelerate the pace of ﬁltration,
making water re-use possible and increasingly affordable. Grey-water reuse, along with simple water conservation technologies for urban applications (more
efficient toilets, in-house grey water recycling, more
efficient showers) would also make water conservation practices for urban dwellers more affordable. The
opportunity cost of selecting ecological options would
decrease both at the individual and the community
scale. This will mean more efficient options for urban
planning and an increase in green building design,
which will facilitate the efficient integration of new urban migrants.
Similar developments can be expected from anticipated growth in renewable energy technology, and
in energy efficiency measures, which are themselves
driven by pressures on current energy resources. As
water is a key input in almost all energy production
(from extraction to cooling), industrial demand for
water is expected to increase as population growth
is paired with increasing energy demand. The growth
in renewable or alternative energy technology will
therefore have a beneﬁcial impact on water demand,
potentially freeing resources for more efficient uses,
perhaps for agriculture. Photovoltaic panels and wind
turbines, which have recently expanded in number in
many countries, require much less water for production and very little for maintenance. Urban development using cheaper solar energies would therefore
reduce water demand.

WWDR4

Rapid uptake of these technologies would be paired
with the anticipated evolution of global consciousness regarding human impacts on environment, and in
particular, an increased understanding of water scarcity issues (see Section 9.1). Developed country markets, already beginning to show a preference towards
‘responsible’ products, would continue to encourage
technology development, while the availability of affordable green products, practices and options would
induce a gradual transformation towards a green economy. This applies to food as well as other consumer
goods. It also has the potential to effect a gradual shift
in agricultural practices towards organic farming, local
or peri-urban agriculture, and overall more sustainable
and equitable agriculture, which uses fewer pesticides,
maximizes efficiency in its use of inputs including water, and produces higher yields and socio-economic
beneﬁts. Recent data shows that markets for organic
food and beverages expanded 10–20% on average per
year between 2000 and 2007 (Sahota, 2009), resulting in a similar expansion of sustainably managed
farmland (UNEP, 2011).
UNEP deﬁnes the green economy as ‘one that results
in improved human well-being and social equity, while
signiﬁcantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities’ (UNEP, 2010, p. 4). A naturally evolving green economy – one brought about without a
conscious policy effort through the combined result
of technology development and increased awareness
– would result in a decreased water footprint in most
water-using sectors, in particular agriculture, because
of increased conservation, reuse and recycling, and
greater efficiency. This would also have positive results on overall poverty reduction and socio-economic
development.
In such a future, voluntary labelling of products according to their water efficiency or water use would
become more frequent (although not necessarily subject to well-established norms and standards). Fairtrade, green or sustainable labelling would increasingly
include a measure of water footprints.
These somewhat spontaneous technology developments (extrapolated from current trends) would produce beneﬁts for water, but might not produce the
complete set of expected green-economy beneﬁts
for a variety of reasons. First, there may be delays in
adoption because of cultural obstacles to technological uptake (for example, resistance to the recycling

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

271

of sewage water for drinking). Second, there may be
structural or policy obstacles to technology transfer and
dissemination because of intellectual property barriers,
or a lack of investment in research and extension (particularly in the agricultural sector), or a lack of funding,
which could lead to regional disparities in access, potentially aggravating current income gaps. Such gaps in
access already exist, with small pockets of private sector
interests holding the majority of public-interest patents
and intellectual property rights. There is a risk that the
unregulated development of technology could lead to
perpetuated polarities between the ‘haves’ and ‘havenots’. Finally, inadequate governance and decision-making systems may create market distortions towards inefﬁcient technologies, for example, through inappropriate
subsidies or for lack of long-term vision. As a result, this
second possible future, although realistically achievable
in some targeted places or pockets, will remain suboptimal, highlighting the need for a set of policy responses
or measures to bring about more rapid, equitable and
sustainable change.
Nevertheless, this possible future represents a marked
change in the uncertainty we face, as increased awareness and a marked private-sector interest in emerging opportunities mean that water management is no
longer obscured by other short-term gains. In this possible outcome, the impacts on water of various sectoral
or interest-based decisions are more readily understood
thanks to investments in research and development,
and because the possibilities offered by technology are
more evident. In this possible future, some segments
of the private sector and governments are shouldering
a part of the short-term risks by investing in research
and development and creating new markets, because
the long-term risks are more apparent and the potential
beneﬁts are also more clearly understood. However, the
long-term risks and uncertainties faced by water users
and water-using sectors are still not entirely mitigated.
Furthermore, while there is a chance that this spontaneously emerging greener economy has positive impacts
on water, there remains uncertainty about continued
negative impacts and trade-offs.
9.3.3 Policies that encourage a transition to a
sustainable water economy
A third possible future extrapolates on current demographic and technology trends, as well as a set of
policy interventions that could be adopted over the
next two decades. It presents a picture of a possible
future based upon key or important policy decisions

272

CHAPTER 9

regarding ﬁnancing, poverty reduction, climate change,
science, and water governance and overall economic
policy being taken.
As highlighted in Section 9.2.2, a legally binding international agreement to combat climate change could
be in place by 2040, along with signiﬁcant ﬁnancing
for awareness-raising and adaptation in low-income
countries. Because most climate change impacts are felt
through water, this would have positive repercussions
on the overall levels of ﬁnancing for water. This could
mean higher levels of investment in water infrastructure, leading to reductions in waste and increases in
sustainable mobilization, as well as increased sanitation
network coverage. The adoption of a concerted effort to
curb greenhouse gas emissions would send a clear signal to the private sector concerning the further development of alternative and renewable energies, conﬁrming
a trend explored in the above technology-driven future.
Hence, technology development for water extraction
and distribution, and reductions in industrial water use
(especially for energy), are also expected from the
adoption of an optimal climate change regime.
Stronger concerted efforts to reduce poverty would
also yield signiﬁcant beneﬁts for water and sanitation, through an increase in funding for water-related
initiatives. As water is often a constraining factor on
agricultural productivity and other forms of economic
development, investment in water management and
conservation, as well as sanitation, is expected to deliver multiplied poverty-reduction beneﬁts. Moreover,
debt forgiveness – also among the potentially expected international policy decisions – could free substantial levels of funding for water infrastructure and
development.
At the national level, another key policy might be
achieved by establishing fair prices for water. This
would be contingent on the development of solid
property regimes, documented land tenure arrangements, and clearly established water rights and allocation systems. However, if coupled with a growing sense of awareness among local populations and
a generally higher level of understanding of water
issues, the more likely outcome would be the integration of water issues into development planning,
particularly urban planning. Adequate revenues from
water management would also allow for the regular
maintenance of water infrastructure and reduce contamination and leakages.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

“Debt forgiveness – also among the potentially
expected international policy decisions – could
free substantial levels of funding for water
infrastructure and development.”
Other policy changes would include the removal of
unsustainable subsidies in agriculture and overall agricultural trade liberalization. Subsidies that encourage inefficient uses of land, water and fertilizers, and
create market distortions towards higher water users,
would be gradually replaced by ﬂexible, index-based
insurance schemes that allow producers to make
short-term cropping decisions based on climate variability and extremes, while encouraging intra-seasonal
innovation and technological upgrading of cultivation
practices. This, coupled with increased spending on
agricultural technology, extension and research (as an
engine of economic recovery), would lead to signiﬁcant water efficiency gains in the agriculture sector
alone. Models developed recently for the UNEP Green
Economy initiative show that trade liberalization tends
to reduce water use in water-scarce regions and increase water use in water-abundant regions, meaning that water would be allocated to its most effective
use at the global level (Calzadilla et al., 2010). There is,
however, a risk that without transparent and equitybased local allocation mechanisms, further liberalization could still create barriers or difficulties of water
access for smaller producers.
Another policy shift might be inspired by the recognition that healthy environments provide key services,
in particular, water. Hence, governments at the local,
subregional and national levels could begin investing in the restoration and rehabilitation of key ecosystem functions. As a result, productivity would increase
without jeopardizing key environmental services. This
would be greatly facilitated by current technology
development trends and increases in awareness, particularly in developed countries. It would also be supported by the increased understanding that healthy
ecosystems can help adapt to the effects of climate
change while maintaining local livelihoods. As seen
in recent studies, water-related services provided by
healthy ecosystems, such as mangroves, forests and
wetlands, compare favourably with those provided

WWDR4

by man-made structures (such as treatment plants),
which usually come with much higher costs (see
TEEB, 2010; World Bank, 2010), shorter life-spans, and
are potentially less resistant to anticipated climate
changes.
Increased awareness among the global and national
population, coupled with increased access to information and increased inclusiveness and participation of
stakeholders everywhere, could also lead to shifts in
water governance within and between countries. With
recognition of the fact that water is best managed at
local levels, water-basin institutions and decentralized authorities would be given increased power and
resources to effectively manage water within countries.
This would promote local and climate-responsive allocation of water among users, facilitated by well-regulated pricing and, potentially, innovative water rights
trading mechanisms. It would ensure that basic water
needs are met, as well as needs for environmental
purposes, while promoting the most efficient uses of
water. For shared basins, transparent processes for allocation and distribution could emerge, provided other
market distortions are removed and trade is further liberalized as mentioned above.
A deeper evolution in values may be required, including a decline in consumerism and conscious efforts to
reduce energy consumption at the individual and local
level, speciﬁcally in developed countries. This may also
require a softening of aspirations to food sovereignty
(i.e. production of all food locally regardless of impacts
on water) to allow for the emergence of fairer international trading systems. While water has been recognized as a human right, mentalities may need to evolve
to allow for equitable water prices to emerge.
Communities and countries would be better prepared
for uncertainties and more adept at managing longterm risks to water with increased information, participation and dialogue among water users, and a

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

273

longer-term view towards (and acceptance of) holistic approaches. This outcome represents the product
of concerted thinking and action based on potential
risks and trade-offs. Uncertainties would be reduced
due to the increase in information and knowledge, and
the adoption of clear policies would provide signals
to markets, further reducing risks. In this future, each
segment of society shoulders a part of the short-term
risks involved in changing policies or practices and
developing new products and markets, allowing for a
reduction of the global long-term risks.

ever more necessary in the face of the risks and uncertainties involved in continuing with the business-asusual modes of water management.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

Notes
1

A signiﬁcant number of scenarios related to water at the global
and other geographic scales were identiﬁed and examined
to determine drivers that should be reviewed in the WWAP
scenarios project. Through this review, ten drivers were
identiﬁed for in-depth research by graduate-level researchers,
to examine possible future developments in each of the
domains while also seeking to identify inter–linkages with some
of the other selected drivers. See the two WWAP ‘Global Water
Futures 2050’ publications Five Stylized Scenarios (G. Gallopín)
and The Dynamics of Global Water Futures: Driving Forces 2011–
2050 (C. E. Cosgrove and W. J. Cosgrove).

2

The occurrence of droughts is determined largely by changes
in sea surface temperatures, especially in the tropics, through
changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation. Over the
past three decades, droughts have become more widespread,
intense and persistent due to decreased precipitation
over land and rising temperatures, resulting in enhanced
evapotranspiration and drying.

3

Based on the United Nations Population Division’s quinquennial
estimates and projections. World Population Prospects, 2006
revision, and the UN Common Database code 13600.

4

For more information see the Fund for Peace website
http://www.fundforpeace.org

5

Stochastic analysis is deﬁned as having a probability
distribution, usually with ﬁnite variance.

6

A project of the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
partially funded via UN-Water.

7

National Research Council (2010) and 2030 Water Resources
Group (2009) as cited in UNEP (2011) (GER 4).

9.4 Water futures for better decisionmaking
These exercises in future thinking provide a cursory
view of potential futures and an illustration of the interconnections between the various drivers. They illustrate the possible impacts of a set of strong policies
and choices that may appear difficult (or risky) today,
but are most likely to yield rapid economic and livelihood beneﬁts at all levels and reduce long-term risks
and uncertainties.
However, more concrete, rational and scientiﬁc modelling of water futures is necessary to better calibrate
and explore these possible futures, including the development of regional and global water scenarios. Lack
of knowledge is one of the key limitations to adopting some of the measures noted above. Targeted and
relevant knowledge is necessary to make informed ‘noregrets’ policy decisions, whether at the international,
national or local level. Knowledge reduces uncertainties and makes risks more manageable at the individual, community and international level.
This includes science-based and consensus-based
measures of the water footprint of various products;
measures of water-use efficiency for energy supply
technology, basic appliances and crops; downscaled
climate and hydrological models that would allow for
basin-based allocation decision-making; and economics-based modelling that would provide ﬁnancial
information on the rates of return of various policy
measures and investments, including infrastructure,
ecosystem rehabilitation or diversiﬁcation – as well as
information on the long-term costs of inaction. The
comprehensive and rigorous water scenarios being
developed as part of WWAP’s World Water Scenarios
Project, should provide a stronger indication of policy
pathways towards (or avoidance of) determined water
futures. The development of water scenarios appears

274

CHAPTER 9

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. P.
(eds). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical Paper
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Geneva, IPCC Secretariat.
Calzadilla, A., Rehdanz, K. and Tol, R. J. S. 2010. The
Impacts of Climate Change and Trade Liberalisation on
Global Agriculture. Working Papers. Hamburg, Germany,
Sustainability and Global Change research unit, Hamburg
University.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Cosgrove, C. and Cosgrove, W. 2011. Using Water Wisely:
Global Drivers of Change. Paris, UNESCO.
Cosgrove, W. J. and Rijsberman, F. R. 2000. World Water
Vision: Making Water Everybody’s Business. London,
Earthscan.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2010. Fighting Poverty and Hunger – What Role
for Urban Agriculture? Policy Brief No. 10. Rome, FAO.
Fund for Peace. 2011. The Fund for Peace website.
Washington DC, Fund for Peace.
http://www.fundforpeace.org. (Accessed 30 May 2010.)
Gallopín, G. C. 2012. Five Stylized Scenarios. Perugia, Italy,
UNESCO-WWAP.
Gibbons, P., Briggs, S. V., Ayers, D., Seddon, J., Doyle, S.,
Cosier, P., McElhinny, C., Pelly, V. and Roberts, K. 2009. An
operational method to assess impacts of land clearing on
terrestrial biodiversity. Ecological Indicators, Vol. 9, No. 1,
pp. 26–40. New York, Elsevier.
Juo, A. S. R., Franzluebbers K., Dabiri A. and Ikhile B. 1995.
Changes in soil properties during long-term fallow and
continuous cultivation after forest clearing in Nigeria.
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Vol. 56, No. 1, pp.
9–18.
Nakicenovic, N. (ed.) 2000. IPCC Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios. Prepared by the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group III for COP 6.
Geneva, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
and World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity).
2010. The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity:
Mainstreaming the Economics of Nature: A synthesis of
the approach, conclusions and recommendations of TEEB.
Geneva, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs). 2009. World Population Prospects, The
2008 Revision – Executive Summary. New York, UNDESA.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007.
Global Environmental Outlook 4 – Environment for
Development. Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2010. Driving a Green Economy Through Public Finance
and Fiscal Policy Reform. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/
documents/ger/GER_Working_Paper_Public_Finance.pdf
––––. 2011. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable
Development and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/GreenEconomy/Portals/93/
documents/Full_GER_screen.pdf
World Bank. 2010. The Economics of Adaptation to Climate
Change. Washington DC, The World Bank.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2007. Making Water
– Desalination: Option or Distraction for a Thirsty World?
Gland, Switzerland, WWF.

Sahota, A. 2009. The global market for organic food
and drink. H. Willer and L. Kilcher (eds) The World of
Organic Agriculture: Statistics and Emerging Trends 2009.
FIBL-IFOAM Report. Bonn/Frick/Geneva, International
Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM)/
Research Institute of Organic Agriculture (FiBL)/
International Trade Centre (ITC). http://orgprints.
org/18380/16/willer-kilcher-2009.pdf

WWDR4

UNDERSTANDING UNCERTAINTY AND RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH KEY DRIVERS

275

CHAPTER 10
Unvalued water leads to
an uncertain future

—
Author James Winpenny

276

CHAPTER 30

MANAGING WATER©UNDER
UNCERTAINTY AND RISK
Shutterstock/SebStock

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The policies that shape water governance are commonly formulated by politicians and
officials in planning, economic, ﬁnance and water-using departments. As such, national
economic and ﬁnancial considerations play a highly inﬂuential role. The case for investment in
water and for reforming its development and management is also often framed by others in
social, ethical, equity or public health terms. As a consequence, the real importance of reform
is not always apparent in public decisions. In the face of rapid change and uncertainty there
is a risk that this situation will continue or worsen, creating even greater challenges. It is vital
therefore that the case for reform be adequately stated in economic terms. This chapter sets
out the elements of such an economic case, starting with the overall beneﬁts of water to
an economy, and proceeding to consider the value of water in the various parts of its cycle.
These beneﬁts and values can be used to inform policies for the allocation and use of water
in situations of growing resource pressures, uncertainties and associated risks.

10.1 The political economy of investing in
water: Stating the beneﬁts
Investing in water has various economic beneﬁts. In
particular, it promotes the growth of national income
by providing:
đ Security against ﬂuctuations in the availability of water (mitigating both ﬂoods and droughts) and promotion of long-term climate resilience.
đ A growth catalyst by opening up new types of economic activity, which were not previously feasible.
đ Ongoing beneﬁts in terms of added value and welfare
for users throughout the hydrological cycle. These users include economically productive sectors such as
agriculture, industry, hydropower, navigation, recreation and tourism, and households. Water also constitutes a vital input to ecosystems and all aquatic
habitats, which in turn provide essential life support in
addition to services with an economic value.
The following three sections examine these beneﬁts in
turn.
10.1.1 A buffer against climatic ﬂuctuations and a key
to climate resilience
There is no universally accepted deﬁnition of water
security; the term can mean different things in different contexts. In general, it reﬂects a country’s ability to
function productively in the face of water vulnerability.
This has been expressed (e.g. Grey and Sadoff, 2008) as
the need for all societies to have a minimum platform of
investment in water institutions and infrastructure as a
basis for water security. Below this minimum, societies
are too vulnerable to water shocks and unreliable water
supply for production or human livelihoods: ‘social fabric is signiﬁcantly affected and economic growth cannot
be reliably and predictably managed’ (Grey and Sadoff,
2008,, p. 7). Once the minimum platform has been put
in place, basic needs are satisﬁed and further water
development can stimulate economic growth.
Many countries where this concept is most relevant are
regularly devastated by climatic extremes, fail to meet
the basic household needs of their populations, and
cannot offer reliable water services to their farmers
and industries. In such economies investment in agriculture is discouraged, while an unreliable water supply is also a deterrent to the development of industry
and services (AICD, 2010). A greater ability to counteract climatic variability can avoid the worst costs of
droughts and ﬂooding. In Kenya losses from ﬂooding

278

CHAPTER 10

from El Niño in 1997-98 and drought from La Niña in
1998-2000 ranged from 10-16% of GDP during those
years. Growth of GDP in Mozambique was reduced by
1% annually due to water shocks. In Zambia hydrological variability is estimated to lower agricultural growth
by 1% each year. In Tanzania the impact of the 2006
drought on agriculture caused losses equivalent to 1%
of GDP ([McKinsey, 2009)]. Reducing the damaging
impact of this hydrological variability would have major beneﬁts for the macroeconomy (AICD, 2010).
The strong likelihood of climate change is an additional
justiﬁcation for implementing projects to strengthen
water security. However, many such projects are justiﬁable even without this scenario. No regret and low
regret projects generate net social and/or economic
beneﬁt irrespective of the impacts and consequences
of climate change. Many of these projects would enable an economy to better cope with existing climatic
variability, irrespective of future changes.
10.1.2 Water infrastructure as a catalyst for economic
growth
The harnessing and development of water resources
has been a fundamental driver of economic growth in
many countries and periods throughout history. For
example, it constituted the major factor in the development of the western United States of America
throughout much of the twentieth century, and galvanized the recovery of the Tennessee Valley region from
the Great Depression of the 1930s (Delli Priscoli, 2008).
The role of water resources development in economic
growth in Arizona (USA), Korea and Turkey is covered
extensively in Mays (2006).
The construction of large dams has become controversial. It is therefore important to fully assess the alternatives and to be aware of, and properly manage, their
social and environmental impacts (World Commission
on Dams, 2009). Nevertheless, investment in large
dams in certain regions (e.g. the Aswan, Kariba and
Volta dams in Africa) has provided a major stimulus
for the development and diversiﬁcation of the host
economies (Granit and Lindstrom, 2009). Subject to
the above-mentioned qualiﬁcations, climate change
reinforces the existing case for providing greater water
storage in Africa and elsewhere.
10.1.3 The whole-cycle beneﬁts of water
Much of the water resulting from rainfall and other
precipitation is stored in lakes, aquifers and so on for

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

multiple uses, after which it is returned to rivers, lakes
or groundwater for further use.1 Although water is
often misleadingly referred to as a sector, it is actually
a ubiquitous medium, and one that creates beneﬁts
at each part of its hydrological cycle (Figure 10.1). The
many facets of water can also be viewed as a value
chain (OECD, 2010).
The development and management of watersheds and
catchments spans a range of activities, both ‘hard’ and
‘soft’. The spectrum varies from major multi-purpose
storage schemes to activities entailed in the protection
and enhancement of watershed and river basin functions including afforestation, catchment management,
land use controls, and so on. Many of these activities
are carried out by land users themselves, as in the case
of farmers responding to incentives and sanctions.
These activities create value for downstream communities through savings in costs that would otherwise be incurred. In New York State, a programme for
watershed protection that encourages farmers in the
upper catchment area to convert to more environmentally friendly cultivation practices is expected to
lead to substantial savings in downstream water treatment for the population of New York City (Salzman,
2005; OECD, 2010). Data from other American cities
(Portland Oregon, Portland Maine and Seattle) conﬁrm
the signiﬁcant ﬁnancial savings from watershed protection, compared with the cost of building new water

FIGURE 10.1
Beneﬁts from the water cycle

Services from
ecosystems and
aquatic habitats

River basin
management,
resource
development,
ﬂood control,
etc.

Value-added in
hydropower,
industry,
agriculture,
mining,
recreation and
tourism, etc.

Wastewater
collection,
treatment, reuse
and disposal

Water supply and
sanitation for
households

WWDR4

treatment and ﬁltration systems (Emerton and Bos,
2004). Similar experiences exist in Latin America, as
for example in Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Salvador
(Dourojeanni and Jouravlev, 1999; Jouravlev, 2003).
Upstream investment and management can beneﬁt
downstream users in other ways, directly and indirectly. Greater regularity of ﬂows of good quality water
can save costs of storage, development and treatment
for urban waterworks, industrial abstractors, farmers
and other water users. The maintenance of minimum
river ﬂows creates assimilative capacity for wastewater
releases (which would otherwise need pre-treatment)
and provides ‘ﬂushing’ for rivers with a heavy sediment
load. In each of these cases, any impairment of the
natural river functions due to inadequate management
would require costly human interventions to deal with
the problems caused.
Water is increasingly a critical factor in decisions regarding the location of economic activities such as industry, mining, power and tourism. Companies working or
contemplating investment in water-stressed regions are
becoming aware of their ‘water footprint’ and its impact
on local communities, which could pose operational and
reputational risks to their business. A growing number of countries will also face increasing difficulties in
providing water to their growing water-intensive cities,
farms and industries. Investment in measures to bring
supply and demand into better alignment can safeguard future development in such cases.
In a study of the water supply-demand balance in four
rapidly growing countries and regions – China, India,
the state of Sao Paulo in Brazil and South Africa – current trajectories and unchanged policies produce
growth projections to 2030 incompatible with water
endowments. Achieving the required growth targets
will necessitate action to close the potential supply-demand gap for water, combining investments in supply
enhancement and measures of demand management
(McKinsey, 2009).
The most visible and best-studied aspect of the water
cycle concerns household services – the beneﬁts to individual people and their families from receiving clean,
safe water and associated sanitation in a reliable fashion or close to where they live. People receiving such
services are at less risk of contracting water-borne disease, spend less time fetching water and less money
buying it, and have more time and energy available

UNVALUED WATER LEADS TO AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

279

“The principal beneﬁts
of wastewater
treatment are
avoidance of the costs
of pollution and of the
use of contaminated
water by downstream
users, such as other
municipalities,
industries, farmers and
the tourism industry.”
for personal washing, cooking and domestic cleaning.
Likewise, improved household sanitation provides numerous beneﬁts for public health, as well as less time
spent seeking privacy, more dignity and less embarrassment, greater opportunities for female education,
and greater pride and communal and personal prestige.2 Lentini (2010) and Oblitas de Ruiz (2010) provide
an exhaustive overview of the many and diverse beneﬁts of water services in a typical developing country
setting, and Lentini (2010) also presents a methodology for their monetary estimation.

280

1. The drinking water part of the target to ‘halve, by
2015, the proportion of the population without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic
sanitation’, with priority given to those already with
improved sanitation (UN, 2010, p. 58, Target 7c)
2. The above target for both water and sanitation
3. Access for all to improved water and sanitation
4. Universal disinfection of water at point of use on
top of intervention (3)
5. Universal access to regulated, piped water and
sewage connections into homes
For each of the 17 WHO regions and for each of the
ﬁve interventions models, beneﬁt-cost ratios were positive, some spectacularly so3 (Hutton and Haller, 2004,
pp. 35 and 64).
The economic beneﬁts of sanitation include time saved
from queuing for public toilets or seeking out secluded
spots in the open; increased school attendance, especially for adolescent girls; and gains in national productivity from the greater ease of employing women
where proper sanitation facilities are provided. Local
standards of sanitation also have an effect on tourist
visits to areas concerned (OECD, 2010, p. 33).
In Indonesia, World Bank research estimates that the
country lost US$6.3 billion (2.3% of GDP) in 2006 from
poor sanitation and hygiene. The result was increased
health costs, economic losses, and offsetting costs in
other sectors (World Bank, 2008b). Corresponding
losses in the Philippines as part of the same overall study amounted to US$41.4 billion or 1.5% of GDP
(World Bank, 2008a).

These potential beneﬁts cannot be fully captured in
economic terms, although evidence is becoming available that is suggestive of the size of beneﬁts and their
returns on the investment. Empirical studies carried
out at the World Health Organization (WHO) and
elsewhere show that investments in a range of water supply and sanitation interventions can have high
economic beneﬁt-cost ratios. The beneﬁts are typically
savings in time spent in household duties, including
fetching water and, to a lesser extent, savings in the
various costs incurred in illness and medical treatment
(Hutton and Haller, 2004).

Investment in safe wastewater collection and treatment,
including industrial effluents, can also remove a potential brake on economic activity. It has been estimated
that water pollution in South Africa costs the country
1% of its annual national income (Pegram and Schreiner,
2010). The principal beneﬁts of wastewater treatment
are avoidance of the costs of pollution and of the use
of contaminated water by downstream users, such as
other municipalities, industries, farmers and the tourism
industry. In serious cases, the pollution of water bodies
has caused industries to be closed down and relocated
at great cost, or impede access of agricultural and ﬁshery products to international markets.

The following interventions were modelled in the
above-mentioned study:

Water continues to provide beneﬁts after its use by
households, industries and others. Growing water stress

CHAPTER 10

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

in many regions is leading to a greater appreciation of
the economic value of wastewater. The recycling of municipal wastewater for agriculture, urban landscaping,
industrial cooling, groundwater recharge, restoring environmental ﬂows and wetlands, and for further urban consumption is increasing rapidly in water-scarce countries.
An important part of water infrastructure consists of
natural systems such as forests, catchments and wetlands that store water, regulate its ﬂow and help to preserve its quality. If these natural systems are destroyed
or compromised, their functions have to be replaced by
man-made facilities, often at high cost. In one example,
the ﬂood attenuation functions of the Muthurajawela
Marsh, a peat bog in Sri Lanka, were valued at US$5
million annually, in relation to the mitigative or avertive
spending that would be needed if it were lost. The same
is true for the Nakivubo Swamp in Uganda, which runs
through the capital city Kampala and has a key role in
assuring urban water quality. A large amount of untreated household sewage and the effluent of the city’s sewage works enters the swamp prior to passing into Lake
Victoria, close to the intake of the water works supplying the city with drinking water. The swamp provides
natural ﬁltration and puriﬁcation of the wastewater:
the infrastructure required to provide a similar level of
wastewater treatment would cost up to US$2 million per
year (Emerton and Bos, 2004).
Contrary to the common view that water and irrigation are uneconomic investments, a comparison of the
(weighted) average economic rates of return for both
water supply and irrigation projects in sub-Saharan
Africa shows that they compare favourably in relation
to other types of infrastructure (Table 10.1).

10.2 Valuing water
10.2.1 Water’s manifold value
The beneﬁts of the water services mentioned above
are based on the economic value of water in its various
states and uses. Valuing the multiple socio-economic

beneﬁts of water is essential to improving the decisions of governments, international organizations, the
donor community, civil society and other stakeholders.
Conversely, a failure to fully value all the beneﬁts of
water in its different uses is a root cause of the political neglect of water and its mismanagement. It leads
to insufficient appreciation of the importance of water;
suboptimal levels of investment in water infrastructure; and the low priority accorded to water policy in
country development programmes, poverty reduction
strategies and other policies. Finally, it plays a signiﬁcant part in the failure to meet international socio-economic objectives.
Valuing water should facilitate water resources and
services to be added or compared, or allocated to
maximize social welfare. However, not all the beneﬁts
of water can be quantiﬁed or expressed in monetary
terms. There are many limitations to the methods
developed to derive the economic value of water in
its different uses: some are controversial, have high
data requirements, are complex, or require technical
and economic skills. Valuation is an eclectic discipline,
with different techniques for different uses and policy
purposes. But although the production of a comprehensive system of economic values for water is an
over-ambitious task, some useful results have been
produced in speciﬁc local or regional contexts from
multi-stakeholder processes involving actors with different subjective valuations.
Such political and technical dialogues can lead to
broad agreement, which is useful for setting policies. However, different groups of people value water
in different ways and even the same group’s perceptions can alter as conditions change. Moss et al. (2003,
p. 46) argue that ‘the complexity of the interfaces
between many different stakeholders and the tendency for water to raise strong emotions frequently
leads “value differences” to become “value divides”.’
These can lead to polarization that blocks dialogue and

TABLE 10.1
Economic rates of return for infrastructure projects in sub-Saharan Africa (%)
Railway
rehabilitation

Irrigation

Road
rehabilitation

Road
upgrades

Road
maintenance

Power
generation

Water
supply

5.1

22.2

24.2

17.0

138.8

18.9

23.3

Source: AICD (2010, p. 71).

WWDR4

UNVALUED WATER LEADS TO AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

281

prevents reasonable governance solutions. Improved
understanding of the value differences can help identify commonalities and interdependencies that may be
useful for negotiated agreements.
According to the OECD (2010), the lack of a coherent analysis of investment beneﬁts across the entire
value chain of water and sanitation is due to the fragmented markets in which water services are delivered.
Although ministries are responsible for setting overall
policy direction, investments are made by utilities and
agencies operating at a decentralized level, often in an
uncoordinated manner. As a result, the beneﬁts (and
costs) of a wider range of investments across the full
value chain of water management and services do not
receive adequate assessment.
10.2.2 Economic values of water in different uses
The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable
Development (1992) states that ‘water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be
recognised as an economic good’. A distinction needs
to be made between the value, cost and price of water, which are often very different from each other. The
economic value of water is particularly apparent in situations of water scarcity. Water has different economic
values in its different uses. It has an economic cost of
supply, which also varies in different situations and for
different purposes. Water provided to a particular user,
in a speciﬁc place, at a certain time has an economic
beneﬁt, but also entails an economic cost. The relationship between the speciﬁc beneﬁt and the speciﬁc
cost is the basis of the economic justiﬁcation for supplying that user. Finally, the price of water is a ﬁnancial
or ﬁscal transaction between the provider and the user,
which is often closely controlled by public authorities,
and often bears little relation to either its value in speciﬁc uses, or its cost of supply.
Allocating water purely on the basis of such economic
principles is complicated and difficult to apply in practice (Turner et al., 2004; Winpenny, 1997). However,
the basic concept of comparing the costs and beneﬁts
of supplying water in speciﬁc locations and to speciﬁc
categories of users is fundamental to water policy, especially in situations of growing stress. This requires an
estimation, however approximate, of the value of the
water in its various states and uses.
The methods of valuing water are eclectic and depend on the sector concerned, the type of use and

282

CHAPTER 10

the information available (Winpenny et al., 2010).
Household consumption is commonly valued using evidence of willingness to pay (WTP) from direct surveys
that make use of structured questionnaires or ‘choice
experiments’ survey techniques. This ‘stated value’ approach can be supplemented and cross-checked by
evidence of revealed preference, such as inferring users’ preferences from their changes in consumption
following a tariff change, or by estimating their actual
expenditure.
Irrigation water use can be valued in either of two
different ways. The marginal productivity of water (the extra value of output that can be obtained
from additional applications of water) can be estimated from changes in yields during crop-water trials.
Alternatively, the more common approach (the ‘netback’ method) is to derive the value of water from
farm budget data as the residual after all other costs
have been allowed for. This latter method makes the
crude assumption that the residual, or unexplained,
farm surplus is due entirely to water, rather than to
other factors.
Industrial water valuation poses a greater problem. For
many industrial (and commercial) enterprises, water
constitutes a small part of their total costs. It would
therefore be misleading to use the residual method, as
for irrigation, and attribute the whole residual surplus
to water. Much industrial bulk water is self-supplied
from wells and rivers. Many ﬁrms recycle water by
treating and reusing waste ﬂows. One valuation approach regards the cost of recycling as the upper limit
on industrial WTP, because ﬁrms would rationally recycle rather than buy in above this level.
The above uses all involve the abstraction of water.
However, water also has in-stream values for waste
assimilation and dilution, ﬂushing sediment, the functioning of ecological systems, navigation, and various kinds of recreation (water sports, sight-seeing,
ﬁshing, rambling, etc.). Various valuation options can
be applied to these uses. Often, these natural functions of water (assimilation, dilution, ﬂushing) can be
compared with the extra cost of alternatives (dredging, treatment). The value of water for navigation can
be imputed from its cost advantage over the next
cheapest transport mode (e.g. railways). The value
of water for recreation and ecological purposes (the
maintenance of low ﬂow regimes and wetlands) is
generally estimated by WTP or travel cost4 surveys.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

It is increasingly common to use the beneﬁt transfer
approach to derive empirical values for these environmental effects. As the term suggests, evidence
is transferred from situations where it is available
to locations and projects which seem to be broadly
comparable.5
Hydropower water usage is normally valued according to the cost advantage of hydro over thermal power
and other alternative ways of generating electricity.
In this, as in other cases, it is important to compare
like with like, and to be clear about the basis of the
estimate.6
There have been a number of comprehensive studies
of the economic value of water in different uses, and a
number of more selective exercises. The earliest studies use data from the USA, but more recent studies from
other regions broadly endorse their results. Table 10.2
indicates the results of a recent comparative US study.
The evidence presented in Turner et al. (2004, p. 91)
shows that the value of water for irrigated agriculture
of many low-value crops (typically food grains and
animal fodder) is very low. By the same token, water values can be high for high-value crops (e.g. fruit,
vegetables, ﬂowers) where the water is reliable. The
same is true for supplementary irrigation taken as insurance against drought. These results are supported
by the actual prices paid for water where water markets exist. In short, the value attached to irrigation
water depends heavily on how reliable it is and on the
type of crop being produced. Values tend to be higher for privately owned groundwater than for publicly
supplied surface water schemes.

“Household water
used for truly essential
needs such as drinking,
cooking and basic
hygiene comprises only
a minor part of typical
daily use; the rest is
used for ‘lifestyle’ or
productive purposes.”
Household values are relatively high, but this is not a
homogeneous category. Household water used for
truly essential needs such as drinking, cooking and
basic hygiene comprises only a minor part of typical
daily use; the rest is used for ‘lifestyle’ or productive
purposes. In affluent regions with a warm climate a
high proportion of water is used for outdoor purposes
such as watering gardens and lawns, washing cars and
ﬁlling swimming pools. Households tend to place a
higher value on indoor than outdoor uses, though this
would not apply where water is used for productive
purposes. In some societies, much of the water available to households is used for growing crops and feeding livestock (in other words, it is supplied for multiple
use purposes). In practice, the valuation of water for

TABLE 10.2
Economic value of water use in the USA: US$ in 1995 prices per acre-foot of water
Average

Median

Minimum

Maximum

No. of
observations

Waste disposal

3

1

0

12

23

Recreational and habitat

48

5

0

2 642

211

Navigation

146

10

0

483

7

Hydropower

25

21

1

113

57

In situ uses

Note: Acre-foot is the amount of water entailed in covering one acre to a depth of one foot. In metric terms, an acre-foot corresponds to
0.1233 m3 per ha.
Source: Turner et al. (2004, table 9, p. 92).

WWDR4

UNVALUED WATER LEADS TO AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

283

household use is commonly taken to be equivalent to
the average tariff, which usually underestimates the
economic cost of supply and ignores the consumer
surplus7 involved.
The value of water with regard to its environmental uses
is not adequately represented in the studies described
above, which relate mainly to use values, in particular
recreation. In fact, recreational values show great variation, depending on the visitation rate, the location of
the site, the quality of water and the type of recreation
(with ﬁshing and shooting licences attracting high fees
in some countries). Failure to account for these beneﬁts
in water valuation can result in inefficient water allocation decisions. Valuations of the non-use environmental beneﬁts of water employ a range of techniques and
produce a wide spectrum of results, although typical
values tend to fall in between agricultural and municipal/household levels (Turner et al., 2004, p. 92).

10.3 Using beneﬁts and values to inform
water policies
A sense of the economic value of water in its different states and uses is a necessary part of water management. This is true in routine management of river
basins and the operation of multi-purpose storage
schemes, where decisions on allocations have to be
made in real-time, day-to-day situations. It also applies to seasonal drought responses and even more so
to strategic decisions on adaptation to growing water
stress and supply-demand imbalances.
In a functioning water market, economic values will
establish themselves through trading prices. However,
water markets are characterized by various degrees of
imperfect competition, externalities, uncertainty, asymmetric information and distributional impacts. These
characteristics affect the appropriateness of market
prices for use as measures of value (Saliba et al., 1987).
As a result, most observed market prices deviate from
an ideal measure of willingness to pay, and may serve
only as a rough indicator of the marginal value of additions to regional water supply if the additional volume
of water made available is small relative to the region’s
total supply.
A more complete analysis of differential water values
and market failures is desirable in decisions to allow
for and regulate water trading, for example, when it is
in the public interest to allow trading between rights
holders. Trading water rights among farmers during

284

CHAPTER 10

Australia’s recent eight-year drought greatly mitigated
its impact on agriculture in the Murray–Darling Basin.
Water transfers from low to higher value purposes
meant that a 70% fall in the availability of water only
led to a 30% fall in the value of production (Sadoff and
Muller, 2009).
Using water values to inform management and allocation policies does not imply that markets should have
the last word in such decisions. As is the case with
other sectors, the market can be a good servant but
a poor master. Public authorities need to intervene to
establish regulations designed to prevent transfer of
negative externalities, ensure adequate supplies of water and sanitation services to satisfy basic needs, and
safeguard public health.
The value of adequate water supplies to the natural environment is another aspect that requires active public
intervention. In the Murray–Darling Basin growing aridity is increasing water losses from evaporation, which
threatens water-dependent ecosystems, whose needs
have to be weighed alongside those of other uses
(Young and McColl, 2009).

10.4 Allocating water under conditions of
risk and uncertainty
Recognition and acceptance of the economic value of water will add an economic dimension to the
social, ethical, public health and equity dimensions
of allocating water. The latter dimensions by themselves have failed to generate the required investments in water to meet socio-economic development
objectives.
The allocation of scarce water to competing uses lies at
the heart of water management. In many parts of the
world, increasing pressures on water resources are
leading to a shortage of water to satisfy all needs. In
general, four interrelated processes drive water stresses:
population growth; economic growth; increased demand
for food, feed and energy (of which biofuel is one
source); and increased climate variability. Choices must
be made about how to share, allocate and reallocate
the increasingly scarce water – within sectors, from
one user group to another and between sectors. Such
dilemmas invoke debates about the principles that
should guide water allocations, and how access and
equity, economic efficiency, sustainability and existing
customary norms and values can be reconciled in
speciﬁc contexts.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Typically, water allocations are the outcome of dialogue between interested stakeholders. Such parties
need to build convergence in their ‘value perspectives’
(Figures 10.2 and 10.3).
Water allocation embraces practices that vary greatly
in scale and duration. They include: the grant of water
rights or permits to large irrigation schemes expected
to last for decades or even indeﬁnitely, while effective
and beneﬁcial use continues; hourly allocation schedules between irrigators; short-term reservoir releases
to cover peak demands in the electricity grid; and
schedules for rationing water between industries, essential services, power generation, farmers and households in the event of drought.
There are four main aspects of a water allocation
system:
đ Water entitlements (formal or informal) confer on
the holder the right to withdraw water and apply it
in a generally recognized beneﬁcial use (Le Quesne
et al., 2007). A person’s entitlement to withdraw water must be considered legitimate by others.

đ Water allocation is a process whereby the available
water is shared among, and distributed to, legitimate
claimants (Le Quesne et al., 2007).
đ Water service delivery (or control) is the physical act
of supplying water to those who are entitled to it in
such a manner that they can effectively use it.
đ Water use is any deliberate application of water to a
speciﬁed purpose (Perry, 2007).
Water entitlements, allocation, service delivery and
use are dynamically linked and constrained by the
amount of water that is available at speciﬁc times.
The use of water creates expectations of similar use in
the future. If it is continued over time an entitlement
emerges, which may be difficult to ignore or claim
back; yet the amount of water available is prone to
natural and man-made ﬂuctuations and changes.
The increasingly variable hydrological cycle makes
the availability of the resource more uncertain both
in time and geographically. Demographic, technological, economic and political futures, along
with changing human values, add additional longterm uncertainties. It is crucial to therefore identify

FIGURE 10.2
Parties in the water dialogue space

Environment Organizations

Media, Academia +?

Labour Unions

Dialogue Space:
Where stakeholders
Farmers and
Food Processors

meet to ensure there

Utilities
(Public and Private)

are no ‘missing
conversations’

Government and
Community
Groups

Water Quality
Regulators

Manufacturers

Source: Adapted from Moss et al. (2003, p. 37).

WWDR4

UNVALUED WATER LEADS TO AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

285

allocation mechanisms that can effectively and ﬂexibly deal with change, uncertainties and the accompanying risks.
The ability to estimate future surface and groundwater availability at different time scales and the
inability to predict future water demands and uses
are important factors. Arguably, the largest uncertainty stems from the risk of lack of adaptation on
the part of institutions to real issues that need to be
addressed, and the possibility of water management
organizations taking the wrong decisions.
Given these uncertainties, water allocation problems
imply four main challenges:
1. How should water be allocated/reallocated in times
of shortage and to respond to changes in natural
and economic conditions?
2. What solutions are available where rights have
been over-allocated and cannot satisfy all holders
in times of drought, or where the availability of water from a particular source is subject to long-term
decline?

3. How can water institutions evolve to keep pace
with and anticipate change?
4. What institutional measures can serve to manage
rising tensions that form the source of disputes and
conﬂicts, and how can these tensions be transformed into forms of cooperation?
Effective stakeholder engagement is necessary to
make water allocation decisions transparent and fair.
Improving the information available to water users is
essential but not sufficient to enable them to make
the best decisions. Routine stakeholder consultation
is not the same as true empowerment, where a community takes control of its water management, leading
to more legitimate and cost-effective solutions with
better chances of implementation. Fortunately, the
experts consulted under the WWAP scenarios project
(see Chapter 9) foresee that more information will be
made public in the future, and that citizen participation will be more widely practised.

FIGURE 10.3
Value perspectives in the water dialogue space

Environmental

Others?

Social

Dialogue Space:
Clarifying value
Gender

perspectives and

Economic

ﬁnding common
ground through
discussion
Public Health

Political

Products and
Products Use

Source: Adapted from Moss et al. (2003, p. 36).

286

CHAPTER 10

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

2

The exception is consumptive use of water, which evaporates
from lakes, reservoirs, trees and crops. (This includes green
water, which the WWDR3 [WWAP, 2009, p. 161] deﬁnes as ‘soil
moisture generated from rainfall that inﬁltrates the soil and is
available for uptake by plants and evapotranspiration. Green
water is non-productive if evaporated from soil and open water’
in the form of rain falling directly onto the land.) Freshwater
discharged into the sea, or in a highly contaminated form, is
also effectively consumed in the sense that is not available for
further beneﬁcial use, except at high cost.
In a letter to the Financial Times (7 June, 2010), Jon Lane,
Director of the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative
Council, refers to the fact that more Africans now own mobile
phones than toilets. He adds, however, that ‘in some countries,
a toilet is the new mobile phone – something that shows
you’ve made it’. It is reported that, under the Total Community
Sanitation Programme, families in certain communities have
decided to categorically reject marriage proposals coming
to their daughters from villages where open defecation is
practised (Kar, 2003). This exempliﬁes the recognition of access
to sanitation as a sign of health and prosperity.

3

The highest being 191.05.

4

The travel cost valuation method infers the valuation that
visitors place on a free amenity from the amount of time and
expense they incur in getting to the site.

5

A number of results are reviewed in Turner et al. (2004).

6

If a short-term approach is taken, an assumption is made that
capacity is ﬁxed for both alternatives to be compared. In the
long term, new investments can be made in either. Marginal and
average costs will also differ for both alternatives.

7

The difference between what consumers would be willing to
pay, and what they actually have to pay.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
AICD (Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic) (V.
Foster and C. Briceno-Garmendia, eds). 2010. Africa’s
Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation. Washington DC,
The World Bank/Agence Française de Développement.
Delli Priscoli, J. 2008. Two Stories. A presentation at the First
African Water Week, Tunis, March 2008.
Dourojeanni, A. and Jouravlev, A. 1999. Gestión de cuencas y
ríos vinculados con centros urbanos. LC/R.1948. Santiago,
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/
publicaciones/xml/8/5668/LCR1948-E.pdf

WWDR4

Emerton, L. and Bos, E. 2004. Value: Counting Ecosystems as
Water Infrastructure. Gland, Switzerland/ Cambridge, UK,
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
Granit, J. and Lindström, A. 2009. The Role of Large Scale
Artiﬁcial Water Storage in the Water-Food-Energy Nexus.
Stockholm, Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI).
Grey, D. and Sadoff, C. 2008. Achieving Water Security
in Africa: Investing in a Minimum Platform. Paper and
presentation at the First African Water Week, Tunis, March
2008.
Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs and
Beneﬁts of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the
Global Level. Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO).
Jouravlev, A. 2003. Los municipios y la gestión de los recursos
hídricos. LC/L.2003-P. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/7/13727/lcl2003e.pdf
Kar, K. 2003. Subsidy or self-respect? Participatory Total
Community Sanitation in Bangladesh. Working Paper No.
184. Brighton, UK, Institute of Development Studies (IDS).
Lentini, E. 2010. Servicios de agua potable y saneamiento en
Guatemala: beneﬁcios potenciales y determinantes de éxito.
LC/W.335. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.
cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/0/41140/lcw335e.pdf
Le Quesne, T, Pegram, G. and von der Heyden, C. 2007.
Allocating Scarce Water – A Primer on Water Allocation,
Water Rights and Water Markets. WWF Water Security
Series 1. Godalming, UK, World Wide Fund for Nature UK
(WWF-UK).
Mays, L. 2006. Water Resources Sustainability. New York,
McGraw-Hill.
McKinsey & Company. 2009. Charting our Water
Future: Economic Frameworks to Inform Decisionmaking. 2030 Water Resources Group. http://
www.2030waterresourcesgroup.com/water_full/
Moss, J., Wolff, G. Gladden, G. and Gutierrez, E. 2003. Valuing
Water for Better Governance: How to Promote Dialogue to
Balance Social, Environmental and Economic Values? White
paper for the Business and Industry CEO Panel. Calif.,
Paciﬁc Institute.
Oblitas de Ruiz, L. 2010. Servicios de agua potable
y saneamiento en el Perú: beneﬁcios potenciales y
determinantes de éxito. LC/W.355. Santiago, United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/
xml/4/41764/lcw355e.pdf
OECD (Organization for Economic Co operation and
Development). 2010. Beneﬁts of Investing in Water and
Sanitation: An OECD Perspective. Paris, OECD.
Pegram, G. and Schreiner, B. 2010. Financing Water Resource
Management: South African Experience. A Case Study
Report prepared by Pegasys Consultants for the OECD
Expert Meeting on Water Economics and Financing, March
2010. European Water Initiative (EUWI) and Global Water
Partnership (GWP).

UNVALUED WATER LEADS TO AN UNCERTAIN FUTURE

287

Perry, C. 2007. Efficient irrigation; inefficient communication;
ﬂawed recommendations. Irrigation and Drainage, Vol. 56,
No. 4, pp. 367–78.

Winpenny, J., Heinz, I., Koo-Oshima, S., Salgot, M., Collado, J.,
Hernandez, F. and Torricelli, R. 2010. The Wealth of Waste:
The Economics of Wastewater Use in Agriculture. FAO
Water Report No. 35. Rome, FAO.

Sadoff, C. and Muller, M. 2009. Water Management, Water
Security and Climate Change Adaptation: Early Impacts
and Essential Responses. GWP Technical Committee,
Background Paper no. 14. Stockholm, Global Water
Partnership (GWP).

World Bank. 2008a. Economic Impacts of Sanitation in the
Philippines. Summary. Research Report published for the
Water and Sanitation Programme (WSP). Jakarta, The
World Bank.

Saliba, B. C., Bush, D. B., Martin, W. E. and Brown, T. C. 1987.
Do water market prices appropriately measure water
values? Natural Resources Journal, Vol. 27, pp. 617–51.

––––. 2008b. Economic Impacts of Sanitation in Indonesia.
Research Report published for the Water and Sanitation
Programme (WSP). Jakarta, The World Bank.

Salzman, J. 2005. Creating markets for ecosystem services:
notes from the ﬁeld. NYU Law Review, Vol. 870.
http://www1.law.nyu.edu/journals/lawreview/issues/vol80/
no3/NYU302.pdf

World Commission on Dams. 2000. Dams and Development:
A New Framework for Decision-making. London, Earthscan.

Turner, K., Stavros, G., Clark, R., Brouwer, R. and Burke,
J. 2004. Economic Valuation of Water Resources in
Agriculture. FAO Water Report No. 27. Rome, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
UN (United Nations). 2010. The Millennium Development
Goals Report 2010. New York, UN.

WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009.
United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water
in a Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO Publishing/
Earthscan.
Young, M. and McColl, J. 2009. More from less: when should
river systems be made smaller and managed differently?
Droplet, No. 16, email newsletter, 13 April. Adelaide,
University of Adelaide.

Winpenny, J.T. 1997. Sustainable management of water
resources: an economic view. R. M. Auty and K. Brown
(eds) Approaches to Sustainable Development. London,
Pinter.

288

CHAPTER 10

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 11
Transforming water management
institutions to deal with change

—
Authors Hannah Edwards, Daniel P. Loucks, Anthony Turton and James Winpenny
Contributors Richard Connor, Uri Shamir and Jos G. Timmerman

© Philippe Bourseiller

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
All individuals, agencies and institutions involved in water resources management are
very aware that the impacts of decisions they make may not turn out to be the ones they
hoped for. Factors that inﬂuence the economic, environmental and social beneﬁts or costs
resulting from any management decision are not known with certainty. This uncertainty
can result in some degree of vulnerability just as much as it may result in higher levels of
reliability or resilience. Water managers and their institutions need to recognize the potential
consequences of their decisions in uncertain environments, environments where the
uncertainty is changing in uncertain ways.
Vulnerability assessments of water resources systems constitute an important basis for water
management under conditions of uncertainty and risk.
Leaders in government, the private sector and civil society make most of the important
decisions impacting water. It is therefore imperative that they understand the role of water
and incorporate this information into their range of decisions. Important instruments
to support decision-making include forecasts and scenarios, and combining a range of
forecasts of possible futures allows for more robust decision-making. Water management
institutions must be created or transformed to reﬂect this approach.

11.1 Introduction
Sustainable development under conditions of inherent uncertainty requires a paradigm shift. Key factors include the need for an increasing range of input
data and the capacity to adapt to growing pressure
on the resource. This will require deliberate efforts to
build robustness and resilience into the management
structures of water projects as a matter of routine. As
shown in Chapter 5, such fundamental changes are
likely to occur in the non-structural elements of water management measures. In an inherently complex
world, leaders in government, private sector and civil
society outside the ‘water box’ take most of the important decisions impacting water. It is therefore important to develop new ways to provide specialized information to decision-makers in government, as well as to
those affected by the decisions they take (Falkenmark,
2007). This requires a formal structuring of relationships between technical specialists, government
decision-makers and society as a whole (see Figure 11.3,
with explanation later in the chapter) (Hattingh et al.,
2007; Turton et al., 2007a,b).
Recent changes in global climate, ﬁnancial markets,
land use and consumption patterns, have increased the
uncertainty surrounding future management of water
resources. This uncertainty is inherent to the system
itself, and relates to the interconnectedness of various
systems – hydrological, ﬁnancial, social and ecological – as well as a general lack of knowledge concerning
how an ecosystem might respond to the new demands
being made of it. Some now call for a change in thinking away from separate ecosystems and social systems towards socio-ecological systems (SESs) instead
(Burns and Weaver, 2008). In this regard it is accepted
that human impact is so signiﬁcant that economic activities and associated social endeavours are no longer
seen as being separate from ecosystems – instead
social-ecological systems have co-evolved. This is consistent with the emerging notion of the Anthropocene
as a potentially new geological epoch (Zalasiewicz et
al., 2008). Rather than planning for one deﬁned future, water management agencies increasingly need
to improve their methods of assessment in order to
respond to a range of possible futures, all of which are
uncertain but present varying degrees of probability.
Major engineering issues across all possible futures will
include planning, designing and operating sustainable,
reliable, resilient and non-vulnerable water resource
systems, embedded within an increasingly uncertain
set of drivers. The ultimate aim should be to inculcate

WWDR4

a multi-disciplinary approach to the development of
guidelines and regulations for water resources planning, integrating science, economic decision criteria,
and monitoring and evaluation processes, all of which
should embrace a range of future realities.
As shown in Chapter 5, water management has traditionally been top-down in orientation. Adaptive water
management, which can be thought of as the management of water resources under conditions of inherent uncertainty, links this to a bottom-up approach.
Contemporary experience increasingly shows that a
combination of the two approaches is best suited to
the core challenge of dealing with uncertainty and risk.
A top-down approach, being more strategic in orientation, can provide an overall picture, offering a general
framework within which a water management activity
or programme can be developed and implemented. A
bottom-up approach, being more operational in orientation, can provide an accurate picture of relevant
‘on-the-ground’ water issues, needs and uncertainties
experienced by a wide range of actors and stakeholders. Enthusiasm and support for addressing waterrelated issues are often best developed at the local
level, as this is closest to the point of actual impact,
thereby facilitating acceptance of needed actions,
provided that it is adequately positioned and has the
capacity to effectively deal with the issues.
Developing and implementing an effective water resources management programme ideally incorporates
both ends of this management spectrum, speciﬁcally as the emphasis shifts from building infrastructure to building institutions (Figure 11.1). However, the
relative importance of each approach will vary under
differing social, political, economic and environmental conditions. A major challenge for dealing with
inherent uncertainties and risks is the introduction of
a more adaptive approach to management, irrespective of whether integrated water resources management (IWRM) is adopted as a framework. Adaptive
management is based on speciﬁc principles and
approaches.
11.1.1 Introducing adaptive management to IWRM
IWRM is a globally accepted management framework
for achieving sustainable development (Ashton et al.,
2006). IWRM has been deﬁned in many ways and the
most widely known deﬁnition has it not as a tool but
as a process. Furthermore, IWRM is a means, not an
end in itself, and the process has been very difficult to

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

291

implement in developing countries, despite some progress, as described in Chapter 1 (Section 1.3.3).
Governance and IWRM are the principal means for resolving competition among multi-sectoral demands
on a relatively ﬁnite water resources base. Each sector
fashions its own set of management principles, rules
and incentives that are maximized, often in conﬂict
with one another. Deﬁning social risk tolerance and
service reliability is part of a social contract to be determined through a continuing dialogue within each
society (Nyambe et al., 2007), whether it be for new
drugs, nuclear power plants or water infrastructure.
IWRM is contextually shaped through this process
to encompass the different dimensions of sustainability (ecological, biophysical, economic, social and
institutional), but it is also often path-dependent (see
Section 11.4.4). Thus, effective IWRM is knowledgeintensive and needs to be adaptive if it is to continue
to respond to exogenous changes over which it generally
has little direct control. However, it should also be
noted that adaptation can also be identiﬁed and
adopted without IWRM as the underlying process.
Adaptive management is ‘a process that promotes
ﬂexible decision-making in the face of uncertainties as

outcomes from management actions and other events
become better understood’ (US National Research
Council, 2004). This report describes adaptive management as an approach for keeping up with future
changes and making periodic modiﬁcations in past
decisions in response to those unpredictable changes.
It is applicable to situations in which future social, economic, climatic or technological conditions that inﬂuence the outcome of any decisions cannot be forecast
with certainty.
Absolutely essential for effective adaptive management is a continuing awareness of the changes that
are taking place over time, as well as the responses
stemming from past decisions. Monitoring, database management and communication are important components of any adaptive management approach. It is an approach that is linked to information
about out-of-the-water-box drivers such as economic
growth data, population trends and changes in food
consumption patterns, mining impacts and demands
for energy. Adaptive management is applicable to
many aspects of water management, and no less so
for responding to ﬂood and drought conditions and
their impacts on food production, property damage,
and human dislocation and other social impacts. To

FIGURE 11.1
Conceptual model illustrating the general trend of change as water resource managers adapt to include a
wider range of drivers and issues

Developing
infrastructure
(ﬁrst order focus)

Water is not an
Economic Resource

Supply-side
options

Centralized management

A

Demand-side
options

Water is an Economic
Resource
B

Water is a Social and
an Economic Resource
C
Developing
institutions
(second order
focus)

Decentralized management

Source: Turton et al. (2007a, ﬁg. 1.1, p. 5, with kind permission of Springer Science+Business Media).

292

CHAPTER 11

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

effectively accommodate the ‘precautionary principle’
(see Section 11.2.3), together with the broader aims of
sustainable development, it is necessary to consider
the full range of drivers that impact on water infrastructure under a wide range of inherently uncertain
supply and demand scenarios. This builds robustness and resilience into water projects by providing
ﬂexibility.

11.2 Principles for managing water under risk
and uncertainty
In order to meet the goals set by decision-makers, water management must deal with the uncertainty and
variability that characterize current changes in the contemporary world. Lempert and Groves (2010) give an
indication of the core principles needed to achieve this
objective:
đ Seek robust projects or strategies, and substantially revise the current economic and optimization decision rules routinely used in water resources
management.
đ Employ adaptive strategies to achieve robustness;
near-term strategies should be explicitly designed to
be revised as better information becomes available.
đ Use computer-aided processes to engage in interactive exploration of hypotheses, options and
possibilities.
These principles are increasingly being advocated by
water resource practitioners and academicians, and are
manifesting as technological innovations, engineering
design changes, multi-objective watershed planning,
public participation, regulatory, ﬁnancial and policy
incentives. One example is the emergence of a water accounting framework in Australia (see Chapter 6),
designed speciﬁcally to integrate reporting across normally disconnected sectors and bureaucracies (AASB,
2011; Godfrey and Chalmers, 2011). Improvements in
existing approaches to forecasting are being made using a large number of imperfect but possible future
scenarios. These enable analysts and decision-makers
to identify a series of near and long-term actions that
anticipate a wide range of scenarios, rather than relying exclusively on a single probabilistic forecast of one
possible future.
Another key principle is associated with the need to
anticipate periods of induced stress brought on by the
unanticipated periodic coincidence of high demand
and low availability.

WWDR4

Consider some of the options that may help relieve
some of this drought stress. In the long run, additional
infrastructure can be built to provide added storage
capacity, and measures can be taken to reduce leakage in diversion canals and water distribution systems,
increase the efficiency of irrigation systems, and provide additional supplies, perhaps through desalination. Alternative sources of energy, such as geothermal,
wind and photovoltaic cells, might be developed that
use less water than more conventional and more water-consuming alternatives. Short-term options might
include demand management measures that reduce
human water consumption and increase water reuse.
11.2.1 Diversiﬁcation as a core principle of adaptive
water management
The objective of adaptive water resource management
is to enhance resilience by improving the capacity to
react appropriately to unanticipated events. These
principles, most notably under the broad banner of resilience theory (Burns and Weaver, 2008), are derived
from ecosystem theory (Holling, 1973), which argues
that diverse systems can better cope with extreme
events. An example is the application of portfolio theory, in which investments are made in products of widely differing risk proﬁles, thereby reducing the overall
risk of the total portfolio. Several steps can be taken
to diversify water management decisions and investments. For example, in a semi-arid agricultural area
that is largely dependent on rainwater, the challenge is
to develop new drought mitigation measures, such as
increased storage capacity of surface water, increased
groundwater capacity, irrigation schemes for local
farming communities, satellite technology for precision farming, and new drought-resistant seeds. Water
managers would need to advise decision-makers on
the policy frameworks necessary to promote such
measures, including water pricing policies, subsidies or
other ﬁnancial incentive mechanisms.
11.2.2 Assessing vulnerability
Hashimoto et al. (1982) introduced a taxonomy capable of embracing the risk and uncertainty inherent in
water management performance evaluation. They use
simple principles that represent a set of descriptors to
characterize the key components of the more traditional engineering reliability analysis. In essence they
focus on the sensitivity of parameters and decision
variables to considerations of uncertainty, including
some aspects of strategic uncertainty. These key principles are (Hashimoto, 1982):

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

293

đ Reliability: probability of successful outcomes
đ Robustness: the satisfactory performance of a system
under a range of scenarios
đ Resilience: how quickly a system recovers from failure
(ﬂoods, droughts, pollution spills)
đ Vulnerability: how severe the consequences of failure
may be
These ﬁve principles expand the key components of
more traditional engineering reliability analysis, by focusing on the sensitivity of parameters and decision
variables to conditions of uncertainty. Increasing attention is being paid to reducing the structural vulnerability of hydraulic systems by enhancing system resilience
as a matter of design. The main question is how to
evaluate such strategies? Traditionally, this has been
done through risk management on the basis of historical data and statistical analysis, but it is now apparent
that past experiences are incapable of predicting future realities, because of the growth of non-linear complexity (Turton, 2007). Strategies are now being selected, for example, using cost–beneﬁt-based risk analysis.
The choice of the discount rate in economic analysis is
an important determinant of the economic viability of
a water project, and the level of discount rate appropriate for projects with very long lives, or with strong
social or environmental beneﬁts, is the subject of lively
debate in engineering circles. The same is true for the
level of acceptable risk or uncertainty, even if the latter
cannot be fully quantiﬁed. Supplementary decisionsupport tools are required when risks cannot be quantiﬁed or isolated, as is the case when the many factors
described in Chapter 9 interact.
11.2.3 The precautionary principle
The precautionary principle states that if the impacts
resulting from an action or policy may cause harm to
people or the environment, in the absence of scientiﬁc consensus on a probable outcome, the burden
of proof that an action or policy is not harmful falls
on those taking the action. This implies that decisionmakers have a social responsibility to err on the side
of caution by protecting the public and the environment from exposure to harm, where a plausible risk
has been identiﬁed. This is increasingly evident in
corporate governance structures found within complex economies, in particular companies listed on various international stock exchanges. These constraints
can only be relaxed if subsequent scientiﬁc ﬁndings
emerge providing sound evidence that no harm will
occur.

294

CHAPTER 11

11.2.4 Meeting information needs for management
under uncertainty and risk
Reducing the risks associated with water resource
management, under conditions of inherent uncertainty, requires a broader set of information inputs.
Hydrological data has been often collected for speciﬁc
purposes, such as the use and design of hydroelectricity schemes, water supply systems and water treatment plants. However, the need for adaptive IWRM
places a greater burden on the suppliers of information. The movement of water in time and space is in
constant ﬂux, but it is generally managed as if it were
a static resource. This approach was possible in the
past as demands on the resource were less complex
(Turton, 2008, 2010). Today, the web of water dependencies is becoming increasingly complex and the lack

BOX 11.1
Mine closure in South Africa as an example of
growing complexity

The city of Johannesburg in South Africa is unusual in
the sense that it lacks a river, lake or seashore. Instead, it
straddles a continental watershed divide and exists only
because of the vast gold resources that lie beneath the
city (Turton et al., 2006). These gold-bearing ore bodies consist of pyrite rich in sulphides and are overlain by
a massive karst system (Buchanan, 2010). However, the
cessation of mining activities is causing the resultant void
to ﬁll with highly acidic water, causing some anguish to
property owners (Coetzee et al., 2002, 2006). This is
driving a degree of uncertainty and constitutes a classic
example of the growing complexity confronting water resource managers.
A central issue is calculating the rate of rising water in
the void. This requires direct access in order to monitor
the water level, however, the companies that control the
shafts do not want the data to be made public as they
seek to limit their liabilities (Adler et al., 2007). This provides a good example of the need for new types of data
previously considered irrelevant to water resource management, as the mine water ﬂows into the headwaters of
two major river basins, the Orange and Limpopo, both of
which sustain vast socio-economic interests in at least ﬁve
different downstream countries (Botswana, Mozambique,
Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe). One of the water
resource management challenges is, therefore, establishing how to manage mine closure in situations where
limited legislation exists and the absence of cross-sectoral institutional linkages inhibits the ﬂow of needed data
(Strachan et al., 2008; van Tonder and Coetzee, 2008).

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

of accurate information poses a growing challenge
for decision-makers, in particular regarding the range
of management options including water conservation and demand management strategies. A growing
problem is the retention and manipulation of data by
commercial entities inaccessible to the public or regulator (Box 11.1). Information may be available in existing
government agencies and/or water data sources, but
it may also be necessary to initiate monitoring efforts
directed to obtaining such data, where it does not
currently exist. Monitoring requires extensive instrumentation and transmission capabilities, and demands
human capacity; it is also expensive to operate on a
sustainable basis. As such, there is mounting pressure
in this speciﬁc arena (Chapter 6).

11.3 Approaches for managing water under
risk and uncertainty
It is useful to differentiate between the vulnerability of
a water resources system and societal susceptibility to
economic disruptions and dislocation. The vulnerability
of a water resources system is a function of the hydrological sensitivity and relative performance of a water
management system. The vulnerability of the SES is a
function of the sensitivity of the water infrastructure
and the resilience of the SES. The two are intimately
linked; however, the latter is increasingly manifesting
as greater population pressure is placed on a relatively
stressed water resource system. The result is a general loss of resilience and a reduction in the margin of
error possible before catastrophic failure occurs. This
can best be thought of as a general propensity towards vulnerability as greater reliance is placed on an
increasingly stressed resource, both as a source and as
a sink.
The motivating reasons for making many water management decisions are economic, environmental and
social drivers that are not controlled by water managers. Similarly the effectiveness of any water management decisions made is largely determined by these
‘outside-the-water-box’ drivers. Just how vulnerable
any decision-making organization may be given the
uncertainties of changing drivers needs to be considered when decisions are made. The question to ask
when recommending or making decisions regarding
water use or water management, especially long-term
decisions, is Will a particular decision or development
policy be considered a wise or beneﬁcial one, say,
50 years from now? Does it truly ﬁt in to an integrated
water resources plan or policy?

WWDR4

It is not easy for water management institutions to
adopt an integrated planning and management strategy. Many existing rules and regulations may limit the
scope of responsibilities or decisions any given institution can make. Hence one question to ask to check on
the degree of integration obtained by some decision
by some institution is who is responsible for implementing integrated plans and policies (Box 11.2). Who
is responsible for making sure all possible outcomes,
and drivers, and affected stakeholders, have been
considered in the decision-making process? Who is
responsible for looking into the future and judging
whether or not some decision will be judged as important for future sustainability? Having answers to these
questions is a measure of the extent to which adaptive
IWRM has been implemented.
Regularly reviewing these questions will enable adaptations to be made before the challenge is too great
to be adequately met by existing institutional arrangements and decision-making processes.

BOX 11.2
Climate Vulnerability Index

People’s vulnerability to global changes is inﬂuenced by
the quantity of water available now and in the future,
underpinned by a range of social, economic and environmental factors. Collectively, these affect the ability to
cope with changing conditions. The Climate Vulnerability
Index (CVI) is a composite index approach that captures
the essence of this deﬁnition of vulnerability. This method
helps identify to vulnerability in order to prioritize actions
to protect local populations. The CVI combines Global
Impact Factors (GIFs) including geospatial variables; resource quantiﬁcation; and information on the accessibility
of water and property rights, the capacity of people and
institutions, water utilization and the maintenance of
ecological integrity. The index values range from
0 to 100, with high values indicating high vulnerability.
By developing a range of future conditions, both in terms
of climate and socio-economic scenarios, the change in
CVI scores from present values indicate how different
GIFs will change under different conditions. The CVI has
the potential to involve stakeholders, thereby rendering
the outcome legitimate and implementable in the eyes of
those affected.
Source: Sullivan and Meigh (2005).

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

295

11.3.1 Key elements of an adaptive management
approach
Adaptive management approaches are slow to evolve,
because of increasing uncertainty of future scenarios on the basis of the historical record, in non-linear
systems. Consequently, the major challenges facing
water resource managers change at unpredictable
rates. Failure to respond adequately thus becomes an
increasing risk in its own right. A pragmatic ‘proactive
adaptive management’ approach needs to be adopted, comparable to the ‘no regrets’ philosophy noted in
Chapter 5. An adaptive IWRM approach consists of the
following elements:
đ Strengthened emergency management and preparedness plans for all projects including enhanced
public participation and identiﬁcation of the conditions under which public emergencies requiring special measures will be declared and the limits of such
measures (i.e. power and responsibilities of authorities and users)
đ Ability to programme the gradual and measured
adoption of measures of adaptation and deﬁne the
threshold which trigger these measures
đ An effective information and communications strategy to convey the messages, establish dialogue with
allied sectors, inﬂuence other sectors’ decision-making and rally public support (Nyambe et al., 2007)
đ Strengthened inter-agency collaboration for developing joint procedures and applied research for
change adaptation
đ Risk-based planning and design of infrastructure to
account for a deﬁned range of uncertainties
đ A new generation of risk-based design standards for
infrastructure responding to extreme events (ﬂoods
and droughts)
đ Increased inspections, oversight and regulation of
infrastructure during operation, maintenance and life
cycle management of aging infrastructure
đ Vulnerability assessment of water infrastructure and
impact assessment of the socio-economic system in
case of failure
đ Increased research and development oriented to hydrological change and variability
đ Improved forecasting methods
đ The process should be reiterative and guided at all
stages by common principles
Information and data on water availability and use is
inadequate in virtually all countries, irrespective of the
state of development. Even where information and

296

CHAPTER 11

data exist, they are often unreliable or fragmented, or
may be based on gross estimates. They are usually
incompatible both temporally (between periods) and
spatially (between countries, water sectors or users, or
water basins).
11.3.2 Scenarios as an element of an adaptive
management approach
Improvements are being made though an adaptive
management approach, involving a range of imperfect forecasts of the future. These rely on many plausible futures, and allow analysts and decision-makers
to identify a series of near-term and long-term options that are robust across a wide range of conditions.
Rather than relying on a probabilistic forecast of a single future, this approach asks what can be done today
to shape a more desirable range of possible futures
(Lempert and Groves, 2010; Chapters 8 and 9 of this
report.)
There is a need for increasingly sophisticated monitoring systems to source and integrate the necessary data.
This adds additional stresses to the overall decisionmaking process. The need for adaptive management
carries with it a fundamental requirement for complex data, hard-wired into feedback loops, speciﬁcally
for managing the incremental changes needed in the
various systems including the means of tracking those
changes (Stakhiv and Pietrowsky, 2009). In effect this
creates institutional learning as core problems are redeﬁned and new responses are generated through the
modiﬁed decision-making processes.
11.3.3 Modelling as an element of an adaptive
management approach
Systems of locks, dams, levees, irrigation canals and
conveyance tunnels were built worldwide before the
era of sophisticated modelling and risk and reliability analysis, or the existence of adequate databases
for determining risk and uncertainty associated with
hydrological variability. Yet those structures still stand
and have performed effectively through a wide range
of unanticipated supply and demand conditions. In
short, they have been remarkably robust and resilient.
On the other hand, it is not known how the design
speciﬁcations based on speciﬁc climate parameters
will perform under a changing climate.
Every profession has its established customs and
standards, and certainly engineers responsible for public safety have theirs. These are partly the result of past

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

practice that seems to be successful or at least acceptable by the public, and partly the result of rules and regulations that engineering contractors need to meet or
satisfy to meet legal requirements. An example of such
safety standards is the widely used 100-year ﬂoodplain
that delineates what is susceptible to ﬂooding and what
is safe. This is clearly arbitrary and often does not reﬂect
the actual risks of damage involved. Another example is
the level of levee protection in the Netherlands, where
the range is protecting from a 1,250-year return ﬂow to
a 10,000-year coastal storm. Much depends on what the
public is willing to pay to be ‘safe’.
Modelling can help to identify the type and accuracy
of data required for decisions being considered. But
although the data obtained from current monitoring programmes are intended to be of value to future
managers, it is difficult to predict the exact data and
precision those future managers may require. The ﬁrst
stage in designing a monitoring system is therefore to
deﬁne the information needed for the kinds of decisions being made. The information needed determines
the attributes to be measured, the types of data to be
collected, and the kinds of analyses to be applied.
Although hydro-climatologic information about
frequencies, magnitude, duration and incidence of
precipitation and runoff events are the basic inputs
into most water management decisions, they are
but precursors to more fundamental economic, environmental and socio-economic information and
objectives that typically dominate most water management decisions. In fact, it is the non-hydrological
information that directs and constrains the basic
decision rules that societies use to choose from
a range of options that can be employed for any
given water management problem. Land-use regulations, economic priorities, trade policies, beneﬁtcost criteria and even the choice of a discount rate
used in deciding the present value of future streams
of beneﬁts and costs, are more prominent as decision factors than most hydrologic information.
(Stakhiv, 2010, p. 22)
Frequency of measurement and the density of monitoring sites are dependent on the variability of an attribute or parameter’s value over time and/or space.
Once the monitoring network design has been deﬁned,
it is important to specify data collection, storage and
analysis procedures, along with plans for reporting
and disseminating the results. This is included in the

WWDR4

FIGURE 11.2
Monitoring and assessment cycle

Water Management

Information needs

Reporting and
information use

Information strategy

Data management
and assessment

Monitoring and
data collection

Source: UNECE (2006, ﬁg. 3, p. 16).

monitoring strategy. These are subject to change and
enhancement over time, reﬂecting changes in knowledge or goals, improvements in methods and instrumentation, and budgets. Actions taken to manage
the system more effectively on the basis of monitoring data will lead to changes in information needs. As
these change, the monitoring plan is revised accordingly (Figure 11.2) (UNECE, 2006). This approach supports the development of adaptive monitoring programmes that evolve iteratively as new information
emerges and research questions change (Lindenmayer
and Likens, 2009). This is an inherent property of institutional learning and is an indicator of appropriate
adaptive change.
11.3.4 Decision-making that embraces uncertainty
and risk
Adaptive IWRM is a sensible and pragmatic approach
for modern water managers. It is an extension to
IWRM in that it is designed to address the increasing
uncertainty inherent to our modern socio-ecological
systems (Burns and Weaver, 2008). The natural environment can be considered as ‘infrastructure’ because
it supplies many of the same services as man-made infrastructure. Wetlands assimilate many organic wastes
in the same manner as wastewater treatment plants.
Soil moisture and groundwater represent signiﬁcant
sources of potential strategic storage. Increased research and monitoring regarding ecosystem water
needs helps to optimize use of the natural environment in an infrastructural context.

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

297

Water conservation and demand management is an
important element of enhanced resource management
when set against a backdrop of adaptive IWRM. This
requires making trade-offs between various types of
water usages to encourage engagement and ﬂexibility. Water management tools for addressing future demands include institutional reforms and policy changes
that support demand management and more efficient
water use, including the use of appropriate technologies. Appreciation of this approach to managing water resources is important as it embraces behavioural
changes and economic and other incentives (Brooks et
al., 2009). To be most effective this requires increased
public awareness efforts and greater public participation. There is a need for enhanced analytical tools and
models yielding results that are credible, understandable and communicable to a broad band of non-technical stakeholders, including the public, the media
and political role-players, such as that envisaged by
the trialogue approach shown in Figure 11.3 (Ashton
et al., 2006; Hattingh et al., 2007; Turton et al., 2007a,
2007b). Such a multi-disciplinary approach involves
stakeholders, psychologists, economists, hydrologists, water resources managers and political scientists,
among others, and is increasingly a requirement for
deriving optimal infrastructure designs and water-use
policies.

FIGURE 11.3
The Trialogue Model with structured interfaces
between the three main actor clusters of
government, society and science is conducive to
adaptive IWRM

Go
ve
rnm
en
t–S
oc
iet
y
Government
process

Governance

ce
rfa
nte
yi
iet
oc
–S
ce
ien
Sc

int
erf
ac
e

Society
process

Government–Science interface

Source: Hattingh et al. (2007, ﬁg. 1, © CSIR 2007).

298

CHAPTER 11

The inability to meet water supply demands and
protect people and property against ﬂoods and
droughts is a signiﬁcant threat to all countries, but
is felt most notably by developing states unable to
build the infrastructure needed to reduce the adverse impacts of such events. The reality is that water
management systems are not designed to satisfy all
demands, given the full range of possible expected
extreme events under what is understood to be contemporary hydrological variability. They are designed
to minimize the combination of risks and costs of a
wide range of hazards to society. This risk-cost balance is constantly adjusted by societies, which is why
many countries have ﬂood and drought infrastructure reliability set at a speciﬁed-year return period.
Of course, as population density and life styles in
urban areas increases, these standards invariably
change, and begin to approach the risk-averse standards of countries like the Netherlands and Japan. The
setting of new design standards and planning criteria
are probably the most important aspects of any adaptation strategy.
Water resource management, which is now co-evolving with principles of adaptive management, has employed a variety of tools, in different combinations, to
reduce vulnerability, enhance system resiliency and robustness, and provide reliable delivery of water-related
services. ‘These tools consist of many technological innovations, engineering design changes, multi-objective
watershed planning, public participation, regulatory,
ﬁnancial and policy incentives. However, well-functioning institutions are needed to effectively administer
this broad array of complex, dispersed and expensive
combinations of management measures. Hence, tackling the central issue of governance is a key aspect of
any strategy’ (Stakhiv, 2010, p. 23) intending to deal
with demand change adaptation, and this is a product
of adaptive institutions (Falkenmark, 2007; Nyambe et
al., 2007; Priscoli, 2007).

11.4 Institutions for managing risk
and uncertainty

Science
process

Present-day water institutions in general are not
equipped to deal with contemporary challenges, such
as integrating land and water resource management,
working towards synergies, ensuring transparency
and accountability, acquiring sufficient capacities and
resources, and possessing adaptive capacity. Typical
mechanisms to deal with uncertainty include establishing watershed services, reducing transaction costs,

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

creating linkages across sectors, and developing a new
leadership style.

effectiveness. The key challenges to sustain healthy
institutional evolution are as follows.

Improving institutions entails strengthening institutional capacity, creating learning-oriented institutional processes, tackling institutional deﬁcits, and incorporating
informal institutions into water management. This implies fostering the capacity to work outside the water
box in a way not yet common in mainstream practice.

Integration
This includes the alignment and integration policies
within the formal and informal institutions that regulate actions for both land and water. Effective institutions encourage cost-effective conservation measures and efficiency enhancements, like water-demand
management practices, while remaining ﬂexible and
adaptable enough to accommodate increasingly uncertain climate forecasts. They also need to be robust
enough to accommodate changes in water availability by facilitating the reallocation of water supplies, which is an action prone to the generation of
instability, if incorrectly managed. When integration
cannot be achieved, trade-offs may be necessary and

Institutional capacity needs to encompass a clear deﬁnition of the roles and responsibilities of each authority,
particularly in cases of emergencies or slow-onset disasters. Important features of adaptive institutional capacity are: clear decision-making procedures, communication protocols and contingency planning, sustained
by regular training and simulation exercises (UNECE,
2009; WWAP, 2009).
Conventional water planning tends to be rigid and
water institutions are typically poorly linked to other
institutions required for effective governance of the
water resource and services (Funke et al., 2007). The
collective challenge is to ascertain how to develop
adaptive governance frameworks and institutions, in
response to growing calls for attention to more resilient institutions and approaches (GWP, 2009). Recent
developments in water management focus on improved governance and institutional changes, including changes within formal and informal domains, as
well as the shifting boundaries of the public/private
divide (Falkenmark, 2007; Priscoli, 2007; Nyambe et
al., 2007). While some countries have made signiﬁcant
improvements, the success of institutional reform has
been mixed, with many countries still facing governance, ﬁnancial and capacity shortcomings to implement new institutional structures (Box 11.3).
11.4.1 Creating adaptable and ﬂexible institutions
Recognition that IWRM (see Section 5.1) needs to
become more adaptive has brought increased appreciation for multi-sector and multi-disciplinary collaborative efforts towards sustainable development.
This provides an opportunity for healthy institutional
change. Without institutions capable of accommodating uncertainty, climate and other external changes
will impose signiﬁcant costs on water users and waterdependent communities, ultimately limiting economic
growth potential. Identifying the way that endogenous
and exogenous features inﬂuence management processes enhances adaptive institutional architecture and

WWDR4

BOX 11.3
Water quality monitoring in Nigeria

The goal of water-quality monitoring is to obtain information useful for managing water resources. In Nigeria, most
of the water used for domestic and industrial purposes
is channelled from rivers and groundwater. The majority of the populace obtains water from rivers and shallow wells, and constant water-quality monitoring is a way
to check and avert pollution, as well as upgrade standards. This is most practical in cities where high population
density and industries result in the discharge of a large
amount of waste into water bodies. Water-quality monitoring in Nigeria only involves the monitoring of groundwater levels once a year in each state, and is performed
by the state water board using standards established by
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency of Nigeria.
There is no integrated river water-quality-monitoring
scheme. Although the environment is characterized by
unfavourable legislative, technical and operational conditions, the principal constraints on water-quality monitoring in Nigeria are institutional barriers: the organizational framework does not function in a way to enable
such monitoring. The key issues include inadequate and
untimely funding, shortage of requisite personnel, lack
of a central coordination body for agency activities, poor
maintenance of infrastructure, and lack of response to
institutional reform needs. As a result, there are only mild
or even no penalties for culprits. Moreover, the lack of information on pollution is a serious hindrance to pollution
management. Monitoring is not just a technical issue; it is
also an organizational and institutional issue.

Source: Ekiye and Zejiao (2010).

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

299

synergies can be sought, to achieve resource optimization and minimize adverse impacts. A key challenge is how to engage unregulated traditional and
informal institutional frameworks with formal water
supply regimes.
Realizing synergies
Different institutions may take measures that inﬂuence each other. For example, the European Union (EU)
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) plays a beneﬁcial
role in achieving the goals of the EU Water Framework
Directive (WFD). Such synergies are beneﬁcial for at least
one of the institutions. Identiﬁcation of weak or strong
links between institutions helps to identify possibilities for
synergies (or avoidance of disruption), delineate reform
tasks, and set institutional priorities (Wettestad, 2008).
Similarly, policies implemented by agencies responsible
for mining in water-constrained areas might beneﬁt society at large, but have severe negative impacts on national
food security, because of the unintended consequence
of unplanned mine closure, such as is the case in South
Africa (van Tonder and Coetzee, 2008).
Water integrity and accountability
Transparent processes and access to information are
required to discourage corruption, which adversely affects efficient and equitable water allocation and the
delivery of water and sanitation services – particularly
to poor and vulnerable groups. Corruption is a symptom of a governance crisis that increases transaction
costs (Allen, 1999; Lund, 1993) and discourages investments (Earle, 2007). Hence, it affects institutional reform for improved accountability (Marin et al., 2007).
In most developing countries, regulators tasked with
these speciﬁc roles are often weak and are sometimes
absent (van Wyk et al., 2007). Water accounting is
now starting to emerge in water-constrained countries,
like Australia, driven by the need to improve the integrity of reporting on water usage by all stakeholders
(AASB, 2011; WWAP-UNSD, 2011).
Capacity development and resources
Adequate ﬁnancing and appropriate staffing are required for effective and efficient delivery of water services, and the ability and authority to address basic
governance issues like integrity and accountability.
One emerging example comes from the Mapungubwe
area in the Limpopo River Basin, where the government has allocated mining rights without consideration
for water constraints and cultural sensitivities in the
adjacent UNESCO World Heritage Site. The outcome of

300

CHAPTER 11

a process of vigorous contestation was a new agreement between the mining industry, government and
wildlife conservationists, to create a new form of offset
trading to meet the requirements of all parties.1
Adaptive capacities of institutions to deal with risk and
uncertainties
Developments in technology and infrastructure, as well
as the availability of ﬁnancial resources, will be essential to improve water-use efficiency.
An example is found in the new coal ﬁelds in the
Greater Soutpansberg (portion of the Limpopo River
basin), where endemic water scarcity is a fundamental
constraint to job creation through mining. One solution
under investigation involves the creation of what is
known as a special purpose vehicle (SPV) by the DWA,
which would facilitate the buy-out of the existing water rights of farmers, along with the negotiation of an
off-take agreement with the mining sector. This is an
example of adaptive management, where government
plays a proactive role in shifting water from an activity
with a known low sectoral water efficiency (SWE) ratio
(agriculture) to one with a known high SWE (mining).
Generating adequate and sustainable ﬁnancing
Many water institutions in developing countries are
plagued by under-ﬁnancing and capacity deﬁcits. New
funding is required for more effective institutional
implementation, but existing funding should be used
more efficiently. Most water funding goes to infrastructure development rather than being invested in developing institutions and human capacities. Governments
and the private sector must provide better incentives
for innovative funding approaches that can enhance
institutional implementation, and thus reduce the uncertainties affecting people’s livelihoods, as well as access to water resources and services.
Another mechanism is to reduce free-riding and transaction costs (Nicol et al., 2001). Water resource institutions determine who can use what water, how, at
what time and for how much; they also set management responsibilities, tariffs and collect fees. To keep
an institution viable the various members need to
contribute ﬁnancially. Free-riding occurs when legitimate water users take more than their allocated share
of water, which can trigger disputes over allocation.
Water resources may also be extracted by illegitimate
users without legal rights, permits or entitlements to
that speciﬁc resource, which is especially common and

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

difficult to control in the case of groundwater. For that
reason, community-based water supply projects in rural areas have frequently proved untenable, with many
communities unable to raise sufficient funds to meet
operation and maintenance costs associated with common water resources. The transaction costs for monitoring and policing water users can be so high that
it outweighs the beneﬁts, particularly in rural areas
where water users can be dispersed over large areas.
This may also be the case if community goals of fairness in water allocation and cost-sharing are deﬁcient.
Social sanctioning may minimize the number of freeriders (Clark, 1977; Olson, 1965). Social norms can generate punishment for community members who break
the rules, and run the risk of social exclusion or disrespect (Breier and Visser, 2006; Ostrom, 1990).

BOX 11.4
Review of water management institutions and
reforms in 11 countries

A review of 11 countries – Mexico, Chile, Brazil, Spain,
Morocco, Israel, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Australia, China,
and India, undertaken by Saleth and Dinar (1999) – suggests that among the 11 countries, only Australia and Chile
(and within the United States of America, California and
Colorado) are at an advanced (though not ideal) stage of
institutional change.
‘Some of the recommendations from this study on institutional changes include:
đƫƫƫ00!),0/ƫ0+ƫü4ƫ%/+(0! ƫ,.0/ƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ)*#!)!*0ƫ
will inﬂuence other dimensions. An integrated approach
is best, at the heart of which should be institutional
changes aimed at modernizing and strengthening legal,
policy and administrative arrangements for the ‘whole
spectrum of water management.
đƫƫƫ*/0%010%+*(ƫ$*#!/ƫ0'%*#ƫ,(!ƫ!2!.53$!.!ƫ/1##!/0ƫ
that the opportunity costs of (and net gain from) institutional change are overtaking most transaction costs.
But institutional change is not uniform, suggesting that
opportunity and transaction costs vary.
đƫƫƫ1* %*#ƫ#!*%!/ƫ/$+1( ƫ"+1/ƫ!û+.0/ƫ* ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ
in countries, areas, and subsectors that already have
enough critical mass in institution-building to ensure
success and lower transaction costs.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ/!-1!*!ƫ* ƫ,!ƫ+"ƫ.!"+.)ƫ/$+1( ƫ.!ý!0ƫ.!(%ties of scale economies and political pressures from reform constituencies. When possible, political economy
should be exploited to quicken reform.’

Source: Saleth and Dinar (1999, from the summary ﬁndings).

WWDR4

The raising of capital to overcome some of these constraints has a rich history. The Swayam Shikshan Prayog
project in India has facilitated the formation of more
than 1,000 women’s savings and credit groups, which
have mobilized their own capital to provide loans for
one another. The Sakhi Samudaya Kosh was established
as a non-proﬁt organization in 2006 to provide microcredit for women for agriculture, water and sanitation,
as well as insurance to low-income people in disaster
areas.2 The Grameen Bank is another example, which
has been shown to be highly effective to the point that
it was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in 2006.3
11.4.2 Actions which can improve institutions
Institutional changes within water management occur due to endogenous factors (water scarcity, performance deterioration and ﬁnancial non-viability) as well
as exogenous factors (macro-economic crisis, political
reform, natural calamities and technological progress).
Together, these raise the opportunity costs of institutional change, reduce the corresponding transaction
costs, and create an institutional culture that is conducive to reform. Box 11.4 provides recommendations
that can be useful in mobilizing the mutually supportive aspects of these factors for institutional reform.
Institutional water management is most effective
when based on collaborative governance. Water management that builds on a joint effort of government,
society and technical institutions ensures that measures will be both effective and sustainable (Hattingh
et al., 2007; Turton et al., 2007). This entails looking outside the water box and improving disciplinary integration over diverse aspects such as water,
agriculture, mining, environment, planning, ﬁnance
and rural development, on both technical and policy
levels. Achieving this will require the building of trust
and social capital (Fine, 2001; Ostrom, 1994, 2001) to
ensure that a problem-solving process takes place
(Timmerman et al., 2010).
Institutional reform needs to be ﬁrmly anchored
among stakeholders and their leadership. If institutions
do not have legitimacy in the eyes of the public, they
will not receive support and stakeholders are more
likely to retain the status quo, or even develop their
own informal rules, thereby undermining the integrity
of the system. An important mechanism is therefore
to improve institutional performance by improving political will and leadership. This remains a challenge for
water decision-makers.

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

301

“Transparent processes
and access to
information are
required to discourage
corruption, which
adversely affects
efficient and equitable
water allocation and
the delivery of water
and sanitation services
– particularly to poor
and vulnerable groups.”
The basis of any serious and workable system of dispute resolution is the existence of an independent
administrator or judiciary with compulsory jurisdiction over the conﬂict to adjudicate, should every other
means fail. Otherwise the party beneﬁting from the
status quo has no incentive whatsoever to submit to
any other means of (voluntary) dispute resolution.
Effective institutional change, and the degree to which
this can deal with inherent uncertainty, is closely related to path dependence. In its simplest form, path
dependence explains how current situations facing
water decision-makers for any given circumstance, are
generally deﬁned by past decisions, even though the
past circumstances may be irrelevant in the present
and future. Because of the path dependence of water
institutions in general, it is important that water decision-makers intensify their efforts to provide incentives
for meaningful institutional change, by adopting the
following measures.
Reinforce water institutions: Addressing implementation challenges, such as vested political interests and
accountability systems, before any new institutions
are put in place, helps to strengthen those institutions. Many countries are plagued by implementation

302

CHAPTER 11

problems driven by a lack of human capacity, information ﬂows and ﬁnancing. The fundamental governance
issues that generate disincentives for enforcement by
water institutions, and appropriate institutional set-up,
generally remain intractable. Within governance systems characterized by the existence of a patron/client
relationship, corruption and vested political interests
tend to endure. Changing decision-making practices so
that they are transparent and accountable will be more
effective than increased capacities and better scientiﬁc
information under these circumstances.
Create learning-oriented institutional processes:
Experience suggests that institutional reform is an iterative learning process, where change is negotiated between different groups. There are no perfect solutions,
only solutions that work in a particular context, so the
best ﬁt is often more important than the best practice
(Baietti et al., 2006).
Fostering dialogue and consensus at the national level
is an essential element for success, ensuring the full involvement of all sectors of society.
Address institutional deﬁcits: The institutional setup in areas responsible for water quality and groundwater management is often very limited. Sustainable
management of these areas is likely to become more
relevant with changing demographics, socio-economic
developments and climate change.
Go beyond formal regulation and incorporate informal institutions into risk and uncertainty analyses:
Informal local institutions allocate water resources in
many parts of the world, and formal regulatory systems may only have limited inﬂuence on such decisions. A major challenge is to reach poor and marginalized social groups that normally depend on informal
systems of water allocation and service delivery.
Looking beyond what is traditionally considered water
management – going outside the water box – is therefore inevitable. Connecting water management with
land management and sectors like agriculture, mining
and energy, at the institutional level, will enhance the
probability of effective decision-making (Ashton et al.,
2006). Realizing this approach is highly demanding on
leadership, and overcoming the inertia of traditional
approaches and resistance from various actors remains
a daunting task. Decision-makers need support in putting these ideas into practice, as well as the courage to

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

withstand criticism, and the willingness to share power
with other actors. Previous experience has shown that
those who champion policy change often become victims of the very process of change that they successfully initiate (Huitema and Meijerink, 2009).

11.5 Communicating risk and uncertainty
In order to make appropriate decisions to manage particular uncertainties and risks, the uncertainties and
risks involved ﬁrst have to be clearly understood. Events
carrying a low probability of risk (e.g. an aeroplane
crash or nuclear plant leak) are often feared more than
those carrying a higher probability of risk (e.g. being
hit by a car while walking or cycling). Without precise
information expressed in a clear and concise way, the
magnitude of any risk or uncertainty involved in an action is easy to misjudge. Mistakenly attaching excessive
risk to events may not only cause unnecessary anxiety,
but may also cause individuals to put themselves in the
way of harm (Thaler and Johnson, 1990). Uncertain situations have uncertain outcomes and therefore carry a
degree of the unknown, which if communicated inadequately can cause exaggerated worry or fear. It is therefore important to supply enough accurate information
to give the individual a certain amount of control when
faced with uncertainty. This can make managing uncertainty less stressful and, as a result, attain more positive
and realistic outcomes.
11.5.1 Media inﬂuence
It is all too easy to negatively communicate uncertainty, as can be frequently observed in the media.
High levels of uncertainty can give those who aspire
to a particular agenda an opportunity to ‘spin the
facts’ and communicate in a deliberately misleading
or manipulative way, often causing worry or fear. If the
objective is to motivate people into positive action,
communicating in this manner, commonly used as a
method of control, be it political or otherwise, can be
largely counterproductive, generating a climate of fear
and feelings of helplessness.
The task of covering an issue in a balanced and responsible way presents an obvious challenge for members
of the press and the media in general. This is especially
true in situations where statements about uncertainties
can be immediately seized upon and interpreted in different and conﬂicting ways in ongoing public debates.
Uncertainty can also offer crucial opportunities for
generating beneﬁts, and it is important to ﬁnd, where

WWDR4

possible, ways of communicating uncertainty that are
empowering and constructive and that highlight the
possible beneﬁts.
Another area that can cause confusion when communicating uncertainty and risk – and indeed when communicating in general – comprises the numerous different voices or opinions, expert or otherwise, that are put
forward. If conﬂicting arguments or opinions are being
expressed by what are considered to be reliable and
reputable sources – such as trusted media organizations,
experts, government agencies or respected personalities and journalists – the resulting situation rapidly creates confusion in the eyes of the general public.
Individuals or groups may have different reactions to
conﬂicting information: some may choose to accept
an opinion that most suits their lifestyle/belief system, some may delve deeper – if they are interested
enough – and commit to further research on which to
base a more informed opinion. Others may be unable
or unwilling to make sense of the conﬂicting opinions
and may be discouraged by the topic altogether: ‘you
can’t believe what you hear’.
In order to face the global changes and challenges that
lie ahead, a concerted effort by the water community
to communicate in one voice – a strong and collective voice – is a priority, especially if it is to encourage
leaders and decision-makers and stakeholders from all
walks of life to cooperate and act in the best interests
of all. The importance of expressing important information coherently and in a coordinated manner should
not be underrated.
11.5.2 Deciphering uncertainty and risk
Specialists and non-specialists alike constantly manage uncertainty and statements of probability. While
errors in detail can be made, many people succeed
in managing non-technical probabilistic information
about the likelihood of events, such as river ﬂows, lake
levels, weather events, water shortages, ﬂoods and pollution levels. Communicating aspects of uncertainty and
risk can be a particular challenge when the nature of the
decisions being debated is largely technical. Decisionmakers other than water managers, including users,
politicians, leaders and the general public, all of whom
participate in modern water management decisionmaking at some level, sometimes have difficulty fully
understanding standard technical concepts, such as
those concerning a 100-year ﬂoodplain or a category 5

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

303

hurricane storm surge. Explaining various aspects of
the uncertainties and unknowns associated with nonstationary phenomena to the decision-making public becomes even more demanding. The challenge is
how to most effectively help the public, stakeholders
and decision-makers to understand uncertainties and
their impact on possible decisions, thereby enabling
them to be better informed as they participate in debates over which decisions are best. One of the aims
is therefore to express probabilistic information and
expert opinion in transparent non-technical and recognizable terms.
Bridging the gap between scientiﬁc research and
decision-makers is the key to change. Communication
plays a large part in the decision-making process and
should not be underestimated.
The extremes and changes currently being experienced
are still mostly within the norms of natural historical
climate variability. Much of today’s existing water resources infrastructure was designed to accommodate
order-of-magnitude of variability. Standard engineering practices account for uncertainties by including
redundancy (safety factors) in designs. It is also imperative for anyone involved in setting ﬂood and crop
insurance rates, deﬁning ﬂoodplain zones, and designing levees, reservoirs, storm sewers and highway culverts, for example, to understand these risks and uncertainties and their possible economic, environmental,
and social consequences.
Most people prefer certainty to uncertainty. They
would much rather be told that it is going to rain today, or that it is not going to rain today, or that their
ﬂight will depart on time, than being told that there
is a 64% chance of getting wet, and consequently
there is a small chance of a ﬂight delay, even if they
know that these deﬁnitive statements may not be true.
If the statements turn out to be false, clearly some
trust between the forecaster and the public will be
lost. People’s responses to uncertainty partly depend
on their attitude towards what is uncertain, such as a
ﬂood hazard. Those desiring more certainty will not
be satisﬁed, and those who had intended to ignore
the hazard may become even less concerned about it
because if there is a substantial risk of harm related to
some possible event, it is no doubt wise to make sure
the public knows what that harm might be, even if the
probability of that event and hence the risk might be
low.

304

CHAPTER 11

The same applies to warnings and reassurances. The
temptation to suppress uncertainty and express conﬁdence is ever present, but it is best if the temptation
is resisted. If over-conﬁdence proves to be misplaced
it damages credibility and the ability to communicate
effectively. If possible, people should be told what is
certain, what is almost but not quite certain, what is
probable, what is a gamble, what is possible but unlikely, and what is almost inconceivable. Bounds can
be placed on the uncertainty: uncertain risks can be
expressed in terms of the range of expert opinions.
The greater the uncertainty, the more justiﬁed the
precautions, precisely because the risk could be more
serious.
It should be acknowledged by all those making estimates of, or trying to quantify, risk and uncertainty
that these estimates or quantitative measures are
themselves uncertain. For example, just how conﬁdent is it possible to be that the probability of rain
today will be 10%? This higher level of uncertainty
just complicates the communication of risks and
uncertainties, but it is there, even if it is not known.
Those who wish to wait before saying anything about
a risk level until they know how conﬁdent they are of
their risk predictions may never have anything to say.

BOX 11.5
Gender-sensitive dissemination of information:
The case of early warning systems in Bangladesh
Men and women access, process, interpret and respond to
information in different ways, due to the cultural context
and gender division of labour. Statistics from past disasters around the world demonstrate the consequences of
gender-neutral early warning systems. In 1991, for example, the death toll from the Bangladesh cyclone was ﬁve
times higher for women than men, partly because early
warning information was transmitted by men to men in
public spaces, rarely reaching women directly. Early warning systems that are ‘gender neutral’ are not effective in
reaching women adequately, and thus preparedness is
limited and may ultimately cost lives. A gender-sensitive
approach enhances early warning systems through: monitoring and warning services; dissemination of information
by media that can reach women; and response capability. Women play an important role as ﬁrst responders in
taking appropriate and timely action in response to the
warnings.

Source: UNISDR, UNDP and IUCN (2009).

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Communicating uncertainty is a good start, but it is
not enough. The goal is to communicate what is presently thought, or known, as precisely as possible, and
to communicate the level of uncertainty.
An easy way to specify degrees of uncertainty is with
numbers. The odds of ‘1-in-a-million’ means it is practically not going to happen; ‘1-in-100’ means it is highly
unlikely but could happen; and ‘1-in-10’, although less
unlikely, would still surprise most people if it occurred.
Similar estimates at the other end of the probability
distribution include ‘9-in-10’, ‘99-in-100’, and
‘999,999-in-a-million’. When ‘50-50’ is used it helps
to clarify whether the evidence is generally evenly
divided, or that there is no relevant evidence on which to
base a judgment. When deciding on the consequences of
risk, decisions often largely depend on the context (e.g.
what is at stake): an engineer may not take a 1-in-10
risk in engineering design, but may leave an umbrella
at home if the likelihood of precipitation is 1-in-10.
Other, longer phrases that can communicate different
levels of uncertainty reasonably clearly are as follows
(Sandman, 2004):
đ ‘The weight of evidence suggests that X is likelier
than not, but there is still plenty of room for doubt.
đ We’re almost sure that X is not happening, and are
proceeding on that assumption, but are continuing
to monitor the situation to allow ourselves to change
course should it be mistaken.
đ We think it is probably X or Y and would be shocked
at anything else; although Z is less likely it remains a
possibility.’
11.5.3 Targeted communication
When ideas are expressed (e.g. ‘more effectively addressing risks creates beneﬁts and reduces vulnerabilities’), they can often seem intangible. As such, they
can be easy to agree with, but difficult to know how
to achieve. Effective communication breaks down the
global statement/aim into smaller sections to make it
more easily understood. Questions can be asked such
as ‘How can that goal best be attained?’ ‘What are
the practical steps that could be taken to achieve that
goal?’ ‘Who could meaningfully contribute to reaching
the goal successfully?’ and ‘How could they do this?
Separating the audience into target groups and tailoring the communication to each can clarify and
strengthen the impact of the message. A target group

WWDR4

of high importance is the media, in all its various forms.
Many crucial messages are imparted through the media, whether expressed negatively or positively. The
media is a powerful communicating force both at local
and global levels, and inﬂuences opinions – and therefore actions – in a vast array of topics. Typically the
media need ‘hooks’. Generally the more dramatic the
‘hook’, the more likely it is that the information will be
published or broadcast (e.g. a shocking statistic may
make headlines while a competing positive statement
about the same topic may not). It is important to strike
a balance between attracting the media, while being
aware of and taking responsibility for the possible impact of the information fed to them.
In order to motivate a target audience with targeted
messages it is important to clearly deﬁne each group
and understand their motivation. How each group responds to communication and acts upon its message
is also likely to be different. What motivates political
leaders to act in the face of uncertainty may be different from what motivates teachers or small business
owners. As there are multiple angles to information and
as the reference point, coding and editing of particular messages are key factors in the analysis of decisions
(Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) in order to achieve the
desired communication objective the correct angle, key
words and language should be chosen carefully and
correctly for each target group (see Box 11.5).
Proﬁle questions can be asked to identify what motivates each group. This requires some generalization,
and it is important to be certain when correctly identifying the characteristics of a particular group (avoiding
stereotypical identiﬁers). This is particularly pertinent
if the target group is not the one to which the proﬁler
belongs. A diverse group should therefore carry out
this activity to ensure broader social knowledge and
awareness. Examples of questions that can be asked of
each group are:
đ What is their average level of education?
đ Which newspapers/magazines do/may they buy?
đ What motivates them to make particular purchases/
take particular action?
đ What do they consider as worrying on a local/global
scale?
đ What action can they/would they be likely to take?
What inhibits them from taking this action?
đ What do they/others consider to be their weaknesses and strengths?

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

305

Once the target audiences have been deﬁned and
their motivations and desires better understood, it is
easier to communicate information effectively. It is not
important if the communication material prepared for
one target audience is not understood by all target
audiences, but it is important that it is understandable
to the particular group being addressed. The language
used in targeted communication can be stronger and
clearer as it does not attempt to ‘cover all bases’. The
more familiar the language, the easier it is for that speciﬁc group to understand. For example, technical information and data may be used in abundance for one
target group but greatly modiﬁed or used sparingly for
another.
To maximise effectiveness in terms of positive action
when communicating uncertainty and risk, it may be
necessary for each target group to feel reasonably
challenged (a percentage of shock factor may be necessary), but not fearful or helpless.

Conclusion
Instead of imparting an impression of impending
doom or disaster, uncertainty and risk can instead be
communicated through targeted, precise and enabling messages, with communicators bridging the gap
between experts (who may be largely technical) and
the general public. When communicating through the
media or otherwise, it is important to highlight the fact
that uncertainty and risk can also bring opportunity
and the possibility of positive change.
Knowledge is empowering and forms the basis for
making informed and progressive decisions, and information communicated in a clear and targeted way,
with one voice, can enable people to better understand, and reach their own conclusions, about the risk
involved. This in turn imparts responsibility and encourages action, which is essential for change.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

For more information see http://www.savemapungubwe.org.za/
media.php

2

For more information see the Swayam Shikshan Prayog Project
website http://www.sspindia.org/

3

For more information see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Grameen_Bank

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
AASB (Auditing and Assurance Standards Board). 2011.
Consultation Paper: Assurance Engagements on General
Purpose Water Accounting Reports. Melbourne, AASB.
Adler, R. A., Claassen, M., Godfrey, L. and Turton, A. R. 2007.
Water, mining and waste: an historical and economic
perspective on conﬂict management in South Africa.
Economics of Peace and Security Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp.
32–41.
Allen, D. 1999. Transaction costs. Encyclopedia of Law and
Economics. Cheltenham, UK/Ghent, Belgium, Edward
Elgar/University of Ghent, pp. 893–926. http://encyclo.
ﬁndlaw.com/0740book.pdf.
Ashton, P. J., Turton, A. R. and Roux, D. J. 2006. Exploring the
government, society and science interfaces in integrated
water resource management in South Africa. Journal of
Contemporary Water Research and Education, Vol. 135, pp.
28–35.
Baietti, A., van Ginneken, M. and Kingdom, W. Characteristics
of Well-Performing Public Water Utilities. 2006. Water
Supply and Sanitation Working Notes, no. 9. Washington
DC, The World Bank.
Breier, M. and Visser, M. The Free Rider Problem in
Community-Based Rural Water Supply: A Game Theoretic
Analysis. 2006. Southern Africa Labour and Development
Research Unit (SALDRU) Working Paper Number 06/05.
Cape Town, South Africa, University of Cape Town.
Brooks, D. B., Brandes, O. M. and Gurman, S. (eds). 2009.
Making the Most of the Water We Have: The Soft Path
Approach to Water Management. London, Earthscan.
Buchanan, M. (ed.) 2010. The Karst System of the Cradle of
Humankind World Heritage Site: A Collection of 13 Issue
Papers by the South African Karst Working Group. Pretoria,
South Africa, Water Research Commission (WRC).
Burns, M. J. and Weaver, A. v. B. (eds). 2008. Advancing
Sustainability Science in South Africa. Stellenbosch, South
Africa, Stellenbosch University Press.
Clark, C. W. 1977. The economics of overexploitation. G.
Hardin and J. Baden (eds) Managing the Commons. San
Francisco, Freeman, pp. 82–95.

306

CHAPTER 11

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Coetzee, H., Wade, P. and Winde, F. 2002. Reliance on
existing wetlands for pollution control around the
Witwatersrand gold/uranium mines of South Africa – are
they sufficient? B. J. Merkel, B. Planer-Friedrich and C.
Wolkersdorfer (eds). Uranium in the Aquatic Environment.
Berlin, Springer, pp. 59–64.
Coetzee, H., Winde, F. and Wade, P. 2006. An Assessment
of Sources, Pathways, Mechanisms and Risks of Current
and Potential Future Pollution of Water and Sediments in
Gold Mining Areas of the Wonderfonteinspruit Catchment.
WRC Report No. 1214/1/06. Pretoria, South Africa, Water
Research Commission (WRC).
Earle, A. 2007. The role of governance in countering
corruption: an African case study. Water Policy, Vol. 9, No.
2, pp. 69–81.
Ekiye, E. and Zejiao, L. 2010. Water quality monitoring in
Nigeria: Case study of Nigeria’s industrial cities. Journal of
American Science, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 22–8.
Falkenmark, M. 2007. Good ecosystem governance:
balancing ecosystems and social needs. A. R. Turton, H.
J. Hattingh, G. Maree, D. J. Roux, M. Claassen and W. F.
Strydom (eds) Governance as a Trialogue: Government–
Society–Science in Transition. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp.
60–79.

Lempert, R. J. and Groves, D. G. 2010. Identifying and
evaluating robust adaptive policy responses to climate
change for water management agencies in the American
west. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Vol. 77,
No. 6, pp. 960–974. http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/B6V71-506SX76-1/2/6b7303c489efa3d9254714a0
83d81045
Lindenmayer, D. B. and Likens, G. E. 2009. Adaptive
monitoring: a new paradigm for long-term research and
monitoring. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, Vol. 24, No. 9,
pp. 482–86.
Lund, J. R. 1993. Transaction risk versus transaction costs in
water transfers. Water Resources Research, September,
Vol. 29, No. 9, pp. 3103–7.
Marin, L. E., Sanchez Ramirez, E. and Martinez, V. 2007. The
role of science in improving government accountability to
society. Water Policy, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 113–25.
Nicol, A., van Steenbergen, F., Sunman, H., Turton, A. R.,
Slaymaker, T., Allan, J. A., de Graaf, M. and van Harten,
M. 2001. Transboundary Water Management as an
International Public Good. Stockholm, Ministry for Foreign
Affairs.

Funke, N., Oelofse, S. H. H., Hattingh, J., Ashton, P. J. and
Turton, A. R. 2007. IWRM in developing countries: lessons
from the Mhlatuze catchment in South Africa. Physics and
Chemistry of the Earth, Vol. 32, pp. 1237–45.

Nyambe, N., Breen, C. and Fincham, R. 2007. Organizational
culture as a function of adaptability and responsiveness
in public service agencies. A. R. Turton, H. J. Hattingh, G.
A. Maree, D. J. Roux, M. Claassen and W. F. Strydom (eds)
Governance as a Trialogue: Government–Society–Science in
Transition. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 197–214.

Fine, B. 2001. Social Capital Versus Social Theory: Political
Economy and Social Science at the Turn of the Millennium.
London, Routledge.

Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Public Goods
and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard
University Press.

Godfrey, J. and Chalmers, K. (eds) 2011. Water Accounting:
International Approaches to Policy and Decision Making.
London, Edward Elgar.

Ostrom, E. 1990. Governing the Commons: The Evolution
of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge, UK,
Cambridge University Press.

GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2009. Institutional
Arrangements for IWRM in Eastern Africa. Policy Brief 1.
Stockholm, GWP.

––––. 1994. Constituting social capital and collective action.
Journal of Theoretical Politics, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 527–62.

Hashimoto, T., Stedinger J. R. and Loucks, D. P. 1982.
Reliability, resiliency, and vulnerability criteria for water
resource system performance evaluation. Water Resources
Research, doi:10.2166/wp.2007.130
Hattingh, J., Maree, G. A., Ashton, P. J., Leaner, J. J. and
Turton, A. R. 2007. A trialogue model for ecosystem
governance. Water Policy, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 11–18.
Heyns, P. S. V. 2007. Governance of a shared and contested
resource: a case study of the Okavango River Basin. Water
Policy, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 149–67.
Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability of ecological
systems. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, Vol. 4,
pp. 1–23.
Huitema, D. and Meijerink, S. (eds) 2009. Water Policy
Entrepreneurs: A Research Companion to Water Transitions
around the Globe. Cheltenham, UK, Edward Elgar.
Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. 1979. Prospect theory: an
analysis of decisions under risk. Econometrica, Vol. 47, No.
2, pp. 263–91.

WWDR4

––––. 2001. Social capital: a fad or a foundation concept?
P. Dasgupta and I. Serageldin (eds) Social Capital: A
Multifaceted Perspective. Washington DC, The World Bank,
pp. 172–214.
Priscoli, J. 2007. Five challenges for water governance. A. R.
Turton, J. Hattingh, G. Maree, D. J. Roux, M. Claassen and W.
F. Strydom (eds) Governance as a Trialogue: Government–
Society–Science in Transition. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, p.
xxix.
Saleth, R. M. and Dinar, A. 1999. Water Challenge and
Institutional Response (A Cross-Country Perspective).
World Bank Policy Working Paper No. 2045. Washington
DC, The World Bank.
––––. 2004. The Institutional Economics of Water: A CrossCountry Analysis of Institutions and Performance.
Cheltenham, UK/Washington DC, Edward Elgar/The World
Bank.
Sandman, P. M. 2004. Acknowledging uncertainty. The
Synergist, Nov., pp. 21–22, 41. A longer version of this
article is available at http://www.psandman.com/col/
uncertin.htm

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

307

Stakhiv, E.Z. and Pietrowsky, R. A. 2009. Adapting to Climate
Change in Water Resources and Water Service. Alexandria,
Va., US Army Corps of Engineers, Institute for Water
Resources.
Stakhiv, E. Z. 2010. Practical Approaches to Water
Management under Climate Change Uncertainty. Colorado
Water Institute Information Series No. 109. Workshop in
Nonstationarity, Hydrologic Frequency Analysis, and Water
Management, 13–15 January 2010, Boulder, Colo.
Strachan, L. K. C., Ndengu, S. N., Mafanya, T., Coetzee, H.,
Wade, P. W., Msezane, N., Kwata, M. and Mengistu, H. 2008.
Regional Gold Mining Closure Strategy for the Central Rand
Goldﬁeld. Council for Geosciences Report No. 2008-0174.
Pretoria, South Africa, Department of Mineral Resources.
Sullivan, C. A. and Meigh, J. R. 2005. Targeting attention on
local vulnerabilities using an integrated index approach:
the example of the Climate Vulnerability Index. Water
Science and Technology, Special Issue on Climate Change,
Vol. 51, No. 5, pp. 69–78.
Timmerman, J. G., Koeppel, S., Bernardini, F. and Buntsma,
J. J. 2010. Adaptation to climate change: challenges for
transboundary water management. W.L. Filho (ed.) The
Economic, Social and Political Elements of Climate Change.
Climate Change Management. Berlin, Springer, pp. 523–41.
Thaler, R. H. and Johnson, E. J. 1990. Gambling with the
house money and trying to break even: the effects of prior
outcomes on risky choice. Management Science, Vol. 36,
No. 6, pp. 643–60.
Turton, A. R. 2007. Can we Solve Tomorrow’s Problems
with Yesterday’s Experiences and Today’s Science? Des
Midgley Memorial Lecture presented at the 13th SANCIAHS
Symposium, 6 September 2007, Cape Town, South Africa.
––––. 2008. A South African perspective on a possible
beneﬁt-sharing approach for transboundary waters in the
SADC region. Water Alternatives, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 180–200.
––––. 2010. The sustainability approach: managing water as
a ﬂux. J. Wilsenach (ed.) The Sustainable Water Resource
Handbook: South Africa: The Essential Guide. Vol. 1., pp.
58–64. http://www.waterresource.co.za
Turton, A. R., Schultz, C., Buckle, H, Kgomongoe, M.,
Malungani, T. and Drackner, M. 2006. Gold, scorched earth
and water: the hydropolitics of Johannesburg. Water
Resources Development, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 313–335.
Turton, A. R., Hattingh, J., Claassen, M., Roux, D. J. and
Ashton, P. J. 2007a. Towards a model for ecosystem
governance: an integrated water resource management
example. A. R. Turton, H. J. Hattingh, G. A. Maree, D. J.
Roux, M. Claassen and W. F. Strydom (eds) Governance
as a Trialogue: Government–Society–Science in Transition.
Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 1–28.
Turton, A. R., Godfrey, L. Julien, F. and Hattingh, H. 2007b.
Unpacking groundwater governance through the lens of
a trialogue: a Southern African case study. S. Ragone, N.
Hernández-Mora, A. de la Hera, J. McKay and G. Bergkamp
(eds) The Global Importance of Groundwater in the 21st
Century: Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Groundwater Sustainability. OH, National Groundwater
Association Press, pp. 359–70.

308

CHAPTER 11

UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
2006. Strategies for Monitoring and Assessment of
Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and Groundwaters. ECE/
MP.WAT/20. Geneva, UNECE. http://www.unece.org/env/
water/publications/documents/StrategiesM&A.pdf
––––. 2007. Recommendations on Payments for Ecosystem
Services in Integrated Water Resources Management.
Convention on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes, Geneva, UNECE.
http://www.unece.org/env/water/publications/documents/
PES_Recommendations_web.pdf
––––. 2009. Guidance on Water and Adaptation to Climate
Change. Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes,
Geneva. UNECE.
http://www.unece.org/env/water/publications/documents/
Guidance_water_climate.pdf
UNISDR, UNDP and IUCN. 2009. Making Disaster Risk
Reduction Gender-Sensitive: Policy and Practical Guidelines.
Geneva, UNISDR, UNDP and IUCN.
http://www.preventionweb.net/ﬁles/9922_
MakingDisasterRiskReductionGenderSe.pdf
US National Research Council. 2004. Adaptive Management
for Water Resources Planning. Washington DC, The
National Academies Press.
Van Tonder, D. and Coetzee, H. 2008. Regional Mine
Closure Strategy for the West Rand Goldﬁeld. Council for
Geosciences Report No. 2008-0175. Pretoria, South Africa,
Department of Minerals and Energy.
Van Wyk, E., Breen, C. M., Sherwill, T. and Magadlela, D.
2007. Challenges for the relationship between science and
society: developing capacity for ecosystem governance
in an emerging democracy. Water Policy, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp.
99–111.
Wettestad, J. 2008. Interaction between EU Carbon Trading
and International Institutions: Synergies or Disruptions?
EPIGOV Papers No. 34. Berlin, Ecologic – Institute
for International and European Environmental Policy.
http://ecologic.eu/projekte/epigov/documents/epigov_
paper_34_wettestad.pdf
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
WWAP and UNSD (World Water Assessment Programme
and United Nations Statistics Division). 2011. Monitoring
Framework for Water: The System of EnvironmentalEconomic Accounts for Water (SEEA-Water) and the
International Recommendations for Water Statistics (IRWS).
Perugia/New York, WWAP/UNSD.
Zalasiewicz, J., Williams, M., Smith, M., Barry, T. L., Coe, A.L.,
Bown,, P. R., Brenchley, P., Cantrill, D., Gale, A., Gibbard,
P., Gregory, F. J., Houndslow, M. W., Kerr, A. C., Pearson,
P., Knox, R., Powell, J., Waters, C., Marshall, J., Oates, M.,
Rawson, P. and Stone, P. 2008. Are we now living in the
Anthropocene? GSA Today, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 4–8.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 12
Investment and ﬁnancing in water
for a more sustainable future

—
Author James Winpenny

WWDR4
©
Shutterstock/FloridaStock

TRANSFORMING WATER MANAGEMENT INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH CHANGE

309

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Investment in water and sanitation is a vital concern for the many households that still lack
these services. Water underpins all parts of a modern economy and its productive uses
are also essential for poverty reduction. Water development is an integral part of a green
economy: it is central to society’s adjustment to climate change and is crucial to meeting
future concerns for food security across the world.
Increased ﬁnancing is necessary for all facets of water development, ranging from ‘hard’
infrastructure to equally important ‘soft’ items such as management; data collection, analysis
and dissemination; regulation and other governance issues. The approach to ﬁnancing
propounded in this chapter is pragmatic and eclectic. It examines efforts to minimize the
funding gap through internal efficiency and other measures; improve the generation of
revenues from users, government budgets and official development assistance (ODA); and
use these ﬂows to leverage repayable ﬁnance such as bonds, loans and equity.
The current climate for international ﬁnance is difficult. It is therefore important to exploit all
available risk-sharing tools. International ﬁnancing institutions (IFIs) in particular have a key
role to play.

12.1 Investing in water for sustainable
development
A range of emerging factors are challenging enduring
economic development stereotypes. These include the
response to climate change, destabilizing ﬂuctuations
in commodity prices, concerns for food security, the
increased role of public investment in infrastructure in
response to the global ﬁnancial crisis, and the desire of
governments to limit their exposure to volatile international ﬁnancial ﬂows.
The current environmental imprint of infrastructure
expansion is signiﬁcant. It is therefore imperative that
ways be found to design, operate and maintain systems that minimize negative environmental externalities at a lower cost than existing investments (Fay and
Toman, 2010). Public policies should offer incentives
for private sector decisions regarding investment and
consumption that reﬂect the social beneﬁts of environmental sustainability and the costs of various forms of
environmental protection. At a global level there is a
need to increase environmental research and development (R&D) and encourage the international transfer
of cleaner technologies.
The green economy agenda is a response to these
trends and seeks to reinforce and accelerate the progress of sustainable development.1 It involves public
policy, individual and collective business initiatives and
private customer behaviour. The agenda has serious
implications for water infrastructure. It increases pressure for more efficient use of resources and reductions
in waste and greenhouse gas emissions, both of which
aim to shift investment and consumption patterns towards alternatives that deplete less natural resources.
There are 11 key green economy sectors: agriculture,
buildings, cities, energy, ﬁsheries, forestry, manufacturing, tourism, transport, waste management and water.2
The water development agenda overlaps with the green
economy agenda in the following areas: pollution control,
wastewater collection, treatment and reuse, successive
uses of water, water use efficiency, energy efficiency in
water and wastewater treatment, distribution and reuse,
energy recovery, emission mitigation (capture of methane in wastewater treatment and irrigation), irrigation,
and hydropower and management of natural water ecosystems (including wetlands).
A large percentage of these projects target several objectives simultaneously. This can often make ﬁnancing

WWDR4

such projects easier. Water development can thus gain
from the economic and ﬁnancial synergies that stem
from the green economy. However, other actions justiﬁed by their ‘greenness’ may pose problems for water
management unless they factor in and mitigate their
potential impact on water. The promotion of biofuel
technologies is an example of this. (For implications
of biofuel developed for water resources management
and use see Saulino, 2011.) Furthermore, to regard or
compartmentalize water as a sector among others is
too limiting, in spite of its presence as one of the 11
green economy sectors.
Investment in water infrastructure, in both its physical
and natural assets, can be a driver of growth and the
key to poverty reduction (Garrido-Lecca, 2010; UNEP,
2010). Although the recent global economic crisis set
back investment in water in many countries (Winpenny
et al., 2009), the impacts have been varied, and some
governments have made determined efforts to compensate through counter-cyclical ﬁscal measures.
Green investment in renewable energy, energy efficiency, more efficient use of materials, clean technology,
waste mitigation, and sustainable use and restoration
of ecosystems and biodiversity accounts for approximately 20% of the US$2 trillion of economic stimulus
packages announced since 2008. Water is one of the
beneﬁciaries of these programmes, although its full
importance has not been recognized.
UNCTAD reports that ‘there is considerable scope
for developing economies in the [following] years
and decades to gain from the opportunities that will
emerge from the structural change towards renewable
sources of energy, climate-friendly technologies, lowcarbon equipment and appliances, and more sustainable modes of consumption’ (UNCTAD, 2009, p. 168).
Entry into these new markets could help developing
and transition economies to combine climate change
mitigation policies with faster growth and the creation of employment (UNEP, 2008). Developed countries dominate the global market for ‘environmental
goods’, but some developing economies are building
their market share based on their natural comparative
advantages.
12.1.1 The Millennium Development Goals and
sustainable development
Environmental goals cannot be achieved without development and efficiency. Poor people without adequate food, sustenance and water and sanitation

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

311

will degrade their environment if they must do so to
survive – even if it risks their long-term survival. Hence,
sustainable development goals cannot be achieved
and maintained without sound environmental management. Investment in programmes for poverty reduction
is crucial for environmental policy, while investment in
maintaining a healthy environment is vital for successful poverty reduction., However, investments remain
seriously inadequate in many regions of the developing world to meet the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
The UN Millennium Project and the UN Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment (MA, 2005; see Section 2.5)
highlight the interdependencies between economic development and environmental management for
poverty reduction and general well-being. The combination of poverty, vulnerability to drought and crop
failure, lack of safe drinking water, and other environmentally related ills result in the deaths of millions of
people each year. Over 1 billion people suffer from disease due to a lack of safe water, and are consequently
less productive than they could be. The desperate situation of the poor therefore exacts a toll on the economy as well as on their environment and its ecosystem (Box 12.1). Lentini (2010) presents an overview for
evaluation of the diverse beneﬁts of water services in

a typical developing country setting, especially for low
income groups.
Alongside the UN’s MDGs for ending poverty, eradicating hunger, achieving universal primary education,
improving health, and restoring a healthy environment, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA)
examines the consequences of ecosystem change for
human well-being, and analyses options for conserving ecosystems while enhancing their contributions to
human society. Environmental degradation is a major
barrier to sustainable development and to the achievement of the MDGs. ‘The MA examined 24 ecosystem
services (the beneﬁts people obtain from ecosystems)
and found that productivity of only four had been
enhanced over the last 50 years, whereas 15 (including capture ﬁsheries, water puriﬁcation, natural hazard
regulation, and regional climate regulation) had been
degraded. More than 70% of the 1.1 billion poor people
surviving on less than US$1 per day live in rural areas,
where they are directly dependent on ecosystem services.’ (Sachs and Reid, p. 1002).
Investing in environmental assets and the management
of those assets can help achieve national goals for
relief from poverty, hunger and disease. Investments
in improved agricultural practices to reduce water

BOX 12.1
Economics of access to improved drinking water and sanitation
Improving access to safe water and basic sanitation could have huge economic returns. World Bank studies in ﬁve SouthEast Asian countries estimate that around 2% of their combined GDPs are lost because of poor sanitation, and in the worst
case (Cambodia) this ﬁgure rises to over 7% (World Bank, 2008). Economic beneﬁts due to improvements in health include
lower health system costs, fewer days lost at work or at school through illness or caring for an ill relative, and convenience
time-savings (Hutton et al., 2007). The prevention of sanitation and water-related diseases could save approximately US$7
billion per year in health system costs, and the value of deaths averted, based on discounted future earnings, would add a
further US$3.6 billion per year (Hutton et al., 2007). In fact, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that the overall
economic beneﬁts of halving the proportion of people without sustainable access to improved drinking water and sanitation,
by 2015, would outweigh the investment cost by a ratio of 8:1 (Prüss-Üstün and Corvalán, 2006). Despite clear beneﬁts to
the development of individual countries’ economies and health from increased access to sanitation and drinking water, ‘many
countries seem to allocate insufficient resources to meet the Millennium Development Goal target for sanitation and drinking
water. When compared to other sectors (namely education and health sectors), sanitation and drinking water receive a relatively low priority for both official development assistance (ODA) and domestic allocations’ (WHO/UN-Water, 2010, p. 2).
In fact, total aid for all aspects of water fell from 8% to 5% between 1997 and 2008 (WHO/UN-Water, 2010). Moreover, domestic and foreign aid are not necessarily well targeted to where need is greatest (e.g. the poorest and underserved populations). Less than half of the funding from external support agencies for water and sanitation goes to low income countries,
and a small proportion of these funds is allocated to the provision of basic services, where it would have the greatest impact
on achieving the MDG target (WHO/UN-Water, 2010). Stakeholders must continue to make the economic and development
case for increased investment in sanitation and water. Furthermore, research must continue on the appropriate level of resources for sanitation and drinking water, compared to other sectors.

312

CHAPTER 12

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

pollution can boost coastal ﬁshing industry. Wetlands
protection can help meet needs of rural communities
while avoiding costs of expensive ﬂood control infrastructure. (Sachs and Reid, p. 1002).
Conversely, reaching environmental goals requires progress in eradicating poverty. Coherent and bold poverty reduction strategies can ease environmental stresses by slowing population growth and enabling the
poor to invest long term in their environment. Periodic
environmental/ecosystem assessments would be helpful in this context.3 ‘A global network of respected
ecologists, economists, and social scientists working to
bring scientiﬁc knowledge to decision-makers and to
the public can clarify the state of scientiﬁc knowledge,
help to mobilize needed research’, and counter any

misinformation published by groups having special interests (Sachs and Reid, p. 1002).

12.2 Funding governance, institutional
reform and management
To function properly and sustainably, all aspects of water resources management and water supply-related
services must be fully funded. This not only includes
the creation and maintenance of physical infrastructure, but also water resource management, environmental protection and pollution abatement measures,
and less visible functions such as policy development,
research, monitoring, administration, legislation enforcement, provision of public information, control of
corruption and of conﬂicts of interest, and the involvement of public stakeholders (see Chapter 17).

BOX 12.2
Cost of adaptation to climate change for water
A World Bank study (see Chapter 24) has evaluated the impact of adapting the water sector to climate change in developing
countries, over the period 2010–2050, based on a socio-economic baseline and two climate change scenarios, created by the
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) in Australia and the National Centre for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) in the United States of America.
The adaptive costs were deﬁned in terms of hard options including building dams and dykes, and soft options such as the
use of early warning systems, community preparedness programmes, watershed management, and urban and rural zoning.
The table below represents average annual water resource adaptations costs, combining riverine ﬂood protection and industrial and municipal raw water supply. According to these estimates, measures to cope with the climate scenarios imply an
annual increase in adaptation costs of US$13–17 billion for developing countries as a whole. This represents 3% of their GDPs.
Africa is the worst affected region.

Average annual water resource adaptation costs (2010–2050) US$ billions (% GDP)
Baseline*
Region

CC (net costs)**
CSIRO**

NCAR

East Asia and Paciﬁc

29.4 (0.06)

2.1 (0.00)

1.0 (0.00)

Europe and Central Asia

15.8 (0.03)

0.3 (0.00)

2.3 (0.00)

Latin America and Caribbean

13.4 (0.03)

3.2 (0.01)

5.5 (0.01)

Middle East and North America

11.9 (0.02)

0.1 (0.00)

-0.3 (0.00)

South Asia

34.9 (0.07)

4.0 (0.01)

-1.4 (0.00)

Sub-Saharan Africa

9.8 (0.02)

7.2 (0.01)

6.2 (0.01)

Total: developing country

115.1 (0.22)

16.9 (0.03)

13.3 (0.03)

Total: non-developing country

56.2 (0.11)

7.4 (0.01)

13.3 (0.01)

* The baseline year is 2050. ‘Development baselines were crafted for each sector, essentially establishing a growth path in the absence of climate change that determines sector-level performance indicators … [using] a consistent set of GDP and population forecasts for 2010-50.’
(World Bank 2010a, p. 2)
** Figures of 0.00 are positive amounts, rounded to the nearest decimal point; they do not imply zero amounts.
Note: Discount rate = 0%; negative values refer to net beneﬁts.
Source: World Bank (2010d; 2011). Table data from World Bank (2010e, table 5.4, p. 41).

WWDR4

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

313

Adequately funded water governance is essential to
reduce uncertainty and manage risks. Generating data
for policy-makers and managers (observations, analysis, modelling, scenario-building) helps to inform
decision-makers and reduce uncertainty. Effective
governance in areas such as environmental controls,
groundwater monitoring and abstraction licensing,
and monitoring and policing of pollution, can reduce
the risk of over-exploitation of water resources and
catastrophic surface water pollution and irreversible
contamination of aquifers. Some of these governance
functions can be self-ﬁnanced through abstraction and
pollution charges.
The same is true of regulation. Both public and private water agencies with operational functions
should be subject to oversight from independent
regulators with full and timely access to relevant information. Far-sighted service providers recognize
the value of objective and transparent regulation in
giving their activities the public scrutiny and sanction
necessary to confer legitimacy and provide assurance
against arbitrary actions for short-term political gain.
Many regulators are funded by an earmarked tax on
water bills (e.g. England and Wales, and Scotland)
(see Chapter 25).
The third edition of the World Water Development
Report (WWAP, 2009) highlighted the need to transcend the ‘silo mentality’ often found in water planning, and to take account of the wider implications of
water decisions and the impact on water of decisions
taken in other economic sectors. This is a central aim
of integrated water resources management (IWRM).
Among other development agencies, the World Bank
aims to use its lending programmes to create capacity for IWRM as a way to overcome the institutional
fragmentation which affects water. As part of this approach, the World Bank is working to incorporate the
cross-cutting nature of water in its country programming, and integrate water interventions with projects
in other sectors. In its water programmes, it intends to
make focus on projects linking different components,
hitherto funded separately, such as resource management, services, water quality and ecosystems (World
Bank, 2010b).
Many water governance problems arise at the transboundary level, which is fraught with potential risks
and conﬂicts. Capacity-building and management
support for transboundary water institutions require

314

CHAPTER 12

proper funding. This is typically drawn from multilateral and bilateral agencies, local governments and other
sources, usually in combination.

12.3 Funding for information
Chapter 6 of this report addresses the neglect and
decline of national observation systems, which have
caused a loss of vital hydrological data. Investment in
the technology needed to upgrade countries’ water
and water-related information bases can result in good
returns. As a result the World Bank and other agencies
are targeting these systems for support (World Bank,
2010b). Such information is of vital national concern,
but also constitutes a regional and international public
good, albeit one which is ‘seriously underfunded, and
therefore under-provided’ (Winpenny, 2009, p. 8). This
is for three main reasons:
Regional programmes and institutions involve cooperation between two or more neighbouring governments, often themselves poor, and which give
transboundary issues a low priority compared to urgent national concerns. The problem is aggravated
where neighbouring countries are at war with one
another.4
The attribution of beneﬁts to the different partner
countries is difficult, hence sharing costs is problematic, and hampers setting realistic budgets and
funding modalities.5
For such reasons both donors and recipients of
Official Development Aid (ODA) may view regional
public goods as less desirable objects than national
programmes. Donors may also prefer supporting international, rather than regional, public goods out of
self-interest, since they may perceive greater beneﬁt accruing to themselves from actions of global
concern. According to one estimate, only 3 to 4% of
ODA goes to regional public goods, although such
programmes can give high returns.
This problem is particularly acute in Africa: there are
more than 60 transboundary rivers and international
river basins cover 60% of the total area of the continent. Practically all African rivers cross several borders: the Nile crosses ten, the Niger nine, the Senegal
four and the Zambezi eight. African water security
will require the construction of regional and shared
infrastructure on a large scale and the coordinated
management of shared water infrastructure. Such an

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

effort will require a greatly strengthened information
base of regional climatic and hydrological data.
Better hydrological information about river regimes
and groundwater reserves is essential for reducing
uncertainty and anticipating climatic variability, which
has had a heavy cost in many countries. In Kenya,
losses from ﬂooding from El Niño in 1997–1998 and
drought from La Niña in 1998–2000 ranged from 10
to 16% of GDP during those years. Growth of GDP in
Mozambique was reduced by 1% annually due to water shocks. In Zambia, hydrological variability is estimated to lower agricultural growth by 1% each year.
Similarly, in Tanzania, the impact of the 2006 drought
on agriculture caused losses equivalent to 1% of GDP
(McKinsey, 2010). Reducing the damaging impact of
this hydrological variability would have major beneﬁts
for the macroeconomy (AICD, 2010). Improved weather and ﬂood forecasting is crucial to ﬂood risk management, especially in reducing the impact of ﬂoods.
Investment in weather forecasting and hydrometeorological services can be highly cost-beneﬁcial.
In water resources management, for instance, there
is a real need for better hydrological and meteorological information. The basic data should come from
systems (including satellite observations) operated by
national public and international agencies. However, in
many cases agencies fail to collect or share the data.
Private companies can also play a signiﬁcant role in
the generation, interpretation and application of such
data for applied economic purposes. In France, a private company, Infoterra, provides satellite data for the
analysis of farmland to anticipate the likely impact of
climate change. In Germany, a private satellite operator,
RapidEye, sells data to insurance companies marketing
crop insurance to governments in countries at risk of
drought and famine. Likewise, companies active in oil
exploration and development offer unrivalled services
for the prospection and exploitation of groundwater
aquifers (Winpenny, 2010).

12.4 Funding in response to climate change
and growing water scarcity
Projections reveal that the annual cost of climate
change adaptation in developing countries in the industrial and municipal raw water supply sector would
be between US$9.9–US$10.9 billion (net) and US$18.5–
$19.3 billion (gross). Costs for riverine ﬂood protection
are projected at between US$3.5–$5.9 billion (net) and
US$5.2–$7.0 billion (gross)6 (Box 12.2).

WWDR4

Climate change will mainly be experienced through
greater variability of temperatures and hydrological
conditions. Adapting to current variability is an important ﬁrst step in many cases. As the IPCC has observed,
‘many actions that facilitate adaptation to climate
change are undertaken to deal with current extreme
events’ (Adger et al., 2007, p. 719).
Greater variability around, and changes in, the climatic mean are likely to be compounded by greater
uncertainty over the boundaries of variation, the possible appearance of new factors, and the presence
of thresholds, irreversibilities and tipping points (see
Chapter 2). Uncertainty has major implications for decision analysis and criteria (Box 12.3).
A common element of risk management, in view of
the residual uncertainty about the impacts of climate
change and other forces driving change, is the no regret criterion: a policy that would generate net social
and/or economic beneﬁt irrespective of what change
occurs. Examples include demand management measures; improvements in the efficiency of water distribution; wastewater recycling; early warning systems for
ﬂoods, droughts, and other extreme weather events;
and risk-spreading through insurance schemes.
Although no-regret projects can be justiﬁed in ﬁnancing terms, independent of the risks and uncertainties
they face, there are many reasons why they may not
happen: lack of project preparation, shortage of capital and credit, and a misalignment of social beneﬁts
with ﬁnancial incentives for sponsors. These factors are
seen in water demand-management programmes, for
example, in cases where both household and industrial
users seem reluctant to take up appliances and technologies that, on paper at least, promise rapid payback. No-regret projects may be attractive in theory,
but may still require active promotion. Climate change
impacts may lend them the extra beneﬁts and impetus
they need to make them a reality.
In comparison, projects justiﬁed solely on the basis
of expected climate change would only be justiﬁable
if the predictions of climatic and hydrological models
proved accurate. Such projects include construction
of new storage and supply infrastructure, retroﬁtting
of existing structures, altering operational protocols,
and developing new water sources and water transfers.
Such climate-justiﬁed projects and policies have to
be planned and implemented against the backdrop of

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

315

an uncertain future. The key criteria for these projects
are resilience, robustness, ﬂexibility and intelligence
(the ability to provide services or management over a
range of possible conditions). Depending on circumstances, some of these projects may have beneﬁts
outside of a climate change scenario. As the IPCC observes, ‘adaptation measures are seldom undertaken in
response to climate change alone’ (Adger et al., 2007,
p. 719).
Ensuring the capacity to cope with the greater variability and uncertainty caused by climate change and
other change forces (see Chapters 1 and 9) constitute a
broad challenge for water infrastructure. The measures
required will pose severe tests for governments, public agencies and international research institutes. Their
efforts will need to be supplemented by the actions
of private, non-governmental bodies of all kinds, who
can add value though extra resources, different ways of
working, new approaches and innovative products.
Adaptation and mitigation projects implemented by
public agencies can draw on a range of development
funds, including new adaptation funds created for this

speciﬁc purpose. There are currently over 20 specialized climate change funds accessible to public agencies.7 Leaving aside those funds specializing in forestry
or energy, around a dozen funds are available for adaptation for water, amongst other sectors. Of particular
relevance is the funding provided by the Pilot Program
for Climate Resilience (PPCR), sponsored by the World
Bank and other major IFIs:
The pilot programs and projects implemented under
the PPCR are country-led, and build on National
Adaptation Programs of Action (NAPA) and other
relevant country studies and strategies. They are
strategically aligned with other donor-funded activities to provide ﬁnancing for projects that will produce experience and knowledge useful to designing
scale-up adaptation measures. (CIF, 2011)
Speciﬁcally, funding is available through PPCR for
technical assistance to assist developing countries in
‘integrating climate resilience considerations into national development planning’ (CIF, 2011).

BOX 12.3
Implications of climate change uncertainty for decision-making
Greater variability and fundamental uncertainty would have profound implications for decisions about water infrastructure,
which typically has a long physical life. These implications are at various levels, and of different kinds:
The climate risk of such infrastructure should be assessed, at a sector and/or project level.
Traditional ways of dealing with risk in cost–beneﬁt analysis need to be fully exploited: these methods include sensitivity
analysis, switching values, and risk-beneﬁt analysis.
Decision rules should be used that take into account the risk preferences of the agency concerned (minimax, maximin, minimum regret) (Ben Tal et al., 2009).
These traditional aids to decision-making under uncertainty and risk need to be complemented by the use of scenario building, which constructs a series of plausible futures, which could not necessarily have been predicted by extrapolation from
current trends. Projects which stand up well on different scenarios are considered to be robust (World Bank, 2010a).
Project design needs to allow for greater climatic variability, and be resilient in dealing with events that cannot be foreseen as
yet. The initial cost of building in resilience (e.g. greater storage, which may not be needed; or forfeiting current economies of
scale in favour of greater freedom of manoeuvre in future) could be regarded as an insurance premium to avoid future losses
in the CC scenario.

Source: Reproduced from Winpenny (2010, pp. 1–2).
Note: Sensitivity analysis measures the impact on a project’s rate of return of a change in a speciﬁc variable. Switching values are the change in
a speciﬁc variable required to reduce the rate of return to zero. Risk-beneﬁt analysis compares the risk of action (= its cost) with the beneﬁt of
action (= avoided loss).
Minimax = minimizing the maximum expected loss; maximin = maximizing the minimum likely outcome; minimum regret = minimizing the
difference between the worst possible outcome and others.

316

CHAPTER 12

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

There is a risk that these climate change funds might
add to the administrative burdens placed on recipients (Porter et al., 2008). Such funds can be useful
sources of money for pilot projects (e.g. the PPCR),
but at a country level there is a strong case for ‘mainstreaming’ adaptation as much as possible, rather
than consigning it to a marginal part of the public
investment programme, requiring its own procedures
and criteria.
Much of the adaptation and mitigation effort, however,
will fall to private companies, farmers and households,
as well as subsovereign agencies that cannot access
these development funds. For them, commercial ﬁnancial sources are critical. Microﬁnance is particularly
suitable for ﬁnancing the improvement of irrigation
efficiency for small farmers. Certain forms of contract
can also be funded by quasi-equity, in which rewards
depend on the successful achievement of project aims,
for example, performance-related contracts for water
leakage reduction.

12.5 Funding diversiﬁcation and demand
management
Diversifying the sources of water by increasing the use
of technologies, such as desalination and reclaimed
water and promoting self-supply by users (farmers,
households and companies) can reduce and distribute
risk, compared with relying on a few sources that are
dependent on the same hydrological system. Some of
these are easier to ﬁnance from conventional means
than others. Desalination plants and certain projects
for the use of reclaimed water, which entail sizeable
investment in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs),
lend themselves to public sector or stand-alone commercial ventures funded from equity and commercial
ﬁnance – typically under a form of concession contract. In Mexico, the Atotonilco WWTP re-uses treated
urban wastewater in irrigation. Under the terms of a
recent contract, bids were invited under a build-operate-transfer (BOT) structure, with 49% of costs coming
from the National Infrastructure Fund and the remainder from the private concessionaire. The Matahuala
and El Morro WWTPs have similar aims and ﬁnancing
structures: design-build-operate-transfer (DBOT) and
BOT, respectively (GWI, 2009, pp. 51–2).
Dealing with future water deﬁcits will also require
action on the demand side. Demand management
needs a different approach to ﬁnancing. In South
Africa, current trajectories and policies produce urban,

WWDR4

“Microﬁnance is
particularly suitable
for ﬁnancing the
improvement of
irrigation efficiency for
small farmers.”
agricultural and industrial growth projections to
2030 incompatible with the country’s water endowment. In the base case scenario, South Africa faces
a gap between projected 2030 demand and current
supply equivalent to 17% of demand. Moreover, the
impact of climate change might increase the size of
this gap. Competition for limited water supplies will
intensify in each of the basins feeding the largest cities (Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban and Cape Town).
Household demand is expected to increase as a result of income growth and improved service coverage. The current planning scenario for the Vaal system
(Johannesburg, Pretoria and surrounding areas) assumes that demand management will reduce demand
increases under a business-as-usual (BAU) scenario by
15% (although that is not yet happening), which will
generate substantial investment burdens. Agriculture
is not seen as a major growth sector, although its water allocation may need to decrease, implying greater
efficiency in its use. Meanwhile, industry, power generation, mining and agriculture – the sectors that will
drive the income growth – are all water-intensive.
Closing the projected supply-demand gap for water
in 2030 and thereby enabling South Africa’s growth
potential to be realized can be achieved with a portfolio of different measures: supply-side transfer schemes,
new dams and modiﬁcations to existing structures, reengineering of existing irrigation schemes to increase
water efficiency, and better use of water in mining and
industrial companies. In short, a balance of supply-side
and demand management measures are needed. Much
of the cost of demand management falls on consumers
– households, farmers and industries – and is ﬁnanced
largely by them, though governments can help with
subsidies and tax breaks (McKinsey, 2010).

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

317

12.6 Generating ﬁnance for water
infrastructure and services
All countries at every level of development face heavy
costs in creating a water infrastructure that is ‘ﬁt for
purpose’, which can address the growing challenges
and risks identiﬁed throughout this report.
According to a recent World Bank Study (2010c), the
global ﬁnancial crisis has negatively impacted progress
towards fulﬁlling the MDGs. The crisis will also potentially magnify the already large investment needs.
Using three macroeconomic scenarios to illustrate the
risks involved, the report reveals that serious global
shortfalls are looming in water development indicators. According to one projection for 2015, 100 million
more people will lose access to safe drinking water. A
rethinking in ﬁnancing strategies is therefore required
to ensure that improvement in public expenditure efﬁciency results in additional resources.
The African Infrastructure Country Diagnostic (AICD,
2010) determines the investment needs in infrastructure in sub-Saharan Africa. This tool assists policymakers to set priorities for investment in all infrastructure sectors and provides a baseline for monitoring
progress. The AICD estimates that US$22 billion
per year (approximately 3.3% of Africa’s GDP) is the
amount required to attain the MDGs in water and sanitation. These estimates, based on minimum acceptable
asset standards, include an annual capital expenditure
of US$15 billion and operating expenditures of around
US$7 million. These ﬁgures do not include the cost of
investment in hydropower or irrigation. Similar estimates for Latin America and the Caribbean are available in an IDB study (2010) ‘Drinking Water, Sanitation,
and the Millennium Development Goals in Latin
America and the Caribbean’.
A pragmatic and eclectic approach is required to raise
the sums needed. The ﬁrst step should be to squeeze
the ﬁnancing requirements to a minimum through improvements in efficiency, better collections of revenues
due, and adjustments to service levels and technological solutions (AICD, 2010). The second step is to
improve the rate of sustainable cost recovery by raising
tariff revenues, budgetary allocations due from governments and ODA. In this context, the willingness to
pay of water users may well be greater than the willingness to charge of politicians. The third step is to use
these revenues to attract repayable sources of funds,
using available devices for the reduction, mitigation

318

CHAPTER 12

and sharing of water ﬁnancing risks (Winpenny, 2003;
OECD, 2010a among others).
Raising commercial ﬁnance for water has become
more difficult due to the global ﬁnancial situation since
2007, which
has discouraged new private interest in water infrastructure projects, and has also unsettled partners
in existing private public partnership (PPP) ventures. Earlier in 2009 the IFC reported that US$200
billion of PSP projects had been postponed or had
become ‘at risk’, 15–20% of which were in water
supply and sanitation. The ﬁnancial climate affected both the supply of risk capital (e.g. equity) and
loan capital to ﬁnance these concession deals, since
liquidity has become scarce, and the problems of
international banks have had repercussions on local
banks too. Many innovative deals, developed with
technical assistance and risk-sharing from donor
agencies, are at risk. (Winpenny et al., 2009, p. 18)
The Private Participation in Infrastructure (PPI) database, maintained by the World Bank and the PublicPrivate Infrastructure Advisory Facility, reported that in
2009 the number of water projects reaching ﬁnancial
or contractual closure had declined by 46% compared
with 2008, and that annual investment commitments
had fallen by 31% over the same period. In 2009, 35
water projects with private participation were implemented in seven low or middle income countries, involving investment of around US$2 billion. However,
three countries (Algeria, China and Jordan) accounted
for most of this activity (see Chapter 24).
Many projects that were close to ﬁnancial closure
when the crisis broke have survived by switching their sources of funding to local public banks
or agencies. Even when the ﬁnancial crisis abates
ﬁnancing terms for PSP deals in water and other
sectors are likely to remain harsh, and will call for
more ‘conservative’ project ﬁnancing structures
(i.e. more equity, less debt, more risk mitigation) …
These developments are occurring against (and
reinforce) a gathering trend towards more selectivity in the choice of markets and type of project by
the handful of western multinationals that remain in
the market for new international water concessions.
(Winpenny et al., 2009, p. 18)
However, these multinationals are increasingly joined
by more recent market entrants from Latin America,

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

the Middle East, Southeast and East Asia and elsewhere (Winpenny, 2006).
Public-private partnerships (PPPs) in urban water
utilities have had a mixed record in developing countries, with relative success in some (mainly in Chile)
and problems in others (e.g. Argentina and Bolivia)
(Jouravlev, 2004; Ducci, 2007; Lentini, 2011) and in
increasing efficiency than in directly bringing new ﬁnance (Marin, 2009). This is particularly relevant as
many urban water transmission and distribution systems are highly inefficient in their use of water and
energy (AICD, 2010; Kingdom et al., 2006). Improved
cost control and better cash ﬂow in utilities will indirectly increase their ability to raise their own ﬁnance.
This also has implications for energy costs. Water is
a large and generally inefficient consumer of energy.
This constitutes a sizeable percentage of water delivery
cost, even at the subeconomic electricity prices that
often apply. The use of more marginal sources as water
becomes scarcer will increase the energy requirement
for sourcing and treatment (GWI, 2009).
Another potential source of ﬁnance would be improving the rate of collection of water bills. In Africa,
under-collection is valued at US$0.5 billion annually. Improving the collection rate is an obvious way
of increasing water revenues without raising tariffs.
Although the better performing water utilities in Africa
normally manage collection rates of 80% or more
(Mehta et al., 2009), persistent non-payment, especially by public departments and agencies, leaves a big
hole in the accounts of water authorities normally be
expected to be self-sufficient.
International ﬁnancial events since 2007 have consolidated the position of national and international public
agencies as important sources of ﬁnance for water infrastructure. Though many national governments are
constrained by their ﬁscal position, others have beneﬁted from strong commodity prices and have used
their ﬁscal resources to invest in infrastructure, including water (Winpenny et al., 2009). Although the share
of water in total ODA has declined since the mid-1990s,
the absolute volume of ODA has started to rise (Box
12.4). In 2007–2008, the bilateral annual aid commitments of DAC countries to water and sanitation rose
to US$5.3 billion. Including concessional outﬂows of
multilateral agencies the total ODA for water and sanitation for that period was US$7.2 billion (OECD-DAC,
2010), compared with US$5.6 billion in 2006.

WWDR4

In addition to ODA, which in the case of water and
sanitation is evenly split between grants and soft
loans (OECD-DAC, 2010), public international development banks (World Bank, regional development
banks, European Investment Bank) offering loans on
attractive terms have regained some market share for
infrastructure ﬁnance during the recent ﬁnancial crisis,
taking advantage of the absence of commercial lenders (e.g. World Bank, 2010b). The Asian and Middle
Eastern sovereign wealth funds and publicly sponsored
companies are an additional and increasingly important source of money for the development of natural
resources and infrastructure (ICA, 2007). The abovementioned public sources of grant and commercial
ﬁnance are likely to remain important funders of big
water infrastructure projects, especially in Africa.
Nearly all the revenues generated by water accrue
in local currency (with the exception of transboundary water and power sales, and the indirect beneﬁt
to foreign exchange through exports of produce).

BOX 12.4
Increasing aid to water and sanitation: 2002-2008
Aid to water and sanitation has been rising sharply since
the 2002-2003 reporting period, from total average commitments of US$ 3.3 billion to US$7.2 billion in 2007-2008
(last reported period and includes DAC member countries’ contributions and multilateral agencies’ concessional
ﬂows). Among DAC members the largest donors for this
last reported period were Japan (on average US$1.9 billion per year), Germany (US$771 million) and the USA
(US$644 million). Over the period 2003–2008 aid to water and sanitation primarily targeted regions most in need
of improved access to water and sanitation: sub-Saharan
Africa received 29% of total aid to the sector, and South
and Central Asia 18%. Poorest countries classiﬁed as ‘low
income’ received 43% of total aid to the sector, two-thirds
of which was in the form of grants. Projects for the category deﬁned as ‘large systems’ are predominant and
accounted for 57% of total contributions to the water and
sanitation sector in 2007-08. 68% of total ODA for large
systems was in the form of loans, and loans also represented 33% of the ﬁnancing for river development. By
contrast, donors relied almost exclusively on ODA grants
(90% of total) to ﬁnance basic drinking water and sanitation. Grants were also predominant in the subsectors of
water resources policy and administrative management,
water resources protection and education and training.

Source: OECD (2010b).

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

319

This introduces a foreign exchange risk into loans
and equity capital raised externally, even on favourable ﬁnancing terms (e.g. from IFIs). Devaluation has
been catastrophic for some high-proﬁle international
water concessions8 needing to service their debt in
foreign currency, and is a serious potential risk for all
water projects and providers, both private and public. Hedging against devaluation risk is not a practical
proposition. The more sustainable long-term solution
is to generate more internal revenues from tariffs, and
to rely as much as possible on local ﬁnancial and capital markets, as suggested by experiences in Chile and
Brazil (Jouravlev, 2004; Lentini, 2011). A number of donors and IFIs offer risk-sharing products (see Section
12.7) to encourage the growth of local currency ﬁnance
for water and other infrastructure.9

12.7 Mitigating ﬁnancial and political risks
Many local water utilities are funded with revenues from
users or public budgets insufficient to exceed their dayto-day operating costs. As a result, they lack adequate
cash ﬂow to borrow money. Such utilities cannot fund
long-term investments if they do not receive grant subsidies. However, many that might have adequate cash
ﬂows remain unable to ﬁnance investments through
borrowings, either because lenders perceive them as an
unacceptable risk or because their potential rating results in loans with short terms and high interest rates.
Financial markets have a variety of ways of dealing with
the risks for lenders and investors discussed in this report. Insurance and guarantees can ‘cover political, contractual, regulatory and credit risk from both multilateral
and bilateral development agencies. These guarantees have a development motive, as opposed to export
credit and investment insurance, limited to ﬁrms domiciled in the country offering the guarantee, which has a
commercial aim. There is also a large and active private
market offering insurance’ against political, contractual
and credit risks. In addition to these external guarantees,
sovereign guarantees are those ‘offered by national governments to their own citizens, companies or subsovereign bodies when they borrow or attract direct investment. Certain other instruments have a quasi-guarantee
status, such as the ‘umbrellas of comfort’ which IFIs and
other agencies erect over other lenders and investors
through participations (‘B loans’) and Municipal Support
Agreements’ (Winpenny, 2005).10
Political risks affect not only lenders and investors.
They also impact water utilities which depend on

320

CHAPTER 12

political decisions for setting rules and objectives, ﬁxing tariffs or allocating subsidies. Water utilities can
only ﬁnance investment through borrowings if their
revenues are sufficiently predictable. Many investments are delayed by a failure – often for political reasons – to adjust tariffs to changes in economic conditions. Public subsidies that cannot be anticipated
cannot form the basis for borrowing.
Guarantees work in various ways: mitigating speciﬁc
risks which are the critical sticking points on a project;
enhancing securities (e.g. bonds) to take them over a
critical threshold of creditworthiness; improving the
terms on which borrowers and project sponsors can
get access to loans and investment; and giving lenders
and investors exposure to previously unfamiliar markets and products (Winpenny, 2005; Matsukawa and
Habeck, 2007; OECD, 2010a).
Guarantees for investment in water services projects have
not been widely adopted, compared with other sectors.
Of 124 guarantees issued since 2001 by IFIs, only four
were issued for water supply and sanitation projects. This
outcome is a mixture of governance and incentive factors
affecting both the supply of funds from the originating
agencies and the attitudes and practices of borrowers
and host governments. Guarantees can mitigate speciﬁc
risks, but cannot offset other negative project fundamentals often present in water services (Winpenny, 2005;
Matsukawa and Habeck, 2007; OECD, 2010a). However,
they can form a crucial feature of complex strategic infrastructure ﬁnance packages, such as the Nam Theun
Hydro Project in Lao PDR. The World Bank’s Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) investment guarantees against political and speciﬁc regulatory risk have
also proved helpful to the ﬁnancing of water projects
(World Bank, 2010b).
Pooling mechanisms are another device to reduce perceived risks. Some countries have developed national
revolving funds, following the well-established model
used in the United States of America. Another example
is the decision taken by a group of communities
in Colombia in 2010 to form a trust, which issued a
US$92 million peso-denominated bond to domestic
investors on the Colombian stock exchange. The deal,
done under the auspices of Colombia Infrastructure
Group LLC, allowed small and medium-sized municipalities access to long-dated funds at competitive
rates, with the express purpose of funding local water
and wastewater projects (GWI, 2010).

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

All potential ﬁnanciers are concerned with managing
the reputational risk entailed by certain types of infrastructure projects. The World Bank terms such projects
‘high risk-high reward’. The typical IFI response is to
develop an extensive set of processes and operational
policies to ensure that high risk-high reward (HRHR)
projects risks are appropriately addressed and mitigated (World Bank, 2010b).
As a general principle, the risk of ﬁnancial default can
be managed by tailoring ﬁnancial terms to the risk
proﬁle and expected cash ﬂow of the project concerned. For large and complex projects it is becoming
common to blend different types of ﬁnance (commercial loans, concessionary loans, grants, equity)
to achieve an acceptable overall mix. A number of
international platforms now exist (e.g. the EU-Africa
Infrastructure Trust Fund and the EU Neighbourhood
Investment Facility) to fund major infrastructure projects on terms appropriate to borrowers’ repayment
ability and the speciﬁc risks in each case.
Another risk management approach is to allow the
ﬁnancial terms to adjust to the outcome of a project.
Convertible loans can be converted into equity when
cash ﬂow would otherwise cause debt-servicing problems. The interest rate on some loans is indexed to the
price of the good or service provided by the project,
where this is outside the control of the sponsor.
Another outcome-oriented ﬁnancial device is outputbased aid (OBA), which is only released to the sponsor
when a project is completed and up and running. The
sponsor has the assurance that the grant will be forthcoming in due course, enabling commercial ﬁnance to
be raised, but the clients (local government and international agencies) have the assurance that their funds
will not be wasted. There are currently 31 projects with
OBA from the World Bank in water supply and sanitation (World Bank, 2010b).
Among other innovative funding methods to cope
with the heightened risks of water management are
index insurance and weather derivatives for farmers
(Winpenny, 2010). Other risk mitigation methods include options on water stored in reservoirs and ‘contract options’ bought by urban water authorities for
the use of farmers’ water rights in times of drought.
All these methods provide insurance against water variability, while avoiding the heavy costs of new
infrastructure.

WWDR4

“A precondition of
adequate ﬁnancing
for water is a full
appreciation of the
social and economic
purposes that it
serves.”
A recent review of innovative ﬁnance for water notes
that commercial funding of all types has suffered from
global ﬁnancial turmoil. Instruments, such as guarantees have been underutilized, and the credibility
of complex structured ﬁnancial products has been
weakened. The long-term ﬂow of commercial, including private, ﬁnance to water depends on reforms to its
governance and operation, and novel forms of ﬁnance
will remain limited by this constraint. However, there is
considerable scope for blending public grant and concessional funds with commercial sources, as noted in
the examples above (OECD, 2010a).

Conclusion
Water, in its various forms, will need to attract much
more ﬁnance than it currently receives if it is to overcome its current under-funding, support the future expansion of food production, supply the needs of growing populations including those in the post-2015 MDG
targets, and continue performing all the other services
it provides to a modern, growing economy. The new
impetus to create a green economy offers opportunities, as well as challenges, for the management of
water. Climate change sets its own agenda, in addition
to and partially overlapping with the above, involving
the mitigation of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
the adaptation of water infrastructure and services.
Water is also central to disaster preparedness, which is
likely to increase in importance for any future climate
scenario.
One basic reason why water does not receive sufficient funding is that its scope is often viewed too narrowly, whereas in reality it underpins a wide range of

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

321

economic sectors, all of which would be threatened by
water scarcity, pollution or pressures from the other
drivers described in this report. Hence, a precondition
of adequate ﬁnancing for water is a full appreciation of
the social and economic purposes that it serves.
Even with this, however, the ﬁnancial climate for water
will remain challenging and will call for a pragmatic and
eclectic approach to funding. This chapter outlines such
an approach, involving a mixture of efficiency measures, review of standards and technological options,
improved rates of collection, better cost recovery from
water users, more predictable government budgetary
allocations and ODA, and the intelligent use of such basic revenues to attract repayable funding sources using
the array of risk-sharing devices now available.

A form of lending used by the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development in which loans to a
subsovereign body, such as a local water utility, are made under
a formal understanding that the responsible municipality will
do everything in its power to enable the utility to continue
servicing the debt.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Adger, W. N., Agrawala, S., Mirza, M. M. Q., Conde, C., O’Brien,
K., Pulhin, J., Pulwarty, P., Smit, B. and Takahashi, K. 2007.
Assessment of adaptation practices, options, constraints
and capacity. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P.
J. van der Linden and C. E. Hanson (eds) Climate Change
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University Press, pp. 717–43.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

AICD (Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic). 2010.
Africa’s Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation.
Washington DC, The World Bank/Agence Française de
Développement.

Notes

Ben-Tal, A., L. El Ghaoui, L. and A. Nemirovski, A. 2009.
Robust Optimization. New Jersey, NY, Princeton University
Press.

1

A green economy is ‘an economy that results in improved
human well-being and reduced inequalities over the long
term, while not exposing future generations to signiﬁcant
environmental risks and ecological scarcities’ (UNEP, 2010, p. 4).

2

For more information see http://www.unep.org/GreenEconomy/
Portals/93/documents/Full_GER_screen.pdf

Birdsall, N. 2006. Overcoming coordination and attribution
problems: meeting the challenge of underfunded
regionalism. I. Kaul and P. Conceicao (eds) The New Public
Finance: Responding to Global Challenges. Oxford, Oxford
University Press.

3

Possibly modelled on the UN Millennium Assessment reports,
the GEO series, or the OECD’s Environmental Outlooks.

CIF (Climate Investment Funds). 2011. Pilot Program
for Pilot Resilience. Washington DC, CIF. http://www.
climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/ppcr

4

Control of the desert locust in Sahelian countries has been
severely hampered by the decline of regional information
and monitoring systems, due in part to civil unrest and armed
conﬂict endemic in border regions in these countries.

Ducci, J. 2007. Salida de operadores privados internacionales
de agua en América Latina. Washington DC, InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB). http://idbdocs.iadb.
org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=957044

5

Birdsall (2006) cites the Southern Africa Power Pool, the Baltic
Sea clean up, the control of onchocerciasis in the Sahel, and the
control of Chagas disease in Latin America.

6

Gross costs include all costs incurred by adaptation to climate
change. Net costs allow for (i.e. deduct from gross) any
negative costs (i.e. cost savings) that may arise from climate
change. The method used in this study nets out positive and
negative cost items for each country, but not across countries
within a region (World Bank, 2010c: pp. 3, 54, and elsewhere).

7

For more information see http://www.climatefundsupdate.org/
listing

8

Buenos Aires, the original West Manila concession, and Jakarta.
The West Manila concession inherited earlier debt owed to the
World Bank and Asian Development Bank.

9

322

10

For example, the US Development Credit Agency, the Agence
Française de Développement, and the GUARANTCO scheme of
DFID, SIDA and others.

CHAPTER 12

Fay, M. and Toman, M. 2010. Infrastructure and sustainable
development. Post-Crisis Growth and Development.
Washington DC, International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank, pp. 329–82.
Garrido-Lecca, H. 2010. Inversión en agua y saneamiento
como respuesta a la exclusión en el Perú: gestación, puesta
en marcha y lecciones del Programa Agua para Todos
(PAPT). LC/W.313. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/41044/lcw313e.pdf
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2009. Global Water
Intelligence. August, pp. 51–2.
––––. 2010. Global Water Intelligence. Brieﬁng, 9 December.
Hutton, G., Haller, L. and Bartram, J. 2007. Economic
and Health Effects of Increasing Coverage of Lowcost Household Drinking-Water Supply and Sanitation
Interventions to Countries Off-Track to Meet MDG Target 10.
Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO).

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ICA (Infrastructure Consortium for Africa). 2007. Annual
Report. Tunis Belvedere, Tunis, ICA.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2010. Drinking
Water, Sanitation, and the Millennium Development Goals
in Latin America and the Caribbean. Washington DC, IDB
Water and Sanitation Initiative. http://idbdocs.iadb.org/
wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=35468495
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation
Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century. LC/L.2169-P.
Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/9/19539/lcl2169i.pdf
Kingdom, B., Liemberger, R. and Marin, P. 2006. The Challenge
of Reducing Non-revenue Water (NRW) in Developing
Countries – How the Private Sector Can Help: A Look at
Performance-based Service Contracting. Water Supply and
Sanitation Board Discussion Series, No. 8. Washington DC,
International Bank for Reconstruction/The World Bank.
Lentini, E. 2010. Servicios de agua potable y saneamiento en
Guatemala: beneﬁcios potenciales y determinantes de éxito.
LC/W.335. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.
cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/0/41140/lcw335e.pdf
Lentini, E. 2011. Servicios de agua potable y saneamiento:
lecciones de experiencias relevantes. LC/W.392. Santiago,
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.cepal.org/
publicaciones/xml/9/43139/Lcw392e.pdf
MA (UN Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Living
Beyond our Means. Natural Assets and Human Well-being.
Statement from the Board. March 2005
Marin, P. 2009. Public-private Partnerships for Urban Water
Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries.
Washington DC, International Bank for Reconstruction/The
World Bank.
Matsukawa, T. and Habeck, O. 2007. Review of Risk Mitigation
Instruments for Infrastructure Financing and Recent Trends
and Developments. Washington DC, International Bank for
Reconstruction/The World Bank.
McKinsey & Company. 2010. Charting our Water
Future: Economic Frameworks to Inform Decisionmaking. 2030 Water Resources Group. http://
www.2030waterresourcesgroup.com/water_full/
Mehta, M., Cardone, R. and Fugelsnes, T. 2009. How Can
Reforming African Water Utilities Tap Local Financial
Markets? Insights and recommendations from a
practitioners’ workshop in Pretoria, South Africa, July 2007
(Revised in 2009). Washington DC/Tunis, Tunisia, Water and
Sanitation Programme (WSP)/Public-Private Infrastructure
Advisory Facility (PPIAF)/African Development Bank (AfDB).
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2010a. Innovative Financing Mechanisms for
the Water Sector. Paris, OECD.
––––. 2010b. Financing Water and Sanitation in Developing
Countries: The Contribution of External Aid. Paris, OECD.
OECD-DAC (OECD Development Assistance Committee).
2010. Focus on Aid to Water and Sanitation. Paris, OECD.
http://www.oecd.org/dac/stats/water.

WWDR4

Porter, G., Bird, N., Kaur, N. and Peskett, L. 2008. New
Finance for Climate Change and the Environment.
Washington DC, World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)/
Heinrich Böll Foundation.
Prüss-Üstün, A. and Corvalán, C. 2006. Preventing Disease
through Healthy Environments: Towards an Estimate of the
Environmental Burden of Disease. Geneva, World Health
Organization (WHO).
Sachs, J. D. and Reid, W. V. Investments toward
sustainable development. Science, Vol. 312, p. 1002.
http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/documents/
ScienceMag_19-05-06.pdf
Saulino, F. 2011. Implicaciones del desarrollo de los
biocombustibles para la gestión y el aprovechamiento
del agua. LC/W.445. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC).
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development). 2009. UNCTAD Trade And Development
Report 2009. Geneva, UNCTAD. http://www.unctad.org/en/
docs/tdr2009_en.pdf
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2008.
Green Jobs: Towards Decent Work in a Sustainable, Lowcarbon World. Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2010: Green Economy Report: A Preview. Nairobi, UNEP.
WHO (World Health Organization)/UN-Water. 2010. GLAAS
2010. UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking Water: Targeting Resources for Better Results.
Geneva, WHO/UN-Water.
Winpenny, J. 2003. Camdessus Report. Financing Water
for All: Report of the World Panel on Financing Water
Infrastructure. Stockholm/Marseilles, France, Global Water
Partnership (GWP)/World Water Council (WWC).
––––. 2005. Guaranteeing Development? The Impact of
Financial Guarantees. Paris, OECD.
––––. 2006. Opportunities and Challenges Arising from
the Increasing Use of New Private Water Operators in
Developing and Emerging Economies. Background paper
for OECD Global Forum on Sustainable Development, Paris.
––––. 2009. Investing in Information, Knowledge and
Monitoring. UN WWAP, Side Publications Series. Scientiﬁc
Paper. Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
Winpenny, J., Bullock, A., Granit, J. and Löfgren, R. 2009.
The Global Financial and Economic Crisis and the Water
Sector. Stockholm, Stockholm International Water
Institute (SIWI).
Winpenny, J. T. 2010. Private Providers of Climate Change
Services: The Role and Scope for the Private Sector in the
Provision of Non-ﬁnancial Climate Change-related Services
Relevant to Water Infrastructure. Water Working Notes No.
26. Washington DC, The World Bank.
World Bank. 2008. Economic Impact of Sanitation in
Indonesia: A Five-country Study Conducted in Cambodia,
Indonesia, Lao PDR, the Philippines, and Vietnam Under the
Economics of Sanitation Initiative. Water and Sanitation
Program. Washington DC, The World Bank.

INVESTMENT AND FINANCING IN WATER FOR A MORE SUSTAINABLE FUTURE

323

World Bank. 2010a. The Cost to Developing Countries of
Adapting to Climate Change. New Methods and Estimates.
The Global Report of the Economics of Adaptation to
Climate Change Study. Consultation Draft. Washington DC,
The World Bank.
––––. 2010b. Sustaining Water for All in a Changing Climate:
World Bank Group Implementation Progress Report of
the Water Resources Sector Strategy. Washington DC,
International Bank for Reconstruction/The World Bank.
––––. 2010c. Global Monitoring Report 2010: The MDGs After
the Crisis. Washington DC, The World Bank.

––––. 2010e. The Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change.
Background Papers: Costs of Adaptation Related to
Industrial and Municipal Water Supply and Riverine Flood
Protection (P. J. Ward, P. Pauw, L. M. Brander, Jeroen,
C. J. H. Aerts and K. M. Strzepek) Discussion Paper No.
6. Washington DC, The World Bank. http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/EXTCC/Resources/407863-1229101582229/
DCCDP_6Riverine.pdf
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009.
United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water
in a Changing World. Paris/London: UNESCO Publishing/
Earthscan.

––––. 2010d. The Economics of Adaptation to Climate Change:
New Methods and Estimates. Washington DC, International
Bank for Reconstruction/The World Bank.

324

CHAPTER 12

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 13
Responses to risk and uncertainty
from a water management
perspective

—
Authors Erum Hassan, Daniel P. Loucks and Joana Talafré
Contributor William J. Cosgrove

WWDR4
©
Philippe Bourseiller

TRANSFORMING
INVESTMENT AND
WATER
FINANCING
MANAGEMENT
IN WATER
INSTITUTIONS
FOR A MORETO
SUSTAINABLE
DEAL WITH CHANGE
FUTURE

325

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Increasing uncertainty concerning the availability and quality of water resources and their use
poses unique challenges for decision-makers (Shaw and Woodward, 2010). Rapid, sometimes
unforeseeable changes in external pressures and drivers are the cause of these new and
increased uncertainties and associated risks (see Chapters 8 and 9). Managing these risks
and taking advantage of any opportunities that arise calls for new kinds of action involving all
stakeholders, many of whom have not as yet considered how their decisions and actions affect
water.
Water managers employ differing approaches to address the risks and uncertainties
surrounding water resources (Chapter 11), relying on the ‘rules’ set in place by their local
and national institutions (Chapters 5 and 11). They have tools and options at their disposal
to facilitate the transformation of traditional static planning and management approaches
into more adaptive and ﬂexible practices that can increase the resilience of water systems.
These include informing the people who make decisions affecting water of the potential
beneﬁts and costs of altering allocations to different uses, and the trade-offs among various
performance criteria that may need to be made. Although water managers play a signiﬁcant
part in this process, expertise is also required from the social and economic sectors (and
from the ultimate beneﬁciaries).
Water managers operate in differing contexts: some function and adapt to circumstances
where governments anticipate water scarcity and variability and adopt precautionary
policy instruments; others may have to operate in a context where governments prefer to
maintain the status quo in policy development despite changes affecting water resources.
Despite the differing contexts, water managers need to review their risk assessment and
management practices. Moreover, they need to raise awareness among broader stakeholders
of the beneﬁts of responding to uncertainty through risk management – and of the dangers
of failing to do so. A shared understanding of the concepts of uncertainty and risk in the
context of water resources management, and the allocation and provision of water resources
to meet the many uses they need to satisfy, can serve as a basis for further analysis.
Collecting and sharing data are another essential element. With these complementary tools
in hand, analysis of the impacts of external forces can be broadly inclusive, involving experts
from multiple disciplines. Their experiences, both positive and negative, provide options to
those who now need to decide how to act. What interventions are water managers willing
to make without the assurance that risk and uncertainty will in fact be reduced? Most
decision-makers base their choices on some variation of an ex-ante beneﬁt-cost analysis
when it comes to water resources (Shaw and Woodward, 2008). However, it is the beneﬁts
rather than the costs that are hard to estimate and which make policy-making regarding
water so uncertain. As a result, decision-makers may be able to estimate the costs that their
interventions will impose, but the advantages of such interventions may remain uncertain.
This chapter illustrates some responses to dealing with uncertainties in the planning, design
and operation of water supply and pollution control systems, when attempting to meet
changing demands. These responses usually involve the use of various tools to identify and
evaluate alternative water resources plans, policies, infrastructure designs and operating rules
applicable to different regions of the developed and developing world. These responses and
their outcomes illustrate both successes and difficulties in meeting desired water planning
and management goals, and demonstrate the relative effectiveness of associated data
collection, generation and management schemes in supporting decisions. They also illustrate
how technologies have been used to address issues related to adaption to change and
dealing with risks and uncertainties.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
This chapter also addresses the need to make decisions under increased uncertainty resulting
from abrupt changes, discontinuity and unpredictability. While some of these may pose
additional risks, others may provide opportunities. Decision-makers can draw on examples
of how some uncertainties and risks are being managed – successfully and unsuccessfully –
including through adaptation. Finally, this chapter examines the trade-offs that governments
are prepared to make in the face of risk and uncertainty. The following sections do not
purport to provide an exhaustive inventory of all possible responses to risk and uncertainty
implemented by water managers, but rather seek to provide illustrations of various ways in
which risks and uncertainties related to water have been reduced or mitigated.

13.1 Reducing uncertainty
One of the most direct ways of reducing uncertainty
is to generate new knowledge or understanding of
conditions governing water availability and quality in
the present and in the future. Data collection, analytical capacity and predictive ability are all required to
reduce uncertainty and therefore to facilitate decisionmaking about allocations, uses, mobilization and treatment. While the risk to water is not reduced, it is better
understood.
Given the multiplicity of factors that could potentially
affect water directly and indirectly, this exercise is not
as straightforward as it may seem; otherwise no country or user would ever have been surprised by a water crisis. The following section provides examples of
means by which this uncertainty has been reduced, or
the risks better understood.
13.1.1 Monitoring, modelling and forecasting to reduce
uncertainty and understand risk
As technology evolves, tools for predicting future water
availability become more reﬁned, allowing for the consideration of multiple variables and drivers. Chapter 6 of
this report elaborates on various aspects of data and
information in water resources, including the challenges that confront water resources management. Regular
monitoring and basic data collection serve as a basis
for deriving linear trends as well as to develop more
complicated models.
A multi-disciplinary approach can be useful to achieving realistic projections, since it integrates the tools
and participation of ecologists, engineers, economists,
hydrologists, political scientists, psychologists, and
water resources managers, among others. Involving
parties from these different sectors permits greater

WWDR4

insights into how to manage water resources in the
face of risk and uncertainty. Given the interconnectedness of water with other sectors, inclusion of different
kinds of expertise can help provide some degree of
clarity to uncertainty and risk.
It is commonly recognized that solving water resources problems ‘requires the integration of technical, economic, environmental, social, and institutional aspects
into a coherent analytical and management framework. Since the 1960s, computational frameworks that
combine optimization and simulation tools have been
used to develop and assess water resources development strategies for decades. While these prior works
have produced signiﬁcant advances in understanding
interactions between economic objectives and physical
constraints, consideration of the complexity of the systems has been relatively narrow’ (Mayer and MuñozHernandez, 2009, p. 1177). Box 13.1 illustrates the use
of a less narrow multidisciplinary tool, which provides
many beneﬁts, but highlights the challenges that uncertainty and risk can bring, despite comprehensive
analyses and modelling.
13.1.2 Adaptive planning in anticipation of ﬂuctuating
risks and uncertainties
Adaptive planning and management are sensible and
pragmatic approaches that water managers can use
under conditions of change, increasing uncertainty
and risk. Adaptive management is often employed to
decrease uncertainty and optimize decision-making,
while ensuring learning from the process. Adaptive
planning and management integrates project design,
management, monitoring and evaluation for the purposes of testing assumptions, and learning from the
outcomes. Essentially, adaptive planning is based on a
‘learning by doing approach’ (Kato and Ahern, 2008).

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

327

BOX 13.1
Integrated Water Resources Optimization Models (IWROMs)

Integrated water resources optimization models (IWROM) are tools that have been developed over the last decade for determining optimal water allocations among competing sectors. IWROMs use optimization methodologies to ﬁnd the most
efficient water allocation strategies from an economic viewpoint, usually while considering the environmental impact of these
strategies. Models of economic beneﬁts associated with the consumption of water in various use sectors are derived and
assembled in an objective function, including economic beneﬁts associated with the environment. Hydrological simulation
models provide values of state variables, which are needed to evaluate the economic beneﬁt models, constrain the physical
system, and, in some newer cases, provide state variables for evaluating environmental impacts. The simultaneous evaluation
and consideration of allocations across various water sectors, economic beneﬁt models, models of the biophysical system,
and economic and environmental impacts constitute the basis of the integrated nature of IWROMs.
IWROMs seek to ﬁnd water-allocation strategies that occur in an efficient way, by maximizing the economic beneﬁts or by
minimizing the costs or number of people affected by such strategies. In addition, IWROMs allow for testing of different future
scenarios that could be experienced by a particular region. These scenarios include potential changes in climate, land cover and
land use, improvement of infrastructure, population, and consumer preferences. By testing these scenarios, the stakeholders can
anticipate the potential environmental or economic consequences related to speciﬁc decisions taken in the basin.
IWROMs are particularly useful for regions where competition for water is intense, valuation of water for the various use sectors can be estimated, economic and operational impacts of proposed management alternatives are of interest, and data are
available to calibrate supporting models. IWROMs allow for the simulation of and assessment of water resources economic
policies and investments in water infrastructure. IWROMs seek to depict coupled human–nature relationships and mimic the
impact of driving forces and feedbacks from the environment so they can effectively analyse sustainability. IWROMs support
basin-wide decision-making since appropriate biophysical models can reﬂect spatial heterogeneity in [hydroclimatic] conditions and water uses among different subregions.
[IWROM applications use hydrological simulators and] mathematical methods to solve optimization problems. It is suggested
that IWROMs (a) seek to model coupled human–nature relationships and mimic the impact of water resources management
strategies on the environment at the basin scale; (b) allow for the simulation and assessment of economic policies and strategies on water resources management; (c) can support basin-wide decision-making; and (d) are particularly useful for waterscarce regions.
[However, as efficient as IWROM may be, uncertainty poses several challenges to its application. For instance,] specifying
sources of error and making accurate estimates of uncertainty in the outputs of IWROMs can be very difficult (Jakeman and
Letcher, 2003). Sources of error in individual models may be difficult to identify and quantify, as is the case in the hydrological simulators and economic models used in IWROMs, where the lack of data for model calibration and validation is commonly an issue. Because of the breadth and complexity of issues involved in an integrated model, ‘the level of uncertainty goes
beyond unexplained randomness to a situation where many things are fundamentally unknowable in a traditional, objective,
scientiﬁc sense’ (Rothman and Robinson, 1997, cited in Jakemen, and Letcher, 2003). In addition, it is often that case that the
propagation of errors through the IWROM is poorly understood, due to the complexity of feedbacks within the integrated
system. Appropriate processes for validating IWROMs have yet to be fully developed; however, in a few cases, researchers
have at least attempted to calibrate IWROMs to historical water demands (Cai and Wang, 2006; Draper et al., 2003).
All of these issues indicate that applications of IWROMs must be sensitive to the effects of uncertainty on the model results
and more sophisticated approaches may be needed to quantify uncertainty. Furthermore, models tend to be used to investigate scenarios that can be very different from the situation in which the model was calibrated and tested. The validity of
the IWROM or component models outside these circumstances may be questionable and the level of uncertainty in predictions may be difficult to quantify. Rational procedures for choosing planning periods in IWROM applications, which have
ranged from 10 to 30 years, have not been established. The value of long-term applications of IWROMs is questionable, given
the considerable uncertainty in many modelling aspects, especially the prices and costs include in the economics models.
Scenario analysis, [as referred to in Chapter 8,] may be used to explore model uncertainties in these cases. However, formulating realistic scenarios may be difficult, considering that temporal trends in many of the phenomena quantiﬁed in these scenarios (such as climate, land use and population change) may be non-stationary.
Source: Reproduced from Mayer and Muñoz-Hernandez (2009, pp. 1176, 1187–8, 1191–2).

328

CHAPTER 13

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

As Kato and Ahern (2008) note, the key concepts and
principles of adaptive management in the literature
and application review are: ‘(1) conceiving management actions as experiments; (2) conducting several plans/experiments at once for fast learning; (3)
monitoring being the key; and (4) learning by doing.’
Adaptive management is thus a social process as well
as a scientiﬁc one, where stakeholders play a key role
in informing the learning process (Chapters 5 and 11).
Adaptive management embeds uncertainty as a fundamental principle in the management approach.
Adaptive management strategies allow decision-makers to alter the direction of projects and programmes
due to emerging information gained by the learningby-doing approach.
There are some challenges to using adaptive management. These include forgoing short-term advantages
for long-term objectives, as well as the demands that
are placed on stakeholder participation. Stakeholders
are expected to maintain their level of engagement over
the long-term, which may not be possible (Lockwood
et al., 2006). There are circumstances under which
adaptive management is seriously compromised and
does not work, for example, when monitoring is not
fully completed, when monitoring data is not analysed
or accurately assessed, or when the results are inconclusive (Moore and McCarthy, 2010). Moreover, if
the process does not have participation of key stakeholders, adaptive management will not yield optimal
results.
Because decisions made outside the water domain
also affect the resource and its use, many perceive
an integrated adaptive approach as the most appropriate basis for managing water systems sustainably.
Adaptive water management is an extension of integrated water management in that it is designed to address future uncertainties in a comprehensive fashion.
The inclusion of feedback mechanisms in response to
changing conditions and increased knowledge is critical for revising and updating integrated water management efforts; adaptive modelling considers both
human and ecosystem water needs and takes feedback mechanisms into account.
For example, studies carried out in the Netherlands
to support long-term water management planning, in
the light of uncertainty regarding climate change impacts, focused on three aspects of water management:

WWDR4

“Adaptive planning
and management
integrates project
design, management,
monitoring and
evaluation for the
purposes of testing
assumptions, and
learning from the
outcomes.”
ﬂood defence, drinking water supply and protection
of Rotterdam Harbour. The key point of interest was
whether, and for how long, current water management strategies would continue to be effective under
different climate change scenarios. To this end, the
studies employed the concept of ‘adaptation tipping
points’ (see Chapter 8, Section 8.1.5). If the magnitude of change was such that a current management
strategy could no longer meet its objectives, the study
assumed that the tipping point had been reached and
that an alternative adaptive strategy was needed.
Therefore this approach combined both modelling and
forecasting elements with those of adaptive management, providing an iterative process to consider the
validity of management approaches. Triggers, or tipping points, are an effective way of evaluating various management milestones, and if agreed upon and
recognized by stakeholders outside the realm of water
management, can provide an effective rallying point
for making decisions about water, while including all
users.
A similar concept has been applied in many instances under the broader heading of disaster risk management (DRM), where emergency triggers can be
considered as the equivalent of ‘adaptation tipping
points’. Indeed, DRM provides a framework for rapid
adaptive management based on a set of agreed
management changes that occur under speciﬁc

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

329

BOX 13.2
Adaptive management: Adaptation tipping points
in current Dutch ﬂood management
To ensure safety against ﬂooding, safety levels for all
ﬂood defences in the Netherlands must be able to withstand a storm event with a certain frequency, as well as
maintain the morphological boundary conditions for dune
growth along the coast. Optimization of both sand mining
and nourishment must be able to meet ecological requirements. Thus, even in the most extreme sea level-rise-scenario, the existing policy of protecting the sandy coast is
not likely to encounter an adaptation tipping point (ATP).
Potential ATPs might arise on the social and political level,
however. For example, the social acceptability of living
behind giant dykes might decline, and increasing spatial claims of ever-larger dykes might provoke changes in
governance arrangements.
The Maeslant Barrier is essential to protecting Rotterdam
Harbour and its tidal river area against ﬂooding. The dykes
in this region are designed to withstand water levels that
have a probability of occurrence between 1/10,000 and
1/4000 annually. To meet this safety level, the barrier closes
if the water level at the outlet of the waterway exceeds 3 m
or exceeds 2.90 m upstream at Dordrecht. The return period of such an event is approximately 10 years. Rising sea
level implies that the barrier will close more often. However,
closing the Maeslant Barrier hinders navigation to and
from Rotterdam Harbour. According to the Rotterdam Port
Authority a maximum closing frequency of once per year is
acceptable. This is considered an ATP. The closing frequency of the Maeslant Barrier depends on the sea water level,
the duration of storm events, and the discharge of the rivers. Another ATP is the maximum sea level rise the barrier
has been designed for, which is 50 cm.
The tidal river area is crucial for freshwater provision
(drinking water and agriculture) in the southwest of the
Netherlands. Rising sea level and reduced river discharge
during dry summers lead to extra salinization of groundwater and surface water. An ATP for this sector would occur if
sea level rise in combination with lower river drainage were
to result in an inability to maintain salt concentrations at a
level low enough to maintain key functions. Water allocation has been established in a series of water agreements
between national and regional administrations. To meet the
requirements, the maximum allowable chloride concentration in the inland water system is 250 mg per L. Under
current conditions, the freshwater inlet needs to be closed
once between every ﬁve and 10 years to protect against
saltwater intrusion. However, the frequency and duration of
necessary closure of freshwater inlets rapidly increases with
rising sea levels and decreasing river discharges.

Source: Kwadijk et al. (2010).

330

CHAPTER 13

conditions. This is not a new approach, but one that
functions with varying degrees of effectiveness depending on the context. The successful operation of a
rapid and ﬂexible DRM system requires a number of
basic functions such as availability of data, the technical means for monitoring, and rapid response systems, which are not always functional in all countries.
In this case, however, uncertainty is not reduced, but
mitigated by the adoption of pre-established management responses triggered by speciﬁc events. As
highlighted in the 2011 Global Assessment Report
published by UNISDR, however, DRM frameworks can
help to address other ‘non-emergency’ needs as well,
such as planning for hydro-electricity, agriculture and
other water needs. DRM need not be a parallel exercise to other risk and uncertainty reduction initiatives in the water domain. ‘However, the examples
[Box 13.3] indicate that ecosystem-based disaster
risk management is an increasingly attractive option
for addressing problems as varied as river-basin and
urban ﬂooding, drought and wildﬁres.’ (UNISDR, 2011,
p. 127)
Another tool used in dealing with disasters from a
planning and risk management perspective is catastrophe modelling, as described in Box 13.4.
13.1.3 Proactive management
Another way of dealing with risk and uncertainty in
water management is to anticipate the future conditions of a number of key drivers, chief among them demand for water. Analysis of the determinants of water
demand can provide useful avenues for reducing some
water uncertainties, and many countries have adopted
demand management as a mechanism for water allocation, management, conservation and planning.
Water demand has been on the rise for a number of
years, particularly in urban areas, and projections show
continuing growth in demand (Butler and Memon,
2006). The chief inﬂuencing factors are the drivers
referred to in Chapter 2, including population growth,
migration, lifestyle and economic changes, demographic shifts and the impacts of climate change. All of
these drivers create conditions of uncertainty and challenges to meet the increasing demand. Demand-side
management, as highlighted in Chapter 5, addresses
consumptive demand so as to postpone or avoid the
need to develop new resources (Butler and Menon,
2006), thereby limiting the uncertainties and risks
emerging from unbridled water demand and potential
shortages in the future.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

BOX 13.3
Risk-addressed examples

River basin ﬂooding
In Hubei Province, China, a wetland restoration programme reconnected lakes to the Yangtze River and rehabilitated 448 km2
of wetlands with a capacity to store up to 285 million m3 of ﬂoodwater. The local government subsequently reconnected a
further eight lakes covering 350 km2. Sluice gates at the lakes have been re-opened seasonally, and illegal aquaculture facilities have been removed or modiﬁed. The local administration has designated lake and marshland areas as nature reserves.
In addition to contributing to ﬂood prevention, restored lakes and ﬂoodplains have enhanced biodiversity, increased income
from ﬁsheries by 20–30% and improved water quality to potable levels (WWF, 2008).
In 2005, the Government of the United Kingdom launched the programme Making Space for Water, an innovative strategy
that uses ecosystems instead of costly engineered structures for ﬂood and coastal erosion risk management along river banks
and coastlines. The programme, triggered by severe ﬂoods in 1998, 2000 and 2005, consists of 25 nationwide pilot projects
at the catchment and shoreline scales, and involves collaborative partnerships between local governments and communities. Since April 2003, the Government has invested between US$4.4 and US$7.2 billion as of March 2011. One such project
covered an area of approximately 140 km2 of the Laver and Skell Rivers west of Ripon in North Yorkshire. Activities included
planting trees as shelterbelts, establishing vegetative buffer strips along riverbanks, the creation of woodland, fencing off existing woodland from livestock, hedge planting, and creation of retention ponds and wetlands for increased ﬂood storage capacity. These activities reduced surface ﬂow during ﬂoods by trapping, retaining or slowing down overland ﬂow and provided
other beneﬁts such as protection of wildlife habitats and improved water quality (PEDRR, 2010).
Urban ﬂooding
Urban development replaces vegetated ground that provides a wide range of services, including rainwater storage and ﬁltration, evaporative cooling and shading, and greenhouse gas reduction, with asphalt and concrete, which do not. Although the
functions of green spaces in urban areas are easily overlooked, local governments have started reinstating ‘green infrastructure’
(Gill et al., 2007) as a viable component of urban water management and as a means of combating urban heat. In New York,
for example, untreated storm water and sewage regularly ﬂood the streets because the ageing sewerage system is no longer
adequate. After heavy rains, overﬂowing water ﬂows directly into rivers and streams instead of reaching water treatment plants.
The US Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that around US$300 billion would need to be invested over the next
20 years to upgrade sewerage infrastructure across the country. In New York City, alone, it is estimated that traditional pipe and
tank improvements would cost US$6.8 billion (New York City, 2009). Instead, New York City will invest US$5.3 billion in green
infrastructure on roofs, streets and sidewalks. This promises multiple beneﬁts. The new green spaces will absorb more rainwater
and reduce the burden on the city’s sewage system, air quality is likely to improve, and water and energy costs may fall.
Drought
Two different but almost simultaneous agro-ecological restoration processes that started 30 years ago in southern Niger and the
central plateau of Burkina Faso have increased water availability, restored soil fertility and improved agricultural yields in degraded drylands. With very little external support, local farmers experimented with low-cost adaptations of traditional agricultural and
agroforestry techniques to solve local problems. Three decades later, hundreds of thousands of farmers have replicated, adapted
and beneﬁted from these techniques, transforming the once barren landscape. In Burkina Faso, more than 200,000 ha of dryland
have been rehabilitated, producing an additional 80,000 tonnes of food per year. In Niger, more than 200 million on-farm trees
have been regenerated, providing 500,000 additional tonnes of food per year, as well as many other goods and services. In addition, women have particularly beneﬁted from improved supply of water, wood fuel and other tree products (Reij et al., 2010).
Aboriginal people in northern Australia have a long history of using ﬁre to manage habitats and food resources. Due to changes
in settlement patterns and marginalization, traditional ﬁre management was fragmented over vast areas, leading to an increase
in destructive ﬁres in ﬁre-prone savannahs. Traditional ﬁre management practices, such as early dry-season prescribed burning,
have been revived and combined with modern knowledge, such as using satellite technology to locate ﬁres.
Aboriginal ﬁre rangers have considerably reduced large-scale ﬁres through ﬁre management across 28,000 km2 of western Arnhem
Land, with subsequent reductions in greenhouse gas emissions of more than 100,000 tonnes of CO2-equivalent per year. The
Darwin Liqueﬁed Natural Gas plant compensates aboriginal communities with approximately AU$1 million (US$1 million) per year
for offsetting carbon, generating important income in disadvantaged communities. Additional ﬁre management beneﬁts include
protection of biodiversity and indigenous culture (PEDRR, 2010).

Source: Reproduced from UNISDR (2011, p. 129).

WWDR4

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

331

For example, demand management is a key element in
the United Kingdom government’s sustainable development policy. The government has implemented this
policy by enacting the Green Deal. This encourages
efficient use of water in homes and business through
delivering joint energy and water savings; promoting investment by water and sewerage companies of
UK£22 billion by 2015; and developing new assets and
innovative technologies (EA, 2011).
A water-demand programme was also implemented in
South Africa. The objective of the Greater Hermanus
Water Conservation Programme was to conserve the
natural water resource against increased demand

BOX 13.4
Catastrophe modelling as a tool for understanding
and calculating risk in the insurance industry
Catastrophe modelling is a tool developed by private
sector companies, working in the insurance sector, as a
‘mechanism to integrate and synthesize all the relevant
science, data, engineering knowledge and even behaviour
of claimants and insurers in the aftermath of a catastrophe’ (Shah, 2008, p. 5). Today, it has evolved into a risk
identiﬁcation and prevention tool. The approach, which
combines mapping risk and measuring hazard, came together in a deﬁnitive form in the late 1980s.
While it is generally agreed that a probabilistic approach is the most appropriate method to model the
complexity inherent in catastrophes, probabilistic
modelling itself is multifaceted. It requires simulating
thousands of representative, or stochastic, catastrophic events in time and space; compiling detailed databases of building inventories; estimating physical damage to various types of structures and their contents;
translating physical damage to monetary loss; and,
ﬁnally, summing over entire portfolios of buildings. …
Catastrophe models require substantial amounts of
data for model construction and validation. (Grossi and
TeHennepe, 2008, p. 7)
Originally intended as tools reserved for the calculation
and projections of ﬁnancial losses within the insurance
industry, catastrophe models are increasingly being used
by governments and municipalities as a risk management
and prevention tool. Catastrophe modelling provides an
integrative model whereby eventual losses can be quantiﬁed and trade-offs analysed towards the integration of
adaptive measures in planning.

Source: The Review (2008).

332

CHAPTER 13

using a comprehensive long-term water conservation
programme. It was based on a series of principles including: water-loss management to deal with unaccounted for water such as unmetered and illegal connections and leakage; retro-ﬁt programmes to supply
existing homes and buildings with water-saving devices (owners were ﬁned if devices were not installed
after a certain period of time); school audits to ﬁnd
out what activities consume the most water and why;
assurance of supply with a ﬁxed amount levied every
month, forming the basis of the authority’s pledge to
provide water to every house as long as it is available;
escalating block-rate tariffs; water-wise gardening
methods; the use of ‘grey’ water for food production;
and the creation of water regulations and building bylaws (WMO, 2001).
Although managing water demand is one way of limiting risks associated with increasingly uncertain levels
of consumption and potential future shortages, it also
poses some unforeseen challenges. For example, water
demand management calls for a good understanding of who is making the demands on water and how
much they are demanding. This requires considerable
knowledge and information, without which policies
may target suboptimal sectors or users, thereby having a negligible impact on future risks. Improvements
in resource monitoring and databases of water use
information are therefore required. In turn, these valuable new resources can be used to produce improved
forecasts of water demand, so that planning procedures are able to guarantee water supplies to more
people – especially the poorest members of society
who are traditionally hardest hit by water shortages
(WMO, 2001).
Another challenge is that as policies address the need
for demand management, new issues arise regarding
recognition of the environment as a user. Traditionally,
the environment has been neglected, but with the
National Water Act in South Africa, for example, comes
the concept of an ‘environmental reserve’, designed
to protect the ecosystems that underpin water resources. The Act also states that it is the duty of the
Government ‘to assess the needs of the environmental
reserve and to make sure that this amount of water, of
an appropriate quality, is set aside’ (DWA, 1997). This
approach has immense impacts on water resources
management in South Africa, but raises the difficult
question of how much environmental reserve a river or
water resource requires (WMO, 2001).

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

An additional challenge that demand management
raises, and which limits its ability to minimize risk and
uncertainty, is the necessary participation of various
stakeholders at different levels. It requires community
buy-in, commitment, monitoring and adherence to the
paradigm of demand management. It also requires
transparent ﬂows of information, for example, to address unknown users, such as illegal water connections,
leakages and other losses, that are not attributable,
but which bring an additional layer of uncertainty and
risk to the equation.

However, integrating a participatory dimension to demand management can `democratize’ the process of
determining and prioritizing risks and uncertainties
(Baroang et al., 2010). Including various stakeholders can also balance their multiple needs, and inform
policy formulations and management responses that
respond to them, as illustrated by the example in
Box 13.5.

BOX 13.5
Farmer managed groundwater systems in Andhra Pradesh, India

The Andhra Pradesh Farmers Ground Water Management System (APFAMGS) is a community-based project involving over
28,000 men and women farmers in 638 villages across 7 drought-prone districts. The project focuses on developing the capacity of groundwater users in managing their resource in a commonly sustainable way. The project adopted a demand side
approach to groundwater management, wherein farmers are made to understand how their groundwater system functions
so that they can make informed decisions about their water use. The core concept or belief of APFAMGS is that sustainable
management of groundwater is feasible only if users understand its occurrence, cycle and limited availability, and they accept
that groundwater conservation through collective decisions is ultimately a safeguard of their own interest. Thus, the burden
of control of extraction is transferred to individuals in communities who know the ‘why and how’ and act based on sound information, rather than being enforced by government imposed rules and regulations.
The project emphasizes sustainable use of shared water resources, while promoting capacity development of groundwater
users. The demand-side approach to the project allows farmers to manage their water resources, understand how groundwater systems operate, and make informed choices regarding their water use. The underlying premise of APFAMGS is that
sustainable management of groundwater is feasible only if users understand its occurrence, cycle and limited availability, as
well collective decision-making, which will govern the resource. Extraction is thus practiced by individuals in communities
who know the ‘why and how’ of their practices, and base their decisions on sound, collective information, rather than being
subject to government laws and regulations.
The project does not offer any ﬁnancial incentives or subsidies. Rather, the assumption of the project is that access to scientiﬁc data and knowledge will enable farmers to make appropriate choices and decisions regarding the use of groundwater
resources.
The objective is to equip farmers with the necessary knowledge, data and skills to manage the groundwater resources available to them in a sustainable manner, mainly through controlling demand. The project also facilitates access to information
about irrigation water-saving techniques, improved agricultural practices and ways to regulate on-farm demand for water.
Unlike most other attempts at centrally based groundwater management, APFAMGS does not seek an agreement from communities to reduce their groundwater use – farmers are free to make crop planting decisions and extract groundwater as they
desire, and there is no collective agreement by communities on self-regulation of groundwater use. The project therefore relies solely on the impact of groundwater education to inﬂuence individual decisions of thousands of farmers regarding crop
selection and irrigated areas in the post-monsoon season.
The project has been successful in that the groundwater supplies have provided a sustainable source of water for the farmers. Even though it is possible, no farmer or group of farmers has depleted the groundwater supply. A number of factors have
contributed to the success of this project, two of which are the timely availability of current data on the status of groundwater availability and projected demand, enabling informed planting decisions – a key input to the farmer’s risk management
paradigm, and reductions in groundwater overdraft resulting from multiple individual risk-management decisions of farmers.
As a result, authoritative leadership is unnecessary for enforcement (GWP, 2008).
Source: APFAMGS (2008); World Bank (2010).

WWDR4

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

333

13.2 Reducing exposure to threat and
minimizing risks
If the examples in the preceding boxes illustrate various approaches used in attempting to reduce uncertainty, other tools exist that allow for the reduction
of risks. The key approach is to analyse the various
factors of risks, including the probability of certain
events or triggers, and to reduce or eliminate exposure
to such risks for water resources and for communities
who depend on them.
13.2.1 Investments in infrastructure
New, updated and expanded water resources infrastructure can reduce the risks associated with climate
change, hydrological variability and their impacts on
water resources and systems. Adding new infrastructure can potentially take advantage of new technology.
For example, while in some regions reservoirs are being removed to reduce the risks to ecosystems, including ﬁsh, the development of increased water storage
capacity, particularly to reduce water scarcity risks and
manage ﬂoods in other regions, appears inevitable in
the light of highly likely water shortages.
There are various types of infrastructure that states can
invest in to address the challenge of risk and uncertainty. One response option for reducing the variability
and uncertainties of natural stream and river ﬂows is to
construct reservoirs designed and operated to redistribute water over time and space in ways that better meet
human and environmental needs in comparison to the
natural ﬂow regime. Reservoirs are controversial. Many
are being planned and built in water scarce or energy
deﬁcient areas of the world, while in other areas they are
being removed in an effort to restore ecosystems. Dams
and reservoirs are essentially risk-avoidance tools, based
on a knowledge of current conditions and variability.
For example, the International Water Management
Institute (IWMI) predicts that climate change will have
dire consequences for feeding an ever-expanding global
population, especially in areas of Africa and Asia where
millions of farmers rely solely on rainwater for their
crops. In Asia, 66% of cropland is rainfed, while 94%
of farmland in sub-Saharan Africa relies on rain alone,
according to IWMI. These are the regions where water storage infrastructure is least developed and where
nearly 500 million people are at risk of food shortages.
IWMI suggests that the solution is to fund a diversity
of water storage projects, from small-scale rainwater

334

CHAPTER 13

tanks and larger-scale dams to systems that artiﬁcially recharge groundwater aquifers, to improve the
soil so it can hold more water. Stored water in times of
drought can lead to increased food security. ‘Just as
modern consumers diversify their ﬁnancial holdings
to reduce risk, smallholder farmers need a wide array
of ‘water accounts’ to provide a buffer against climate
change impacts’ (McCartney and Smakhtin, 2010; quotation from IWMI, 2010, p. 1).
Small-scale storage projects have delivered some positive results when planned with the participation of both
politicians and farmers. For example, small collection
basins have boosted maize yields in times of rain or
drought in Zimbabwe. In India’s Rajasthan State,
10,000 water harvesting structures that help to recharge
groundwater now irrigate 34,600 acres (14,000 ha) and
feed 70,000 people (Eichenseher, 2010). In India, where
there is expected to be a 50% gap between water demand and supply by 2030, decision-makers are starting
to fund storage projects because they recognize
the long-term economic beneﬁts of a secure supply
(IWMI, 2009).
Investing in infrastructure for future risk reduction can
also have its trade-offs and unforeseen consequences.
For instance, in the case of the Savannah River in the
United States of America, the construction of three
dams and reservoir systems just 50 years ago has negatively altered the natural ﬂow patterns that support
the wildlife, natural communities of the river, its estuary and ﬂoodpath. This is of particular concern given
that the lower Savannah River watershed supports
extremely high species diversity, including the greatest
number of native ﬁsh species (108) of any river draining into the Atlantic (Hickey and Warner, 2005).
An infrastructure approach thus has to examine all aspects of risk and functions of water. Only at that point
can water managers make decisions with the most advantageous trade-off – with the best possible picture
of uncertainty and risk.
The example of the Savannah River reveals that positive outcomes ensue when the iterative, consultative approach is used. In 2002, the US Army Corps
of Engineers (USACE) and The Nature Conservancy
(TNC) launched the Sustainable Rivers Project to restore the river (Hickey and Warner, 2005). The main
strategy was to deﬁne ﬂow regimes that restored
downstream ecosystems processes and services, while
continuing to meet other human uses of water such

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

as power generation (provisioning service), recreation
(cultural) and ﬂood control (regulatory). The project
began in April 2003 with an orientation meeting with
more than 50 leading scientists from the Georgia and
South Carolina state governments, federal agencies,
academic institutions and other non-governmental
organizations to deﬁne the process. Historical data
was used to deﬁne the seasonal water ﬂows needed to
support the freshwater, ﬂoodplain and estuary. It was
difficult to get the participants in the ﬂow recommendations workshops to suggest any quantitative ﬂow
targets. However, once reminded them that their recommendations were a ﬁrst approximation that would

be reﬁned over time through an adaptive management process, the targets were established. Working
with many scientists and agencies can be onerous and
time-consuming, but most of these constraints were
avoided by giving the most time-consuming activities
to one research team. This report became the accepted basic knowledge for other scientists in the project,
making it easier to reach consensus during the ﬂow
recommendations workshop.
Eventually a ﬂow prescription plan for executing a
series of seasonal controlled releases was designed
and tested. For ﬁve days, USACE released the ﬁrst

BOX 13.6
Mangrove restoration in Viet Nam

Viet Nam has lost over 80% of its mangroves since the 1950s. The two major causes are the use of defoliating agents during
the Vietnam War and the rapid expansion of the aquaculture industry during the early 1980s. Mangrove restoration and rehabilitation has been ongoing since 1991 as a policy response to this loss. The underlying goal of restoration and rehabilitation is
to mitigate the impact of sea level rise and coastal storms. Yet with respect to the restoration of mangrove forests, stakeholders have a diverse set of interests and diverging priorities and preferences.
Viet Nam is extremely vulnerable to climate change. Climate change scenarios from different institutions indicate vastly different trends for precipitation, with some projecting decreases and some projecting increases, thus creating climatic uncertainties. Projections also suggest that there will be an increase in frequency and intensity of tropical storms, and that sea level
will rise.
Clearly there is a high degree of uncertainty in these climate change projections. However, even in the absence of the changes suggested by these projections, the country’s agriculture and water resources are increasingly vulnerable to impacts from
saline intrusion and ﬂood inundation. Climate change could result in seawater intrusion into groundwater, which provides
valuable freshwater supplies for many coastal areas. Rapid conversion and drainage of wetlands, combined with changes in
water ﬂows connected to upstream infrastructure developments, may increase the incidence of ﬂoods and droughts. Storm
surges can also severely damage coastal infrastructure and the dykes and structures that support the rapidly developing
aquaculture industry. Tidal mixing associated with ﬂoods and storm surges leads to saline concentrations that have a widespread impact on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem goods and services, in particular native species and species with high
economic value.
In contrast to stand-alone measures such as dykes, mangrove restoration and rehabilitation has been promoted as a ‘low/no
regret measure’. It can be applied as a precautionary approach to climate change adaptation and foster ‘win–win’ situations
by addressing present multi-sectoral vulnerabilities and future risks. In northern Viet Nam the focus of mangrove restoration
and rehabilitation is disaster risk mitigation, and thus its protective function is prioritized. Most of the forests in this region are
classiﬁed as ‘protection forests’, owned and managed by the government. In the South, mangrove restoration and rehabilitation has in many cases been promoted as a development action to meet multiple objectives. ‘Planted production forests’
can be privately owned, with the owner having ‘all right to use of forestland including development of combined agricultureﬁshery-forestry model’. This regional differentiation in function or purpose is perhaps not surprising given that northern Viet
Nam lies in the typhoon belt and is thus most exposed to structural damage from storm surges.
The implementation of mangrove restoration and rehabilitation, nested within a no/low-regret action planning process, is
more likely than any single objective approach and stand-alone measures to secure a greater set of beneﬁts across stakeholder groups, even in a future characterized by uncertainty (Mangrove Action Project, 2008).

Source: APFAMGS (2008); World Bank (2010).

WWDR4

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

335

controlled ﬂood of 450 m3 per second (cms) of water from the Thurmond Dam, a sizable increase from
the existing daily release of 130 cm. Several controlled ﬂoods have been conducted from March 2004
to the present time. These controlled releases mimic
pre-existing ﬂow conditions before the dams were
built. There have been numerous ecological impacts
that have been evaluated by various projects – most

notably the ability to monitor changes. These include:
assessing impacts of controlled ﬂoods on the salinity
of the estuary, examining the possibility of regenerative beneﬁts to ﬂoodplain forest, following the movement of the shortnose sturgeon, and tracking ﬂoodplain invertebrates and ﬁsh. Such monitoring provides
great insights to stakeholders and yields greater information on possibilities of wildlife preservation.

BOX 13.7
Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment in Bayawan City, Philippines
The ability of wetlands to ﬁlter and transform nutrients and other constituents has resulted in the construction and use of
artiﬁcial wetlands to treat wastewater and acid mine drainage (Hammer, 1989, 1992; Wieder, 1989). Such a wetland was constructed in Bayawan City – the ﬁrst of its kind in the Philippines. It was designed to protect coastal waters from pollution from
domestic wastewater, protect the health of local residents through improved housing with safe sanitation and wastewater
treatment facilities, and to demonstrate the use of constructed wetland technology as a pilot for other communities in the
Philippines.
The project took place in the south-west of Negros Island, covering a total land of 70,000 ha with a population of about
113,000. The project was located in a peri-urban area of Bayawan, which has been used to resettle families that lived along
the coast in informal settlements, and had no access to safe water supply and sanitation facilities. Records from the City
Health Office showed a high incidence of morbidity and mortality arising from water-borne diseases in these informal
settlements.
Both the village and the constructed wetland are close to the seashore and during the rainy season groundwater rises to
ground level. The project involved creating cells built of concrete and concrete blocks with a drainage system positioned at
the bottom of each cell. These cells were covered by a separation layer and then a ﬁlter layer. The plants used in the ﬁlter are
a species of locally available reed called ‘tambok’ (Phragmites karka). The reeds also act as an odour barrier during the ﬁlling
process.
The wastewater distribution system is composed of four concrete header tanks and a system of perforated high-density polythene (HDPE) pipes. The system is manually operated comprising the switching on and off of the pump and the emptying of
the header tanks into the distribution system. The header tanks are ﬁlled two to three times a day. Since coming into operation, the system has been continuously improved. The header tanks were covered to minimize odour during the ﬁlling process, and the collection sumps between the two wetland cells and after the second cell were covered to reduce algae growth.
In addition, a large storage tank was built for the treated wastewater.
The local water service provider regularly analyses the inﬂuent and effluent of the constructed wetland. This analysis includes
TDS, pH, BOD, ammonia, nitrate and phosphate, as well as the microbiological parameters E. coli). The analysis of the treated
wastewater showed very good pollutant removal efficiency (97% removal of BOD).
The treated wastewater was initially used in construction, for concrete production, which reduced construction costs. It is
now also used for an organic cut ﬂower and vegetable farming project introduced in the region. Only a basic microbiological analysis on the effluent from the constructed wetlands was conducted. However, since November 2008, more frequent
and accurate monitoring has been conducted to analyse for faecal coliforms. The effluent has almost ideal concentrations of
nitrate and phosphate to be used for ‘fertigation’ (fertilizer plus irrigation) for the vegetable and cut ﬂower project. The more
advanced analysis of total coliform, however, showed that the pathogen concentrations remain too high for unrestricted irrigation, but demonstrated that the total coliforms concentration in the treated effluent is still lower than in virtually all the
rivers of Negros Oriental (approximately 10,000 – < 100,000 CFU per 100 mL in rivers). The investment in this constructed
wetland infrastructure consequently provides water resources for various economic activities, which would otherwise be
compromised, thereby reducing uncertainty (Lipkow and von Münch, 2009).

Source: APFAMGS (2008); World Bank (2010).

336

CHAPTER 13

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

13.2.2 Environmental engineering
The natural environment can also be considered as
‘infrastructure’, as it supplies many of the same services as man-made infrastructure (see Section 8.3).
Wetlands, for example, can reduce peak ﬂood ﬂows
and assimilate many organic wastes in the same manner as wastewater treatment plants. Humans often
ignore ecosystem water needs in allocating water resources, thereby risking the sustainability of life-supporting ecosystem services. Increased research and

BOX 13.8
Community-based watershed management in India
and Brazil
Examples of community-based watershed management
systems in countries such as India and Brazil provide
evidence for the value of involving women’s groups in
maintaining and protecting their water sources. In semiarid areas of Gujarat, India, the Self Employed Women’s
Association (SEWA) created its Women, Water and Work
campaign in 1995 to sustain and protect traditional water
sources through water harvesting, watershed management, and repair and maintenance of pipelines and equipment. SEWA’s collective action approach for women combines the presence of a strong grassroots institution and
the establishment of a technical cadre of women. SEWA’s
membership has increased greatly due to the success of
the water campaign. Women have beneﬁted in terms of
increased income, reduced drudgery, improvements in
the livelihoods of their families, reduced migration of both
women and men, and increased participation in SEWA’s
other programmes. SEWA is a powerful non-governmental organization (NGO) with the capacity to negotiate in
the water management area, previously occupied by men
only (Panda, 2007).
In the community of São João D’Aliança in central Brazil,
the local Union of Rural Workers in collaboration with
University of Brasília (UnB) designed a community water
project to stop pollution of the das Brancas River and
to rehabilitate original vegetation along the riverbanks.
In the women-led initiative, called the ‘Water Women’
project, each group of women adapted environmentally
friendly practices to their daily activities. Community education taught local people not to dump their sewage into
the river, and how to plant native species of trees along
the riverbanks. As a result, there is a visible absence of
waste in the river, a considerable growth of new vegetation of native species on the riverbanks and decreased
soil erosion. Women’s political participation was strengthened, and public perceptions regarding their leadership
capabilities were changed (Souza, 2006).

WWDR4

monitoring regarding ecosystem water requirements
will help planners and managers use the natural environment as a component of water resources infrastructure. Infrastructure planning, particularly investing in ecosystems, can also take a no-regrets approach
by anticipating greater variability, and planning for
sustainability.
Although the uncertainties around natural disasters
may be addressed by investing in physical infrastructures, examples exist where strengthening natural ecosystems can mitigate some of the challenges posed
by natural variability. The following responses to ﬂood
damage reduction illustrate this and demonstrate that
strengthened ecosystems can create greater support
mechanisms in the face of weather-induced uncertainties and risk. Natural ecosystems are also options for
ﬂood damage reduction, as discussed in Section 8.3.
Stakeholders other than the states can carry out investments in the environment. As the following example of India and Brazil demonstrates, communitybased management can lead to successful investment
in and management of environment resources:
13.2.3 Mondi Wetlands Programme, South Africa
Water is South Africa’s scarcest natural resource, and
55% of South Africa’s wetlands to date have been lost
due to irresponsible agriculture and forestry, urban
development, pollution, dam-building, erosion and ﬁre.
Moreover, the majority of South Africans do not have
access to drinking water and therefore rely on streams,
rivers, marshes and other types of wetlands to supply them with enough water to satisfy their needs. If
the current supply and demand rates continue, South
Africa’s water resources will be fully utilised by 2025
(MWP, n.d.).
Based in Centurion (Gauteng) and Howick (KwaZuluNatal) in South Africa, the Mondi Wetlands Programme
(MWP) is a joint programme of South Africa’s two
largest NGO conservation organizations, WWF-South
Africa and the Wildlife and Environment Society of
South Africa (WESSA), together with two corporate
sponsors, the Mazda Wildlife Fund and Mondi Ltd.
Established in 1991, the MWP is the most successful
non-governmental wetland conservation programme
in South Africa, and is recognized by its partner organizations as pioneering wetland conservation outside
reserves in South Africa.

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

337

“In an environment of
uncertainty and risk,
policy-makers may
be inclined to make
decisions that offer
the highest utility,
which in uncertain
circumstances, may be
the status quo.”
In January 2001, the Mondi Wetlands Project launched
a communal wetlands programme to help manage
and rehabilitate communally used wetlands. The main
objective of the programme has been to promote and
facilitate the effective participatory management and
sustainable use of wetlands in communal areas. The
objective was supported by the following working activities: develop partnerships with government extension services and service providers, and build their
capacity in wetland management; identify community-based wetland management problems and issues;
develop an understanding of community dynamics
and perceptions of wetlands; catalyse, build and support institutions that can help develop the capacity of
communities to use their wetlands sustainably; and
facilitate rehabilitation of degraded wetlands where
feasible.
By including the participation of various stakeholders,
including government departments, tribal authorities and NGOs, the programme has had many tangible successes. For example, the Mondi Wetlands
Programme has initiated the rehabilitation of degraded wetlands in South Africa, on a multi-million Rand
scale; assessed the condition of over 30,300 ha of
wetlands and initiated rehabilitation in many of these;
started wetland conservation activities in 21 core areas around South African outside declared reserves;
trained more than 1,050 people from 60 organizations in wetland assessment and functioning; and

338

CHAPTER 13

promoted education regarding wetlands. Community
buy-in and stakeholder participation is ensured by
lengthy processes: the manager of the communal
wetland programme is tasked with creating wetland awareness of wetland issues in rural tribal areas,
building capacity and competence of government
extension officers, lobbying decision-makers of various institutions to address wetlands conservation,
facilitating the establishment of wetland governance
structures, and promoting the implementation of better wetland management practices (Rosenberg and
Taylor, 2005).
Wetlands play a crucial role in managing water. They
perform ‘water puriﬁcation, storage, recharging of underground aquifers and streamﬂow regulation. They
are of further national importance for their control
of erosion, ﬂood attenuation and biodiversity value.
Presently, wetlands are one of the most threatened
and under-managed habitat types in South Africa and
the world today’ (WWF South Africa, n.d.). However, it
can be difficult to invest in wetland protection, particularly for non-state actors. Wetlands are often perceived
as having little or no value compared to the other uses
of land and waters (Schuijt, 2002). Part of the dilemma is that wetlands do not provide immediate and visible beneﬁts to risk reduction. However, investments
in wetlands provide safeguards against future risk and
uncertainty. Africa, one of the two regions facing serious water shortages (UNEP, 2002), needs wetlands for
the long-term health, safety and welfare of its many
communities (Schuijt, 2002).
However, most African wetlands are under threat.
Stakeholders can be a signiﬁcant part of the problem.
The fact is that many stakeholders of wetlands hold
divergent interests. As a result, claims are laid against
wetlands that do not coincide, and wetland resources
are often turned over for exploitation (Schuijt, 2002).
This is why the Mondi Wetlands Programme is such a
notable success: it has managed to solicit stakeholder support across various social levels. In the face of
future risk and uncertainty, this investment in wetlands supports the life cycles of wildlife that depend
on it, provides natural ﬁltration of water, secures water
sources and moderates the effects of future droughts,
ﬂoods, climate change and erosion.
Stakeholder participation, although a useful approach
to manage risk and uncertainty, can also pose some
challenges. There is always a risk that stakeholders

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

will be unwilling or unable to participate in water
management processes. Although the latter problem
can be resolved through effective capacity-building,
this requires additional resources. The willingness of
stakeholder participation is more difficult to achieve,
and can involve slower processes aimed at changing
attitudes and values, and promoting education.

identiﬁed as an area where water usage can be improved. The aim behind this intervention is to create
water-savings, which can then underpin environmental sustainability. The Plan also sets up a buy-back
process to address the issue of over-allocation of water, which has been identiﬁed as a cause for concern
and a contributing factor to future water shortages.

13.3 Living with risks and uncertainties:
Trade-offs in water decision-making

There are, however, some unforeseen consequences
to this plan. Despite investing in engineered and technological ﬁxes, involving engineers at a greater level
in managing water resources than farmers may have
other implications. Engineering-based solutions may
interfere with farm level decision-making, which may
perhaps be less efficient than educative practices
developed with farmers over the long run. Moreover,
despite the affordability of the buyback system as
a mechanism to address water allocation, the withdrawal of water from some irrigation uses and the
exit of irrigators will leave those remaining in the industry with an unreasonable ﬁnancial burden due to
the less-intense use of irrigation infrastructure (Crase,
2008).

To meet human and environmental needs for water, water managers have always dealt with the risks
and uncertainties arising in part from natural variability. But new issues have emerged, particularly
due to climate and land use changes and the oftenconﬂicting pressures from other external drivers. This
introduces additional uncertainties and associated
risks, making it difficult to evaluate costs and the impacts that policy changes can have. Future actions
can no longer be based exclusively on past conditions, particularly considering emerging global-scale
phenomena such as climate change, or rapid migration ﬂows. The increasing speed with which some of
water’s drivers are changing such as consumption,
demographics and technology, and possible discontinuities in some of them, are exacerbating unpredictability. Decision-makers may address the uncertainties that climate change imposes in a myriad of ways;
one of these ways is to convert the uncertainty into a
risk scenario, in other words, to assume that risk exists and factor the probability into the management
or policy approach. This, however, requires an accurate understanding of the trade-offs involved in each
policy option.
Australia, as shown below, has employed the precautionary approach in the face of climate change.
However, as the example displays, governments may
opt for precautionary measures to avoid future risks,
but policy decisions can have unforeseen outcomes,
which may in fact create new uncertainties.
The Australian government developed the National
Plan for Water Security to address public concerns
over water resources, particularly relative to increasing droughts and fears over future shortages. The
10-point plan aims to spend US$10 billion over ten
years on water resources. In efforts to exercise precautionary measures, the largest portion of funding,
US$6 billion, is to be spent on engineering solutions
to enhance irrigated agriculture, which has been

WWDR4

Another unforeseen consequence is that the focus on
irrigation water has led to lapses in the legislation regarding groundwater. Legislative policies have restricted access to surface water with the result that groundwater demand is increasing. This leaves policy-makers
playing catch up to rein in excessive surface level
extraction, while monitoring and controlling groundwater use (Crase, 2008). Groundwater use could thus
increase the creation of new water uncertainties and
challenges.
This example is an illustration of a willing government
trade-off to reduce future water uncertainty and risk.
However, there is no certainty of policy outcome, as
is demonstrated by the unforeseen consequences
highlighted above. In an environment of uncertainty
and risk, policy-makers may be inclined to make decisions that offer the highest utility, which in uncertain circumstances, may be the status quo. As some
research demonstrates, decision-makers exhibit a
strong status-quo bias in the face of uncertainty – a
bias that becomes stronger when faced with more
options (Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988). Faced
with the increasing uncertainties regarding water,
business-as-usual water management often indicates
a de facto trade-off between the satisfaction of immediate needs and longer-term solutions that would

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

339

involve the loss of ﬁnancial or political capital in the
short term.
Limited water availability, growing and evolving demands, and competition among increasingly scarce
ﬁnancial and physical resources create difficult tradeoffs for decision-makers, who must plan effectively
under considerable risk and uncertainty. Countries can
take precautionary or status quo approaches towards
addressing risk and uncertainty, and these reﬂect the
trade-offs they are willing to make to address risk and
uncertainty. Policy changes only occur when the costs
of maintaining the status quo exceed the transaction costs of implementing change (Saleth and Dinar,
2004). In this vein, countries can view their transaction costs in different ways: some may see the deterioration of water and environmental resources as negative externalities not costly enough for current policy
change, while others may view future water challenges as bearing higher costs which require current policy
change for future beneﬁt.

However, not all trade-offs need be negative. There
are indeed examples of win–win situations where efforts to address risks and uncertainties in and outside
the water realm have led to multiple multi-sectoral
beneﬁts, and to beneﬁts for water in the long-term.
The example below illustrates how a private sector
ﬁrm, Dow Chemicals, faced with the rising costs of
water as an industrial input, pollution control costs
and corporate social responsibility issues, managed its
own risks in a manner that was beneﬁcial to all water
users.
While this chapter has focused on the management of
risks and uncertainties from within the water domain,
the following chapter highlights examples of how efforts to manage other growing risks and uncertainties
can also result in positive or negative impacts on water. As the web of risks and uncertainties grows more
complex and as changes accelerate, it will become important to derive management approaches that help
deliver multiple beneﬁts.

BOX 13.9
Ensuring reliable access to water for industrial purposes while providing a key pollution control service

Dow is a company specialized in innovative chemical, plastic and agricultural products and services. Its Terneuzen manufacturing facilities in the Netherlands require a signiﬁcant amount of freshwater. However, the local water is brackish, requiring
freshwater to be transported a distance of ~100 km. Because the freshwater is utilized by both industry and municipalities,
Dow needs to reduce potentially major business risks of increased scarcity and increased costs of freshwater.
The objective of the Terneuze project is to provide a long-term, cost-effective, reliable supply of water for the industrial site.
Development of the ‘household wastewater utilization’ project began in early 2005 with implementation occurring in early
2007. Together with regional partners, the utility provider Evides and the regional Water Board, a robust integrated water
management system was created. Thanks to this scheme, the Terneuzen site is now taking the local community’s treated
wastewater, which was previously discharged directly into the river, and reusing it twice – ﬁrstly for steam production in manufacturing plants and then again in cooling towers – before releasing it into the atmosphere as vapour.
Since 2007, the site accepts more than 9.9 million litres of municipal household wastewater every day. Dow has been able to
cut its freshwater use in half by using the wastewater from the municipality and also through recycling efforts. By managing
water in this manner, Dow has also reduced the amount of brackish water required.
Along with signiﬁcant reductions in the amount of freshwater used by the site, an additional major environmental beneﬁt lies
in the fact that the household wastewater can be puriﬁed under lower pressure than the salt water that was used in the past.
This translates into 65% less energy and 500 tons fewer chemicals to be used per year, and consequently 5,000 tons less CO2
is discharged annually. As an additional outcome, every litre of water is used three times, instead of once.
The result is a reliable long-term water supply for the site which allows the manufacturing facilities to be cost effective. A key
aspect of this project is the partnership between Dow, the water company Evides and the regional Water Board. This partnership allows water to be supplied for the same prices as Dow had paid in the past.

Source: Reproduced from WBCSD (2010).

340

CHAPTER 13

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
APFAMGS (Andhra Pradesh Farmer Managed Groundwater
Systems Project). 2008. Project Completion Report
supported by FAO in cooperation with Bharati Integrated
Rural Development Society (BIRDS). Andhra Pradesh,
APFAMGS.
Baroang, K. M., Hellmuth, M. and Block, P. 2010. Identifying
Uncertainty and Deﬁning Risk in the Context of the
WWDR4. Issues Workshop Discussion Paper prepared for
the World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP). New
York, Earth Institute, Columbia University, International
Research Institute for Climate and Society.
Butler, D. and Memon, F. A. 2006. Water Demand
Management. London, IWA Publishing.
Cai, X. and Wang, D. 2006. Calibrating holistic water
resources-economic models. Journal of Water Resources
Planning and Management, Vol. 132, No. 6, pp. 414–23.
Crase, L. (ed.) 2008. Water Policy in Australia: The Impact of
Change and Uncertainty. Washington DC, Resources for
the Future. http://admin.cita-aragon.es/pub/documentos/
documentos_CRASE_2-5_b8e6f4de.pdf
Draper, A. J., Jenkins, M. W., Kirby, K. W., Lund, J. R. and
Howitt, R. E. 2003. Economic-engineering optimization for
California water management. Journal of Water Resources
Planning and Management, Vol. 129, No. 3, pp. 155–64.
DWA (Department of Water Affairs). 1997. South Africa’s
White Paper on Water Policy. Section B (New National
Water Policy), sub-section 5.2.2 (Environmental
Requirements). Pretoria, Government of South Africa.
EA (UK Environment Agency) 2011. National Infrastructure
Plan – A Vision for Water. London, EA. http://publications.
environment-agency.gov.uk/PDF/GEHO0111BTJC-E-E.pdf
Eichenseher, T. 2010. How to Stem a Global Food Crisis?
Store More Water. National Geographic. 7 September.
Gill, S., Handley, J. F., Ennos, A. R. and Pauleit, S. 2007.
Adapting cities for climate change: the role of the green
infrastructure. Built Environment, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 115–33.
Grossi, P. and TeHennepe, C. 2008. Catastrophe modelling
fundamentals. The Review. A Guide to Catastrophic
Modelling. London, Informa, pp. 6–9.
GWP (Global Water Partnership) Integrated Water Resources
Management Toolbox. 2008. India: Andhra Pradesh Farmer
Managed Groundwater System; Demand Side Groundwater
Management. Stockholm, GWP. http://www.gwptoolbox.
org/index.php?option=com_case&id=277
Hammer, D. A. 1989. Constructed Wetlands for Wastewater
Treatment: Municipal, Industrial, and Agricultural. Fla., Lewis
Publishers.
Hickey, J. and Warner, A. 2005. Sustainable Rivers Project
– A Corps and Conservancy Partnership: River project
brings together Corps, The Nature Conservancy. The Corps
Environment, April.

WWDR4

IWMI (International Water Management Institute). 2009.
Flexible water storage options and adaptation to climate
change. Water Policy Brief, 31. Colombo, IWMI.
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/Water_Policy_
Briefs/PDF/WPB31.pdf
––––. 2010. In a changing climate, erratic rainfall poses
growing threat to rural poor, new report says. R&D by
EurekAlert. Battaramulla, Sri Lanka, IWMI.
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/News_Room/pdf/RDMAG-In_a_
changing_climate_erratic_rainfall_poses_growing_threat_
to_rural_poor.pdf
Jakeman, A. J. and Letcher, R. A. 2003. Integrated
assessment and modelling: features, principles and
examples for catchment management. Environmental
Modeling Software, Vol. 18.
Kato, S. and Ahern, J. 2008. Learning by doing: adaptive
planning as a strategy to address uncertainty in planning
and management. Journal of Environmental Planning and
Management, Vol. 51, No. 4, pp. 543–59.
Kumar, M. D., Sivamohan, M. V. K., Niranjan, V. and Bassi, N.
2011. Groundwater Management in Andhra Pradesh: Time
to Address Real Issues. Hyderabad, India, Institute for
Resource Analysis and Policy.
Kwadijk, J. C. J., Haasnoot, M., Mulder, P. M., Hoogvliet, M. M.
C., Jeuken, A. B. M., van der Krogt, R. A. A., van Oostrom, N.
G. C., Schelfhout, H. A., van Velzen, E. H., van Waveren, H.
and de Wit, M. J. M. 2010. Using adaptation tipping points
to prepare for climate change and sea level rise: A case
study in the Netherlands. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Climate Change, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 729–40.
Lipkow, U. and von Münch, E. 2009. Constructed Wetland
for a Peri-urban Housing Area Bayawan City, Philippines –
Case Study of Sustainable Sanitation Projects. Sustainable
Sanitation Alliance (SuSanA). http://www.susana.org/docs_
ccbk/susana_download/2-51-en-susana-cs-philippinesbayawan-constr-wetlands-2009.pdf
Lockwood, M., Worboys, G. and Kothari, A. 2006. Managing
Protected Areas: A Global Guide. London, Earthscan.
Mangrove Action Project. 2008. Vietnam’s Mangrove
Restoration Program. Port Angeles, Wash., US, Mangrove
Action Plan. http://mangroveactionproject.org/news/
current_headlines/vietnams-mangrove-restoration-program
Mayer, A. and Muñoz-Hernandez, A. 2009. Integrated water
resources models: An assessment of a multidisciplinary
tool for sustainable water resources management
strategies. Geography Compass, doi:10.1111/j.1749
8198.2009.00239.x
McCartney, M. and Smakhtin, V. 2010. Water Storage in an Era
of Climate Change: Addressing the Challenge of Increasing
Rainfall Variability. Blue Paper. Battaramulla, Sri Lanka,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Moore, A. L. and McCarthy, M. A. 2010. On valuing
information in adaptive-management models.
Conservation Biology, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 984–93.
MWP (Mondi Wetlands Programme). N.d. Website. Irene,
Pretoria, South Africa, MWP. http://www.wetland.org.za/

RESPONSES TO RISK AND UNCERTAINTY FROM A WATER MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE

341

New York City. 2009. NYC Green Infrastructure Plan – A
Sustainable Strategy for Clean Waterways. New York, City
of New York.
Panda, S. M. 2007. Women’s Collective Action and
Sustainable Water Management: Case of SEWA’s Water
Campaign in Gujarat, India. CAPRi Working Paper No.
61. Washington DC, International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI).
PEDDR (Partnership for Environment and Disaster Risk
Reduction). 2010. Demonstrating the Role of Ecosystemsbased Management for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Background Paper prepared for the ISDR Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2011.
Geneva, UNISDR.
Reij, C., Tappan, G. and Smale, M. 2010. Resilience to Drought
through Agro-ecological Restoration of Drylands, Burkina
Faso and Niger. Case study prepared for the PEDRR
Background Paper to the 2011 Global Assessment Report
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
The Review. 2008. A Guide to Catastrophic Modelling. London,
Informa. http://www.rms.com/Publications/RMS%20
Guide%202008.pdf
Rosenberg, E. and Taylor, J. 2005. Mondi Wetlands Project
Evaluation. Final Report. Irene, Pretoria, South Africa,
Mondi Wetlands Project (MWP).
Saleth, R. M. and Dinar, A. 2004. The Institutional Economics
of Water: A Cross Country Analysis of Institutions and
Performance, Washington DC, The World Bank.
Samuelson, W. and Zeckhauser, R. 1988. Status quo bias in
decision-making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 1, pp.
7–59.
Schuijt, K. 2002. Land and Water Use of Wetlands in Africa:
Economic Values of African Wetlands. Laxenburg, Austria,
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis.
http://www.iiasa.ac.at/Admin/PUB/Documents/IR-02-063.
pdf
Shah, H. 2008. Learning lessons from the unexpected. The
Review. A Guide to Catastrophic Modelling. London,
Informa, p. 5.
Shaw, W. D. and Woodward, R. T. 2010. Water management,
risk and uncertainty: things we wish we knew in the 21st
Century. Western Economic Forum, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 7–21.
http://agecon2.tamu.edu/people/faculty/shaw-douglass/
wef.pdf

342

CHAPTER 13

Souza, S. M. 2006. Gender, Water And Sanitation: Case
Studies on Best Practices (Advance Version). New York,
United Nations. http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/sdissues/
water/casestudies_bestpractices.pdf
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2002.
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
Action Plan for the Environment Initiative. Midrand, South
Africa, NEPAD. http://www.unep.org/roa/Amcen/docs/
publications/ActionNepad.pdf
UNISDR (United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Risk Reduction). 2011. Global Assessment Report on
Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
WBCSD (World Business Council on Sustainable
Development). 2010. The Dow Chemical Company –
Utilizing household wastewater in the large-scale. Geneva,
WBCSD. http://www.wbcsd.org/Plugins/DocSearch/
details.asp?DocTypeId=24&ObjectId=MzkxMDA&URLBack
=%2Ftemplates%2FTemplateWBCSD5%2Flayout%2Easp%3
Ftype%3Dp%26MenuId%3DODY%26doOpen%3D1%26Click
Menu%3DRightMenu
Wieder, R. K. 1989. A survey of constructed wetlands for acid
coal mine drainage treatment in the eastern United States.
Wetlands, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 299–315.
World Bank. 2010. Deep wells and prudence: towards
pragmatic action for addressing groundwater
overexploitation in India. A Groundswell of Change:
Potential of Community Groundwater Management in India.
Washington DC, International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank, pp. 59–77.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2008. Water for
Life: Lessons for Climate Change Adaptation from Better
Management of Rivers for People and Nature. Gland,
Switzerland, WWF.
WWF South Africa. n.d. Mondi Wetlands Programme.
Website. Cape Town, South Africa, WWF Africa.
http://www.wwf.org.za/what_we_do/freshwater/
mondi_wetlands/
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2001. Technical
reports. Hydrology and Water Resources, No. 73. Geneva,
WMO. http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/hwrp/documents/
TD73.pdf

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

CHAPTER 14
Responses to risks and uncertainties
from out of the water box

—
Authors Erum Hassan and Joana Talafré
Contributors Daniel P. Loucks and William J. Cosgrove

WWDR4
©
Shutterstock/Sihasakprachum

RESPONSES
TRANSFORMING
INVESTMENT
TO RISK AND
AND
WATER
UNCERTAINTY
FINANCING
MANAGEMENT
INFROM
WATER
A
INSTITUTIONS
WATER
FOR A MORE
MANAGEMENT
TO
SUSTAINABLE
DEAL WITH
PERSPECTIVE
CHANGE
FUTURE

343

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
As seen in the previous chapter, water managers use a number of mechanisms to help reduce
the risks and uncertainties they face. Water policy responses can take various forms, from
risk avoidance to anticipatory adaptive management. However, in a world where risk and
uncertainties prevail in every domain of human life, responses to water challenges must come
primarily as part of attempts to address (or in some cases, failure to address) other sectoral
risks and uncertainties.
As noted in WWDR3, many of the problems faced within the water sector are caused by
decisions made in other sectors, while many of the solutions to water problems can also be
found within these sectors. Most decisions, within or outside the water world, involve some
form of risk management. Anticipation of future beneﬁts or threats are an integral part of
sectoral decisions and business decisions alike. These decisions do not always take water into
consideration, but often have an impact on water – and an impact on the types of decisions
and reactions that water managers have to choose from.
This chapter seeks to demonstrate how the management of risks and uncertainties outside of
the ‘water box’ can also have beneﬁts for water management.

14.1 Reducing poverty and greening growth
and economies
Water is so close to the heart of social and economic
development that it is difficult to address one without
addressing the other. Yet short-term plans for poverty reduction and economic development are often undertaken without a long-term analysis of potential water tradeoffs, creating unsustainable development pathways.

BOX 14.1
Cuba uses organic agriculture for sustainable growth

The Cuban government responded to a food crisis in
September 1993 by eliminating the majority of state farms
and turning them into basic units of cooperative production. Much of the 80% of all farmland that was once held
by the state was turned over to the workers and re-established as worker-owned enterprises. Although peasants
did not own the land, they were allowed to rent the land
indeﬁnitely and free of charge as long as they continued
to meet production quotas for their key crops.
Food crops produced in excess of these quotas could be
freely sold at farmers markets, thereby providing a price
incentive for farmers to effectively use new organic technologies such as biofertilizers, earthworms, compost and
the integration of grazing animals. Farmers also revived
traditional techniques such as intercropping and manuring
in order to increase production yields.
Public policies also supported urban organic agriculture
through the Programa Nacional de Agricultura Urbana
(National Programme of Urban Agriculture) in 1994, which
was designed to encourage urban farmers to produce
diversiﬁed, healthy and fresh products. Havanans transformed their vacant lots and backyards into small farms
and grazing areas for animals. This resulted in 350,000
new well-paying jobs (out of a total workforce of 5 million), 4 million tonnes of fruits and vegetables produced
annually in Havana (up tenfold in a decade) and a city of
2.2 million agriculturally self-sufficient inhabitants.
While ensuring national food security under a trade embargo, Cuba’s transition to organic agriculture has also
had a positive impact on people’s livelihoods by guaranteeing a steady income for a signiﬁcant proportion of the
population. Moreover, the lack of pesticides for agricultural production is likely to have a positive long-term impact
on Cubans’ well-being since such chemicals are often associated with various negative health implications such as
certain forms of cancer.

Source: Reproduced from UNEP (2011); see also Alvarez et al.
(2010).

WWDR4

Beyond the provision of water for basic human needs,
such as food, drinking and hygiene, many development
efforts have an impact on water risks and uncertainties. In most cases, more development means more
water use, and more water pollution arises from higher
levels of economic growth. For example, intensiﬁcation
of agricultural production is continuously highlighted as
the primary engine for growth and poverty reduction in
developing and emerging countries alike. While this is
true, it has an impact on the availability of water for other uses. Choosing diverse economic growth pathways
could therefore help to address risks and uncertainties
related to water availability; however, very few countries
have the option to do so because the trade-offs and political costs are so high and immediately felt.
Box 14.1 illustrates how one country, Cuba, has elected
to maintain agriculture as an engine of poverty reduction, but has adopted policies to promote organic
methods and intensify crop production per hectare,
this reducing water pollution and creating improved
water use efficiency, with a lesser impact on scarce
water resources, thereby reducing risks of future water
crises and ensuring a sustainable basis for economic
development.
In some cases, green growth entails turning a development challenge – for example, lack of access to chemical fertilizer – into a sustainable development opportunity. Following this model, existing water scarcity could
provide a basis for technological innovation to help
countries leapfrog towards greener economies, while
avoiding the common risks faced by other countries.
In countries where expensive water-based sanitation
systems are out of reach, especially in rural areas, for
example, the dissemination of dry toilets or composting toilets can be an effective alternative, ensuring the
provision of basic sanitation services without imposing an additional demand or risk on water. Countries
equipped with water efficient or dry devices thereby
avoid a series of risks related to water, whether disease-related, scarcity-related or ﬁnancial in nature.

14.2 Responding to climate change:
Adaptation and mitigation
Climate change represents one of the greatest uncertainties currently facing human society. At the global level, there may be a high degree of likelihood for
certain types of impact such as temperature increases
and sea level rise; however, impacts at the local level
are far less predictable.

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

345

Efforts are, however, underway to develop adaptation
pathways referred to as ‘no-regrets’ approaches. This
means that they will provide beneﬁts – developmental or environmental – regardless of the realization of
a given climate scenario. In the absence of certainty
regarding local impacts, it is important to plan development in a way that allows for a ﬂexible response to
various climate scenarios.
There are also various efforts ongoing throughout the
world to anticipate and respond to the impacts of climate change on water, particularly since climate impacts are likely to be felt mostly by increasing uncertainties regarding water availability: changes in rainfall
patterns, droughts and so on. As seen in the previous chapter, adaptive management provides a useful
framework through which to make various decisions,

and with the help of increasingly precise models and
data, can help to somewhat reduce uncertainties.
Certain efforts to plan for climate change also provide solutions to water risks and uncertainties without speciﬁcally intending to do so. In many countries
already suffering from low agricultural yields, for example, efforts to promote no-regrets climate adaptation include measures that combine diversiﬁcation out
of agriculture, sustainable technologies for achieving
higher yields per inputs, and technology transfer for
the promotion of more sustainable input use (such as
land, water, fertilizers, labour). This can have multiple
beneﬁcial impacts on mitigating water risks and uncertainties, since it provides the means of producing more
food, using theoretically less water. In a context where
water is likely to become more scarce, investment in

BOX 14.2
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) with water co-beneﬁts

The UN-REDD Programme is the United Nations Collaborative initiative on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD) in developing countries. The programme takes as its basis the statement of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) that the forestry sector, mainly through deforestation, accounts for about 17% of global greenhouse emissions, making it the second-largest source of emissions after the energy sector. The basic assumption is that
‘reduced deforestation and forest degradation can play a signiﬁcant role in climate change mitigation and adaptation, yield
signiﬁcant sustainable development beneﬁts, and may generate a new ﬁnancing stream for sustainable forest management in
developing countries. If cost-efficient carbon beneﬁts can be achieved through REDD, increases in atmospheric CO2 concentrations could be slowed, effectively buying much needed time for countries to move to lower emissions technologies.’ (FAO/
UNDP/UNEP, 2008b, p. 1)
It is recognized that properly managed forests provide a number of non-carbon services. They conserve biodiversity, enhance ‘soil and water conditions, help ensure sustained supplies of timber and non-timber forest products and help sustain
or improve livelihoods and food security for local communities’ (FAO/UNDP/UNEP, 2008a). However, there may be trade-offs
between forests and water, since site-speciﬁc land uses will affect water services differently. For example, forests can sometimes reduce annual water ﬂows, effectively creating a new water risk; however, they can also play a role in reducing sedimentation – in this case reducing risks to a hydropower plant or controlling ﬂood risks. Careful site-speciﬁc identiﬁcation of
the water risks and co-beneﬁts expected from a REDD initiative, as well as appropriate ranking of various co-beneﬁts, could
prove useful tools in devising appropriate REDD programmes to help mitigate climate change as well as water risks
and uncertainties.
Ecuador provides an example of such environmental co-beneﬁts through implementation of its REDD strategy, via the Socio
Bosque Programme (an incentive-based policy to tackle deforestation). Throughout the Programme, forest landowners and
indigenous communities voluntarily commit to conserving their native forests for a period of 20 years. In exchange, they
receive a yearly economic incentive. Since September 2008, Socio Bosque has signed conservation agreements that cover
more than 400,000 ha, beneﬁting more than 40,000 people. The speciﬁc identiﬁcation, ranking and monitoring of co-beneﬁts, both social and environmental (including expected water beneﬁts), occurs through the establishment of a system of
safeguards, integrated within the monitoring structure of the REDD programme. This helps to ensure that future risks posed
by climate change to water provision, quantity or quality, will be reduced, generating additional adaptive beneﬁts for targeted communities.

Source: World Bank (2011).

346

CHAPTER 14

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

agricultural development for climate adaptation can
also provide a response to water uncertainties.
An example of efforts creating mutually supporting
beneﬁts is the interface between forest management
and water resources management (Box 14.2).

14.3 Business decisions to reduce risk and
uncertainties
Most business decisions are based on an approach to
risks and uncertainties. Decisions on investments and
modes of production make presumptions about the

future. Many decisions that are uniquely motivated
by the ﬁnancial bottom line can also provide effective
means of reducing risks and uncertainties related to
water.
These can also be encouraged by government policies
such as taxation rates, or ﬁscal incentives for attracting
investment and business in a given location, while legal frameworks also go a long way to reducing uncertainties by providing boundaries and deﬁning incentives for the investment context. It is not rare to see tax
beneﬁts offered to companies in exchange for the job

BOX 14.3
Restoring water provision in a dry area: Italcementi
The Sitapuram limestone mine is a captive mechanized open-cast mine operated by Zuari Cement Ltd (part of the Italian
Italcementi Group). It is located at Dondapadu, in Nalgonda District, in south-eastern India. The area sustains agriculture while
two perennial streams ﬂow through the existing mining lease area and eventually into Dondapadu Village. The area has a tropical climate with an average rainfall of 64 cm, and a maximum humidity of 82%. The temperature ranges from 22 to 50ºC.
The company’s objective was to reach the base rock (sandstone) after removing limestone, and convert the excavated area
into a lake (75–80% of the mining area) using a geo-hydraulic model for the groundwater balance, then develop a recreation
site around it. The company also opted to develop a green belt around the lake to maintain the soil and help protect the ﬂora
and fauna.
The conversion of the excavated area into a lake included the creation of small ponds and larger water bodies, in addition
to regular assessment of water quality and the water table. Catchment drains or garland drains were constructed and connected to pits to arrest silt and sediment ﬂowing out of the mining area. This helped to reduce uncertainty by creating water
reserves and decreased the potential pollution from the mining activities.
The quarry has been operational since 1986, and an adjacent green belt was developed in 2000. Bushes were planted on the
slope of the pit to retain soil and protect the pit’s walls from collapsing. The developed green belt along the boundary of the
mining lease area acted as a barrier, protecting the surrounding area from the dust and noise created by mining activities. In
2007, 300 Ganuga plants were planted near the factory’s residential complex. The topsoil removed from the ﬁrst bench of the
mines was used to make a bed above the exposed earth of the land, before plantation. Jatropha plants (for bio-diesel) are
being grown on 20 acres in and around the mining lease areas. PVC pipelines were laid to provide a permanent water source
to the trees from the quarry bench.
The results have been as follows:
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ.!0%+*ƫ+"ƫƫ(.#!ƫ+ 5ƫ+"ƫ30!.Čƫ3$%$ƫ$/ƫ00.0! ƫ)*5ƫ%. /ƫ".+)ƫ+0$!.ƫ.!/Čƫ%*(1 %*#ƫ 1'/Čƫ.*!/ƫ* ƫ$+.*bills, and sometimes kingﬁshers if ﬁsh have spawned in water reservoirs. This adds to the preservation of the ecological
environment. The reservoir also beneﬁts the local communities who often face water scarcity and can use the reservoir for
agricultural irrigation and ﬁsh cultivation.
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ.!$.#%*#ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ1* !.(5%*#ƫ-1%"!.Čƫ3$%$ƫ$/ƫ.%/! ƫ0$!ƫ30!.ƫ0(!ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ/1..+1* %*#ƫ.!ƫ* ƫ%*.!/! ƫ
vegetation.
đƫƫƫƫ +*%0+.%*#ƫ* ƫ)*#!)!*0ƫ+"ƫ/%(0ƫ !,+/%0%+*Čƫ3$%$ƫ,.!2!*0/ƫ+2!.ý+3ƫ+"ƫ/! %)!*0/ƫ".+)ƫ0$!ƫ)%*!ƫ.!ƫ%*0+ƫ0$!ƫ/1.roundings and consequent disturbance of local ﬂora and fauna. Some of the mined pits may ﬁll up over a longer period
of time.
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ.!0%+*ƫ+"ƫ#.!!*!.5ƫ.+1* ƫ)%*!ƫ,.!)%/!/Čƫ.!0!*0%+*ƫ+"ƫ!.0$ƫ 1!ƫ0+ƫ0$!ƫ,(*00%+*ƫ+"ƫ0.!!/ƫ* ƫ1/$!/Čƫ* ƫ.! 1tion of CO2 levels in the atmosphere.

Source: WBCSD (n.d.).

WWDR4

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

347

and wealth creation they can provide in a city, leading them to establish themselves in locations where
they may have impacts on water (near water bodies)
or where they can more readily use water. For example (as seen in Chapter 9), governments may facilitate
land acquisitions by foreign entities for food or other
production, because of the wealth it generates for the
country, but may be ignorant of the potential impacts
these activities could have on their water resources.
The opposite is also true. Governments may choose to
attract investments that provide the highest value for
water units, although examples of such types of decision remain unfortunately rare. Box 14.3 illustrates how
a business decision, initially motivated by proﬁt and
the need to access natural resources for production,
has helped to reduce risks and uncertainties related to
future water scarcity by providing an additional water
reserve for communities and the environment.
Tools such as the proper pricing and valuation of water
resources (including charges for water abstraction and

wastewater discharges, and transferable water rights)
can encourage these sorts of decisions by businesses,
particularly when water is a key input in production.
They can help to highlight trade-offs, costs and beneﬁts/co-beneﬁts that would otherwise not be apparent to business owners. In a government-led example
of this, the provincial government of the Northwest
Territories in Canada established a comprehensive
framework for water planning that includes a vision
and strategy, as well as an action plan for achieving
water sustainability goals across all sectors. This also
includes research into the various values of water, from
market value to ecological services provided by watersheds, as well as cultural values (NWT, 2010).
Risk management is an integral part of business, and
as noted by the World Economic Forum (2011), is becoming increasingly necessary as the nature of risks
and uncertainties themselves evolve, imposing complex and interconnected considerations on businesses
and governments alike today. Whereas industry and
businesses learn to deal with uncertainties to protect

BOX 14.4
Implicit valuation reduces business and water risks
Rio Tinto Aluminium’s Weipa bauxite-mining operations in Australia have multiple sources of water, each of which has its own
associated costs and additional values. The four main sources are:
đƫƫƫƫ!*0ƫ30!.ƫĨ.!5(! ƫ+.ƫ.!1/! ƫ30!.ĩƫ".+)ƫ0$!ƫ0%(%*#/ƫ )ƫĨ3$!.!ƫ0$!ƫ)0!.%(/ƫ(!"0+2!.ƫ"0!.ƫ!40.0%*#ƫ0$!ƫ)%*! ƫ
material are stored. These materials often include muds, leachates, chemical residues, as well as crushed rock).
đƫƫƫƫ%0!ƫ.%*"((ƫ.1*+ûƫ,01.! ƫ%*ƫę/(+0/ĚƫĨ(%'!ƫ/)((ƫ3!((/ĩƫ* ƫ+0$!.ƫ/)((ƫ/0+.#!ƫ/%0!/ƫ.+//ƫ0$!ƫ)%*%*#ƫ(!/!ċƫƫ
đƫƫƫƫ$((+3ƫ-1%"!./ƫ1* !.(5%*#ƫ0$!ƫ.!ċ
đƫƫƫƫ$!ƫ !!,!.ƫ-1%"!./ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ.!0ƫ.0!/%*ƫ/%*ċƫ
Availability of the different sources can vary during the year, particularly the ﬁrst two. Rio Tinto identiﬁed the level of sensitivity of the shallow aquifers and the Great Artesian Basin during normal environmental risk management processes. This has
been reinforced by engagement with key stakeholders, including the Great Artesian Basin Coordinating Committee and nongovernmental organizations. The latter have focused on the connectivity that can occur between the shallow aquifers and
local rivers.
These processes have aided the establishment of a formal hierarchy of sources, directing the operation to source ﬁrst from
tailings dams, then ‘slots’, then the shallow aquifers, and ﬁnally the Great Artesian Basin aquifers.
In general, the costs associated with sourcing from tailings dams and slots are less than those arising from operating boreﬁelds fed by underground aquifers. However, due to the large area of the mining lease, there are situations where it could be
both cheaper and more convenient to source from one of the latter.
The establishment of the sourcing hierarchy effectively places an implicit value on the natural sources of water. In the case of the
Great Artesian basin, the focus is on the long-term sustainability of the resource, as it has the slowest rate of recharge. The shallow
aquifers recharge very quickly due to the climate; their shallow depth, though, can be linked more closely to the river ecosystems.
Source: Reproduced from WBCSD (n.d.).

348

CHAPTER 14

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

their investment, governments and communities can
apply similar risk management models to protect their
own livelihoods, safety and development.
Other factors are also increasingly motivating businesses to take certain types of decisions, in particular
related to business or brand image, reputational risk
and social responsibility. As noted in a CERES report
(2010), license to operate can no longer be taken for
granted, as resources become increasingly scarce,
and consumers and shareholders demand greater
accountability in relation to sustainability and equity
standards.
Unfortunately, not all well-intentioned, reputationbased business decisions lead to positive impacts
on water. In a recent study, it was noted that ‘paper

BOX 14.5
Business decision to promote reputational
advantage leads to water beneﬁts

Water efficiency has long been an environmental focus
at PepsiCo. Through the third quarter of 2010, our global
food and beverage businesses reduced water-use intensity by 19.5% versus 2006. And we’re on track to achieve
our 2015 target for company-owned facilities. Upgrading
our facilities with new technologies is one important way
we are reaching this goal. For example, our Frito-Lay facility in Casa Grande, Arizona has been equipped with a
state-of-the-art water ﬁltration and puriﬁcation system
that can recycle and reuse up to 75% of the water used in
production. Similar technology is also being deployed in
our Tingalpa facility in Australia, a water-stressed area. …
In 2009, PepsiCo’s operations in India achieved positive
water balance, enabling us to give back to society more
water than we used to manufacture our products. To expand this achievement to other water-distressed areas
where we have a presence, we have launched a number
of projects. In 2010, for example, we began working with
The Nature Conservancy to develop ways to identify areas of high water risk, so we can focus our attention and
resources on achieving ‘net positive water impact’ in the
most vulnerable areas where we operate. We have selected watersheds in China, Mexico, Europe, India and the US
to pilot the development of a ﬂexible and robust system
that allows PepsiCo plants not only to characterize their
water risk, but also identify locally relevant restoration initiatives that will improve water availability.

Source: Reproduced from PepsiCo (2011, p. 33).

WWDR4

manufactur[ing] … plants that use wastepaper as raw
material require more water per ton of paper produced
to remove ink, dirt, plastic, and other contaminants
from the pulp slurry. Second, reuse of water raises
chemical oxygen demand levels in effluent, making
wastewater harder to dispose of’ (Klop and Wellington,
2008, p. 30). Using recycled material, although ‘good’
from a public image perspective, can have negative
environmental consequences if not undertaken within
a full life-cycle overhaul of production processes.
Box 14.5 illustrates one example of a business decision driven both by the need to address access to key
production input and to increase the positive image of
the company brand. The PepsiCo 2010 annual report
describes various efforts to reduce its environmental
footprint, by increasing water-use efficiency and by
working with non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
(The Nature Conservancy) to implement environmental rehabilitation and conservation efforts.

14.4 Managing sectoral risks to generate
beneﬁts to water
In the absence of a comprehensive framework for
managing the increasingly complex trade-offs between policy choices, one approach may be to manage
sectoral risks in a way that seeks to maximize beneﬁts
of water, or that reduces the uncertainties and risks
faced by water users. This can reduce the number of
variables, drivers and determinants to be considered in
a given policy or investment choice, yet help to create
win–win situations. The following section provides examples of such win–win situations.
14.4.1 Reducing risks and costs in the transport sector
Building large infrastructure requires a certain degree
of forecasting to ensure the viability of investments.
Most large-scale projects for transportation now include some mechanism for reducing future uncertainties, particularly as regards climate change, as seen
above, but also take into consideration other drivers
such as population and consumption patterns.
Box 14.6 illustrates how one company, in an effort to
lengthen the durability of its infrastructure investment
and reduce maintenance costs, has undertaken measures to reduce damage risks, which have in return had
positive impacts on reducing uncertainties regarding
future water ﬂows and supply in the surrounding region, with the added beneﬁt of providing developmental and environmental assets.

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

349

14.4.2 Reducing health risks includes reducing
water risks
Lifestyle choices often have unintended or misunderstood impacts on natural resources. Meat-rich diets,
common in developed countries, and on the rise in
rapidly emerging countries, are also having an impact
on soil, land and water resources.
In a recent article, Capon and Rissel (2010) show the
correlation between climate change and chronic disease, with diet as the main factor. Meat-rich diets and
low rates of exercise contribute to creating heavy
disease burdens and high health costs in many developed countries. There are a number of programmes
already underway to promote more active lifestyles

and healthier diets, such as the use of public transport.
These are noted as having potential for co-beneﬁts in
terms of addressing GHG emissions, reducing pollution and promoting healthier lifestyles. They also have
signiﬁcant co-beneﬁts for water, by reducing the use
of water consumed as a result of meat consumption,
and also by reducing the risk of water pollution from
unsustainable or inefficient transport.
In another example, win–win beneﬁts between water
and health planning can be found as the world’s concern over pandemics and rapidly transmissible animal
and human diseases increases. Since water acts as a
vector of transmission or as a determining factor in the
prevalence of certain transmissible diseases, efforts

BOX 14.6
Autovias’s Waterway Program decreased the need for road maintenance while helping to recharge one of
Brazil’s most important aquifers

Most problems on the planned road occur during the rainy season when water gathers on roads and then runs off, causing
erosion and road damage. So Autovias, a company belonging to the Spanish group Obrascon Huarte Lain S.A. (OHL), has developed a project that collects water on the highways’ surfaces and directs it towards the Guarani aquifer recharge zone.
The company designed the program mainly to protect this vital water resource. Autovias earns no direct income from putting
water into the aquifer, but the program helps decrease the need for road maintenance and prevents washouts, thus saving
the company money.
Autovias has won a franchise to manage 316.5 km of highways in Brazil’s São Paulo State. This involves a number of activities,
including infrastructure construction, which often changes the landscape, modifying water dynamics within catchment areas. This can lead to erosion, settling, decreased groundwater inﬁltration, particularly in aquifer recharge capacity, and direct
changes in the local hydrological cycle.
Autovias’s environmental commitment to present and future generations is focused on guaranteeing the quality of the hydrological cycle, effectively using and recycling water resources, and developing public awareness of the correct use of water
resources.
The Guarani aquifer, the world’s largest known aquifer, covers an area of more than 1.2 million km2 and is under all the highway the company manages. This mega-aquifer extends under Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay and Argentina. It may contain over
40,000 km3 of water, which is more than all the water contained in all of the Earth’s rivers.
The Waterway Program consists of building rainwater containment dams along the highway grid managed by the company, particularly in the areas of public-supply springs, waterways and headwaters located within the drainage basins of the
Sapucaí-Mirim, Pardo and Grande rivers.
Some 520 rainwater containment dams have been built, with an average capacity of 4,000 m3, making possible a storage capacity of approximately 2 million m3 of rainwater and rainwater runoff along the toll road network and adjacent areas during
the rainy season. The contribution area of the basin extends to approximately 5,200 ha.
These works store rainwater ﬂowing from the highways and adjacent areas; slow the speed of the water, allowing it to recharge the aquifer, and prevent the water table from falling and the ground from eroding and being dislodged along drainage
areas.
Source: Reproduced from WBCSD (n.d).

350

CHAPTER 14

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

to prevent (or prepare for) global pandemics could
generate beneﬁts for managing risks and uncertainties
related to water. A World Health Organization (WHO)
study revealed that the return on investment from
each dollar spent on water and sanitation in developing countries would be between US$5 and US$28
(Hutton and Haller, 2004).
Box 14.7 illustrates how crowd sourcing can provide a
tool for reducing risk and uncertainties in various sectors, from crises to pandemics, with side beneﬁts for
water management.
14.4.3 Rising risks and uncertainties from the energy
sector
A number of international organizations highlight the
water-food-energy nexus as illustrating the most difficult

choices, risks and uncertainties facing policy-makers today. Examples abound of the various intended or unintended consequences of favouring one pillar over the
other (e.g. food security vs. energy security). For example, the International Energy Organization (IEA) predicts
that ‘at least 5% of global road transport will be powered
by biofuel [by 2030] – over 3.2 million barrels per day.
However, producing those fuels could consume between
20–100% of the total quantity of water now used worldwide for agriculture’ (WEF, 2011, p. 31) if the production
processes and technology remain unchanged. Another
example is shale gas extraction, which promises access to
new reserves of fossil fuels, but is highly water-intensive
and may pose a risk to water quality.
A key challenge will therefore be to incorporate the
complex interconnections of risks into response

BOX 14.7
Crowd-sourced health information reduces risks and uncertainties for water

In the aftermath of the tsunami in Japan, in 2011, a number of initiatives began gathering information on survivors, radiation
levels and rescue efforts. Ushahidi, an international crowd-sourcing platform, helped to establish a site dedicated to mapping
danger zones and relocating lost family members. The site enabled anyone with a mobile phone or smartphone to post details of survivors in difficult-to-reach or unsafe areas. This information was then relayed to rescue operations. In turn, the site
posted easily accessible information on the nearest emergency services stations, as well as locations of safe water supplies
and food stores (Bonner, 2011). Pachube provided another site where real-time radiation readings taken by citizens, combined with official data, were uploaded onto mapping software to provide a tool to help track radiation movements. This also
enabled grouped monitoring of tap water quality.
Another application, developed by Google Trends, enabled passive crowd sourcing of health information. Based on a statistical
analysis of search words entered in a given location, the service was able to monitor and, in some cases, predict ﬂu outbreaks in
the United States of America and Canada with high degrees of accuracy (Google, 2011). Government authorities and water managers could use similar mechanisms to obtain real-time water availability and quality reports. In fact, a number of applications
exist today whereby users can upload information on the status of water levels and quality in their area (see CreekWatch).
Berkeley students in India launched the NextDrop project to assist households to predict water availability, providing further proof that crowd sourcing in the health sector can help reduce water uncertainties, including those related to water.
‘Information about local piped water deliveries was delivered over cell phones from water utility employees who call an interactive voice response system when they open valves to distribute water. These reports are used to generate real-time water
availability updates and notiﬁcations 30-60 minutes in advance of water delivery. In addition, NextDrop uses crowd-sourcing
to verify the accuracy of utility reports and create a feedback loop, introducing much needed visibility for engineers in the
water utility.’ (NextDrop, n.d.)
A similar partnership is being entered between Google and UN Habitat in Zanzibar, where partners worked together to establish citizen-based participatory monitoring techniques to support and empower communities in the management of their
newly constructed water resources. A system for collection of geo-referenced data, disaggregated by gender and socio-economic group, and supported by information on the health and environmental status was developed. The partnership has also
established a system of benchmarking service providers not only to improve service coverage and efficiency, but also to enhance accountability to customers (UN-Habitat, 2010).

Note: For more information on CreekWatch see http://creekwatch.researchlabs.ibm.com/

WWDR4

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

351

strategies that are integrated and take into account
the many relevant stakeholders.
14.4.4 Win–win reduction of uncertainties through
better integrated urban planning
Modelling tools can also help to reduce uncertainties
when considering various drivers and policy options.

BOX 14.8

14.5 Mitigating risks and uncertainties

Landscape analysis helps reduce uncertainties
within urban planning requirements: The case
of Oregon

When it is not possible to minimize risks or to reduce uncertainties, it is sometimes possible to minimize the consequences through mechanisms that
help share risk burden, or that mitigate the various
negative consequences of a given possible outcome.
Insurance is of one of the oldest such mechanisms
– one that is applicable to all sectors, but that also
helps to reduce the impacts of water-related risks.
Sharing or redistributing the burden of risk becomes
a useful mechanism where the possible consequences of a given risk are heavier for one group as
compared to another (for example, the rural poor
can withstand less risk than large multinational
corporations).

The development of spatially explicit landscape analyses
is a principal activity in research on the relationships between human activities and changes occurring in natural
systems. Using geographical information systems and related tools we produced digital and paper representations
depicting the past, present, and potential future conditions of a 320 km2 watershed in western Oregon. These
tools were used to identify trends over space and time
in human occupancy and natural resources. Based on a
set of values and desired future conditions developed by
working with citizen groups, digital representations of the
alternative future landscapes were evaluated for their effects on water quality and biodiversity using hydrological
and ecological effects models. The water quality evaluative model, a non-point pollutant source geographic information system model, simulated storm events based on
ﬁeld data to calculate pollutant loads across the ﬁve alternative futures, the present, and the past. The biodiversity
evaluative model measured the change in species richness
and potential habitat area for breeding species in each alternative future and in the past and compared these data
to the present.
Results from the water quality model show increases in
the volume of surface water runoff and total suspended
solids under the development-oriented futures in catchments undergoing signiﬁcantly increased residential development or having a high percentage of area in erosive
soils on steep slopes. Results from the biodiversity model
show that all native species have at least some habitat in
all alternative futures. If land use trends in the watershed
continue unchanged or become more highly developed,
there will be an increased risk to abundance of extant native species. The set of species at risk in the developmentoriented futures differs signiﬁcantly in composition and is
placed at risk at a higher rate than in the past, suggesting
that the kinds of habitat changes to date differ from those
envisioned in the alternative.

Source: Reproduced from Hulse et al. (2000, ©2000 by the Board
of Regents of the University of Wisconsin System. Reproduced
courtesy of the University of Wisconsin Press.).

352

Water usually features prominently in urban planning considerations, but the integration of water’s
various values and uses – and the risks and uncertainties affecting each of these – is rather more recent. Box 14.8 illustrates how a city has undertaken
a modelling exercise in order to determine tradeoffs, while considering water’s various values in the
community.

CHAPTER 14

14.5.1 Insurance as a risk minimizing mechanism
There are different ways of sharing risk burden. One
such is risk spreading across space (geographic risk
spreading), for example, where complementary climate patterns have been identiﬁed in different regions.
In Africa, for example, a dry season in the eastern region is often associated with a wetter season in the
southern region, and vice versa. This observation is
linked to the ENSO phenomenon: La Niña events are
associated with lower rainfall in eastern Africa and
higher rainfall in southern Africa, while during El Niño
the reverse pattern is often seen. This could provide
a mechanism whereby risks and uncertainties related
to precipitation and variability could be shared across
borders.
Index-based (or parametric) insurance is also emerging as a potentially powerful tool for risk management
in all sectors. This form of insurance is linked to an
index or event, such as rainfall, temperature, humidity or crop yields, rather than to the amount of actual
loss. Rather than addressing the amount of actual loss,
this approach makes the product more attractive and
more accessible to developing country clienteles, while
remaining a ﬁnancially viable product for insurance
providers.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

Box 14.9 illustrates a combination of both mechanisms,
where disaster risks and uncertainties are reduced
through the application of loss modelling, and where
risks are redistributed geographically through pooled
purchase of insurance products.
14.5.2 Treaties as a mechanisms for reducing
uncertainties
Conﬂict among natural resource users as well as civil
unrest can create pressures on water directly or indirectly. Treaties and agreements have always been
mechanisms to reduce uncertainties regarding future
safety, provision of services or access to resources.
Water treaties or agreements regarding water allocation in shared transboundary basins are multiplying, and are often quoted as having side beneﬁts for

BOX 14.9
The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
(CCRIF)

The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
(CCRIF) is based on geographic risk spreading. The CCRIF
is designed to limit the impact of extreme weather events
such as hurricanes, severe rainfall events and earthquakes.
It provides funds when speciﬁc events occur, using parametric formulas.
With original funding from the Japanese government,
CCRIF has been recapitalized through a multi-donor
trust fund and maintained by membership fees paid by
the 16 participating governments: Anguilla, Antigua and
Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda, Cayman
Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and
Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Trinidad
and Tobago and Turks and Caicos Islands.
Participating countries pool their country-speciﬁc risks
into one, diversiﬁed insurance portfolio. As natural disaster risks in any given year are randomly distributed
among the Caribbean islands, the cost of coverage for the
pooled portfolio is less than the sum of premiums that
the countries would have to pay individually for the same
coverage. In practice, insurance premiums are reduced by
almost half.
The CCRIF also uses a catastrophe modelling approach
(see Chapter 13) as a means of understanding the scope
of potential losses from a given risk, and therefore as a
basis for pricing insurance premiums for a given territory.

Source: CCRIF (2011).

WWDR4

“There are different
ways of sharing risk
burden. One such is
risk spreading across
space (geographic risk
spreading).”
reducing other risks, through the establishment of
trust-building mechanisms and a certain amount of
predictability in stakeholder behaviours.
As noted by Dreischova et al. (2001), uncertainties related to water are not always fully recognized in treaty
design or in the elaboration of water collaboration
mechanisms. The adoption of open-ended strategies,
allowing for ﬂexible rule-making within the agreements, indicates a growing understanding of how uncertainties may affect water policy-making. Examples
such as the Nile Basin Initiative and the SADC protocol
on Shared Watercourse Systems provide mechanisms
for managing risks, deciding on allocations and promoting the application of joint norms.
The opposite is also true: agreements and treaties
signed for purposes other than water may help reduce risks and uncertainties regarding water, particularly where they provide mutual assurance of the
other party’s behaviour regarding natural resource use.
Peace treaties could be the ﬁrst mechanism where water risks (at least those that arise from human use) are
reduced.
Trade agreements are often cited as having potentially
negative consequences, or creating additional risks, for
water. The case of the inﬂuence of free trade agreements on North American water resources constitutes
one such example. Even prior to the signing of the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), there
was debate as to whether or not bulk water exports
from water-rich Canada could be pursued or allowed
under the current regulatory framework. These fears
have heightened since the adoption of NAFTA, speciﬁcally ‘over whether surface and ground water in
its natural state (for example, in lakes and rivers) is

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

353

subject to NAFTA obligations. Some argue that this is
the case. At the same time, however, the governments
of Canada, the United States and Mexico have expressly stated that the NAFTA does not apply to water in its
natural state’ (Johansen, 2002, p. 19).
14.5.3 Addressing water and security concerns
through multi-sectoral cooperation
Uncertainties continue to grow, whether related to
climate change and resource scarcity or to economic
volatility, and security concerns remain at the forefront
of policy-making everywhere. In this context, water
constitutes a nexus of risk where all these issues mesh,
sometimes with dire consequences.
For example, the recent severe drought in East Africa,
combined with ongoing conﬂict in Somalia and Sudan,
has resulted in highly volatile conditions where violence and famine are affecting millions of people, already among the poorest in the world. Water scarcity,
which has led to crop and livestock failure, has led to
migration and increased competition for resources. In

BOX 14.10
Creating cooperative security-based institutions
around water in Central Asia

[The OSCE has worked with Kyrgystan and Kazakhstan]
in operationalizing the Agreement on Utilization of the
Water Facilities of Interstate Use on the Chu and Talas
Rivers. As a result, the inter-state Commission was established and the OSCE assisted in … [setting up the
Commission and in performing some repair and maintenance works on] multi-purpose water facilities. This
framework included mediation to reach consensus between the governments of both countries.
The OSCE also continues to support the Interstate
Committee for Water Coordination (ICWC) in Central
Asia … with a strong emphasis on regional co-operation,
promotion of policies on water management and environmental sustainability in the region. In collaboration with
the ICWC, the OSCE is working on seminars to improve
the economic mechanisms related to water management
and improve environmental conditions to promote cooperation in the region.
Closer interaction between the countries on the sustainable management of water and water related ecosystems
is key to ensuring security and development in the region.
Source: Reproduced from OSCE (n.d.).

354

CHAPTER 14

a situation where conﬂict was already rampant and
weapons were already available, this has degenerated
into widespread humanitarian disaster.
Creating conditions for national and regional security
can also generate multiple beneﬁts for water – and become a mechanism for dealing with future water risks
and uncertainties. Much has already been said about
the potential role of water cooperation in creating the
conditions for peace-building across borders, namely
by creating conditions of trust, joint objectives and
institutions, and gradual achievements that can later
translate into broader cooperation.
However the opposite is also true. Cooperation on security issues can help to address water concerns, and
thereby help to create conditions for development and
growth on all sides. This was recently recognized by
the Organization for Security in Central Europe (OSCE),
which works to establish regional cooperation frameworks among countries of Central Asia around water
(surface and groundwater) management (Box 14.10).
The role of water as a potential factor of stability in war-torn countries or in countries recovering
from conﬂict was also raised in a recent US study on
Afghanistan. The study recommended that reconstruction efforts focus on creating institutions with the capacity to withstand and manage shocks and risks, as
well as on the need to institute more effective water
management systems, both nationally and regionally
(US Senate, 2011).

Conclusion
This chapter highlights how methods used to deal with
risks and uncertainties in all areas of socio-economic
development can positively or negatively affect water
risks and uncertainties, leading to potential restrictions
or an increase in the management choices available to
water managers. Risk management, whether it takes
the form of avoidance, reduction or mitigation, forms
an integral part of all policy-making. Moreover, the
complexity of the risks and uncertainties now facing
society is increasing and accelerating.
Understanding the way choices impact on water can
help to shape decisions that maximize beneﬁts in all
domains, creating long-term safer and more sustainable pathways for development. This also requires a
clear-minded consideration of immediate, mid-term
and long-term trade-offs.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Alvarez, M., Bourque, M., Funes, F., Martin, L., Nova, A. and
Rosset, P. 2010. Surviving crisis in Cuba: the second
agrarian reform and sustainable agriculture. P. Rosset,
R. Patel and M. Courville (eds). 2006. Promised Land:
Competing Visions of Agrarian Reform. Institute for Food
and Development Policy. Oakland, Calif., FoodFirst.
http://www.foodﬁrst.org/ﬁles/bookstore/pdf/
promisedland/12.pdf
Bonner, S. 2011. RDTN.org: Crowdsourcing and Mapping
Radiation Levels. Blog entry posted to boingboing, 19
March 2011. http://boingboing.net/2011/03/19/rdntorgcollects-cro.html
Capon, A. G. and Rissel, C. E. 2010. Erratum to: Chronic
disease and climate change: understanding co-beneﬁts
and their policy implications. New South Wales Public
Health Bulletin, Vol. 21, No. 10, p. 196.
CCRIF (The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance
Facility). 2011. Website home page and Q&A document.
http://WWW.CCRIF.ORG/content/about-us and
http://www.ccrif.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/
BookletQuestionsAnswersMarch2010.pdf (Accessed 4
November 2011.)

Johansen, D. 2002. Bulk Water Removals, Water Exports
and the NAFTA. Ottawa, Government of Canada, Law
and Government Division. http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/
Collection-R/LoPBdP/BP/prb0041-e.htm
Klop, P. and Wellington, F. 2008. Watching Water: A
Guide to Evaluating Corporate Risks in a Thirsty World.
New York, JP Morgan Global Equity Research. http://
www.questwatersolutions.com/Quest%20Water%20
Solutions%20Inc./News_ﬁles/JPMorgan-WatchingWaterApril%202008.pdf
NextDrop. n.d. Website. A collaboration of UC Berkeley
School of Information, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, and Goldman School of Public
Policy. http://www.nextdrop.org
NWT (Northwest Territories). 2010. Northern Voices,
Northern Waters. NWT Water Stewardship Strategy.
Yellowknife, Canada, Department of Environment and
Natural Resources (GNWT). http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/_live/
documents/content/NWT_Water_Stewardship_Strategy.
pdf
OSCE (Organization for Security and Co-operation in
Europe). Website. Vienna, OSCE. http://www.osce.org/
eea/45910 (Accessed 4 November 2010.)
PepsiCo. 2011. Annual Report 2010: Performance with
Purpose. The Promise of PepsiCo. Purchase, NY, PepsiCo.
http://www.pepsico.com/annual10/performance/
performance.html?nav=environmental

CERES. 2010. The 21st Century Corporation: The CERES
roadmap for sustainability. Boston, CERES. http://
docs.google.com/viewer?url=http://www.ceres.org/
resources/reports/ceres-roadmap-to-sustainability2010&chrome=true (Accessed 19 October 2011.)

UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2011. Green
Economy Report. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/
greeneconomy/SuccessStories/OrganicAgricultureinCuba/
tabid/29890/Default.aspx

Dreischova, A., Fischhendler, I. and Giordano, M. 2011. The
role of uncertainties in the design of international water
treaties: an historical perspective, Climatic Change, Vol.
105, pp. 387–408.

UN-Habitat. 2010. Google and UN-HABITAT Partnership
to Improve Data Collection. UN-Habitat website.
Nairobi, UN-Habitat. http://www.unhabitat.org/content.
asp?cid=7751&catid=460&typeid=6

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations)/UNDP (United Nations Development Programme/
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2008a.
UN-REDD Programme Framework Document. Geneva,
FAO/UNDP/UNEP.

US Senate. 2011. Avoiding Water Wars: Water Scarcity
and Central Asia’s Growing Importance for Stability in
Afghanistan and Pakistan. A majority staff report prepared
for the use of the Committee on Foreign Relations, United
States Senate, 112th Congress, ﬁrst session 22 February
2011.

––––. 2008b. Role of Satellite Remote Sensing in REDD.
Issues Paper. Geneva, FAO/UNDP/UNEP. http://
www.un-redd.org/LinkClick.aspx?ﬁleticket=p7SsfE7AR0%3D&tabid=587&language=en-US
Google. 2011. Google.org Flu Trends website. Calif., Google.
http://www.google.org/ﬂutrends/ca/#CA
Hulse, D., Eilers, J., Freemark, K., Hummon, C. and White, D.
2000. Planning alternative future landscapes in Oregon:
evaluating effects on water quality and biodiversity.
Landscape Journal, Vol. 19, NO, 1&2, pp. 1–19.
Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs and
Beneﬁts of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the
Global Level. Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health/wsh0404.pdf

WWDR4

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable
Development). n.d.Website. Repository of Case Studies.
Geneva, WBCSD, http://www.fundacionentorno.org/Data/
Documentos/Sustain30_090908_proof2173545873.pdf
(Accessed 17 October 2011.)
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2011. Global Risk 2011, Sixth
Edition: An initiative of the Risk Response Network. Geneva,
WEF.
World Bank. 2011. Estimating the Opportunity Costs of
REDD+: A Training Manual. Washington DC, The World
Bank Institute/Forest Carbon Partnership Facility.
http://wbi.worldbank.org/wbi/Data/wbi/wbicms/ﬁles/
drupal-acquia/wbi/OppCostsREDD+manual.pdf

RESPONSES TO RISKS AND UNCERTAINTIES FROM OUT OF THE WATER BOX

355

CONCLUSIONS

—
Authors Richard Connor and Joana Talafré
Contributor William J. Cosgrove

356

CHAPTER 14

MANAGING WATER UNDER
UNCERTAINTY
AND RISK
© Philippe
Bourseiller

This fourth edition of the World Water Development
Report (WWDR4) report has sought to demonstrate
the challenges facing water today and the increasing complexity, uncertainties and risks of tomorrow,
as well as to provide avenues for responding to these
challenges in the near future. Water is at the centre of
the development nexus, and it has far reaching connections with every realm of human life – from the
basic concerns of food, health and energy, beyond to
industry, trade and the economy. Today most of these
sectors face a crisis. New approaches that will provide
insight into possible futures – and where responses
can set the stage for future prosperity and avoid imminent catastrophe – are called for. The WWDR4 reveals
that the path to solving these crises ﬂows through water, and that solving water problems now is necessary
to ensuring chances for the future of our planet and
the prosperity of its people.
Sadly, not much has changed since the publication of
the last WWDR in 2009. Nearly 1 billion people still do
not have access to improved sources of drinking water
and there are more people without access to tap water
in cities today than there were at the end of the 1990s.
In addition, 1.4 billion people do not have electricity in
their homes, and nearly 1 billion suffer from malnutrition. Although there has been progress in achieving
some of the water-related Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) in certain countries and regions, much
work remains, particularly to address the special
needs of the most vulnerable members of society –
women and children – who bear the brunt of poverty
worldwide.
Water constraints on sustainable development have
created hotspots where multiple challenges mesh
and result in a spiral of increasing poverty, uncertainty and instability. This happens in all regions,
though the root of the challenges may differ from
one region to the next. In Africa there is insufficient
investment in water infrastructure and accessibility,
compounded by low levels of technical and institutional capacity, over-consumption and pollution,
which creates increasing constraints on North African
countries’ economies. In Asia, growing population
and urbanization create challenges for sanitation,
and disputes between users as well as high exposure
to natural disasters and extreme events exacerbate
existing vulnerability, risk and uncertainty. Demand
is ever-increasing within some Arab and Western
Asian countries that are already facing severe scarcity

WWDR4

constraints, and in Latin America and the Caribbean,
increased demand fuelled by industry, trade and
growing economies is also posing a challenge alongside governance systems that are often inadequate to
deal with the pressures.
From a sectoral perspective, pressures on water continue to grow and technological innovation that could
provide much needed water savings is still not fully
implemented. Agriculture, the largest water user, continues to be practiced in a water-inefficient manner in
many countries; in developing countries, this is mostly
due to a lack of capacity or political support. Higher
per capita rates of energy consumption and rapidly
growing energy demand are also exerting increased
pressure on water, with water-intensive energy sources
still being the chief part of the energy portfolio in the
vast majority of countries. Great quantities of freshwater are used for urban sanitation (in cities where sanitation services are available), and demands for freshwater are increasing to meet MDG target 7c. The vast
majority of wastewater is returned to the environment
without treatment, generating health risks to humans
and ecosystems.
As was discussed in Chapter 2, water demand is affected by a number of drivers, and while there is uncertainty about how each of these will evolve in future,
it is somewhat certain that demand will increase – the
big questions remaining, ’Where?’ and ‘By how much?’
It is also somewhat certain that, all other things remaining equal, if our approaches to management remain the same, and if our development trajectories
continue without some interjection that alters their
course, water resources will be insufficient to meet all
future demands. In fact, in many regions and countries
that are facing scarcity today (Chapter 7).
As described throughout Part 2 of this report, the
world is changing faster than ever and becoming more
and more complex. Uncertainties about water availability and demand are increasing, as are the associated risks to development and well-being of people,
societies and the environment. Unless we can generate the awareness and political will to react now, the
crises we are experiencing now are likely to escalate
and the odds of meeting our developmental goals will
degenerate. However, the harsh realities of existing
challenges outlined throughout the WWDR4 must not
completely overshadow important progress achieved
since WWDR3.

CONCLUSIONS

357

There is in fact increasing recognition of the link between water and other aspects of development, as
exempliﬁed by the Conference on the Water, Energy
and Food Security Nexus (Bonn, November 2011). The
increasing recognition can be seen as a positive development for water, especially as some of the most
prominent initiatives have been led by actors from
the energy and food sector, and may be viewed as
increased recognition of water’s importance in development. Without fully implemented (and adaptable)
plans for integrated water resources management
(IWRM), the ‘nexus’ dialogue creates a pragmatic and
substantial opportunity for informed decision-making
outside the ‘water box’. There have been improvements in IWRM as well: preliminary ﬁndings from a
2011 UN-Water global survey to determine progress
towards IWRM show a wider adoption of integrated
approaches with signiﬁcant impact on development
and water management practices at a country level (Chapter 1). There have also been some advances
made under the recent United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Conferences
of the Parties (COPs) (Chapter 1).
Unfortunately, while many stakeholders recognize in
theory that water is a fundamental aspect of achieving global goals, many such as the MDGs and other
international and national processes continue to treat
water concerns as separate from other issues and challenges; as do for example climate change negotiations
and the UNCSD 2012 (Rio+20) process. Yet as seen in
this report, failure to address water concerns creates
untenable risks and uncertainties for all developmental sectors –agriculture, energy, industry, health and
livelihoods – with consequences for global trade and
economic growth.
Water policy-makers and resource managers are beginning to understand that long-term cross-sectoral
action is required to manage the resource appropriately. Policy-makers in other sectors also need to see
the beneﬁts of rallying to this position, and they need
to participate in an integrated approach to addressing multiple sector challenges, managing inter-related
risks and reducing uncertainties. Governments and water managers have a responsibility to work with stakeholders and water users in making decisions about
re-allocating water to the most appropriate and equitable uses for achieving national development goals.
But, as water-related problems extend beyond national boundaries into all spheres of the global economy,

358

concerned national governments – as it is the national
governments that drive the international policy – have
a responsibility to bring water issues forward on the
international stage, so that common problems can ﬁnd
shared solutions.
As noted in Chapter 5, ‘water is a fugitive resource’,
and its role in the global economy is ubiquitous but
difficult to grasp. If we continue to ignore its fundamental roles and values (and to underestimate the
value of its many beneﬁts) in everyday decisions, at all
levels, we will have exhausted the resource’s full potential before we can adopt alternate behaviours. Water
managers need to take a pro-active leadership role in
educating and informing decision-makers in all sectors
about the different values of water, its multiple beneﬁts to development, and about the options that can
help maximize co-beneﬁts for human socio-economic
well-being through water, thereby effectively minimizing potentially negative trade-offs. These win–win approaches abound, as can be seen from the examples
in Chapters 13 and 14, and many tools exist for sectoral
management – adaptive management, science-based
tools, economic approaches and other policy mechanisms – to help deliver multiple beneﬁts.
Managing water in a context of increasing and increasingly complex uncertainty requires new approaches
that function across sectoral and institutional boundaries to create new coalitions among water users and
providers. Such management approaches are already
underway in many contexts, and many countries have
experience to showcase. Transboundary watershed
management, multi-disciplinary scenario-based planning, and ‘green accounting’ mechanisms are currently
being implemented in developed as well as developing countries. However, broader improvement will
require institutions to evolve into more ﬂexible dialogue-based mechanisms that promote continuous
discussion on social goals and targets and that provide
support for rapid decision-making on water allocation and management in response to rapidly changing
circumstances.
Successful water management will also require an explicit recognition of the economic values of water and
its different beneﬁts, as seen in Chapter 10, not only
because there is a need to promote investment in water infrastructure and institutions, but because without such investment, water will become the ‘ghost in
the machine’: the current economic model encourages

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

investment based on growth scenarios that themselves
are based on implicit assumptions regarding natural
resources (chieﬂy water). Failure to understand the
way water underpins today’s global and local economy will simply lead to unrealistic predictions about
sustainable growth. Recognizing the full value of water
and its beneﬁts and ensuring these beneﬁts’ equitable
distribution as well as operational continuity in water
services, can help mitigate future economic risks and
uncertainties.
Beyond this recognition, successful water management
will also require increased investment by national governments and the international community if we are to
achieve national and international development goals.
Successful management entails both ‘hard’ investment
in solid and lasting infrastructure to provide water services over the long term – thus reducing risk – and ‘soft’
investment in capacity, science, data collection and
analysis, and information about water, so that uncertainties are continuously reduced. It will also require
investment in alternative and innovative forms of water
service provision, including the restoration of water services provided by healthy ecosystems, which have thus
far been largely ignored as entry points for water management. As seen in Chapters 5, 8 and 11, combining
hard and soft approaches helps ensure higher degrees
of water availability and quality in a sustainable manner.
The optimization and equitable distribution of water’s
beneﬁts can only occur if economic policy, industrial
planning, urban design, food, energy and trade policies become more water conscious. Trade-offs and cobeneﬁts can become more visible thanks to emerging
planning tools such as modelling, risk management,
low- and no-regrets planning tools (Chapter 8). This
helps reduce uncertainties related to water as well as
economic uncertainties and risks, and can contribute
to higher rates of economic growth. Public and private sector decision-makers can take advantage of a
certain degree of public awareness regarding environmental sustainability to make decisions that would
perhaps have been harder to make 20 years ago. This
growing awareness indicates a willingness on the part
of the public to shoulder part of the short-term risk to
reduce longer-term uncertainties (social risk tolerance,
Chapter 11).
As a risk-taker, the private sector is often the root of
technological innovation. In this regard, the push to
achieve ﬁnancial proﬁt can become a useful impetus

WWDR4

for water sustainable futures, if harnessed appropriately, motivating technological progress towards more
resource efficiency, less waste, and less pollution. Many
businesses are in fact one step ahead of governments,
by acting on a recognition that, in the long term, environmental sustainability or water stewardship is a prerequisite to economic sustainability. Indeed, in some
cases, large private sector ﬁrms have shown an eagerness to respond to the market’s appetite for corporate
responsibility by investing in ecological stewardship
which, in exchange, provides them with efficient and
continued access to resources. However, this type of
approach is not yet part of the mainstream of private
sector decision-making, mainly because public policy
is lagging behind, and because there remain ﬁnancial
obstacles to the adoption of ‘greener’ technologies. In
contrast, some of these green approaches, while wellintentioned, can have negative consequences for water,
as seen for example in Chapter 13.
Hence it is important for governments to send the
right signals and provide the right incentives to private
sector decision-makers about the hierarchy of tradeoffs, and particularly about the place of water in business decisions. Civil society, environmental NGOs in
particular, also has a role to play. Where environmental
NGOs were once sometimes seen as a force of opposition, their constructive participation in collaborative
decision-making today helps ensure that different concerns and interests are appropriately represented in
the spectrum of decisions taken by public and private
operators.
Anticipating and proactively adapting to change
present unique opportunities to bring into effect
beneﬁcial change without taking overstated risks.
Recognizing that past experience is no longer the
best way to anticipate the future (Chapter 8), we can
however anticipate outcomes based on current trends.
As seen in Chapter 9, analysis of the evolution of key
drivers provides useful insights into what might happen if we do nothing, or what could happen if certain
decisions were made today. Seeing the world in terms
of possible futures can help guide our course from the
present moment. Approaches to climate change adaptation provide us with a useful model for ‘no-regrets’
development planning, in that the model demonstrates
how – within a more or less broad window of uncertainty (or certainty) – decisions can be made that
achieve maximum beneﬁts regardless of the situation
(Chapter 13). Adaptive management and no-regrets

CONCLUSIONS

359

planning can be applied to all sectors provided that
public and private institutions are given the ﬂexibility
(and legitimacy) for course correction when new information is made available to them. As noted earlier and
in Chapters 5 and 11, an adaptive approach to IWRM
has become increasingly relevant to water and nonwater managers alike.

room for improvement in terms of applying this sort
of visioning exercise – whether for water speciﬁcally or
for development in general. While the MDGs express
this sort of vision, by missing the opportunity to explicitly incorporate the cross-cutting nature of water in
the development nexus, they may have taken an overly
fragmented approach.

Parallel to this change in how we plan for the future,
we also need to signiﬁcantly invest in our knowledge
and understanding of how systems work. Climate
predictions, modelling and scenarios should become
essential parts of the public policy tool box. Similar
knowledge should evolve about water systems in and
of themselves, for example groundwater (Chapter 3),
or the role of ecosystems in maintaining and regulating water ﬂows and their ability to sustainably provide a wide range of services (Chapters 4 and 8). This
knowledge must become an intrinsic part of everyday
decision-making, rather than the exclusive domain of
water scientists, and must be communicated effectively to a broader range of direct and indirect water users.
Knowledge and technological innovation can play a
signiﬁcant role in reducing risks and uncertainties related to water, and in moving us from a water-intensive
to a water-efficient development model. As described
in Chapter 6, the absence of systematic data collection
in most countries impedes regular reporting on water
resources and water use situation and trends. There
is consequently a growing interest in and demand for
better water data and accounting, which needs to be
translated into improved data availability, more structured data acquisition, and better information about
water – from which different users can calculate indicators of speciﬁc interest to them.

There is therefore a need to replace the old ways of
sector-based decision-making with a wider framework
that considers the multiple facets of the development
nexus, and the multiple risks and uncertainties, costs
and beneﬁts or every decision, in light of a long-term
goal. In this regard, national governments have a major contribution to make by creating stronger, more
collaborative, ﬂexible institutions, by adopting appropriate ﬁnancing mechanisms to ensure the long-term
viability of water services and infrastructure, and by
ensuring that water considerations are mainstreamed
into everyday policy decisions as well as international
governance processes. Water managers have a responsibility to continuously inform these processes and to
raise awareness of the centrality of water in the development nexus.

The difficulty faced today is in identifying the tradeoffs made in everyday policy-making and business.
Each decision made has potentially far reaching consequences on water; for example, the recent decision
made by certain governments to move away from
nuclear energy could have impacts on water use if it
leads to water-intensive energy production (for example, oil sands extraction). Hastily made decisions
in reaction to catastrophe or perceived public opinion
could leave unwanted legacies if they are not considered from a cross-sectoral, long-term perspective.
Identifying the ‘end-point’ or the most preferred outcome (or future) – expressing a vision of a desired future – can help in identifying the acceptable trade-offs
in the short, medium and long terms. Yet there is much

360

This is why the most recent economic crisis could be
seen as an opportunity; it provides an occasion for reﬂecting on a desired collective future, and it provides
a critical glimpse of the interconnections between
countries, sectors and policies. Similarly, looking at the
future through a water lens also provides the insight
needed to make decisions that maximize beneﬁts to
people, the environment and the global economy.
The ﬁnancial, food, fuel and climate crises are, even
individually, serious problems, but in combination their
effects could be catastrophic for global sustainability.
The WWDR4 has sought to provide a new way of looking at our water reality, through the perspective of risk
and uncertainty. It has sought to encourage different
ways of thinking about the world’s collective future by
identifying tools and approaches that maximize water’s beneﬁts to different developmental sectors and
by demonstrating that win–win scenarios are indeed
possible. Political and business leaders as well as water managers, water users and ordinary citizens have a
unique opportunity to see past immediate challenges
and risks and to effect long-term change towards sustainable prosperity for all, through water.

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

BOXES, TABLES, FIGURES AND MAPS

BOXES
1.1

Water for All Programme, Peru

29

1.2

Climate change adaptation: The pivotal role of water

31

1.3

UN-Water’s recommendation to UNCSD and potential actions in support of green economic approaches

39

2.1

Complexities in comparing water use and consumption for hydropower production with that for other types of energy

55

2.2 Water and ecosystem services

70

2.3 Biodiversity increases ecosystem efficiency

70

2.4 Rethinking ecosystem water ‘demand’ using an ecosystem services framework:
Disaster risk transfer and mitigation in the Mississippi Delta, USA
2.5 The Mekong River Basin, South-East Asia
4.1

Cholera

72
72
104

4.2 Harmful algal blooms

106

4.3 Dengue

106

4.4 Have the global limits of water sustainability already been reached?

113

4.5 Ecosystem tipping points: theory or reality?

113

4.6 Trends in wetlands in China: Reversing losses to restore beneﬁts

114

4.7

119

Women in times of disaster

4.8 Key facts on desertiﬁcation

121

5.1

145

Adaptation to water stress in the Greater Himalayan Region

5.2 Development of regulatory accounting in Latin America

146

5.3 Water conﬂict as an agent of change

147

5.4 Enhancing adaptive capacity in the Mekong Basin

149

5.5 Political leadership as a driver for better water management outcomes

149

5.6 Forum for integrated resource management (FIRM): An example from rural Namibia

150

5.7 Social learning and adaptive water resources management in the South Indian Lower Bhavani

152

6.1

163

Informing trade-offs: Water for electricity in South Africa

6.2 Australian water accounting standards

164

6.3 Water resource information for conﬂict prevention in Central Asia

167

6.4 Data as a gateway to progress for sustainable water management

170

6.5 WWAP’s dynamic TARWR pilot initiative with CUNY and GWSP

171

7.1

Africa’s WSS investment needs

181

7.2

Africa’s irrigation investment needs

182

7.3

Groundwater resources in the Lake Chad basin

183

7.4

Joint management of the Senegal River

184

7.5

Agriculture and water use in Central Asia

188

7.6

Wastewater treatment infrastructure in the Republic of Moldova

188

7.7

Uncertainty and risk on the North American prairies

190

7.8

Satisfying municipal water needs in drought-prone regions

190

7.9

Water management in Barbados

202

7.10 Competition for water in the Copiapo Valley

203

7.11

205

Investment in sanitary infrastructure in Chile

7.12 The Guarani Aquifer System (GAS) project: Managing transboundary groundwaters

207

7.13 Water conﬂicts in Yemen

210

7.14 Water dimensions of the surge in transnational land acquisitions

217

WWDR4

BOXES,
EUROPE
TABLES,
AND
FIGURES
NORTHAND
AMERICA
MAPS

361

8.1

Dutch Delta Approach

239

8.2 Queensland, Australia, warned of ﬂoodplain risks

241

8.3 US Corps of Engineering risk analysis

242

8.4 Adaptive strategies for responding to drought and ﬂood in South Asia

243

8.5 Changing paradigms for water management

250

8.6 Rethinking physical infrastructure approaches

251

8.7 Ecosystem solutions for water quality risks

251

8.8 Ecosystems and ﬂood risk reduction

252

8.9 Lessons learned in the implementation and operation of the Water Protection Fund (FONAG, Ecuador)

253

8.10 Rethinking water storage: Restoring soil functionality

253

11.1

294

Mine closure in South Africa as an example of growing complexity

11.2 Climate Vulnerability Index

295

11.3 Water quality monitoring in Nigeria

299

11.4 Review of water management institutions and reforms in 11 countries

301

11.5 Gender-sensitive dissemination of information: The case of early warning systems in Bangladesh

304

12.1 Economics of access to improved drinking water and sanitation

312

12.2 Cost of adaptation to climate change for water

313

12.3 Implications of climate change uncertainty for decision-making

316

12.4 Increasing aid to water and sanitation: 2002-2008

319

13.1 Integrated Water Resources Optimization Models (IWROMs)

328

13.2 Adaptive management: Adaptation tipping points in current Dutch ﬂood management

330

13.3 Risk-addressed examples

331

13.4 Catastrophe modelling as a tool for understanding and calculating risk in the insurance industry

332

13.5 Farmer managed groundwater systems in Andhra Pradesh, India

333

13.6 Mangrove restoration in Viet Nam

335

13.7 Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment in Bayawan City, Philippines

336

13.8 Community-based watershed management in India and Brazil

337

13.9 Ensuring reliable access to water for industrial purposes while providing a key pollution control service

340

14.1 Cuba uses organic agriculture for sustainable growth

345

14.2 Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) with water co-beneﬁts

346

14.3 Restoring water provision in a dry area: Italcementi

347

14.4 Implicit valuation reduces business and water risks

348

14.5 Business decision to promote reputational advantage leads to water beneﬁts

349

14.6 Autovias’s Waterway Program decreased the need for road maintenance while helping to recharge
one of Brazil’s most important aquifers

350

14.7 Crowd-sourced health information reduces risks and uncertainties for water

351

14.8 Landscape analysis helps reduce uncertainties within urban planning requirements: The case of Oregon

352

14.9 The Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF)

353

14.10 Creating cooperative security-based institutions around water in Central Asia

354

TABLES
2.1

Population, energy consumption and water consumption for energy, 2005–2050

57

2.3 Average US ﬁgures for water production

58

3.1

Top 10 groundwater-abstracting countries as of 2010

85

3.2

Key estimates on global groundwater abstraction (reference year 2010)

86

3.3

Key water quality risks

96

3.4 Summary of possible water quality interventions by scale

362

57

2.2 Population, energy consumption and water consumption for energy, 2005–2050, with improved energy efficiency

97

6.1

United Nations World Water Development Report indicators

160

7.1

Total and proportional renewable water resources in Africa’s subregions

178

7.2

Main pressures on water resources in order of priority

189

CHAPTER 30

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

10.1 Economic rates of return for infrastructure projects in sub-Saharan Africa

281

10.2 Economic value of water use in the USA

283

FIGURES
1.1

Global water savings associated with international trade in agricultural products (1996–2005)

33

2.1

Water withdrawal by sector by region (2005)

47

2.2 Wetlands water quality state changes by continent

48

2.3 World marketed energy consumption, 2007–2035

52

2.4 Historical world fuel production from 1990 to 2007 with projections to 2035

53

2.5 Projections for world net electricity generation, 2007–2035

53

2.6 Operational water consumption for the production of various types of energy

56

2.7

62

Inter-relationship of water risks among business, government and society

2.8 Slum population by region, 1990–2020

65

2.9 Ratio of treated to untreated wastewater discharged into water bodies

67

2.10 A simpliﬁed conceptual framework illustrating the role of ecosystems in the water cycle

71

3.1

Total annual renewable water resources (TARWR) by country – most recent estimates (1985–2010)

79

3.2

Per capita total annual renewable water resources (TARWR) by country – population data from 2008

80

3.3

Schematic of normal and El Niño conditions in the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean

81

3.4 Impacts of El Niño on global climate during northern hemisphere summer and winter seasons

82

3.5 Spatial pattern and time index of PDO and El Niño

83

3.6 NAO spatial pattern and its impact on the mid-latitude jet stream and its impacts on climate over
3.7

North America and Western Europe

84

Intensity of groundwater abstraction by the year 2000, as allocated by the PCR-GLOBWB model

85

3.8 Groundwater abstraction trends in selected countries

87

3.9 Stream and well hydrographs from the North China Plain, showing evidence of reduced stream ﬂow
caused by groundwater depletion

88

3.10 Global distribution of glaciers and ice sheets

90

3.11 Delineation of the basins of the Brahmaputra, Ganges and Indus

91

3.12 GRACE satellite image showing the extent of glacier cover in the Himalaya – Karakoram and estimation of
groundwater depletion in north-west India

91

3.13 Dangerous glacier dammed lakes within Bhutan

92

3.14 Lugge Tsho Glacial lake, Bhutan

92

3.15 Indus River: Glacier dams and related events

93

3.16 Annual cost of the environmental degradation of water

95

4.1

Nutrient loading in inland and coastal waters

111

4.2 Nitrogen balance in Europe

112

4.3 Since 1997, the proportion of river basins in Malaysia classiﬁed as clean has been increasing

114

4.4 Climate variability has an impact on GDP

115

4.5 People exposed to ﬂoods

116

4.6 Hazard mortality risk (ﬂoods, tropical cyclones and precipitation-triggered landslides)

117

4.7

The extent of dryland systems worldwide (2000)

120

4.8 Freshwater availability (m3 per person per year, 2007)

124

4.9 Global Water Stress Indicator (WSI) in major basins

125

4.10 Global physical and economic water scarcity

125

5.1

Key constraints to doing business in several geographic and economic regions

143

6.1

Dashboard of data availability in SADC countries

166

7.1

Use of improved drinking water sources (2008)

179

7.2

Number of people affected by selected extreme weather events in the UNECE region, 1970–2008

191

7.3

Asia-Paciﬁc water hotspots

7.4

Increase in urban populations between 1970 and 2010

200

7.5

Frequency of hydrometeorological events, 1970–2007

204

WWDR4

195

BOXES,
EUROPE
TABLES,
AND
FIGURES
NORTHAND
AMERICA
MAPS

363

7.6

Domestic water consumption relative to GDP per capita in the UNESCWA region

7.7

Decline in renewable water resources in the Arab region per capita

209

8.1

Backcasting versus forecasting scenarios

9.1

Key drivers and causal links affecting water stress and sustainability and human well-being

211
245

10.1 Beneﬁts from the water cycle

267
279

10.2 Parties in the water dialogue space

285

10.3 Value perspectives in the water dialogue space

286

11.1

Conceptual model illustrating the general trend of change as water resource managers adapt to include
a wider range of drivers and issues

292

11.2 Monitoring and assessment cycle

297

11.3 The Trialogue Model with structured interfaces between the three main actor clusters of government,
society and science is conducive to adaptive IWRM

298

MAPS

364

7.1

UNECA Member States

176

7.2

UNECE Member States

186

7.3

UNESCAP Member States

193

7.4

UNECLAC Member States

199

7.5

UNESCWA Member States

208

CHAPTER 30

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY AND RISK

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AASB
AC
ACCA
ACCRA
ACMAD
ACWUA
ADB
ADPC
ADSS
AfDB
AFED
AI
AICD
AMCOW
AMO
AMOC
AMWC
ANA
AO
APFAMGS
APWF
ARH
ARPA
ASCE
ASEAN
ATP
AWB
AWC
AWDR
AWF
AWICH
AWM
AWM
AWTF
BAT
BAU
BEP
BGR
BIRDS
BMAP
BMWS
BOD
BOT
BRIC(S)
BSE
BSR
CAD
CADA

WWDR4

Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
(Australia)
Albufeira Convention (Portugal)
Association of Chartered Certiﬁed
Accountants (UK)
African Climate Change Resilience Alliance
African Centre for Meteorological Applications
for Development
Arab Countries Water Utilities Association
The Asian Development Bank
Asian Disaster Preparedness Centre
advanced decision support system
The African Development Bank
Arab Forum for Environment and
Development
Aridity Index
Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic
African Ministers’ Council on Water
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation
Arab Ministerial Water Council
National Water Agency (Brazil)
Arctic Oscillation
Andhra Pradesh Farmers Ground Water
Management System
Asia-Paciﬁc Water Forum
Administração da Região Hidrográﬁca
(Portugal)
Regional Agency for Environmental Protection
(Italy)
American Society of Civil Engineers
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
adaptation tipping point
area water board
Arab Water Council
African Water Development Report
African Water Facility
African Water Information Clearing House
adaptive water management
agricultural water management
Africa Water Task Force
best available technique
business as usual
best environmental practice
Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural
Resources (Germany)
Bharati Integrated Rural Development Society
basin management action plan
barley, maize, wheat and soybean
biological (or biochemical) oxygen demand
build-operate-transfer
countries: Brazil, Russian Federation, India,
China (South Africa)
bovine spongiform encephalopathy
business for social responsibility
Central Apennines District
Central Apennines District Authority

CADC
CAMRE
CAP
CATIE
CBD
CBO
CBRN
CBSR
CCAI
CCRIF
CD
CDA
CEC
CEC
CEDARE
CEDAW
CEH
CELADE
CEPMLP
CHRAJ
CIDA
CIF
CIFOR
CILSS
CIS
CLIMPAG
CNE
COD
CONAGUA
CoP
COP
CPA
CPWC
CRED
CRM
CSDRM
CSE
CSEC
CSIRO
CSR
CVI
CWA

Commission for the Application and
Development of the Convention (Portugal)
Council of Arab Ministers Responsible for the
Environment
Common Agricultural Policy (EU)
Centro Agronómico Tropical de Investigación
y Enseñanza (Costa Rica)
Convention on Biological Diversity
community-based organization
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear
Canadian Business for Social Responsibility
International Climate Change Adaptation
Initiative
Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility
capacity development
Chilika Development Authority (India)
California Energy Commission
Commission for Environmental Cooperation of
North America
Center for Environment and Development for
the Arab Region and Europe
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women (UN)
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (UK)
Latin America and the Caribbean
Demographic Centre
Centre for Energy, Petroleum and Mineral Law
and Policy (The University of Dundee)
Commission for Human Rights and
Administrative Justice (Ghana)
Canadian International Development Agency
climate investment fund
Center for International Forestry Research
Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
Common Implementation Strategy (EU)
climate impact on agriculture
Comisión Nacional de Prevención de Riesgos
y Atención de Emergencias (Mexico)
chemical oxygen demand
National Water Commission (Mexico)
community-of-practice
Conference of the Parties
cleaner production assessment
Co-operative Programme on Water and
Climate (UNESCO-IHE)
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of
Disasters, Catholic University of Louvain
climate risk management
climate smart disaster risk management
Centre for Science and Environment (New
Delhi)
Supreme Council for Water and Climate
(Morocco)
Commonwealth Scientiﬁc and Industrial
Research Organisation (Australia)
corporate social responsibility
Climate Variability Index
Clean Water Act (USA)

ABBREVIATIONS
EUROPE AND NORTH
AND ACRONYMS
AMERICA

365

CWPP
CWSA
DAC
DBOT
DEWATS
DFE
DFID
DLDD
DO
DOE
DPSEEA
DRI
DRM
DRR
DWA
DWAF
EAWAG
EC
EC-IFAS
ECOWAS
EDC
EEA
EHP
EIA
EMA
EMCA
EMS
ENERGIA
ENSO
EPA
EPRI
EU
EUWI
EWP
EWRA
FAO
FIRM
FMMP
FO
FONAFIFO
FONAG
FWRA
GAR
GAR
GAS
GCC
GCF
GCM
GDP
GEF
GEMS
GEO
GHG

366

Congo Cross-Border Water Pipeline Project
Community Water and Sanitation Agency
(Ghana)
Development Assistance Committee (OECD)
design-build-operate-transfer
decentralized wastewater treatment systems
design for environment
Department for International Development
(UK)
desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought
dissolved oxygen
US Department of Energy
driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action model (WHO)
Disaster Risk Index
disaster risk management
disaster risk reduction
Department of Water Affairs (South Africa)
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry
(South Africa)
Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic Science
and Technology
European Commission
Executive Committee of the International
Fund for saving the Aral Sea
Economic Community Of West African States
endocrine disruptive compound
European Environment Agency
Environmental Health Project
US Energy Information Administration
environmental management accounting
Environment Management and Coordination
Act (Kenya)
environmental management system
International Network on Gender and
Sustainable Energy
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
US Environmental Protection Agency
Electric Power Research Institute (USA)
European Union
European Water Initiative
Ecosystem Workforce Program (University of
Oregon)
Egyptian Water Regulatory Agency
Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
Forum for Integrated Resource Management
Flood Mitigation and Management
Programme (of the Mekong River)
farmer organization
Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento Forestal
(Mexico)
Water Protection Fund (Ecuador)
Florida Water Resources Act
Global Assessment Report
groundwater recharge
Guaraní Aquifer System
Gulf Cooperation Council
Green Climate Fund (UNFCCC)
general circulation model
Gross Domestic Product
Global Environment Facility
Global Environment Monitoring System
Global Environment Outlook
greenhouse gas

GIF
GLAAS
GLIMS
GLOF
GLOWS
GPOBA
GPWAR
GRACE
GTN-H
GVEP
GWC
GWCL
GWD
GWI
GWP
GWSP
HAB
HDI
HEPP
HIA
HKJ
HRC
HRHR
HVBWSHE
IAHS
IBNET
IBRD
IBWT
ICA
ICCPR
ICE
ICID
ICIMOD
ICLEI
ICOLD
ICPAC
ICPDR
ICRAF
ICRISAT
ICS
ICT
IDB
IDRC
IDS
IEA
IEG
IFAD
IFAS
IFI

global impact factor
Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water (WHO/UN-Water)
Global Land Ice Measurements from Space
glacial lake outburst ﬂood
Global Water for Sustainability Program
Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid
General Purpose Water Accounting Report
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment
Global Terrestrial Network for Hydrology
Global Village Energy Partnership
International
green water credit
Ghana Water Company Limited
Groundwater Directive (EU)
Global Water Intelligence
Global Water Partnership (CACENA, Caucasus
and Central Asia; SEA, Southeast Asia)
Global Water Systems Project
harmful algal bloom
Human Development Index
hydroelectric power plant
Health Impact Assessment
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
Human Rights Council (UN)
high risk-high reward
Human Values-Based approach to Water,
Sanitation and Hygiene promotion
International Association of Hydrological
Sciences
International Benchmarking Network for
Water and Sanitation Utilities
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
Inter-Basin Water Transfer Project
Infrastructure Consortium for Africa
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights
Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad
(Mexico)
International Commission on Irrigation and
Drainage
International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development
International Council for Local Environmental
Initiatives
International Commission on Large Dams
Climate Prediction and Applications Centre
(IGAD, Africa)
International Commission for the Protection of
the Danube River
World Agroforestry Centre
International Crops Research Institute for the
Semi-Arid Tropics
information and communication systems
information communication technology
The Inter-American Development Bank
International Development Research Centre
Institute of Development Studies (UK)
International Energy Agency
Independent Evaluation Group (World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural
Development
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
international ﬁnancing institution

IFPRI
IFRC
IGAD
IGRAC
IGWA
IHA
IIA
IIED
IIRR
IISD
ILC
ILEC
ILWRM
IMR
IPCC
IRB
IRI
IRS
IRTCES
IRWS
ISARM
ISET
ISNAR
ISO
ISPRA
ISRIC
ISWM
ITCZ
IUCN
IUWM
IWA
IWLP
IWM
IWMI
IWRM
IWROM
JISAO
JMP
JRV
KDP
LAC
LAS
LBP
LCB
LCBC
LCRBC
LDC

WWDR4

International Food Policy Research Institute
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies
Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development
International Groundwater Resources
Assessment Centre
Interagency Group on Water
International Hydropower Association
international investment agreement
International Institute for Environment and
Development
International Institute of Rural Reconstruction
International Institute for Sustainable
Development
International Land Coalition
International Lake Environment Committee
integrated land and water resources
management
UN-Water Task Force on Indicators,
Monitoring and Reporting
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
Indus River basin
International Research Institute for Climate
and Society
indoor residual spraying
International Research and Training Center on
Erosion and Sedimentation
International Recommendations for Water
Statistics
Internationally Shared Aquifer Resources
Management
Institute for Social and Environmental
Transition
International Service for National Agricultural
Research
International Organization for Standardization
Italian National Institute for Environmental
Protection and Research
World Soil Information
integrated stormwater management
Intertropical Convergence Zone
International Union for Conservation of Nature
integrated urban water management
International Water Association
International Water Law Project
integrated water management
International Water Management Institute
integrated water resources management
integrated water resources optimization
model
Joint Institute for the Study of the
Atmosphere and Ocean
Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply
and Sanitation (WHO/UNICEF)
The Jordan Rift Valley
World Bank-supported Kecamatan
Development Project
Latin America and the Caribbean
League of Arab States
Lower Bhavani Project
Lerma Chapala River basin
Lake Chad Basin Commission
Lerma Chapala River Basin Council
least developed country

LHWP
LLDC
LLIN
LME
LNMC
LPI
LVBWO
LVWATSANI

Lesotho Highlands Water Project
land-locked developing country
long lasting insecticide-treated mosquito net
large marine ecosystem
Libyan National Meteorological Centre
Living Planet Index
Lake Victoria Basin Water Office
Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation
Initiative
MA
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
MAP
Mediterranean Action Plan (UNEP)
MAR
managed aquifer recharge
MAWF
Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry
MCED
Ministerial Conference on Environment and
Development of the Asia-Paciﬁc
MDB
Murray–Darling basin
MDBA
Murray–Darling Basin Authority
MDG
Millennium Development Goal
MDWPP
Multi-donor Water Partnership Programme
MEA
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
MEA
multilateral environmental agreement
MEDAWARE European Commission Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership
MIGA
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(World Bank)
MINAET
Ministry of Environment, Energy and
Telecommunications (Mexico)
MPM
Marseille Provence Métropole Urban
Community
MRB
Mara River basin
MRC
Mekong River Commission for Sustainable
Development
MRI
Mortality Risk Index
MTWM
Ministry of Transport and Water Management
(Netherlands)
MWI
Ministry of Water and Irrigation (Kenya)
MWP
Mondi Wetlands Programme (South Africa)
MWRWH
Ministry of Water Resources, Works and
Housing (Ghana)
NADMO
National Disaster Management Organization
(Ghana)
NAFTA
North American Free Trade Agreement
NAO
North Atlantic Oscillation
NAPA
National Adaptation Plan (or Programme) of
Action
NAS
National Academy of Sciences
NCAR
National Centre for Atmospheric Research
(USA)
NCASI
National Council for Air and Stream
Improvement (USA)
NCMH
National Commission on Macroeconomics and
Health (India)
NDMA
National Disaster Management Authority
(China)
NDMP
National Disaster Management Plan (Ghana)
NEPAD
New Partnership for Africa’s Development
NETL
National Energy Technology Laboratory
NFUS
National Farmers Union (Scotland)
NGO
non-governmental organization
NMHS
national meteorological and hydrological
service
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (USA)
NRC
National Research Council (USA)
NRW
non-revenue water

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

367

NWC
NWC
NWI
NWL
NWM
NWP
NWP
NWS
NWSC
OAU
OBA
ODA
OECD
OKACOM
OLADE
OMVS
ONE
ONEP
OSCE
OSU
OTA
PAHO
PCaC
PCB
PDO
PEDDR
PER
PES
PGDAC
PID
PIDA
PMEL
PNA
PNRC
POP
PoU
PPCPs
PPCR
PPI
PPP
PPWSA
PRB
PRESA
PRTA
PSI
PUB
PURC
PV
PWTOA
R&D

368

National Water Commission (Australia)
National Water Council (Portugal)
National Water Initiative (Australia)
national water law
Indian National Water Mission
Nairobi Work Programme
National Water Policy (Mexico)
National Water Strategy (Jordan)
National Water and Sewerage Corporation
(Uganda)
Organisation of African Unity (now the African
Union)
output-based aid
official development assistance (or aid)
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development
Okavango River Basin Trans-boundary
Management Commission
Latin American Energy Organization
Organization for the Development of the
Senegal River
Office National de l’Electricité (Morocco)
Office National de l’Eau Potable (Morocco)
Organization for Security in Central Europe
Oregon State University
Optimal Territorial Area (Italy)
Pan American Health Organization
Programa Campesino a Campesino
(Nicaragua)
polychlorinated biphenyl
Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation
Partnership for Environment and Disaster Risk
Reduction
public expenditure review
payment for ecosystem services
Piano di Gestione del Distretto dell’Appennino
Centrale (Italy)
Provincial Irrigation Department (China)
Provincial Irrigation and Drainage Authority
(China)
Paciﬁc Marine Environmental Laboratory
(NOAA, USA)
Paciﬁc North American Pattern
Le Plan National de lutte contre le
Réchauffement Climatique (Morocco)
persistent organic pollutant
point-of-use
pharmaceuticals and personal care products
Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
Private Participation in Infrastructure database (World Bank)
public-private partnership
Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority
Population Reference Bureau
Pro-poor Rewards for Environmental Services
in Africa
Regional Plan for Water Protection (Italy)
Pilot Study on Indicators (WWAP)
prediction of ungauged basins
Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
(Ghana)
solar photovoltaic
Private Water Tanker Owners Association
(Ghana)
research and development

RAED
RBB
RBC
RBDA
RBDC
RBF
REDD
RMC
RRC
RWSSI
SAARC
SABEP
SACI
SADC
SADC-DMC
SAFE
SALDRU
SAP
SAPP
SARPN
SAWAF
SAWUN
SBSTA
SDWA
SEE
SEEAW
SEI
SEM
SENARA
SEPA
SES
SEWA
SIDS
SISS
SIWI
SIWW
SJRB
SJR-WMD
SLM
SME
SOC
SOM
SOPAC
SPI
SST
SSWM
SWA
SWAP
SWAR
SWE
SWOT

Arab Network for Environment and
Development
river basin board
river basin council
river basin development authority (Nigeria)
river basin district council
results-based ﬁnancing
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and
Forest Degradation initiative (UNFCCC)
regional member country
River Restoration Centre (UK)
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Initiative
(AfDB)
Comprehensive Framework on Disaster
Management (India)
Companhia de Saneamento Básico do Estado
de São Paulo
South African Capacity Initiative
Southern African Development Community
SADC Drought Monitoring Centre
surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness and
environmental improvement
Southern Africa Labour and Development
Research Unit
strategic action plan
South African Power Pool
South African Regional Poverty Network
South Asia Water Forum
Water Utility Network (South Asia)
Subsidiary Body for Scientiﬁc and
Technological Advice (UNFCCC)
Safe Drinking Water Act (USA)
South-Eastern Europe
UN System of Environmental-Economic
Accounting for Water
Stockholm Environmental Institute
Société des Eaux de Marseille
Servicio Nacional de Aguas Subterráneas,
Riego y Avenamiento (Mexico)
Scottish Environment Protection Agency
socio-ecological system
Self Employed Women’s Association (Gujarat,
India)
small island developing states
Superintendencia de Servicios Sanitarios
(Chile)
Stockholm International Water Institute
Singapore International Water Week
St Johns River basin
St Johns River Water Management District
sustainable land management
small and medium enterprises
soil organic carbon
soil organic matter
Paciﬁc Islands Applied Geoscience
Commission
Standardized Precipitation Index
sea surface temperature
sustainable sanitation and water management
Sanitation and Water for All global initiative
sector-wide approach to planning
surface water runoff
sectoral water efficiency
strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-threats

TAC
TAO
TARWR
TDS
TEEB
TEST
TMDL
TNC
TRB
TRB
TRBA
TSG
TWB-MRB
UFW
UN ECOSOC
UN
UN-HABITAT
UNAG
UNCCD
UNCSD
UNCTAD
UNDESA
UNDP
UNDRO
UNECA
UNECE
UNECLAC
UNEP
UNEP/GEMS
UNESCAP
UNESCO
UNESCO-IHE
UNESCO-IHP
UNESCWA
UNFCCC
UNICEF
UNIDO
UNISDR
UNOCHA
UNSD
UNSGAB
UNU
UNU-WIDER

WWDR4

Technical Advisory Committee of the Global
Water Partnership
Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project
total annual renewable water resources
total dissolved solids
The Economics of Ecosystems and
Biodiversity
transfer of environmentally sound technology
total maximum daily load
The Nature Conservancy
Tiber River basin
Tagus River Basin
Tiber River Basin Authority
Techknowledgy Strategic Group (USA)
Transboundary Water for Biodiversity and
Human Health in the Mara River basin
unaccounted for water
United Nations Economic and Social Council
United Nations
United Nations Human Settlements
Programme
National Union of Farmers and Ranchers
(Nicaragua)
United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertiﬁcation
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development
United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development
United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Disaster Relief Organization
United Nations Economic Commission for
Africa
United Nations Economic Commission for
Europe
United Nations Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean
United Nations Environment Programme
Global Environment Monitoring System
(UNEP)
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization
Institute for Water Education
International Hydrological Programme
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia
United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations Industrial Development
Organization
United Nations International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction Secretariat
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs
United Nations Statistics Division
United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory
Board on Water and Sanitation
United Nations University
United Nations University World Institute for
Development Economics Research

UNWAIS+
UNW-DPAC
UNW-DPC
UPA
USACE
USAID
USBR
USDA
USDOE
USEPA
USEPA
VBD
WACF
WAJ
WAPDA
WAPP
WASH
WaterSHED
WBCSD
WCD
WDM
WEC
WEF
WEF
WESSA
WFD
WFP
WFP
WFPF
WHA
WHO
WHYCOS
WIN
WMO
WRC
WRI
WRMA
WSS
WSSCC
WSSD
WTP
WUA
WWAP
WWC
WWDR
WWF
WWF
WWTP
YRB
YRCC

UN-Water Activity Information System
UN-Water Decade Programme on Advocacy
and Communication
UN-Water Decade Programme on Capacity
Development
urban and peri-urban agriculture
United States Army Corps of Engineers
United States Agency for International
Development
United States Bureau of Reclamation
United States Department of Agriculture
United States Department of Energy
National Service Center for Environmental
Publications (USA)
United States Environmental Protection
Agency
vector-borne diseases
Water Accounting Conceptual Framework
Water Authority of Jordan
Water and Power Development Authority
(China)
West African Power Pool
water, sanitation and hygiene
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Enterprise
Development
World Business Council on Sustainable
Development
World Commission on Dams
water demand management
World Energy Council
Water Environment Federation
World Economic Forum
Wildlife and Environment Society of South
Africa
Water Framework Directive (EU)
United Nations World Food Programme
Water Financing Program (ADB)
Water Financing Partnership Facility
World Health Assembly
World Health Organization
World Hydrological Cycle Observing System
(WMO)
Water Integrity Network
World Meteorological Organization
Water Resources Commission (Ghana)
World Resources Institute
Water Resources Management Authority
(Kenya)
water supply and sanitation
Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative
Council
World Summit on Sustainable Development
willingness to pay
water users association
World Water Assessment Programme
World Water Council
World Water Development Report
World Water Forum
World Wide Fund for Nature
wastewater treatment plant
Yellow River basin
Yellow River Conservancy Commission

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

369

GLOSSARY

‘Anthropocene’ A new geological epoch so named because
humans have come to rival nature in their impact on the
physics, chemistry and biology of the global environment.

Aﬂaj A system of tapping underground water which is led
by man-made subterranean channels to villages where it is
used for irrigation and domestic purposes.

ablation The removal of material from the surface of an
object by vaporization, chipping or other erosive processes.
Ablation constitutes a key part of glacier mass balance. The
ablation zone refers to the low altitude area of a glacier or an
ice sheet where there is a net loss in ice mass due to melting,
sublimation, evaporation or calving.

agriculture Activities related to the growing and production of animals and crops that can take place either given the
natural rainfall patterns (rainfed agriculture) or with the application of additional water (irrigation), often from surface
or groundwater sources.

abstraction The process of taking water from a source,
either temporarily or permanently.
acid rain The precipitation of dilute solutions of strong
mineral acids, formed by the mixing in the atmosphere of
various industrial pollutants, primarily sulphur dioxide and
nitrogen oxides, with naturally occurring oxygen and water
vapour.
adaptation Any alteration in the structure, function or
behaviour of an organism, an institution or a society as its
external environment changes so that it becomes better able
to survive, multiply and achieve its goals, as applicable, in its
changing environment.
adaptation tipping point The costs, risks and impacts of
climate change will increase over time to the point when
they challenge the expectations of resource managers and
the business community as they make decisions.
adaptive capacity The capacity of a system (e.g. ecological or human social) to adapt if the environment where the
system exists is changing.
adaptive decision-making Approaches and techniques
for addressing problems over time in response to changing
conditions.
adaptive management A type of natural resource management where adjustments are made in response to project
monitoring, new information, and changing social conditions
that may indicate the need to change a course of action. The
aim is to learn about the system and improve system performance over time.
adaptive planning Planning methods that consider adaption to changing and uncertain conditions over time to
achieve improved performance, more effective or efficient
resource use, increased beneﬁts, reduced costs and so forth.
adaptive strategy Planning or management strategy that
can change depending on changing environmental conditions or changing objectives.
adaptive water management Water management policies
that can adapt to changing conditions and objectives over
time.
advance market commitment A binding contract, typically offered by a government or other ﬁnancial entity, used
to guarantee a viable market if a product is successfully
developed.

370

agriculture-to-urban water transfer When water supplies
that traditionally have been allocated to agriculture activities
are allocated to urban areas to help meet their demands.
aquaculture Also known as aquafarming, the farming of
aquatic organisms such as ﬁsh, crustaceans, molluscs and
aquatic plants. Commercial ﬁshing is the harvesting of wild
ﬁsh.
AQUASTAT The global information system on water and
agriculture developed by the Land and Water Division of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO).
aquifer A water body occupying pore space in the Earth
or rock formations under the surface of the Earth. Fossil
aquifers take thousands of years to build – and rebuild (or
recharge).
arable cropping The process of growing crops on land that
can be ploughed.
Arctic Oscillation (AO) Also known as Northern Annular
Mode/Northern Hemisphere Annular Mode (NAM), an index
of the dominant pattern of non-seasonal sea-level pressure
variations north of 20° latitude, characterized by pressure
anomalies of one sign in the Arctic with the opposite anomalies centred 37–45°N.
arid region Characterized by a severe lack of available water, to the extent of hindering or even preventing the growth
and development of plant and animal life. There is no universal agreement on the precise boundaries between classes
such as ‘hyper-arid’ or ‘semi-arid’.
Aridity Index (AI) A numerical indicator of the degree
of dryness of the climate at a given location. A number of
AIs have been proposed; these indicators serve to identify, locate or delimit regions that suffer from a deﬁcit of
available water, a condition that can severely affect the effective use of the land for such activities as agriculture or
stock-farming.
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC)
Carries warm upper waters into far-northern latitudes and
returns cold deep waters southward across the Equator. Its
heat transport makes a substantial contribution to the moderate climate of maritime and continental Europe.
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) Variability of the
sea surface temperature in the North Atlantic Ocean.

Backcasting Reverse-forecasting technique which starts
with a speciﬁc future outcome and then works backwards
to identify policies and programmes that will connect to the
present conditions. Forecasting is the process of predicting
the future based on current trend analysis.
ballast water Fresh or salt water, sometimes containing
sediments, held in tanks and cargo holds of ships to increase
stability and manoeuvrability during transit. The discharge of
water from ballast tanks has been responsible for the introduction of species that cause environmental and economic
damage.
basin closure When supply of water falls short of commitments to fulﬁl demand in terms of water quality and quantity
within the basin and at the river mouth, for part or all of the
year, basins are said to be closing or closed. Basin closure
can be an anthropogenic process.
Bayesian network A graphical model that encodes probabilistic relationships among variables of interest. It can be
used to learn causal relationships, and hence predict the
consequences of intervention.
behavioural decision theory Theory on how people make
judgments and choices, and how the processes of decision
might be improved using concepts and tools from psychology, economics, statistics and other disciplines. People’s behaviour is based on their perception of what reality is, not on
reality itself.
beneﬁt transfer approach Method used to estimate economic values for ecosystem services by transferring available
information from studies already completed in another location or context.
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) The amount of oxygen needed by microorganisms digest the organic material
in a unit volume of water at a given temperature and for a
given time. It is an index of the degree of organic pollution
in water.
biodiversity The variability among living organisms from
all sources including terrestrial, marine and other aquatic
ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they
are part. The totality of genes, species and ecosystems in a
region.
biofuel Organic material – produced by plants, animals or
microorganisms – such as sugar cane stalks, leaves or animal
dung, that can be burned directly as a heat source or converted into a gaseous or liquid fuel. These fuels can be used
for any purposes, but the main use is in the transportation
sector.
biomass energy The energy derived from the carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in biomass. Biomass energy is derived
from ﬁve distinct energy sources: garbage, wood, waste,
landﬁll gases and alcohol fuels.
biome The complex of living communities (including humans) maintained by the climate of a region and characterized by a distinctive type of vegetation, such as tundra, tropical forest, steppe and desert.
black water

Wastewater containing faeces.

blue water Natural surface water and groundwater.
bottom billion The almost one billion people who live
in the 60 or so impoverished countries that have failed to

WWDR4

progress despite international aid and support. Coined by
Paul Collier in the 2007 book Why the Poorest Countries are
Failing and What Can Be Done About It.
bottom-up approach A stakeholder-driven approach to
planning and decision-making as opposed to a government
top-down approach that dictates to the stakeholders what
decisions will be made.
BRIC(S) countries Brazil, Russian Federation, India, China
(and South Africa). The WWDR4 uses both terms (BRIC and
BRICS) as BRICS is a new development and not all statistics
and descriptors have been updated to include South Africa
in the group.
brittleness (as a characteristic of a solution) The likelihood
of failure should input variable values deviate from those expected and for which the solution was designed.
business-as-usual approach Proceeding as in the past, in
the usual prescribed manner without changing any policy or
plan.
capacity The ability to perform and accomplish particular
tasks. Capacity-building and capacity development usually
refers to educational programmes designed to give individuals the knowledge and skills needed to perform given tasks.
carbon credit A generic term for any tradable certiﬁcate
or permit representing the right to emit one tonne of carbon
dioxide or the mass of another greenhouse gas (GHG) with
a carbon dioxide equivalent to one tonne of carbon dioxide. Carbon credits and carbon markets are a component of
national and international attempts to mitigate the growth in
concentrations of GHGs. Carbon trading is an application of
an emissions trading approach.
carbon cycle The biogeochemical cycle by which carbon
is exchanged among the biosphere, pedosphere, geosphere,
hydrosphere and atmosphere of the Earth. It allows for carbon to be recycled and reused throughout the biosphere and
all of its organisms.
carbon sequestration Capturing and storing carbon discharges to the atmosphere in carbon sinks (such as oceans,
forests or soils) to either mitigate or defer global warming
and avoid dangerous climate change.
cash crop Crop grown for sale as opposed to for consumption by those who grew them on the farm (subsistence crop).
catastrophe modelling Development and use of models
that predict risks of catastrophic events.
clean energy Sources of energy that do not pollute the
environment or discharge greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, such as energy derived from the sun, tides and wind.
Hydropower and nuclear energy sources are also often considered clean.
clientelism Term used to describe a political system at the
heart of which is an asymmetric relationship between groups
of political actors described as patrons and clients.
climate change Climate change refers to any signiﬁcant
change in measures of climate (such as temperature, precipitation or wind) lasting for an extended period (decades or
longer). Climate change can result from natural processes or
human activities. Mitigation refers to measures that reduce
any adverse impacts from climate change. Adaptation refers
to measures that are taken to better manage systems as

GLOSSARY

371

they change due to a changing climate. Forcing is a process
that alters the energy balance of the climate system; that is,
changes the relative balance between incoming solar radiation and outgoing infrared radiation from Earth.
Climate Vulnerability Index (CVI) A function dependent on
climate exposure, resilience and adaptability. The CVI uses
water as a focus as it is a key factor of human and ecological
well-being.

decision rules (minimax, maximin) Strategies or policies
that minimize the worst that can happen (i.e. minimize the
maximum adverse aspect or impact or measure of system
performance) or that maximize the least beneﬁcial aspect,
impact or measure of system performance.

climate-smart cropping Measures to conserve nutrients,
water and biodiversity in ways that increase crop yields.

decision-scaling Identifying what kind of climate changes
would cause problems and then turning to the climate models to estimate whether those climate changes are likely.

closed-loop production system An environmentally friendly production system in which any industrial residual output
is capable of being recycled to create another product.

decision-support tool Tools such as models that inform
the process of decision-making. Often these are interactive
menu-driven computer-based programmes.

command-and-control approach An approach in which a
regulatory body or political authority dictates a behaviour
or how some goal is to be achieved. In environmental policy,
this basically involves the setting of standards to protect or
improve environmental quality.

deforestation The removal of forests and forest cover,
often for the purpose of agriculture, urban or industrial
development.

conditional cash transfer (CCT) Programmes that aim to
reduce poverty by making welfare programs conditional
upon the receivers’ actions. The government transfers the
money only to persons who meet certain criteria.
conservation agriculture Practices that aim to achieve
sustainable and proﬁtable agriculture and subsequently improved livelihoods of farmers through minimal soil disturbance, permanent soil cover and crop rotations.
convertible loan Loan that entitles the lender (or the
holder of loan debenture) to convert the loan to common or
preferred stock (ordinary or preference shares) at a speciﬁed
conversion rate and within a speciﬁed timeframe.
corporate social responsibility (CSR) A form of corporate
self-regulation integrated into a business model. The goal is
to embrace responsibility for the company’s actions and encourage a positive impact through its activities on the environment, consumers, employees, communities, stakeholders
and the public.
corruption Inducement to wrong by improper or unlawful
means such as bribery.
cost–beneﬁt–risk analysis Procedure for calculating and
evaluating the beneﬁts, costs and risks of a proposed project.

delta A landform that is formed at the mouth of a river
where that river ﬂows into an ocean, sea, estuary, lake, reservoir, ﬂat arid area or another river, from the deposition of the
sediment carried by the river as the ﬂow leaves the mouth.
demand hardening As a water user becomes more efﬁcient in the use of water, it becomes more difficult to save
increased amounts of water during a shortage or drought.
demand management measure An action that is meant to
ensure greater availability of resources to meet the level of
requests.
demography The study of the characteristics of human
populations, such as size, growth, density, distribution and
vital statistics.
desalination Removal of salt and other impurities from sea
or brackish surface or groundwater.
desertiﬁcation Land degradation in arid, semi-arid and dry
sub-humid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities.
disaster risk management (DRM) Measures taken to reduce the risks of human suffering and economic losses
caused by natural and technological disasters.
disaster risk reduction (DRR) The practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyse and reduce
the causal factors of disasters.

cradle-to-cradle Industrial design and operation paradigm
based on the principles and an understanding of the pursuit
of value, processes for product and material research and development, and for educating and training. Cradle-to-cradle
principles encourage making waste into food and fuel just as
nature does; they seek to create systems that are not just efﬁcient but essentially waste free.

discounting Determining the value of some amount of
money in an earlier time period taking into account the time
value of money. It is the opposite of compounding, and requires the use of an interest rate applicable to the time interval being considered.

crop per drop The amount or value of product over volume
or value of water depleted or diverted to produce it.

dissolved oxygen (DO) The amount or concentration of
oxygen in a medium, such as water. The DO deﬁcit from its
saturation concentration is a common indicator of the degree of organic pollution in a water body.

cross-cutting (issue) Topic of concern to several different
sectors or interests that include subjects such as education,
ﬁnance and budgeting, personnel management and security,
trade, technology transfer, consumption and production patterns, science, capacity-building and information.
cryosphere Portions of the Earth’s surface where water is
in solid form, including sea ice, lake ice, river ice, snow cover,

372

glaciers, ice caps and ice sheets, and frozen ground (which
includes permafrost).

diversiﬁcation The variability or richness of types of species or organisms in ecosystems or types of investments in
investment portfolios that decrease the risks of major failures in ecosystems or of large economic losses, as applicable.
driver Force or event outside the system of interest that affect its behaviour or performance directly or indirectly.

drought The naturally occurring phenomenon that exists
when precipitation has been signiﬁcantly below normal recorded levels, causing serious hydrological imbalances that
adversely affect land resource production systems.

energy–climate–water cycle This cycling of water is intimately linked with energy exchanges among the atmosphere,
ocean, and land that determine the Earth’s climate and cause
much of natural climate variability.

drought-resilient crop Crop that is able to survive and
recover from extended dry periods. Drought-resistant crops
typically refer to crops that have been subjected to plant
breeding to improve their ability to survive in periods of extended water shortage.

environmental ﬂow The core objective of river basin management. Instream or river ﬂows and regime designed to
maintain healthy aquatic ecosystems in the stream or river.
Waters allocated to environmental ﬂows are not available for
withdrawals to off-stream users.

drylands Arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, other
than polar and subpolar regions, in which the ratio of annual
precipitation to potential evapotranspiration falls within the
range from 0.05 to 0.65.

environmental management accounting (EMA) A business
tool for creating internal demand in businesses for cleaner
and less wasteful production processes.

dry-year option Contractual agreements that provide for
voluntary and temporary drought-triggered water transfers.
durable consumption rate Rate of consumption of goods
that do not quickly wear out, or more speciﬁcally, goods that
yield utility over time rather than being completely consumed in one use.
early warning system Technology designed to provide advanced warning of pending hazards or other events.
eco-efficiency water infrastructure guidelines Procedures
for designing water infrastructure for the delivery of competitively priced goods and services that satisfy human needs
and improve quality of life, while progressively reducing ecological impacts and resource use.
eco-innovation The commercial application of knowledge
to elicit direct or indirect ecological improvements.
ecological footprint The biologically productive land and
water area that a person or population requires from around
the world to produce the resources consumed and to absorb
the wastes generated using prevailing technology.

environmental management system (EMS) Management
of an organization’s environmental programmes in a comprehensive, systematic, planned and documented manner. An
EMS offers a structured way to incorporate environmental
considerations into day-to-day operations.
environmental/ecosystem assessment Estimation of the
adverse effects that human activities and pollutants have on
an ecosystem.
estuary A bay or inlet often at the mouth of a river in which
large quantities of freshwater and saltwater mix together.
eutrophication The nutrient enrichment of waters that
stimulates an array of symptomatic changes, among which
increased production of algae and macrophytes, deterioration of water quality and other changes are considered undesirable and interfere with water users.
evapotranspiration Water released to the atmosphere
through evaporation from the ground and water surfaces
and from the leaf surface of plants (transpiration).
extraction The process of locating, acquiring, removing
and selling any resource.

ecosystem A dynamic complex of plant, animal and microorganism communities and their non-living environment
interacting as a functional unit.

extreme (hydrological) event Unusual hydrological conditions rarely observed, such as ﬂoods, droughts, temperatures,
winds and storms.

ecosystem/environmental infrastructure Infrastructure
that provides ecosystem services such as water puriﬁcation,
ﬂood control, recreation and climate stabilization.

ﬁt-for-purpose structure A structure that is suitable and
good enough to do the job it was designed to do. ‘Fit-forpurpose’ is one of the principles for quality assurance.

ecosystem services (and goods and functions) Any aspect
of ecosystem structure and function that has an economic,
social or cultural value, known or unknown, to its inhabitants.

ﬂash ﬂood Flash ﬂoods are short-term events, occurring
within six hours of the causative event (heavy rain, dam
break, levee failure, rapid snowmelt or ice jam) and often
within two hours of the start of high intensity rainfall.

ecosystem tipping point A threshold at which a relatively
small change causes a rapid change in an ecosystem. When
the threshold has been passed, the ecosystem may no longer
be able to return to its previous state.
effluent The discharge from a wastewater treatment plant,
or water user.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) A quasiperiodic complex climate pattern that occurs across the tropical Paciﬁc
Ocean roughly every ﬁve years, with impacts such as ﬂoods
and droughts.
energy Primary energy is an energy source found in nature
that has not been subjected to any conversion or transformation process. It can be renewable or non-renewable.
Secondary energy is derived from primary energy sources; for example, electricity, transformed from such primary
sources as coal, oil, natural gas and wind.

WWDR4

ﬂoodplain Mostly ﬂat land adjacent to a river, formed by
the actions of the river. Floodplains are beneﬁcial for reducing the number and severity of ﬂoods.
food security Having, at all times, both physical and economic access to sufficient food to meet dietary needs for a
productive and healthy life. Food security is built on food
availability, access and use.
food wastage Food wastes are the organic residues generated by the handling, storage, sale, preparation, cooking and
serving of food. Food wastage is a symptom of developed
countries’ consumerism.
fossil fuel, hydrocarbon A broad name given to a variety
of fuels found in the Earth. These fuels have the name fossil
fuels because they probably formed from the remains of ancient decaying organisms.

GLOSSARY

373

free-riding In economics, collective bargaining, psychology and political science, free-riding refers to the behaviour
of consuming a resource without paying for it, or paying less
than the full cost. It is usually considered to be an economic
problem only when it leads to the non-production or underproduction of a public good or when it leads to the excessive
use of a common property resource.
freshwater Water containing less than 1,000 milligrams
per litre of dissolved solids, most often salt. It naturally occurs on the Earth’s surface in ice sheets, ice caps, glaciers,
bogs, ponds, lakes, rivers and streams, and underground as
groundwater in aquifers and underground streams. This term
speciﬁcally excludes seawater and brackish water although it
does include mineral rich waters such as chalybeate springs.
glacier A large persistent body of ice that forms where the
accumulation of snow exceeds its ablation (melting and sublimation) over many years, often centuries. Glacial ice is the
largest reservoir of freshwater on Earth.
glacier lake outburst ﬂood (GLOF) and outbursts of glacierdammed lakes (jökulhlaups) As glaciers retreat due to
increasing temperatures, glacial lakes start to form and rapidly ﬁll up behind natural moraine or ice dams at the bottom
or on top of these glaciers. The ice or sediment bodies that
contain the lakes can breach suddenly, leading to a discharge of volumes of water and debris.
global trade in water resources Long-distance transfers of
water in direct or indirect (virtual) form, where virtual water
is the volume of water that has been used to produce a commodity and that is thus virtually embedded in it.
global warming The rising average temperature of Earth’s
atmosphere and oceans and its projected continuation.
globalization The increasingly global relationships of culture, people and economic activity.
governance Decisions that grant power, or verify performance. Governance is either a part of management or leadership processes or a separate process. These processes and
systems are typically administered by a government. Water
governance is the set of formal and informal processes
through which decisions related to water management are
made.
green economy An economy that results in improved human well-being and social equity while signiﬁcantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities. Its most
distinguishing feature from prior economic regimes is direct
valuation of natural capital and ecological services as having
economic value.
green infrastructure The collection of ‘life support’ functions provided by a network of natural ecosystems, with an
emphasis on interconnectivity to support long-term sustainability. Examples include clean water and healthy soils, ﬂood
protection, as well as the more anthropocentric functions
such as recreation and providing shade and shelter in and
around towns and cities.
green water The precipitation on land that does not run off
or recharge the groundwater but is stored in the soil or temporarily stays on top of the soil or vegetation. Eventually, this
part of precipitation evaporates or transpires through plants.
Green water can be made productive for crop growth (but
not all green water can be taken up by crops, because there

374

will always be evaporation from the soil and because not all
periods of the year or areas are suitable for crop growth).
greenhouse gas (GHG) A gas in an atmosphere that absorbs and emits radiation within the thermal infrared range.
The primary GHGs in the Earth’s atmosphere are water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and ozone.
grey water Polluted water that results from non-sanitary
uses of water (e.g. dishwashing, showers).
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) The market value of all ﬁnal goods and services produced within a country in a given
period. GDP per capita is often considered an indicator of
a country’s standard of living. It is not to be confused with
Gross National Product (GNP), which allocates production
based on ownership.
groundwater Aquifer storage changes depending on the
water withdrawn (abstracted) and added (recharge) over
time. Aquifer storage can act as a buffer, permitting withdrawals during periods of low recharge, as long as the deﬁcit
is reduced during periods of relatively high recharge.
hard infrastructure, hard engineering approach Large
physical networks necessary for the functioning of a modern
industrial nation.
health impact assessment (HIA) A means of assessing the
health impacts of policies, plans and projects in diverse economic sectors using quantitative, qualitative and participatory techniques.
household water security The reliable availability of safe
water in the home for all domestic purposes. The term has
both a quantity and a quality component.
Human Development Index (HDI) A tool developed by the
United Nations to measure, track and compare countries’ levels of social and economic development based on four criteria: life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling, expected years of schooling, and gross national income per capita.
human well-being A state of health, happiness and prosperity; of being with others, where human needs are met,
where one can act meaningfully to pursue one’s goals, and
where one enjoys a satisfactory quality of life.
hydroelectricity Electricity generated from a hydropower
plant that typically uses water from a storage reservoir to
drive turbines that generate the electricity.
hydro-geological dataset Databases containing values of
hydrological and geological parameters and variables.
hydrographic network The sum total of water bodies and
streams on land (rivers, lakes, swamps and water reservoirs).
hydrological cycle = hydrologic cycle = H2O cycle = water
cycle The circulatory ﬂux of water at or near the Earth’s
surface.
hydrological record Recorded time series data of hydrological variable values such as streamﬂows, precipitation,
groundwater levels and water quality constituent concentrations, obtained from monitoring.
hydrometeorology A branch of meteorology and hydrology that studies the transfer of water and energy between the
land surface and the lower atmosphere.

hydromorphological alteration/modiﬁcation Human pressure on the natural structure of surface waters such as modiﬁcation of bank structures, sediment/habitat composition,
discharge regime, gradient and slope.
impacts thinking
ternal events.

Thinking that has been impacted by ex-

indeterminacy The quality of something being uncertain,
or incalculable.
indicator A measure that indicates the state of something else. In ecology, an organism or ecological community
so strictly associated with particular environmental conditions that its presence is indicative of the existence of these
conditions. In economics, any of a group of statistical values
that taken together give an indication of the health of the
economy.
institution Interpersonal networks of groups of individuals (informal institutions) that deal with social issues evolve
as society develops economically into formal institutions of a
market-based economy, such as a structured system of laws
imposed by representative forms of governance.
integrated pest management Effective and environmentally sensitive approach to pest management that relies on
comprehensive information on the life cycles of pests and
their interaction with the environment. This information, in
combination with available pest control methods, is used to
manage pest damage by the most economical means, and
with the least possible hazard to people, property and the
environment.
integrated plant nutrition management Use of nutrients
in a yield-targeted, site-and soil speciﬁc way; understanding
the inter-relation of different nutrients; use of combinations
of mineral and organic fertilizers; provision of nutrients on a
cropping-system/rotation basis; and use of on-farm and offfarm waste through recycling.
integrated urban water management (IUWM) The practice
of managing freshwater, wastewater and stormwater as links
within the resource management structure, using an urban
area as the unit of management.
integrated water resources management (IWRM) A systematic process for the sustainable development, allocation
and monitoring of water resource use in the context of social,
economic and environmental objectives.
irrigation The science of artiﬁcial application of water to
the land or soil. In surface irrigation systems, water moves
over the land by simple gravity ﬂow in order inﬁltrate into
the soil. In drip irrigation, the water is placed drop by drop
near the root zone of the plants. Ground and rainfed sources
obtain their water from groundwater and rainfall respectively.
jet stream Relatively strong winds concentrated within a
narrow stream in the atmosphere.
knowledge management The branch of management that
seeks to improve performance in business by enhancing an
organization’s capacity to learn, innovate and solve problems.
land and water rights The relationship, whether legally
or customarily deﬁned between people, as individuals or
groups, with respect to land. In essence a water right is a legal right: to abstract or divert and use a speciﬁed quantity of
water from a natural source; to impound or store a speciﬁed

WWDR4

quantity of water in a natural source behind a dam or other
hydraulic structure; or to use water in a natural source.
land degradation Reduction or loss of the biological or
economic productivity and complexity of land, resulting from
processes, including processes arising from human activities
and habitation patterns, such as (i) soil erosion caused by
wind and/or water; (ii) deterioration of the physical, chemical
and biological or economic properties of soil; and (iii) longterm loss of natural vegetation.
land management Process by which the resources of land
are put to good effect, from an environmental and an economic perspective.
land subsidence Sinking elevation of the ground surface,
which may occur over an aquifer that is slowly draining and
decreasing in volume because of pore collapse.
large-scale land acquisition Gaining of tenure rights to
large areas of land through purchase, lease, concession or
other means.
least developed countries (LDCs) A group of countries
that have been identiﬁed by the United Nations as ‘least developed’ in terms of their low gross national income, their
weak human assets and their high degree of economic
vulnerability.
livelihood

A means of support or subsistence.

low-ﬂow appliance An appliance that is designed to reduce water consumption without compromising performance of the appliance.
managed aquifer recharge (MAR) The process of adding
a water source such as recycled water to aquifers under controlled conditions for withdrawal at a later date, or of using
the water source as a barrier to prevent saltwater or other
contaminants from entering the aquifer.
megacity A city that has a population of more than 10 million people and that is often made of two or more urban areas that have grown so much they have become connected.
microﬁnance The goal of microﬁnance is to give lowincome people an opportunity to become self-sufficient
by providing a means of saving money, borrowing small
amounts of money through microcredit, and buying microinsurance for lower valued assets.
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) Goals that aim
to improve human well-being by reducing poverty, hunger, child and maternal mortality, ensuring education for all,
controlling and managing diseases, tackling gender disparity, ensuring sustainable development, and pursuing global
partnerships.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment Identiﬁcation of the
consequences of ecosystem change for human well-being
and the scientiﬁc basis for action needed to enhance conservation and sustainable use of those systems.
modular water treatment design Design of pre-fabricated,
self-contained and transportable water treatment facilities.
monsoon The seasonal wind of the Indian Ocean and
southern Asia, blowing from the southwest in summer and
northeast in the winter.
moraine An accumulation of earth and stones carried and
ﬁnally deposited by a glacier.

GLOSSARY

375

multilateral environmental agreement An agreement created by the United Nations between multiple nations that
pledge to conduct trade operations in such a way that limits
negative environmental impacts.
nexus A connected group or series of interdependent
components.
nitrate vulnerable zone Areas of land that drain into nitrate polluted water, or water that could become polluted by
nitrates.
non-consumptive production process Production processes that may use but do not consume water. Examples include
the water used for hydropower electricity production and
that used for cooling of thermoelectric power plants.
nonstationarity, nonstationary probabilities Changing
probability distributions or their parameters over time.
no-regrets decision A decision taken by households, communities or institutions that can be justiﬁed from economic,
social and environmental perspectives regardless of future
changes in external conditions.
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) The large-scale seesaw
in atmospheric mass between the subtropical high and polar
low.
official development assistance/aid (ODA) The amount
that a nation expends through grants and other development assistance programs calculated as a percent of gross
national product.
output-based aid (OBA) Development aid strategies that
link the delivery of public services in developing countries to
targeted performance-related subsidies.
Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO) A pattern of Paciﬁc climate variability that shifts phases on at least an inter-decadal time scale, usually 20 to 30 years.
path dependence Explains how the set of decisions faced
for any given circumstance is limited by the decisions made
in the past, even though past circumstances may no longer
be relevant.
payment for ecosystem/environmental services (PES) The
practice of offering incentives to farmers or landowners in
exchange for managing their land to provide some sort of
ecological service.
peak ecological water The point beyond which the total
costs of ecological disruptions and damages exceed the total
value provided by human use of that water.
peak renewable water A term applied where ﬂow constraints limit total water availability over time.
percolation rate The rate at which water moves through
saturated granular material.

376

phreatophytic agriculture A type of agriculture focusing
on deep-rooted plants that obtain water from the water table or the layer of soil just above it.
physical ﬂood defence system Levees, weirs, dykes and
reservoirs – systems in place to protect areas from ﬂood
devastation.
point-of-use (PoU) water treatment/technology A method of water treatment used to improve water quality for an
intended use at the point of consumption instead of at a
centralized treatment facility.
polluter pays principle In environmental law, the polluter
pays principle is enacted to ensure the party responsible for
producing pollution is responsible for paying for the damage
done to the natural environment.
pollution abatement technology Technology that is designed to reduce the concentration of contaminants in water
or on land.
pollutant/pollution Contaminants in a natural environment that cause instability, disorder, harm or discomfort to
the ecosystem or reduce the value of environmental media
for other uses. Point source pollution is a single identiﬁable
localized source of pollution. Non-point source pollution
comes from many diffuse sources – by airborne deposition
as well as from rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through
the ground. Diffuse source pollution has no speciﬁc point of
discharge.
portfolio theory Theory of investment which attempts to
maximize portfolio expected return for a given amount of
portfolio risk, or equivalently minimize risk for a given level
of expected return, by carefully choosing the proportion of
various assets.
potable/non-potable water Potable water is suitable for
human consumption; non-potable water is not.
precautionary principle States that if an action or policy
has a suspected risk of causing harm to the public or to the
environment, in the absence of scientiﬁc consensus that
the action or policy is harmful, burden of proof that it is not
harmful falls on those taking the action.
protectionist policy, protectionism The economic policy
of restraining trade between states through methods such as
tariffs on imported goods, restrictive quotas and a variety of
other government regulations designed to allow ‘fair competition’ between imports and goods and services produced
domestically.
public–private partnership (PPP) A government service
or private business venture which is funded and operated
through a partnership of government and one or more private sector companies.

peri-urban slum/area About a third of the world’s slum
dwellers live in traditional inner cities, but most live on the
peripheral edge in peri-urban slums – sprawling, endless
slum-suburbs.

Ramsar convention An intergovernmental treaty that
embodies the commitments of its member countries to
maintain the ecological character of their Wetlands of
International Importance and to plan for the ‘wise use’ or
sustainable use of all of the wetlands in their territories.

photobioreactor (PBR) A device that houses and cultivates algae. It provides a suitable environment for algae
growth, supplying light, nutrients, air and heat to the culture,
in addition to protecting the culture from contamination.

recharge Groundwater recharge is a hydrological process
where water moves to groundwater. Surface water recharge
is a hydrological process where water runs off to surface
watercourses.

reclaimed water Former wastewater (sewage) that is
treated to remove solids and certain impurities, and is used
in landscaping, irrigation, industrial cooling, or to recharge
groundwater aquifers. The purpose of these processes is water conservation, rather than discharging the treated water
to surface waters such as rivers and oceans.

sector-wide approach to planning (SWAP) An approach
wherein planning and activity is at the whole of sector level,
and the many aspects of a sector are taken into consideration (capacity of personnel, institutional strength, stakeholder consultation, implementation processes, monitoring,
ﬁnancing and so on).

reservoir rule/guide curve A reservoir release policy specifying releases as a function of existing storage level or volume and time of year, or specifying a target storage value
given the time of year and sometimes the inﬂow as well.

sensitivity analysis The study of how the variation (uncertainty) in the output of a model can be attributed to different
variations in the inputs of the model.

resilience A measure of the ability of a system to recover
from an unsatisfactory state.
results-based ﬁnancing (RBF) Ties the disbursement of
subsidies (or aid) to the delivery of actual results. For example, a carbon ﬁnance strategy involves mitigation policies and market mechanisms to create an environment that
promotes diverse energy sources and incentives for new and
cleaner technologies.
retention capacity
such as in soil.

The capacity to store and hold water,

rights-based approach Use of human rights as a framework to guide the development process.
risk Probability of an undesirable outcome.
risk management The identiﬁcation, assessment and prioritization of risks followed by coordinated and economical
application of resources to minimize, monitor and control the
probability or impact of unfortunate events or to maximize
the realization of opportunities.
river gauging station Site and facility where the river ﬂow
or stage is being measured and recorded.
riverine ﬂood protection Measures taken to protect areas on the ﬂoodplain from experiencing a ﬂood, such as
ﬂood prooﬁng, levees and upstream reservoir ﬂood storage
capacity.
robustness A measure of how well a system, strategy or
decision may perform or function given a range of possible
inputs, not all of which are predicted.
runoff Surface ﬂow from land areas during and after a
storm or precipitation event.
run-of-the-river dam A reservoir that is created by a dam
and whose storage volume is maintained at a constant value,
so that the inﬂow equals the outﬂow less any losses.
rural zoning Land use and development that is restricted
to rural uses and activities.
saltwater intrusion The inﬁltration or ﬂow of saltwater into
fresh surface or groundwater bodies.
sanitation The provision of infrastructure, facilities and
services for the safe disposal of human urine and faeces.
Inadequate sanitation is a major cause of disease worldwide.
scenario An account or synopsis of a projected course of
action, event or situation. Scenario development is used in
policy planning, organizational development and generally,
when organisations wish to test strategies against uncertain
future developments.
sectoral water efficiency (SWE) Measure (ratio) of efficiency based on inputs and outputs.

WWDR4

sewage administration Administration of wastewater collection and treatment systems typically so that they produce
enough revenues to fund their own activities.
sewage, sewerage Domestic wastewater typically collected in sewers or ditches and treated in wastewater treatment
plants or discharged as is into water bodies.
smallholder An individual farming on a small area of land,
less than the size of a small farm.
snowpack Layers of snow that accumulate in geographic
regions and high altitudes where the climate includes cold
weather for extended periods during the year.
social learning Observational learning can occur in relation
to an actual person demonstrating the desired behaviour –
an individual describes the desired behaviour in detail, and
instructs the participant in how to engage in the behaviour
– through the media, including, movies, television, Internet,
literature and radio.
socio-ecological system (SES) A bio-geo-physical unit and
its associated social actors and institutions. Socio-ecological
systems are complex and adaptive and delimited by spatial
or functional boundaries surrounding particular ecosystems
and their problem context.
soft infrastructure All the institutions that are required to
maintain the economic, health, cultural and social standards
of a country, such as the ﬁnancial system, the education system, the health care system, the system of government, law
enforcement, and emergency services.
soft path (approach, measure, infrastructure, policy) The
soft path integrates both supply and demand concepts, recognizing that water is a means to satisfy demands for goods
and services, and asks how much water, of what quality, is
actually required to satisfy those demands efficiently and
sustainably.
stakeholder A person, group, organization or system who
affects or can be affected by an organization’s actions.
stationary hydrology The probabilistic nature of hydrological processes is not changing over time.
stochastic analysis The analysis of random processes that
take place over time.
storm surge An offshore rise of water typically associated
with a low pressure weather system.
storm track Relatively narrow zones in the Atlantic and
Paciﬁc Oceans along which most Atlantic or Paciﬁc extratropical cyclones or hurricanes travel.
supply-side infrastructure Infrastructure designed to provide the supply and quality of water or energy needed to
meet the demand.

GLOSSARY

377

surface water Water located on the surface of the Earth,
such as in streams, rivers, lakes, seas and oceans.

different phases of production to delivery to ﬁnal consumers
and disposal after use.

surprise (in a system) System behaviour or performance
that is not expected or foreseen.

virtual (embedded) water
tion of a good or service.

sustainability, sustainable development The capacity to
endure. The long-term maintenance of environmental, economic and social aspects such that the quality of life is improved over time.

vulnerability Degree to which people, property, resources,
systems and cultural, economic, environmental and social activity is susceptible to undesired outcomes, harm, degradation or destruction.

sustainable land management (SLM) Managing land for productivity in agriculture and forestry while providing environmental protection and ecosystem services and taking into account demographic growth and increasing pressure in land use.

wadi

sustainable water management The use of water that supports the ability of human society to endure and ﬂourish into
the indeﬁnite future without undermining the integrity of the
hydrological cycle or the ecological systems that depend on
it.
TARWR (total actual renewable water resources) The theoretical maximum annual volume of water resources available on a sustainable basis in a country.
technocratic knowledge Any kind of management or administration by specialized experts selected through bureaucratic processes on the basis of specialized knowledge and
performance, rather than democratic election.
teleconnections Links among world climate anomalies.
Teleconnection pattern refers to a recurring and persistent
large-scale pattern of pressure and circulation anomalies that
span vast geographical areas.
tipping point The point at which a slow, reversible change
becomes irreversible, often with dramatic consequences.
top-down approach An approach to decision-making
where an executive, decision-maker or other person or body
makes a decision. This approach is disseminated under their
authority to lower levels in the hierarchy, who are, to a greater or lesser extent, bound by them.
transboundary basin, aquifer A river basin or groundwater aquifer that spans multiple political entities, separated by
boundaries.
trialogue approach

Links science, government and society.

unaccounted-for water (UfW) Water that has been produced and is ‘lost’ before it reaches the customer.
uncertainty Lack of sureness about something. Uncertainty
may range from a falling short of certainty to an almost complete lack of conviction or knowledge, especially about an
outcome or result.
urban and peri-urban agriculture (UPA) The practice of
cultivating, processing and distributing food in, or around, a
village, town or city. It can involve animal husbandry, aquaculture, agro-forestry and horticulture.

378

The water used in the produc-

The Arabic term traditionally referring to a valley.

wastewater Any water that has been adversely affected in
quality by human inﬂuence.
water accounting Keeping track of the water resources in
a river basin, indicating where water is going, how it is being
used, and how much remains available for further use.
water allocation system Institutional structure for allocating water. The choice of structure is ultimately a compromise
between the physical nature of the resource, human reactions to policies, and competing social objectives.
water balance (in industry) A description of the ﬂow of
water in and out of an industrial system.
water bank An institutional mechanism used to facilitate
the legal transfer and market exchange of various types of
surface water, groundwater and water storage entitlements.
‘water box’ The collection of activities and organizations
that assess, develop and manage water resources. This is
in contrast to those who make decisions in their respective
economic sectors that have impacts on the decisions and options of those within the water box.
water conservation The reduction of the usage of water
and recycling of waste water for different purposes such as
cleaning, manufacturing and agricultural irrigation.
water conveyance The transport of water from one place
to another, such as in a canal, pipeline or aqueduct.
water demand management Measures taken to alter the
demand for water, as opposed to supply management measures that attempt to meet the demands.
water development agenda A comprehensive blueprint of
action to be taken by organizations and major groups with respect to water development that can impact on human welfare.
water dialogue space A space that allows individuals within multistakeholder groups to resolve real but ‘neutral’ problems and thereby build trust and mutual respect.
water distribution The percentages of volumes of fresh
and saline water, both on and under the surface of the Earth.
Alternatively, the transport of water supplies from water
treatment plants to particular water users in an urban area.
water diversion The withdrawal and transport of water
from one place (i.e. from a natural water body) to another
place (of use) typically via a canal or pipeline.

urbanization The physical growth of urban areas as a result of global change. Urbanization can represent the level of
urban relative to overall population, or it can represent the
rate at which the urban proportion is increasing.

water efficiency The accomplishment of a function, task,
process or result with the minimal amount of water feasible.
It focuses on reducing waste.

value chain (agriculture, food) The full range of activities, with maximum generation of value, that are required to
bring a product (or a service) from conception through the

water entitlements The right to obtain water established
by apportionment institutions. In some places, water entitlements are granted by the state and constitute an informal

contract between the state and licence-holders. In other,
water entitlements constitute a formal property right with
judicial enforcement. Whether formal or informal, the contractual nature of water entitlements adds to the cost of institutional change.
water footprint The total volume of freshwater used to
produce the goods and services consumed by an individual
or community or produced by a business. The direct water
footprint of a consumer or producer (or a group of consumers or producers) refers to the freshwater consumption and
pollution that is associated to the water use by the consumer
or producer. It is distinct from the indirect water footprint,
which refers to the water consumption and pollution that
can be associated with the production of the goods and services consumed by the consumer or the inputs used by the
producer. The grey water footprint of a product is an indicator of freshwater pollution that can be associated with the
production of a product over its full supply chain. It is the
volume of freshwater that is required to assimilate the load
of pollutants based on existing ambient water quality standards, calculated as the volume of water that is required to dilute pollutants to such an extent that the quality of the water
remains above agreed water quality standards.
water harvesting Activities such as forest condensation,
fog harvesting, cloud seeding (the dispersal of substances
into the air that serve as cloud condensation or ice nuclei,
which alter the microphysical processes within the cloud)
and direct collection of rainwater related to the increase and
capture of precipitation to supplement water supplies.
water infrastructure Physical and organizational structures
needed to provide the water quantities and qualities demanded by various water users.
water market The ability to buy, sell or lease water rights,
in whole or in part, from one legal entity to another and
which involves an exchange of a monetary value.
water productivity The ratio of goods and services produced over the volume of water required for their production; measures the efficient use of water.
water quality The physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water. It is a measure of the condition of water
relative to the requirements of one or more biotic species
and or to any human need or purpose.
water reallocation The transfer of water from one use to
another.
water reform Measures taken to change current water
management practices to provide increased beneﬁts to water users and the environment, typically couched in terms
of reducing if not removing inefficiencies, corruption and
incompetence.
water renewability The ability of water to be replaced
through biological, physical or other natural processes and
replenished with the passage of time. Water is renewable
through the process of the hydrological cycle.
water resources management The activity of planning, developing, distributing and managing the supply and use of
water resources. The development and use of structural and
non-structural measures to provide and control natural and
human-made water resources systems for beneﬁcial uses.

WWDR4

water security The availability of a reliable and secure access to water over time.
‘water sector’ Commonly refers to all activities, trade and
professional organizations and individuals involved with
providing drinking water and wastewater services (including
wastewater treatment) to residential, commercial and industrial sectors of the economy.
water service management, delivery, control A water
service control system includes an underground water main,
at least one water consumer station downstream from the
water main, and an underground water delivery channel and
valves that control the ﬂow from the water main to the water
consumer.
water storage A term used within agriculture to deﬁne locations where water is stored for later use.
water stress The symptomatic consequence of water scarcity (physical or economic), which may manifest itself as
increasing conﬂict over sectoral usage, a decline in service
levels, crop failure, food insecurity and so forth. It is often
measured by the extent of the difference between supply
and demand.
water supply and sanitation (WSS) Services typically provided by water utilities to provide the quantities and qualities of water where and when demanded, and to provide the
means of wastewater collection, treatment and disposal.
watercourse Any ﬂowing body of water.
water-derived beneﬁt Economic, ecological or social beneﬁt obtained due to the particular use or management of
water.
water-related hazard Human health, economic or social
hazard resulting due to the excess, shortage or pollution of
water.
watershed The area of land where all of the water that is
under it or drains off it goes into the same place. Healthy
watersheds provide a host of services, including water puriﬁcation, groundwater and surface ﬂow regulation, erosion
control and streambank stabilization.
wetland An area of ground that is saturated with water
either permanently or seasonally (swamp, marsh, peatland,
shallow lake).
willingness to pay (WTP) The maximum amount a person would be willing to pay, sacriﬁce or exchange in order
to receive a good or to avoid something undesired, such as
pollution.
withdrawal The removal of water from some type of
source, such as groundwater, for some use by humans. The
water that is not consumed is subsequently returned to the
environment after use, but the quality of the returned water
may not be the same as when it was removed. Withdrawn
water can be used (such as for cooling) without being
consumed.
yellow water

Sanitary wastewater containing only urine.

GLOSSARY

379

The purpose of this glossary is to serve as a reference for readers of the United Nations World Water Development Report 4.
Deﬁnitions might differ somewhat from those used in other publications, and they do not represent official deﬁnitions of the UN,
UN-Water, or contributors to the WWDR4.
The glossary was prepared under the coordination of Daniel P. Loucks, Contributing Lead Author (Part 2).
This glossary draws, sometimes directly, on material available on the following websites:
http://actionaidusa.org http://answers.yahoo.com http://dictionary.cambridge.org http://dictionary.com
http://dictionary.reverso.net http://en.wikipedia.org http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com http://nsidc.org
http://orf.od.nih.gov http://science.nasa.gov/earth-science http://thinkquest.org
http://waterwiki.net
http://wiki.answers.com www.merriam-webster.com www.Africanwater.org www.alcwin.org www.answers.com
www.awwa.org www.businessdictionary.com www.cees.iupui.edu www.cglrc.cgiar.org www.cleanenergyprinciples.com
www.corix.com www.cpc.noaa.gov www.csiro.au www.dainet.com www.ecosystemvaluation.org www.ecy.wa.gov
www.eoearth.org www.epa.gov www.ess.uci.edu www.euroscience.org www.exclusion.net www.fao.org
www.fema.gov www.greenfacts.org www.homelandsecuritynewswire.com www.icpdr.org www.investopedia.com
www.kmci.org www.ldeo.columbia.edu www.maweb.org www.mbdc.com www.nationsonline.org www.noaa.gov
www.nrdc.org www.ofwat.gov www.physicalgeography.net www.ramsar.org www.science20.com www.sswm.info
www.thecommonsjournal.org www.thefreedictionary.com www.ucowr.org www.un.org www.unccd.int
www.unep.org www.unisdr.org www.usaid.gov www.waterdialogues.org www.webopedia.com www.who.org
www.worldbank.org www.wri.org www.wto.org.
It also draws on Peak Water: Conceptual and Practical Limits to Freshwater Withdrawal and Use by P. H. Gleick and
M. Palaniappan (2010); The New Slum Dwellers by M. Davis (2006); the Macmillan Dictionary; and
http://www.ce.utexas.edu/prof/mckinney/papers/aral/Aral.pdf.

380

INDEX

acid rain, 40, 59, 403, 407, 415
adaptive water management, 13, 15, 31, 140–41, 148, 150, 263,
289–300, 327, 329, 330, 359, 394, 396, 586, 596, 597
and climate change, 141
and demographic changes, 141
advanced decision support systems, 395
Afghanistan
Indus River basin, 821
Aﬂaj irrigation systems, 142, 569
Africa, 638–54, 674, 714, 715, 730–780, 714–84
climate change impacts, 171, 178, 182, 184, 315–19
demographic change, 177, 178
desertiﬁcation and drought, 121, 178
ﬂoods, 178
food security, 5, 86, 180
groundwater abstraction, 86, 182
hydropower, 32
investment in water supply and sanitation, 181
land aquisitions, 217
MDG targets, 640, 652
payment for ecosystem services, 632
water institutions, 143
Africa Strategic Initiative, EU, 650
Africa Water Atlas, 180, 183
Africa Water Vision 2025, 177, 649, 653
Africa Water Week, 184, 649, 650
African Development Bank, 183, 643, 649, 650, 651, 652
African Ministers’ Council on Water, 149, 175, 180, 183, 184, 643, 649,
650, 651, 652
African Union, 159, 177, 183, 184, 643, 649, 650, 652
Sharm el-Sheikh Summit, 649
Summit of Heads of State on Water and Sanitation, 184
African Water Development Report, 651
African Water Facility, 183, 650, 652
African Water Vision, 643, 650, 651, 653
AfricaSan, 649
Agenda 21, 38, see also UNCSD (UN Conference on Sustainable
Development)
agriculture, 24–25, 105
biofuels, 26, 140, 180, 203, 454, 666, 715–16
competition for water, 105, 194, 446, 457
deforestation, 49, 105, 113, 730
greenhouse gases from, 452, 457
IWRM, 138, 139
land degradation and drought, 120, 616–37
livestock, 26, 49, 440–62
organic, 345
pesticides, 187, 414
population growth, 25
rainfed, 46, 47, 49, 123, 152, 178–80, 212, 217, 247, 253, 261,
262, 269, 448–452, 457, 458, 494, 520, 573, 604, 605,
611, 626, 635, 714, 747, 748, 753, 784
wastewater use, 105, 214, 719
water pollutants from, 3, 9, 16, 25, 48, 50, 51, 66, 96, 105,
112, 122, 138, 163, 187–189, 210, 216, 262, 269, 271, 273,
345–46, 404–14, 434–35, 447, 454–59, 461, 494, 510,
511, 540, 546, 574, 630, 656, 659–66, 712, 795, 816,
824, 829, 840, 844, 850
water withdrawals for, 24, 187, 719
waterborne diseases, 725, 730
agrochemicals, 9, 187
Akosombo Dam, 781, 784
Albufeira Convention, 844
algae, 26, 70, 106, 188, 336, 477, 733, 811
photobioreactors, 26

WWDR4

Algeria, 210, 214, 218, 318, 647, 709, 712, 714, 719, 720, 799
drought, 212
allocation mechanisms, 35, 144, 273, 286, 387, 518, 519, 522, 526, 571
Amazon River basin, 113, 200, 239, 398, 505, 511, 694, 697, 700
deforestation, 113, 511
hydroelectricity, 201
Angola, 419, 646
aquifer recharge, 28, 350, 454, 540, 718, 719, 765
in Arab region, 214
aquifers, transboundary, 31, 32, 136, 185, 192, 658, 757, 758, 762,
766–68
bilateral and multilateral cooperation, 185
Latin America and Caribbean, 207
Arab Countries Water Utilities Association, 213, 709, 716
Arab Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change, 214, 715, 718
Arab Ministerial Water Council, 207, 213, 708, 709
Arab Water Security Strategy, 207, 213, 708, 712, 716
Arabian Peninsula, 48
Aral Sea, 122, 135, 192, 633, 662, 665, 674, 678
International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, 188
Arctic Oscillation (AO), 83
Argentina, 123, 146, 198, 201–02, 206, 207, 319, 385, 425, 695, 700–
703, 767
climate change impacts, 92
Guarani aquifer, 350
Aridity Index, 120, 623
Armenia, 186, 191, 657, 665, 667, 676, 679
payment for ecosystem services, 663
arsenic, 103, 407, 410, 663, 725, 727, 736, 765
Asian Development Bank, 584, 591, 676, 683, 685, 687, 824
Asia-Paciﬁc region, 9, 671–91
food security, 5
groundwater abstraction, 5, 86
integrated water resources management (IWRM), 197, 684
land degradation and drought, 121
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 684
population growth, 64
urban water quality, 195
vulnerability to natural disasters, 9, 196
Aswan dam, 214, 278, 397, 529, 714, 718, 720
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO), 81, 383, 766, 849
Atlantic Ocean, 643, 660, 661, 780, 799, 843, 848
Australia, 803–8
drought and water stress, 121, 164, 404, 645
ﬂoods, 219, 241
green technology, 198
IWRM, 139
National Water Initiative, 69, 164
urban water supply, 397
water accounting, 172
water consumption, 121
Austria, 827
ﬂood management, 663
Autovias, 350
backcasting, 244, 245
Bangladesh, 93, 106, 116, 194, 304, 448, 568, 584, 586, 606, 613, 676,
679, 681, 682, 685, 760
food security, 195
groundwater abstraction, 85
Barbados, 202, 353, 694
Basel Convention, 61, 407, 414, 485
basin management committees, 149, 150, 627
and IWRM, 149
Beas River, 821
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 110, 752

INDEX

xiii

Benin, 182
Bhutan, 93, 674, 675, 682, 687
ﬂood risks, 94
glacier-related ﬂoods, 93
urban water quality, 195
biofuels, 4, 13, 23–26, 32, 46, 50, 52–54, 58, 59, 123, 128, 140, 201, 216,
217, 218, 267, 270, 284, 311, 351, 404, 407, 454, 455, 467–477, 520,
521, 666, 694, 715–716, 748, 749, 750
algae production, 26
Asia-Paciﬁc, 454
Arab region, 211
competition with food production, 25, 26, 218
European Union, 26, 454
kerosene substitute, 749
Latin America and Caribbean, 201, 203
pollution, 455
sub-Saharan Africa, 454
United States of America, 454
biological oxygen demand, 406, 457, 459, 505, 712
biomass, 53, 54, 70, 180, 181, 473, 476
Bolivia, 204, 207, 319, 695, 698, 700, 750
Ministry of Water, 144
Botswana, 294, 644, 646
malaria, 118
Brahmaputra River basin, 90, 145, 385, 505
das Brancas River, 337
Brazil, 46, 49, 123, 198, 200, 202, 206, 207, 253, 279, 301, 320, 337,
350, 398, 407, 443, 460, 512, 536, 554, 557, 692–704, 717, 734, 766,
767
agro-industries, 213
biofuels, 50, 201
deforestation, 457
drought, 204
ethanol and biodiesel production, 454, 455
extreme climate events, 696
greenhouse gases, 453
groundwater recharge, 87
Guarani aquifer, 350
IWRM and water management reforms, 139, 198, 206, 139
Water Producer Programme, 251
Water Women project, 337
Burkina Faso, 182, 331, 647, 780
Burundi, 397
Cambodia, 192, 312, 428, 676, 679, 682, 685, 686, 687, 750, 751
Mekong River Agreement, 72, 506
Mekong River basin, 72, 149, 587
Disaster Risk Reduction Forum, 149, 587
Cameroon, 182, 563, 647, 712
Canada, 48, 90, 123, 184, 190, 191, 192, 253, 348, 351, 353, 354, 447,
482, 485, 493, 511, 528, 575–77, 578, 658, 660, 661
Canada Water Act, 191
irrigation, 187
water in industry, 485
water supply and sanitation services, 190
water withdrawals, 185
Cancun Adaptation Framework, 37, see also UNFCCC
capacity-building for IWRM, 145, 146, 150, 300, 338, 436, 573, 582–
96, 682, 716, 718, see also adaptive water management
Arab Countries Water Utilities Association, 213
to meet MDGs, 148
in Mekong basin, 149, 506, 587
Cape Verde, 182, 647
catchment protection, 138, 160, 540, 541, 543
Central African Republic, 647, 712
Central America
Central Asia, 184, 185, 186, 658, 661, 662, 673, 674
Chad, 122, 182, 210, 419, 644, 647, 648, 712
groundwater withdrawals, 644
chemical oxygen demand, 349, 457
Chenab River, 821
Chesapeake Bay Program, 414
child mortality, 5, 103, 110, 160, 265, 584, 751, 752
Africa, 180
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196

xiv

waterborne diseases, 726, 751
Chile, 55, 66, 198, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207, 220, 301, 319, 320, 385,
408, 542, 692, 694, 695, 698, 699, 700, 701, 703
biofuels, 203
climate change impacts, 92
demographic change, 201
drylands, 398
ﬁnancing water supply and sanitation services, 205
hydroelectricity, 201
mining, 201, 203
privatization of water assets, 146
urban water supply, 198
wastewater treatment, 201
water conﬂicts, 203
water management reforms, 206
Chilika Lake, 415
China, 27, 46, 56, 93, 112, 113, 145, 192, 194, 196, 197, 217, 218, 252, 270,
279, 301, 318, 331, 386, 388, 407, 408, 412, 413, 417, 430, 434, 443,
453, 459, 460, 473, 475, 482, 485, 486, 520, 529, 546, 554, 559,
570, 633, 665, 678, 679, 680, 681, 682, 720, 759, 760, 762, 763,
809, 810, 811, 812, 810–13, 821
climate change, 122
ethanol and biodiesel production, 218
food security, 195
green technology, 197
groundwater abstraction, 85
Indus River basin, 821
land degradation and drought, 113, 120, 121, 126
natural disasters, 413
water conﬂicts, 194
water efficiency, 349
water institutions, 143
cholera, 64, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 118, 179, 183, 409, 537, 732, 733,
783, 784, 831
clean technology, 95, 96, 311, 402, 407, 411
climate change, 2, 5, 29–31, 383–85, see also Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and UNFCCC
adaptive water management, 29, 141
Africa, 184, 397
agriculture, 25
IWRM, 139, 145
Arab region, 212, 214
Asia-Paciﬁc, 197, 243, 397
deforestation, 30
developing countries, 29
energy implications, 25
Europe, 239
glacier melt, 5, 20
green economy, 39
greenhouse gases, 431, 457
Latin America and Caribbean, 204
mitigation strategies, 29, 141, 144, 162, 394
Nairobi Work Programme, 37–38
natural disasters, 27, 94, 187, 218, 252
scenario-based approach, 394
UNFCCC (UN Framework Convention on Climate Change), 37–38
vulnerability of women, 454
climate forcings, 78, 79, 383, 393
Cochabamba, 750
Colorado River basin, 113, 389, 392, 393, 396, 397, 472, 523
Columbia, 395
payment for ecosystem services, 632
Common Agricultural Policy, EU, 300, 663
Comoros, 715
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture, 26,
47, 49, 84, 85, 253, 389, 449, 451, 457
food security, 86
CONAGUA, see Mexico
Conference of the Parties, see UNFCCC
Congo River basin, 122, 178, 182, 218, 397, 505, 643, 644, 646, 647,
648
Conference on Environment and Development, UN (Rio Earth
Summit), 35, 796

Conference on Sustainable Development, UN (UNCSD), 23, 39
Rio+20 (UNCSD 2012), 20, 35, 39, 358, 796
Convention on Biological Diversity, 508, 796, see also UNCSD
Convention on Biological Diversity Biodiversity, 508
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, 110, 752
Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International
Watercourses, 32
Convention on the Protection and Use of Trans-boundary
Watercourses and International Lakes, 32
Copenhagen Consensus, 537
cost–beneﬁt analysis, 145
cost recovery, 14, 97, 145, 160, 318, 322, 407, 419, 437, 557, 558, 559,
560, 561, 563, 564, 573, 750, 801, 817
Costa Rica, 279, 701, 853, 854, 855, 857, 858, 853–58, 860
demographic change, 201
payment for ecosystem services, 632, 856, 858
water as a human right, 856
Côte d’Ivoire, 182, 780
Cuba
demographic change, 200
ﬁnancing water supply and sanitation services, 205
organic agriculture, 345
population growth, 696
Programa Nacional de Agricultura Urbana, 345
cyanobacteria, 413
cyclones, 9, 81, 116, 117, 118, 196, 601, 602, 605, 606, 608, 610, 611, 682,
714
Czech Republic, 614, 826–29
ﬂood management, 663
Dahkla Basin, 644
Danube River basin, 188, 189, 190, 192, 511, 543, 658, 663, 667, 827
Convention on Co-operation for the Protection and Sustainable
Use of the River Danube, 31
ﬂoods, 662
hydropower, 188
decadal-scale variability, 393, 394
deforestation, 49, 105, 113, 118, 121, 190, 218, 262, 263, 269, 271, 346,
457, 504, 633, 645, 730, 783, 795, 855
Amazon basin, 113, 511
Brazil, 457
China, 812
climate change, 30, 113, 698
eutrophication, 413
ﬂoods, 662
greenhouse gases, 30, 49, 457, 698
Latin America and Caribbean, 204
water security, 511, 629, 631
waterborne diseases, 725
demographic change, 4, 45, 52, 66, 111, 140, 141, 162, 183, 193, 200,
221, 233, 264, 265, 269, 272, 330, 385, 388, 424, 433, 450, 451, 485,
568, 606, 635, 659, 677, 692, 696, 708, 714, 795, 865
Africa, 177
Arab region, 209
Asia-Paciﬁc, 243
Latin America and Caribbean, 198, 200, 201
Denmark, 151, 458
desalination, 4, 14, 25, 28, 52, 57, 58, 59, 160, 209, 214, 241, 261, 262,
263, 264, 265, 270, 293, 317, 433, 467, 471, 475, 477, 539, 540, 545,
623, 631, 708, 709, 710, 719, 801
Arab region, 209, 214
desert ecosystem services, 254
desertiﬁcation, 6, 19, 20, 23, 27, 102, 119–122, 253, 254, 546, 608, 616–
37, 647, 648, 714, 719, 795, 800, 838
Africa, 121, 216
Arab region, 212
diarrhoea, 29, 95, 103, 104, 105, 106, 123, 148, 179, 265, 537, 663, 674,
682, 725, 727, 728, 732, 734, 736, 751, 802, 824
disaster recovery and reconstruction, 118–19
capacity-building for, 119
early warning systems, 118
ﬁnancing, 119
gender equality, 119

WWDR4

disaster risk management, 94
Disi aquifer, 709
Dniester basin, 663
drinking water, access to, 36, 37, 96, 103, 127, 142, 160, 164, 179, 180,
190, 192, 312, 436, 538, 552, 591, 596, 673, 640, 726
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196
global rates, 196
drought, 616–37
Arab region, 209, 211, 212
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196, 243, 404
Australia, 121, 404
China, 121
climate change impacts, 27, 645
desertiﬁcation, 121
Europe, 218
eutrophication, 645
India, 121, 243
Latin America and Caribbean, 204
resilient crops, 25
sub-Saharan Africa, 121, 178, 212, 645
North America, 189, 393
drylands, 6, 102, 121, 122, 331, 430, 619, 616–37, 620, 621, 622, 623,
626, 627, 628, 629, 630, 631, 632, 633, 634, 635, 636, 637
deforestation, 631
ecosystem services, 120
food insecurity and famine, 122, 631
productivity, 631
early warning and emergency response systems, 118, 119
East Kolkata Wetlands, 505
eco-efficient water infrastructure, 197, 686
Asia-Paciﬁc, 682
ecological sanitation, 423, 435
ecosystems, 24, 69–72, 502–14
deforestation, 629
degradation of, 27, 97, 188
desertiﬁcation, 27
ecosystem health, 110–15
green economy, 39
toxic contamination, 414
wetlands, 113, 508
ecosystem goods and services, 24, 27, 28, 47, 69, 70, 72, 95, 97, 113,
114, 137, 139, 168, 188, 335, 403, 411
in drylands, 120
and land degradation and drought, 120
pricing mechanisms, 168
Ecosystem-Based Management Tools Network, 512
Egypt, 210, 211, 214, 216, 397, 497, 529, 596, 644, 708, 709, 711, 712,
714, 715, 716, 717, 718, 719, 720, 747
agro-industries, 213
conﬂict, 209, 210
food security, 218
groundwater withdrawals, 644
transboundary waters, 181
urbanization, 208
water institutions, 213
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 78–83, 118, 184, 203, 204, 261,
278, 314, 352, 383, 392, 393, 394, 643, 649, 696, 698, 700, 702,
766, 849
embedded water, see virtual water
endocrine disruptive compounds, 411, 765
energy, 24, 25–26, 465–78
biofuels, 26, 140, 180
consumption, 180
for desalination, 25
freshwater withdrawals for, 25
global energy consumption, 25
health impacts, 26
hydroelectricity, 24, 25
nuclear electricity, 25
solar, 25
thermal power plants, 140
for wastewater treatment, 25
energy security, 28, 39, 138, 351, 475, 522, 555, 675, 715

INDEX

xv

environmental ﬂow, 71, 505, 632, 788, 833, 840
evapotranspiration, 71
environmental legislation, 185, 656
Environmental Protection Agency, US (EPA), 106, 188, 331, 432, 782,
784, 851
Ethiopia, 119, 182, 216, 397, 408, 419, 529, 648, 649, 717, 718
agro-industries, 213
Europe, 655–68
EU Urban Water Directive, 435
EU-Africa Strategic Initiative, 650
EU target for biofuels, 26
water consumption, 121
eutrophication, 66, 95, 96, 140, 168, 171, 210, 402, 405, 406, 413, 415,
418, 540, 572, 630, 645, 659, 712, 844
evapotranspiration, 29, 55, 71, 80, 113, 120, 170, 254, 383, 386, 388,
457, 458, 623, 808, 815
extreme weather events, 119
famine, 117, 120, 249, 314, 354, 605, 631, 635, 645, 647, 714, 863
farming, see agriculture
fertilizers, 25, 50, 96, 112, 122, 187, 210, 216, 269, 273, 346, 407, 409,
413, 434, 454, 455, 510, 511, 540, 546, 574, 659, 660, 663, 712, 717,
816, 824, 829, 840, 844, 850
ﬁnance
disaster recovery and reconstruction (DRR), 118–119
public–private partnerships, 563, 564
ﬂocculants, 726
ﬂoods
Africa, 397
Arab region, 212, 214
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196, 243
Australia, 219, 241
climate change, 27
damage assessment, 242, 662
defence systems, 28, 115, 162, 185, 188, 233, 241, 242, 296, 297, 304,
663, 812, 828, 844
economic costs, 662
Europe, 662
management of, 28, 30, 188, 190, 252, 330, 539, 659, 663, 844
Mekong Flood Forum, 149, 506, 587
North America, 248
ﬂow regulation of rivers, 160, 510
ﬂuorosis, 94, 408, 725
food production, 24–25, see also agriculture
Africa, 26
changing diets, 25
economic opportunities, 25
population growth, 25
food security
Arab region, 211, 212
climate change impacts, 180
groundwater, 5
land degradation and drought, 120, 616–37
sub-Saharan Africa, 86, 122, 180, 184
Former Soviet Union, 453, 569
France, 221, 251, 314, 435, 472, 508, 584, 602, 663, 808, 830–34
ﬂood management, 663
ﬂoods, 662
payment for ecosystem services, 508
G8 Water Action Plan, 35
Ganges basin, 90, 167, 385, 395, 505, 686
gender equality, 26, 109–10, 584, 676, 742–55, 856
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196
Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, 110
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 110, 676
health and sanitation, 751–52
improving disaster resilience, 28, 119
land and water rights, 26, 28, 119
MDG 3, 36
policies, 119
sex-disaggregated data, 676
UNESCO global priority, 110
women’s empowerment, 196, 742–45, 749, 754–55

xvi

gender mainstreaming
disaster recovery and reconstruction (DRR), 119
general circulation models, 392, 394, 396
Georgia, 186, 191, 334, 657, 658, 665, 667, 675, 682, 848, 850
Germany, 314, 319, 390, 432, 434, 435, 482, 593, 595, 596, 631, 667,
808, 827
ﬂood management, 663
Ghana, 182, 537, 717, 735, 749, 777, 780, 782, 783, 784, 779–84
Akosombo Dam, 781, 784
hydropower, 781, 784
National Water Policy, 781
Volta River basin, 781
water governance reforms, 144
water withdrawals, 781
glaciers, 5, 20, 78, 80, 83, 89, 90, 93, 89–94, 190, 385, 454, 505, 681,
700, 822
glacier melt, 92, 93
glacier-related ﬂoods, 90, 93
Latin America, 204
Peru, 398
Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
(GLAAS), see WHO/UN-Water
Global Biodiversity Outlook, 111, 508
Global Climate Observation System, 172
Global Compact, UN, 169, 170, 493, 495
Global Environment Facility (GEF), 497, 749, 762, 767, 796
Small Grants Programme, 749
Global Environment Monitoring System, 98
Global Environment Outlook, 111, 508
global warming, see climate change
Global Water Partnership (GWP), 138, 146, 220, 299, 333, 414, 455,
572, 649, 650, 655, 662, 678, 679, 761, 858
Global Water System Project (GWSP), 171, 172, 593
globalization, 7, 18, 33–35, 34, 414, see also virtual water
trade in agricultural products, 29
and IWRM, 139
Asia-Paciﬁc, 243
foreign investment protection, 18, 34
impact on marginalized, 18
government transfers, 546, 561
GRATIS Foundation, 749
Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE), 87, 90, 91, 758,
763
Great Lakes, 658
climate change impacts, 190
Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, 31
International Joint Commission, 665
Greece, 435, 659
water use for agriculture, 187
green economy, 21, 28, 39, 61, 127, 271, 310, 311, 321, 555, 556, 565
urbanization, 39
green technology, 197, 198, 496, 556, 686
Asia-Paciﬁc, 198
China, 197
green water credits, 632
greenhouse gases, 30, 49, 50, 113, 128, 181, 218, 238, 245, 249, 263,
272, 311, 321, 331, 350, 388, 430, 431, 448, 452, 455, 457474, 666,
698, 766, 800, 806, 855
deforestation, 30, 698
agriculture, 49, 452, 453, 457
emissions reduction, 30, 698
global GHG emissions, 698
Latin America and the Caribbean, 698
Methane, 311, 452, 453
Nitrous oxide, 452, 453
groundwater, 78, 83–89, 756–73, see also aquifers
climate change mitigation, 5
food security, 5, 86
fossil groundwater reserves, 48
non-renewable, 85, 86, 87, 799
pollution of, 5
renewable groundwater resources, 48

groundwater abstraction, 5, 66, 83, 84, 85, 86, 88, 89, 665, 759, 760,
762, 763, 764, 769, 794, 801, 806, 816, 822
global rate, 5, 85
groundwater recharge, 85, 87, 89, 135, 171, 212, 261, 269, 281, 383, 396,
448, 470, 613, 623, 629, 683, 688, 713, 720, 758, 760, 761, 765, 766,
781, 782, 806, 808, 817
Brazil, 87
climate change impact, 87
global rate, 87
groundwater storage, 4, 51, 87, 88, 89, 462, 526, 757, 758, 762, 763,
765, 766
global total, 87
groundwater-fed irrigation, 86
Guarani aquifer, 207, 350
Guinea, 182, 543, 644, 647, 674, 675, 682, 712, 780
Gujarat, India, 337
Harmattan, 643
health, 24, 102, 103–9, 723–41
Cuba, 345
wastewater treatment, 336
water quality, 94–98
impact assessments, 108, 729
Himalayas, 90, 93, 574, 578, 687
glacier melt, 90, 91, 92, 93
HIV/AIDS, 148, 264, 409, 590
Human Development Index (HDI), 39, 621
human right to water, 35, 34–35, 36, 108, 142, 215, 220, 266, 274, 485,
490, 518, 519, 521–22, 592, 626, 737, 751
Costa Rica, 856
Human Rights Council, United Nations (HRC), 35, 36, 142, 215, 623,
737, 751
Human Values-Based Approach to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
Education, 69
hydroelectricity, 8, 24, 55, 180, 294, 472, 524, 535, 539, 541, 692, 694,
781, 838, 855, 858
Latin America and Caribbean, 201
hydro-geological datasets, 183
hydrological cycle, 24, 27, 35, 60, 69, 78–83, 111, 112, 135, 159, 218, 237,
240, 249 250–53, 260, 262, 278, 279, 285, 350, 383, 388, 392, 403,
404, 428, 431, 433, 435, 436, 474, 482, 484, 504, 505, 508, 511, 518,
584, 593, 659, 672, 680, 758, 759, 769
climate change impacts, 18, 29, 30, 31, 40, 78, 249, 519
contaminants, 60, 383, 758
Global Climate Observation System, 172
impact of greenhouse gas emissionss, 49
impacts of climate change, 29, 39, 110–15, 188, 403
observation and monitoring, 78
pressures on, 18, 19, 60, 231, 431, 433, 758
hydrological extremes, 183, 261, 388
hydromet measuring, 8, 168
hydropower, 8, 25, 32, 46, 53, 54, 55, 59, 72, 113, 137, 160, 180, 181, 185,
189, 190, 237, 242, 248, 249, 250, 254, 278, 311, 318, 346, 390, 393,
394, 407, 445, 472, 524, 529, 540, 656, 662, 663, 665, 666, 681,
687, 735, 784, 823, 838, 840, 855, 857
Danube River basin, 189
Africa, 182, 184
Latin America and Caribbean, 207
Inter Agency Group on Water, 652
improved sanitation, 37, 65, 95, 105, 142, 160, 164, 179, 192, 280, 407,
426, 663, 672, 673, 674, 725, 728, 733, 734, 735, 783, 784, 795, 802,
856
Asia-Paciﬁc, 196
global access to, 196
Latin America and Caribbean, 205
MDG 7c, 36–37, 96, 103, 127, 142, 164, 180, 190, 192, 205, 436, 437,
591, 596, 640
India, 46, 48, 56, 91, 93, 94, 113, 126, 145, 170, 192, 194, 196, 216, 219,
279, 301, 333, 334, 337, 347, 351, 385, 386, 388, 395, 396, 407, 408,
412, 425, 430, 434, 443, 447, 448, 482, 485, 486, 505, 520, 525,
527, 536, 542, 545, 559, 563, 621, 633, 676, 678, 680, 681, 682, 683,
686, 688, 727, 728, 734, 745, 759, 763
climate change impacts, 122, 194
ﬂoods, 119, 194, 574

WWDR4

greenhouse gases, 453
groundwater abstraction, 85, 86
Indus River basin, 821
Indus Water Treaty, 32, 821
land degradation and drought, 121, 126, 243
Lower Bhavani Project, 152
Permanent Indus Commission, 821
water efficiency, 349
water governance reforms, 144
wetlands for wastewater treatment, 505
Indonesia, 218, 280, 428, 435, 485, 578, 674, 676, 679, 682, 684, 750
food security, 195
groundwater abstraction, 85
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 684
urban water quality, 195
Indus basin, 90, 93, 113, 194, 219, 445, 505, 762, 820–825
Indus Water Treaty, 32, 821–822
climate change impacts, 821
Permanent Indus Commission, 821
precipitation, 821
industrial wastewater, 62, 96, 418, 430, 480–98, 661, 680, 829, 844
infrastructure, 550
dams, 140
eco-efficient water infrastructure, 136, 197, 682, 686
investments in, 122, 136
urban drainage systems, 140
institutional change, 567–79
integrated water resources management (IWRM), 6, 13, 21, 24, 38, 39,
71, 135, 137, 138–41, 144, 148–150, 159, 177, 207, 213, 242, 251, 290–
99, 313, 358, 360, 452, 513, 514, 542, 593, 594, 601, 616, 645, 651,
652, 677–79, 684, 687, 688, 695, 716, 717, 761, 856, 864–65
adaptive water management, 139, 140, 148, 149, 150, 263, 289–300,
506, 587, 601, 645, 651, 652, 678
Arab region, 213
Asia-Paciﬁc, 197
basin management committees, 149
climate change, 140, 144, 145
economic development, 139
environmental ﬂow, 71
institutional reform, 137, 139
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, 39
national IWRM plans, 139, 144, 148, 150
Rio+20, 2012, 39
risk mitigation, 135
stakeholder engagement, 138, 139, 144, 145, 149
transboundary plans, 72, 144, 506
water institutions, 144, 145
WSSD target, 38
integrated water resources optimization models, 328
intensive agriculture, 96, 606, 622, 675
Inter-Agency Group on Water in Africa, see UN-Water
Inter-American Development Bank, 202, 735
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 29, 37, 116, 117,
118, 182, 187, 190, 203, 204, 214, 216, 218, 314, 316, 346, 383, 384,
385, 404, 431, 487, 511, 512, 552, 681, 702, 718, 766, 822, 838
modelling scenarios, 87
scenarios, 30
international basins, see transboundary waters
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, 574
International Development Research Centre, 590
International Monetary Fund, 218
international river basins, see transboundary waters
International Shared Aquifer Resources Management (ISARM), 31, 32,
762, 767
International Water Association (IWA), 591
Cities of the Future programme, 68
invasive species, 67, 96, 415
Iran, 675, 682, 710, 712, 713, 760, 762, 821
groundwater abstraction, 85
Ireland, 435
irrigation, 144
Africa, 180, 182

INDEX

xvii

ISARM, see International Shared Aquifer Resources Management
(ISARM)
Istanbul, 68, 504, 661
Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional Authorities, 69
Italy, 659, 759, 835, 836, 838, 840, 835–40
groundwater abstraction, 84, 85
water use for agriculture, 187
IWRM, see integrated water resources management
Japan, 48, 53, 298, 319, 351, 459, 460, 478, 482, 679, 680
virtual water imports, 33
Japanese encephalitis, 103, 106, 730, 732, 736
Jatropha, 347, 749
Jeju Island, Korea, 814–19
Jhelum River, 821
Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, 39
Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean (JISAO),
83
Joint Monitoring Programme on Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP),
see WHO/UNICEF
Jökulhlaups, 93
Jordan, 209, 210, 214, 218, 318, 708, 709, 712, 715, 717, 719, 720, 792,
793, 794, 795, 796, 792–96
access to improved water, 709
water institutions, 213
wetlands, 795
Juba–Shabelle basin, 181
Kabul River, 821
Kazakhstan, 354, 665, 667, 675, 676, 679, 680, 682, 684, 686
Kenya, 144, 146, 182, 216, 278, 397, 545, 553, 570, 571, 574, 648, 649,
735, 746, 750, 786, 787, 788, 789, 790, 786–90, 791
drought, 182
Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative, 596
MDG targets, 180
natural disasters, 314
payment for ecosystem services, 632, 790
Vision 2030, 790
water policies, 790
Korea, 814–19
Kufra Basin, 644
Kyrgyzstan, 186, 569, 657, 665, 667, 675, 679, 680, 682
payment for ecosystem services, 663
Lake Chad, 122, 210, 514, 633, 643, 647, 648, 650, 712
Lake Chad basin, 183, 184
Lake Constance, 658
Lake Geneva, 658
Lake Peipsi, 658
Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative, 596
land acquisitions, 34, 50, 216, 217, 348, 718
Asia, 217
land degradation and drought, 616–37
food security, 122
India, 121
migration, 120
land rights, 220, 748, 753
women, 27
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, 72, 192, 506, 676
Mekong River Agreement, 72, 506
Latin America and the Caribbean, 9, 21, 66, 198–207, 198, 318, 357,
691–704, 692, 693, 695, 696, 697, 698, 699, 700, 701, 702, 703,
704
desertiﬁcation, 121
greenhouse gases, 453
Guarani aquifer, 350
land degradation and drought, 121
natural disasters, 696
population growth, 200
water management reforms, 206
least developed countries, 3, 46, 123, 264, 436, 441, 452, 462, 708,
709, 718, 749
Nairobi Work Programme, 37
Lebanon, 10, 210, 419, 708, 709, 710, 711, 712, 713, 714, 715, 716, 717,
718
access to improved water, 709

xviii

conﬂicts, 209
urbanization, 208
water institutions, 213
Lerma–Chapala River basin, 521, 861–65
Lesotho, 149, 182, 646
levees, 28, 115, 304
Liberia, 419
Libya, 184, 210, 218, 644, 647, 709, 712, 720
conﬂicts, 209
groundwater withdrawals, 644
Luxembourg, 435
lymphatic ﬁlariasis, 103, 105, 106, 730, 732, 736, 783
Madagascar, 182, 216, 717
malaria, 105, 106, 730
Malawi, 119, 182, 746
disaster response, 119
Malaysia, 195, 218, 674, 679, 682, 686
ecosystem health, 114
Mara River basin, 786–90
payment for ecosystem services, 790
Marseille Provence Métropole Urban Community, 830–34
Matanza-Riachuelo basin, 201
Mauritania, 543, 644, 647, 712, 714, 715, 718, 799
MDGs, see Millennium Development Goals
Mekong River basin, 72, 144, 149, 167, 505, 506, 587, 681
adaptive water management, 149, 506, 571, 587
climate change impacts, 681
Mekong River Agreement, 506
Mekong River Commission, 32, 72, 149, 678, 681
Methane, 453
Mexico, 9, 66, 113, 119, 200, 202, 205, 206, 301, 317, 354, 396, 427, 507,
525, 526, 528, 651, 692, 694, 695, 700, 701, 703, 704, 759, 762,
860, 861, 862, 863, 864, 861–65
disaster response, 119
groundwater abstraction, 84, 85
National Water Commission (CONAGUA), 206, 695, 703, 704, 863,
864, 865
natual disasters, 696
virtual water imports, 33
water efficiency, 349
water management reforms, 198, 206
microﬁnance, 317, 687
migration, 4, 7, 10, 52, 93, 128, 135, 139, 140, 193, 208, 211, 221, 264,
330, 337, 339, 354, 418, 423, 424, 631, 644, 657, 658, 659, 662, 663,
708, 709, 714, 795
adaptive water management, 141
land degradation and drought, 120
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), 23, 35, 36–37, 69, 96, 103,
123, 127, 148, 162, 168, 180, 181, 205, 312, 318, 357, 358, 360, 408,
409, 415, 416, 437, 537, 552, 553, 554, 590, 591, 596, 603, 612, 650,
651, 652, 664, 666, 676, 692, 693, 698, 701
Arab region, 213
climate change impacts, 698
Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional Authorities, 69
MDG 1, eradicate poverty, 36, 37, 103, 180
MDG 3, gender equality, 36, 584
MDG 7c, access to improved sanitation, 36, 37, 96, 103, 123, 127,
142, 164, 180, 190, 205, 436, 591, 596, 640
MDG 7c, access to safe water,36–37, 96, 103, 127, 142, 164, 180, 190,
192, 205, 436, 437, 591, 596, 640
sub-Saharan Africa, 180, 596, 640, 650, 651, 652
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme on Water Supply and
Sanitation (JMP), 36, 64, 65, 108, 142, 163, 164, 426, 709, 737
WHO/UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water (GLAAS), 36, 108, 142, 146, 148, 312, 437,
539, 737
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 27, 70, 111, 312, 411, 508, 511, 548,
623
minimum ﬂow, see environmental ﬂow
mining, 138, 347, 698, 735
and IWRM, 139
ecosystem contaminants, 414
Mississippi River basin, 72, 187, 248, 251, 507, 611, 848

moisture index, 159
Moldova, Republic of, 186, 191, 657, 658, 662, 663, 664, 665, 667, 668
ﬂoods, 662
wastewater treatment, 188
Mole National Park, 783
Mondi Wetlands Project, 337
Mongolia, 675, 676, 679, 682, 810
Morocco, 212, 214, 218, 301, 497, 564, 708, 712, 714, 715, 716, 717, 718,
719, 720, 735, 798–802
drought, 212
urbanization, 208
water institutions, 213
Mount Halla, 819
Mozambique, 182, 216, 218, 278, 294, 314, 524, 643, 746, 747
disaster response, 118
ﬂoods, 183, 643
multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs), 38, 485
Murray–Darling basin, 397, 404, 529, 543, 571, 803–8
saltwater intrusion, 404
Nairobi Work Programme, 37–38
Namibia, 182, 294, 634, 646
forum for integrated resource management, 150
IWRM plan, 150
NASA GRACE satellite imagery, see Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment
National Adaptation Plans, 37, 148
national water plans, 139, 144, 148, 150
Australia, National Water Initiative, 69
Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional Authorities, 69
Negros Island, Philippines, 336
Nepal, 93, 145, 243, 432, 433, 434, 675, 676, 679, 682
access to safe water and sanitation, 437
Netherlands, 297, 298, 329, 330, 340, 482, 494, 568, 585, 593, 650,
761, 766
ﬂood management, 248, 663
infrastructure reform, 136
resilience to climate change, 239, 245
New Zealand, 90
loss of wetlands, 113
Niger River basin, 122, 178, 181, 182, 217, 314, 331, 397, 543, 574, 643,
644, 645, 647, 712
Nigeria, 182, 299, 419, 514, 647, 712
Nile Basin States, 181
Nile River basin, 32, 113, 122, 181, 210, 217, 314, 353, 397, 528, 529, 644,
712, 713, 719, 720, 787
Nile Basin Initiative, 32
nitrogen balance, 112
nitrogen loading, 159
Nitrous oxide, 453
no-regrets planning, 359
North Africa, 10, 48, 403, 415, 486, 570, 596, 759, 762, 799
cost of poor water quality, 97
land degradation and drought, 121
North America, 655–68
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), 81, 83, 383
North China Plain, 27, 88, 194, 759, 762, 810
Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System, 644, 762
nuclear electricity, 24, 25
nutrient loading, 111, 112, 508, 850
nutrient removal in wastewater, 96
official development assistance, 21, 312, 436
Okavango basin, 181
onchocerciasis, 103, 105, 106, 730, 732, 736
Orinoco river basin, 200
oxygen deﬁcit, 96
Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO), 81, 82, 83, 383, 393, 766
Paciﬁc North American (PNA) pattern, 393
Pakistan, 48, 93, 113, 122, 135, 145, 219, 447, 537, 577, 602, 606, 607,
608, 675, 679, 682, 760, 820–25, 824
climate change, 122
ﬂoods, 194
food security, 195
greenhouse gases, 453

WWDR4

groundwater abstraction, 85
Indus River basin, 821–822
Indus Water Treaty, 32, 821–822
water stress and draught, 194, 574
Palestine, 592, 717, 719, 795
water institutions, 213
Papua New Guinea
urban water quality, 195
Paraguay, 142, 204, 207, 569, 700, 703, 767
Guarani aquifer, 350
Parana basin, 398
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 251, 507, 514, 632, 659, 684,
788, 790, 858
Africa, 632, 788, 791
Asia-Paciﬁc, 197, 682, 684
Europe, 189, 508, 663
Latin America and Caribbean, 663, 856, 858
North America, 663
Permanent Indus Commission, 821
persistent organic pollutants, 411, 414
Peru, 29, 105, 106, 198, 202, 204, 206, 252, 385, 408, 537, 605, 610,
692, 694, 695, 696, 698, 700
agricultural production, 700
Broggi glacier, 398
climate change impacts, 92, 204, 308
drylands, 398
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), 700
glacier melt, 92, 204, 398
mining industry, 201, 398
Water for All Programme, 28, 29
White Cordillera, 398
pesticides, 3, 9, 48, 51, 66, 105, 187, 216, 271, 345, 407, 409, 410, 411,
414, 461, 510, 546, 656, 659, 660, 661, 663, 666, 850
DDT, 414
Philippines, 280, 336, 392, 428, 524, 676, 679, 682, 684, 717, 750
agro-industries, 213
green technology, 198
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 684
Phnom Penh, 685, 750, 751
photobioreactors, 26
point-of-use water treatment, 540, 726, 727
polluter pays principle, 28, 560
pollution,
agrochemicals, 3, 9, 16, 25, 48, 50, 51, 96, 105, 112, 122, 138, 163,
187–189, 210, 262, 269, 345–46, 434–35, 447, 454–59, 461,
494, 510, 511, 540, 546, 574, 630, 656, 659–66, 712, 795, 816,
824, 829, 840, 844, 850
domestic wastewater, 140, 336
economic growth, 345, 675
impact on environment, 5, 60
industrial, 60, 455, 497
regulatory frameworks, 25
population growth
Africa, 177
Arab region, 211
Central America, 200
Latin America and Caribbean, 198, 200
population trends index, 160
waterborne diseases, 725
Portugal, 575, 659, 662, 842, 843, 844, 845, 842–46
Instituto da Água, 844
water use for agriculture, 187
precautionary principle, 64, 232, 239, 247, 292, 294, 495, 668
public–private partnerships, 563, 564
rainfall, global mean, 87
rainfed agriculture, 49, 178, 179, 180, 212, 217, 247, 253, 261, 448, 452,
573, 605, 611, 626, 714, 747, 748, 753
Africa, 178, 179, 180
Arab region, 212
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, 508, 514
Ravi River, 821
reallocation of water, 137, 522, 523, 525, 579
remote sensing, 8, 166, 168, 170, 171, 214, 264, 720

INDEX

xix

renewable water resources, 8, 79, 80, 124, 136, 160, 178, 180, 192, 207,
210, 443, 451, 681, 708, 711, 793, 799, 854, 865
Asia-Paciﬁc, 194
sub-Saharan Africa, 178
Republic of Korea, 606, 675, 679, 682, 815
results-based ﬁnancing, 562, 565
revenge effects, 136
Rhine River basin, 190, 192, 665, 667
right to water, see water rights
traditions, 50
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 702
Rio Earth Summit, see UNCSD (UN Conference on Sustainable
Development)
Rio Grande basin, 95, 408
Rio+20, see UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD)
river basin management authorities, 145
Rural Water and Sanitation Initiative, Africa, 183
Russia, 189, 419, 661, 666, 715
drought, 218
Rwanda, 182, 397, 747
Sahara, 178, 210, 643, 644, 646, 647, 709, 712, 762, 768, 799
Sahel, 514, 574, 643, 647, 650, 709, 714, 715, 735
Lake Chad basin, 183
water stress, 645
salination of soils, 645
salinization of groundwater, 140, 330
saltwater intrusion, 66, 88, 94, 96, 210, 214, 330, 335, 403, 404, 408,
411, 415, 418, 427, 488, 681, 708, 710, 712, 718, 719, 760, 764, 765,
766, 816, 819, 832, 849
Arab region, 214
Europe, 427
sanitation, access to improved, 26–27, 36, 37, 96, 103, 123, 127, 142,
164, 180, 190, 205, 436, 591, 596, 640
and gender equality, 676
socio-economic development, 26
São João D’Aliança, 337
São Paulo, Brazil, 350
Sasumua watershed, 632
Saudi Arabia, 210, 214, 216, 217, 218, 270, 473, 709, 712, 714, 715, 718,
719, 720, 762, 793
groundwater abstraction, 85
scenarios
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 30
modelling, 140
water quality scenarios, 98, 402
schistosomiasis, 103, 105, 106, 179, 730, 735, 736, 751, 783
sea level rise, 16, 88, 204, 210, 238, 239, 330, 335, 345, 404, 415, 418,
474, 512, 513, 610, 611, 615, 708, 712, 713, 719, 752, 758, 765, 766,
780, 782, 793, 799, 804, 810, 821, 827, 849, 854, 855, 861
sedimentation, 121, 140, 188, 346, 404, 510, 546, 621, 630, 632
Senegal, 182, 210, 216, 217, 314, 543, 564, 623, 647, 712, 713, 714
Senegal River basin, 184
SEWA (Self Employed Women’s Association), India, 337
Sierra Leone, 419
siltation, 121, 263, 269, 415, 621, 623, 630, 633, 645, 822
Sinai dam, 214, 714, 718
Singapore, 433, 478, 681, 683
green technology, 198
Institute of Water Policy, 433
Singapore International Water Week, 433
Slovakia, 661, 827
ﬂood management, 663
slums, 4, 64, 65, 68, 105, 159, 265, 424, 425, 431, 435, 640, 644, 645,
685, 732, 733, 750, 751, 783
sub-Saharan Africa, 64, 177, 179
small island developing states (SIDS), 9, 37, 196, 611,
Nairobi Work Programme, 37
Soft path approach, 136, 137, 140
soil fauna, 629
soil organic matter, 629
solar energy, 25
Somalia, 354, 648, 709, 714, 715, 718
drought, 212

xx

South Africa, 135, 149, 163, 180, 182, 279, 280, 294, 300, 301, 317, 332,
337, 338, 436, 437, 529, 530, 735
hydroelectricity, 163
MDG targets, 180
water governance reforms, 144
Working for Water programme, 632
South African Power Pool, 184
South Sudan, 713
Southern Africa, 419, 454, 643
climate change vulnerability, 50
Southern African Development Community, 165, 646
Drought Monitoring Centre, 184
Protocol on Shared Watercourses, 181
Spain, 301, 435, 542, 575, 659, 662, 759, 762, 843, 844, 846
drought, 190
groundwater abstraction, 84
groundwater-fed irrigation, 86
water use for agriculture, 187
Sri Lanka, 118, 252, 281, 301, 584, 605, 679, 682, 684, 759
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 684
St Johns River basin, 847–52
Standardized Precipitation Index, 608, 609
Stockholm World Water Week, 765
sub-Saharan Africa, 8, 46, 50, 66, 68, 123, 143, 178, 179, 180, 262, 265,
281, 318, 319, 334, 409, 419, 437, 450, 452, 454, 538, 559, 562, 570,
584, 640, 644, 646, 728, 735, 747, 748, 749
climate change impacts, 182, 184
food security, 86, 122, 180, 184
land aquisitions, 217
land degradation and drought, 121, 180, 184, 212, 616–37
MDG targets, 36, 180, 596, 640, 650, 651, 652
population growth, 64, 120, 121
rainfall, 121
renewable water resources, 178
slums, 179
water stress, 182, 645
Sudan, 182, 210, 211, 216, 354, 397, 529, 643, 644, 646, 647, 710, 711,
712, 715, 716, 717, 718
agro-industries, 213
groundwater withdrawals, 644
surface water runoff, 171, 352, 713
sustainable agricultural practices, 31, 96, 418
sustainable land management, 123, 627, 633, 634
Sutlej River, 821
Swaziland, 646, 746
Sweden, 151
Switzerland, 615, 658, 659, 663
payment for ecosystem services, 663
Syria, 214, 604, 709, 714, 793
conﬂicts, 209
rainfed agriculture, 212
System of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water (SEEAW),
169, 548
Tagus estuary, 844
Tagus River basin, 842, 843, 844, 842–46, 845
Taihu Lake, 413
Tajikistan, 186, 569, 658, 674, 675, 676, 679, 681, 682
Tanzania, 182, 278, 314, 397, 419, 542, 558, 573, 648, 649, 746, 748,
786, 787, 788, 789, 790, 791
Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative, 596
Ministry of Water, 144
payment for ecosystem services, 790
water policies, 790
Thailand, 66, 72, 197, 218, 412, 427, 459, 506, 511, 611, 676, 682
green technology, 198
Mekong River Agreement, 72, 506
thermal power plants, 54, 55, 140, 469
Tiber River basin, 835–40
Tibetan Plateau, 810, 821
Togo, 780
total actual renewable water resources (TARWR), 79, 80, 159, 160,
162, 165, 166, 171, 709
toxic contamination, 96, 411, 414

transboundary river basins, 535, 635, 646, 661, 663
transboundary waters, 9, 16, 29, 31–32, 34, 61, 72, 93, 122, 123, 136,
181, 184, 185, 187, 192, 207, 210, 216, 217, 219, 313, 314, 319, 353, 397,
404, 414, 487, 492, 496, 506, 521, 528, 529, 535, 543, 571, 627, 631,
635, 641, 643, 644, 646, 648, 652, 656, 658, 659, 660, 661, 663,
664–65, 31–32, 664, 665, 667, 668, 678, 757, 758, 762, 766, 767,
768, 787, 788, 790, 843, 844, 846, see also individual basins
Africa, 216, 397, 643
Arab region, 210
Australia, 397
bilateral and multilateral agreements and cooperation, 32, 185,
658, 665
Congo River basin, 122
Europe, 185, 190
Ganges, 167
Guarani aquifer, 350
Indus basin, 820–825
Lake Chad, 122, 184
Latin America and Caribbean, 207
Mekong River basin, 144, 149, 167, 506, 571, 587
Niger River basin, 122, 181, 397
Nile River basin, 122, 181, 397
Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System, 644
sub-Saharan Africa, 181
Volta River basin, 122
water allocation, 188, 206, 210, 284, 285
Zambezi River basin, 122
Tunisia, 208, 209, 210, 497, 623, 708, 709, 711, 712, 714, 719, 720
conﬂict, 210
drought, 212
rainfed agriculture, 212
Turkey, 218, 278, 666, 710, 712, 717
agro-industries, 213
drought, 190
Uganda, 149, 182, 281, 397, 585, 747, 751
Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative, 596
Ukraine, 191, 419, 658, 661, 663, 664, 665, 667
ﬂoods, 662
UN Conference on Environment and Development (Rio Earth
Summit), 35
UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD), 23, 39
UN Conference on Sustainable Development 2012, see Rio+20
UN Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of
International Watercourses, 32
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 23
UN Millennium Project, 312, 437
UN Women, 110, 676, 752
UNCSD (UN Conference on Sustainable Development)
Convention on Biological Diversity, 508, 796
Rio Earth Summit, 1992, 38, 796, see also Agenda 21
Rio+20, 2012, 38, 39, 61, 127, 358
UN-Water recommendations, 39
UNDP Adaptation Learning Mechanism, 94
UNFCCC (UN Framework Convention on Climate Change), 20, 30, 35,
37–38, 358, 800
COP15, Copenhagen 2009, 37
COP16, Cancun 2010, 37
UNIFEM (United Nations Development Fund for Women), 749, see
also UN Women
United Kingdom, 108, 313, 331, 332, 432, 435, 493, 511, 513, 573, 662,
750
privatization of water assets, 146
water footprint of, 112
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 175, 180, 181, 407,
643, 644, 646, 650, 651, 652
United States National Water Quality Inventory Report, 660
United States of America, 47, 48, 55, 67, 68, 72, 87, 113, 115, 120, 121,
123, 135, 167, 190, 192, 221, 270, 278, 283, 301, 315, 319, 320, 334,
351, 386, 387, 389, 396, 397, 411, 414, 447, 454, 459, 468, 470, 471,
472, 473, 475, 482, 486, 507, 512, 573, 660, 662, 663, 667, 762, 763,
766, 847, 848, 849, 847–52
Clean Water Act, 191
drought, 121, 393

WWDR4

ethanol and biodiesel production, 50, 454, 455
ﬁshing industries, 82
ﬂoods, 248, 662
greenhouse gases, 453
groundwater abstraction, 84, 85
irrigation, 187
IWRM, 139
Mississippi River, 187
payment for ecosystem services, 663
population growth, 185
virtual water exports, 33
water contamination, 189
water stress, 126, 397
water withdrawals, 185
wetlands, 252
UN-Water, 20, 31, 39, 108, 124, 126, 142, 146, 148, 159, 165, 172, 221,
236, 312, 358, 437, 539, 621, 636, 676, 737, 752, see also WHO/
UN-Water
gender priority, 110
task force on water resources management, 38
and UNCSD (UN Conference on Sustainable Development), 39
UN Water/Africa, 175, 180, 643, 650, 651, 652
urban drainage systems, 28, 140
urban wastewater, 66, 96, 191, 201, 317, 435, 528, 667, 702
urban wastewater treatment, 96, 418
Urban Water Directive, EU 435
urban water supply, 68, 110, 144, 220, 265, 431, 557, 692, 698, 744,
750, 783
Australia, 397
Africa, 652
Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional Authorities, 69
IWA Cities of the Future programme, 69
Latin America and Caribbean, 198
quality constraints, 195
urbanization, 11, 24, 46, 49, 64, 65, 68, 69, 96, 107, 128, 135, 139, 140,
162, 183, 192, 193, 202, 240, 264, 265, 269, 357, 407, 409, 418, 422–
37, 423, 424, 425, 426, 431, 434, 442, 450, 451, 455, 456, 555, 568,
645, 662, 672, 673, 675, 697, 708, 724, 783, 817, 863
Arab region, 208–09
Asia-Paciﬁc, 192, 194, 197
Europe, 239
green economy, 39
greenhouse gases, 431
human health, 106, 140
Istanbul Water Consensus for Local and Regional Authorities, 69
and IWRM, 139, 435
Latin America and the Caribbean, 200, 696
water stress, 140, 435, 645
Uruguay, 206, 207, 472, 694, 695, 696, 703, 767
demographic change, 200, 201
Guarani aquifer, 350
population growth, 696
Uzbekistan, 186, 408, 569, 674, 675, 680, 681, 682
water stress, 194
valuing water, 141, 533–48
vector-borne diseases, 103, 105, 106, 118, 148, 179, 265, 409, 537, 730,
731, 732, 734, 735, 736, 783, 784, 824
Latin America and Caribbean, 204
Viet Nam, 72, 252, 335, 459, 506, 676, 679, 682, 684, 687, 759
Mekong River Agreement, 72, 506
natural disasters, 65
payment for ecosystem services, 197, 684
virtual water, 10, 18, 32–34, 33, 34, 35, 51, 63, 112, 163, 185, 217, 261,
452, 482, 486, 493, 520
Arab region, 212
foreign investment protection, 18, 34
United Kingdom, 112
Volta River basin, 122, 278, 644, 781, 782, 783, 784
Lake Volta, 781
wadis, 210, 212, 715, 795
wastewater treatment, 14, 28, 57, 58, 60, 61, 67, 95, 96, 97, 105, 107,
135, 188, 189, 241, 252, 280, 281, 297, 311, 317, 336, 337, 403, 407,
409, 411, 416, 418, 423, 430, 431, 433, 435, 459, 467, 470, 471, 472,

INDEX

xxi

473, 474, 494, 495, 528, 540, 554, 656, 659, 661, 662, 663, 668,
672, 678, 679, 681, 732, 765, 795, 829, 831, 832, 833, 839, 840, 851,
865
artiﬁcial wetlands, 336
Asia-Paciﬁc, 197
eco-efficient water infrastructure, 682
in industrialized countries, 435
Latin America and Caribbean, 205
water supply and sanitation services, 26–27
wastewater reuse, 26, 138, 336
water abstraction, 25, 27, 72, 86, 113, 348, 525, 644, 674, 760, 781,
795, 801, 828, 856, 862
for agriculture, 24, 187, 719
Arab states, 85, 644
Asia-Paciﬁc, 5, 85, 86
China, 85
for energy, 25
Europe, 84, 85, 185
of groundwater, 5, 66, 83–89, 665, 759, 760, 762, 763, 764, 769,
794, 801, 806, 816, 822
renewability threshold, 27
North America, 84, 85, 185
sub-Saharan Africa, 182, 644, 781
water accounting, 63, 164, 169, 172, 293, 300, 526, 530, 548
Water Action Plan, G8, 35
water allocation, 6, 16, 37, 51, 71, 72, 109, 128, 135, 138, 188, 285, 284–
86, 300, 301, 302, 317, 328, 330, 339, 353, 358, 382–98, 461, 487,
503, 505, 516–33, 542, 545, 569, 570, 576, 579, 634, 651, 662, 665,
674, 692, 713, 797, 813, 846, 863
water as a human right, 35, 34–35, 36, 108, 142, 215, 220, 266, 274,
485, 490, 518, 519, 521–22, 592, 626, 737, 751
Costa Rica, 856
water cycle, see hydrological cycle
water efficiency, 33, 34, 38, 59, 64, 202, 238, 271, 273, 300, 317, 349,
455, 478, 493, 495, 857, 862, 865
water efficiency plans, 38, 455
Water Framework Directive, EU, 9, 189, 191, 192, 300, 542, 560, 575,
577, 595, 659, 661, 663, 667, 668, 762, 765, 828, 829, 839, 840,
845
water governance, 29–35
global cooperation on climate change, 29
water institutions, 7, 144, 148
climate change, 145
food security, 144
IWRM, 145
water legislation, 9, 50, 206
Canada, 191
Europe, 191
governance reforms, 32, 144, 198, 206
water optimisation, 496
water pricing, 137, 159, 248, 293, 387, 389, 558, 560, 667
water quality, 401–19
assessment frameworks, 402
economic impacts, 5
lack of data, 402
scenarios, 402
water rights, 35, 34–35, 36, 108, 142, 215, 266, 274, 490, 518, 626, 737
and women, 110
water security, 3, 6, 25, 51, 52, 110, 113, 122, 138, 149, 159, 170, 197, 198,
207, 249, 251, 254, 278, 314, 395, 441, 455, 462, 503, 504, 505, 510,
511, 513, 514, 539, 544, 545, 552, 672, 684, 685, 708, 744, 750, 795,
832, 856
IWA Cities of the Future programme, 69
water stress, 12, 27, 57, 102, 112, 122, 123, 124, 126, 140, 145, 163, 182,
187, 190, 261, 262, 268, 281, 284, 390, 395, 408, 433, 443, 486, 513,
541, 564, 573, 574, 645, 661, 694, 708, 715, 780, 784, 843, 846
Arab region, 121, 194, 210, 211, 212, 574
Asia-Paciﬁc, 121, 164, 243, 404, 645
Europe, 190, 218
Latin America and Caribbean, 201, 202
North America, 121, 393
sub-Saharan Africa, 121, 178, 180, 182, 184, 212, 216, 616–37
water stress index, 159

xxii

water supply and sanitation services (WSS), 26–27, 35, 108, 123, 205,
207, 423, 432, 433, 436, 552, 573, 693, 695, 701, 707, 737, 781, 839,
856
in Latin America and the Carribbean, 205
universal coverage, 39
Water Women project, São João D’Aliança, Brazil, 337
waterborne diseases, 96, 106, 115, 118, 408, 409, 432, 540, 725, 726,
728, 730, 751, 752
child mortality, 726
climate change impacts, 725
schistosomiasis, 730
water-related hazards, 27, 102, 115, 116, 118, 119, 602, 603, 613, 614, 801
Asia-Paciﬁc, 9, 65, 196
China, 413
climate change impacts, 27, 94, 187, 218, 252
Latin America and the Caribbean, 696
watershed management committees, see basin management
committees
weirs, 28, 832
West Africa, 643
ethanol and biodiesel production, 218
groundwater recharge, 87
West African Power Pool, 184
wetlands
Chilika Lake, 415
loss of, 118, 140, 252, 611, 662
rehabilitation, 337
sustainable management of, 337
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme on Water Supply and
Sanitation (JMP), 36, 64, 65, 66, 68, 108, 142, 163, 164, 426, 539,
709, 737
WHO/UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and
Drinking-Water (GLAAS), 36, 108, 142, 146, 148, 312, 437, 539, 737
women
collection of water, 751
empowerment of, 749, see also gender equality
food production, 26
land and water rights, 27
marginalization of, 18, 747
vulnerability to risks, 18, 751
water management, 26
women, involvement of
Water Women project, São João D’Aliança, Brazil, 337
Women, Water and Work Campaign, Gujarat, India, 337
World Business Council on Sustainable Development (WBCSD), 169,
251, 340, 347, 348, 350, 493, 495, 507
World Economic Forum, 23, 35, 169, 170, 215, 348, 485
World Health Organization, see WHO
World Meteorological Organization, 172, 332, 534, 608, 613, 663
World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 608
World Water Development Report (WWDR), 134
WWDR1, 2003, 19, 20, 78, 159, 504
WWDR2, 2006, 19, 20, 78, 111, 142, 508, 510, 512, 572, 590
WWDR3, 2009, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 60, 78, 111, 139, 158, 163, 233, 249,
313, 344, 357, 508, 510, 513, 810, 813
WSSD (World Summit on Sustainable Development), 38, 651, 652,
668
integrated water resources management (IWRM) target, 38
Yangtze River basin, 331, 505, 529
Yellow River basin, 810–13
Yemen, 209, 210, 211, 218, 434, 709, 712, 713, 714, 715, 717, 720, 762,
764
water conﬂicts, 210
water institutions, 213
Zambezi River basin, 122, 314, 524, 528, 644
Zambia, 182, 278, 314, 524, 553, 573, 735, 746
zero discharge, 63, 64, 484, 485, 490, 496, 498
Zimbabwe, 294, 334,

This ﬂagship report is a comprehensive review that gives an overall picture of the world’s freshwater resources. It
analyses pressures from decisions that drive demand for water and affect its availability. It offers tools and response
options to help leaders in government, the private sector and civil society address current and future challenges. It
suggests ways in which institutions can be reformed and their behaviour modiﬁed, and explores possible sources of
ﬁnancing for the urgently needed investment in water.
The WWDR4 is a milestone within the WWDR series, reporting directly on regions and highlighting hotspots, and it
has been mainstreamed for gender equality. It introduces a thematic approach – ‘Managing Water under Uncertainty
and Risk’ – in the context of a world which is changing faster than ever in often unforeseeable ways, with increasing
uncertainties and risks. It highlights that historical experience will no longer be sufficient to approximate the
relationship between the quantities of available water and shifting future demands. Like the earlier editions, the
WWDR4 also contains country-level case studies describing the progress made in meeting water-related objectives.
The WWDR4 also seeks to show that water has a central role in all aspects of economic development and social
welfare, and that concerted action via a collective approach of the water-using sectors is needed to ensure water’s
many beneﬁts are maximized and shared equitably and that water-related development goals are achieved.
—
UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for all freshwater related issues. It was
formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. It currently counts 29 UN
Members and 25 other international Partners. UN-Water complements and adds value to existing UN initiatives by
facilitating synergies and joint efforts among the implementing agencies. See www.unwater.org

UNDESA, UNECA,
UNECE, UNECLAC,
UNESCAP and UNESCWA

9 789231 042355

United Nations
     
Cultural Organization

VOLUME 1

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted by UNESCO and brings together the
work of 28 UN-Water members and partners in the triennial World Water Development Report (WWDR).

Knowledge
Base
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 2

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

Knowledge
Base
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 2

Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France

WWDR4 has been published on behalf of the United Nations World
Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) with the support of the
following organizations:

© UNESCO 2012
All rights reserved

United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT)
United Nations University (UNU)

Chapter 24, ‘Investing in water infrastructure, its operation and its
maintenance’, © The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
ISBN 978-92-3-104235-5
e-book ISBN 978-92-3-001045-4
Original title: The United Nations World Water Development
Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk (Vol. 1),
Knowledge Base (Vol. 2) and Facing the Challenges (Vol. 3).
Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
UNESCO Publishing: http://publishing.unesco.org/
Suggested citation:
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2012. The United
Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of
the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not
commit the Organization.

—
The contents of Volume 2 were contributed by the UN-Water
members and partners listed on the title pages of the chapters
therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content
provided or for discrepancies in data and content between
contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as
authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in Volume 2.
WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.

—
Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid
A/S, an ISO 14001 (environmental management) and a DS 49001
(corporate social responsibility) certiﬁed and approved carbon
neutral company.
Printed by Imprimerie Centrale S. A. (Imprim’Vert certiﬁed) for
UNESCO CLD, Paris.
This publication is printed with vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources
paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves. This is a carbon
neutral print product. Imprimerie Centrale will contribute funds to a
project replanting trees in Panama for this publication.
Printed in Luxembourg

Specialized UN Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
(UNESCAP)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA)
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation (UNCCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR)
United Nations Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS
Chapter 15. State of the Resource: Quantity
15.1 Drivers of variability
15.2 Stressors on water resources
15.3 Risks and uncertainty in water resources management
15.4 Hot spots

381
383
383
388
395

Chapter 16. State of the Resource: Quality
16.1 Introduction
16.2 Natural processes combined with social and economic drivers of water quality risks
16.3 Relationship between water quantity and water quality
16.4 Human health risks related to water quality
16.5 Ecosystem health risks related to water quality
16.6 Economic costs of poor water quality
16.7 Risks, monitoring and intervention

401
403
403
408
408
411
415
418

Chapter 17. Human Settlements
17.1 The changing urban background
17.2 Water abstraction
17.3 Climate change and resilient urban water systems
17.4 Water education
17.5 Financing the water sector

422
424
427
431
436
436

Chapter 18. Managing water along the livestock value chain
18.1 Water: A key role in agriculture
18.2 Managing water resources in agriculture
18.3 Uncertainties and risk management
18.4 A new era in food and water management?
18.5 Water use along the livestock value chain

440
442
449
452
455
456

Chapter 19. The global nexus of energy and water
19.1 Introduction
19.2 Exacerbation of the strain in the energy–water relationship
19.3 Policy choices towards more energy-intensive water and water-intensive energy
Conclusions and recommendations

465
467
473
474
477

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
QUANTITY

iI

II
ii

Chapter 20. Freshwater for industry
20.1 Key issues
20.2 External drivers
20.3 Principal risks and uncertainties
20.4 Challenge areas
20.5 Opportunities

480
482
484
487
489
492

Chapter 21. Ecosystems
21.1 The challenges
21.2 The role of ecosystems in regulating water quantity and quality
21.3 Ecosystem status and trends
21.4 Risks, vulnerabilities and uncertainties affecting ecosystems and water security
21.5 Ecosystem-based approaches to the management of water

502
504
504
508
510
512

Chapter 22. Allocating water
22.1 Allocating water
22.2 Main issues
22.3 New water allocation paradigms in the face of uncertainty
22.4 Opportunities: How the key water allocation issues can be addressed
Conclusion

517
519
519
522
525
530

Chapter 23. Valuing water
23.1 Introducing the issues
23.2 Challenges for Valuing water

533
535
547

Chapter 24. Investing in water infrastructure, its operation and its maintenance
24.1 Water, risk and uncertainty
24.2 Investment needs in the water sector
24.3 Financing the gap
Conclusions and recommendations: The way forward

550
552
553
556
564

Chapter 25. Water and institutional change: Responding to present and future uncertainty
25.1 Institutions: Form and function
25.2 Institutional responses to uncertainty
25.3 Implementation of acceptable and workable institutions
25.4 Opportunities for improving water institutions

567
569
572
575
578

Chapter 26. Developing knowledge and capacity
26.1 A changing agenda
26.2 Developing capacity
26.3 Preparing a capacity development strategy
26.4 Capacity development strategies and approaches
26.5 The way forward

582
584
584
587
592
596

Chapter 27. Water-related disasters
27.1 Introduction
27.2 Anatomy of disasters: Trends in ﬂood and drought risk
27.3 Water-related disaster risk drivers
27.4 Methodologies and tools for reducing water-related hazard risk
27.5 Emerging approaches to reduce ﬂood and drought hazard risk
27.6 Conclusions and required actions

600
602
604
609
612
614
615

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE
KNOWLEDGE
AREA REPORTS
BASE

Chapter 28. Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought and their
impacts on water resources in the drylands
28.1 Introduction
28.2 The challenge: Water as a key resource under pressure in the drylands
28.3 Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought: Drivers, risks and uncertainties, and hotspots
28.4 Potential responses to save the drylands and their populations
Conclusions and recommendations

619
621
622
627
631
636

REGIONAL REPORTS
Chapter 29. Africa
29.1 Regional issues and recent developments
29.2 External drivers
29.3 Principal risks, uncertainties and opportunities
29.4 Geographical hotspots
29.5 Response measures
Conclusion

639
641
643
645
647
649
652

Chapter 30. Europe and North America
30.1 Introduction
30.2 Water management and response measures
30.3 Uncertainties and risks
30.4 Water governance

655
657
658
664
667

Chapter 31. Asia and the Paciﬁc
31.1 Introduction
31.2 Issues
31.3 Emerging drivers
31.4 Principal risks and uncertainties
31.5 Achievements through policy-making
31.6 Sectoral priorities and regional initiatives

671
673
673
675
681
681
685

Chapter 32. Latin America and the Caribbean
32.1 External drivers and their effects
32.2 Risks, uncertainties and opportunities
32.3 Areas of particular concern
32.4 The challenge ahead

691
693
697
699
703

Chapter 33. Arab region and Western Asia
33.1 Regional developments
33.2 Drivers
33.3 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
33.4 Response measures
Conclusion

706
708
708
711
716
720

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
QUANTITY

III
iii

SPECIAL REPORTS

IV
iv

Chapter 34. Water and health
34.1 Introduction
34.2 Water-related disease groups, environment–health pathway and promising interventions
34.3 Trends and hotspots
34.4 Solution options
Conclusions

723
725
725
732
734
736

Chapter 35. Water and gender
35.1 Introduction
35.2 Challenges and opportunities
35.3 The way forward

742
744
744
752

Chapter 36. Groundwater
36.1 Groundwater in a web of interdependencies
36.2 Panorama of change
36.3 Key issues on groundwater
Conclusions

756
758
758
762
768

Boxes, tables and ﬁgures

773

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE
KNOWLEDGE
AREA REPORTS
BASE

CHAPTER 15
State of the resource: Quantity

UNESCO-IHP
—
Authors Balaji Rajagopalan and Casey Brown
Contributors Anil Mishra (Coordinator), Siegfried Demuth (Coordinator), Edith Zagona,
Jose Salas, Ashish Sharma, Upmanu Lall and Austin Polebitski

© Lawrence Hislop/UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://www.grida.no/photolib)

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
What is the current state of the world’s freshwater resources? What are the most important
external drivers and their resulting pressures and impacts on these resources as well as their
use and management? This chapter tries to answer these questions. It begins by describing
the main issues facing the state of the resource and how these have been changing over
recent years. The chapter then outlines the related principal risks, challenges, uncertainties
and opportunities. Finally, geographic hotspots of particular concern are identiﬁed and
examples of how some countries are dealing with the issues and challenges are provided.

15.1 Drivers of variability
15.1.1 The hydrological cycle
It is well known that a mere 2.5% of global water resources is potentially available for human, animal and
plant consumption; the remaining 97.5% resides in the
oceans. Adding to this limitation is the fact that freshwater is highly uneven in its spatial distribution; thus,
it is not uncommon that regions habitable for human
settlement ﬁnd themselves with insufficient freshwater.
The movement of freshwater among terrestrial parts of
the earth, the oceans and the cryosphere is known as
the hydrological cycle, the water cycle or the H2O cycle.
Evaporation and evapotranspiration account for
30–70% of the losses to temperature in arid climates
and groundwater recharge is about 1–30% for these
regions (e.g. see table 4.1 in WWAP, 2006). A large
part of the world’s population lives in semi-arid and
arid climates that have about 30% of precipitation
available for ready use. The increase in temperature
due to global warming will reduce the amount of water available for ready use in the future, and increasing
temperatures will also reduce groundwater recharge,
further exacerbating the water availability challenge.
Table 15.1 shows the total precipitation and renewable
water available for the population in different ecosystems and regions of the world. The world’s population
has substantially increased while global precipitation
has remained largely constant. Precipitation may be
signiﬁcantly reduced in the future in semi-arid and
arid regions, which tend to be among the most vulnerable and poorest in the world, due to anthropogenic
climate change (IPCC, 2007). Thus, a smaller fraction
of global freshwater will have to satisfy an increasing
population, as can be seen in Figure 15.1.
Understanding the movement of water and the spatial
and temporal variability of water availability are the
most important aspects of water resources that need
to be understood and incorporated in planning and
management for resource sustainability. Large-scale
climate forcings (i.e. drivers) orchestrate the spatial
and temporal movement of water. The seasonal variation of available water resources is driven by the
earth’s tilt and its revolution about the sun. This results
in wet and dry seasons in the tropics due to the annual movement of the Intertropical Convergence Zone
(ITCZ). In the tropics, annual total rainfall may be large
but intra-annual variation is also large, posing a challenge to water resources management and economic

WWDR4

development (Brown and Lall, 2006). At high latitudes
precipitation is more equally distributed, but streamﬂow may be inﬂuenced by the accumulation and melting of snowpack.
15.1.2 El Niño-Southern Oscillation and other oceanic
oscillations
The El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO), a coupled
ocean-atmospheric phenomenon in the tropical Paciﬁc
Ocean, is the dominant driver of global climate at seasonal to interannual time scales. The state of the tropical Paciﬁc triggers ‘teleconnection’ responses in other
parts of the world – especially in Latin America, South
and South-East Asia, and Africa.
The Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO), the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and the Atlantic
Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) are drivers that operate at longer time scales (interdecadal to century);
they are not robust phenomena that can easily be
identiﬁed, observed and predicted like ENSO. These
phenomena impact regional climates in the midlatitudes, mainly in North America and Europe.
Research in understanding these drivers and their
teleconnections to regional climate and hydrology is
nevertheless emerging.
All of these oscillations are drivers that impact the variability of moisture delivery in space and time around
the world. Understanding and diagnosing their teleconnections to regional hydrology is a potentially powerful tool for water resources prediction and simulation,
and consequently, for adaptation to climate variability
and change.

15.2 Stressors on water resources
The state of water resources is constantly changing as
a result of the natural variability of the earth’s climate
system, and the anthropogenic alteration of that climate system and the land surface through which the
hydrological cycle is modulated. The state of water
resources is also inﬂuenced by human activities that
affect demand, such as population growth, economic
development and dietary changes, as well as by the
need to control the resources, such as is required for
settlement in ﬂood plains and drought-prone regions.
15.2.1 Water supply
The greatest stress on water supply comes from
the variability of moisture delivery to a river basin,
which predominantly reﬂects variability in climate – a

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

383

powerful stress on water supply around the world. The
consequence of this stress is ampliﬁed by socioeconomic growth, management policies, land cover
and land use changes. The state of water resources is
in constant change, the effects of which can be only
partially anticipated. Some changes that we can
anticipate are described below.
Decrease in mean ﬂow
There is increasing evidence of substantial streamﬂow
reduction in a number of river basins around the world
in the coming decades due to global warming. While

some regions, such as those in higher latitudes, could
see increases in moisture and streamﬂow, unfortunately, in much of the populated regions of the world there
is projected to be a reduction in ﬂow (IPCC, 2007).
Increase in ﬂood potential
The implications of climate change include acceleration of the water cycle, which could lead to an increase
in the probability of heavy rainfall and consequently
the ﬂooding potential. Extreme rainfall events produce
enormous volumes of water that cause loss of life and
damage to property. Furthermore, without signiﬁcant

TABLE 15.1
Estimates of renewable water supply, the renewable supply accessible to humans, and the population served
by the renewable supply in different ecosystems and regions

Systema or region

Area

Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment (MA)
System

(million km2)

Forests

41.6

Mountains
Drylands

Total
precipitation
(P1)

Total renewable
water supply, blue
water ﬂows
(B1)

Renewable water
supply, blue water
ﬂows, accessible to
humansb
(B2)

Population served
by renewable
resourcec

(thousand km3 per
year) [% of global
runoff]

[% of B1]

(billion)
[% of world
population]

49.7

22.4 [57]

16.0 [71]

4.62 [76]

32.9

25.0

11.0 [28]

8.6 [78]

3.95 [65]

61.6

24.7

3.2 [8]

2.8 [88]

1.90 [31]

Cultivated

22.1

20.9

6.3 [16]

6.1 [97]

4.83 [80]

Islands

8.6

12.2

5.9 [15]

5.2 [87]

0.79 [13]

Coastal

7.4

8.4

3.3 [8]

3.0 [91]

1.53 [25]

Inland water

9.7

8.5

3.8 [10]

2.7 [71]

3.98 [66]

Polar

9.3

3.6

1.8 [5]

0.3 [17]

0.01 [0.2]

Urban

0.3

0.22

0.062 [0.2]

0.062 [100]

4.30 [71]

Asia

20.9

21.6

9.8 [25]

9.3 [95]

2.56 [42]

Former Soviet Union

21.9

9.2

4.0 [10]

1.8 [45]

0.27 [4]

Latin America

20.7

30.6

13.2 [33]

8.7 [66]

0.43 [7]

North Africa/
Middle East

11.8

1.8

0.25 [1]

0.24 [96]

0.22 [4]

Sub-Saharan Africa

24.3

19.9

4.4 [11]

4.1 [93]

0.57 [9]

OECD

33.8

22.4

8.1 [20]

5.6 [69]

0.87 [14]

World Total

133

106

39.6 [100]

29.7 [75]

4.92 [81]

d

Region

a Note: double-counting for ecosystems under the MA deﬁnitions.
b Potentially available supply without downstream loss.
c Population from Võrõsmarty et al. (2000).
d For cultivated systems, estimates are based on cropland extent from Ramankutty and Foley (1999) within this MA reporting unit.
Source: Hassan et al. (2005, table 7.2, p. 173). © Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Reproduced by permission of Island Press, Washington DC.

384

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

that the snowmelt would occur early due to the advancement of spring and its warmer weather. This
early snowmelt would reduce the snow season and
increase moisture delivery in the form of rain thus increasing inﬁltration and evaporative losses during the
melt. All of this will place a heavy stress on the amount
of water available for use. This is likely to be the case
over much of mid-latitude regions, but it will be especially acute in semi-arid and arid regions that depend
on mountainous snowmelt.

FIGURE 15.1
Cumulative distribution of the population with
respect to freshwater services, 1995–2000

Cumulative population
(millions) served by runoff
6000
Ćāāā

Of the world’s population:
đƫĂĀŌƫ$/ƫ*+ƫ,,.!%(!
water supply
đƫćĆŌƫ/$.!/ƫ(+3ġ0+ġ
moderate supplies
ĨŖĀĢĆĀŌƫ+"ƫ#(+(ƫ.1*+ûĩ
đƫāĆŌƫ(%2!/ƫ3%0$ƫ.!(0%2!
30!.ƫ1* *!
ĨĆĀĢāĀĀŌƫ+"ƫ#(+(ƫ.1*+û

3000

āāĆĀ
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

.0%+*ƫ+"ƫ#(+(ƫ.1*+û

Source: Hassan et al. (2005, ﬁgure 7.7, p. 173). © Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment. Reproduced by permission of Island Press,
Washington DC.

storage capacity, the ﬂood ﬂows do not relieve periods
of water shortage.
Increase in losses
It is widely believed that the mean temperature will
increase in almost all parts of the world (IPCC, 2007).
Climate models are much more useful in temperature
projections than in those for precipitation. The consequences of increasing temperatures on water supply
are direct and strong – increased evaporation, transpiration (although this is modulated to some degree by
carbon fertilization) and inﬁltration, all of which greatly
increase the losses from incoming moisture, thus severely reducing the amount of water easily available
for use. The increase in evaporative demand cannot
easily be countered and therefore will impact surface
runoff and water availability.
Altered seasonality and timing of ﬂow in snowmelt basins
Many river basins in the mid-latitudes (i.e. snowmelt
basins) get their water in the form of snow in the winter, which then melts in the following spring to produce runoff in the rivers that is then stored in reservoirs for water supply. Snow is beneﬁcial from a water
supply perspective because it acts a reservoir. Water
managers have used the timing of the melt for effective management of reservoir operations to satisfy environmental needs. In a warmer climate it is projected

WWDR4

Decrease or increase in ﬂow due to glacier melt
Few populous places depend entirely on ﬂow from
glaciers. The Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers in India
receive glacier melt during the winter and spring
months (i.e. non-monsoon months) that accounts for
9–12% of their annual ﬂow (see Eriksson et al., 2009,
table 2). For India, a country with one billion people, a
reduction in ﬂow due to climate change in even one of
its vital rivers could pose a serious threat to its water supply. Peru, Chile and Argentina similarly receive
a substantial amount of water from glaciers in the
Andes. With a warming climate there are two major
impacts related to glaciers: (i) reduced snowfall in the
lower elevations, resulting in a reduction in the size of
the lower elevation glaciers; and (ii) increased losses
during the melt season, thereby reducing the amount
of ﬂow. Projections indicate a rapid depletion of lower
elevation glaciers around the world (IPCC, 2007).
Loss of the groundwater buffer
Groundwater provides a vital buffer against rainfall
variability, especially in water stressed parts of the
world. Almost all of the shallow groundwater reservoirs are recharged from rainfall, but recharge is greatly impacted by withdrawal, population growth and
land cover change. Groundwater also plays a vital role
in buffering the variability of surface water resources.
With rainfall variability projected to increase in future, the groundwater buffer will become no longer
available.
15.2.2 Water demand
The demand for water services involves human use
of water for agriculture and industry as well as instream ﬂow requirements for water quality and
ecosystems. There is considerable uncertainty surrounding current and future global water demands.
This is due in part to (a) the lack of current data describing national consumption patterns, withdrawals
and sector usage; (b) large demographic changes,

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

385

including population growth, economic growth and
dietary changes; and (c) our limited understanding
of how water demand changes dynamically in response to growing scarcity.
In many parts of the world, water demand is growing
due to an increase in population, resulting in an
increase in demand for agricultural and industrial
products. Economic growth in developing countries
often leads to an increase in water demand, for which
there are at least two causes. First, direct use of water
increases with economic development as access to
water and household appliances improve. Second, in
many countries a dietary shift occurs along with
economic development – a shift from a primarily
plant-based diet to one that has a higher proportion of
meat. Meat production requires much greater amounts
of water; for example, it takes approximately 16,000 L
of water to produce 1 kg of beef compared with
3,000 L of water to produce 1 kg of rice (Water
Footprint Network, n.d.). In the USA and Europe, the
per capita water requirement for food is higher than in
other countries, and food consumption is dominated
by animal products (Figure 15.2).
Globally, agriculture is the primary water-using sector: more than 70% of water diverted from streams or
renewable sources is used for agricultural purposes,
and this number is even higher in developing countries.

The prevailing climate of a region is an important driver
of agricultural water needs, as evapotranspiration rates
are sensitive to changes in air temperature, incoming solar radiation, humidity and wind speed. Climate
variability plays a large role in agricultural water needs
nationally, though globally, weather-driven variability
in irrigation is less than 10% (Wisser et al., 2008). The
type of crops grown and the land management techniques and irrigation methods used factor strongly into
regional agricultural demands. Wisser et al. (2008)
noted global irrigation sensitivities to percolation rates
in rice paddies: a 50% change in percolation rate creates a 10% change in global irrigation water use; therefore, about 20% of global irrigation water may be percolating from ﬂooded rice paddies.
Countries with the largest per capita water footprints
tend to have large gross domestic products (GDPs)
and large durable consumption rates (see Margat
and Andréassian, 2008). The consumption of durable goods increases the water footprint. The USA has
the largest water footprint of any nation, with a large
proportion of the per capita water footprint in industrial goods (Figure 15.3); however, the USA ranks third
globally in overall water consumption (Figure 15.4).
India and China have lower per capita water footprints
than the USA but are overall the largest total water
consumers (Figure 15.4).

FIGURE 15.2
Per capita water requirements for food (m3 per capita per year)

Developed
Cereals and starchy roots
Developing
Sugar and sweeteners
World
Oil crops and vegetable oils
South Korea
Vegetables and fruits
Japan
Alcoholic beverages
USA
Animal products
EU15
China

0

500

1000

1500

2000

Source: Liu and Savenije (2008, ﬁg. 5, p. 893).

386

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

There is growing recognition of the negative impacts
on ecosystems of water withdrawals and alteration of
ﬂow patterns due to human use of water. Water ﬂows
for aquatic ecosystems are now a standard part of
water management objectives, and increasingly there
is demand for ﬂows that match some measure of the
historical ﬂow regime in place of minimum streamﬂow
requirements, which are seen as insufficient.

Despite large water footprints, water demands in developed countries such as the USA have been on a
downward trend in the past 20 years. More economically efficient water pricing and the use of water efficient technologies both domestically and in agriculture
are the primary causes (Box 15.1).
Other changes in water demand are due to the evolution of human habitation from largely rural to increasingly
urban. This shift offers potential advantages in terms of
economies of scale for providing domestic water as well
as sanitation to people. While this is a potentially helpful
trend, the provision of water services in rapidly growing
and economically depressed urban areas is a complex
challenge that requires continuous effort. Despite domestic water use being a small proportion of total water consumed (10–20%), providing it is becoming increasingly
challenging as urban populations expand.

Inevitably, the varied demand for water resources sets
the scene for conﬂicts over allocation of water services. As the variability of water resources may increase,
there is a need for more ﬂexibility in water allocation
mechanisms so that demands can be satisﬁed and
shortfalls allocated in the most socially beneﬁcial way.
Because environmental beneﬁts are often the most difﬁcult to assign value to, they may be at risk of being
left out or underestimated.
Demand for groundwater presents its own set of
challenges. As a relatively cheap and reliable water

Another major source of water demand is for sustaining ﬂows for ecosystems, called environmental ﬂows.

FIGURE 15.3
National per capita water footprint and the contribution of different consumption categories for selected
countries

Water footprint (m3 per capita per year)
3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

Domestic water consumption

Industrial goods

USA

Italy

Thailand

Nigeria

Russia

Mexico

Brazil

Indonesia

Pakistan

Japan

India

China

0

Agricultural goods

Source: Hoekstra and Chapagain (2007, ﬁg. 5). Reproduced by permission from Springer Science+Business Media B.V.

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

387

FIGURE 15.4
Contribution of major consumers to the global water footprint

Indonesia
4%

Nigeria 3%

Russian Federation 4%

Brazil 3%
Pakistan 2%

USA 9%

Japan 2%
Mexico 2%
China 1%

Other

58%

Thailand 2%
Other

44%

India 13%

Source: Hoekstra and Chapagain (2007, ﬁg. 4). Reproduced by permission from Springer Science+Business Media B.V.

supply, groundwater has been a boon to farmers
throughout the world and a major cause of increasing food security. However, as a common property
resource, groundwater is inherently prone to overuse. Many major aquifers around the world are being mined, from the High Plains of North America,
to southern India, and the northern plains of China.
Groundwater in these regions is being extracted at
rates that far exceed recharge and often exceed the
economically efficient use rate. Regulation of the
common property resource is difficult due to its diffuse nature and the political issues of regulating a resource that is privately accessed.
Finally, there is demand not only for water resources but also protection from hydrological extremes.
Societies around the world continue to be negatively
impacted by ﬂoods and droughts, and the human toll
is large. The cumulative impact of hydrological risks
has a negative effect on economic development in
many countries. Infrastructure and alternatives (structural and non-structural) are needed to reduce these
negative impacts. Investment in storage and control
structures such as dams is needed in many developing
nations. Improved forecasting, early warning systems
and insurance mechanisms are all important components of a strategy for addressing ﬂood risk. Water
storage at multiple scales, water markets and banks,
and insurance are likely components of a strategy for
addressing drought.

388

CHAPTER 15

15.3 Risks and uncertainty in water
resources management
15.3.1 Understanding the sources of uncertainty
The key sources of uncertainty related to water resources are those associated with supply, demand
and the policy context. The uncertainty of water supply results originally from the natural variability of the
earth’s climate system and the hydrological cycle, as
described earlier. However, anthropogenic inﬂuences
are introducing new sources of uncertainty. These include the perturbation of the earth’s climate due to the
emission of greenhouse gases; the large–scale emission
of aerosols that inﬂuence the physics of precipitation;
and changes to the earth’s surface through land use
development which affect rates of runoff and evapotranspiration. Taken together, natural variability and
anthropogenic forcings create a nonstationary climate
and hydrological context within which water resources
must be managed. This is particularly notable because
the current principles for water resources management
are based largely on an assumption of hydrological
stationarity – the assumption that the future hydrological record can be adequately simulated with the
statistics of the historical record.
Uncertainty related to water demand
The uncertainty associated with water demand is
largely related to both the difficulty of anticipating
demographic change and our limited understanding of how water responds to changing climate and
policy conditions. Projections of water demand are

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 15.1
Conservation and demand hardening

Demand hardening occurs when long-term conservation practices and efficiency gains reduce the effectiveness of short-term water conservation measures within
a given sector of use. Technological advancements and
behavioural changes are the primary drivers of increased
water use efficiency. Demand hardening increases as water availability becomes either physically or economically
limiting.
The concept of ‘peak water’ (Gleick and Palaniappan,
2010) provides a good description of the demand hardening process. When a region extracts more water from
a watershed than is naturally replenished, peak renewable water is said to be reached. Watersheds such as the
Colorado River basin and the Yellow River basin are two
examples approaching peak water. Ecologically, this can
be unsustainable and a more appropriate metric, ‘peak
ecological water’, may be targeted so that environmental
and ecological damages are minimized. Basins that reach
peak water may also be considered ‘closed’; that is, all
utilizable water has been allocated. Further allocation of
water from the system will result in less water for other
sectors or for ecological ﬂows. It has been suggested that
the USA has reached peak water, as withdrawals have remained constant or below historical peak water withdrawals reached during the late 1970s.
In response to dwindling water availability, conservation efforts such as indoor ﬁxture retroﬁt programmes,
outdoor watering education campaigns and technology
investments have been used to extend existing supplies,
thus increasing demand hardening. This by no means suggests the USA is headed for mass water shortages. Many
cities in the USA use water metering coupled with water
pricing policies as an effective control of outdoor water
consumption. But, despite the efficiency gains from metering and pricing schemes, in much of the USA, in addition to other economically developed countries, both municipal and agricultural use remains unmetered. Metering
of individual units in multifamily structures is even less
common. Additional water savings can be found in the
future if cities meter their residents and apply appropriate
water pricing.
Gains in ﬁxture efficiency are an important driver of indoor domestic water demands. In the USA, federal regulations made in the early 1990s continue to decrease per
capita water consumption as older ﬁxtures are replaced
with newer, more efficient ﬁxtures. In Australia, lasting
drought across the continent has increased the penetration rate of efficient ﬁxtures in domestic, agricultural and
industrial sectors. National initiatives for water re-use and
grey-water systems are reducing per capita consumption.

WWDR4

notoriously difficult to get right. Better understanding
of the dynamic relationship between water demand
and supply and more sophisticated means of modelling changes in demand dynamically are needed.
To model changes in demand, the underlying drivers
of demand growth (or decrease) must be understood.
The primary factors affecting water demand in much of
the developing world are population growth and socioeconomic growth. As economies grow, water use increases signiﬁcantly, which typically leads to increases
in water demand. The developing world is projected to
have much higher growth in total water demand than
the developed world. Increasing demand is projected
to occur in agriculture (for irrigation), domestic and industrial sectors – all linked to economic growth. Figure
15.5 shows the global physical and economic water
scarcity, the latter of which is a combination of socioeconomic growth and water availability. It can be seen
that both physical and economic water scarcity occurs
together almost entirely in regions with high population growth and situated in the tropics. Economic water scarcity is largely a result of insufficient infrastructure and lack of management capacity.
There is considerable uncertainty in projections of
water demand, especially in the projection of socioeconomic factors such as population and economic
growth. Without accompanying increases in the efficiency of water use, growth in water demand may be
unsustainable and ultimately an impediment to continued economic growth.
Uncertainty related to water supply
Climate variations have a signiﬁcant impact on the water supply and thus are an important source of uncertainty. Climate models project a decrease in precipitation and consequently in streamﬂow in several regions
around the world. Figure 15.6 shows water availability
projections for the 2050s from global climate models
(taking into account climate variability, precipitation,
temperature, topography and socio-economic factors
that inﬂuence demand). These projections show a reduction in the future due to climate change in tropical
regions. While these are projections of surface water
availability, which is a major source of water for almost
all human activities, the groundwater scenario is likely
to be similar or worse as reduced precipitation leads
to reduced recharge. With increasing exploitation from
socio-economic growth, groundwater will be stressed
further. The regions currently under severe stress will

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

389

face severe to catastrophic stress in the future under
these forces.
Projections of water supply due to climate variability
come with large uncertainty. A major question that
emerges is whether the uncertain climate change projections should be used to make planning and adaptation decisions. While the information used for water
planning has always been uncertain, the current rate
of potential change and degree of uncertainty associated with it is probably unprecedented. Managing this
uncertainty is one of the great water challenges of the
century.
15.3.2 Managing uncertainty and risks
Managing the irreducible uncertainties that affect
water supply, demand and the policy context is a
signiﬁcant component of an effective water resources
management strategy. Approaches to risk management
offer well-developed methodologies for addressing
uncertainties associated with hazardous events. There
is growing recognition that many uncertainties can
offer opportunities in addition to risks (e.g. de Neufville,

2002); for example, unexpectedly high ﬂows may
offer opportunities to generate additional water
service beneﬁts (such as hydropower) if water managers
are prepared to address such an uncertainty.
A general framework for risk management can be described in three steps: hazard characterization, risk
assessment and risk mitigation. The ﬁrst step is to
characterize a given event, often considered a hazard,
in terms of the impacts or consequences it may have.
The next step, risk assessment, involves actual calculation of the risk – deﬁning risk as the product of the
probability of an event and the consequences of that
event. The ﬁnal step is the development of a strategy for addressing the risks identiﬁed and quantiﬁed.
Cost–beneﬁt analysis has traditionally been used in the
development of such a strategy and the process of risk
quantiﬁcation accommodates a quantitative cost–
beneﬁt analysis. However, if there are costs or beneﬁts
that are not easily quantiﬁed then other multiobjective decision-making methods may be needed.

FIGURE 15.5
Global physical and economic water scarcity

Little or no water scarcity
Physical water scarcity
Approaching physical
water scarcity
Economic water scarcity
Not estimated

Deﬁnitions and indicators
đƫƫƫ %00(!ƫ+.ƫ*+ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ċƫ1* *0ƫ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ.!(0%2!ƫ0+ƫ1/!Čƫ3%0$ƫ(!//ƫ0$*ƫĂĆŌƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ".+)ƫ.%2!./ƫ3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ$1)*ƫ,1.,+/!/ċƫ
đƫƫƫ$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫĨ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ !2!(+,)!*0ƫ%/ƫ,,.+$%*#ƫ+.ƫ$/ƫ!4!! ! ƫ/1/0%*(!ƫ(%)%0/ĩċƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫĈĆŌƫ+"ƫ.%2!.ƫý+3/ƫ.!ƫ
3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ#.%1(01.!Čƫ%* 1/0.5Čƫ* ƫ +)!/0%ƫ,1.,+/!/ƫĨ+1*0%*#ƫ"+.ƫ.!5(%*#ƫ+"ƫ.!01.*ƫý+3/ĩċƫ$%/ƫ !ü*%0%+*ƬĢƫ.!(0%*#ƫ30!.ƫ2%(%(%05ƫ
0+ƫ30!.ƫ !)* ƫĢƫ%),(%!/ƫ0$0ƫ .5ƫ.!/ƫ.!ƫ*+0ƫ*!!//.%(5ƫ30!.ƫ/.!ċ
đƫƫƫ,,.+$%*#ƫ,$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ċƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫćĀŌƫ+"ƫ.%2!.ƫý+3/ƫ.!ƫ3%0$ .3*ċƫ$!/!ƫ/%*/ƫ3%((ƫ!4,!.%!*!ƫ,$5/%(ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ*!.ƫ"101.!ċ
đƫƫƫ+*+)%ƫ30!.ƫ/.%05ƫĨ$1)*Čƫ%*/0%010%+*(Čƫ* ƫü**%(ƫ,%0(ƫ(%)%0ƫ!//ƫ0+ƫ30!.ƫ!2!*ƫ0$+1#$ƫ30!.ƫ%*ƫ*01.!ƫ%/ƫ2%((!ƫ(+((5ƫ0+ƫ)!!0ƫ$1)*ƫ
!)* /ĩċƫ0!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ.!ƫ1* *0ƫ.!(0%2!ƫ0+ƫ30!.ƫ1/!Čƫ3%0$ƫ(!//ƫ0$*ƫĂĆŌƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ".+)ƫ.%2!./ƫ3%0$ .3*ƫ"+.ƫ$1)*ƫ,1.,+/!/Čƫ10ƫ)(*10.%0%+*ƫ!4%/0/ċƫ

Source: Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture (2007, map 2.1, p. 63, © IWMI, http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/) (from an
International Water Management Institute analysis using the Watersim model).

390

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 15.6
Projected per capita water availability in 2050

Very Severe Water Stress

Severe Water Stress

Some Water Stress

Adequate Water Supply

2050s

Million litres available per person per year
Less than 0.5 - Extreme stress

0.5 to >1.0 - High stress

1.0 to >1.7 - Moderate stress

1.7 and over - No stress

No data

The top panel shows a watershed basis using the most detailed digital basin boundaries available, outputs of precipitation minus evaporation (as a proxy for runoff) from the CCSM3 climate model, and population based on a combination of
Global LandScan 2007 current population distribution and downscaled CIESIN country-level growth projections. ‘Very severe water stress’ indicates that <500 m3 per person per year of freshwater is projected for the basin; ‘severe water stress’,
500–1000 m3 per person per year; ‘some water stress’, 1000–1700 m3 per person per year; and ‘adequate water supply’,
>1700 m3 per person per year. For further details, see http://www.ornl.gov/sci/knowledgediscovery/QDR/water/Glbdetbsn_
WA2050_A2p-e_A2pop.png.
The bottom panel was prepared by Martina Floerke and colleagues at the Centre for Environmental Systems Research,
University of Kassel, Germany for the BBC using the UK Met Office Hadley Centre generated projections of future temperature and rainfall along with their water resources model, waterGAP (http://www.usf.uni-kassel.de/cesr/).
Both top and bottom projections are for same assumptions of climate change mitigation strategies (A2 scenario; see
Nakicenvoic et al., 2000) and aggressive population growth. These indicate there are different ways to make water availability projections (using different models and scenarios). Models are constantly improving, generating new information.
Additional research efforts are required to update our knowledge concerning possible future conditions.

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

391

Climate risks are particularly relevant to water resources
management and their nature warrants some discussion.
Some climate risks have a degree of predictability if, for
example, they are inﬂuenced by a predictable climate
phenomenon such as ENSO. Any such predictability
should be investigated during the hazard characterization and risk assessment steps of risk management.
Climate risks may also be related to climate opportunities and a wider view of climate risk management, such
as consequence or uncertainty management, should be
embraced. Finally, the advent of anthropogenic climate
change and the recognition of the nonstationarity of
hydrological records present special challenges to traditional approaches to risk management. The calculation
of probabilities associated with climate or hydrological
events is confounded by nonstationarity. The historical record is no longer considered representative of the
future, and projections from general circulation models
(GCM) are not yet able to produce reliable predictions.
As a result, methods that depend solely on accurate estimations of probability face large shortcomings.
Given the uncertainties associated with risk estimation, there is a need to consider methods for handling
the potential increasing risks. One method is to identify, consider and manage residual risk. Residual risk
refers to those risks that are not directly addressed
by a risk management strategy. For example, low risk
events may not be directly addressed because the
cost of addressing them exceeds the beneﬁts of doing
so. However, because estimates of low risk events are
made with unreliable probability estimates, it is possible that residual risks are actually signiﬁcant.
Also relevant is the concept of surprise. A surprise is
generally understood to be the occurrence of an event
that has a low probability relative to other events that
could occur. Such events are typically not planned for.
Again, because the probability estimation may not be
reliable, it is worth considering how such events would
be managed if they were to occur, even if nothing is invested in directly managing their occurrence. Doing so
would improve the robustness of a particular plan – a
robust plan being one that works well enough under a
wide range of possible futures rather than just for a best
guess estimate of the future. The utility of robustness as
a planning criterion reﬂects the growing awareness of
the inability to predict the future (Brown, 2010).
Institutional complexities inhibit ﬂexibility in planning.
Large and old institutions in particular tend to have

392

CHAPTER 15

entrenched rules and stakeholders who resist change
and science- and knowledge-based decision-making.
Developing countries may have a comparative advantage
in this regard in that as they are developing institutions
they can instil ﬂexibility in them and learn from the drawbacks of matured systems. In the Philippines, progress
has been made in improving reservoir performance in the
city of Manila due to the willingness of competing water
users to consider new approaches to managing drought,
including the use of seasonal climate forecasts (Brown
et al., 2009). Progress is also possible in mature systems,
especially when new information provides an opportunity
for reconsideration of past assumptions. The Colorado
River water resources management system is a good example. Methods such as Bayesian networks in which all
the participants and their probabilistic interactions can be
represented and the system performance assessed provide an excellent framework for a participatory solution
(Bromley, 2005). The report from the NeWater project
(http://www.newater.info) provides an excellent summary
of the identiﬁcation of major sources of uncertainty in
integrated water resources management practice
(van der Keur et al., 2006).
15.3.3 Emerging opportunities for managing
uncertainty
There is a growing list of methodologies available for
addressing the new challenges to water resources
management. Those described below are in various
stages of development but most are still nascent in
their practical application. Realizing the full potential
of these innovations requires a collaborative effort between the research community and the practicing water management community.
Observations, models and forecasts
The ability to monitor all aspects of the hydrological cycle has never been stronger. Remote sensing,
ground-based monitoring and modelling techniques
that allow real-time observations and forecasts at
multiple time scales are new and potentially important tools to improve water resources management.
However, gaps between the production of this information and its use in practice are wide.
Seasonal climate forecasts are increasingly skilful and
there are several agencies that provide probabilistic seasonal forecasts for the entire globe. Innovative tools can
translate these seasonal forecasts to hydrological and
hydroclimate forecasts. For example, researchers have
established connections in river basins around the globe

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

between streamﬂows and large-scale climate forcings,
particularly ENSO, PDO and the Paciﬁc North American
(PNA) pattern (Grantz et al., 2005; Regonda et al., 2006
and references therein). Using these connections, novel
forecast methods have been developed to produce skilful streamﬂow forecasts at a few months lead time (e.g.
Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 1999; Clark et al., 2001; Grantz
et al., 2005; Regonda et al., 2006). Additionally, new
stochastic simulation techniques (Rajagopalan et al.,
2009) can be used to generate ensembles of hydrological scenarios in a water resources system conditional on
large-scale seasonal climate forecast. The ensembles
can be used in a decision tool to provide estimates of
system risks at the seasonal to interannual time scales
and thus enable efficient decisions. A good demonstration of these ensemble forecasts can be found in Grantz
et al. (2007) and Regonda et al. (2011).

Decadal-scale patterns of variability
The paleo record affords a long view of hydrological variability that is not possible with the observed hydrological
record. Recent and current research based on waveletbased spectral analysis of paleo data reveals decadalscale patterns of variability that correlate with large-scale
multidecadal climate forcings such as the PDO and AMO
described earlier. Better understanding of these modes of
variability could enhance water resources management.
The existence of decadal-scale variability in the historical
hydrological record implies that a water resource system
could beneﬁt from ﬂexibility to manage periods of relatively greater and less water availability.
Dynamic operational strategies
Traditional water resources management principles are
based on the assumption that the probability distribution for hydrological states is the same every year; that
is, the assumption of climatology that the long-term
statistics are dominant in every year. For
example, reservoir rule curves identify the optimal
storage levels at various times of the year that best
meet operating objectives, considering the timevarying hydrological conditions. Storage is drawn
down before expected periods of high inﬂows;
conservation storage is built up in anticipation of an
irrigation season or a period of high hydropower
demand. A typical reservoir guide curve is shown in
Figure 15.8. Such curves are designed – using the
probability distribution of the period of record
hydrology – to provide acceptable levels of risk and
reliability in meeting operational objectives and
avoiding damage or catastrophe.

Paleo data
Historical and paleo reconstructed streamﬂow and
climate data can be a valuable resource to quantify
historical climate risk. For instance, on the Colorado
River, long paleo reconstructions of streamﬂow indicate a much higher frequency of dry spells and
low ﬂows relative to the streamﬂow in the twentieth
century (Figure 15.7). The paleo data provide a more
realistic estimate of the drought risk than the historical observational record alone. For example, the recent
prolonged drought (2000–2010) on the Colorado River
appears to be highly unusual based on the observed
data but quite common based on the long paleo reconstruction. There are emerging methods to combine
observed and paleo information to obtain robust risk
estimates (Prairie et al., 2008).

FIGURE 15.7
Paleo reconstruction of the Colorado River streamﬂow
Flow (million ac-ft/yr)
25
23
21
19
17
15
13
11
9
7
1490

1540

1590

Paleo Reconstruction

1640

1690

1740

1790

Historic Natural Flow

1840

1890

1940

1990
Time (Years)

Note: One acre-foot is 1,233 m3.
Source: Based on data from Woodhouse et al. (2006) and Prairie and Callejo (2005).

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

393

Improved forecasts and understanding of multi-year
variability as described above provide a reﬁned understanding of the probability distribution seasonally
and annually. A seasonal forecast may indicate a much
higher than normal probability of low ﬂows. This could
be linked to ENSO or other climate signals and have
multi-year effects. Similarly, the ability to forecast extended wet and dry periods may soon be possible as
a result of decadal-scale forecasting research (Nowak,
2011). These scientiﬁc advances make possible the use
of dynamic operational strategies such as reservoir or
water system rule curves that change in response to
forecasts or observations; ﬂexible water allocation and
pricing approaches, such as in response to scarcity;
and the use of economic mechanisms to facilitate
water exchanges. Adaptive reservoir operations,
wherein rule curves are modiﬁed to produce more
effective management given improved streamﬂow
forecasts, are gaining recognition (e.g. Bayazit et al., 1990;
Yao and Georgakakos, 2001).
Adaptive management
Adaptive management is a method used to address
the uncertainties associated with climate change, other
hydrological change, and our limited ability to correctly anticipate the future in complex water resources systems. The approach was developed in ecology.
The general principle of the approach is ‘learning by
doing’ and it emphasises monitoring and the ability
to change decisions and update hypotheses on the
basis of observations. It can be appropriate in cases
where reversible decisions are possible, so that a decision may be changed as climate and socio-economic
conditions evolve and a better understanding of the
system is achieved. Sankarasubramanian et al. (2009)
demonstrate that utility of climate information even of
modest accuracy, when coupled with adaptive operations, can beneﬁt water allocation projects with high
demand–to–storage ratios as well as systems with
multiple uses constraining the allocation process. The
ability to ingrain ﬂexibility into a system improves the
opportunities for making use of adaptive management
principles.
Scenarios-based approach
A common approach to dealing with the implications
of climate change is the scenario-based approach. A
small number of internally consistent visions of the
future are created and plans are evaluated according to how well they perform under these scenarios.
Projections from GCM represent internally consistent

394

CHAPTER 15

climate scenarios that are used in the planning process.
The GCM projections are converted to hydrological
variables through a process that includes bias correction, resolution increases and hydrological modelling,
and these variables drive models of the water resources systems. Often, extreme points of the range of GCM
projections are chosen to attempt to capture the range
of GCM uncertainty, although the true range of climate
uncertainty remains unknown. Recent examples of this
approach include Traynham et al. (2011), Vano et al.
(2010a, 2010b) and Vicuna et al. (2010). A downside of
this approach is that water planners struggle with the
very wide range of impacts represented by the scenarios, which often include negligible and severe impacts
that are considered equally probable. It is difficult to
design a plan that addresses all scenarios: the costs of
addressing some scenarios are often exorbitant, and
the analysis provides no information as to which is
more likely.
Robust decision-making methodologies
Water resources planners and policy-makers have long
understood that most decisions are made under considerable uncertainty related to the future. Nonetheless,
anthropogenic climate change raises issues that are
different from the typical uncertainty with which water
planners are familiar. In particular, assumptions related
to the use of the historical hydrological record are jeopardized by the prospect of changing climate. On the one
hand, the water planner is informed that ‘stationarity is
dead’ (Milly et al., 2005) and the usual use of the historical record for planning is no longer valid. On the other
hand, climate change projections from general circulation models (GCM) are acknowledged to be too uncertain to be used for planning purposes and are
associated with signiﬁcant biases. How are decisions to
be made when the future is characterized not only by
uncertainty but also by two or more potentially contradictory visions of the hydrological future? A variety
of approaches have emerged that attempt to address
decision-making under climate uncertainty: see Box 15.2.
Information and communication technology
Advances in information and communication technologies offer great potential for improving the management of water resources. The low cost of these
technologies has made them ubiquitous, including
widespread use in developing countries. Potential
applications include forecast transmittal, early warning
systems , and crowd sourcing for data collection and
monitoring.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 15.8
Example reservoir rule curve showing drawdown for spring ﬂoods, ﬁlling as the ﬂood season subsides, and
maintenance of summer levels for water supply, recreation and hydropower production

Flood Control

Recreation
Season

Fill Period

Drawdown
Period

Flood Guide

Elevation (metres)

Targeted Minimum
Summer Level
Reserved for Flood Control
Typical Operation
Discretionary
Release Zone
Minimum Operating Guide

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Advanced decision support systems
The application of many scientiﬁc advances, such as
probabilistic forecasting, requires a decision support
system in which current and future states of the hydrological system can be modelled, stochastic hydrology
that reﬂects a wide range of assumptions as described
above can be generated, and various management and
infrastructure alternatives can be evaluated. Decision
support tools should support the quantiﬁcation of risk
and reliability and offer the ability to measure performance of a management plan with respect to agreedupon criteria such as the reliability of supply and the
risk of damage to the human or ecological systems.
Advanced decision support systems (ADSS) must enable the participatory involvement of a range of scientiﬁc, government and management agencies as well as
various stakeholders. Such systems have been developed and applied successfully in several basins and are
under development in others across the globe.

15.4 Hot spots
15.4.1 India
India faces an unprecedented crisis in the next two
decades. Today, major urban areas are unable to provide a reliable and regular water supply. Industrial and

WWDR4

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

energy development face water constraints. Scarcity
of water for irrigation is a leading concern of farmers. This can be seen in agricultural water stress maps
(Columbia Water Center, n.d.). Of particular concern
is that the water stress dramatically increases with
multi-year drought. This threatens the country’s food
and water security. Mighty rivers, such as the Ganges,
are signiﬁcantly depleted over much of the year, and
highly polluted over much of their course. Life (biodiversity) abundant in India until as recently as the 1990s
is now seriously threatened. Aquifers, the resource of
choice due to subsidized energy for pumping, present
variable stock and quality. Not surprisingly, aquifer
depletion and inefficient water use are now endemic.
Uncertainty as to what climate change portends for
the water supply is a concern, but the needs for food
of a growing population will likely determine the shape
of the water crisis in the country. The dramatic natural
climate variability (seasonal to interannual to decadal
to century scale) and its spatial manifestation as ﬂoods
and droughts across India poses a serious threat in
this context as water stores that could normally buffer
against such variations are exhausted and no infrastructure or multi-scale coordinated planning efforts
are implemented.

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

395

The World Bank warns of a turbulent water future for
India absent dramatic coordinated government investments in water infrastructure, governance and agricultural productivity (Briscoe, 2005). The International
Water Management Institute (IWMI) talks of taming
the anarchy of uncontrolled groundwater exploitation
by the population as a whole, and proposes investments in groundwater recharge among policy reforms
(Shah, 2008).
Despite these warnings, rather limited in-depth analyses and projections of the water resources of the country, sectoral and ecological demands, and potential
solutions exist. Controlled access to the detailed data
needed to reconstruct the past and project the future
and a lack of institutional support for interdisciplinary research into long-range water resources planning and management are key factors contributing to

the situation. Non-government organizations are active lobbyists and implementers of local solutions (e.g.
rainwater harvesting, well provision, water treatment,
sanitation training and water data provision) but typically do not come close to meeting the needs of a national, state and local strategic analysis.
15.4.2 Western USA
Western USA is mountainous, predominantly semiarid and receives its water supply from snowmelt. Its
population steadily increased during the latter half of
the twentieth century. The large population centres are
in the south-west desert, while their water is supplied
by the Colorado River, which originates in the higher
elevations of the Rocky Mountains far to the north. The
water in the river is divided among seven basin states
and two countries (USA and Mexico); thus, water management is highly contentious.

BOX 15.2
Decision-making under climate uncertainty

An emerging approach to planning under climate uncertainty focuses on providing the speciﬁc information needed to inform
a decision process. These decision-based approaches typically apply decision analytics to the planning process to identify the
conditions that favour a particular decision over another.
The ﬁrst approach is known as identifying and implementing ‘no regrets’ decisions. The idea is that there are decisions that
will work well regardless of the degree of climate change or its attributes. The decision pays off for the historical record and
for the anticipated climate change. Decisions such as this that are essentially insensitive to future climate are straightforward
to make – the challenge is identifying them. Based on the degree to which water managers continue to struggle with the implications of climate change, no regrets decisions that adequately address these climate concerns are rare.
Robust decision-making is a decision-based approach that uses GCM projections as scenario generators that incorporate a variety of decision inputs. (Lempert et al., 2006) and addresses ‘deep uncertainty’ by favouring management plans that perform
well over a range of possible future conditions (Brekke et al., 2009). It uses clustering techniques to identify the conditions that
favour particular decisions and to assess the robustness of a decision by varying the assumptions that underlie those conditions.
The objective is to identify decisions that are superior regardless of the future climate that is assumed.
Decision-scaling uses sensitivity analysis to identify the climate conditions that favour one decision over others (Brown et
al., 2010). Information from multiple GCM super ensembles and historical climate analysis is tailored to estimate the relative
probability of those conditions compared to the climate conditions favouring alternative decisions. Risk management strategies are then developed to address the implications of low probability outcomes. In all cases, the process begins with the
identiﬁcation of the key climate information that causes a particular decision to be favoured over others. The hope is that
the identiﬁcation of these factors may reveal that they are less uncertain than the spectrum of climate change possibilities
as a whole. This allows even uncertain climate change projections to be able to offer valuable information for the planning
process.
Adaptive management can be coupled with robust decision-making by continually monitoring the performance of a robust
plan. At intervals in the future, if performance decreases, the plan can be modiﬁed to improve its performance. The modiﬁcation would be made with improved knowledge of future possible conditions. An approach that applies decision-scaling to
adaptive management is currently being adopted in the plan for the regulation of outﬂows from Lake Superior (Brown et al.,
2011).

396

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

The river has extensive storage (almost four times the
annual average ﬂow in the river), which is managed by
the United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR), mandated to manage the water resources of the Colorado
River basin in the USA and coordinate water delivery
obligations with Mexico, under a complicated set of
decrees and rules known as the ‘law of the river’. The
law of the river worked well for much of the twentieth century, when demand was much lower than supply. But a ‘perfect storm’ comprising economic growth,
increasing population and increasing water demands,
coupled with severe sustained drought in the recent
decade, is stressing the physical system and the agreements. Paleo reconstructions of streamﬂow in the
basin indicate drier epochs with regular frequency. In
fact, they indicate that the twentieth century, when
the law of the river was drafted, was one of the wettest. Climate change projections indicate a substantial decrease in annual average streamﬂow, which will
only exacerbate the situation. Many studies (recently
Rajagopalan et al., 2009) underscore this and also
suggest that ﬂexible and innovative management of
the system and collective stakeholder participation can
instil effective adaptive management practices that
can help mitigate the risk. Studies indicate that the region is likely to experience severe water supply crises
in the not-too-distant future if management practices
are not modiﬁed (USBR, 2005).
15.4.3 West Africa: Niger basin
The Niger River basin is a transboundary basin covering signiﬁcant portions of nine countries in West Africa.
Approximately 100 million people are dependent in
some way on the river – for livelihood, trade, transportation and food. The basin is facing complex problems
of poverty and low productivity, and it is characterized
by severe water constraints, including water-borne diseases and extreme weather events such as ﬂoods and
droughts. Managing this river system has been challenged by the growing competition for water among
urban, industrial, agricultural and ecological users, as
well as by the day-to-day, intraseasonal and interannual vagaries of climate variability and climate change.
Past interannual variability is large in magnitude compared to any projected climate changes. Within this
context, a climate risk assessment of the infrastructure
investment plan has been conducted (Brown, 2011).
Due to the great uncertainty of the future climate,
a decision-scaling approach was applied that begins with an assessment of the potential impacts of

WWDR4

hypothetical climate changes and then utilizes climate
information to assess the likelihood of problematic climate changes (Brown, 2011). The resulting analysis indicated that the investment plan was largely well prepared for moderate climate changes or less. Only very
large reductions (about 20%) in precipitation would
pose signiﬁcant impacts. The subsequent climate analysis revealed that such changes are not common in
climate projections for the region and thus are considered to have a low likelihood. To enhance its preparedness for future climate variability and change, the use
of seasonal hydrological forecasts is currently being
investigated as an additional adaptation strategy.
15.4.4 East Africa: Nile basin
The Nile, the longest river in the world at about
6700 km, drains about 3 million km2 and runs through
10 riparian African countries. The Nile comprises two
main river systems: the White Nile and the Blue Nile.
The White Nile has its source in the Equatorial Lakes
Plateau where it originates above Lake Victoria, the
second largest freshwater lake in the world, and supports populations and ecosystems of six Eastern
Africa nations: Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania, Kenya,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Uganda. The
Blue Nile originates in the Ethiopian highlands and
ﬂows west to meet the White Nile at Khartoum in
Sudan. The main Nile ﬂows north from this conﬂuence
to the High Aswan Dam in Egypt, then continues north
and empties into the Mediterranean Sea through a
large delta. The total population of Nile basin countries
is about 300 million, and more than half of this population is dependent on the Nile. The river supports particularly large populations in Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia
and Uganda. The population in these countries is expected to increase by about 50% in the next 20 years.
The effects of climate change are not certain, although
it is likely that arid countries will become warmer as
more water will evaporate. Analysts expect that future
stresses will be due in great part to population and
development pressures, and will be aggravated by climate change. Egypt, for example, is projected to have
in 2025 only about half the per capita water availability that it had in 1990.
15.4.5 Australia
Much of Australia’s population is conﬁned to a narrow strip along the coastline, which makes urban water supply a major challenge for the present and an
even bigger one for the future, as climate change is

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

397

projected to lead to a reduction in overall precipitation.
While many studies comment on the likely reduction
in rainfall across the continent in a warmer climate, it is
generally accepted that the future will see an increase
in evaporation (Johnson and Sharma, 2010), resulting
in a signiﬁcant reduction in the continent’s already low
water availability. Australia’s farming heartland, the
Murray-Darling basin, is likely to see a reduction in water supply to serve the demands for irrigation, urban
use and industry along with an increase in the vulnerability of migratory birds visiting freshwater wetlands
(Hennessey et al, 2007).

the effects of global warming. For example, Peru has
lost at least 22% of its glaciers’ surface since 1970,
affecting some of the water supply in the Peruvian
highlands. The White Cordillera, where 35% of
Peruvian glaciers are located, have lost about
190 km2 of ice surface; for example, the Broggi glacier
has retreated about 950 m in the period 1948–2004
and the Pastoruri glacier about 490 m in the period
1980–2005 – the latter glacier has been closed to
tourism for safety reasons (PUCP, 2008).

15.4.6 South America
South America is a large continent with a wide range
of geomorphological and climatic features, such as
the desert lands along the western coasts of Peru and
Chile, the Andes Mountains in western South America,
and the Amazon forest basin in Peru and Brazil. Thus
one ﬁnds a variety of water resources problems that
are typical of certain regions such as ﬂash ﬂooding
in many high-gradient mountain rivers, large-scale
ﬂoods and inundations in large rivers (e.g. the Parana
and Amazon basins), and periods of low ﬂows and
droughts in many regions.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

During the past few years, the economies of several
South American countries have been developing signiﬁcantly, making them attractive for capital investment and growth. One of the reasons for such unprecedented growth has been the mining industry. For
example, many regions in Peru have important mineral
stock and have attracted the attention of major mining corporations (Salas et al., 2008). While this has
brought employment opportunities for thousands of
Peruvian workers and has helped boost the regional
and national economy, it has also brought a number of
concerns related to the impact of mining operations on
water resources and the environment. These impacts
include effects on the water quantity and quality of
nearby streams, depletion of groundwater levels and
water ﬂow from springs, and increased soil erosion. In
addition, the mining boom has raised concerns about
the vulnerability of inhabitants, livestock, wildlife, vegetation, soil and water to any toxic waste that may result from industrial operations and accidents.

Briscoe, J. 2007. India’s Water Economy: Bracing for a
Turbulent Future. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.

An additional water-related problem that has become
relevant in many South American countries in the past
decades relates to the accelerated ‘deglaciation’ of the
tropical Andes mountains, – due to, it has been argued,

398

CHAPTER 15

References
Bayazit, M. and Unal, N. E. 1990. Effects of hedging on
reservoir performance. Water Resources Research, Vol. 26,
No. 4, pp. 713–19.
Brekke, L. D., Kiang, J. E., Olsen, J. R., Pulwarty, R. S., Raff,
D. A., Turnipseed, D. P., Webb, R. S. and White, K. D. 2009.
Climate Change and Water Resources Management – A
Federal Perspective. US Geological Survey Circular 1331.
Reston, VA, USGS. http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1331/

Bromley J. (ed.). 2005. Guidelines for the Use of Bayesian
Networks as a Participatory Tool for Water Resources
Management. A MERIT Report. Wallingford, UK, Centre for
Ecology and Hydrology (CEH).
Brown, C. 2010. The end of reliability. ASCE Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management, Vol. 136, p. 143.
––––. 2011. Decision-scaling for Robust Planning and Policy
under Climate Uncertainty. Washington DC, World
Resources Report. http://www.worldresourcesreport.org
Brown, C. and Lall, U. 2006. Water and economic development:
The role of variability and a framework for resilience. Natural
Resources Forum, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 306–17.
Brown, C., Conrad, E., Sankarasubramanian, A. and
Someshwar, S. 2009. The use of seasonal climate forecasts
within a shared reservoir system: The case of Angat
reservoir, Philippines. F. Ludwig, P. Kabat, H. van Schaik
and M. van der Valk (eds), Climate Change Adaptation in
the Water Sector, London, Earthscan.
Brown, C., Werick, W., Fay, D. and Leger, W. 2011. A decision
analytic approach to managing climate risks – Application
to the Upper Great Lakes. Journal of the American Water
Resources Association, doi:10.1111/j.1752-1688.2011.00552.x.
Clark, M. P., Serreze, M. C. and McCabe, G. J. 2001. Historical
effects of El Niño and La Niña events on the seasonal evolution
of the mountain snowpack in the Columbia and Colorado River
Basins. Water Resources Research, Vol. 37, pp. 741–57.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Columbia Water Center. n.d. Homepage. http://water.
columbia.edu/?id=India&navid=india_water_stress
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute.
Eriksson, M., Jianchu, X., Bhakta Shrestha, A., Ananda Vaidya,
R., Nepal, S. and Sandström, K. 2009. The Changing
Himalayas: Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources
and Livelihoods in the Greater Himalayas. Kathmandu,
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
(ICIMOD).
Gleick, P. H. and Palaniappan, M. 2010. Peak water limits
to freshwater withdrawal and use. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, Vol. 107, No. 25, pp. 11155–62.
Grantz, K., Rajagopalan, B., Clark, M. and Zagona, E. 2005. A
technique for incorporating large-scale climate information
in basin-scale ensemble streamﬂow forecasts. Water
Resources Research, doi:10.1029/2004WR003467.
––––. 2007. Water management applications of climate-based
hydrologic forecasts: Case study of the Truckee-Carson
River Basin, Nevada, ASCE. Journal of Water Resources
Planning and Management, Vol. 133, No. 4, pp. 339–50.
GreenFacts. n.d. Scientiﬁc Facts on Water Resources Web
page. http://www.greenfacts.org/en/water-resources/
ﬁgtableboxes/9.htm
Hamlet, A. F. and Lettenmaier, D. P. 1999. Columbia River
streamﬂow forecasting based on ENSO and PDO climate
signals. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management, Vol. 125, pp. 333–41.
Hassan, R., R. Scholes and N. Ash (eds). 2005. Condition
and Trends Working Group of the Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Current
State and Trends, Vol. 1. Washington DC, Island Press.
http://www.eoearth.org/article/Ecosystems_and_Human_
Well-Being:_Volume_1:_Current_State_and_Trends:_
Freshwater_Ecosystem_Services
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Chapagain, A. K. 2007. Water footprints
of nations: Water use by people as a function of their
consumption pattern. Water Resources Management,
Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 35–48.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
Climate Change 2007 – The Physical Science Basis:
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the IPCC. Geneva, IPCC.
Johnson, F. and Sharma, A. 2010. A comparison of Australian
open water body evaporation trends for current and future
climates estimated from Class A evaporation pans and
general circulation models. Journal of Hydrometeorology,
doi:10.1175/2009JHM1158.1.
van der Keur, P., Henriksen, H. J., Refsgaard, J. C., Brugnach, M.,
Pahl-Wostl, C., Dewulf, A. and Buiteveld, H. 2006. Identiﬁcation
of Major Sources of Uncertainty in Current IWRM Practice and
Integration into Adaptive Management. Report of the NeWater
Project – New Approaches to Adaptive Water Management
Under Uncertainty. Osnabrueck, Germany, NeWater.

WWDR4

Lempert, R. J., Groves, D. G., Popper, S. W. and Bankes, S. C.
2006. A general, analytic method for generating robust
strategies and narrative scenarios. Management Science,
Vol. 52, No. 4, pp. 514–28.
Liu, J. and Savenije H. H. G. 2008. Food consumption
patterns and their effect on water requirement in China.
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, Vol. 12, pp. 887–98.
Margat, J. and Andréassian, V. 2008. L’eau, les Idées Reçues.
Paris, Editions le Cavalier Bleu.
Milly, P. C. D., Dunne, K. A. and Vecchia, A. V. 2005. Global
pattern of trends in streamﬂow and water availability in a
changing climate. Nature, doi:10.1038/nature04312.
Nakicenvoic et al. 2000. Special Report on Emissions
Scenarios. A Special Report of Working Group III of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge,
UK, Cambridge University Press.
de Neufville. 2002. Architecting/Designing Engineering
Systems Using Real Options. ESD WP 2003-01.09.
Engineering Systems Division Symposium, June 2002,
http://esd.mit.edu/WPS/2003.htm
Nowak, K. 2011. Stochastic streamﬂow simulation at
interdecadal time scales and implications to water
resources management in the Colorado River Basin. PhD
dissertation, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.
Prairie, J. and Callejo, R. 2005. Natural Flow and Salt
Computation Methods, Salt Lake City, UT, US Department
of the Interior.
Prairie, J., Nowak, K., Rajagopalan, B., Lall, U. and Fulp,
T. 2008. A stochastic nonparametric approach for
streamﬂow generation combining observational and
paleo reconstructed data. Water Resources Research,
doi:10.1029/2007WR006684.
PUCP (Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica del Perú). 2008.
Climatic Changes Website. Lima, Peru, PUCP.
Rajagopalan, B., Nowak, K., Prairie, J., Hoerling, M., Harding,
B., Barsugli, J., Ray, A. and Udall, B. 2009. Water supply
risk on the Colorado River: Can management mitigate?
Water Resources Research, doi:10.1029/2008WR007652.
Regonda, S., Rajagopalan, B., Clark, M. and Zagona, E. 2006.
Multi-model ensemble forecast of spring seasonal ﬂows in
the Gunnison River basin. Water Resources Research,
Vol. 42, 09494.
Regonda, S., Zagona, E. and Rajagopalan, B. 2011. Prototype
decision support system for operations on the Gunnison
basin with improved forecasts. ASCE Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management, Vol. 137, No. 5, pp.
428–38.
Salas, J. D., Paulet, M. and Vasconcellos, C. 2008. Feasibility
study for water resources development in the Chonta and
Mashcon rivers; Cajamarca, Peru. Colorado Water, Vol. 25,
No. 5, pp. 12–13.
Sankarasubramanian, A., Lall, U., Souza Filho, F. D. and
Sharma, A. 2009. Improved water allocation utilizing
probabilistic climate forecasts: Short-term water contracts
in a risk management framework. Water Resources
Research, Vol. 45, W11409.

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUANTITY

399

Shah, T. 2008. Taming the Anarchy Groundwater Governance
in South Asia. London, RFF Press.

Water Footprint Network. n.d. Homepage.
http://www.waterfootprint.org

Traynham, L., Palmer, R. N. and Polebitski, A. S. 2011.
Impacts of future climate conditions and forecasted
population growth on water supply systems in the Puget
Sound region. Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management, doi:10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000114.

Wisser, D., Frolking, S., Douglas, E. M., Fekete, B. M.,
Vörösmarty, C. J. and Schumann, A. H. 2008. Global
irrigation water demand: Variability and uncertainties
arising from agricultural and climate data sets. Geophysical
Research Letters, doi:10.1029/2008GL035296.

USBR (US Bureau of Reclamation). 2005. Water 2025:
Preventing Crises and Conﬂict in the West. Washington, DC,
USBR.

Woodhouse, C. A., Gray, S. T. and Meko, D. M. 2006.
Updated streamﬂow reconstructions for the Upper
Colorado River Basin. Water Resources Research,
doi:10.1029/2005WR004455.

Vano, J. A, Voisin, N., Cuo, L., Hamlet, A. F., Elsner, M. M.,
Palmer, R. N., Polebitski, A. and Lettenmaier, D. P. 2010a.
Climate change impacts on water management in the
Puget Sound region, Washington State, USA. Climatic
Change, doi:10.1007/s10584-010-9846-1.
Vano, J. A., Voisin, N., Scott, M., Stöckle, C. O., Hamlet, A.
F., Mickelson, K. E. B., Elsner, M. M. and Lettenmaier, D. P.
2010b. Climate change impacts on water management and
irrigated agriculture in the Yakima River Basin, Washington
State, USA. Climatic Change, Vol. 102, No. 1–2, pp. 287–317.

WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
Yao, H. and Georgakakos, A. 2001. Assessment of Folsom
Lake response to historical and potential future climate
scenarios: 2. Reservoir management. Journal of Hydrology,
Vol. 249, No. 1–4, pp. 176–96.

Vicuna, S., Dracup, J. A., Lund, J. R., Dale, L. L. and Maurer,
E. P. 2010. Basin-scale water system operations with
uncertain future climate conditions: Methodology and
case studies. Water Resources Research, doi: 10.1029/
2009WR007838.
Vörösmarty, C. J., Leveque, C. and Revenga, C. 2005. Fresh
water. R. Bos, C. Caudill, J. Chilton, E. M. Douglas, M.
Meybeck, D. Prager, P. Balvanera, S. Barker, M. Maas,
C. Nilsson, T. Oki, C. A. Reidy, Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, Volume 1: Conditions and Trends Working
Group Report. Washington DC, Island Press, pp. 165–207.

400

CHAPTER 15

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 16
State of the resource: Quality

UNEP-DHI Centre for Water and Environment
—
Authors Mogens Dyhr-Nielsen, Gareth James Lloyd, and Paul Glennie
Contributor Peter Koefoed Bjørnsen
Acknowledgement Børge Storm

© UN Photo/Gill Fickling

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
A global water quality assessment framework is needed. While there are many ways to
address water quality, from an international to a household scale, there is an urgent lack of
water quality data to support decision-making and management processes. An assessment
framework should draw on national data sources. The motivation for such a framework is to
better understand the state of water quality and its causes; understand recent trends and
identify hot spots; test and validate policy and management options; provide a foundation
for scenarios that can be used to understand and plan for appropriate future actions; and
provide much needed monitoring bench markers.
Water quality is inextricably linked with water quantity as both are key determinants of
supply. Water quality degradation is not only a product of external pollutants but is also
related to quantity depletion. The problem of water quality can be expected to increase
as water scarcity increases. In the past, quality and quantity issues have generally been
considered separately. Policy-makers must make a concerted effort to better integrate the
two issues. In turn they need the support of the research community who can help to better
quantify the problems, as well as the remedial solutions.
Socio-economic development is dependent on water quality. There are well-documented
human and ecosystem health risks linked to poor water quality that also threaten socioeconomic development. Cost-effective options for collecting, treating and disposing of
human waste must still be combined with public education efforts on the environment.
Efforts must be directed toward industries using or producing toxic substances.
Development of clean technology and substitution processes, combined with cost-efficient
treatment options, is a priority. The control of non-point sources of pollution, particularly
nutrients leading to eutrophication, is an increasing global challenge. Institutional efforts
are also needed to strengthen emergency responses when water sources are threatened or
destroyed, and greater attention needs to be given to enforcing existing regulations.
Poor water quality is expensive. The costs of poor water quality can be signiﬁcant:
degradation of ecosystems, health-related costs and their impacts on economic activities,
increased treatment costs and reduced property values among others. Conversely,
signiﬁcant savings can be can be made by improving or ensuring that water quality is
maintained, such as lives saved, reduced industrial production costs and water treatment
costs. More research is needed to better understand and quantify the economic costs and
beneﬁts of ecosystem services.

16.1 Introduction
Safe drinking water and basic sanitation are intrinsic
to human survival, well-being and dignity. Without
a serious advance in implementing the water and
sanitation agenda, there is little prospect of achieving development for all. (United Nations Secretary
General Ban Ki-moon, 2008)
Good water quality is an important yet vulnerable development asset, and essential for maintaining ecosystem health. Water quality is inextricably linked with
water quantity. Poor quality water that cannot be used
for drinking, bathing, industry or agriculture reduces the
amount of useable water (UNEP, 2010). Moreover, overuse of water may lead to quality degradation. For example, over-abstraction of groundwater can lead to saline
intrusion in coastal areas, or to higher concentrations
of naturally occurring toxic compounds (Stellar, 2010),
whereas extraction of surface water can lead to high
pollutant concentrations during low ﬂow conditions.
The health risks related to drinking water supply and
sanitation are generally acknowledged as a priority
concern of global signiﬁcance, as stressed in the above
quote by United Nations (UN) Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon (2008). Approximately 3.5 million people die
each year due to inadequate water supply, sanitation,
and hygiene, predominantly in developing countries
(WHO, 2008a). Release of toxic wastes from waste
dumps and industries is a major threat to the provision
of safe water in the developed world.
Ecosystem health has historically been a concern of
the richer, more developed countries. However, the
increasing recognition of the many beneﬁts of lifesustaining ecosystem goods and services, such as
provision of food and ﬁbre, has made ecosystem
health and vulnerability an important socio-economic
issue, even in the poorest countries.
Poor water quality can lead to signiﬁcant and varied
economic costs, including degradation of ecosystem
services; health care; agriculture and industrial production costs; lack of tourism; increased water treatment
costs; and reduced property values (UNEP, 2010). For
example, the estimated costs of poor-quality water in
countries in the Middle East and North Africa range
between 0.5 and 2.5% of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) (World Bank, 2007). As the water resources is
becoming increasingly scarce in the future, the costs
associated with addressing water quality problems is

WWDR4

expected to increase and the consequences of not addressing such issues in a timely manner are expected
to worsen.
Water quality is a global concern as risks of degradation translate directly into social and economic impacts. Improved management of vulnerability and risk
must focus on the unknown and the unexpected in an
era of accelerated changes. Given that the world’s water quality situation is poorly understood, an important
step is to develop a global water quality assessment
framework to reduce the information gap and support
decision-making and management processes.

16.2 Natural processes combined with social
and economic drivers of water quality risks
Water quality conditions are the result of a variety
of pressures created by many drivers. A causal chain
links drivers to impacts on water quality and further to
socio-economic concerns about human and ecosystem
health. Identiﬁcation of these drivers can reduce risks
and vulnerabilities through appropriate management.
Drivers are the external causes of changes in water
quality. In some instances they may be under the direct
control of water managers (like wastewater treatment),
although more typically their control is largely beyond
the inﬂuence of water management. The main drivers
may broadly be divided in two separate groups: social
and economic. Assessment and consensus on the primary causal chains between drivers, water quality and
public concerns are a precondition for developing actions to address them.
Before considering these drivers in detail, it is worth
looking at the role of natural processes.
16.2.1 Natural processes
The hydrological cycle is the most important natural
process inﬂuencing freshwater quality. For example, atmospheric transportation is a natural mechanism that
can inﬂuence water quality by carrying and depositing
atmospheric pollution from one location to another.
Sulphur emissions from fossil fuels can be transported
over long distances and precipitate as acid rain. In sensitive lakes and rivers with limited buffer capacity, they
may cause acidiﬁcation on the ecosystems. Sulphur
emission control has signiﬁcantly reduced the issue of
acid rain in developed countries, although many power
plants still lack proper treatment methods.

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

403

Climate processes and associated climate variability
and change inﬂuence the hydrological cycle. Managing
risks associated with climate change is complicated by
the challenges of determining the resulting impacts.
It is reasonable to expect that the global temperature
will rise by more than 2°C, and perhaps by more than
3°C, by the year 2050. The Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change is predicting major risks for serious
impacts, although it emphasizes that there are still major uncertainties in its forecasts (IPCC, 2008).
Many impacts may not manifest themselves for several
decades, during which time promising progress could
be made. Nevertheless, some issues need immediate attention in regard to risk management, as there
are clear indications that climatic events are becoming increasingly erratic and violent. Major ﬂoods can
destroy safe water supplies and sewage treatment
plants, leaving communities with contaminated waters.
Heavy rains and ﬂoods can increase erosion and sedimentation, while forest ﬁres during droughts can also
increase erosion risks.
Droughts and extreme low ﬂows in water systems
reduce ecosystem capacity to absorb and process
contaminated waters. Estuaries may become affected
by increasing saltwater intrusion, as in the MurrayDarling in Australia (Box 16.1), while sea level rise can
increase salt intrusion, affecting major urban water
supplies, as well as freshwater ecosystem stability
and productivity.

BOX 16.1
Risks of salinity intrusion threaten the water supply
of Adelaide, Australia
The Murray-Darling Basin (MDB) covers over 1 million km2,
covering four states in Australia, with the city of Adelaide
at its mouth. Part of the agreement to manage the basin
is to ensure the salinity at Adelaide is less than 800 electrical conductivity (EC) at least 95% of the time. In the
2000s the MDB experienced some of the lowest recorded rainfalls in the last 100 years, reducing river ﬂows and
Adelaide’s water supply. The drought has highlighted the
increased risks of salinity intrusion into the estuary under
changing climatic conditions. Response options include
ensuring more ﬂow reaches the mouth, but this water is
under high demand from upstream users, hence requiring
a catchment-wide management approach.

Source: Adamson et al. (2009)

404

CHAPTER 16

16.2.2 Social drivers
Social drivers have received little attention in water
management efforts. Many emerging issues in water quality management are strongly related to social
drivers causing waste discharges and associated water
quality problems.
Social and political conﬂicts may jeopardize water
management efforts, particularly in transboundary situations. Agreements frequently focus on water quantity, as it is perceived as more important, and generally
easier to measure than water quality. Water quality is
often neglected in agreements, although considering
and improving water quality could beneﬁt all parties
(Eleftheriadou and Mylopoulos, 2008).
Community habits, preferences and consumption
patterns bring additional social dimensions to uncertainties in water quality management. Cultural habits of waste disposal are difficult to change, not least
in manufacturing enterprises and farming practices.
Increasing needs for commodities, such as biofuels
and meat products in both developed and emerging
economies, put new pressures on already-intensive agricultural activities, and may increase nutrient and pesticide contamination. The production and subsequent
waste deposition of an increasing number of complex
chemical substances also creates new and unexpected
impacts.
Population growth is a well-established driver of human wastewater loads. Demographic forecasts are
well-developed, but assessment of future migrations,
particularly to urban areas, where more than 50% of
the world’s population already live, is more uncertain.
High population density may create critical pollution
hot spots. An estimated 2.6 billion people worldwide
live without adequate sanitation facilities (WHO and
UNICEF, 2010), and the majority of wastewater in developing countries is discharged untreated into receiving water bodies (Corcoran et al., 2010).
Rudimentary control of solid waste dumping can create substantial risks of leakage of toxic chemical to
both rivers and groundwater resources. Even where
treatment plants exist, inefficient operation and disposal of waste sludge may contaminate soils and
groundwater.
Military conﬂicts are also drivers that cause migration
of millions of people annually, creating increasing risks

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

for developing pollution hot spots and unsustainable
pressures on the affected ecosystems.

Agriculture accounts for about 70% of global water
use and the potential risk of water quality impacts
of agricultural return ﬂows is therefore signiﬁcant.
Agricultural practices cause nutrient contamination, and the sector is the major driver of eutrophication, except in areas with high urban concentrations.
Nutrient enrichment has become one of the planet’s
most widespread water quality problems (WWAP,
2009). Further, pesticide application is estimated
to be over two million metric tonnes per year on a
global scale (UNEP, 2010). These toxic substances
may carry substantial risks to the health and productivity of aquatic ecosystems, although the banning of
certain substances and integrated pest management
has contributed to reduced risks of pesticide pollution.

16.2.3 Economic drivers
The importance of economic drivers is well-established
in water management, and several sectors are discussed in separate challenge area reports in this edition of the World Water Development Report. The
impacts of economic growth on urban settlements,
industrial development and food production translate
directly into increasing risks and emerging water
quality issues. The direct economic drivers are
primarily to waste discharges and construction of
infrastructure such as barrages, dams and diversions.

FIGURE 16.1
Hazardous waste generation in 2001 as reported by the Parties to the Basel Convention

Germany

Norway
Finland
Estonia
Uzbekistan

United Kingdom

Kyrgyzstan

Iceland Netherlands
Ukraine

Ireland
Spain
Portugal

China

South Korea
Italy

Romania
Georgia
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Israel

Morocco

Iran
Kuwait

Cuba
Niger
Saint Lucia
Million tonnes
15

Benin

Sri Lanka
Malaysia

10
Australia

5

0

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/hazardous_waste_generation_in_2001_as_reported_by_the_parties_to_the_
basel_convention, a map by P. Rekacewicz, with source Basel Convention).

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

405

Intensive meat production in pig farms and feed lots
may also create harmful local water contamination in
the form of biological oxygen demand (BOD), ammonia, and nutrients.

seriously degraded large numbers of estuarine ecosystems and destroyed the potential for further aquaculture production.
Industrial development is a key driver behind the risk
of hazardous substances contamination. Technological
development creates more consumer goods introducing new toxic and hazardous chemicals (Figure 16.1).
In the developing world, enforcement of environmental
standards is challenging, making it difficult to prevent
releases of untreated industrial wastes into freshwater bodies. Globalization has increased the risks of
environmental dumping, both in the form of polluting

Pulp and food processing industries may also create
untreated BOD and nutrient rich discharges, potentially leading to oxygen deﬁcits, eutrophication and general ecosystem degradation.
Aquaculture can also be an important source of water
pollution. A particular concern is contamination of the
natural environment with diseases. Such diseases have

FIGURE 16.2
Hazardous industrial site, water pollution and mining hot spots in the Balkans

1

Krsko
Subotica

(Slovenia)

ZAGREB

Voj
ojvodi
ojv
odina

CROATIA
TIA

ROMANIA
M A
MA
Novi Sad

Rep
epublic
p licc oof Srpska
pskka
p
Brcko
Ugljevik

Doboj

Pancevo

Sabac

BELGRADE
Cu mine & mill

Lukavac
Zajaca Pb-Zn mine
Tuzla
& mill
Smederevo
Birac Zvornick
Kostolac
Krupanj
Lazarevac
Vares
Veliki
Kolubara
Madjan
Zenica
Pb-Zn mine
Lignite mine
Kakanj
& mill
Srebrenica
Maglaj

Jajce

BOSNIA
A AND
D
HERZEGOV
VINA
VI
V
Federation
ati
t o of
ti
Bosnia and
nd
nd
Herzegovi
Herz
He
e
vina
vi

Kragujevac

Pb-Zn mine & mill

Lucani Cacak
Konjic
Pb-Zn mine & mill

BULGARIA
BU
ARIA
R
Pljevlja
Mojkovac and
Brskovo

Zvecan
Tuneli i Pare
Kosovska Mitrovica
Trepca
Pristina
Berane Rudnik

MONTENEGRO
A

D

R

Djakovic
PODGORICA

Tivat
Cetinje

C

Shkoder

S

ITALY

E

2

Nuclear power
generation site

Mining industry
hot spots
Serious water
pollution

Waste disposal site
National capital

Autonomous boundary

1 to 5 million inhabitants

Inter-entity boundary line

100 000 to 1 million

The boundaries and names shown and the designations used
on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance
by the United Nations.

Kriva
Pb-Zn
Lojane Palanka
tailings dam
Sasa
Probistip Zletovo
Kocani
SKOPJE
Cu mine & mill
Veles
Pb-Zn mine

M E
MACE
EDONIA
A

TIRANA

Bucim
Radovis
Negotino

Kavadarci

Ohrid

Smelter complex Ferrochromium, Fe
(steel) & Ni smelters

Fier

Republic boundary

Cr & Sb mine &
beneﬁciation mill

Kicevo

Sharra

Durres

SOFIA
Pernik

Kriva Feja

Gnjilan
Jegunovce

Furshe-Kruje

Hazardous
industrial site
Mining site

Cu mine &
beneﬁciation complex

Badovac

Kosovo
oosovo
sovv

Kumanovo
Fushe-Arrez
Tetovo
Gostivar
Rubik

A

Leskovac

Rozaje

Niksic
Kotor

A

Nis

Leposavic
Electrolytic Zn
smelter & reﬁnery

I

6

Cu mining, concentration,
smelting, reﬁnery, alloying, etc...

SSERBIA
RBIA

Gacko

T

Prahovo
Cerovo
Veliki Krivelj
Bor
Kozloduy

& ash deposits

SARAJEVO

Suplja

I

Majdanpek

Suvodol

Elbasan

Fe-Ni & Sb mine(s)
& ferronickel smelter

Bitola

ALBANIA
A
A
AN
Ballsh

Vlore

GREECE
RE

Patos

0

100

200

300

Kilometres

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/balkans-hazardous-industrial-sites-water-pollution-and-mining-hot-spots, a map
by UNEP/DEWA/GRID-Europe).

406

CHAPTER 16

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

industries, and as direct exports of chemical wastes
from developed or emerging economies to developing countries. Industrial accidents involving dangerous
chemicals (not least during natural disasters) also create risks of spills to surface water and groundwater.
Energy production and distribution is a main cause
of oil contamination. Hydrocarbons are biodegradable in small concentrations, but major leaks and accidents (including sabotage) create severe contamination risks. Further, shipping of hydrocarbons over
the oceans as well as in inland waterways creates also
risks of spills. Cooling water releases and bottom water releases from hydropower reservoirs may cause
temperature shocks to ecosystems, though can generally be controlled by adequate legislation. Fossil fuel
power plants emit large amounts of sulphates, which
can contaminate soil and surface water through acid
rain. Acid rain was a common problem in industrialized
countries in the 1980s, but through legislation on emissions limits and ‘cleaning’ technology, the situation is
vastly improved, though still present. Today, in emerging economies with rapidly expanding fossil fuel power
industries, acid rain is increasing. In 2006, one-third of
China was affected by acid rain, posing a major threat
to soil and food safety (Zijun Li, 2006). While China
has implemented programs to reduce sulphate emissions, gains are being offset by increases in nitrogen
emissions (Zhao et al., 2009).
A rapidly emerging risk issue is the introduction of
biofuels as a climate change mitigation strategy. Aside
from the potentially detrimental impacts to food production, this activity involves intensive cultivation practices requiring high use of fertilizers and pesticides.
Mining creates contamination risks from hazardous
substances and acidiﬁcation (Figure 16.2). Mine drainage waters can be extremely polluted by salts in the
groundwater itself; metals such as lead, copper, arsenic and zinc present in the source rock; sulphur compounds leached from rock; and mercury or other materials used in extraction and processing. The pH of these
drainage waters can be highly variable. Some mine
drainage is extremely acidic, with a pH of 2–3; other
source materials can lead to very alkaline discharges
(UNEP, 2010).
Numerous small-scale and primitive mining operations are carried out in developing countries with no
or limited control. Artisanal and small-scale mining is
practiced in about 50 countries by people living in the

WWDR4

poorest and most remote rural areas, with few employment alternatives. An estimated 13 million people are
engaged in artisanal and small-scale mining, inﬂuencing the livelihood of additional 80–100 million people
(Hentschel, 2002). These numbers are likely to increase, caused by higher prices and demands for minerals, both in Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) countries and emerging
economies, such as China, India and Brazil.
Forest logging activities are often conducted without
efficient erosion control practices jeopardizing both
environmental conditions and safe water supplies. This
also applies when natural forests are replaced by oil
palm plantations for biofuel production.
Tourism generally provides a strong incentive to protect
the environment and water quality, because a healthy
environment is what attracts its trade. As such, tourism
development may become a positive driver, if properly
advised and facilitated, but urbanization and lack of
proper waste treatment have destroyed recreational
assets.
The ﬁnancial sector is normally not associated with
water quality risks. However, the current global ﬁnancial crisis has had a potentially signiﬁcant negative
impact on private sector investments in clean technology, production safety and wastewater treatment.
Despite increased government support to stimulus

BOX 16.2
Financing and cost recovery
Simply maintaining the current percentage of urban population with access to improved sanitation over the next
15 years will require extending access to over 800 million
urban residents. However, piped wastewater systems may
be too costly to apply on a wide scale, particularly in informal urban settlements, because of infrastructural and
geographic cost constraints, as well as the relatively cost
prohibitive hook-up expenses for individual households
that lack the capacity to pay. As a result, many countries
assign a lower priority for sanitation, partly as a result
of the high investment costs, and partly because of the
lower perceived beneﬁts (individual and societal) of sanitation services, compared to water supply investments.
Accordingly, global sanitation investment comprises only
20% of the total invested in the water and sanitation development sector.
Source: Reproduced from USAID (2010).

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

407

packages, the crisis has reduced government funds for
public mitigation and adaptation responses, such as
urban sewage systems and treatment plants (Box 16.2).
This particularly applies to international development
funding (Committee of African Finance Ministers and
Central Bank Governors, 2009 and UNECA, 2009).

16.3 Relationship between water quantity
and water quality
Water quality is just as important as water quantity
for satisfying basic human and environmental needs,
yet it has received far less investment, scientiﬁc support and public attention in recent decades, even
though the two issues are closely linked (Biswas and
Tortajada, 2011).
Poor water quality reduces the amount of water available for drinking, industrial and agricultural purposes
(UNEP, 2010) (Box 16.3). The more polluted the water
is, the greater the cost of treatment to return it to a
useable standard.
Excessive pumping of groundwater can impact the
water quality through increased concentrations of

BOX 16.3
Water quality and quantity impacts of mining in
Peru
Peru is Latin America’s most water-stressed country.
Water draining from the Andean highlands serves as a
water tower that supports the downstream population
and agricultural activities. Many mining concessions are
located in headwater areas in the high Andes, and mining
can adversely affect water quality downstream, with impacts potentially lasting for generations.

naturally occurring compounds that become dangerously high as the amount of water dwindles. In India,
ﬂuorosis potentially threatens or directly affects millions of people (Box 16.4). Groundwater quality may
also be affected by increasing salinity levels as a result
of saltwater intrusion into their coastal aquifers, as observed in Cyprus and the Gaza Strip (Stellar, 2010).
Similarly, overuse of surface water reduces the natural ﬂow and increases the concentration of harmful substances present in the water due to pollution.
According to Stellar (2010), ‘A marked example of this
is the... Rio Grande River, where decreased ﬂows in
summer months coincide with large declines in water
quality. During the dry season, pathogen concentrations increase by almost 100 times.’
It is important to acknowledge that there is a spectrum
of quality–quantity interactions. Some water issues are
purely quality related; this refers to water sources that
are simply over-polluted as opposed to being overused. Other water quality problems have both quantity
and quality components, for example in connection
with mining activities.

16.4 Human health risks related to water
quality
Reduction of human health risks are important local, national and global priorities, as expressed in the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Waterborne
diseases are major global killers, taking millions of lives
as a direct result of unsafe drinking water, and inadequate sanitation and hygiene.
Major human health risks from use of unsafe surface and groundwater are related to the presence

BOX 16.4
Reduced water quantity equals reduced water
quality: Fluorosis in India
Millions of people in India are threatened or directly affected by ﬂuorosis caused by groundwater that contains
excessive natural ﬂuoride levels. India’s escalating water
stress is forcing people to search for water deeper
underground, which is more contaminated with ﬂuoride.
Fluorosis is also a problem in countries such as Chile,
Ethiopia and Uzbekistan to China, where there are an
estimated 1.6 million victims.
Source: Bebbington and Williams (2008). Photo: Paulo Tomaz at
Wikimedia (http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Antamina_
Mine_Tailings_Pond.jpg)

408

CHAPTER 16

Source: Shah and Indu (2008).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

TABLE 16.1
Estimated deaths of children under the age of ﬁve
(8.795 million in total)
68% (5.970 million) of deaths were from infectious
diseases
Pneumonia

18% 1.575
million

1.046–1.874 million [UR]

Diarrhoea

15% 1.336
million

0.822–2.004 million [UR]

Malaria

8%

0.601–0.851 million [UR]

0.732
million

41% (3.575 million) of deaths occurred in neonates
PTB
complications

12% 1.033
million

0.717–1.216 million
[UR]

Birth asphyxia

9%

0.814
million

0.563–0.997 million
[UR]

Sepsis

6%

0.521
million

0.356–0.735 million
[UR]

Pneumonia

4%

0.386
million

0.264–0.545 million
[UR]

Note: UR, uncertainty range.
Source: Black et al. (2010).

of pathogenic organisms and toxic substances, from
municipal and industrial waste discharges as well as
storm-generated non-point-source runoff. In a global
context, water contamination with pathogenic substances is acknowledged as the most serious risk factor in relation to human health.
Less attention has been paid to risks of runoff from
agricultural lands, where health impacts of fertilizers
and pesticides may be transferred to humans through
groundwater and surface water. The health impact
from livestock waste, particularly from intensive farming, is of continued concern (Corcoran et al., 2010).
Risks of human health impacts also arise in the food
chains of ﬁsh and seafood, as noted in Section 4.1.
16.4.1 Waterborne diseases
Most waterborne diseases are related to contamination
from untreated wastewater, or sewage (WSSCC, 2008).
Sewage refers to liquid waste from private households as well as wastewater from non-industrial and
industrial activities. In many parts of developing countries, sewage is dumped directly into local waterways.
Untreated sewage contains waterborne pathogens that
can cause serious human illness and even death.

WWDR4

Massive efforts have been made to reduce risks of waterborne contamination by establishing piped drinking
water supplies in order to reach the MDGs.
Diarrhoea is typically transmitted by the consumption
of food or water contaminated with faecal bacteria
from an infected person. Although a global issue, it is
most extreme in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia,
killing over 2 million people annually (WHO, 2008).
Almost 1.5 million of these deaths are children under
the age of ﬁve, accounting for 15% of all child deaths
under the age of ﬁve, second only to pneumonia, and
more than HIV/AIDS, measles, and malaria combined
(Black et al., 2010) (Table 16.1). Less common waterborne diseases include typhoid, cholera, and hepatitis
A. While the number of deaths from these diseases is
relatively low, the number of cases (17 million annually
for typhoid) put a high burden on communities in developing countries.
Drivers to waterborne diseases are strongly linked to
population growth, combined with migration to urban
centres with a high population density. Lack of ﬁnances limits the possibilities to establish costly sewer
and treatment systems to handle urban wastewaters.
Natural disasters (ﬂoods, storm surges, hurricanes,
earthquakes) often destroy safe water supplies, leaving the population with no alternative to using contaminated water for long periods.
Response efforts may ﬁrst consider public education – hand washing is the most vital component of
personal hygiene (Pokhrel, 2007).This effort must
be combined with appropriate, cost effective options for collecting, treating and disposing of human wastes. There is an urgent need to create more
innovative solutions within the ﬁnancial capabilities
of municipalities in the developing world. Innovative
ﬁnancing of appropriate wastewater infrastructure
should incorporate the full life cycle of the plants,
and the valuation of non-market dividends from
wastewater treatment (such as public amenity and
ecosystem services) need to be better understood
to enable more comprehensive cost–beneﬁt analyses. Institutional efforts are needed to strengthen
emergency responses when safe water supplies are
destroyed because of natural disasters and conﬂicts. This will become particularly important with the
emerging climate change threats.

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

409

16.4.2 Water quality degradation from toxic
substances
Compared to the global importance of human waste
contamination, the toxic impacts from hazardous
chemicals are often of more local or regional concern.
Although the number of fatalities is smaller than for
waterborne pathogens, the number of people at risk is
substantial (Table 16.2). Further, hazardous chemicals
in developing countries are often not noticed before
their toxic effects have become evident in the population. Toxic substances in water may originate from
natural sources (e.g. arsenic), as well as from human
sources (e.g. pesticides).
Inorganic pollutants from industrial processes include
the toxic metals such as lead, mercury, and chromium.
They are naturally occurring, but become a health issue
due to anthropogenic contamination. When present
in water, they can cause toxic effects, including damage to the brain, kidney, and lungs. They may damage
neural networks and cause blood and brain disorders. Poisoning by trace metals typically arise from
consumption of contaminated drinking water or food,
such as irrigated crops, ﬁsh and seafood.
Arsenic in drinking water can cause human organ
failure and cancer. Arsenic poisoning of groundwater

from natural sources has been found in many countries
and it is estimated that approximately 130 million people have been or are still consuming groundwater with
arsenic concentrations above the standard set by the
World Health Organization (WHO) (Royal Geographic
Society with IBG, 2008) (Figure 16.3).

TABLE 16.2
Estimated impacts of toxic pollution

Top six toxic
threats:

Estimated
population
at risk at
identiﬁed sites
(million people)

1. Lead

10

18–22

2. Mercury

8.6

15–19

3. Chromium

7.3

13–17

4. Arsenic

3.7

5–9

5. Pesticides

3.4

5–8

6. Radionuclides

3.3

5–8

Estimated
global impact
(million people)

Notes: The population estimates are preliminary and based on an
ongoing global assessment of polluted sites. The estimated global
impact is extrapolated from current site research and assessment
coverage.
Source: Blacksmith Institute (2010, p. 7).

FIGURE 16.3
Probability of occurrence of excessively high arsenic concentrations (>0.05 mg per L) in groundwater

high
low
uncertain

Source: Brunt et al. (2004).

410

CHAPTER 16

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Nitrate is a nutrient commonly found in both surface
water and groundwater as a result of fertilizer application losses. Although harmless to human health in
small concentrations, nitrate may cause harm to infants at levels above 50 mg per L (WHO, 2008).
Chloride from seawater intrusions may also render water unsuitable for drinking, though there is currently no
guideline value for chloride (WHO, 2008).
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are organic compounds resistant to environmental degradation. POPs
can remain in the environment for a long time and capable of bioaccumulation in human and animal tissues.
POPs exposure can cause death and illness, including disruption of the endocrine, reproductive and immune systems; neurobehavioural disorders, and cancer.
POPs include substances such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), many pesticides (e.g. DDT), as well as
certain pharmaceuticals and body care products. PCB
use has been banned in the European Union and the
United States (USA).
Some of the synthetic chemicals that are found in
wastewater containing pesticides and pharmaceuticals
are endocrine disruptors (Colborn and vom Saal, 1993)
(Box 16.5). The potentially negative effects of these
chemicals on humans and human development have
been documented, and studies on animals suggest

BOX 16.5
Risk of hormonal modiﬁcations in ecosystem
populations
The effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals (organic
chemicals that can mimic natural hormones) on wildlife
include the thinning of eggshells in birds, inadequate parental behaviour, and cancerous growths (Carr and Neary,
2008). The feminization of ﬁsh and amphibians downstream of wastewater treatment plants, for example, has
long been linked to estrogenic pharmaceuticals (Sumpter,
1995), and more recently to pesticides such as atrazine
(Hayes et al., 2006). A WHO Global Assessment of the
State-of-the-Science of Endocrine Disruptors in 2002
identiﬁed the need for better understanding of EDCs and
their impacts on humans and ecosystems. However, there
is still no global study on the impact of EDCs, partly due
to complexities involved in identifying dose–response relationships. While many EDCs have been banned (particularly in Europe and North America), some continue to be
used, such as DDT.
Source: UNEP (2010).

WWDR4

there is cause for concern, even at low doses. Research
shows the effects may extend beyond the exposed
individual, particularly affecting foetuses of exposed
pregnant women and breastfed children (DiamantiKandarakis, 2009).
Toxic water contamination risks are primarily a function
of industrial and agricultural production. Driver uncertainties are related to the particular industrial processes and practices, particularly their waste emissions,
including wastewater to solid waste deposits. An important issue is the risk of accidental releases of toxic
chemicals, particularly from chemical industries.
Intensive agriculture practices (including the Green
Revolution) are heavily dependent on pest control, with
considerable risk of contaminating both surface water
and groundwater. Mining enterprises represent substantial risks for toxic contamination, both from mining waste
materials, as well as the mining processes themselves.
Response efforts may primarily be directed toward industries using or producing toxic substances. Development of
clean technology and substitution processes, combined
with cost efficient treatment options, is a priority component. However, regulations and their efficient enforcement
are also needed. Risks of accidental spills must be addressed within the enterprises themselves, but supported
by public alarm and response frameworks. Furthermore,
handling of solid wastes from production processes must
be considered from the perspective of minimizing contamination of waste dumps. Pesticide contamination can
be minimized through use of low-impact substances and
integrated pest management techniques (UNEP, 2010).
Awareness campaigns and extension services on pesticide use are of particular importance. In 1987, the National
Union of Farmers and Ranchers (UNAG) in Nicaragua
founded the Programa Campesino a Campesino (PCaC),
an innovative effort to promote best agricultural practices
through peer-to-peer education. Producers from
817 communities are beneﬁtting from the PCaC
methodology where the producers share their knowledge
and experiences with one another (UNEP, 2010).

16.5 Ecosystem health risks related to water
quality
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA, 2005a,b)
recognized the importance of ecosystem goods and
services as an important and multifaceted asset in
poverty alleviation, as well as for sustainable economic development. The report changed the focus from
simply protecting endangered species to include the

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

411

livelihoods and income opportunities of the poor dependent on ecosystems for their livelihoods.
16.5.1 Oxygen depletion and ﬁsh kills
A healthy aquatic environment maintains a high level
of dissolved oxygen (DO), between 80 and 120% saturation. Oxygen demands by microorganisms may
deplete the DO to critical levels, causing ﬁsh kills and
anaerobic conditions in the water column and bottom
sediments (Department of Water Affairs and Forestry,
1996). Such conditions can destroy ﬁsheries and seriously harm the ecological structure and the recreational value of the ecosystem (Box 16.6).
Untreated sewage contains high loads of organic material, supporting the growth of microorganisms and
increasing their oxygen demand as they decompose
the organic matter. Oxygen deﬁcit is related to pollution from human and industrial wastewaters. Therefore,
urban centres and industries like pulp producers, abattoirs and pig farms become hot spots for DO deﬁcits
in aquatic ecosystems. Figure 16.4 shows the modelled
organic loading taking into account different types
of sewage treatment only. It shows hot spots in every

BOX 16.6
Bang Pakong pollution destroys valuable
ecosystem assets and income opportunities

The Bang Pakong estuary has perfect conditions for the
river shrimp that is one of Thailand’s major delicacies.
The estuary is home to endangered species
(e.g. the Irawaddy dolphin) and, like many estuaries,
plays an important role for both brackish and marine
ﬁsheries. However, water quality issues caused by shrimp
farming within the estuary are compounded by
effluents from catchment activities, including waste water discharges from all sectors. High pollution loads have
been reported from different sources: domestic (nearly
6,000 kg BOD per day); industrial (nearly 9,000 kg
BOD per day); and agriculture (30,000 kg BOD per day).
The development of inland low salinity shrimp farms in
the freshwater areas of the basin is an additional
pollution threat producing up to 32 million kg BOD per year.
Although several plans have been prepared to address
the situation the water quality conditions remain poor.
It is recommended to adopt an ecosystems services approach to better realize the beneﬁts of the ecosystem.

Source: UNEP (2008).

FIGURE 16.4
Modelled organic loading based on different types of sewage treatment

Driver organic loading

0.2
0

0.6
0.4

1
0.8

Source: Vörösmarty et al. (2010, supp. ﬁg. 2, pp. 3–10.). Reproduced by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

412

CHAPTER 16

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 16.7
Lake eutrophication in China

Taihu Lake (or Lake Tai) is the third largest freshwater
lake in China, providing water to 30 million people. It has
a thriving ﬁshing industry and was previously a popular
tourist destination. In May 2007 a severe algal bloom and
major pollution with cyanobacteria occurred, largely driven by the high levels of industry and development in the
catchment, made worse because the lake was at its lowest level in 50 years. The Chinese government called the
lake a natural disaster. and banned water providers from
implementing price hikes after bottled water rose to six
times the normal price. It was reported that the Chinese
government had shut down or given notice to over
1,300 factories around the lake by October 2007.
The State Council set a target to clean Taihu Lake by 2012,
but in 2010 a fresh pollution outbreak was reported. This
highlights the complexities involved in controlling pollution, often with competing political, developmental, commercial, and environmental interests.

Sources: The Economist (2010) and Wikipedia (2011).

region, with particularly large areas affected in central
Asia, India, and northern China.
Eutrophication can also cause severe oxygen deﬁcits
through the microbial decomposition of dead algal
cells.
High levels of nutrients like nitrate and phosphate can
also destroy the normal biological structures. Often
the dominating sources of nutrients are fertilizers,
though domestic wastewater also contains nutrients.
Agricultural losses are non-point sources, which are
difficult to identify, therefore associated with considerable uncertainties and risks (Box 16.7).
Erosion caused by inappropriate land uses (e.g. deforestation) can also become critical sources of nutrients
causing eutrophication. As previously noted, an emerging issue is more frequent incidences of forest ﬁres,
which may be associated with subsequent erosion.
Unfortunately, there is insufficient data to give a complete overview of eutrophication trends at the global

FIGURE 16.5
World hypoxic and eutrophic coastal areas

Eutrophic
Hypoxic
Systems in recovery

Source: Diaz et al. (2010).

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

413

level, but it is thought that incidents of eutrophication
are becoming more common and more severe. This is
supported by Figure 16.5 below, which shows coastal
areas suffering from eutrophic and hypoxic (insufficient oxygen) conditions.
Response efforts to urban and industrial point sources
are similar to the previously described efforts. Control
of non-point sources of nutrients must be conducted
in close cooperation with land owners, through extension services and development of appropriate options
for reducing contamination risks. The Chesapeake Bay
Program, in the USA, which has run for over two decades, has shown that the control of non-point sources
is a signiﬁcant challenge. During this program research
demonstrated that atmospheric input was a major
contributor to the Bay’s declining water quality. Thus,
in addition to the watershed, the ‘airshed’ needs to
be considered in an integrated management effort
(GWP, 2011).
16.5.2 Ecosystem degradation from hazardous
chemicals
Toxic substances that affect humans can also affect
ecosystems. Fish kills and changes in biological structures are common impacts of toxic contamination,
threatening the livelihood of local communities
(Box 16.8).
Metals like mercury, lead and cadmium from industrial
and mining wastes are characteristic ecosystem contaminants. Ammonia is a toxic waste product of the
metabolism in animals which can lead to fatal poisoning of ﬁsh, often with dramatic consequences on local
ﬁsheries.
In addition to the direct poisoning of ﬁsh, seafood
and vegetation, many substances (e.g. mercury, lead,
POPs) accumulate in organic tissues, resulting in poisoning if eaten by humans. This bioaccumulation can
also lead to toxic chemicals being transported long
distances, and must be addressed by quality assurance procedures in the food sector. Irrigation with
cadmium contaminated water can accumulate in
crops.
Pesticides are by their very deﬁnition toxic to ecosystems. Most pesticides are soluble in water, and
losses to water resulting from improper use readily
translate into threats to both ecosystems and humans.
Chemicals such as DDT are toxic to a wide range of

414

CHAPTER 16

BOX 16.8
The Basel Convention

The Basel Convention was established to address the human health and environmental risks associated with the
export of toxic wastes. With the tightening of environmental laws in developed nations in the 1970s, hazardous waste disposal costs increased dramatically. At the
same time, globalization of shipping made transboundary
movement of wastes more possible, and the trade in hazardous waste, particularly to developing countries, rapidly
increased. The convention aims to keep waste as close to
the sources as possible, and they can only be exported
with prior written notiﬁcation by the state of export to the
states of import and transit. The vast majority of countries
have ratiﬁed the treaty and it is generally seen as a success, and the Convention Secretariat now works closely
with the Rotterdam and Stockholm Conventions. The
Convention is legally binding, including reporting national
reporting requirements on the movement of hazardous
wastes.

Source: OECD (1989).

animals, in addition to insects, and are highly toxic to
aquatic life. Pesticides have particularly serious impacts on ﬁsh production in rice ﬁelds, an important
by-product of traditional paddy systems.
Risk mitigation of toxic contamination of ecosystems
is similar to efforts focusing on human health. The
drivers are the same, as are many of the response
options.
16.5.3 Ecosystem modiﬁcations
Some water quality parameters may appear harmless
under normal conditions, but possess signiﬁcant risks
when concentration levels are slightly altered.
This is particularly true for the coastal interface between fresh and marine waters. Minor changes in salinity, temperature or turbidity may catalyse signiﬁcant
risks of changes in the biological structures of estuaries and lagoons providing important livelihoods for
coastal communities (Box 16.9).
Salinity is also an important ecological factor.
Freshwater species may be evicted with increasing
salinity and replaced by brackish or even marine species. Also, many plants are sensitive to salinity – an
important issue for irrigation water intakes. The most
critical cases of salinity changes occur in the coastal
zones, where morphological changes in lagoons and

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 16.9

FIGURE 16.6

Chilika Lake: slow deterioration and rapid recovery

Annual cost of the environmental degradation of
water
Share of GDP
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Tunisia

Syria

Morocco

Lebanon

Jordan

Iran

Egypt

0.0
Algeria

Chilika Lake is the largest wintering ground for migratory
waterfowl on the Indian subcontinent. The highly productive lagoon ecosystem, with its rich ﬁshery resources,
sustains the livelihoods of more than 200,000 people.
Threats to the lake ecosystem increased through the
1980s from pollution, intensive aquaculture, overﬁshing,
and increased siltation from poor land management. By
1993 the situation became so severe that the lake was put
on the Montreux Record (a Ramsar list signifying threats
from human activities). In 1992 the State Government set
up the Chilika Development Authority (CDA), which facilitated the development of an adaptive integrated management plan with stakeholder participation. Signiﬁcant
national funding supported activities such as catchment
conservation, education campaigns, improved socio-economic conditions (e.g. improvement of services), and habitat restoration. Ten years later, Chilika Lake was awarded
the Ramsar Wetland Award in recognition of signiﬁcant
improvements. Lessons learned included: (a) danger of
unilateral decisions on established rights of stakeholders;
(b) vital role of science; (c) importance of coordination
and diverse funding; (d) need for long term policies; (e)
stakeholder participation can lead to self–initiated good
practices; and (f) links between poverty alleviation and
ecosystem restoration.

Source: World Bank (2007, ﬁg. 4.4, p. 109), from various data
sources.

A similar effect in relation to invasive species may be
caused by temperature changes.
Responses to ecosystem changes depend on an indepth understanding of the biological processes under
transformation. First and foremost, an efficient and targeted monitoring system is needed to detect changes,
and if trends are identiﬁed, further research must be
directed towards understanding the causes.

Source: Ghosh and Pattanaik (2006).

16.6 Economic costs of poor water quality
estuaries can cause drastic salinity impacts. Storm
surges also may raise salinity in freshwater reservoirs
and soil water of low lying agricultural lands.
Many species may be temperature sensitive, particularly during spawning. Therefore, changes in
the water temperature may deplete certain species.
Increasing water temperature may also compound
the impacts of eutrophication. Primary causes of
temperature changes are cooling water releases
from electricity generation and other industrial activities. However, impacts can be mitigated through
legislation and enforcement. Acidity changes
may also create changes in the ecosystem structures. Acid rain and acid mining wastewaters have
been shown to have adverse impacts on aquatic
ecosystems.
Climate change also threatens ecosystems. Sea level
rise (or extended droughts) may increase salt water
intrusion in estuaries and lagoons, and change the biological structure from freshwater to saltwater species.

WWDR4

Poor water quality may lead to signiﬁcant economic
costs/losses such as reduced ecosystem services; health
care; increased agriculture and industrial production costs;
lack of tourism; increased water treatment costs; and
reduced property values (UNEP, 2010). The estimated
costs of poor quality water in countries in the Middle East
and North Africa range between 0.5 and 2.5% of GDP
(Figure 16.6) (World Bank, 2007). With freshwater resources projected to become increasingly scarce in these
and other regions, the costs associated with addressing
the resulting problems can be expected to increase.
Increased health has economic beneﬁts to governments and individuals through reduced expenditure on
disease treatment and lost time in seeking treatment,
and beneﬁts to the agricultural and industrial sectors
through improved productivity and fewer expenses associated with employee health care (SIWI, 2005).
Many studies on the health-related costs of poor water quality are in reference to the water and sanitation MDGs, whereby the international community is

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

415

committed to halving the proportion of people without
access to safe water and sanitation by 2015. If this goal
is met, it is estimated that 322 million working days
per year will be gained, corresponding to nearly
US$750 million (SIWI, 2005). Meeting the MDGs on
water and sanitation would also result in an annual savings to health sector expenses of US$7 billion. Overall,
the total economic beneﬁts of meeting the MDG target
have been estimated at US$84 billion (SIWI, 2005).
The beneﬁts of wastewater treatment range between
US$3–34 for every US$1 invested in sanitation and
drinking water (WHO, 2004).

In terms of agriculture, salinized water can reduce
crop quality or even destroy it. The use of poor quality
water can also have serious consequences on human
health. In 2011, several people died from an European
E. coli outbreak, which was suspected to stem from
vegetables that had come into contact with infected
water. A strong consumer reaction resulting from a
lack of clarity on the source led to thousands of tonnes
of vegetables being dumped and an estimated cost to
the European Commission of US$300 million to
compensate farmers for their losses (Flynn, 2011).

TABLE 16.3
Summary of major risks and their main drivers
Risk

Main driver

Response option

Human health
impact

Severity

Natural process

Social

Economic

Intervention

Waterborne
disease

Millions of fatal
cases

Increasing ﬂood
disasters damage
safe water supply

Urban migration
Poverty

Shortage of
investment in
wastewater
treatment

Urban wastewater
treatment

Saltwater
intrusion due to
sea level rise and
drought

Waste disposal
attitudes

Industrial waste
and spills

Industrial waste
treatment

Poverty

Mining

Clean technology

Increasing waste
discharge due to
urbanization
Toxic
contamination

Millions of affected
persons
Thousands of cases
of serious impacts
in hot spots

Low-cost
community waste
treatment

Warning systems
Disaster response
systems

Lack of reliable
documentation
Ecosystem health
impact

Severity

Natural process

Oxygen
deﬁcit and
eutrophication

Thousands of km2

Increasing heat
waves and ﬂood
erosion events

Coastal ﬁsheries
decline

Social

Hundreds of km2
Fisheries
destruction

Intervention

Intensive
agriculture

Sustainable
agricultural
practices

Biofuels

Recreational value
decline

Poisoning

Economic

Urban wastewater
Industrial
wastewater
Increasing ﬂood
disasters

Waste disposal
attitudes
Poverty

Agriculture
Urban wastewater

Invasive species
increase

Seawater
intrusion

Invasive pest
increase

Heating

Turbidity increase

Erosion after
forest ﬁres and
ﬂoods

Poverty

Integrated pest
management

Agriculture
Forestry

Hydropower

416

CHAPTER 16

Sustainable
agricultural
practices

Urban wastewater
Industrial
wastewater

Industrial waste
treatment
Clean technology

Industrial
wastewater
Mining

Ecosystem
modiﬁcation

Nutrient removal in
wastewater

Sustainable
forestry
Nutrient removal in
wastewater

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

While industrial production is foremost considered
to affect water quality it can also be negatively affected by poor water quality. An indication of concern
over quality and quantity is the increasing engagement of food and beverage companies, such as Nestlé
and Coca Cola, in public discussions on water-related
challenges. While no estimates exist on worldwide
costs of poor water quality to industry, in 1992, China’s

industrial sector was estimated to have lost approximately US$1.7 billion as a result of water pollution
(SIWI, 2005).
One of the most important services that freshwater ecosystems provide is waste treatment, although
more research is required to better quantify this service. Costanza et al., (1997) estimated that the global

FIGURE 16.7
Wastewater: A global problem with differing regional issues

Total fertilizers usage
Million tonnes over
1980-2002 period
Water disease
related deaths
per 100 000 inhabitants
less than 15
15 to 30
30 to 100

910

100 to 200
200 to 400
More than 400

370

45

Dead zones

Polluted river basins

Variation within Europe:
Exceeding critical nutrient loading

Ganges
Brahmaputra
Meghna

Helmand

3

55
Indus

Eutrophication
equivalents (N) per
hectare and year
None
0 to 200
200 to 400

94

Ecosystem deterioration
parameter *
Severe
High
Wastewater discharge

(Billion cubic metres per year)

400 to 700
700 to 1 200

Note: The ecosystem deterioration parameter is deﬁned as the land ratio without vegetation coverage (forest area and wetlands) used to
present the contribution of an ecosystem’s deterioration to the vulnerability of its water resources.
Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/wastewater-a-global-problem-with-differing-regional-issues, a map by UNEP/
GRID-Arendal with sources WHO database, data for 2002; FAO database; Babel and Walid, 2008; European Environment Agency, 2009;
Diaz et al., 2008).

WWDR4

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

417

services provided by lakes and rivers alone were in the
region of US$133 billion per year. This ﬁgure does not
take into consideration wetland biomes, some of which
are coastal, which are expected to provide services of
far greater value.

TABLE 16.4
Countries least likely to express satisfaction with
the quality of water in their communities
Risk
Country

Satisﬁed (%)

Chad

21

Ukraine

26

Nigeria

29

Ethiopia

29

Liberia

30

Russia

30

Tanzania

35

Lebanon

35

Sierra Leone

36

Angola*

38

People have historically relied on natural processes
in freshwater ecosystems to clean agricultural, municipal, and industrial wastes. Often, however, the
magnitude and toxicity of these wastes has overwhelmed the capacity and resilience of such ecosystems, degrading water quality locally and regionally.
Such degradations manifest themselves in impaired
amenity values, declining biodiversity, and diminished ability to provide wastewater treatment and
other ecosystem services (Arthington et al., 2009).

16.7 Risks, monitoring and intervention
A summary of global key risk issues, their main drivers
and some response options is presented in Table 16.3.

*Only urban residents interviewed.

While Table 16.3 is general in scope, it provides a
useful overview of the key factors of water quality

Source: Ray (2008).

TABLE 16.5
Summary of possible water quality interventions by scale

Scale

Education and
capacity building

Policy/law/
governance

Financial/
economic

Technology/
infrastructure

International/
national

Initiate training
and awareness
building

Institute
integrated
approaches

Institute polluter/
beneﬁciary pays
system

Promote best
practice and
support capacity
building

Develop
monitoring
framework

Institute pricing
systems

Invest in
infrastructure
and appropriate
technologies

Build regional
capacity to collect
and process water
quality data

Consider
decentralized
treatment
technologies

Carry out and
analyse household/
community surveys

Institute pollution
prevention
Watershed

Strategic level for
raising awareness
on impacts of
water quality
Establish training
for practitioners
and develop best
practice

Community/
household

Connect individual/
community
behaviour to water
quality impacts
Build capacity
to make
improvements
in sanitation/
wastewater
treatment

Create
watershed-based
planning units
Develop water
quality goals

Amend codes to
allow innovative
storm water
treatment
options

Institute cost
recovery

Data/monitoring

Create incentives
for efficiency

Encourage
investments

Promote access
to information

Source: Adapted from UNEP (2010, table 8, p. 73).

418

CHAPTER 16

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

risk. However, there is a critical lack of global water
quality data upon which to make a robust assessment
of trends and geographic hot spots, which means
that the world’s water quality situation is poorly
understood. While there have been advances locally
and in some regions, the overall global synthesis of
water quality data has deteriorated in recent decades,
making it difficult to support international decision
making processes. An example of the regional
differences is given in Figure 16.7. Although this Figure
has been taken from a recent UN publication, much of
the data is over ten years old. More up-to-date data is
not available at the global scale.
An alternative to quantitative data is qualitative data,
an example being the 2008 Gallup Poll on water
quality satisfaction. 1000 residents from 145 countries
were asked the simple question, ‘In the city or area
where you live, are you satisﬁed or dissatisﬁed with
the quality of water?’ While it might come as no
surprise that the regional median rate of satisfaction
was just 48% in sub-Saharan Africa (with a high of
62% in Southern Africa), the global top ten of least
satisﬁed countries contains both Russia and Ukraine
(Table 16.4).
While there can be many reasons for a country’s ranking, such as the fact that Lebanon was surveyed just
after the 2006 conﬂict with Israel, and that greater
comparative emphasis is perhaps given on drinking
water quality, the survey provides a simple but interesting snapshot.
Water quality issues also vary with scale, ranging
from the international to the community or household level. In 2011, UNEP published its Policy Brief
on Water Quality, which included a summary table
on the possible interventions by scale in the form
of education and capacity building; policy, law and
governance; ﬁnancial and economic; technology and
infrastructure; and data and monitoring. Table 16.5
provides a summary of possible intervention measures at different scales, including increased capacity
for monitoring.
A more substantial body of data on water quality is
urgently required. One of the greatest challenges is to
create a much needed framework for a global water
quality assessment. Some possibilities for the form and
value this could have are included in Table 16.5, while
the motivation for such a framework would be to:

WWDR4

đƫ better understand the state of water quality and its
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ

causes,
understand recent trends and identify hot spots,
test and validate policy and management options,
provide a foundation for scenarios that can be used
to understand and plan for appropriate future actions, and
provide much needed monitoring bench markers
(Alcamo, 2011).

The multitude of water quality parameters and uncertainties, and their impacts, makes water resources
management a complex and multidimensional issue,
particularly with respect to human activities. Improved
management of vulnerability and risks is needed to
focus on the unknown and the unexpected in an era of
accelerated changes and new uncertainties.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Adamson, D., Schrobback, P. and Quiggin, J. 2009. Options
for Managing Salinity in the Murray-Darling Basin under
Reduced Rainfall. Second International Salinity Forum.
http://www.internationalsalinityforum.org/Final%20
Papers/adamson_C4.pdf
Alcamo, J. 2011. The Global Water Quality Challenge.
Presentation at UNEP Water Strategy Meeting, 7 June 2011.
Arthington, A. H, Naiman, R. J., McClain, M. E. and Nilsson, C.
2009. Preserving the biodiversity and ecological services
of rivers: New challenges and research opportunities.
Freshwater Biology, Vol. 55, No. 1, pp. 1–16.
Ashley, R. and Cashman, A. 2006. The impacts of change
on the long-term future demand for water sector
infrastructure. Infrastructure to 2030: Telecom, Land
Transport, Water and Electricity, pp. 241–349. Paris, OECD.
Ban Ki-moon. 2008. Remarks on Sanitation and Water
Supply: ‘One World One Dream: Sanitation and Water for
All’. Speech given on 24 September 2008. UN News Centre.
http://www.un.org/apps/news/infocus/sgspeeches/search_
full.asp?statID=330 (Accessed 28 September 2008.)
Bebbington, A. and Williams, M. 2008. Water and mining
conﬂicts in Peru. Mountain Research and Development,
Vol. 28, No. 3/4, pp. 190–95.
Biswas, A. and Tortajada, C. 2011. Water quality management:
An introductory framework. Water Resources Development,
Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 5–11.
Black, R. E, Cousens S., Johnson H. L. et al. 2010. Global Child
Mortality: Status in 2008. Presentation for the Child Health
Epidemiology Reference Group of WHO and UNICEF. Global,
regional, and national causes of child mortality in 2008: A
systematic analysis. The Lancet, 5 June 2010, Vol. 375(9730),
pp. 1969–87. http://cherg.org/projects/underlying_causes.html

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

419

Blacksmith Institute. 2010. World’s Worst Pollution Problems
Report. New York, Blacksmith Institute.
Brunt, R., Vasak, L. and Griffioen, J. 2004. Arsenic in Groundwater:
Probability of Occurrence of Excessive Concentration on
Global Scale. Report SP 2004-1. Utrecht, The Netherlands,
International Groundwater Resource Centre (IGRAC).
Carr, G. M. and Neary, J. P. 2008. Water Quality for Ecosystem
and Human Health, 2nd edn. Ontario, Canada, United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) Global
Environment Monitoring System.
Colborn, T., vom Saal, F. S. and Soto, A. 1993. Developmental
effects of endocrine-disrupting chemicals in wildlife and
humans. Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 101, No. 5,
pp. 378–84.
Committee of African Finance Ministers and Central Bank
Governors. 2009. Impact of the Crisis on African Economies
– Sustaining Growth and Poverty Reduction. African
Perspectives and Recommendations to the G20. A report
from the Committee of African Finance Ministers and
Central Bank Governors established to monitor the crisis.
http://www.afdb.org
Costanza, R., d’Arge, R., de Groot, R. et al. 1997. The value of
the world’s ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature,
Vol. 387, pp. 353–60.
Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D. and
Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role of
Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development. A
Rapid Response Assessment. United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), UN-HABITAT, GRID-Arendal. http://www.
grida.no/ﬁles/publications/sickwater/poster1_SickWater.pdf
Department of Water Affairs and Forestry. 1996. South
African Water Quality Guidelines. Volume 7, Aquatic
Ecosystems, 1st edn, 1996. Republic of South Africa.

Lake Basin Management Initiative, International Lake
Environment Committee (ILEC).
Global Water Partnership. 2011. Cases. USA: Chesapeake
Bay (#294). GWP Toolbox – Integrated Water Resources
Management. Stockholm, Global Water Partnership (GWP).
http://www.gwptoolbox.org/index.php?option=com_
case&id=184&Itemid=42 (Accessed 1 November 2011.)
Hayes, T. B., Stuart, A. A., Mendoza, M., Collins, A., Noriega,
N., Vonk, A., Johnston, G., Liu, R. and Kpodzo, D.
2006. Characterization of atrazine-induced gonadal
malformations in African Clawed Frogs (Xenopus laevis)
and comparisons with effects of an androgen antagonist
(cyproterone acetate) and exogenous oestrogen
(17β-estradiol): Support for the demasculinization/
feminization hypothesis. Environmental Health
Perspectives, Vol. 114 (S-1), pp. 134–41.
Hentschel, T., Hruschka, F. and Priester, M. 2002. Global
Report on Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining. Mining,
Minerals and Sustainable Development project, January
2002. London/Geneva, International Institute for
Environment and Development (IIED)/World Business
Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD).
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (R. K.
Pachauri and A. Reisinger, eds). 2008. Climate Change
2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups
I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, Geneva.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005a. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis.
Washington DC, World Resources Institute.
––––. 2005b. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: Synthesis.
Washington DC, Island Press.
OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development). Basel Convention. 1989.

Diamanti-Kandarakis, E. et al. 2009. Endocrine-disrupting
chemicals: An endocrine society scientiﬁc statement.
Endocrine Reviews, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 293–342.

Pokhrel, A. 2007. How to Promote Measures to Prevent
Water-Borne Diseases? The Hague, IRC International Water
and Sanitation Centre. http://www.irc.nl/page/8904

Diaz, R. J., Selman, M. and Chique-Canache, C. 2010. Global
eutrophic and hypoxic coastal systems. Eutrophication and
Hypoxia: Nutrient Pollution in Coastal Waters. Washington
DC, World Resources Institute. http://www.wri.org/map/
world-hypoxic-and-eutrophic-coastal-areas
(Accessed 1 November 2011.)

Ray, J. 2008. Water Quality an Issue Around the World:
Satisfaction Lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa. GALLUP, 19
March. http://www.gallup.com/poll/105211/water-qualityissue-around-world.aspx (Accessed 8 September 2011.)

The Economist. 2010. Raising a stink. Efforts to improve
China’s environment are having far too little effect. 5
August. http://www.economist.com/node/16744110
(Accessed 9 September 2011.)
Eleftheriadou, E. and Mylopoulos, Y. 2008. Conﬂict Resolution
in Transboundary Waters: Incorporating Water Quality in
Negotiations. Thessaloniki, Greece, UNESCO Chair INWEB.
http://www.inweb.gr/twm4/abs/ELEFTHEIADOU%20Eleni.pdf
Flynn, D. 2011. Germany’s E. coli outbreak most costly
in history. Food Safety News, 16 June. http://www.
foodsafetynews.com/2011/06/europes-o104-outbreak--most-costly-in-history/ (Accessed 8 September 2011.)

Royal Geographic Society with IBG. 2008. Arsenic Pollution:
A Global Problem. London, Royal Geographic Society with
IBG. http://www.rgs.org/NR/rdonlyres/00D3AC7F-F6AF48DE-B575-63ABB2F86AF8/0/ArsenicFINAL.pdf
Shah, T. and Indu, R. 2008. Fluorosis in Gujarat: A Disaster Ahead.
Bangalore, India Water Portal. http://www.indiawaterportal.
org/sites/indiawaterportal.org/ﬁles/Fluorosis_Gujarat_
Tushaar%20Shah_CAREWATER_2008.pdf
SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute). 2005. Making
Water a Part of Economic Development: The Economic
Beneﬁts of Improved Water Management and Services.
Stockholm, SIWI. http://www.siwi.org/documents/
Resources/Reports/CSD_Making_water_part_of_
economic_development_2005.pdf

Ghosh, A. K. and Pattanaik, A. 2006. Chilika Lagoon:
Experience and Lessons Learned Brief. Kusatsu-shi, Japan,

420

CHAPTER 16

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Stellar, D. 2010. Can We Have Our Water and Drink It, Too?
Exploring the Water Quality-Quantity Nexus. State of the
Planet. Blogs from the Earth Institute. New York, Columbia
University. http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2010/10/28/canwe-have-our-water-and-drink-it-too-exploring-the-waterquality-quantity-nexus/ (Accessed 1 September 2011.)

Vörösmarty, C. J., McIntyre, P. B. and Gessner, M. O. 2010.
Global threats to human water security and river
biodiversity. Nature, Vol. 467, pp. 555–61.

Sumpter, J. P. 1995. Feminized responses in ﬁsh to
environmental estrogens. Toxicology Letters, Vol. 82–83,
pp. 737–42.

––––. 2008. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update.
Geneva, WHO.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa).
2009. The Global Financial Crisis: Impact, Responses and
Way Forward. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2006. The
State of the Marine Environment: Trends and Processes. The
Hague, Coordination Office of the Global Programme of
Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from
Land-based Activities (GPA), UNEP.
––––. 2008. Water Security and Ecosystem Services: The
Critical Connection: Ecosystem Management Case Studies.
Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/themes/freshwater/
pdf/the_critical_connection.pdf
––––. 2010. Clearing the Waters: A Focus on Water Quality
Solutions. Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2011. Policy Brief on Water Quality. Nairobi, UNEP. http://
www.unwater.org/downloads/waterquality_policybrief.pdf
USAID (United States Agency for International Development).
2010. Making Cities Work: Urban Sanitation and Wastewater
Treatment. Washington DC, USAID. http://oldmcw.zaloni.
net/urbanThemes/environment/sanitation.html (Accessed
1 November 2011.)

WWDR4

WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. Evaluation of the
Costs and Beneﬁts of Water and Sanitation Improvements
at the Global Level. Geneva, WHO.

WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-Water: 2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
Wikipedia. 2011. Lake Tai. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taihu_
Lake#Pollution (Accessed 9 September 2011.)
World Bank. 2007. Making the Most of Scarcity: Accountability
for Better Water Management Results in the Middle East
and North Africa. Washington DC, The World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMENA/
Resources/04-Chap04-Scarcity.pdf
WSSCC (Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council).
2008. A Guide to Investigating One of the Biggest Scandals
of the Last 50 Years. Geneva, WSSCC.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
Zhao, Y., Duan, L., Xing, J., Larssen, T., Nielsen, C.P. and
Hao, J. 2009. Soil acidiﬁcation in China: Is controlling SO2
emissions enough? Environmental Science and Technology,
Vol. 43, No. 21, pp. 8021–26.
Zijun, Li. 2006. Acid Rain Affects One-Third of China: Main
Pollutants Are Sulfur Dioxide and Particulate Matter.
Washington DC, Worldwatch Institute.

STATE OF THE RESOURCE: QUALITY

421

CHAPTER 17
Human settlements
UN-HABITAT
—
Coordinator Overall coordination was provided by Andre Dzikus (Chief Water and
Sanitation, Section II, Water Sanitation and Infrastructure Branch, UN-HABITAT)
Contributors K. E. Seetharam (Director, Institute of Water Policy, Lee Kuan Yew
School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore), Priyanka Anand (Research
Associate, Institute of Water Policy, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National
University of Singapore), Kala Vairavamoorthy (Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Executive Director, Patel School of Global Sustainability, University of
South Florida), Michael Toh (Public Utilities Board Singapore), Bindeshwar Pathak
(Founder, Sulabh International), Debashish Bhattacharjee (Human Settlements Officer,
Water and Sanitation Section II, WSIB, UN-HABITAT), Kennedy Kamau (Research
Officer, Water and Sanitation Section II, WSIB, UN-HABITAT), Bhushan Tuladhar
(Regional Technical Adviser, Water for Asian Cities Programme, UN-HABITAT) and
Kulwant Singh (Consultant, Water and Sanitation Section II, WSIB, UN-HABITAT)

© Philippe Bourseiller

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The challenge is not to curb urbanization but to seize the opportunities it can provide, giving
due consideration to environmental issues.
The very real effects of rapid urbanization and climate change on urban water and sanitation
systems must be addressed, and resilience must be built in.
Particular attention must be given to the needs of women and girls.
Sustainable and ecological sanitation systems must be promoted to reduce water
consumption as well as pollution; and the loop between water use, wastewater generation
and wastewater treatment must be closed.
The concept of an urban continuum must be given due consideration, and the consequences
for system design, institutional setup and investment needs for urban centres must be well
recognized.
Planning must anticipate migration and growth so that the provision of water supply and
sanitation services is not outpaced by urbanization.

17.1 The changing urban background

In 2005, the more developed regions of the world were
host to 29% of the total urban population. But between
2000 and 2030, urban populations are expected to expand by 1.8% globally, and by 2.3% (from 1.9 billion to
3.9 billion) in developing countries (Cohen, 2006). And
in developed countries, the urban population is expected to increase only marginally, from 0.9 billion in 2000
to 1 billion in 2030 (Brockerhoff, 2000).

In 2008, for the ﬁrst time ever, more people lived in urban than in rural areas. And this trend in urbanization
is set to continue. In 2011, the world population crossed
the 7 billion threshold – just 12 years after the 6 billion
threshold was reached in 1999. Figure 17.1 shows, region
by region, the proportion of total populations that live
in urban areas. The graph shows a general upward trend
from the 1960s up to the middle of this century.

While rapid urbanization, particularly in developing
countries, is a major challenge, cities also bring opportunities. They generate wealth, enhance social development, provide employment and serve as incubators
of innovation and creativity in an increasingly knowledge-based global economy. As for the challenges associated with urbanization, to a great extent they stem
from the failure to match planning with migration and
population growth. This failure has severe effects on
the provision of basic services such as water supply
and sanitation, and results in degraded living environments. The poor, particularly poor women, are the
worst affected.

Existing cities have been expanding rapidly while
new ones are also emerging, particularly in Asia and
in low income and middle income countries. In 1960,
for example, seven of the world’s ten largest urban
conurbations were in high income, developed countries. But by 2000, just two of the ten largest were in
developed countries and six were in Asia and Latin
America. In 1950, only two cities, New York and Tokyo,
had populations of over 10 million. By 2015, it is expected that 23 cities worldwide will have populations
of over 10 million – and 19 of these will be in developing countries. In 2000, 22 cities had populations
of between 5 million and 10 million; 402 cities had
between 1 million and 5 million; and 433 cities were in
the 0.5 million to 1 million category (UN-DESA, 2005).
Projections show that this urbanization trend is set to
continue in lower income and middle income countries (Table 17.1).

17.1.1 The growing challenge of slums
Rapidly expanding urban spheres exert increasing pressure on the resources, infrastructure and environment
on which cities depend. Coupled with failure to plan for
migration and demographic growth, this has resulted

FIGURE 17.1
Proportion of world population living in urban areas, 1960–2050
%
100
90
80
70
World

60

Asia
50

Northern America
Sub-Saharan Africa

40

Europe
Oceania
Africa
Latin America and
The Caribbean

30
20
10.
2050

2040

2030

2020

2010

2000

1990

1980

1970

1960

0

Source: Based on data from UN-DESA (2010).

424

CHAPTER 17

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

TABLE 17.1
Ten largest urban conurbations, 1960–2025
By global income distribution
Ten largest urban agglomerations

Income classiﬁcation
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2015

2020

2025

High income economies

7

6

5

5

3

2

2

2

2

Lower middle income economies

1

2

2

4

5

5

5

5

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

Low income economies
Upper middle income economies

2

4

3

3

3

By geographical region
Region

Ten largest urban agglomerations
1960

1970

Countries of the Commonwealth
of Independent States

1

1

Developed regions

7

6

Eastern Asia

1

Latin America

1

3

Southern Asia

1980

1990

2000

2010

2015

2020

2025

5

4

3

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

3

3

3

2

2

2

2

2

2

3

5

5

5

5

Source: Based on data from UN-DESA (2010), ‘30 largest cities’ data at http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/CD-ROM_2009/WUP2009-F11a-30_
Largest_Cities.xls).

in the emergence of slums, and the many problems associated with slums. These typically include poor housing, inadequate access to clean water, poor sanitation,
overcrowding and insecure tenure. All these conditions
have a serious effect on urban well-being (Sclar et al.,
2005). Women are the worst affected. Because of bad
planning and inappropriate land use policies, slums are
typically located on marginal and dangerous land that
is unsuitable for human settlement – locations such as
on canal embankments and along railway tracks. For
example, shanty towns near Buenos Aires in Argentina
are built on ﬂood-prone land, which forces residents to
make a tough choice between safety and health on the
one hand, and the need for shelter on the other (Davis,
2006).

UN-HABITAT’s 2008 report, State of the World Cities
2010/2011, projected that between 2000 and 2010,
227 million people in the developing world will have
moved out of slum conditions. This reﬂects a remarkable achievement, well beyond the 100 million target
set under Millennium Development Goal (MDG) No. 7.
During that period, the proportion of urban residents
living in slums dropped from 39% to 33% in developing countries. However, as also pointed out in the report,
these numbers do not show the whole picture. The
number of slum dwellers has actually increased considerably during this period and this trend is predicted to
continue (UN-HABITAT, 2008). The ﬁgure below shows
slum population numbers in the world’s major regions
between 1990 and 2020.

The overall percentage of urban populations that live
in slums is high − nearly one-third of the entire world
urban population, according to some estimates (see
Figure 17.2 below and Sclar et al., 2005). In some cities, such as Mumbai in India, the situation is worse with
nearly 50% living in slums and shanty towns (Stecko
and Barber, 2007).

17.1.2 Water and urbanization
Urban centres in low income countries are already facing numerous challenges such as inadequate infrastructure, a lack of basic services such as water and
sanitation, and a deteriorating environment caused
by pollution. Rapid urbanization and the extraction of
resources to meet the demands of growing populations will put enormous stress on water resources in and

WWDR4

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

425

FIGURE 17.2
Slum population by region, 1990–2020 (thousands)
1,600,000
1,400,000
Oceania

1,200,000

Western Asia
1,000,000

South-East Asia
South-central Asia

800,000

Eastern Asia
Latin America and

600,000

The Caribbean
Sub-Saharan Africa

400,000

Northern Africa
200,000

Other
Europe

0
1990

2001

2005

2010

2015

2020

Source: Produced by UN-Habitat based on data available at http://ww2.unhabitat.org/programmes/guo/documents/Table4.pdf (published in
their State of the World’s Cities Report 2001).

around the cities as well as on ecosystems as a whole.
Moreover, the expansion of paved and surfaced areas
such as roofs, pavements and parking lots, affects the
local hydrology and reduces the natural inﬁltration of
water into the ground – which results in higher peak
ﬂows during storms.
Although the provision of water and sanitation to urban residents has improved in developing countries,
it is not keeping up with the rapid pace of urbanization. According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme (JMP) on water and sanitation, the world is
on track to meet the MDG on drinking water. This prediction is based on the statistic that 87% of the world
population already had access to improved water sources in 2008, compared with only 77% in 1990 (WHO/
UNICEF, 2010).
However, the problem is that in urban areas, the increase in access to drinking water has been only a minimal 1% during the same period. But in absolute terms,
the number of urban residents with access to improved
sources of drinking water has actually decreased. The
case of sanitation is similar. Between 1990 and 2008,
some 813 million urban residents gained ﬁrst-time access to improved sanitation facilities, but during the
same period, the total urban population grew by over
a billion. This means that the total number of urban
dwellers who do not have access to improved sanitation

426

CHAPTER 17

actually increased by 276 million in this period (WHO/
UNICEF, 2010). As urban populations keep growing, efforts to improve water supply and sanitation in Africa’s
and Asia’s urban areas clearly must be stepped up, particularly for the poor.
Such efforts should come as part of an integrated approach that encompasses the management of upstream catchment areas and river basins, and waterrelated and sanitation-related infrastructure (including
treatment, storage and distribution), as well as conservation of the aquatic environment in the receiving water bodies downstream. As rapid urbanization
puts pressure on existing infrastructure and services,
and with climate change compounding the adverse
impacts on water availability and the frequency of
water-related disasters, future links between water and
urbanization must be analysed and managed more
carefully than ever.
Achieving sustainable water supplies and improved sanitation in the cities of developing countries will require
capital investment, improved governance, political will
and a new ethic that values all resources and ecosystems. Figure 17.3 depicts the complex interplay between
challenges, the variables that can potentially be managed, and some promising strategies that can be adopted by governments and other stakeholders. Although
some broad trends, such as the scale and nature of

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 17.3
Issues and solutions related to water and urbanization

Water and urbanization

Issues
Factors

Strengthened
capacity for improved
service delivery
Advocacy, awareness
raising, education
(HVWSHE)

Solution
strategies

TARGET

Sustainable urban
water supply and
improved environmental
sanitation in the world’s cities
User/polluter pay
principle ($) innovative
ﬁnancing, increased
budgetary support
Rights based approaches,
reduce corruption and fraud,
community driven

Comprehensive
city planning,
integrated urban
water and solid
waste management

Governance,
transparency,
accountability,
equity,
capacity

Policial will

Self sustaining urban
environments; resource
recovery, water demand
management; reduce,
reuse and recycle

Ethics and
values
Technology

Climate
change
impacts

Rapidly
increasing
urban growth

Public
awareness

Ageing,
deteriorated
and absent
infrastructure

Finances and
investments

Source: WSS-II, WSIB, UN-HABITAT.

urbanization and the depletion or degradation of water
resources, may be discernible, managing uncertainty
and risk will be critical.

17.2 Water abstraction
The main sources of water in urban areas are surface
water in upstream catchment areas, groundwater in or
around the city and rainwater. These water sources, particularly the upstream catchment areas of river basins
and groundwater reserves, must be preserved and used
wisely to ensure long-term sustainability.
In developing countries, groundwater sources are extremely important for urban centres because they provide a relatively low-cost water supply that is usually of
a high quality. However, intensive exploitation of such
resources has led to major and widespread falls in aquifer levels. In conurbations such as Bangkok, Manila and
the Chinese city of Tianjin, levels have fallen by as much
as 20 m to 50 m, and in many others by between 10 m
and 20 m. In all these cases, the drop in levels has been
accompanied by either land subsidence, a deterioration
in groundwater quality or, in some cases, by both. In

WWDR4

Mexico City, the aquifer level fell by between 5 m and 10
m between 1986 and 1992, and sections of the city have
sunk by 8 m or more over the last 60 years (Foster et al.,
1998; Hutton et al. 2008). In coastal areas, over-abstraction results in saltwater intrusion. In Europe, 53 out of
126 groundwater areas show saltwater intrusion. This is
mostly in aquifers that are used for public and industrial
water supplies (Elimelech, 2006),
Freshwater withdrawals for agriculture exceed withdrawals for other sectors (households, manufacturing,
etc.). But withdrawals are expected to rise in all sectors (Fig. 17.4), and cities in developing countries will be
most affected. By 2025, water withdrawals are expected
to rise by 50% in developing countries as opposed to
18% rises in developed countries. In addition to high agricultural demand, pressure on water resources is compounded by the physical alteration and destruction of
habitats caused by urban and industrial developments
(UNEP, 2007).

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

427

FIGURE 17.4
Changes in global water use, by sector
km 3
3 200
assessment

Agricultural

forecast

Withdrawal

2 800

Consumptive
use
Returns and
waste

2 400
2 000
1 600
1 200

17.2.1 Discharge of wastewater
In the course of the hydrological cycle, water sustains
communities and economies throughout the watershed
as it is used in agriculture, in industry and by domestic consumers (Figure 17.4). However, these users do
not return the water they extract in its original condition (Corcoran et al., 2010). Across the world, the total
sewage, agricultural waste and industrial effluent discharged into waterways amounts to 2 million tonnes
every year (Corcoran et al., 2010). Much of this waste
comes from urban areas.

800
400
0
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

2025

km 3
1 600
assessment

Domestic

forecast

Withdrawal

1 400

Consumptive
use
Returns and
waste

1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

2025

km 3
800
assessment

Industrial

forecast

Withdrawal

700

Consumptive
use
Returns and
waste

600
500
400
300
200
100
0
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

2025

km 3
400
assessment

Reservoir

forecast

Evaporation

350
300
250

Figure 17.5 depicts the ratio of treated to untreated
wastewater discharged into water bodies across ten
regions of the world. Urban wastewater poses a particularly serious threat when combined with untreated
industrial waste. Treated urban sewage is largely limited
to high income countries, while in developing countries
about 90% of sewage is discharged without any treatment. In Indonesia, Jakarta’s 9 million residents generate 1.3 million m3 of sewage daily, of which less than 3%
is treated. By contrast, Sydney, Australia’s largest city,
which has a population of over 4 million, treats nearly
all its wastewater, some 1.2 million m3 per day (Corcoran
et al., 2010). Point sources such as where sewage is
discharged are being controlled more and more, and
the concern is now shifting to non-point pollutant loads
from storm-generated runoff.
Nutrients in the wastewater discharged from municipal
treatment plants and the runoff from cities and farms
pose a major health problem. These nutrients have
caused an increase in harmful algal blooms in freshwater and coastal systems over the last twenty years
(UNEP, 2007). It is estimated that about 245,000 km2
of marine ecosystems feature ‘dead zones’ caused by
the discharge of untreated wastewater, which has a
detrimental effect on ﬁsheries, livelihoods and the food
chain. Such discharge merely shifts problems from
upstream to downstream areas.

200
150
100
50
0
1900

1925

1950

1975

2000

2025

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/
changes-in-global-water-use-by-sector, by Bounford.com and UNEP/
GRID-Arendal with sources UNEP/GRID-Arendal, 2002, based on
Shiklomanov and UNESCO 1999).

428

CHAPTER 17

Poor sanitation and inadequate wastewater management in developing countries results in the contamination of freshwater sources, and is a major cause of disease and death, particularly among children. It also holds
serious economic and environmental consequences. For
instance, World Bank research in South-East Asia found
that Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam
lose an estimated US$9 billion a year because of poor
sanitation. This amounts to about 2% of their combined
gross domestic product (GDP) (Hutton et al., 2008).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 17.5
Urban freshwater and wastewater cycle: Water withdrawal and pollutant discharge

Rain
Evapotraspiration

Global water withdrawal
percentage by sector
Agriculture

Waste water
discharge
Urban

Rural

Contaminated
food provision

Domestic
70%

8%

Industry
22%

Reusing processed
sewage
Drinking water treatment
Sewage sludge

Ecosystem
degradation

Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/freshwater-and-wastewater-cycle-water-withdrawal-and-pollutant-discharge,
by UNEP/GRID-Arendal with sources WHO, FAO, UNESCO and IWMI).

FIGURE 17.6
Ratio of treated to untreated wastewater discharged into water bodies (March 2010)

Baltic Sea
Central and East Europe
Western
Europe
North
Atlantic

Caspian Sea

Mediterranean

Caribbean

East
Asia
Southern
Asia
West and
Central Africa
Untreated

Treated

UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/ratio-of-wastewater-treatment1, a map by H. Ahlenius, adapted from a map by H.
Ahlenius [http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/ratio -of-wastewater-treatment, sources UNEP-GPA, 2004]).

WWDR4

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

429

Even where extensive sewerage networks and treatment plants are in place, they are all too often unable
to adjust to ongoing, rapid urban expansion and the
associated massive capital expenditure required. In addition, they often do not have adequate capacity in the
areas of planning, design, operations and maintenance.
Alternatives such as off-site sanitation and decentralized
wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS) are rarely explored, because of a lack of awareness among policymakers and planners, and poor capacity among utility
staff. As a result, extensive sewerage systems often end
up with poor, environmentally damaging sanitation services and next to no wastewater treatment.
Even in the face of growing demand, reusing and recycling water remain exceptions. Just as overlooked is
the potential for recovering nutrients and energy from
wastewater for use in food and fuel production. On top
of these two types of technology, it must also be highlighted that other technologies exist that can reduce the

BOX 17.1
Water-saving sanitation methods: Reviewing the
options

Sanitation, particularly the use of modern ﬂush toilets,
ranks among the major sources of water demand in urban
areas. Conventional ﬂushing systems use 10 L to 12 L of
water per ﬂush, wasting large amounts of water and polluting water bodies. The main alternatives to conventional
toilets include the Sulabh toilet, urine-diverting dry toilets,
and waterless urinals, all of which reduce water consumption while improving sanitation standards. Among these,
probably the most popular is the Sulabh ﬂush composting toilet developed by Bindeshwar Pathak and his team
at Sulabh International in New Delhi. These toilets are very
popular in India as well as in other developing countries.
When developing a technology, it is important to keep
local culture in mind. The Sulabh toilet was designed to
suit the speciﬁc needs of people who use water for anal
cleansing as well as for ﬂushing. To save water, Sulabh toilets use only 1 L to 1.5 L per ﬂush, as opposed to the 10 L
to 12 L used in conventional toilets.
On top of these signiﬁcant savings, the Sulabh technology also helps to reduce global warming because it prevents greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere. And
in public toilets where a biogas digester is linked up, the
gases are burned when they are used for cooking, lighting
and producing energy.

Source: B. Pathak, Sulabh International (personal communication).

430

CHAPTER 17

amount of water that’s required for sanitation – which in
turn lowers the amount of wastewater that’s returned to
the environment untreated (see Box 17.1).
17.2.2 Urban water needs and their effects on
ecosystems
Human activities have a huge effect on freshwater ecosystems across the world. Freshwater deterioration is
particularly acute in cultivated systems, drylands, wetlands and urban areas. However, the effect that urban
water requirements have on ecosystems is not fully or
systematically researched. Cities are highly diverse, and
the effects that their water needs have on ecosystems
vary considerably from one to another.
When natural land surfaces are turned into impervious
surfaces such as paved streets, parking lots and roofs,
the percolation of rainwater and snowmelt into the soil
is inhibited. The ﬂow velocity of water over the land is
increased, transferring pollutants into receiving water
systems Chiramba, 2010). The reclamation of inland
and coastal water systems has caused the loss of many
coastal and ﬂoodplain ecosystems and services. Lost
wetlands have resulted in changed ﬂow regimes, with
increased ﬂooding in some places together with shrinking wildlife habitats (UNEP, 2007).
Healthy water ecosystems bring multiple beneﬁts to
various aspects of urban life. Wetlands provide important natural wastewater treatment functions. For
instance, in Xiamen in China, municipal authorities
generate revenue by imposing ﬁnes on polluters and
charging fees for a number of facilities such as using
marine areas. Improved wastewater treatment facilities have led to an increase in the quantity of wastewater being discharged – which has also resulted in
an increase in Xiamen’s revenues. This has allowed the
city authorities to spend US$2 billion on sewage treatment systems since the mid-1990s. The result of this
has been a huge increase in the proportion of industrial and domestic waste that’s being processed. In the
mid-1990s, just 20% of industrial wastewater was processed, ten years later, that ﬁgure had reached 100%.
And the ﬁgures for domestic wastewater processing
are almost as impressive with an increase from 28%
to 85% over the much same period. Today Xiamen
attracts immigrants, tourists and real-estate development (Chiramba, 2010).
In Kolkata in India, ponds provide a low cost, natural
wastewater reuse and treatment system in a city that

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

lacks conventional treatment plants. This system also
provides employment for 17,000 poor ﬁshermen and
produces 20 tonnes of ﬁsh daily (Newman and Jennings,
2008; UNEP, 2002).
Every year across the world, coastal ecosystems provide
an estimated US$25 billion worth of services in the form
of food security, shoreline protection, tourism and
carbon sequestration (Naber et al., 2008). In Zanzibar,
marine ecosystem services account for 30% of GDP,
77% of investment, large amounts of foreign currency and
numerous jobs (Lange and Jiddawi, 2009). Caribbean
countries depend on coral reefs for tourism, ﬁsheries
and shoreline protection. Degradation of these reefs
could reduce net beneﬁts by between US$350 million
and US$870 million a year. Because conventional urban
management is hardly concerned with water resources
management, adverse effects are expected to continue
before the costs and beneﬁts are fully recognized.

17.3 Climate change and resilient urban
water systems
Alongside urbanization, climate change is a second,
major, long-term and human-induced factor that affects
natural and human systems alike all over the world. It
has far-reaching consequences on environmental, economic and social stability (UN-HABITAT, 2011). As with
urbanization, the effects of climate change are likely to
be felt more sharply in developing than in developed
countries.
There are close links between cities and climate change.
Cities, where now half of humankind lives, are responsible for up to 70% of greenhouse gas emissions around
the world; and urban populations are also vulnerable to
the effects of climate change (UN-HABITAT, 2011). Cities
also provide the greatest opportunities for combating
climate change for two reasons: they are often centres
of innovation, and action taken at city level can reach
out to a large number of people.
Although vulnerability to the effects of climate change
varies from place to place, in developing countries, poor
people, particularly poor women, stand out as the most
vulnerable. Many poor women live in risk-prone slums,
along river banks for example, and their adaptive capacities are minimal (IPCC, 2007).
Water generally acts as a critical link between climate
change and its effects on human and physical systems.
Rising temperatures will change the hydrological cycle,

WWDR4

which, in turn, may alter temporal and spatial rainfall
patterns and trigger extreme events such as droughts
and ﬂoods. Urban water systems are likely to be very
vulnerable to the effects of climate change, particularly
in developing countries where they are poorly managed and ill-equipped to deal with changed conditions.
Therefore, various components of urban water systems
such as the protection schemes for catchment areas,
water supply systems, wastewater treatment plants and
drainage networks must be designed and managed in a
climate-sensitive manner.
The direct effects of climate change include the destruction of infrastructure and facilities. This affects,
among other things, the regular provision of water supplies, drainage and sewerage systems and solid waste
management. If these systems and networks are to
become sustainable, they must be more resilient to severe weather events. For instance, the capacity of water
drainage or combined sewers must be a direct function
of rainfall intensity (as measured in mm/hr).
On the whole, climate change adds to the uncertainty
and severity of extreme water-related events. Floods
and droughts are becoming increasingly unpredictable
and more devastating in many ‘hot spots’ that are also
experiencing rapid urbanization. The existing infrastructure is unable to cope, and public health is endangered
because of a complex combination of factors such as
the dispersal of human excreta during ﬂoods, or increased pathogen loads in freshwater supplies caused
by rising water temperatures. In the face of the combined challenge of urbanization and climate change,
urban water supply and sanitation infrastructure must
be made ‘climate proof. What are also needed are processes that can generate optimal water management
systems – processes that are robust, adaptable and
sustainable under these future global change pressures
(Bates et. al, 2008). Such ﬂexible systems would be
characterized by their capability to adapt to changing
scenarios and associated uncertainties.
These challenges can be addressed with new techniques,
including exploratory modelling that combines the best
features of traditional quantitative decision analysis with
those of narrative, scenario-based planning. Techniques
such as risk assessment and ‘real options analysis’
(Zhao and Tseng, 2003) also offer opportunities in this
respect. ‘Real options-based decision-making’ recognizes the value of ﬂexibility, including ﬂexibility in examining alternatives and future decision-making, and can be

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

431

implemented in a ﬂexible way as and when required to
cope with uncertainty.
Some cities have begun to develop plans for vulnerability assessments and adaptation. Assisting them in
this process are organizations such as UN-HABITAT,
the International Council for Local Environmental
Initiatives (ICLEI) and the World Mayors Council on
Climate Change. Since 2008, UN-HABITAT’s Cities and
Climate Change Initiative has aimed to enhance the
capacity of cities in developing countries to mitigate
and adapt to climate change through collaboration between cities, enhanced domestic policy dialogue, risk
assessment and designing pilot projects. As part of the
Initiative, UN-HABITAT is supporting the preparation
of Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Plans in 18
cities across Asia and Africa (UN-HABITAT, 2011). These
plans are developed in a participatory manor, and this
ensures women’s involvement in processes that are
properly implemented and can be monitored on an ongoing basis. Such an approach is expected to promote
designs that are ﬂexible enough to adapt to new, different or changing requirements. It is also very likely to
result in ‘least regret’ solutions in what seems bound to
remain an uncertain environment.
17.3.1 Infrastructure that is aging, deteriorated or
absent
Most cities in developing countries face an urgent need
to provide water and sanitation infrastructure and services to rapidly expanding populations. And many older
cities, including cities in developed countries, are also
faced with an aging and deteriorated water infrastructure, which is costly to rehabilitate. As well as catering
for ever-expanding urban populations, poor populations
in particular, these systems must be designed to adapt
to and mitigate the challenges posed by global climate
change.
Many cities around the world face capital expenditure backlogs for water supply systems that haven’t
been maintained or upgraded for a very long time.
This infrastructure is likely to include source protection, water transmission lines, treatment systems, storage facilities and distribution networks. Much of this
infrastructure is over 100 years old, which puts public health at increased risk because leaks, obstructions
and malfunctions are more likely as equipment ages.
For example, the United Kingdom is served by over
700,000 km of mains and sewer pipes, which require
over 35,000 maintenance operations per month (Khatri

432

CHAPTER 17

and Vairavamoorthy, 2007). Similarly, in Kathmandu in
Nepal, some of the water pipes are over 100 years old.
Here, planning has eluded the expansion of water and
sewer networks for many years and about 40% of drinking water is unaccounted for, mainly as a result of leaks.
High leakage rates result in increased water demand as
well as greater risk of contamination and the spread of
waterborne diseases (Vairavamoorthy et al., 2007).
The rehabilitation of urban water systems is becoming
increasingly expensive. In Germany, for example,
estimates are that over the next 15 years, €12 billion (or
US$16 billion) will be required annually – that’s
€6.5 billion (US$9 billion) for new facilities and €5.5 billion
(US$7.5 billion) for operation and maintenance. (Hiessl
et al., 2001). In North America, trillions of dollars’ worth
of infrastructure is failing prematurely and is in need of
costly repairs. The US Environmental Protection Agency
anticipates a funding gap of over US$500 billion over the
next 20 years in water infrastructure investment (USEPA,
2002).
As might be expected, the deterioration of urban water infrastructure is often more severe in cities in the
developing world. This is the result of poor construction practices, little or no maintenance and demands
that the infrastructure operates at higher capacities
than it was designed for. Missing records, or a lack of
data on the location and condition of water and wastewater infrastructures, combines with a lack of efficient
management to make the problems even more complex
(Misiunas, 2005).
17.3.2 Integrated water management and new urban
planning
Because water ﬂows in a cycle, no urban water system can be considered in isolation. No one can afford
to overlook cities’ links with upstream catchments and
downstream areas, especially as almost all areas downstream of urban developments are left to cope with
urban waste to some extent or another. Even within a
given urban area, the various components of the water
system – groundwater, water distribution and sewerage
networks – typically interact. These interactions must be
understood and taken into consideration if water supply
and sanitation services are to become effective, efficient
and sustainable.
Like its rural counterpart, integrated urban water management (IUWM) is based on a systems approach
that looks at the hydrological cycle as a whole from

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

catchment to consumption and treatment. Such a perspective includes any links between the various components within the system. The approach recognizes
human as well as ecological demands for water, and
sets out to balance environmental, economic, technical
and social needs in the short term as well as the long
term. In practice, this means that the planning and management of urban water systems must consider water
requirements for human health, environmental protection and economic activities as well as for urban design
and recreation. This approach demands an integrated
and multidisciplinary approach where urban planners
work closely with water engineers, landscape architects,
economists and social scientists (SWITCH, 2006).
In Kathmandu, Nepal some progress has been made
towards an IUWM approach. The Bagmati Action
Plan was developed with support from UNEP and
UN-HABITAT. The scheme identiﬁes a range of stakeholders and corresponding actions that are needed
to prevent the pollution of the Bagmati River, which
serves as the city’s main water source. The Plan
adopts a holistic approach and sets out speciﬁc strategies and actions for ﬁve different zones within the
Kathmandu Valley. The scope of the plan runs from
the conservation zone in the upstream catchment
area and extends all the way to the downstream zone.
Under the Plan, watershed management and conservation is the main goal for upstream areas; sustainable agriculture and eco-tourism are to be promoted in the surrounding rural areas; and decentralized
wastewater treatment systems are a priority for periurban communities (GoN/NTNC, 2009). Funds to
implement the plan come from setting aside a small
portion of the registration fees charged on land transactions in the Kathmandu Valley.
As urban population densities increase, the per-capita
cost of providing water supply and sanitation services
can be reduced (economies of scale) and can make
service provision more efficient (economies of scope).
This can also reduce the ecological footprint of cities.
Those cities in the developing world that aim to improve services to ever-expanding populations should
consider a new planning approach, and review existing density regulations, including in peri-urban areas where most of the expansion is taking place. The
participation of the poor, particularly poor women, in
planning will be critical. The layout of transport networks can signiﬁcantly impact on growth and density
and should be carefully considered, keeping in mind

WWDR4

the potential effect on the provision of water supply
and sanitation services. New urban legislation can also
promote more sustainable service provision. For example, several countries are adopting policies and regulations for the promotion of rainwater harvesting. This
simple technique can reduce water stress in any city.

BOX 17.2
Singapore: A model of integrated water management
The Singapore water story is one of political determination, integrated management, continuous innovation and
community partnership. In the 1960s after independence,
the city-state experienced widespread water shortages
cause by rapid demographic expansion and industrialization. Led by the Public Utilities Board (PUB), which is the
national water agency, Singapore has turned its inherent
water scarcity into growth opportunities. Taking advantage of modern technologies, the PUB has diversiﬁed water supplies under the ‘Four National Taps’ strategy: local
catchment, imports, NEWater’ (that is, treated and recycled wastewater), and desalination. Today, NEWater can
meet 30% of demand, compared with only 10% for desalination. The plan is that by 2060 NEWater should meet
50% of Singapore’s water demand and desalination 30%.
PUB also engages the community, encouraging wise water use, advising against the pollution of catchments and
waterways, and building a closer relationship with water
through leisure and entertainment activities.
Through long-term planning, Singapore has built infrastructure such as the Marina Barrage to serve the
‘three-in-one’ functions: water storage, ﬂood control and
leisure pursuits. The city-state also built the Deep Tunnel
Sewerage System to meet Singapore’s needs for the collection, treatment and disposal of used water over the
next 100 years. The plans to meet water needs for the
next 50 years were announced at the 2010 Singapore
International Water Week (SIWW).
Through collaboration with the private sector, Singapore
has created a vibrant water sector comprising 70 mutually supportive companies. Water has even been identiﬁed
as one of the city-state’s new economic growth engines.
The equivalent of US$261 million has been committed
over ﬁve years to expand the sector through research and
development.
Singapore established an annual event (SIWW) and an
Institute of Water Policy at the Lee Kuan Yew School of
Public Policy with the intent of sharing its experiences,
enhancing its capabilities and providing leadership in water governance through research and education.
Source: Public Utilities Board, Singapore.

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

433

17.3.3 Resource recovery and water demand
management
The current methods of water resources management
and the provision of water supply and sanitation are
coming under enormous pressure from rapid urbanization. Flush toilets and waterborne sewage systems use
large quantities of water, straining already depleted
resources. This makes it all the more important to take
a critical look into current water use and sanitation
practices and to develop strategies and systems that

BOX 17.3
Policies and legislation on rainwater harvesting
from around the world

đƫƫƫ*ƫ * %Čƫ)*5ƫ/00!ƫ#+2!.*)!*0/ƫ$2!ƫ) !ƫ.%*30!.ƫ
harvesting mandatory in buildings. In New Delhi, the
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation
has modiﬁed the building by-laws to make rainwater
harvesting mandatory in all new buildings built on plots
larger than 100 m2. They grant ﬁnancial assistance of up
to 50% or 100,000 rupees (approximately US$2,000)
whichever is less. The State of Tamil Nadu has also
made rainwater harvesting mandatory for all public and
private buildings.
đƫƫƫ*ƫ!,(Čƫ0$!ƫ#+2!.*)!*0ƫ$/ƫ!*0! ƫ,+(%%!/ƫ* ƫ
guidelines on rainwater harvesting, while cities such as
Dharan are providing discounts of up to 30% on building permit fees for houses that install rainwater harvesting systems.
đƫƫƫ*ƫ1/0.(%Čƫ0$!ƫ#+2!.*)!*0/ƫ+"ƫ%0+.%Čƫ+10$ƫ
Australia, Sydney and New South Wales, The Gold
Coast and Queensland have taken steps to ensure that
energy-efficient and water-efficient measures, including rainwater harvesting, are incorporated into all new
houses.
đƫƫƫ*ƫ!.)*5Čƫ.%*30!.ƫ$.2!/0%*#ƫ%/ƫ!*+1.#! ƫ5ƫ0$!ƫ
levying of rain taxes on the amount of impervious surface a property has where runoff is directed straight to
the storm sewers. So converting impervious paving into
porous paved areas or harvesting rainwater from their
rooftops makes property owners eligible for a reduction
in rain tax.
đƫƫƫ*ƫ0$!ƫ*%0! ƫ00!/Čƫ/!2!.(ƫ/00!/ƫ* ƫ%0%!/ƫ,.+2% !ƫ
incentives for water conservation. Residents of Arizona
were offered a one-time tax credit of 25% of the cost
of water conservation systems such as grey water and
rainwater recycling, up to a maximum of US$1,000. The
state has allocated approximately US$250,000 annually to cover these tax credits. Similarly, the residents of
San Antonio in Texas can apply for a tax rebate of up to
50% for their rainwater harvesting projects.
Source: CSE (n.d.).

434

CHAPTER 17

reduce the waste, not just of water, but of other related
resources such as organic matter and nutrients as well.
In a conventional system, water is abstracted from
surface water or groundwater sources, transported to
cities, treated and distributed to households and institutions for various uses. After use, the wastewater is
collected, treated if possible, and discharged into water
bodies. This is a linear system where a large amount of
a scarce resource is used once, contaminated and then
discharged to pollute the downstream environment. In
this process, water is lost – as are many other valuable
resources such as organic matter and nutrients. These
nutrients are valuable for agriculture, but substitutes
such as chemical fertilizers (either mined or manufactured) are applied to the land instead. This may result
in further deterioration of both soil and water resources. Overall, this system is unsustainable and leads to
overexploitation of water bodies, the contamination of
aquatic ecosystems, soil degradation and, ultimately, to
food insecurity.
In traditional societies, sanitation systems were built to
maximize resource recovery and reuse. In many countries in Asia, Europe, Latin America and Central America,
excreta used to be collected and used in the ﬁelds as
manure, thus closing the loop between resource use
and recovery. For instance, in China, farmers have been
aware of the beneﬁts of human and animal excreta in
crop production for more than 2,500 years. This has
enabled Chinese farmers to support higher populations
with the crops they produce. Some societies have also
recycled excreta as fuel. For example, in Yemen’s older
cities, including the capital, Sana’a, separate systems for
collection of excreta and urine were built into in multistorey buildings. The faeces was collected, dried and
used for fuel (Lüthi et al., 2011).
Sanitation systems built around the concepts of resource recovery and reuse have been around for centuries. However, they began to disappear in the wake
of the industrial revolution (and the associated urban
expansion) when sewer systems and newly developed
chemical fertilizers took over. By the middle of the
nineteenth century, industrialized countries turned very
gradually to centralized waterborne sanitation with
ﬂush toilets connected to sewer systems. Later, large
sewage treatment plants were built to meet environmental standards. However, the malfunction of these
treatment plants is not infrequent, leading to waste of
money and environmental pollution.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Even in industrialized countries, wastewater treatment
can remain a challenge for cities. In Europe, EU research found in 2001 that of 540 major cities, only 79
had tertiary sewage treatment and 223 had secondary
treatment; 72 featured incomplete primary or secondary treatment, and 168 cities had no (or unspeciﬁed)
treatment capacity (EU, 2001). In February 2002, the
European Commission even took action against France,
Greece, Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg, Belgium, Spain
and the United Kingdom for alleged failure to implement the EU Urban Water Directive (SEI, 2008). Despite
all these failings, the sustainability of these systems has
rarely been questioned and they are still considered to
be the reference for sanitation.
However, promising new approaches which use waste
as a resource − such as ecological sanitation (EcoSan) −
are now gaining more popularity. The waste and wastewater from households, for example, can be separated
into the following streams and recycled:
đƫ Stormwater, which can be captured and, with minimal treatment, be reused for any purpose ;
đƫ Grey water, or wash water from kitchens and bathrooms, which can be treated and reused for ﬂushing
or irrigation;
đƫ Blackwater or faeces, which can be used to produce
energy (biogas) or compost;
đƫ Urine or yellow water, which can be reused as liquid
fertilizer; and
đƫ Organic waste, which can be composted or used to
produce biogas.
In a bid to promote sustainable sanitation systems, the
Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council
endorsed the ‘Bellagio Principles for Sustainable
Sanitation’ during its Fifth Global Forum in November
2000 (EAWAG, 2005). These principles consider waste
as a resource and promote holistic, integrated and decentralized management.
Sustainable options based on these principles include
EcoSan, rainwater harvesting and decentralized wastewater treatment systems (DEWATS). These decentralized systems focus on reducing demand for water and
preventing water pollution – and they have proved effective in many communities around the world. The time
has come to deploy these technologies on a larger scale,
particularly in newly urbanizing areas and periurban areas in developing countries.

Experience gained from the projects UN-HABITAT has
supported over the years proves that Water Demand
Management (WDM) for utilities is effective. The
method can save or defer massive amounts of capital
expenditure on equipment and networks. WDM entails
a ‘water audit’ of the supply system, the identiﬁcation of
areas of excessive consumption or leakage, the rehabilitation of infrastructure, and the deployment of technical and managerial controls. These measures are most
effective when combined with public awareness raising
and education programmes (McKenzie et al, 2003).
Promotion of sustainable sanitation and holistic water management systems will require knowledge of the
water cycle as a whole and how it is affected by human

BOX 17.4
Decentralized and community-based sanitation
systems

Large conventional wastewater treatment plants are often
expensive to establish and difficult to operate. As a result, many cities in developing countries are unable to set
up such plants and operate them properly. Transporting
the wastewater through drains is the main cost of urban
wastewater management. But decentralized treatment
systems that are based on simple yet effective technologies and that have maximum community ownership can
serve as an alternative in developing countries.
Since it was developed in the 1990s, the Decentralized
Wastewater Treatment Systems (DEWATS) approach has
proved to be successful in many communities, particularly
in slums, peri-urban settlements and institutions in Asia
and Africa. In Indonesia, for example, the CommunityBased Sanitation (SANIMAS) programme (which started
as a pilot project in six locations in 2003) has now been
deployed on a nationwide scale covering more than
420 ‘clusters’ all over the country. Similarly, many slum
settlements in Indian cities such as Bangalore and Mumbai
also enjoy community-based sanitation facilities. Some of
these also generate biogas for cooking and slurry for
vegetable gardening.
The DEWATS approach is based on the principles of decentralization of responsibility, simpliﬁcation of technology and processes, and, where possible, the conservation and recycling of waste energy and nutrients. This
modular system combines technical options such as settlers, biogas plants, anaerobic baffle reactors, constructed wetlands and ponds. All options involve community
participation.
Source: Gutterer et al. (2009).

WWDR4

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

435

activities. In this process, water and urban managers
could take advantage of the Sustainable Sanitation and
Water Management Toolbox (Box 17.4).

17.4 Water education
It is increasingly recognized that improvements in water management cannot be accomplished by technical
or regulatory measures alone. These must be complemented with changes in behaviour and in attitudes
to the use of water in society. Following the recommendations of an International Expert Group Meeting
held in Johannesburg, South Africa, in May 2001, UNHABITAT has been promoting the Human Values-Based
approach to Water, Sanitation and Hygiene promotion (HVBWSHE). This has included running many
HVBWSHE training courses and the publication of the
Facilitators’ and Trainers’ Guidebook. In addition to disseminating information on water, sanitation and hygiene,

BOX 17.5
The Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management
Toolbox

Water resources around the world face increasing pressures from population growth, competing demands
from agriculture and industry, and climate uncertainty.
However, a number of solutions have been developed to
address this challenge, and have been demonstrated to
be effective in several parts of the world. Water managers
must be aware of these solutions and be able to modify
and apply them as necessary to suit their needs. This requires information to be managed effectively so that it
is easily available when required. It also requires capacity-building to build conﬁdence in the holistic approach
to water resource management that is inherent to the
methodology.
The Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management
(SSWM) toolbox is a collection of open-source, easyaccess and easy-to-use information that is available on
line. It allows users to tailor it to their own needs while
maintaining a holistic approach. The methodology considers the water system as a whole and focuses on human
interactions with various components as water moves in
a cycle from source to sea and back. In practice, simple
technical and software tools and approaches are proposed for the various problems associated with the effects of human inﬂuence on the water cycle. In particular,
the methodology links water resources management with
sanitation and agriculture.
Source: SSWM Toolbox (n.d.).

436

CHAPTER 17

this innovative approach inspires and motivates the
public to change its behaviour in favour of the wise and
sustainable use of water and sanitation. Experience has
shown that a values-based approach has many beneﬁts: it does not add to the current school curriculum
because it can easily be mainstreamed into the existing
curriculum, and it creates a lasting effect through character development once it is understood, appreciated
and practised by children and young adults. This now
proven approach has been adopted in several countries
in Asia, Africa and Latin America with support from UNHABITAT and other agencies.

17.5 Financing the water sector
Meeting wide ranging human needs as well as looking
after the natural environment in a sustainable manner
comes at a cost. This is often ignored or underestimated
by governments and individuals, which results in dysfunctional water systems and a deterioration of critical services. Sustainable funding is required for water
resources management as a whole, including providing
water supply and sanitation services, and integrative
functions such as policy and legislation development,
capacity building, research and good governance.
Achieving the MDG targets for access to drinking water
and sanitation will also require signiﬁcant amounts of
capital expenditure, particularly in low income countries
and least developed countries. However, the beneﬁts associated with water and sanitation, such as reductions
in health costs and increases in the number of productive days, will far outweigh the cost of providing safe
water and sanitation. Research has shown that every
single dollar invested in drinking water and sanitation can yield a payback of US$7.40 per year. Similarly,
achieving the MDG targets would result in an additional
320 million productive days every year as a result of
improved health, and a time saving of 20 billion working
days (Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).
In spite of these clear beneﬁts, capital expenditure on
drinking water and sanitation has a relatively low priority for official development assistance (ODA) or domestic allocations, compared with other social development sectors such as health and education. Between
1997 and 2008, total international assistance for waterrelated projects (as measured by the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD])
decreased from 8% to 5% of total overseas development aid. Yet during the same period, aid for health
projects increased from 7% to 12%. Furthermore, less

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

than half of the investment made in water and sanitation by external support agencies goes to low income
countries, and only a small proportion of this goes to
providing those basic services which could make major
contributions to the achievement of the MDGs (WHO
and UN-Water, 2010). Therefore, there is a clear need
for aid agencies to make greater investments in water
and sanitation, particularly in low income countries
where the number of urban poor continues to increase
rapidly.
As well as fresh capital expenditure, the water sector also
requires funding for the proper operation and maintenance of existing systems. In Nepal, for example, according to government estimates, 80% of the population have
access to drinking water from improved sources – which
means that, on paper, the country has met its MDG target of 73% water supply coverage. However, government
data also show that only 17.9% of the water supply systems in the country are functioning properly; 38.9% need
minor repairs, 11.8% need major repairs, 21% need rehabilitation, 9.1% need reconstruction and 1.6% are totally nonfunctional (NMIP and DWSS, 2011). Even in Kathmandu
Valley, where coverage is reported to be close to 100%,
actual service levels fail to meet half the water demand
and the quality of the water supplied is a major concern.
Therefore, even if the world is on track to meet the MDG
for water supply, the operation and maintenance of water
systems will continue to require ﬁnancing.
17.5.1 Bridging the ﬁnancing gap
A preliminary assessment by the UN Millennium Project
(2005) shows that, taking all the MDGs as a whole,
many low income countries, particularly in sub-Saharan
Africa, face large ﬁnancial gaps amounting to 20% to
30% of GDP. This is the case even when domestic resource mobilization is maximized. Consequently, these
countries will require substantial external ﬁnancial support to meet the MDGs, both nationwide and in smaller
urban centres. Options for bridging this gap for water
supply and sanitation are as follows:
đƫ In the poorest countries, external ﬁnance and ODA
should be grant based, especially for delivery to those
who have no water and sanitation service and who live
below the poverty line in small urban centres.
đƫ In all low income countries, and where appropriate,
substantial shares of operating costs in urban centres should be met through grants or other instruments like output-based aid.
đƫ In middle income countries, small urban centres
where people live below the poverty line may need

WWDR4

a variety of instruments, including lifeline tariffs
(such as those used in South Africa), output-based
loans buttressed by the appropriate forms of external guarantees, and internal transfers to meet the
upfront costs of new infrastructure, and ultimately
make charges affordable to the poor.
đƫ Domestic resource mobilization should be maximized while ensuring that capital and operating
costs are adequately funded, keeping in mind the
need to provide the poor, particularly poor women,
with sustainable and affordable services.
đƫ Ensure that considerations of affordability are reconciled with the need to generate revenues from
those that can afford to pay for services.
đƫ Wherever feasible, trunk infrastructure should be
funded by the public sector.
Meanwhile, at national level, strategies must be developed to enable a shift from external to domestic
sources of ﬁnancing, including the private sector. At
international level, there should be a shift from sovereign to sub-sovereign lending, and measures such
as improved ﬁnancial and operational management
should be put in place to improve affordability, and
cost recovery. Measures are also needed to improve
the performance and creditworthiness of local authorities and utilities.
All those involved must recognize the urgent need
to strengthen those ﬁnancial mechanisms that reduce overhead costs, and ensure that more targeted
funds beneﬁt deprived communities. Such mechanisms should also empower the communities, familiarizing them with the challenges involved, and securing
their commitment to the search for common solutions. These ﬁnancial mechanisms should also build
national and international partnerships with appropriate ﬁnancial institutions, in an effort to leverage capital
expenditure.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Bates, B. C., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Wu, S. and Palutikof,
J. P. (eds). 2008. Climate Change and Water. Technical.
Technical Paper VI. Paper of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Geneva, IPCC.
Brockerhoff, M. 2000. An urbanising world. Population
Reference Bureau, Washington DC, PRB. http://www.prb.
org/source/acfac3f.pdf

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

437

Chiramba, T. 2010. Ecological Impacts of Urban Water: A
Contribution to World Water Day 2011. Presentation from
the 2010 World Water Week in Stockholm. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.worldwaterweek.org/documents/WWW_
PDF/2010/tuesday/T5/Chiramba_Pres_WWW_WWD2011_
ﬁnal.pdf

Hutton, G., Rodriguez, U. E., Napaitupulu L., Thang, P.
and Kov, P. 2008. Economic Impacts of Sanitation in
Southeast Asia: A four-country study conducted in
Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Vietnam under
the Economics of Sanitation Initiative (ESI). Jakarta and
Washington DC, World Bank.

Cohen, B. 2006. Urbanization in developing countries:
Current trends, future projections, and key challenges
for sustainability. Technology in Society, Vol. 28, pp.
63–80. http://www7.nationalacademies.org/dbasse/cities_
transformed_world_technologyinsociety_article.pdf

IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).
2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Geneva,
Switzerland, IPCC. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessmentreport/ar4/syr/ar4_syr.pdf

Corcoran, E., Nellemann, C., Baker, E., Bos, R., Osborn, D.
and Savelli, H. (eds). 2010. Sick Water? The Central Role of
Wastewater Management in Sustainable Development. A
Rapid Response Assessment. Nairobi, UNEP/UN-HABITAT.
CSE (Centre for Science and Environment). n.d. CSE WEBNET
websites. Rainwater Harvesting and International Waterharvesting and Related Financial Incentives. New Delhi,
CSE. http://www.cseindia.org/node/1161 and http://www.
rainwaterharvesting.org/policy/Legislation_international.
htm#aus (Both accessed 5 December 2011.).
Davis, M. 2006. Slum Ecology: Inequity intensiﬁes Earth’s
natural forces. Orion Magazine. March/April. http://
www.orionmagazine.org/indexZ.php/articles/article/167
(Accessed October 2009.)
EAWAG (Swiss Federal Institute for Aquatic Science and
Technology). 2005. Household-Centred Environmental
Sanitation: Implementing the Bellagio Principles in Urban
Environmental Sanitation. Provisional Guides for DecisionMakers. Dübendorf, Switzerland, EAWAG. http://www.
wsscc.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/EAWAG_House_
Centred_Environmental_Sanitation_2005.pdf
Elimelech, M. 2006. The global challenge for adequate
and safe water. Journal of Water Supply: Research and
Technology–AQUA, Vol. 55, No. 1, pp. 3–10.
EU (European Union). 2001. 2nd Forum on Implementation
and Enforcement of Community Environmental Law:
Intensifying Our Efforts to Clean Urban Wastewater.
Brussels, EU.
Foster, S., Lawrence, A. and Morris, B. 1998. Groundwater
in Urban Development: Assessing Management Needs
and Formulating Policy Strategies. World Bank Technical
Paper No. 390. Washington DC, World Bank. http://wwwwds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/
WDSP/IB/1998/03/01/000009265_3980429110739/
Rendered/PDF/multi_page.pdf
GoN/NTNC (Government of Nepal/National Trust for Nature
Conservation). 2009. Bagmati Action Plan (2009–2014).
Kathmandu, NTNC.
Gutterer, B., Sasse, L., Panzerbeiter, T. and Reckerzügel, T. 2009.
Decentralised Wastewater Treatment Systems (DEWATS) and
Sanitation in Developing Countries: A Practical Guide. A. Ulrich,
S. Reuter and B. Gutterer (eds). Loughborough, UK/Bremen,
Germany, WEDC, Loughborough University/BORDA. http://
www2.gtz.de/Dokumente/oe44/ecosan/en-sample-onlyborda-dewats-2009.pdf
Hiessl, H., Walz, R. and Toussaint, D. 2001. Design and
Sustainability Assessment of Scenarios of Urban Water
Infrastructure Systems. Karlsruhe, Germany, ISI.

438

CHAPTER 17

Khatri, K. B. and Vairavamoorthy, K. 2007. Challenges for
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation in the Developing
Countries. Discussion Draft Paper for the session on
Urbanization. Delft, the Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE.
Lange, G. M. and Jiddawi, N. 2009. Economic value of marine
ecosystem services in Zanzibar: Implications for marine
conservation and sustainable development. Ocean &
Coastal Management, Vol. 52, No. 10, pp. 521–32.
Lüthi, C., Panesar, A., Schütze, T., Norström, A. McConville,
J., Parkinson, J., Saywell, D. and Ingle, R. 2011. Sustainable
Sanitation in Cities: A Framework for Action. Rijswijk, the
Netherlands, Papiroz Publishing House. http://www.eawag.
ch/forschung/sandec/publikationen/sesp/dl/sustainable_
san.pdf
McKenzie, R. S., Wegelin, W. A. and Meyer, N. 2003. Water
Demand Management Cookbook. Nairobi/Pretoria/
Glenvista, South Africa, UN-HABITAT/WRP/Rand Water.
http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&
source=web&cd=1&sqi=2&ved=0CCUQFjAA&url=http%3A
%2F%2Fwww.unhabitat.org%2Fpmss%2FgetElectronicVers
ion.asp%3Fnr%3D1781%26alt%3D1&ei=-RvRTpSIOI6bOvDFeoE&usg=AFQjCNEVBq__0PZZQB3tv_1Rb8NtNElNtw&sig
2=zC_KmVtfz6dtR0n7VyPHxg
Misiunas, D. 2005. Failure Monitoring and Asset Condition
Assessment in Water Supply Systems. Ph.D. Thesis,
Lund University, Lund, Sweden. http://www.iea.lth.se/
publications/Theses/LTH-IEA-1048.pdf
Naber, H., Lange, G.-M. and Hatziolos, M. 2008. Valuation of
Marine Ecosystem Services: A Gap Analysis. Washington DC/
New York, World Bank/Columbia University. http://new.
cbd.int/marine/voluntary-reports/vr-mc-wb-en.pdf
Newman, P. and, Jennings, I. 2008. Cities as Sustainable
Ecosystems: Principles and Practices. Washington DC,
Island Press.
NMIP-DWSS (Nepal, National Management Information
Project, Department of Water Supply and Sewerage). 2011.
Nationwide Coverage and Functionality Status of Water
Supply and Sanitation in Nepal. Kathmandu, Government
of Nepal.
Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F. and Bartram, J. 2008. Safe
Water, Better Health: Costs Beneﬁts and Sustainability of
Investments to Protect and Promote Health. Geneva, WHO
(World Health Organization) . http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2008/9789241596435_eng.pdf
Sclar, E. D., Garau, P. and Carolini, G. 2005. The 21st century
health challenge of slums and cities. The Lancet, Vol. 365,
No. 9462, pp. 901–3.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

SEI (Stockholm Environmental Institute). 2008. The
sanitation crisis. EcoSanRes Factsheet 1. Stockholm, SEI.
http://www.ecosanres.org/pdf_ﬁles/ESR-factsheet-01.pdf
SSWM Toolbox (Sustainable Sanitation and Water
Management Toolbox). n.d. Website. Basel, Switzerland,
Seecon. http://www.sswm.info
Stecko, S., and Barber, N. 2007. Exposing Vulnerabilities:
Monsoon Floods in Mumbai, India. Case study prepared
for Global Report on Human Settlements 2007. Nairobi,
UN-HABITAT. http://www.unhabitat.org/downloads/docs/
GRHS.2007.CaseStudy.Mumbai.pdf
Sulabh International Social Service Organisation. n.d.
Avantages of Sulabh Toilets. New Delhi, Sulabh. http://www.
sulabhinternational.org/st/advantages_sulabh_toilets.php
(Accessed 22 November 2011.)
SWITCH. 2006. Managing water for the city of the future.
Website. Loughborough, U.K./Delft, the Netherlands,
Loughborough University/UNESCO-IHE. http://www.
switchurbanwater.eu (Accessed 5 December 2011.)
UN-DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs). 2005. World Population Prospects: The
2004 Revision (Analytical Report, Volume III No. ST/ESA/
SER.A/246). New York, UN-DESA.
––––. 2010. Website. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009
Revision: Percentage of Population Residing in Urban Areas
by Major Area, Region and Country, 1950–2050. New York,
UN-DESA. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/index.htm
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2002.
Environmentally Sound Technologies for Wastewater and
Stormwater Management: An International Source Book.
Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2007. Global Environment Outlook 4: Environment for
Development. Nairobi, UNEP.

WWDR4

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Agency for Human
Settlements). 2001. Slum population projection 1990-2020
(based on slum annual growth rate (1990-2001)). State
of the World’s Cities Report 2001. Nairobi, UN-HABITAT.
http://ww2.unhabitat.org/programmes/guo/documents/
Table4.pdf
––––. 2008. State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011. Cities for All:
Bridging the Urban Divide. London, Earthscan.
––––. 2011. Global Report on Human Settlements 2011:
Cities and Climate Change. London/Nairobi, Earthscan/
UN-HABITAT.
USEPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency).
2002. Website: U.S. Water Infrastructure Needs & the
Funding Gap. Washington DC, USEPA. http://water.epa.
gov/infrastructure/sustain/infrastructureneeds.cfm
(Accessed, 05 December 2011.)
Vairavamoorthy, K, Gorantiwar, S. D. and Mohan, S. 2007.
Intermittent water supply under water scarcity situations.
Water International. Vol. 32, No. 1., pp. 121–32.
WHO (World Health Organization) and UN-Water. 2010.
GLAAS 2010: UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of
Sanitation and Drinking Water: Targeting Resources for
Better Results. Geneva, WHO. http://www.unwater.org/
activities_GLAAS2010.html
WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation
and Drinking Water 2010 Update. Geneva/New
York, WHO/UNICEF. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2010/9789241563956_eng_full_text.pdf
Zhao, T. and Tseng, C.-L. 2003. A note on activity ﬂoats in
activity-on-arrow networks. Journal of the Operational
Research Society, Vol. 54, pp. 1296–99.

HUMAN SETTLEMENTS

439

CHAPTER 18
Managing water along the livestock
value chain

FAO and IFAD
—
Lead Authors Karen Frenken and Rudolph Cleveringa
Contributing Authors Melvyn Kay and Marisha Wojciechowska
Acknowledgements Reviewers: Jacob Burke (FAO), David Coates (CBD), Theodor
Friedrich (FAO), M. Gopalakrishnan (ICID), Amir Kassam (University of Reading, UK),
Willem-Jan Laan (Unilever), Lifeng Li (WWF), Jan Lundqvist (SIWI), David Molden (IWMI),
Daniel Renault (FAO), Antonio Rota (IFAD), Pasquale Steduto (FAO), Olaf Thieme (FAO),
David Tickner (WWF), Olcay Ünver (WWAP) and Richard Connor (WWAP)

© Photoshare/Gaurav Gaur

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Agriculture is a valid and essential consumer of water. Water is a limited resource, and
agriculture already accounts for 70% of water withdrawn by all three sectors (i.e. the
agricultural, municipal and industrial), and for 90% of water consumed by these three sectors.
Responsible agricultural water management will make a major contribution to future global
water security.
Water is the key to food security. Globally there is enough water available for future needs,
but access is uneven. Many areas of absolute water scarcity are home to the world’s poor.
Major changes in policy and management will be needed to make best use of available water
resources.
Most least developed countries (LCDs) experience highly variable climates, which add to
the uncertainties facing farmers. Climate change will make matters worse. Investment in
infrastructure and strong institutions will be essential to introduce measurement and control.
Water has a vital role in all links along the agricultural value chain – from production to
transformation, consumption, waste and reuse. The growing demand for water for livestock
products highlights this.
We need to be more ‘water smart’. We all have a responsibility to use this scarce resource
wisely, efficiently, and productively.

18.1 Water: A key role in agriculture

FIGURE 18.1

The link between water and food is simple. Crops and
livestock need water to grow, and lots of it. Producing 1
kg of rice, for example, requires about 3,500 L of water,
1 kg of beef requires some 15,000 L, and a cup of coffee
requires about 140 L (Hoekstra and Chapagain, 2008).
The average European diet requires about 3,500 L per
person per day, and an additional 2–5 L for drinking and
another 145 or so litres for cooking, cleaning, washing,
and ﬂushing. Some diets require even more water, for
example, a meat-rich diet can require over 5,500 L per
person per day. But all this is in stark contrast to the 1.4
billion people living in LDCs in extreme poverty (FAO,
2011e; IFAD, 2011) (Figure 18.1).1 Despite the historic shift
towards urbanization and the fact that urban poverty
is increasing rapidly, poverty still largely remains a rural
problem. Over 1 billion people rely on agriculture to secure their food and livelihoods on the equivalent of less
than 1,000 L of water per person per day.

Millions of rural people living in extreme poverty
(less than US$1.25 per day) by region

People [millions]
600

500

400

300

200

100

0
Closest

Closest

Closest

1988

1998

2008

East Asia

18.1.1 Water and food security
Food insecurity is a growing concern all over the world.
However, there is too little recognition that almost 70%
of the world’s freshwater withdrawals are already committed to irrigated agriculture (Figure 18.2 and
Table 18.1, see Table 18.2 for country groupings) and
that more water will be needed as the demand for

South Asia
South-East Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and North Africa

Source: IFAD (2011, ﬁg. 4, p. 49).

FIGURE 18.2
Water withdrawal by sector by region (2005)
Water withdrawal by sector (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Agricultural

Industrial

Least Developed
Countries

Western and
Central Europe

Eastern Europe
(incl. Russian Fed.)

Northern America

Central America
and Caribbean

Paciﬁc Islands

Southern America
(incl. Brazil)

East Asia
(incl. China)

Australia and
New Zealand

South-East Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Western Asia

Northern Africa

South Asia
(incl. India)

Central Asia

World

0

Municipal

Source: FAO (2011c).

442

CHAPTER 18

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

food grows. Agricultural water withdrawal accounts
for 44% of total water withdrawal in Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries, but this rises to more than 60% within the
eight OECD countries that rely heavily on irrigated
agriculture. In the BRIC countries (Brazil, Russian
Federation, India and China), agriculture accounts for
74% of water withdrawals, but this ranges from a low
20% in the Russian Federation to 87% in India. In LDCs
the ﬁgure is more than 90% (FAO, 2011c).

during the production phase (Table 18.3). The booming
demand for livestock products in particular is increasing the demand for water at every stage along the
livestock value chain, not just during production (see
Section 18.5). It is also affecting water quality, which in
turn reduces availability.
Although agriculture uses substantial volumes of water,
it is time to acknowledge that is also a valid and essential user. In many countries, not just in the LDCs, water
availability for agriculture is already limited and uncertain, and this is set to worsen. Several regions are already facing absolute water scarcity, where renewable

The agricultural sector as a whole has a large water
footprint when compared to other sectors, particularly

TABLE 18.1
Water withdrawal by sector and freshwater withdrawal by region (2005)
Continent

Total withdrawal by sector
Municipal
Regions km3/year

Africa

28
Northern Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa

Americas

Industrial
%

km3/year

km3/year

%

11

5.1

184 82.4

224

224

5.7

9 10.0

6

6.0

80 84.0

95

95

202.2

6

4.5

81.1

129

129

3.3

285 35.5

381 47.6

801

801

4.2

260 43.0

259 42.9

604

604

9.9

14.1

15 58.3

26

26

3.3

22 12.6

107 62.6

171

171

1.4

19

1.4

86

14.2

Central America and Caribbean

7 27.6

Southern America (incl. Brazil)

42 24.8

Asia

%

12.5

135 16.9
Northern America

Agricultural

Total
Freshwater
Total water freshwater
withdrawal
withdrawalw* withdrawal
as % of
IRWR**
km3/year
km3/year

4

105

227

9.0

242

9.6

2 057 81.4

2 526

2 521

21.5

Western Asia

25

9.4

20

7.2

227 83.4

272

269

55.5

Central Asia

6

3.6

8

4.9

150

91.5

164

163

61.8

South Asia (incl. India)

70

7.0

20

2.0

913 91.0

1 004

1 004

56.9

East Asia (incl. China)

93

13.7

149 22.0

436 64.4

677

677

19.9

South-East Asia

33

8.1

330 80.8

409

409

7.1

101

27.7

364

364

5.5

Europe
Western and Central Europe
Eastern Europe (incl. Russian Fed.)

46

11.2

72 19.8

191 52.5

52 21.0

131 52.5

66 26.6

250

249

11.8

60 52.6

35 30.2

115

115

2.6

20

17.2

5

16.7

3

9.5

20 73.8

27

27

3.1

Australia and New Zealand

5 16.6

3

9.5

20 73.9

27

27

3.3

Paciﬁc Islands

0.03 29.8

0.01 11.3

0.05 58.9

0.08

0.08

0.1

467 11.8

732 18.6

2 743 69.9

3 942

3 936

9.3

186 90.9

205

205

4.4

Oceania

World
Least Developed Countries

15

7.3

4

1.8

* Includes use of desalinated water.
** IRWR, internal renewable water resources (see Table 18.4).
Source: FAO (2011c).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

443

TABLE 18.2
Country groupings
Africa
Northern Africa
Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Uganda,
United Republic of Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Americas
Northern America
Canada, Mexico, United States of America
Central America and Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Grenada,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua, Panama, Puerto Rico, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Trinidad and Tobago
Southern America
Argentina, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, French Guiana (France), Guyana, Paraguay, Peru,
Suriname, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
Asia
Western Asia
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Georgia, Iraq, Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Occupied Palestinian
Territory, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
Central Asia
Afghanistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan
South Asia
Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka
East Asia
China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Japan, Mongolia, Republic of Korea
South-East Asia
Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Viet Nam
Europe
Western and Central Europe
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Faroe
Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, United Kingdom
Eastern Europe and Russian Federation
Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Ukraine
Oceania
Australia and New Zealand
Australia, New Zealand
Paciﬁc Islands
Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Niue, Palau, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu

444

CHAPTER 18

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Table 18.2 (continued from previous page)
OECD countries
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States of America
BRIC countries
Brazil, Russian Federation, India, China
Least developed countries (LDCs)
Afghanistan, Angola, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Kiribati,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Nepal, Niger, Rwanda, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, Sudan, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia

TABLE 18.3
Relative water footprints of various industry
sectors
Raw
Product
material
use/end
Direct
production Suppliers operations of life
Apparel
High-tech/
Electronics
Beverage
Food
Biotech/
Pharma
Forest
products
Metals/Mining
Electric
power/
Energy
Note: Water drops indicate the value chain segments that have
relatively high blue, green and grey water footprint intensities.
The water footprint is an indicator of water use that looks at both
direct and indirect water use of a consumer or producer. The water
footprint of an individual, community or business is deﬁned as the
total volume of freshwater that is used to produce the goods and
services consumed by the individual or community or produced by
the business.
Source: Morrison et al. (2009, p. 20).

WWDR4

water resources are below 500 m3 per person per year, or
are facing chronic water shortage (500–1,000 m3) or water stress (1,000–1,700 m3) (Figure 18.3 and
Table 18.4) (FAO, 2011c). By 2030 food demand is predicted to increase by 50% (70% by 2050) (Bruinsma,
2009) and energy demand from hydropower and other
renewable energy resources will rise by 60% (WWAP,
2009). These issues are interconnected – increasing
agricultural output for example, will substantially increase both water and energy consumption, leading to
increased competition for water between the different water using sectors. The main challenge facing the
agricultural sector is not so much growing 70% more
food in 40 years, but making 70% more food available
on the plate. Reducing losses in storage and along the
value chain may go a long way towards offsetting the
need for more production.
Despite these challenges, there are many reasons for
optimism. The world’s population has already shown
how resilient it can be. The large irrigation schemes
built in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the Indus valley fed many millions of people
who would have otherwise starved. In the second half
of the twentieth century world food production more
than doubled in response to a doubling of the population. Agricultural productivity rose steadily and irrigated agriculture was an important part of this success
story. The ‘green’ revolution in the 1960s and 1970s
lifted Asia out of an imminent hunger crisis although
the price was heavy in terms of water use, energy consumption and environmental degradation.
In the 1990s the importance of water ecosystem services became better recognized, as did the need for a

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

445

FIGURE 18.3
Renewable water resources per person in 2008
m3 per person
35,000

30,000

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

Australia and
New Zealand

Southern America
(incl. Brazil)

Eastern Europe
(incl. Russian Fed.)

Northern America

South-East Asia

Central America
and Caribbean

Sub-Saharan Africa

Western and
Central Europe

Central Asia

East Asia
(incl. China)

Western Asia

South Asia
(incl. India)

Northern Africa

World

0

Source: FAO (2011c).

balance between water for food, people, industry and
the environment. The response to this was a ‘greengreen’ revolution founded on the principles of environmental sustainability (Conway, 1997). This revolution
supported the development of ‘green infrastructure’ such as improving the health of rivers and their
catchments to ﬁlter pollutants, mitigate ﬂoods and
droughts, recharge groundwater and maintain ﬁsheries. Technologies that maintain and enhance such services also build resilience into water delivery systems
for people and for agriculture.
Although high food prices may not be popular, there
are beneﬁts. For poor farmers higher food prices can
mean increased farm incomes (provided they actually
receive a portion of the price increase) and for others
they focus attention on food losses and wastage. In
LDCs as much as half of crops produced are lost postharvest while in OECD countries as much as 40% of
food is wasted along the value chain and by consumers. Reducing these high losses would not only reduce
the demand to produce more crops at the farm gate

446

CHAPTER 18

by 2050 but also signiﬁcantly reduce the demand on
water resources required to grow them.
Many countries still have a large, untapped endowment
of rainfall that can be harnessed using conservation
farming practices, and supplementary irrigation has a
signiﬁcant role to play in those areas where there are
sufficient water resources.
18.1.2 Agriculture’s impact on water
Land use changes as a result of agriculture have produced a wide range of impacts on water quantity and
quality (Scanlon et al., 2007). Wetlands in particular have been affected. Poor water quality originating
from agricultural pollution is most severe in wetlands
in Europe, Latin America and Asia (Figure 18.4). The
status of species in freshwater and coastal wetlands
has been deteriorating faster than those of other ecosystems (MEA, 2005a).
The way that water is managed in agriculture has
caused wide-scale changes in ecosystems and

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

TABLE 18.4
Precipitation and renewable freshwater resources by region
Continent

Precipitation

Internal renewable freshwater resources

Depth
(mm/year)

Volume
(km3/year)

678

20 359

3 931

9.3

4 007

Northern Africa

96

550

47

0.1

286

Sub-Saharan Africa

815

19 809

3 884

9.2

4 754

1 088

43 887

19 238

45.4

20 927

Northern America

637

13 869

6 077

14.4

13 401

Central America and Caribbean

2 012

1 510

781

1.8

9 654

Southern America (incl. Brazil)

1 602

28 507

12 380

29.2

32 165

827

26 826

11 708

27.7

2 870

Western Asia

217

1 423

484

1.1

1 632

Central Asia

273

1 270

263

0.6

3 020

South Asia (incl. India)

1 062

4 755

1 765

4.2

1 125

East Asia (incl. China)

634

7 453

3 410

8.1

2 204

South-East Asia

2 405

11 925

5 786

13.7

9 957

544

12 507

6 569

15.5

9 102

Western and Central Europe

827

4 045

2 120

5.0

4 123

Eastern Europe (incl. Russian Fed.)

467

8 462

4 449

10.5

21 430

586

4 733

892

2.1

33 469

Australia and New Zealand

574

4 598

819

1.9

32 366

Paciﬁc Islands

2 062

135

73

0.2

54 059

809

108 312

42 338

100.0

6 292

Regions
Africa

Americas

Asia

Europe

Oceania

World

Volume
(km3/year)

% of world’s
freshwater resources

Per capita in
year 2008 (m3)

Source: FAO (2011c).

undermined the provision of a wide range of ecosystem services. Water management for agriculture has
changed the physical and chemical characteristics of
freshwater and coastal wetlands and the quality and
quantity of water, as well as direct and indirect biological changes in terrestrial ecosystems. The external cost
of the damage to people and ecosystems and clean-up
processes from the agricultural sector is signiﬁcant. In
the United States of America (USA) for instance the
estimated cost is US$9–20 billion per year (cited in
Galloway et al., 2007).
Diffuse pollution from agricultural land continues to
be of critical concern throughout many of the world’s
river basins. Eutrophication from agricultural runoff
ranks among the top pollution problems in the USA,
Canada, Asia and the Paciﬁc. Australia, India, Pakistan

WWDR4

and many parts of the arid Middle East face increasing salinization as a result of poor irrigation practices
(MEA, 2005b). Nitrate is the most common chemical
contaminant in the world’s aquifers and mean nitrate
levels have increased by about 36% in global waterways since 1990. According to data available in FAO
(2011d), the USA is currently the country consuming
the largest amounts of pesticides, followed by countries in Europe, especially those of Western Europe. In
terms of use per unit of cultivated area, Japan is the
most intensive user of pesticides. Over-abstraction
of renewable groundwater resources and abstraction
of fossil groundwater reserves in arid Northern Africa
and the Arabian Peninsula, driven primarily by the
agricultural sector, is putting irreconcilable pressures
on water resources.

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

447

FIGURE 18.4
Wetlands water quality state changes by continent
%
80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0
Africa
Eutrophication

Asia
Agricultural pollution

Europe

Neotropics

North America

Oceania

Water quality lowered

Average eutrophication and quality

Average agricultural pollution

Source: FAO (2008b, p. 50).

In 2005, global conversion of forests (primarily to agricultural land) was estimated to be about 13 million ha
per year, and these land cover changes also account
for 20% of green house gas (GHG) emissions (Bellarby
et al., 2008). South and South-East Asia and Southern
and Central America have the highest net carbon ﬂux
to the atmosphere (Houghton, 2008). Such land cover
changes can increase runoff, increase sediment and
nutrient ﬂows, increase ﬂoods, reduce groundwater recharge, and reduce biodiversity.
Almost 12% of the global land cover is now under cultivation with cropland covering more than 50% of the
land in countries such as India and Bangladesh, and
more than 30% in large parts of Europe (Table 18.6)
(FAO, 2011d).

đƫ the irrigated area can be expanded somewhat, but
it is more important to increase the yield, increase
cropping intensities and improve production systems, such as the system of rice intensiﬁcation;
đƫ the rainfed agriculture area can also be somewhat
expanded but again it is more important to increase
productivity and improve farming systems using
sustainable crop production intensiﬁcation technologies, such as conservation agriculture, integrated
pest management and integrated plant nutrition
management;
đƫ reduce post-harvest, transformation, and consumption losses (see Section 18.5).

TABLE 18.5
Net changes in major land use (million ha)

Between 1961 and 2008, the cultivated area increased
by 12%, from 1,368 million ha to 1,527 million ha, and it
is all attributable to a net increase in irrigated cropping
(Table 18.5).
However, there are also many ways in which agriculture can mitigate these pollution and degradation
problems. For example:

448

CHAPTER 18

1961

2008

Net
increase

Cultivated land

1 368

1 527

12%

Rainfed

1 229

1 223

–0.5%

Irrigated

139

304

119%

Sources: FAO (2011c, 2011d).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

18.2 Managing water resources in agriculture
Do we have enough water (and land) and human
capacity to produce the food for a growing population over the next 50 years? The simple answer is ‘yes,
there is enough’ but only if we act now to improve water use in agriculture (Comprehensive Assessment of
Water Management in Agriculture, 2007).

up in the sea; forestry, grazing lands, ﬁsheries, and biodiversity consume 57%; our towns, cities, and industry
consume just 0.1% (110 km3); while agriculture, including both rainfed and irrigated cropping, consumes
7% (7,130 km3) (Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture, 2007), of which only 990
km3 per year is consumed in the OECD countries.

Only a small percentage of the world’s freshwater is
readily available for us to use. Of the 110,000 km3 of
rain falling annually on the earth’s surface, 36% ends

The annual global agricultural water consumption includes crop water consumption for food, ﬁbre and feed
production (transpiration) plus evaporation losses from

TABLE 18.6
Population, areas and gross domestic product (GDP) by region
Continent

Population

Area

GDP

Area
cultivated
Total
Value
per person
area
% of
added
Per
Total area as % of Culti- economiceconomicworld vated ally active in capita by agriof the
Total
ally active
area (2008) agriculture (2008) culture
country
(2008) Density
population
1000 inh
inh/
active in
1000 ha
%
%
ha
US$/
%
km2 agriculture
capita
Regions
Africa

981 043

33

54 3 004 590

22

8

1.2

1 592

16

Northern Africa

163 969

29

24

575 289

4

5

2.0

3 434

11

Sub-Saharan Africa

817 074

34

59 2 429 301

18

9

1.2

1 222

18

919 269

23

10 4 032 189

30

10

8.8 21 657

2

Northern America

453 480

21

5 2 178 056

16

12

23.1 36 805

1

Central America and Caribbean

80 900

108

75 069

1

20

1.9

3 820

7

Southern America (incl. Brazil)

384 889

22

14 1 779 064

13

7

4.9

7 574

7

4 079 924

126

52 3 242 111

24

17

0.5

3 805

8

Western Asia

296 556

45

21

656 650

5

10

2.9

8 242

6

Central Asia

87 214

19

31

465 513

3

8

3.5

2 272

12

South Asia (incl. India) 1 568 227

350

53

447 884

3

46

0.6

970

18

East Asia (incl. China) 1 546 824

132

56 1 176 232

9

11

0.3

6 413

6

581 103

117

48

495 832

4

20

0.7

2 481

12

721 700

31

6 2 300 705

17

13

12.8 29 026

2

Western and Central Europe

514 081

105

488 872

4

26

9.7 36 777

2

Eastern Europe (incl. Russian Fed.)

207 619

11

9 1 811 833

14

9

16.8

9 434

5

26 659

3

7

807 440

6

6

45.8 41 975

4

Australia and New Zealand

25 304

3

5

800 893

6

6

71.6 45 286

4

Paciﬁc Islands

1 355

21

41

6 547

0

10

1.7

2 847

16

6 728 595

50

41 13 387 035

100

11

1.2

8 813

4

816 782

39

66 2 079 489

16

8

0.7

616

24

Americas

Asia

South-East Asia
Europe

Oceania

World
Least Developed Countries

24

5

Source: FAO (2011c, with data from UN Population Division, FAOSTAT and World Bank World Development Indicators).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

449

the soil and from open water associated with agriculture
such as rice ﬁelds, irrigation canals and reservoirs. Only
about 20% of the total 7,130 km3 of agriculture’s annual
water consumption is ‘blue water’ – that is water from rivers, streams, lakes and groundwater for irrigation purposes. Although irrigation is only a modest part of agricultural water consumption, it plays a crucial role, accounting
for more than 40% of the world’s production on less than
20% of the cultivated land.
However, global water resource assessments hide the
large differences in water availability across the world.
Some regions, such as the more northern latitudes and
the wet tropics, have more than enough water, whereas the drier semi-arid and arid regions have too little.

Unlike other resources, water cannot be moved across
continents in any signiﬁcant quantities except when it
is embedded in food products.
Predicting future water demand for agriculture is fraught
with uncertainty. Future demand for water in this sector
is in part inﬂuenced by demand for food, which in turn
depends partly on the number of people needing to be
fed, and in part on what and how much they eat. This is
complicated by, amongst other factors, uncertainties in
seasonal climatic variations, efficiency of agriculture production processes, crop types and yields.
The world population is predicted to grow from 6.9 billion in 2010 to 8.3 billion in 2030 and 9.1 billion in 2050

TABLE 18.7
Pressure on water resources due to irrigation
Continent

Renewable
Precipitation water resources
(km3)
Regions
(mm)
Year

Africa

Irrigation water
Water
withdrawal
requirement
(km3)
ratio (%)
2008

Pressure on water
resources due to
irrigation (%)

2008

2008

678

3 931

48

184

5

Northern Africa

96

47

69

80

170

Sub-Saharan Africa

815

3 884

30

105

3

1 088

19 238

41

381

2

Northern America

637

6 077

46

259

4

Central America and Caribbean

2 012

781

30

15

2

Southern America

1 602

12 380

28

107

1

827

11 708

45

2 057

18

Western Asia

217

484

47

227

47

Central Asia

273

263

48

150

57

South Asia

1 062

1 765

55

913

52

East Asia

634

3 410

37

436

13

South-East Asia

2 405

5 786

19

330

6

544

6 569

48

101

2

Western and Central Europe

827

2 120

43

56

3

Eastern Europe (incl. Russian Fed.)

467

4 449

67

35

1

586

892

41

20

2

Australia and New Zealand

574

819

41

20

2

Paciﬁc Islands

2 062

73

-

0.05

-

809

42 338

44

2 743

6

Americas

Asia

Europe

Oceania

World

*The water requirement ratio is the ratio between the irrigation requirement and irrigation water withdrawal.
** Pressure on water resources due to irrigation is the ratio between irrigation water withdrawal and renewable water resources.
Sources: Adapted from FAO (2011a) and FAO (2011c).

450

CHAPTER 18

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

(DESA, 2009). But these ﬁgures hide the fact that the
population in some countries, particularly in subSaharan Africa and South Asia, will continue to grow
while in high income countries the population will
decline. By 2050 about 7.5 billion people will be living
in low and middle income countries, with 1.5 billion in
sub-Saharan Africa and 2.2 billion in South Asia.

2008 to 2050. This is expected to increase by about
5% the present water withdrawal for irrigation of 2,740
km3 (Table 18.7). Although this seems a modest increase, much of it will be in regions already suffering
water scarcity (FAO, 2011a).
In semi-arid environments the amount of rainfall used
for cropping is relatively small. Hence in these areas,
better use of rainfall is needed by integrating soil and
water management – focused on soil fertility, improved
rainfall inﬁltration and water harvesting – to reduce
water losses, improve yields and raise the overall water
productivity of rainfed systems. The strategy is to get
‘more crop per drop’.

Although projections vary considerably based on different scenario assumptions and methodologies, future global agricultural water consumption (including
both rainfed and irrigated agriculture) is estimated to
increase by about 19% to 8,515 km3 per year in 2050
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture, 2007). The Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) estimates
an 11% increase in irrigation water consumption from

Globally, irrigated crop yields are about 2.7 times those
of rainfed farming, hence irrigation will continue to

TABLE 18.8
Evolution of area equipped for irrigation, groundwater irrigation and percentage of cultivated land
Continent

Total area equipped for irrigation
(1000 ha)
Regions
Year

Africa

1970

1990

2008

By groundwater
Area

% of total

2008

2008

Total irrigation as % of
cultivated land
1970

1990

2008

8 429

10 990

13 445

2 506

19

4.6

5.4

5.4

Northern Africa

4 376

5 131

6 340

2 092

33

18.4

19.2

22.6

Sub-Saharan Africa

4 053

5 859

7 105

414

6

2.6

3.3

3.2

26 609

38 381

44 002

21 548

49

7.2

9.9

11.1

Northern America

20 004

27 218

31 826

19 147

60

6.7

9.0

12.6

Central America and Caribbean

932

1 669

1 739

683

39

8.0

12.0

11.5

Southern America (incl. Brazil)

5 673

9 494

10 437

1 717

16

6.3

8.7

8.2

116 031

168 195

222 269

80 582

36

23.3

30.3

41.0

Western Asia

11 025

19 802

23 347

10 838

46

17.2

30.0

36.3

Central Asia

7 971

13 366

14 518

1,149

8

15.2

25.9

36.8

South Asia (incl. India)

45 048

66 856

93 140

48 293

52

22.8

32.7

45.6

East Asia (incl. China)

42 894

53 299

68 491

19 331

28

38.5

37.4

51.6

South-East Asia

9 093

14 872

22 773

971

4

12.2

18.8

22.4

15 259

25 908

21 856

7 350

34

4.6

8.1

7.5

Western and Central Europe

10 844

17 635

16 221

6 857

42

7.4

12.7

13.0

Eastern Europe (incl. Russian Fed.)

4 415

8 273

5 635

493

9

2.4

4.6

3.4

1 588

2 113

2 833

950

34

3.5

4.1

6.2

Australia and New Zealand

1 587

2 112

2 830

949

34

3.5

4.2

6.3

Paciﬁc Islands

1

1

3

1.00

33

0.2

0.2

0.5

167 916

245 587

304 405

112 936

37

11.8

16.1

19.9

Americas

Asia

Europe

Oceania

World

Sources: FAO (2011c), FAO (2011d) and Siebert et al. (2010).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

451

play an important role in food production. The area
equipped for irrigation increased from 170 million ha
in 1970 to 304 million ha in 2008 (Table 18.8). There
is still the potential for expansion, particularly in subSaharan Africa and Southern America, in places where
there is sufficient water available. Pathways to improve
productivity and bridge the yield gap in irrigation are:
increasing the quantity, reliability and timing of water
services; increasing the beneﬁcial use of water withdrawn for irrigation; and increasing agronomic or economic productivity so that more output is obtained per
unit of water consumed (FAO, 2011a).
In most LDCs, new institutional structures will be needed which enable governments to centralize responsibilities for water regulation yet decentralize water management responsibility and increase user ownership and
participation. Data collection and synthesis for water
resources planning will need to be strengthened, and
so too will the communication between government
departments which have overlapping responsibilities for
water management. The need is to try and achieve integrated water resources management (IWRM).
Recognizing the local nature of water management
will also be important, as will be the need to signiﬁcantly increase water productivity and adjust water
allocations to meet changing societal habits (FAO,
2009a). The effectiveness of existing agricultural water
consumption can also be greatly improved by reducing the signiﬁcant quantities of crops lost in post-harvest stores in LDCs and reducing the large amounts of
food waste along the value chain in OECD and BRIC
countries.
Virtual water trading may also play an increasing role
in the future. This means growing food in water-rich
places and exporting it (with the water embedded
in its production) to water-scarce countries. This is
already happening in the Middle East, although only
15% of the world’s farm output in terms of embedded
water is traded internationally (Allan, 2011). However,
the concept of virtual water as a means of framing
economic and trade policy is questioned by some
(Wichelns, 2010). One of the main constraints is the
low purchasing power in countries facing the largest
growth in food demand and this is likely to remain so
for the foreseeable future. Evidence from the recent
rise in commodity prices suggests that countries are
quick to raise export tariffs of staple crops as soon as
national food security is threatened.

452

CHAPTER 18

18.3 Uncertainties and risk management
There are many risks and uncertainties about future
water availability for agriculture, and these are greatest in the drought prone low income countries whose
GDP is dependent on agriculture. The economic performance in many LDCs is closely linked to rainfall, but
there are many other issues that add to the risks and
uncertainties created by climate.
18.3.1 A new ‘rurality’ in least developed countries
Most LDC governments look to their rural communities
to produce more agricultural products but those same
communities are impoverished, their productivity is low,
as is their resource use efficiency. Their burden is made
worse by the changing nature of rural life – known as
the new ‘rurality’ (Rauch, 2009). Globalization is transforming the marketplace; new patterns of poverty are
emerging as livelihoods adjust; reforms in governance
and rural service systems are changing the nature of
institutions. All these issues create uncertainty and risk
and are likely to have a disproportionate impact on the
rural poor and their ability to access and make good use
of limited water resources.
18.3.2 Climate change
Agriculture contributes to climate change through its
share of GHG emissions, which in turn is affecting the
planet’s water cycle and adding another layer of uncertainties and risks to food production. Climate change
impacts are mainly experienced through the water regime in the form of more severe and frequent droughts
and ﬂoods, with anticipated effects on the availability
of water resources through changes in rainfall distribution, soil moisture, glacier and ice/snow melt, and river
and groundwater ﬂows. These climate change-induced
hydrological changes are likely to affect both the extent
and productivity of irrigated and rainfed agriculture
worldwide, hence adaptation strategies will focus on
minimizing the overall production risk (FAO, 2011b).
Agriculture is the largest contributor to global non-CO2
GHG emissions (59% in 1990, 57% forecasted for 2020)
(US-EPA, 2006). The agricultural sector contributes
both directly (methane from cattle enteric fermentation, rice production, etc.) and indirectly (conversion of
land to agriculture, fossil fuel use on farms, production
of agro-chemicals, etc.) to GHG emissions. The sector
directly contributes 14% of global annual GHG emissions and indirectly contributes an additional 4–8%
(from forest clearing for rangeland and arable development) (FAO, 2011b). The most common GHGs from the

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

agricultural sector – nitrous oxide (N2O) and methane
(CH4) gases – emanate primarily from agricultural soils
(N2O) and livestock (CH4 from enteric fermentation, i.e.
belching) (Figures 18.5 and 18.6).
In 1990, the OECD countries, China, the Former Soviet
Union countries, Latin America and Africa accounted
for more than 80% of N2O emissions from agricultural soils. By 2020, OECD countries’ agricultural soil
emissions are expected to decrease and contribute
23% of global emissions (compared to 32% in 1990).
Expected increases in crop and livestock production
elsewhere portend that Central, South and East Asia’s
and Eastern Europe’s agricultural soil emissions will
grow more than 50%, and soil emissions from Africa,
Latin America and the Middle East will grow over 100%.
Globally, CH4 emissions from livestock digestion are
forecasted to grow, and while most OECD countries’
livestock enteric fermentation emissions are expected to decrease somewhat overall (–9%), China, Brazil,
India, USA and Pakistan are predicted to be the top
emitters in this category by 2020 (US-EPA, 2006).

Agriculture also offers signiﬁcant mitigation potential
which can be realized through a variety of site-speciﬁc
options spanning from measures and practices aimed
at reducing emissions, enhancing removals,
and/or avoiding (or displacing) emissions. Estimates
suggest that the total biophysical mitigation potential
from agriculture could be 5,500–6,000 megatonnes
CO2-equivalent per year which, if fully reached, could
offset about 20% of total annual CO2 emissions
(Smith et al., 2008). Speciﬁcally, crop and grazing
land management, restoring the carbon content of
cultivated organic soils and restoring degraded lands
provide the most signiﬁcant mitigation potentials in
agriculture, followed by improved water and rice
management, land use changes (i.e. conversion of
cropland to grassland) and agro-forestry, and improved livestock and manure management
(Smith et al., 2007)
In terms of the impacts, ﬂoods and droughts are increasing in incidence and severity, and this trend is
predicted to continue in the future. Recent evidence

FIGURE 18.5
Sources of agricultural greenhouse gases excluding land use change

2128

1792
672

369

616
158

410
CO 2
CH 4+ N 2O

413

CO 2

CH 4

CO 2 + N 2O
N 20
CH 4

CH 4 + N20

Fertilizer
production

Biomass
burning

Rice
production

Farm
machinery

Irrigation

Nitrous oxide
from fertilized soils
Manure
Methane from
cattle enteric
fermentation

Source: Bellarby et al. (2008 ﬁg. 2, p. 7).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

453

forecasts that the Mediterranean basin and the semiarid areas of the Americas, Australia, and Southern
Africa will experience reductions in river runoff and
aquifer recharge, affecting water availability in these
already water-stressed regions. In Asia, changes in
runoff patterns from snowmelt and high mountain glaciers will affect downstream dependent irrigated lands,
as well as the highly populated Asian deltas, from a
combination of reduced inﬂows, increased salinity and
rising sea levels. Worldwide, the rising temperatures
will increase crop water demand (FAO, 2011b).

As climate variability has a direct impact on crop yields
– mainly in terms of precipitation, temperature increases and water availability – adaptive management
practices and systems need to build in ﬂexibility which
allows for adaptation in the agricultural sector. As a
result, climate change research in most OECD countries for instance focuses primarily on examining the
implications for agricultural production, such as forecast changes in regional rainfall and water availability,
and on analysing the efficiency of farm practices under
various climate change scenarios.

Climate change will also affect groundwater and this
in turn will affect the vulnerability of women in many
countries. Since the burden of collecting water for
household purposes often falls on the women, lowering groundwater levels and increasingly depleted
water sources result in women having to walk longer
and longer distances to fetch water, thus taking away
time from agricultural activities and exposing themselves to a variety of dangers (FAO, 2010).

For water, options to adapt to the changes are a combination of improved supply management (adapting storage capacity) and demand management – to reduce
groundwater overuse, promote more efficient conjunctive use and raise water productivity (FAO, 2011a).

It is predicted that South Asia and Southern Africa
will be the most vulnerable to climate change-related food shortages by 2030 (Lobell et al., 2008).
Their populations are food insecure because they are
highly dependent on growing crops in ecosystems
that display high vulnerability and consequences to
climate change projections of temperature and precipitation changes.

18.3.3 Food, economy and energy crises
The food price crisis, followed shortly by the 2009 economic crisis, has had tragic consequences for world
hunger. Food prices are signiﬁcantly higher than they
were in 2006. Although the factors which led to this increase in food prices were said to be temporary – such
as drought in wheat-producing regions, low food stocks
and soaring oil barrel prices that drove up the price of
fertilizers – food prices in 2011 had not yet returned to
their pre-2006 levels. Poor women shoulder the brunt
of economic crises and women with less education tend
to increase their work participation more in times of crisis in almost every region of the world (FAO, 2009b).
The demand for biofuels has soared in recent years.
Substantial amounts of maize in the USA, wheat and
rapeseed in the European Union (EU), oil palm in parts
of sub-Saharan Africa and South and South-East Asia,
and sugar in Brazil, are being raised for ethanol and
biodiesel production. In 2007, biofuel production was
dominated by the USA, Brazil, and to a lesser extent,
the EU. Biomass and waste represented 10% of the
world’s primary energy demand in 2005, more than
nuclear (6%) and hydro (2%) jointly (IEA, 2007).

FIGURE 18.6
Total greenhouse gas emissions from the
agricultural sector by source
Emissions (MtCO2eq)
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0
1990

1995

2000

Agricultural soils
Other agricultural

Source: US-EPA (2006).

454

CHAPTER 18

2005

2010

Enteric fermentation
Manure management

2015

2020
Year

Rice cultivation

If a projected bio-energy supply of 6,000–12,000 million
tonnes of oil equivalent were to be reached in 2050,
this would take up one-ﬁfth of the world’s agricultural
land (IEA, 2006).2 Biofuels are also water intensive and
can add to the strain on local hydrological systems and
GHG emissions. Irrigated biofuels already consume just
under 2% of all irrigation water withdrawals (about 44
km3) (FAO, 2008a) (Table 18.9). For instance, it was

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

estimated that 1 litre of ethanol produced in the irrigated south-western part of Nebraska in the USA requires
about 415 L of water (Varghese, 2007). In Brazil water
pollution associated with biofuel production, the application of fertilizers and agro-chemicals, soil erosion,
and sugarcane washing procedures are major concerns.
18.3.4 Land acquisitions and land use changes
Land use is changing because of the rising international phenomenon of land acquisition, which will in turn
impact on water use. Since 2007 some OECD and BRIC
countries’ sovereign funds and investment companies
have bought or leased large tracts of farmland across
Africa, Latin America and Asia in order to secure their
fuel and food requirements. This was triggered by the
fuel crisis and the demand for biofuels to replace petroleum-based products.

national integrated water resource and water efficiency
plans to national development plans in order to access
government and donor ﬁnance (GWP, 2009).
While there are established tools and instruments to
better manage water assets for agriculture, there are
many other seemingly unrelated issues that underpin
the overall challenges of water governance such as
fragile states, corruption, inequitable access to water
and land tenure rights. More so, agricultural water allocations sit within increasingly competing social–economic–environmental needs and priorities that drive
overall national security and development objectives, and which climate change-induced hydrological changes are set to exacerbate. Various subregional
initiatives have sprouted in recent years in a bid to
increase high-level political attention (hence investments) to water security issues, such as the African
Ministers’ Council on Water and the Asia–Paciﬁc Water
Forum. Local institutions nonetheless remain the frontline actors and here weak capacity and fragmentation
of water-related institutions remain as key concerns in
many regions.

Although there is still potential to increase the cropped
area, some 5–7 million ha (0.6%) of farmland is lost annually because of accelerating land degradation and urbanization, which takes agricultural land out of production and reduces the number of family farms as more
people move to the cities. Increasing population means
that the amount of cultivated land per person is declining sharply – from 0.4 ha in 1961 to 0.2 ha in 2005.

18.4 A new era in food and water
management?

18.3.5 Policy and governance
Improving productivity of irrigated agriculture and using
less water means transferring and adopting newer technologies and adapting equipment and processes to locally appropriate irrigation practices. This requires ﬁnancial
resources, but it also requires good policy and governance, and the links between them need to be given priority. For instance, there have been numerous efforts to link

When water is scarce it is no longer enough to just
think about the amount of water we need to grow
food (Lundqvist et al., 2008), we must also look at
the way water is used along the entire value chain
from production to consumption and beyond
(Figure 18.7). This is particularly true for the more industrialized countries, and also to some extent in the
towns and cities of the BRIC countries, where food
increasingly comes from many different sources, often

TABLE 18.9
Water requirements for biofuel crops

Crop

Annual
obtainable
fuel yield

Energy
yield

Evapotranspiration
equivalent

Potential
crop evapotranspiration

Rainfed
crop evapotranspiration

(L/ha)

(G/ha)

(L/litre fuel)

(mm/ha)

(mm/ha)

Irrigated crop water
requirement
(mm/ha)*

(L/litre fuel)

Sugar cane

6 000

120

2 000

1 400

1 000

800

1 333

Maize

3 500

70

1 357

550

400

300

857

Oil palm

5 500

193

2 364

1 500

1 300

0

0

Rapeseed

1 200

42

3 333

500

400

0

0

* On the assumption of 50% irrigation efficiency.
Source: FAO (2008a).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

455

FIGURE 18.7
Water use along the value chain, from production
to recycling

Freshwater in to dilute pollution

Rainfed, irrigated,
post harvest

Nutrient and wastewater
recycling

losses

Recycling Production

Consumption Transformation

Freshwater in
Food waste – lifestyle and diet

Freshwater in;
point pollution out

BOX 18.1
‘It is distressing to note that so much time is being devoted to the culture of the plant, so much money spent on
irrigation, fertilization and crop protection measures only
to be wasted about a week after harvest’ (FAO, 1981).

over long distances, and in some cases from many different countries. Food security is threatened by the
potential for waste as agricultural products move along
extensive value chains and pass through many hands
– farmers, transporters, store keepers, food processors,
shopkeepers and consumers – as it travels from ﬁeld to
fork. Food can be wasted at every step along the value
chain and this means that the water used to produce
it is also wasted. All this is in sharp contrast to the past
when most food was produced and consumed locally,
which is still the case in most LCDs.
In some countries reducing water use is no longer
just about improving water productivity on the farm.
Water is used for cleaning, preparing, distributing and
consuming food. All these processes pollute the water
which then requires recycling prior to discharge or diluting to reduce contamination.
Water management has traditionally been the responsibility of governments, but major international food
companies are beginning to realize the importance
of water to their businesses, particularly where their
value chains are in water-short countries. Although
their concern may have more to do with customer
perceptions and security of proﬁts, there are potential

456

CHAPTER 18

knock-on beneﬁts for everyone as water is managed
with greater care. Initiatives to promote more efficient
use of water along the value chain include, for example, the CEO Water Mandate and the Alliance for Water
Stewardship.
We are clearly entering a new era of water management in which the links between water and other resources and the socio-economics of poor post-harvest
management (Box 18.1) and food waste along the
value chain are increasingly recognized.

18.5 Water use along the livestock value
chain
The livestock industry, which is growing rapidly, provides a good illustration of the challenges to the water–agriculture–supply chain nexus – how water is
used, consumed and polluted along the value chain as
animals are produced on the farm, transformed into
products, consumed, and the waste products recycled.
Livestock products are also an important part of the
global trade in food and so the industry also highlights the growing beneﬁts and concerns about water
footprints and the ‘exporting/importing’ of water and
pollution as meat and dairy products are shipped from
one country to another.
Livestock farming is one of the most important subsectors in agriculture, both socially and economically. It employs over 1.3 billion people across the world. It generates livelihoods for some 1 billion of the world’s poorest
people. However, livestock farming also contributes to
the most serious environmental problems – land degradation, climate change, air pollution, water scarcity and
pollution, and loss of biodiversity (FAO, 2006b).
The world food economy is being increasingly driven
by the shift in diets and food consumption patterns towards livestock products (FAO, 2006a). In 2008, about
3,350 million ha were under permanent meadows and
pasture – more than twice the area under arable cropping and permanent crops. Livestock provides not just
meat but also dairy products, eggs, wool, hides, and so
on. The livestock sector is now changing at an unprecedented pace as demand for food derived from animals has boomed in the world’s most rapidly growing
economies (FAO, 2006b). Livestock already contributes 40% of the global value of agricultural output. It
is one of the most dynamic parts of the agricultural
economy and is driven by population growth, rising afﬂuence, and urbanization.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

As the demand for livestock products grows, so too do
the concerns about its impact on the environment. The
expansion of land for livestock has led to deforestation
in some countries (e.g. Brazil) and intensive livestock
production (mainly in OECD countries) is already a major
source of pollution. Livestock contributes less than 2%
of global GDP and yet it produces some 18% of GHGs
(FAO, 2006b). Hence critics argue that the disbeneﬁts
far outweigh the beneﬁts that come from livestock, but
others argue that this seriously underestimates the economic and social importance of livestock, particularly in
low income countries. Regardless of the balance of these
arguments, the increasing demand for livestock seems
likely to continue. This means that resource use efficiency
in livestock production is now an urgent priority, and this
includes the management of water.
18.5.1 How the water ﬂows from ﬁeld to fork
Considering this global picture of livestock production
– including rapid growth, the shift in world livestock
output from high income to low income countries, the
changing patterns of international trade, and the potential for further growth in the sector – what are the
implications for water resources, now and in the future,
both in terms of water consumption and the industry’s
impact on water through pollution?
Livestock production – on the farm
All livestock require water for drinking, cooling and
cleaning, but the amount of water required differs according to the animal, the method of rearing and the
location. Extensive livestock systems can increase water demand because of the additional effort needed
as animals search for feed. Intensive or industrialized
systems, however, require additional service water for
cooling and cleaning facilities. Globally, the annual
drinking water requirement for livestock is about
16 km3, and servicing requires an additional 6.5 km3
(FAO, 2006b).

The amount of water used to grow feed and fodder is
much more signiﬁcant in volume terms. This amount
depends not just on the number and kinds of animals
and amount of food they eat but also where the food
is grown. It is estimated that livestock consumes about
2,000–3,000 km3 of water annually – as much as
45% of the global water embedded in food products
(Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture, 2007; Zimmer and Renault, 2003) – although
these estimates are quite imprecise. Whatever the
ﬁgure, the amount involved in producing livestock
products is substantial. Rainfed grasslands consume
most of this water, which is generally thought to be
of little environmental value. Some of the more
intensively managed grazing lands and cereal and
oilseed crops grown for feedstuffs may have alternative agricultural potential but they are mostly located
in water abundant areas.
Irrigation water volumes are much smaller but have an
important role in producing feed, fodder and grazing
for livestock and have a much greater opportunity cost
than rainfed cropping.3 There is no global estimate
available but the authors suggest that it could be 13%
of agricultural blue water consumption (Table 18.10) –
a ﬁgure which could rise in the future as the demand
for livestock products increases. This ﬁgure is based on
information available on irrigated feed, fodder crops
and pasture for the two main animal groups – monogastrics (pigs and poultry) and ruminants (beef and
dairy cows, buffalo).
Pigs and poultry are predominantly reared in intensive and industrially based production systems and
rely on concentrated feedstuffs made up of four
important crops – barley, maize, wheat and soybean (BMWS). Ruminants are mostly reared in extensive rainfed grazing systems though some rely
on irrigated pasture and fodder. In OECD countries

TABLE 18.10
Estimated global annual water consumption of grazing, fodder and feed production for livestock
Net evapotranspiration (km3 per year)

Item
1

Global water to meet current food demanda

7 130

2

Rainfed agriculturea (green water) – % of (1)

5 855 (82%)

3
6

b

Irrigated agriculture (blue water) – % of (1)
b

Irrigated feed, fodder and grazing – % of (3)

1 275 (18%)
160 (13%)

Sources: a CA (2007); b FAO (2011c).

WWDR4

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

457

an increasing number of dairy cows rely on manufactured compound feed, but the picture of what
percentages are irrigated or rainfed is complex.
Estimates are based on the FAO’s global information
system on water and agriculture (AQUASTAT), which
can be considered as minimum values due to incompleteness of the information (FAO, 2011c). United
States Department of Agriculture (2008) sources
suggest that some 16 million ha of permanent fodder
and pasture and 16 million ha of annual fodder and
feed is irrigated globally, consuming about 160 km3
of water. Bringing these data together, the global
irrigated evapotranspiration for livestock is estimated
to be about 13% (Table 18.10 and Figure 18.8).
Transformation
The slaughterhouse is the second largest user of water
in the meat processing value chain (after the production phase) and a potentially signiﬁcant point source
of pollution in local ecosystems and communities. The
source of water entering dairies and abattoirs depends
on the location. The most signiﬁcant water-related
issues with regards to slaughterhouse operations are
the use of large amounts of water; large quantities of
effluents and emissions of high organic strength
liquids into the water; and energy consumption from
refrigeration and water heating.
Hygiene standards in OECD countries typically require large quantities of freshwater at the abattoir to
be used mainly for watering and washing livestock,
cleaning equipment and work areas, and for washing

carcasses (Figure 18.9). Food safety and hygiene
standards have in fact been tightened in recent years
following occurrences of Salmonella, Listeria, and the
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or mad
cow disease) crisis. As a consequence, cleaning and
sterilization operations using hot water have been intensiﬁed, most likely driving up the volume of water
consumed at the slaughterhouse in many OECD countries (European Commission, 2005). For example, 46%
of water used in an Italian pig slaughterhouse is for
cleaning, and 56% of water used at a Danish poultry
slaughterhouse killing 25 million birds per year is used
for washing carcasses and chilling. Together, cleaning
and carcass washing can account for more than 80%
of total water use and effluent volumes (European
Commission, 2005).
In dairies, food safety and hygiene standards explain
that the bulk of water used is for cleaning, sanitizing
and pasteurization (Figure 18.10).
Water use also varies according to the type of animals
being slaughtered. In Denmark and Norway poultry
slaughtering requires the greatest water volumes and
generates the highest nutrient loads when compared
to slaughtering other animals (Table 18.11).
The ﬂoor area of the slaughterhouse also inﬂuences
water use, as does the size of the animals/birds and
slaughter methods, carcass dressing and cooling, and
automation.

FIGURE 18.8
Global annual water consumption for livestock grazing, fodder and feed production
Global net evapotranspiration 7,130 km3

Irrigated feed, fodder
and grazing

13%
Blue water

Irrigated
crops

18%

87%
Blue water use
Crops

47%

Green water

82%

Pasture

53%
Green water use

458

CHAPTER 18

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Meat processing effluents contain blood, fat, manure,
undigested stomach contents and cleaning detergents.
Capital and resource intensive wastewater treatment
infrastructure is required to treat such effluents which,
if left unchecked, will result in high biological oxygen
demand (BOD), suppression of sensitive aquatic species, odours, and other problems.
Consumption
Water is used during the consumption4 stage as food
passes through retailers and is packed and prepared
for eating by food processing companies and also in
the home. This adds to the burden of water pollution
as food is washed, cleaned and prepared.
The most serious aspect of food consumption in terms
of water use is food wastage. This is particularly the
case in industrialized countries where food is wasted
because too much perishable food is produced and
not sold, products deteriorate in storage, and food is
bought and not consumed and hence thrown away. All
this adds up to both a signiﬁcant waste of food and
also a signiﬁcant waste of the water used to produce it
(Lundqvist, 2010).
Recycling
Water recycling is needed at every stage of the value
chain. At the production stage, the increasing numbers

of livestock herds are signiﬁcant sources of pollution
(grey water). Livestock faeces are far more potent in
nutrient loadings than human excreta. Asia generates
about 35% of global annual livestock excretion of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P). Pig waste in Thailand, Viet
Nam and Guangdong (China) contributes more to water
pollution than domestic wastewater (Table 18.12). In the
USA the livestock sector is responsible for about 55%
of soil erosion, 32% of nitrogen loads, and 33% of potassium loads into freshwater resources. A further 37%
of pesticide use and 50% of the volume of antibiotics used come from the livestock sector (FAO, 2006b),
and all contribute to water pollution.
The growth in trade of livestock products is further
transforming meat production and environmental relationships. Major meat importing countries get the beneﬁt of the land and water use and nitrogen emissions
in the meat producing countries. Pig and chicken meat
imports into Japan, one of the world’s top feed and
meat importers, embody the virtual equivalent of 50%
of Japan’s total arable land. Furthermore, Japan’s meat
consumption, while annually releasing some 70,000
tonnes of nitrogen domestically, is estimated to leave
220,000 tonnes of nitrogen behind in meat exporting
countries (Galloway et al., 2007). Figure 18.11 illustrates
Japan’s nitrogen ﬂow in the pig and poultry trade and
shows that about 1.5 times more nitrogen loss occurs

FIGURE 18.9

FIGURE 18.10

Data for water consumption in a typical Italian pig
slaughterhouse

Typical water use by a market milk processor in
Australia

Cooling

Cooling
towers

12%
Operational
processes

Unloading and
Vehicle Wash

Cleaning

46%

6%

6%

4%

Other

3%

12%

7%

Manual
washing Trade
waste

Lairage

6%
Bleeding
Slaughter

1%

1%

Cleaning
place

Crate wash

16%

28%

Hide
Removal

13%
Chilling

Evisceration

1% Splitting 8%
5%
Source: European Commission (2005).

WWDR4

Pasteurization

25%
Source: UNEP (2004, p. 20).

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

459

TABLE 18.11
Water use and emission data in Danish and Norwegian slaughterhouses
Water use,
All values
per tonne of wastewater
(L)
carcass

BOD emission
(kg)

COD emission
(kg)

Suspended
solids emission
(g)

Phosphorus
emission
(g)

Nitrogen
emission
(g)

Cattle

1 623–9 000

1.8–28

4–40

172–1 840

24.8–260

11.2–15.9

Pig

1 600–8 300

2.14–10

3.22–10

180–2 100

20–233

0.12–5.1

Sheep

5 556–8 333

8.89

1 556

500

Poultry

5 070–67 400

2.43–43

560–4 652

26.2–700

4–41.0

48–700

Notes: Biological oxygen demand (BOD) is an indicator of water quality. Chemical oxygen demand (COD) measures the amount of organic
pollutants in surface water.
Source: Water-related data extracted from European Commission (2005).

TABLE 18.12
Estimated nitrogen and phosphorous emissions in water systems

Country/Province

Nutrient

Potential load
(tonnes)

Percentage contribution to nutrient emissions in water systems
Pig waste

Domestic wastewater

Non-point source

China-Guangdon

N
P

530 434
219 824

72
94

9
1

19
5

Thailand

N
P

491 262
52 795

14
61

9
16

77
23

Viet Nam

N
P

442 022
212 120

38
92

12
5

50
3

Source: FAO (2004).

in the exporting countries (mainly the USA) than at
home as a result of its large meat import volumes.
Some 36% of the 220,000 tonnes of nitrogen is in the
form of virtual nitrogen (nitrogen used in production
but not actually embedded in the livestock product).
This implies that high meat importing consumers enjoy the beneﬁts of livestock products without paying
the environmental costs of nitrogen emissions to local
groundwater and surface water and the local atmosphere. In Brazil, 15% of the virtual nitrogen left behind
is due to feed and meat exports to China (Galloway et
al., 2007).
18.5.2 More ‘protein per drop’
With an expected rise in the demand for animal products and a subsequent increase in pressure on freshwater resources, it is essential to get more protein per
drop of water used, particularly for blue water. Some
examples of how this can be achieved at each stage of
the livestock value chain are outlined below.

460

CHAPTER 18

đƫ Production: raising water productivity using sustainable crop production intensiﬁcation techniques for
managing soil fertility (increasing crop productivity
by incorporating both organic and inorganic plant
nutrients which prevent soil degradation and reduces nutrient loss); rainwater harvesting and storage.
đƫ Transformation: adopting cleaner practices that aim
to reduce water volumes and capture and treat nutrient-rich effluents; better storage facilities.
đƫ Consumption: increase consumer awareness campaigns to reduce food wastage.
đƫ Recycling: water, nutrient and waste recycling (including cascading systems reusing treated effluents
for adapted, safe uses) to close the value chain loops.
Innovative technical responses are only possible within
a context of locally-adapted policies, institutions and
incentives that promote productive land and water management solutions, along with investments,
and the steadfast pursuit of scientiﬁc research and
development.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 18.11
Nitrogen associated with the production of pigs and chickens in Japan

4
99
105
65
4

6 2 1

15 18
EU

10
2

2
10

2 2
Thailand

2

4

2

4 1
23 1

Japan

2
5

11

3 1
3

4
11

Notes: Bars refer to N left behind in the producing country during different stages of production. Green, feed; red, live animal production; blue,
meat processing. Arrows represent transfer of total N embedded in shipped product. Data are annual values in thousands of tonnes, averaged
over the years 2000–2002.
Source: Galloway et al. (2007, ﬁg. 2, p. 625), reproduced with permission from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

18.6 ‘Water smart’ food production
Some experts suggest that if everyone adopted a life
style similar to that normally experienced in OECD
countries then more than three ‘earths’ would be
needed to satisfy the resource requirements. This is a
bold claim but it does make the point that we cannot
continue to consume natural resources at the current
rate if we wish to use them sustainably for everyone’s
beneﬁt both now and in the future.
Water will need to be managed so that supply and
demand is balanced and shared across sectors and
across regions. This may mean reducing the amount
of water currently consumed to produce a reasonable
and nutritious diet. Improved ratio of crop productivity
to water use will be needed as will better ways to manage both green and blue water resources.
18.6.1 The role of technology
In higher income countries, science and technology
have long been major drivers of global prosperity. This
will undoubtedly continue in the future. Food production will need to be ‘greener’ and more sustainable so
that it does not add to the burden of climate change

WWDR4

and ecosystem deterioration. We will need innovative
technologies that can improve crop yields and drought
tolerance; produce smarter ways of using fertilizer and
water; improve crop protection through new pesticides
and non-chemical approaches; reduce post-harvest
losses; and create more sustainable livestock and
marine production. Industrialized countries are well
placed to take advantage of these technologies, but
they must also take responsibility to ensure that LDCs
have opportunities to access them.
18.6.2 Human capacities and institutions as assets
Agricultural development in LDCs is mainly in the
hands of smallholders, most of whom are women.
Water technologies appropriate to their needs will play
a crucial role in meeting the food security challenge.
However, in many LDCs, women have only limited access to a wide range of physical assets and lack the
skills to deploy them. Multiple water use schemes can
provide opportunities for women to extend their inﬂuence over water allocation and management.
Most industrialized countries are have the ﬁnancial resources, as well as the infrastructure, institutions and

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

461

capacity, to sustain the levels of water security they now
enjoy. However, perhaps they should be seeking more
sustainable water use per person in the interests of other
less industrialized countries. In contrast, LDCs will need
to seek ways of increasing water availability per person
and whether they can afford to emulate the strategies of
the more industrialized countries. There is a balance to be
struck between these two contrasting strategies.
Major changes in policy and management will be needed
to make best possible use of available water resources.
New institutional arrangements are needed which centralize the responsibility for water regulation yet decentralize water management responsibility and increase
user ownership and participation. New arrangements are
required for safeguarding access to water for poor and
disadvantaged groups, particularly women, and ensuring
they have long-term land and water security.
18.6.3 A focus on the value chain
Improvements will be needed all along the agricultural
value chains. Early gains include opportunities to reduce post-harvest crop losses in LDCs and food wastage in the higher income countries, and hence saving
the water embedded in them. In the medium term,
innovations in climate-smart cropping are possible. In
the longer term, energy-smart conversion of feed and
fodder for livestock is also possible. Water recycling at
all stages of the value chain will help to secure environmental water requirements when reuse of treated
water is not culturally acceptable for other uses.
In the high income countries, the focus will also be on
water pollution which ‘reduces’ freshwater availability. This includes reducing diffuse pollution (in production) and point source pollution (in transformation and
consumption).
18.6.4 Managing risk creatively
Reducing vulnerability to drought will require investment
in both constructed and ‘green’ infrastructure to improve
water measurement and control and, where appropriate, increase surface water and groundwater storage in
constructed reservoirs and in natural storage (both in
wetlands and in the soil). Most beneﬁt is expected to
come from existing water management technologies and
adapting them to new situations. ‘Design for management’, promoted in the 1980s to ensure infrastructure
design took account of who would manage it and how it
would be managed, is still highly relevant today and important for future water management.

462

CHAPTER 18

18.6.5 Virtual water trade
Virtual water may play an increasing role as water-rich
countries export water embedded in food to watershort countries that ﬁnd it increasingly difficult to grow
sufficient staple food crops. But the aqua-politics of
exporting/importing food versus self-sufficiency will
not be easy to resolve; food producing countries may
not wish to export crops when food security is threatened; lower income and least developed countries may
need to continue over-exploiting water resources to
feed their populations.
18.6.6 Implementing ‘water smart’ production
A twin-track approach is needed that makes best use
of available water – demand management options
that increase productivity (more ‘crop per drop’) and
supply management that makes more water available
through water storage to cope with seasonality and increasingly unpredictable rainfall.
For most LDCs the biggest question, which still remains largely unanswered, is how to do it. Even once
appropriate interventions for speciﬁc locations and
target groups are selected, it is challenging for governments and agencies to successfully intervene in
complex and changing agricultural water management
(AWM) systems that have speciﬁc technical, environmental, socio-economic and institutional issues. The
International Fund for Agricultural Development’s
learning and knowledge on innovations in water and
rural poverty (InnoWat) sets out a strategy for this –
the development pathway lies somewhere between
the paralysis that comes from trying to take account of
everything and the folly of focusing in on a single criterion solution.
Major investment in AWM will be needed, and the present-day national priorities in some countries do give
cause for serious concern. In 2010, it was estimated
that only US$10 billion was invested globally in irrigation systems, a surprisingly low ﬁgure given the importance of water for the agricultural sector (in comparison, the global market volume for bottled water in the
same year was US$59 billion) (Wild et al., 2010). Surely
it is time for the world to wake up to the fact that agriculture is a major, valid, consumer of water and investment is essential for the future of global food and
water security. When water is scarce we all have a responsibility to use water wisely, efficiently and productively. Responsible AWM can make a signiﬁcant contribution to future water security. Agriculture needs to be

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

much more water-smart and must be given the right
signals and incentives to make this happen.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Note
1

2

3

4

Least developed countries (LDCs)’ is a group of countries
which are identiﬁed as being particularly vulnerable, with a
low income level and a low index of human assets based on
nutrition, health and education (UNSD, 2006). A list of LDCs is
included in Table 18.2.
The International Energy Agency (IEA, 2006) mentions that
considering very rapid technological progress, the higher
ﬁgure could be 26,200 million tonnes of oil equivalent instead
of 12,000. However, IEA also indicates that a more realistic
assessment based on slower yield improvements would be
6,000–12,000. A mid-range estimate of around 9,500 would
require about one-ﬁfth of the world’s agricultural land to be
dedicated to biomass production.
Opportunity cost is the cost of any activity measured in terms of the
value of the best alternative that is not chosen (that is foregone).
No attempt is made here to closely deﬁne the word
‘consumption’ as food directly eaten by individuals and
contributing to their nutritional requirements. Rather it is used
here to describe in broad terms, the food purchased from retail
outlets which may include both food eaten and food wasted.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Allan, T. 2011. The water-food-trade nexus and global water
resource security. UK Irrigation, No. 37, pp. 21–22.
Bellarby, J., Foereid, B., Hastings, A. and Smith, P. 2008. Cool
Farming: Climate Impacts of Agriculture and Mitigation
Potential. Campaigning for Sustainable Agriculture.
Amsterdam, Greenpeace.
Bruinsma, J. 2009. The Resource Outlook to 2050: By How
Much do Land, Water and Crop Yields Need to Increase by
2050? Prepared for the FAO Expert Meeting on ‘How to
Feed the World in 2050’, 24-26 June 2009, Rome, FAO.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute.
Conway, G. 1997. The Doubly Green Revolution: Food for All in
the Twenty-ﬁrst Century. New York, Cornell University Press.
DESA (Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the
United Nations). 2009. World Population Prospects: The
2008 Revision, Highlights. Working Paper No. ESA/P/
WP.210, New York, DESA Population Division.

WWDR4

European Commission. 2005. Integrated Pollution Prevention
and Control. Reference document on best available
techniques in the slaughterhouses and animal by-products
industries.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 1981. Food loss prevention in perishable crops.
Agricultural Services Bulletin, No. 43. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2004. Livestock Waste Management in East Asia. Project
preparation report. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2006a. World Agriculture: Towards 2030/2050 Interim
Report. FAO, Rome.
––––. 2006b. Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental Issues
and Options. Steinfeld, H., Gerber, P., Wassenaar, T., Castel,
V., Rosales, M. and de Haan, C. Rome, FAO and LEAD.
––––. 2008a. The State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA) 2008.
Biofuels: Prospects, Risks and Opportunities. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2008b. Scoping agriculture-wetlands interactions:
towards a sustainable multi-response strategy. FAO Water
Report, No. 33. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2009a. The State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA) 2009:
Livestock in the Balance. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2009b.The State of Food Insecurity in the World (SOFI)
2009: Economic Crises – Impacts and Lessons Learned.
FAO, Rome.
––––. 2010. Farmers in a Changing Climate – Does Gender
Matter? Food Security in Andhra Pradesh, India. Y. Lambrou
and S. Nelson. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/
i1721e/i1721e.pdf
––––. 2011a. The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources
for Food and Agriculture: Managing Systems at Risk. Rome/
London, Land and Water Division, FAO/Earthscan.
––––. 2011b. Climate Change, Water and Food Security. FAO
Water Report, No. 36. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2011c. AQUASTAT online database. http://www.fao.org/
nr/aquastat (Accessed May 2011.)
––––. 2011d. FAOSTAT online database. http://faostat.fao.org/
(Accessed May 2011.)
––––. 2011e. The State of Food and Agriculture (SOFA)
2010–11. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap for
Development. Rome, FAO.
Galloway, J. N., Burke, M., Bradford, G. E., Naylor, R., Falcon,
W., Chapagain, A. K., Gaskell, J. C., McCullough, J., Mooney,
H. A., Oleson, K. L. L., Steinfeld, H., Wassenaar, T. and
Smil, V. 2007. International trade in meat: The tip of the
porkchop. AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment,
Vol. 36, No. 8., pp. 622–29.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2009. GWP in Action 2009:
Annual Report. Stockholm, Sweden, GWP.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Chapagain, A. K. 2008. Globalization of
Water: Sharing the Planet’s Freshwater Resources. Oxford,
UK, Blackwell Publishing Pty Ltd.

MANAGING WATER ALONG THE LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAIN

463

Houghton, R. A. 2008. Carbon ﬂux to the atmosphere from
land-use changes: 1850–2005. TRENDS: A Compendium
of Data on Global Change. Oak Ridge, Tenn., Carbon
Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2006. World Energy
Outlook 2006. Paris, IEA.
––––. 2007. World Energy Outlook 2007. Paris, IEA.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2011.
Rural Poverty Report. New Realities, New Challenges: New
Opportunities for Tomorrow’s Generation. Rome, IFAD.
Lobell, D. B., Burke, M. B., Tebaldi, C., Mastrandrea, M. D.,
Falcon, W. P., and Naylor R. L. 2008. Prioritizing climate
change adaptation needs for food security in 2030.
Science, Vol. 319, No. 5863, pp. 607–10.

UNEP (United Nations Environment Program). 2004. Ecoefficiency for the Dairy Processing Industry. Melbourne,
Australia, UNEP Working Group for Cleaner Production in
the Food Industry/Dairy Australia.
UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2006. Note on
Deﬁnition of Regions for Statistical Analysis. Prepared
by UNSD on 30 August 2006 (SA/2006/15) for the
eight session of the Committee for the Coordination of
Statistical Activities, Montreal, 4–5 September 2006.

Lundqvist, J. 2010. Producing more or Wasting Less. Bracing
the food security challenge of unpredictable rainfall.
L. Martínez-Cortina, G. Garrido and L. López-Gunn (eds),
Re-thinking Water and Food Security: Fourth Botín
Foundation Water Workshop. London, CRC Press, pp.
75–92.

USDA (United States Department of Agriculture). 2008.
Farm and Ranch Irrigation Survey (2008). 2007 Census of
Agriculture. National Agricultural Statistics Service. Issued
November 2009, Updated February 2010. Washington DC,
USDA.

Lundqvist, J., Fraiture, C. de, and Molden, D. 2008. Saving
Water: From Field to Fork – Curbing Losses and Wastage in
the Food Chain. SIWI Policy Brief. Stockholm, Stockholm
International Water Institute.
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005a.
Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis. Washington
DC, World Resources Institute.

US-EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency).
2006. Global Anthropogenic non-CO2 Greenhouse Gas
Emissions: 1990–2020. EPA 430-R-06-003. Washington
DC, US-EPA.
Varghese, S. 2007. Biofuels and Global Water Challenges.
IATP Reports. Minneapolis, Minn., Institute for Agriculture
and Trade Policy.

––––. 2005b. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Wetlands
and Water. Washington DC, World Resources Institute.
Morrison, J., Morikawa, M., Murphy, M. and Shulte, P. 2009.
Water Scarcity and Climate Change: Growing Risks for
Businesses and Investors. Boston, Mass./Oakland, Calif.,
Ceres/Paciﬁc Institute.
Rauch, T. 2009. The New Rurality – Its Implications for a New
Pro-poor Agricultural Water Strategy. InnoWat. Rome, IFAD.
Scanlon, B. R., Jolly, I., Sophocleous, M. and Zhang, L.
2007. Global impacts of conversions from natural to
agricultural ecosystems on water resources: Quantity
versus quality. Water Resources Research, Vol. 43, W03437,
doi:10.1029/2006WR005486
Siebert, S., Burke, J., Faures, J. M., Frenken, K., Hoogeveen,
J., Döll, P., and Portmann, F. T. 2010. Groundwater use for
irrigation - a global inventory. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences, Vol. 14, pp. 1863–80.
Smith, P., Martino, D., Cai, Z., Gwary, D., Janzen, H.,
Kumar, P., McCarl, B., Ogle, S., O’Mara, F., Rice, C.,
Scholes, B., Sirotenko, O., Howden, M., McAllister, T.,
Pan, G., Romanenkov, V., Schneider, U., Towprayoon, S.,
Wattenbach, M. and Smith, J. 2008. Greenhouse gas
mitigation in agriculture. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. Vol. 363, No. 1492,
pp. 789–813.

464

Smith, P., Martino, D., Cai, Z., Gwary, D., Janzen, H., Kumar,
P., McCarl, B., Ogle, S., O’Mara, F., Rice, C., Scholes, B. and
Sirotenko, O. 2007. Agriculture. B. Metz, O. R. Davidson,
P. R. Bosch, R. Dave, L. A. Meyer (eds), Climate Change
2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University
Press, pp. 499–540

CHAPTER 18

Wichelns, D. 2010. An Economic Analysis of the Virtual
Water Concept in Relation to the Agri-food Sector. Paris,
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD). doi:10.1787/9789264083578-8-en
Wild, D., Buffle, M. and Hafner-Cai, J. 2010. Water: A
Market of the Future. SAM Study 2010. Switzerland, SAM
Sustainable Asset Management.
World Bank. 2011. Online database. http://data.worldbank.org
(Accessed May 2011.)
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. The
United Nations World Water Development Report 3: Water
in a Changing World. World Water Assessment Programme.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
Zimmer, D. and Renault, D. 2003. Virtual water in food
production and global trade. Review of methodological
issues and preliminary results. A. Hoekstra (ed.),
Proceedings of the Expert Meeting on Virtual Water Trade.
Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. http://www.fao.org/
nr/water/docs/VirtualWater_article_DZDR.pdf

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 19
The global nexus of energy and water

UNIDO
—
Author Michael E. Webber
Acknowledgements This chapter includes signiﬁcant contributions from Carey King,
Ashlynn Stillwell and Kelly Twomey. The chapter was coordinated by Igor Volodin and
Carolina Gonzalez-Castro.

© Shutterstock/ded pixto

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Energy and water are inter-related; people use energy for water and water for energy.
The energy–water relationship is under strain, introducing cross-sectoral vulnerabilities (i.e. a
water constraint can become an energy constraint and an energy constraint can induce a
water constraint).
Trends imply that the strain will be exacerbated by:
đŏŏŏ#.+30$ŏ%*ŏ0+0(ŏ !)* ŏ"+.ŏ!*!.#5ŏ* ŏ30!.Čŏ .%2!*ŏ5ŏ,+,1(0%+*ŏ#.+30$Č
đŏŏŏ#.+30$ŏ%*ŏ,!.ŏ,%0ŏ !)* ŏ"+.ŏ!*!.#5ŏ* ŏ30!.Čŏ .%2!*ŏ5ŏ!+*+)%ŏ#.+30$Č
đŏŏŏ#(+(ŏ(%)0!ŏ$*#!Čŏ3$%$ŏ3%((ŏ %/0+.0ŏ0$!ŏ2%(%(%05ŏ+"ŏ30!.Čŏ*
đŏŏŏ,+(%5ŏ$+%!/Čŏ5ŏ3$%$ŏ,!+,(!ŏ.!ŏ/!(!0%*#ŏ)+.!ŏ30!.ġ%*0!*/%2!ŏ!*!.#5ŏ* ŏ)+.!ŏ
energy-intensive water.
Policy options are available to decision-makers to improve energy and water supplies without
compromising either resource.

19.1 Introduction
Energy and water are fundamental ingredients of modern civilization and precious resources. They are key
inputs to agricultural systems, factories and buildings,
and are necessary to meet human requirements for
food, shelter, healthcare and education.
Energy and water are also closely interconnected and
under strain. Consequently, the nexus of the two has
been the subject of attention by the scientiﬁc community, popular media and governing bodies. This nexus
manifests itself in society in many ways. For example, water provides electric power, is used for extraction of fuels, and plays a growing role in the irrigation
of energy crops to produce biofuels such as ethanol.
The thermoelectric sector is one of the largest users of water for cooling. In parallel, the water industry
uses power for moving, pumping, treating and heating water. On top of this relationship, the parts of the
world with high expected rates for population growth
and economic expansion are also often places where
water sources are scarce. Combining these trends with
projections for more irrigation implies rapid growth for

water demands that some localities might satisfy with
desalination or wastewater treatment, both of which
are very energy-intensive.
Despite the importance of energy and water, and the
close relationship between the two, funding, policymaking and oversight of these resources are performed
by different people in separate agencies in many
governments. Integrated energy–water policymaking is
rare. Energy planners often assume they will have the
water they need and water planners assume they will
have the energy they need – if one of these assumptions fails, consequences will be dramatic. By bringing
scientiﬁc and engineering expertise into this vastly
understudied problem, this scenario might be avoided.
19.1.1 Energy and water are inter-related
Energy and water are highly interconnected: people
use water for energy and energy for water. Figure 19.1
shows some of these interconnections. For example,
water is a direct source of energy through hydroelectric dams, which in 2007 provided about 15 per cent of
global electricity generation (or approximately 2 per

FIGURE 19.1
The energy–water nexus

Note: Energy ﬂows are shown in red and water ﬂows are shown in blue. As shown in the residential community, electricity and water are both
used for different purposes.
Source: Courtesy of EPRI (prepared by EPRI for a US DOE Report to Congress in 2006).

WWDR4

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

467

Nearly all of the water used for power plants is returned to the source (typically a river or cooling pond),
though at a different temperature and quality. As a
result of these returns, power plants are often responsible for a small portion of national water consumption,
despite the large withdrawals. Averaging across the
national thermoelectric power sector in the USA1, over
80 litres of water are withdrawn and 2 litres are consumed for every kilowatt-hour of electricity generated
(Webber, 2007). Hydroelectric dams use a signiﬁcant
amount of water consumption for power generation
primarily because the increased surface area of manufactured reservoirs beyond the nominal run-of-river
accelerates the evaporation rates from river basins
(Torcellini et al., 2003). Notably, the estimates for this
increased evaporation depend signiﬁcantly on regional location: hydroelectric reservoirs in the desert

468

CHAPTER 19

The amount of water withdrawn and consumed by
thermal power plants is driven by (a) the type of fuel
and power cycle used by a power plant (e.g. fossil fuels

FIGURE 19.2
Power plants typically use three types of cooling:
open-loop (top panel), closed-loop (middle) and
air-cooling (bottom)

Steam

Steam from
Power Plant

Condensate

Cold Water

(hot)

Hot Water
Cooling System

Water Source

Water
vapour

An important feature of water use is the distinction between water withdrawals and consumption. However,
this terminology is not used in a consistent manner
from one country to the next. Using the terminology
from King et al. (2011), water withdrawal refers to the
volume of water removed from a water source; this water is not lost, but it cannot be allocated to other users
before discharge. Consumption refers to the volume of
water lost through evaporation, transportation, or any
other means by which water is not returned to its native source in liquid form. As consumption is a subset
of withdrawal, it is less than or equal to withdrawal, by
deﬁnition (King et al., 2011).

south-west of the USA have signiﬁcant evaporative
losses, whereas reservoirs in cooler climates might
have negligible losses. Further, whether all the evaporation should be attributed to power generation is not
clear, as reservoirs serve multiple purposes, including
water storage, ﬂood control, navigation and recreation.

(cold)

cent of total energy consumption)(IEA, 2009). Water
also indirectly enables power generation through cooling thermoelectric power plants (power plants that
use heat to generate power), which provide more than
75% of the electricity globally (more than 16,000 TWh)
(IEA, 2009). While agriculture is the largest user of
water globally, because of the large cooling needs of
power plants, the thermoelectric power sector is the
largest user of water (for withdrawals) in the United
States (USA). In the USA the power sector is responsible for nearly half of all water withdrawals (approximately 800 billion litres per day, when including seawater), ahead of even agriculture (Hutson et al., 2004).
Low– and middle– income countries use less water for
power plants and more for agriculture, whereas highincome countries are the opposite (WWAP, 2003). In
addition, water is used for extractive industries that
produce fuels (coal, natural gas, uranium) for the power and transportation sectors.

Steam from
Power Plant

Cooling
Tower

Condensate

Cooling
System

Blowdown

Steam from
Power Plant

Condensate

Fan

Source: Stillwell (2010), based on CEC (2002).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

or nuclear fuels with steam cycles, natural gas with
combined cycle) and (b) the cooling method. There
are three basic cooling methods: open-loop, closedloop, and air-cooling (Figure 19.2). For typical values on water withdrawal and consumption by power
plants, see Table 19.1, which contains a breakdown by
fuel and cooling type.
Open-loop, or once-through, cooling withdraws large
volumes of surface water (fresh or saline), for one-time
use and returns nearly all the water to the source with
little of the overall water consumed due to evaporation (Stillwell et al., 2011). While open-loop cooling is
energy efficient and has low infrastructure and operational costs, the discharged water is warmer than ambient water, causing thermal pollution, which can kill
ﬁsh and harm aquatic ecosystems. Thus, environmental agencies regulate discharge temperatures, taking
into account a water body’s heat dissipation capacity. Closed-loop cooling requires less water withdrawal
because the water is recirculated by cooling towers or
evaporation ponds. However, as the cooling is essentially achieved through evaporation, closed-loop cooling causes higher water consumption (Table 19.1). The
alternative, air-cooling, does not require water, but instead cools by use of fans that move air over a radiator,
similar to that in automobiles. However, power plant
efficiency for air-cooling is lower, up-front capital costs
are higher and real estate requirements are sometimes

larger, often making this option less attractive economically unless water resources are scarce.
Even though power plants return most of the water
they withdraw, their need for large amounts of water
at the right temperature for cooling subjects them to
vulnerabilities. If a severe drought or heat wave reduces the availability of water or restricts its effectiveness
for cooling due to heat transfer inhibitions or thermal
pollution limits, the fact that the power plant consumes so little water becomes less important than the
fact that it needs the water in the ﬁrst place.
Signiﬁcant volumes of water are also used for fuels
production, such as coal, natural gas, oil, uranium and
biofuels. The water requirements for fuels production
for coal, natural gas and uranium, while non-trivial, are
much smaller than the water requirements for their use
within power plants and therefore are considered negligible by comparison. By contrast, the water requirements to produce coal, natural gas and petroleum for
transportation applications is signiﬁcant by comparison (because transport vehicles have no water requirements on-board), and is discussed later in this report.
All forms of energy require water at some stage of
their lifecycles, including production, conversion, distribution and use. Each fuel and technology has a slightly
different set of requirements.

TABLE 19.1
Water used (withdrawn and/or consumed) varies for different fuels, power cycles (combined and open cycle)
and cooling methods (open-loop, closed-loop and air-cooling)
Closed-Loop
(cooling tower)

Open-Loop

Withdrawals
(L/kWh)

Consumption
(L/kWh)

Withdrawals
(L/kWh)

Consumption
(L/kWh)

Nuclear

3.8

2.6

160.9

1.5

Solar CSP

3.0

3.0

---

---

Coal

1.9

1.9

132.5

1.1

Natural gas (Combined cycle)

0.9

0.7

52.2

0.4

Natural gas
(Combustion turbine)

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Solar PV

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Wind

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Negligible

Source: Adapted from Stillwell (2010c).

WWDR4

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

469

Crude oil
Crude oil is the largest primary energy source globally. Its production requires water at drilling, pumping, reﬁnement and treatment. The average water use
is estimated to be 1.058 m3 per GJ (Gerbens-Leenes et
al., 2008). Unconventional oil production, which is projected to increase in North, Central and South America
until 2035, consumes 2.5–4 times more water (WEC,
2010).
Coal
Coal is the second largest primary energy source
globally, and its use is projected to increase by 2035.
UNESCO-IHE (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008) estimates
that approximately 0.164 m3 per GJ are used in the
various processes, signiﬁcantly more of which is used
during underground mining operations than in open
pit mining (Gleick et al., 1994).
Natural gas
Signiﬁcant increases are expected in the production
of natural gas by 2035. Water requirements for drilling, extraction and transportation of conventional gas
sources are relatively modest, at an estimated 0.109 m3
per GJ (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008). However, shale
gas production, which is expected to increase in Asia,
Australia and North America (Paciﬁc Energy Summit,
2011), has slightly higher water-intensity than conventional gas because its extraction method, hydraulic
fracturing, injects millions of litres of water into each
well.
Uranium
Uranium’s share of global energy consumption is projected to increase from about 6% to 9% by 2035 (WEC,
2010). UNESCO-IHE estimates modest water requirements of 0.086 m3 per GJ for uranium mining and
processing (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008).
Biomass and biofuel
Biomass, including wood, agro fuel, waste and municipal by-products, is an important source of ﬁre and
heating in many non-Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) country
households (WEC, 2010). Further, bio-feedstocks are
increasingly grown commercially to replace fossil fuels
in OECD countries, and this trend has raised concerns
about crop water requirements. However, water
intensity depends on the feedstocks, where and how
they are grown, and whether they are ﬁrst– or second–
generation crops (Gerbens-Leenes et al., 2008;

470

CHAPTER 19

WEF, 2009). This variety in production processes
makes it impractical to attribute a singular value or
even a representative range of water consumption to
biofuel production.
Just as signiﬁcant volumes of water are used for energy, in wealthier nations a signiﬁcant fraction of energy is used for water, in the form of electricity to heat,
treat and move water, sometimes across vast distances
(CEC 2005; Cohen et al., 2004; EIA, 2001; Stillwell et al.,
2010a). Most water systems are comprised of many
stages of collection, treatment, conveyance, distribution, end-use preparation, reconditioning and release
Twomey and Webber (2011). The energy intensity of
water is inﬂuenced by source water quality, its proximity to a water treatment facility and end-use, its
intended end-use and sanitation level, as well as its
conveyance to and treatment at a wastewater treatment facility. Treating water to a quality that is safe
for drinking requires signiﬁcant amounts of energy to
pump, treat and distribute water to end-users, who
are likely to heat, chill, or pressurize this water to suit
their needs. After water is used in industrialized countries, much of it is collected and sent to a wastewater
treatment plant where the water is reconditioned so
that it can be released back into a water reservoir. In
some cases, water is recycled or reclaimed, that is, it is
treated to an acceptable standard for use in non-potable
applications (e.g. agricultural and landscape irrigation, groundwater recharge, industrial cooling/process
water, toilet ﬂushing). Self-supplied water users, such
as industrial facilities, power generators and irrigators, typically do not require water for drinking water.
However, these users might utilize energy-intensive
processes, such as heating, chilling and pressurizing.
For the more than 1 billion people who do not have access to piped, clean drinking water, or to water-based
sanitation, the availability of abundant energy, especially in the form of electricity, is a critical ingredient to
enabling those services.
The energy required to produce, treat and distribute water varies depending on the source (Table 19.2
shows typical ﬁgures in the USA). Surface water (e.g.
from lakes and rivers) is the easiest and least energyintensive to treat. However, water conveyance can
require anything from between zero (for gravity-fed
systems) to as much as 3600 kWh per million litres
for long-haul systems (CEC, 2005; Cohen et al., 2004).
Groundwater (e.g. from aquifers) requires more energy for pumping water to the surface for treatment

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

and distribution. For example, water collection alone
from a depth of 40 m requires 140 kWh per ML, while
a depth of 120 m requires approximately 500 kWh per
ML, in addition to treatment energy use (EPRI, 2002;
USDOE, 2006; Stillwell et al., 2011).
As fresh water supplies become strained, water
sources once considered unusable, including brackish groundwater and seawater, are being turned to
(Stillwell et al., 2010b). While use of these water sources helps mitigate constraints on drinking water supplies, treatment of brackish groundwater and seawater
requires use of advanced ﬁltration (e.g. reverse osmosis membranes), specialty materials, and high-pressure
pumps for desalting. Overall, treatment of these water sources can require as much as 4400 kWh per ML
(EPRI, 2002), or 10–12 times the energy use of standard water treatment. The theoretical minimum energy
requirement for desalination using reverse osmosis
systems is 680 kWh per ML (Shannon et al., 2008).
Wastewater treatment also requires large amounts of
energy (WEF, 1997). High-income countries that have
stricter discharge regulations install more energyintensive treatment technologies. Trickling ﬁlter treatment, which uses a biologically active substrate for
aerobic treatment, is a reasonably passive system,
consuming on average over 250 kWh per ML (EPRI, 2002;
Stillwell et al., 2011). Diffused aeration as part of
activated sludge processing is a more energy-intensive
form of wastewater treatment, requiring 340 kWh
per ML due to blowers and gas transfer equipment

(EPRI, 2002; Stillwell et al., 2011). More advanced
wastewater treatment, using ﬁltration and the option
of nitriﬁcation, requires 400–500 kWh per ML
(EPRI, 2002; Stillwell et al., 2011). In fact, more advanced
sludge treatment and processing can consume energy
in the range of 30–80% of total wastewater plant energy use (Center for Sustainable Systems, University of
Michigan, 2008). Treating wastewater sludge through
anaerobic digestion can also produce energy through
the creation of methane-rich biogas, a renewable fuel
that can be used to generate up to 50% of the treatment plant’s electricity needs (Stillwell et al., 2010b;
Seiger et al., 2005).
Because systems vary signiﬁcantly between regions in
terms of pumping requirements, source quality, prevailing treatment practices (if any), and wastewater
collection (if any), it is difficult to assess global energy
inputs embedded in the water system. For the USA,
where data are available, approximately 10% or more
of national energy consumption is required for the entire water system (Figure 19.3) (Twomey and Webber,
2011). These ﬁgures are typical for high- income
countries. For low- and middle- income countries,
where large-scale water systems are rarer, the embedded energy is lower by comparison.
19.1.2 Global strain in the energy–water relationship
The interrelationship of energy and water and the
strains placed on both of these resources manifests
itself in tough choices at the local level. For example,
low water levels in hydroelectric reservoirs can force

TABLE 19.2
Water and wastewater treatment and conveyance requires vast amounts of energy
Source / treatment type

Energy use
(kWh/million L)

Surface water

60

Groundwater

160

Brackish groundwater

1,000–2,600

Seawater

2,600–4,400

Trickling ﬁlter

250

Activated sludge

340

Advanced treatment without nitriﬁcation

400

Advanced treatment with nitriﬁcation

500

Water

Wastewater

Note: Average US ﬁgures for energy used for water production (not including energy used for distribution).
Sources: CEC (2005); EPRI (2002); Stillwell et al. (2010b, 2011); Stillwell (2010c).

WWDR4

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

471

power plants to turn off. Though hydroelectric power is
attractive, it is least reliable during droughts when the
need to use water for other purposes (e.g. for drinking
and irrigation) may take precedence over hydroelectricity. For example, without a change in water usage
patterns, lakes Mead and Powell along the Colorado
River in the USA, which are used for hydroelectric
power and municipal supply, are projected to have a
50% chance of running dry by 2021 (Spotts, 2008).
Similarly, cities in Uruguay must choose whether they
want the water in their reservoirs to be used for drinking or electricity (Proteger, 2008).
The problem is not just limited to hydroelectric reservoirs. As thermoelectric power plants require vast
amounts of water, they are vulnerable to droughts
or heat waves restricting their output. Heat waves in
France in 2003 caused power plants to draw down
their output because of limits on rejection temperatures imposed for environmental reasons (Poumadère

et al., 2005; Lagadec, 2004). Severe heat and drought
killed approximately 15,000 people and created river
water temperatures that were too hot for effective
power plant cooling. Many nuclear power plants had
to operate at much reduced capacity and an environmental exemption was enacted to allow the rejection
temperatures of cooling water from power plants to
exceed prior limits (Poumadère et al., 2005; Lagadec,
2004). At the same time, 20% of hydropower capacity was not available because of low river levels
(Hightower and Pierce, 2008). Just as demand for
electricity was spiking for air conditioning in response
to the heat, supplies were being cut back. The dilemma has also shown up in other countries where
drought has brought nuclear power plants within days
of shutting off because the vast amounts of cooling
water were at risk from diversion to other priorities,
such as municipal use for drinking water.
While water limitations can restrict energy, energy limitations can restrict water. For example, power outages

FIGURE 19.3
Energy ﬂows for the public water supply system in the USA

Coal
2,908 trillion
BTU

2,561

347

Nuclear
1,207 trillion
BTU

1,167

Other
37 trillion BTU

35
2

40

Renewable
598
Energy
678 trillion BTU 80
1,018

Natural Gas
5,644 trillion
BTU

4,626

Electricity
Generation
5,433 trillion
BTU

Rejected Energy
3,341 trillion BTU

2,092 trillion
BTU

Rejected
Energy
7,194 trillion
BTU

Residential 2,967 trillion BTU

1,079
Water Heating: 2,056

1,662
221

1,044
1,923

Other: 911

5
Commercial 1,657 trillion BTU
9

Water Heating: 586
473
628
Public Water and Wastewater: 192
737
1,184
Other: 879
283
Industrial 4,507 trillion BTU
66

385

56

Petroleum
2,000 trillion
BTU

1,944

2,227
347
40

1,440

Power: 158

Chemical and Reﬁning: 2,139

Paper and Pulp: 1,111

2,336

Water
Services
5,278 trillion
BTU

2,171

Other: 1,099

2

Notes: Fuels (on the left) are used directly and indirectly through electricity generation for different purposes (on the right). The thickness of
the ﬂows is proportional to the amount of energy consumed. About 60% of the total energy consumption is lost as waste heat. Only energy
consumption related to the conveyance, treatment, distribution and heating (in the commercial and residential sectors) and public water and
wastewater treatment distributed in the US public water supply is included. Self-supplied sectors, including agriculture and industry are not
included.
Source: Courtesy of K. M. Twomey and M. E. Webber, University of Texas, Austin, USA.

472

CHAPTER 19

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

(due to storms or intentional acts) at water and wastewater treatment plants put the water system at risk of
disruptions due to energy shortages. This trade-off is
a strategic question for some countries. Saudi Arabia
uses much of its own most valuable resources (crude
oil and natural gas) to obtain the resources it does
not have (freshwater), facing the choice of whether it
is better to sell its energy resources at high prices or
have enough freshwater to maintain municipal needs
(EIA, 2007; IEA, 2005).

19.2 Exacerbation of the strain in the energy–
water relationship
Trends imply that the existing strain in the energy–
water relationship will be exacerbated by:
đƫ growth in total demand for energy and water, primarily driven by population growth,
đƫ growth in per capita demand for energy and water,
primarily driven by economic growth,
đƫ global climate change, which will distort the availability of water in positive and negative ways, depending on the location, and
đƫ policy choices, by which people are selecting more
water-intensive energy and more energy-intensive
water.
19.2.1 Growth in total demand for energy and water
Though the global fuel mix is diverse, fossil fuels (oil,
coal and natural gas) satisfy more than 80% of the
world’s needs for primary energy resources. Total energy consumption, including traditional biomass, such
as wood and dung, was approximately 500 exajoules
in 2008. Most projections show an increase in demand
for energy, predominantly driven by both population
and economic growth. Based on its central scenario (New Policies Scenario), the International Energy
Agency (IEA), estimates that world primary energy demand will increase by 36% between 2008 and 2035, or
by 1.2% on average per year (IEA, 2010). In 2008 nonOECD countries were responsible for approximately
56% of the energy consumption (IEA, 2010) and are
expected to account for 93% of the increase with
China accounting for 36%. With fossil fuels accounting for 50 % of the increase from 2008–2035 and with
an estimate that the demand for electricity will grow
by 76% globally between 2007 and 2030 (IEA, 2009),
there will be a complementary signiﬁcant increase in
demand for water.
The United Nations (UN) makes several projections for global population (with low–, medium– and

WWDR4

high– growth variants), all showing population growth
to at least 2050, at which time population could
decrease (UN, 2005; UN, 2006). The IEA assumes for
its projections that (a) global population will grow
1% per year on average from 6.4 billion in 2004 to
8.1 billion in 2030 and (b) that economic growth will
take place at an average of 3.4% per year over the
same period (IEA, 2009). The IEA interprets these
trends to yield a growth in global primary energy
demand of 70% between 2004 and 2030, without a
very signiﬁcant shift in the basic makeup in the fuel
mix, despite policy prioritization for biofuels and other
renewable sources. Similarly, this population growth
should lead to increases in global water demand (Oki
and Kanae, 2006).
19.2.2 Growth in per capita demand for energy and
water
As the world population grows, the global demand
for energy and water is increasing to meet people’s
subsistence and lifestyle needs. Added to this, the per
capita demand for energy and water is also growing. While the developed world is looking for ways to
conserve energy and water, the developing world is
rapidly accumulating wealth, bringing about a desire
for better transportation, a nicer lifestyle, more meatintensive diets, and a robust economy. The combined
effect is that the demand in developing countries is
increasing rapidly for liquid fuels, electricity, and water (for industrial processes, higher-protein diets, and
comfort). Consequently, the growth in demand for energy and water is outpacing the growth in population.
For a world in which these resources are under strain,
accelerating demand could have far-reaching impacts.
Despite population growth estimates of only 19–37%
(UN, 2005; UN, 2006) from 2004 to 2030, the IEA
projects much greater increases in energy demand,
approximately 70% (IEA, 2009), indicating that the annual per capita energy use globally will increase from
1.7 to 2.1 tonnes of oil equivalent. Half of the growth
in demand is projected to come from the power sector (IEA, 2009), showing that electricity is a preferred
form of energy for those who can afford it. Because of
the power sector’s water intensity, the new demand for
electricity will likely lead to increased demand for water withdrawals. The IEA also considers an alternative
policy scenario, for which energy growth is lower than
the nominal reference projection for energy growth.
Even in this alternative, both absolute and per capita
energy demands are expected to increase between

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

473

2004 and 2030 (IEA, 2009). Even in the USA, where
energy-intensive manufacturing has shrunk over the
last few decades, the per capita energy use is projected to increase.
One of the drivers of increasing energy use per capita
is the demand for better environmental conditions as
people’s incomes rise (Dasgupta et al., 2002), a phenomenon that is illustrated with the case of wastewater treatment. Advanced wastewater treatment
is more energy-intensive than standard wastewater treatment, so the trend towards higher treatment
standards will likely increase the unit energy needs
of wastewater treatment for countries moving up in
income (Applebaum, 2000). However, the introduction of greater energy efficiency will possibly offset
the expected increases in energy intensity for stricter
treatment standards, limiting the projected growth in
electricity use at treatment plants. The higher per capita energy expenditures for wastewater treatment to
achieve stricter environmental standards is a scenario
likely to be repeated in analogous ways throughout societies that are achieving affluence; that is, as nations
get richer, they will demand more energy.

On top of the above-mentioned three trends is a
policy-driven movement towards more energyintensive water and water-intensive energy.
19.3.1 Growing energy-intensity of water
Many high-income societies are moving towards more
energy-intensive water because of a push by municipalities for new supplies of water from sources that are farther away and of lower quality, thereby requiring more
energy to get them to the required quality and location.
Because of growing environmental concerns, standards
for water treatment are becoming stricter as water is expected to be cleaner, and so the amount of energy people spend per litre will increase. Unit electricity consumption for water treatment has increased at a compound
rate of 0.8% per year, with no obvious expectation for the
trend to stop (Applebaum, 2000). At the same time, in
many industrialized societies, water or wastewater infrastructure is aging and will increase unit electricity use due
to age-related losses, while other factors (e.g. replacing
older equipment with more efficient new equipment and
processes, and establishing larger treatment plants with
higher energy economies of scale) will decrease unit energy consumption, but not enough to offset the energy
needs of higher level treatment (Applebaum, 2000).
Societies are also going to greater lengths to bring
freshwater from its sources to dense urban areas. These

FIGURE 19.4
The energy–climate–water cycle creates a selfreinforcing challenge

rgy
e
n
E
ter
Wa

19.2.3 Intensiﬁcation of cross-sectoral strain at the
nexus of energy and water through global climate
change
Water systems are likely to be hit hardest by climate
change and will be a leading indicator of temperature
changes. The effects are hard to predict, but higher
temperatures could induce several consequences, including turning some snowfall into rainfall, moving
the snowmelt season earlier (thereby affecting spring
water ﬂows), increasing intermittency and intensity of
precipitation, affecting water quality and raising the
risks of ﬂoods and droughts (Oki and Kanae, 2006;
Gleick, 2000a). In addition, sea level rises could cause
contamination of groundwater aquifers with saline water near the coasts, potentially affecting nearly half of
the world’s population (Oki and Kanae, 2006). These
challenges can be ﬁxed with greater energy expenditures for mining deeper water, moving it farther, treating water to make it drinkable, or storing it for longer
periods of time. With a typical energy mix over the
next few decades, these energy expenditures release
greenhouse gases, which intensify the hydrological
cycle further, compounding the problem in a positive
feedback loop (Figure 19.4).

19.3 Policy choices towards more energyintensive water and water-intensive energy

ate
m
i
Cl

Source: Image based on suggestion of J. Long at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory.

474

CHAPTER 19

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

efforts include digging to ever-deeper underground reservoirs, or by moving water through massive long-haul
projects (Stillwell et al., 2010b). For example, China is
implementing the South-North Water Transfer Scheme,
which is an order of magnitude larger than California’s
aqueduct and will move water from three river basins in
the wet southern part of China to the dry northern parts
(Stone and Jia, 2006). Two of these routes are more
than 1000 km long (Stone and Jia, 2006), representing
substantial investments in energy for transport. Similarly,
in Texas, private investors are proposing a project to
move groundwater from the Ogallala Aquifer (one of
the world’s largest) hundreds of kilometres across the
state of Texas to the municipalities in the Dallas–Fort
Worth Metroplex (Berﬁeld, 2008).
On 12 April 1961, US President Kennedy said, ‘If we could
ever competitively – at a cheap rate – get fresh water
from salt water that would be in the long-range interest
of humanity, and would really dwarf any other scientiﬁc
accomplishment.’ (Gleick, 2000b). A few months later,
he signed a bill to set the USA on a research course to
seek a breakthrough in desalination (Kennedy, 1961).
Since that time, global desalination capacity has seen
a decades-long steep upward trend (Gleick, 2006). It
is unlikely that this trend will end soon given the other
trends noted above. While desalination is traditionally
associated with the Middle East where energy resources
are plentiful but water is scarce, cities in other locations
(e.g. London, San Diego, El Paso) are considering desalination plants to get fresh water either from nearby
saline aquifers or coasts. The steep market penetration
rates for desalination are particularly relevant for the
adoption of new membrane-based technologies (NAS,
2008). While membrane-based reverse-osmosis approaches are less energy-intensive than thermal desalination, they require much more energy than traditional
freshwater production from surface sources.
19.3.2 Growing water-intensity of energy
For a variety of economic, security and environmental
reasons, including the desire among high-income countries to produce a higher proportion of energy from
domestic sources and to decarbonize energy systems,
many of the preferred energy choices are more waterintensive. For example, nuclear energy is produced
domestically, but is also more water-intensive than
other forms of power generation. Carbon capture and
sequestration, which is an option for decarbonizing coal
combustion and other scrubber technologies, are also
much more water-intensive than unscrubbed coal-ﬁred

WWDR4

generation. As environmental controls are tightened on
carbon and other pollutants, water use at power plants
for ﬂue gas management is likely to increase.
The move towards more water-intensive energy is especially relevant for transportation fuels, such as unconventional fossil fuels (oil shale, coal-to-liquids, gas-to-liquids,
tar sands), electricity, hydrogen and biofuels, all of which
can require signiﬁcantly more water to produce than gasoline, depending on how they are produced. It is important to note that the push for renewable electricity also
includes solar photovoltaics (PV) and wind power, which
require very little water, and so not all future energy
choices are worse from a water-perspective.
Almost all unconventional fossil fuels are more water-intensive than conventional fossil fuels (Figure 19.5). While
gasoline might require a few litres of water for every
litre of fuel that is produced (including production and
reﬁning), unconventional fossil sources are typically a
factor of 2–5 more water-intensive. Electricity for plugin hybrid electric vehicles or electric vehicles are appealing because they are clean at the vehicle’s end-use and
it is easier to scrub emissions at hundreds of smokestacks than millions of tailpipes. However, because most
power plants use a lot of cooling water, electricity can
also be about twice as water-intensive than gasoline
per mile travelled if the electricity is generated from the
standard grid that has high fractions of thermoelectric
generation. If that electricity is generated from wind or
other water-free sources, then it will be less water-consumptive than gasoline. Though unconventional fossil
fuels and electricity are all potentially more water-intensive than conventional gasoline by a factor of 2–5,
biofuels are particularly water-intensive. Growing biofuels consumes approximately 1000 L of water for every
litre of fuel that is produced (King and Webber, 2008).
Sometimes this water is provided naturally from rainfall.
However, for a non-trivial and growing proportion of
biofuels production, that water is provided by irrigation.
Sustained higher energy prices and emerging political
consensus about climate change and energy security
have brought fossil fuels into new scrutiny. Consequently,
several countries are seeking an energy solution that is
domestically sourced (addressing some of the national
security concerns), abundant (addressing the concerns
about resource depletion), and less carbon-intensive (addressing the concerns about climate change). Because
signiﬁcant volumes of oil are imported in many countries,
and because this sector is a major contributor to carbon

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

475

emissions, it is on the short-list of targets for change by
policymakers, innovators and entrepreneurs.
Some energy options are unconventional fossil fuels
(including compressed natural gas, coal-to-liquids, tar
sands and oil shale), hydrogen, biofuels and electricity. While these options have their merits, most of their
production methods are more water-intensive than
conventional petroleum-based gasoline and diesel
(King and Webber, 2008). The production of oil shale
and tar sands is very water-intensive. For example, in
situ oil shale production might use vast amounts of
electric power to heat the bitumen underground, and
that electric power will likely need water cooling. Tar
sands production uses steam injection to reduce
the viscosity of the tars. While coal production is not

particularly water-intensive, creating liquid fuels from
coal using Fischer–Tropsch processes requires water as
a process material. Hydrogen can also be very waterintensive if produced by electrolysis (Webber, 2007).
However, if hydrogen is produced from non-irrigated
biomass resources or by reforming fossil fuels, its
water-intensity is on par with conventional gasoline
production and use. Notably, the biohydrogen pathway
is not yet economical or scaled-up.
Biofuels are also very popular because they can be
grown domestically and consume CO2 during photosynthesis. They also hold the potential for displacing fossil
fuels. The real challenge for biofuels is their water intensity (King and Webber, 2008), but there are also some

FIGURE 19.5
Water intensity of transportation

Consumption (L H2O/km)

Withdrawal (L H2O/km)

CONSUMPTION
104

Additional Mining/Farming Range
Additional Processing/Reﬁning Range
Minimum Mining/Farming

103

Minimum Processing/Reﬁning

WITHDRAWAL
Additional Mining/Farming Range
Additional Processing/Reﬁning Range
Minimum Mining/Farming

Denotes Average
Value (L H2O/km)

105

105

104

103

Minimum Processing/Reﬁning

Fossil Fuels

Hydogen Fuel
Cell and Electric
Vehicles

Algae Highly
Productive

Algae Experimental

Biodiesel Not Irrigated Soy

Fuels

Biodiesel Irrigated Soy

10-2
E85 - Not Irrigated
Corn Grain
and Stover

10-2
E85 - Irrigated
Corn Grain

10-1

E85 - Irrigated
Corn Seed
and Stover

10-1

E85 - Irrigated
Corn Seed

100

Battery
Electric
US Grid

100

Fuel Cell Electrolysis
US Grid

101

Gasoline Tar Sands

101

Compressed
Natural Gas

102

Gasoline Conventional
Petroleum

102

Biofuels

Notes: The water-intensity of different fuels in litres of water required per kilometre travelled, show great variation from irrigated biofuels (at the
high end, withdrawing and consuming more than 100 L of water per km) to electricity from wind or solar resources (at the low end, requiring
approximately 0 L per km). Water consumption (left stacked bars read on left axis) and withdrawal (right stacked bars read on right axis) in
L per km for various fuels for light duty vehicles. Water use from mining and farming is designated differently from that used for processing and
reﬁning. Where a range of values exists (e.g. different irrigation amounts in different states), a minimum value is listed with an ‘additional range’.
Otherwise, the values plotted are considered average values. FT = Fischer–Tropsch; FCV = fuel cell vehicle; US Grid = electricity from average
US grid mix; and Renewables = renewable electricity generated without consumption or withdrawal of water (e.g. wind and photovoltaic solar
panels)
Source: Beal (2011, ﬁg. 5-2, p. 273).

476

CHAPTER 19

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

important water quality impacts (Twomey et al., 2010).
Recent analysis indicates that irrigated biofuels can require over 100 litres of water for every kilometre travelled
in a light-duty vehicle (King and Webber, 2008; NAS,
2007), approximately 1,000 times more water per kilometre than conventional gasoline. When scaling up this
kind of production to prepare for national biofuels mandates, water can become a critical limiting factor.

đƫ

Conclusions and recommendations
The nexus of water and energy is fundamental to society, is intertwined in many ways, is under strain, and
that strain is projected to become worse as worldwide demand for both increases more quickly than
population and the effects of climate change manifest
themselves. While the energy–water relationship might
appear intractable, there are many opportunities to
mitigate its worst aspects through new technologies,
new concepts for how to reuse water effectively, new
markets that put a price on water, and recognition that
conserving water and conserving energy are synonymous. Though the world’s water situation appears dire
for many reasons, it also presents an opportunity to
address the problem and there are many tools available. In particular, policy engagement is warranted.

đƫ

đƫ
Because there are many rivers, watersheds, basins and
aquifers that span several regions and/or countries,
there is a need for national and international engagement on energy–water issues. Unfortunately, there are
some policy pitfalls at the energy–water nexus. For
example, energy and water policymaking are typically
disaggregated. Further, the data on water quantity are
sparse, error-prone and inconsistent. National databases of water use for power plants contain errors, possibly due to differences in units, formats and deﬁnitions
between state and federal reporting requirements. For
example, the deﬁnitions for water use, withdrawal and
consumption are not always clear.
Despite the potential pitfalls, there are policy opportunities at the energy–water nexus. For example, water
conservation and energy conservation are synonymous.
That is, policies that promote water conservation also
achieve energy conservation; and policies that promote
energy conservation also achieve water conservation.
Some policy actions for the energy–water nexus are to:
đƫ Collect, maintain and make available accurate, updated and comprehensive water data. Without good
data about water reserves, ﬂows and use, it will be
difficult for analysts to assess the situation and for

WWDR4

đƫ

đƫ

policymakers to respond; this hurdle remains one of
the top barriers to effective action.
Invest heavily in water-related research and development (R&D) to match recent increases in energyrelated R&D. R&D investments are an excellent
policy option for national and international bodies
because local governments and industry usually are
not in a position to adequately invest in research.
Consequently, the amount of R&D in the water sector is much lower than for other sectors, such as
pharmaceuticals, technology or energy. Topics for
R&D include low-energy water treatment, novel
approaches to desalination, remote leak detectors
for water infrastructure, and air-cooling systems for
power plants. In addition, R&D for biofuels should
emphasize feedstocks, such as cellulosic sources or
algae that do not require freshwater irrigation.
Develop regional water plans that consider increased
demands for electricity, and regional energy plans that
consider increased demands for water. For example,
the rise of biofuels or electricity as fuel substitutes will
have very different regional impacts. Biofuels will affect water use in rural, agricultural areas, whereas electric vehicles will affect water use at power plants near
major population centres.
Encourage resource substitution to fuels that have water, emissions and security beneﬁts. Some fuel sources,
such as natural gas, wind and solar PV need much less
water and reduce emissions of pollutants and carbon.
Support the use of reclaimed water for irrigation
and process cooling. Using reclaimed water for power plants, industry and agriculture can spare a significant amount of energy and cost. However, ﬁnancing, regulatory and permitting hurdles restrict this
option. Reuse water can also reduce the demand for
freshwater, for example by using reclaimed water
(e.g. treated wastewater) for power plant cooling or
other industrial uses along with irrigation. There is
precedent for such action, as ‘nearly 80% of water
used in the industrial sector in Japan is currently recycled’ (Oki and Kanae, 2006, p. 1071). While most
cities would refrain from using treated wastewater as a source of drinking water, this avenue is also
available and has been implemented, for example, in
water-scarce Singapore and the International Space
Station without ill effects. Consequently, it is recommended that municipalities affected by waterscarcity should move aggressively towards the use
of reclaimed water.
Support the use of dry and hybrid wet–dry cooling at
power plants. Not all power plants need wet cooling

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

477

all the time. Finding ways to help plants upgrade
their cooling to less water-intensive versions can
spare signiﬁcant volumes of water to meet public
supply or in-stream ﬂow requirements.
đƫ Establish strict standards in building codes for water
efficiency: revised standards for low-ﬂow appliances, water-heating efficiency, purple-piping for reclaimed water, and rain barrels to reduce both water
and energy consumption.
đƫ Invest aggressively in conservation. Water conservation
can be a cost-effective way to save energy, and energy
conservation can be a cost-effective way to save water.
Therefore, conservation has cross-cutting beneﬁts.
Conservation is one of the easiest and most cost-effective approaches to reducing both water and energy
use, especially as saving water is synonymous with
saving energy, and vice-versa (Cohen et al., 2004;
Hardberger, 2008). While conservation will not solve
all of society’s energy and water problems, it will buy
some time while new solutions are developed.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Note
1

Many numbers used in this description are for the USA
because the data are available with greater ﬁdelity and
comprehensiveness than for other countries and regions. While
these numbers are suitably representative for the energy–water
relationship in general, there will be some variation in other
regions due stage of economic development, prevailing climate
and technology choices.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References

Center for Sustainable Systems, University of Michigan. 2008.
U.S. Wastewater Treatment Factsheet. Pub. No. CSS0414. http://css.snre.umich.edu/css_doc/CSS04-14.pdf
(Accessed 9 March, 2008).
Cohen, R., Nelson, B. and Wolff, G. 2004. Energy Down the
Drain: The Hidden Costs of California’s Water Supply. Oakland,
CA, Natural Resources Defense Council Paciﬁc Institute.
Dasgupta, S., B. Laplante, Wang H. and Wheeler D. 2002.
Confronting the environmental Kuznets Curve. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, pp. 147–68.
EIA (Energy Information Administration). 2001. EndUse Consumption of Electricity. Washington DC,
US Department of Energy.
––––. 2007. Country Analysis Briefs: Saudi Arabia.
Washington DC, US Department of Energy.
EPRI (Electric Power Research Institute). 2002. Water and
Sustainability (Volume 4): U.S. Electricity Consumption
for Water Supply and Treatment – The Next Half Century.
Technical Report. Palo Alto, CA, EPRI.
Gleick, P. H. 1994. Water and energy. Annual Review of
Energy and Environment, Vol. 19, pp. 267–99. doi:10.1146/
annurev.eg.19.110194.001411
––––. 2000a. Water: The Potential Consequences of Climate
Variability and Change for the Water Resources of the
United States. Oakland, CA, United States Geological
Survey and Paciﬁc Institute.
––––. 2000b. The World’s Water 2000–2001: The Biennial Report
on Freshwater Resources. WA, USA, Island Press.
Hardberger, A. 2008. From Policy to Reality: Maximizing
Urban Water Conservation in Texas. Austin, TX,
Environmental Defense Fund.
Hightower, M. and S. A. Pierce, The energy challenge. Nature,
2008, 452.
Hutson, S.S., Barber N. L., Kenny J. F., Linsey K. S., Lumia D.
S. and Maupin M. A. 2004. Estimated Use of Water in the
United States in 2000. USGS Circular 1268, Reston, VA, U.S.
Geological Survey. (Released March 2004, revised April
2004, May 2004, February 2005.)
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2005. World Energy
Outlook 2005: Fact Sheet – Saudi Arabia. Paris, France, IEA.
––––. 2009. World Energy Outlook 2009. Paris, France, IEA.

Applebaum, B. 2000. US electricity consumption for water
supply and treatment – The next half century. Water
and Sustainability, Vol. 4. Palo Alto, CA, Electric Power
Research Institute (EPRI).
Beal, C. M. 2011. Constraints on Algal Biofuel Production. PhD
Dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Berﬁeld, S. 2008. There will be water. BusinessWeek, 12 June.
CEC (California Energy Commission). 2002. Comparison of
Alternate Cooling Technologies for California Power Plants:
Economic, Environmental and Other Tradeoffs. Palo Alto,
CA, PIER/EPRI Technical Report.
––––. 2005. California’s Water-Energy Relationship: Final Staff
Report. Prepared in support of the 2005 Integrated Energy
Policy Report Proceeding (04-IEPR-01E).

478

CHAPTER 19

––––. 2010. World Energy Outlook 2010. Paris, France, IEA.
Kennedy, J. F. 1961. Speeches of Senator John F. Kennedy:
Presidential Campaign of 1960. Washington DC,
US Government Printing Office.
King, C. W., Stillwell A. S., Twomey K. M., and Webber M. E.
2011. Coherence between Water and Energy Policies. Paris,
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD).
King, C. W. and Webber M. E. 2008. Water intensity of
transportation. Journal of Environmental Science and
Technology , Vol. 42, No. 21, pp. 7866–7872. doi:10.1021/
es800367m

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Lagadec, P. 2004. Understanding the French 2003 heat wave
experience: Beyond the heat, a multi-layered challenge.
Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management, Vol. 12,
pp. 160–9.

Torcellini, P., Long N. and Judkoff R. 2003. Consumptive
Water Use for U.S. Power Production. NREL/TP-550-33905,
Golden CO, USA, National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
U.S. Department of Energy.

National Academy of Sciences (NAS). 2007. Water
Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States,
0-309-11360-1, Committee on Water Implications of Biofuels
Production in the United States, National Research Council,
National Academy of Sciences, Washington DC.

Twomey, K. M., Stillwell A. S. and Webber M. E. 2010.
The unintended energy impacts of increased nitrate
contamination from biofuels production. Journal of
Environmental Monitoring. Issue 1. doi:10.1039/b913137j

––––. 2008. Desalination: A National Perspective, 0-30911924-3, Committee on Advancing Desalination Technology,
Water Science and Technology Board, Division on
Earth and Life Studies, National Academy of Sciences,
Washington DC.
Oki, T. and Kanae S. 2006. Global hydrological cycles and
world water resources. Science, Vol. 313, pp. 1068–72.
Paciﬁc Energy Summit. 2011. Unconventional Gas and
Implications for the LNG Market, FACTS Global Energy.
Advance Summit paper from the 2011 Paciﬁc Energy
Summit, 21–23 February 2011, Jakarta, Indonesia.
http://www.nbr.org/downloads/pdfs/eta/PES_2011_Facts_
Global_Energy.pdf (Accessed 30 April 2011.)
Poumadère, M., Mays C., Mer S. L. and Blong R. 2005. Heat
wave in France: Dangerous climate change here and now.
Risk Analysis, Vol. 25, 1483–94.
Proteger, F. 2008. The Uruguay, its dams, and its people
are running out of water. International Rivers, 1 February.
http://www.internationalrivers.org/latin-america/paraguayparaná-basin/uruguay-river-its-dams-and-its-people-arerunning-out-water (Accessed 12 November 2011.)

Twomey, K. M. and Webber M. W. 2011. Evaluating the Energy
Intensity of the US Public Water System, Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Energy Sustainability.
Washington DC.
UN (United Nations). 2005. World Urbanization Prospects:
The 2005 Revision. New York, Population Division of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat.
––––. 2006. World Population Prospects: The 2006 Revision.
New York, Population Division of the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations
Secretariat.
Gerbens-Leenes, P.W., Hoekstra, A.Y., Van der Meer, Th. H.
2008. Water Footprint of Bio-Energy and Other Primary
Energy Carriers. Research Report Series No. 29. Delft, The
Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. http://www.waterfootprint.
org/Reports/Report29-WaterFootprintBioenergy.pdf
(Accessed 30 April 2011.)
USDOE (United States Department of Energy). 2006. Energy
Demands on Water Resources: Report to Congress on the
Interdependency of Energy and Water. Washington DC,
US Department of Energy.

Seiger, R. B. and Whitlock D. 2005. Session for the CHP and
Bioenergy for Landﬁlls and Wastewater Treatment Plants
workshop, Salt Lake City, UT, 11 August 2005.

Webber, M. E. 2007. The water intensity of the transitional
hydrogen economy. Environmental Research Letters, 2,
034007 (7pp). doi:10.1088/1748-9326/2/3/034007

Shannon, M. S., Bohn P. W., Elimelech M., Georgiadis J.
G., Marinas B. J. and Mayes A. M. 2008. Science and
technology for water puriﬁcation in the coming decades.
Nature, Vol. 452, pp. 301–10.

WEC (World Energy Council). 2010. Water for Energy.
London, UK, World Energy Council. http://www.
worldenergy.org/documents/water_energy_1.pdf.

Spotts, P. N. 2008. Lakes Mead and Powell could run dry by
2021. The Christian Science Monitor, 13 February.
Stillwell A.S. 2010. Energy Water Nexus in Texas, Master’s
Thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
Stillwell, A. S., Hoppock D. C. and Webber M. E. 2010a. Energy
recovery from wastewater treatment plants in the United
States: A case study of the energy-water nexus. Sustainability
(special issue Energy Policy and Sustainability), Vol. 2, No. 4,
pp. 945–962. doi:10.3390/su2040945
Stillwell, A. S., King C.W. and Webber M. E. 2010b.
Desalination and long-haul water transfer as a water
supply for Dallas, Texas: A case study of the energy-water
nexus in Texas. Texas Water Journal, Vol. 1, No. 1, pp. 33–41.

WEF (Water Environment Federation). 1997. Energy
Conservation in Wastewater Treatment Facilities Manual of
Practice. No. FD-2. Alexandria, VA, WEF.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2009. Thirsty Energy: Water
and Energy in the 21st Century. http://www.weforum.
org/reports/thirsty-energy-water-and-energy-21stcentury?fo=1 (Accessed 30 April 2011.)
Wolff, G., Cooley, H., Palaniappan, M., Samulon, A., Lee, E.,
Morrison, J., Katz, D., Gleick, P. 2006. The World’s Water
2006–2007: The Biennial Report on Freshwater Resources.
WA, USA, Island Press.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. World
Water Development Report 1: Water for People, Water for
Life. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.

Stillwell, A. S., King C. W., Webber M. E., Duncan I. J. and
Hardberger A. 2011. The energy-water nexus in Texas.
Ecology and Society, (Special Feature: The Energy-Water
Nexus: Managing the Links between Energy and Water for
a Sustainable Future), 16 (1): 2.
Stone, R. and Jia H. 2006. Going against the ﬂow. Science,
Vol. 313, 1034–37.

WWDR4

THE GLOBAL NEXUS OF ENERGY AND WATER

479

CHAPTER 20
Freshwater for industry

UNIDO
—
Authors John Payne (SNC-Lavalin Environment, Division of SNC-Lavalin Inc.) and
Carolina Gonzalez-Castro
Acknowledgement Igor Volodin (Coordinator)

© Shutterstock/Denton Rumsey

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Industry’s need for water has not fundamentally changed, but it has become more critical
and it is a function of water productivity in a sustainability context.
Economic forces, comprising several factors that affect the demand side, are the strongest
inﬂuence on water for industry. Climate change is the main supply side driver.
Cheap, plentiful water can no longer be taken for granted. There are uncertainties with the
quantity and quality of water both for industry and its supply chain.
Challenges for industry include adapting to water scarcity, changing management paradigms
and minimizing environmental impacts.
Opportunities exist in proactive integrated water management using corporate water
strategies that are outward looking and involve a commitment to innovation and
implementation.

20.1 Key issues
Industry’s need for water has not fundamentally
changed, but it has become more critical over recent
decades. The issues involved are the supply of and
demand for water, the use and consumption of water,
and wastewater discharge, all key issues for the
industry to be proﬁtable in the context of environmental sustainability.
20.1.1 Water quantity
On a global scale, industry uses relatively little water
in comparison to the agriculture sector, but it does require an accessible, reliable supply of consistent and
acceptable quality. Data indicate that approximately
20% of the world’s freshwater withdrawals are used
by industry, but this ﬁgure varies widely from region
to region (UNEP, 2008) (Figure 20.1). The available
data generally combine industry and energy use; it has
been estimated that only about 30 to 40% of this use
is for actual industry and the balance is used in various
forms of power generation (Shiklomanov, 1999).
The demand for water is expected to increase in parallel with population growth and maybe even exceed it
(Paciﬁc Institute, 2004). Water management in industry is considered in terms of withdrawals and consumption. This is expressed as:
Water Withdrawal = Water Consumption + Effluent
Discharge (Grobicki, 2007)
The total water withdrawal from surface water and
groundwater by industry is usually much greater than
the amount of water that is actually consumed (WWAP,
2006, ch. 8). Improved water management is generally reﬂected in overall decreased water withdrawal
or use by industry. This makes obvious the connection between increased productivity and decreased
consumption and effluent discharge. Indeed, if discharge becomes zero then the water component of increased water productivity is solely a function of water
consumption.
20.1.2 Water quality
It is not uncommon for industry to use higher quality
water than it requires, often because there is a conveniently located local supply – either a natural source
(groundwater, a river or a lake) or a suitable municipal service. Water of lesser quality may be adequate
for many industries, allowing the use of recycled and
reclaimed water from other sources. Conversely, some
industries such as food processing have requirements

482

CHAPTER 20

more demanding than those for drinking water. The
pharmaceutical and high technology industries require
very high quality water and further treat the water
from their primary supplies.
The water quality of effluent discharges is also important to industry as pollution can affect large volumes
of fresh water. While statistics show that industry, in
the macro view, is not necessarily the worst polluter
in terms of concentrations and loads, its effects can
be very signiﬁcant, particularly on regional and local
scales (World Bank, 2010, ﬁg. 3.6). Industrial contamination tends to be more concentrated, more toxic and
harder to treat than other pollutants. The persistence
of these contaminants with respect to their degradation and rate of movement though the environment
and hydrological cycle is often lengthy.
20.1.3 Water productivity and proﬁt
Industry needs to maximize economic output and profit yet use water efficiently and wisely. The measure of
water productivity is how much dollar value can be obtained from each cubic metre of water used (Grobicki,
2007; World Bank, 2010, ﬁg. 3.5). Figures range from
well over US$100 to less than US$10 per cubic metre
depending on the country (WWAP, 2009, ch. 7). As
technology improves, industrial water productivity increases. Low productivity may indicate that water is
undervalued or is simply abundant. High productivity
is linked to high reuse as withdrawals are reduced.
The virtual water content of industrial products is another way to view how much water is being used in
industry. Virtual water is the volume of fresh water
consumed in all steps of the production process. It is
usually considerably more than the actual water contained in the product. The global average virtual water
content of industrial products is 80 L per US$ required
to produce the commodity (Hoekstra and Chapagain,
2007). However, in the United States (USA) the number is 110 L; in Germany and the Netherlands it is about
50 L; and in Japan, Australia and Canada it is only
10–15 L. In large developing nations, such as China and
India, the average number is 20–25 L per US$.
20.1.4 Cleaner production and sustainability
There is a need to break the paradigm of industrial
growth linked to environmental damage and to decouple industrial development from environmental degradation. At a fundamental level this involves cleaner
production and sustainability. Cleaner production has

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 20.1
Global freshwater use by sector at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century

%
0 to 16
16 to 31
31 to 47

Paciﬁc
Ocean

47 to 63
63 to 79
79 to 100

Atlantic
Ocean

Indian
Ocean

Paciﬁc
Ocean

Agriculture

%
0 to 16
16 to 32
32 to 48

Paciﬁc
Ocean

48 to 64
64 to 80
80 to 100

Paciﬁc
Ocean

Atlantic
Ocean

Indian
Ocean

Industry

%
0 to 15
15 to 30
30 to 45
45 to 60

Paciﬁc
Ocean

Paciﬁc
Ocean

Atlantic
Ocean

60 to 81

Indian
Ocean

Domestic use
Source: UNEP/GRID-Arendal (http://maps.grida.no/go/graphic/freshwater-use-by-sector-at-the-beginning-of-the-2000s, by P. Rekacewicz,
based on data from the World Resources Institute).

WWDR4

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

483

many facets, and one of its main objectives is to move
towards zero discharge. Zero discharge changes the
balance of the water productivity equation and is a
key concept in matching water quality to use (WWAP,
2006). In moving towards zero discharge, an attempt
is made to convert wastewater streams into useful
inputs for other industries and industrial clusters. It
seeks to ﬁnd a use for all effluents that would otherwise be discharged by recycling them or selling them
to another user. If an industry approaches this goal
then its overall water consumption will equal its withdrawal. Practically, this means that withdrawal will decrease to meet consumption.
The hydrological cycle includes signiﬁcant industrial intervention, such as effluent discharge into surface water
bodies, the inﬁltration of contaminants into groundwater, and the atmospheric distribution and fallout of
contaminants into water bodies (Figure 20.2). Loops of
recycled and reclaimed water are included in the hydrological cycle. Recycled and reclaimed water may rejoin
the cycle after much delay or perhaps never, if zero discharge becomes a reality. Zero effluent discharge is the
ultimate goal for water quality (WWAP, 2006).

20.2 External drivers
The water need of industry is strongly inﬂuenced by
external drivers that add a layer of uncertain complexity to corporate water management. These external
drivers often act in an indirect way through a chain
reaction, with many consequences. They are essentially recent phenomena and, although their impacts
on water are evident, their exact effects are unpredictable. The problem is magniﬁed because more than one
factor may pressure a driver, the relationships between
factors and drivers are interactive and changing, and
these relationships are difficult to control. The external
drivers discussed below appear to be the most inﬂuential for industry. Other drivers such as ecosystem stress,
societal values, and security, while important, tend to
be more local in nature.
20.2.1 Economic forces
Economic growth and development are the main drivers of the challenge to water resources (2030 Water
Resources Group, 2009). Economic forces affect water,
but at the same time the state of water resources inﬂuences the economy, and water is seen as both a threat
and a constraint to economic growth (WWAP, 2009).

FIGURE 20.2
Water proﬁle for the Canadian forest products industry (million m3 per year)

evapotranspiration

Forets (managed)

surface water runoff and
groundwater recharge

precipitation

water in
wood

surface
water

Water
resource cycle

groundwater
evaporation
recycle

Manufacturing
Non-ﬁbre
raw materials

other water
inputs

water in
products

to surface
water cycle

to ground
water cycle

evaporation

Products

water in
solid residuals

disposal

Source: NCASI (2010, ﬁg. 2.1, p.2)

484

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Concerns were expressed at the 2009 Davos World
Economic Forum that the world is moving to ‘water
bankruptcy’ and that this is one of the world’s most
pressing problems (TSG, 2009).

notion is the belief that access to water is a human
right. Therefore, there are competing trends of fullcost pricing of water versus more customary subsidies
or essentially free water.

Competition for water resources
Industry will ﬁnd itself competing more and more for
limited water resources as demand and consumption increase in all areas. The Paciﬁc Institute (2007,
p. 7, referencing FAO, 2007) states, ‘according to the
United Nations, if present consumption patterns continue, two-thirds of the world’s population will live
in water-stressed conditions by the year 2025’. Lack
of water is already a major constraint to industrial
growth in China, India and Indonesia (Paciﬁc Institute,
2007). Further demographic pressure is resulting from
globalization, which ‘with its accompanying move of
labour industries from high-income to low-income
countries, is creating high water demand outside of its
abundant sources, often in urban areas’ (WWAP, 2003,
ch. 9, p. 244). Agriculture, the biggest single user of
water by far, will remain the biggest competitor for this
resource, potentially in conﬂict with industry.

Privatization of water supply and treatment
Superimposed on the debate over the value of water
is the increasing trend towards privatization of water
supply and treatment – which may also include the
management and ownership of water systems – particularly in high income countries (Paciﬁc Institute, 2004).

The valuation of water
Underlying the competition for water is the concept
that it is an ‘economic good’ and thus subject to market forces in terms of its cost. Figure 20.3, for example,
depicts the cost components in manufacturing industries in Canada. Balanced against the economic good

FIGURE 20.3
Water costs in Canadian manufacturing industries
by cost component, 2005

Intake treatment

11%

Recirculation

11%

Discharge
treatment
Acquisition

49%

Source: Statistics Canada (2007).

WWDR4

11%

Financial crises
The forecasts for recovery time from the 2008 global
ﬁnancial crisis vary greatly, as do the predictions for
the success of the recovery. Financial planning in such
circumstances of uncertainty is difficult and may be
very short term. Moreover, as a result of the crisis, the
dynamics of the world economy may change substantially. There is a growing recognition of water’s value
in the global ﬁnancial infrastructure and it is felt that
investments in water will be less affected than other
investments by the current ﬁnancial crisis (TSG, 2009).
In times of crisis, governments, primarily in developed
countries, resort to deﬁcit spending and much of the
money goes to infrastructure. This spending may be
beneﬁcial to industry because the design and construction of infrastructure for water management and
treatment that is more efficient should provide conﬁdence in adequate supplies of good quality water. On
a global scale, the pursuit of cost savings will drive industry to ﬁnd more economical ways of operating; one
option is the optimization of resources through the
adoption of advanced technologies and practices that
lead to zero discharge.
Trade
Trade is a driver for industry and water through multilateral environmental agreements (MEAs) and international standards. MEAs, such as the Basel Convention,
are used to control international trade for environmental
reasons and were originally devised to protect developing countries from the activities of developed countries.
However, trade from developing countries now faces
the hurdle of meeting the requirements of the developed countries. These requirements include ISO certiﬁcations, environmental management systems (EMS)
and corporate social responsibility (CSR). These have,
in turn, led to product manufacturing standards, which
include energy efficiency and climate change (carbon

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

485

footprint) requirements, and these affect industrial water use. Industry in developing countries is facing stricter
requirements and some control by the multinational
companies to which they supply their goods. A beneﬁt
for industries in these countries is the better management, including of water, such requirements necessitate,
and the resulting increased efficiency.
Water trade is typically a local issue, because it is not
practicable to transport water in bulk over large distances. However, the concept of virtual water puts
water trade on a global scale. Virtual water trade is
trade in goods and services that consume a considerable amount of water – often in their production and
usually less so in their product. It is ‘a tool for determining the movement of water through international
trade’ (WWAP, 2009, ch. 2, p. 35). Therefore, while
international trade can aggravate water stress, it can
also relieve it through virtual water trade. It has been
estimated that virtual water accounts for 40% of total
water consumption and that 20% of this virtual water
is in industrial products (WWAP, 2009, box 2.1). The
state of a country’s water resources can be improved
or made worse if goods with a large water footprint
are exported or imported.
However attractive the trade of virtual water is, there
are some important constraints (TSG, 2009). It has
been suggested that this trade strongly reﬂects trade
in agricultural products, which have large water footprints (GWI, 2008). Consequently, developing countries with little industry but many small farmers will
export water and industrialized countries, regardless
of their natural resources, will import water in food.
Reversing this ﬂow of virtual water is not practicable
as ‘you cannot tell peasant farmers in North Africa,
India or North-East China that they should give up
their land and become advertising executives or bank
clerks because those professions use less water’ (GWI,
2008). The situation is made more complex where an
industrialized country such as the USA is also a major
agricultural exporter.
20.2.2 Climate change
Climate change is a fundamental driver affecting water
availability (supply side) and in turn it pressures demand
side drivers for water. The resulting pressure on industry
is the need to secure and maintain an adequate water
supply. Fulﬁlling this need will become increasingly difficult with the unpredictable location and timing of climate
change impacts. It could happen that many industrialized

486

CHAPTER 20

countries, which are found in the mid-latitudes and the
Northern Hemisphere, will have their supplies come
under stress. Competition among users will intensify in
some regions when existing adequate supplies become
scarce. As a result, industry may need to relocate.
Conversely, some lower income countries, which are
often under water stress at present, may ﬁnd their
supply increases. In many cases multinational corporations have already relocated to lower income countries to take advantage of cheaper labour – with more
water in these areas the trend might be expected to
continue and increase, though improvements in water
infrastructure will be required to take advantage of increased supply. An indirect beneﬁt from the increased
industrial presence may be improved manufacturing quality and labour conditions and better-protected ecosystems, as the markets for their products are
mainly in higher income countries with demanding environmental standards and labour laws.
20.2.3 Technological innovation
Technological innovation applies to the quality of both
water supply and treatment of wastewater in industry,
which have a direct bearing on cleaner production and
sustainability. The constraint to treatment to achieve
high quality water is cost rather than technical capability. Revolutionary technological breakthroughs that
will transform the treatment of water seem unlikely,
but there have been many incremental technological
advances and continual cost reduction (TSG, 2009).
The idea is to commission the most economic system
for the level of quality required.
20.2.4 Policies and governance, laws and ﬁnance
At all levels of government policies, strategies and
regulations concerning water have a direct bearing on
industry and are backstopped frequently by economic
measures. Industry can to some extent inﬂuence government, but it is only one stakeholder in the process
of devising water policy, a process that has many competing interests and drivers. Government initiatives
form a variety of ‘carrot and stick’ approaches that will
either encourage or force industries into more environmentally sustainable practices. However, well-intentioned government strategies can inhibit progress; for
example, waste regulations in the USA prevent waste
transfer in industrial clusters (Das, 2005).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

20.2.5 Public input into water policy
Public involvement in decisions over water resources
and policy is increasing (Paciﬁc Institute, 2004, 2007).
Such decisions may affect the lives of many people
and thus their input is important. Protests, opposition
to projects and globalization, and water controversies
are becoming more common. With the media involved,
bad publicity over water can affect business in a very
negative way. Industry must strategically think about
and plan its need for water to avoid disputes and
confrontation.

20.3 Principal risks and uncertainties
In the past, water was not seen as an uncertain component of the process of the successful and proﬁtable operation of an industry; it was taken somewhat
for granted that supply would be easy and relatively
cheap to secure. Discharges of wastewater presented
more of a challenge but, providing standards were met,
effluent was permissible. The recent number of new
external drivers on water and its management has now
made water use a much riskier proposition for industry
(Figure 20.4). To run an industry well, water is required

in the right quantity, in the right quality, at the right
place, at the right time and at the right price (Payne,
2007). All these factors are now subject to greater
uncertainty.
20.3.1 Reliable supply
Water scarcity is seen as an increasing business risk
and the security of supply to industry is dependent
on sufficient resources (2030 Water Resources Group,
2009) (Figure 20.5). This situation is compounded by
geographical and seasonal variations, which are now
more unpredictable, and perhaps underestimated, being subject to the risks associated with climate change,
which ‘challenges the traditional assumption that past
hydrological experience provides a good guide to future conditions’ (IPCC, 2008, p. 5).
This situation then leads into water allocation and the
competing needs for water in a region, which may be
beyond the control of industry. This is especially true
in transboundary water situations where the needs of
two or more countries may conﬂict.

FIGURE 20.4
Inter-relationship of water risks between business, government and society

CIVIL SOCIETY RISK

PHYSICAL
WATER FAILURE
SOCIAL,
ECONOMIC,
ECOLOGICAL
IMPACTS

primary water resource
shortage, degradation
or ﬂooding
–
secondary water supply
and waterwaste failure

BUSINESS
RISK
operational risk
–
reputational risk
–
regulatory risk

GOVERNMENT RISK

Source: SABMiller and WWF-UK (2009, ﬁg. 2, p. 5), courtesy of SABMiller/WWF (refer to www.SABMILLER.com/water).

WWDR4

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

487

20.3.2 Adequate quality
Water quality risks associated with both supply and
discharge affect industry. Many industries require high
quality water and may use pre-treatment because natural sources of water are increasingly likely to be polluted.
It is estimated that 40% of US rivers and 75% of Chinese
rivers are heavily polluted, and that river water in the
US may be reused up to 20 times before it reaches the
sea (TSG, 2009). Groundwater is being overexploited,
contamination is increasing, and saltwater intrusion is
resulting from groundwater overdraft in coastal regions.
Industry is exposed to these risks and the costs associated with combating them. There will be more reliance
on reusing reclaimed or recycled water in the future,
and in this context, there is clearly a need to improve
the match between water quality and use.
Wastewater discharge regulations and standards present risks to industry. In developed countries there are
pre-treatment requirements before effluent can be
sent to municipal treatment plants or discharged to
watercourses. In developing countries, it is estimated
that 70% of industrial wastes are discharged without

any treatment into usable water supply (WWAP, n.d.).
Therefore, there is considerable pressure on industry to
clean up its effluent and while compliance will doubtless become stricter and more onerous, the actual
criteria and severity of standards will vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The associated risk is that of investment in new treatment technology which may be
obsolete within a few years. Industrial accidents such
as uncontrolled discharges may result from economic
and other drivers to move ahead quickly, possibly with
unproven technology and in sensitive locations. Water
quality issues therefore present restrictions on industrial expansion.
20.3.3 Supply chain disruptions
The increasing interest in water footprints highlights
the importance of the supply chain in delivering the
necessary raw materials and other items that an industry needs to function (Figure 20.6). The links in the
supply chain are subject to external drivers and risks
associated with a reliable supply of water for each
industry involved in the supply chain. A signiﬁcant
break in this chain can result in great difficulties for an

FIGURE 20.5
Aggregated global gap between existing accessible, reliable supply and 2030 water withdrawals, assuming no
efficiency gains

Billion m3, 154 basins/regions
6,900
2%
CAGR
Municipal and
domestic

900
-40%
1,500

2,800
4,200

4,500

100

600

Industry

800

Agriculture

3,100

4,500

Existing
withdrawals2

2030
withdrawals3

Relevant supply quantity is
much lower than the
absolute renewable water
availablity in nature

Basins with
deﬁcits

Basins with
surpluses

700

Groundwater

3,500

Surface water

Existing
accessible,
reliable,
sustainable
supply1

1

Existing supply which can be provided at 90% reliabillity, based on historical hydrology and infrastructure investments scheduled through
2010; net of environmental requirements.
2
Based on 2010 agricultural production analyses from IFPRI.
3
Based on GPD, population projections and agricultural production projections from IFPRI; considers no water productivity gains between
2005–2030.
Source: 2030 Water Resources Group (2009, p. 6) (the Water 2030 Global Water Supply and Demand model; agricultural production based on
IFPRI IMPACT-WATER base case).

488

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

industry. Such risks, with several factors coming into
play, are very difficult to accommodate and make contingency plans for.

be at odds with industry. Poor policy and decisions
may lead to overutilization of water resources in existing locations and underutilization in others. In addition, if the anti-industry bias of some governments,
particularly in the light of environmental activism, is
added to the new and emerging role of the public,
with its own agenda in water management, the outcomes are very uncertain.

20.3.4 Government and water management
It is the practice of governments to set their own
policies with respect to water, based on multifaceted
agendas of particular concerns from the national to
local levels. Priorities change and this variation and
unpredictability makes it particularly difficult for industry, especially global companies, to locate successfully to some countries. The situation is especially difficult if regulations change after a company
has started operations. As such, companies must be
proactive in their efforts to anticipate these uncertain
situations and take measures to address them in advance. The government perception of water risk may

20.4 Challenge areas
The main challenge to industry is how to remain viable
by properly responding to all the new water resource
drivers – their unusual pressures, their heightened levels of uncertainty and their associated risks.
20.4.1 Adapting to water scarcity
Water scarcity is probably the most pressing challenge for industry. Bridging the water gap will be a

FIGURE 20.6
The production chain for cotton

3957 m³/ton

Production chain
cotton

1332 m³/ton

3957 m³/ton

860 m³/ton

2602 m³/ton
4029 m³/ton
2517 m³/ton
Grey
1
11%
Blue
32%

9113 m³/ton

9113 m³/ton
Green
57%

9460 m³/ton

9504 m³/ton
1677 m³/ton

9588 m³/ton
Grey
13%
Blue
33%

Green
54%

10000 m³/ton

Note: The average water footprint of printed cotton (e.g. a pair of jeans weighing 1 kg) is 11,000 L per kg.
Source: Mekonnen and Hoekstra (2010).

WWDR4

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

489

major difficulty, and improved efficiency to meet demand and business-as-usual for supply approaches
are expected to ﬁll only approximately 40% of the gap
(2030 Water Resources Group, 2009) (Figure 20.7).
Scarcity may not only be simply lack of water but also
inadequate delivery due to poor infrastructure or water
management. Tied in to this economic shortage are
ancillary challenges such as ensuring industry access
in competitive situations while not coming into conﬂict with local communities (Paciﬁc Institute, 2007).
Resulting allocations may be constraints to ﬁnd sites
for sourcing, production and retail activities, particularly for those industries using large quantities of water
or needing high quality water.
Meeting basic water needs
The failure of some governments in developing countries to provide basic water needs for their population
places industry in a difficult position with respect to
those needs on a human rights basis (Paciﬁc Institute,
2004). The challenge is to balance public and private
beneﬁts. Many questions have been raised about the
responsibilities of companies to provide or improve
water for basic needs while using water for their own
purposes. There are risks around this issue to a company’s reputation as well as to potential ﬁnancing from
international agencies and institutions.

Determining water budgets
Water scarcity forces industry to understand how
much water it really needs. To increase the efficiency
of water use in a facility, it is necessary to know its
water budget and particularly its losses. This is the
baseline for water savings. Industry must know its own
water balance – the ratio of the input of water to the
output of water (Figure 20.8). Thus the challenge for
industry is to establish its water footprint or proﬁle to
see where efficiencies may be achieved. This is dependent on good data and a consistent approach to
measurement and monitoring.
The combined challenges of water scarcity and water quality generate an associated challenge: how to
increase water productivity and prevent pollution.
Water productivity appears to decrease with total
water consumption, and economic growth usually
comes through increased consumption rather than
by increased productivity (WWAP, 2003). The focal
point of this challenge is how to move to zero discharge. The challenge of water productivity is to do
more with less; in other words, to make every drop
count. If industry is to react positively to pollution
prevention, particularly in tough regulatory regimes,
then cleaner production and zero discharge are

FIGURE 20.7
Business-as-usual approaches will not meet demand for raw water

Billion m3
Portion of gap
8,000
Demand with no productivity
improvements
7,000
Historical improvements
in water productivity1

20%

Remaining gap

60%

Increase in supply2 under
business-as-usual

20%

6,000

5,000

3,000
Today2

2030

Existing accessible
reliable supply3

1

Based on historical agricultural yield growth rates from 1990-2004 from FAOSTAT, agricultural and industrial efficiency improvements from
IFPRI.
2
Total increased capture of raw water through infrastructure buildout, excluding unsustainable extraction.
3
Supply shown at 90% reliability and includes infrastructure investments scheduled and funded through 2010. Current 90%-reliable supply does
not meet avarege demand.
Source: 2030 Water Resources Group (2009, p. 7) (based on the Global Water Supply and Demand model, IFPRI and FAOSTAT).

490

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 20.8
Rio Tinto’s water balance (2009)

Diverted water used for generation or hydroelectric power 140,833 GL
Diverted water around mining and processing sites 109 GL
Water return2
141,800 GL

Water in ore that is
proccessed 383 GL

Water use on site
đƫ .+!//ƫ30!.ƫāČăĆĉƫ 3
đƫ !5(! ƫ30!.ƫĂćāƫ 4
đƫ ƫ$*#!ƫ%*ƫ/0+.#!ƫ 1.%*#
year 6 GL

Imported recycled
water 0.5 GL

Entrained in
product or process
waste 63 GL
Sent to third parties
7 GL
Town supply,
export or pastoral
use 50 GL

Water supplied directly to others 50 GL

Water input

Evaporation and
seepage 612 GL

Water output

Water output = 142,488 GL

Water input = 142,488 GL

Water withdrawn1
1,162 GL

Water supplied

Water use

1

Including onsite impounded/imported surface, onsite/imported ground water (including dewatering) and marine water
Including process effluent, dewatering water discharged without use and non process water
3
Including mining (dewatering), milling, washing, power generation, dust suppression etc.
4
Tailings, sewage or water contaminated in process that has been treated for reuse
5
The difference between total water input and total water output is ‘changed-in storage’.
2

1 GL = 1 gigalitre of water (1 billion litres)
Source: Rio Tinto (n.d.a).

principal objectives. Similarly, closed-loop production system can offer industries another option for
pollution prevention. Individual industries can obtain
economic and environmental beneﬁts from applying this principle in their operations; however it is
best achieved through industrial eco-parks, where
industries from very diverse sectors can make use of
by-products, traditionally considered as waste, from
other industries into their production process, thereby reducing costs in raw materials and/or reducing
treatment and disposal cost (Figure 20.9).
The challenges in water productivity are expressed
on a geographical basis in the disparity between high
and low income countries (WWAP, 2003, ch. 9). High
income users have better water productivity than low
income users, and while water productivity of low income users can equal that of high income users, it is
generally only on a small scale. As low income countries tend to be in areas of water scarcity, and this

WWDR4

scarcity has become more unpredictable with climate
change, the challenge of water productivity correspondingly becomes even greater.
The cost of water
Industry is conditioned to pay little for water, but increasing scarcity will result in higher charges, to which
will be added higher charges for treatment and discharge. Some countries have already implemented a
different price structure for industry – paying more per
unit than the public and paying increasing amounts per
unit as more water is used. These impacts on industry
will naturally force a response towards greater efficiency of water use, as the economic realities of the cost of
water will increase production costs. These effects will
have repercussions in the industrialization taking place
in developing countries, where water is frequently at a
premium, and they may inﬂuence the location of new
plants.

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

491

consistency of the data upon which many decisions
are made. There is a need to become risk smart not
risk averse.

FIGURE 20.9
The closed-loop production system

Production
Re-manufacture

Material
sources

Waste for
recovery

Packaging and
distribution
Re-use

Re-source

Minimized
raw material
extraction

Recovery

Use and
maintenance
Minimized waste streams

Natural environment

20.4.3 Minimizing environmental impacts
Industry has impacts on its primary supplies of water
and their ecosystems and therefore it has a responsibility to mitigate these impacts for the beneﬁt of all
water users and the environment. These impacts can
be at a water basin or transboundary scale. Industry
creates hotspots (sources) that can impact aquifers
and river pathways that can cross several countries
and discharge through coastal areas into large marine ecosystems. As the drivers involved become more
complex, inter-related and unpredictable, effects and
consequent challenges may be magniﬁed over these
large areas.

20.5 Opportunities
Source: OECD (2009, p. 10).

Small and medium-sized enterprises in low income
countries
The economic importance of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in low income countries is well known.
However, the geographical location of the SMEs often
causes additional stress on already stressed local supplies of water. The concepts of water productivity and
cleaner production are either unknown or sidelined in
the effort to make goods and provide jobs. However,
the downside is that the markets for the SMEs’ goods,
which are often in high income countries, have requirements that the manufacture of goods they import be
environmentally sustainable. This creates a situation
where survival of these SMEs is dependent on the
proper, productive and environmentally friendly use of
water – a considerable challenge requiring the means
and the know-how to move forwards.
20.4.2 Changing management paradigms
Notwithstanding the challenges presented by uncertain water issues, business and industry is still charged
with making a proﬁt and return on investment. Actions
taken to meet this goal must be carried out in the
context of corporate, social and environmental responsibility. The challenge is not to work in isolation
from government, the public and other stakeholders,
but to turn the situation into a win–win one. There are
subchallenges such as obtaining ﬁnancing, investing
in new technology, and improving the reliability and

492

CHAPTER 20

There are ways to address the issues, risks and challenges of water productivity, but they require implementation. Information without action is not real progress. The overarching challenge for industry is to play
its role in halting the unsustainable exploitation and
contamination of freshwater resources worldwide
(Box 20.1). In meeting this challenge there is an
opportunity to increase productivity, efficiency and
competitiveness in a sustainable way. This may be
summed up as integrated water management (IWM),
which takes into account company requirements and
the needs and interests of stakeholders and the
environment. Through an IWM approach an industry
identiﬁes and manages water-related risk and opportunities that affects them either directly or indirectly,
this in turn allows them to respond in time to changing
trends and have a better business performance in the
long run (CBSR, 2010).
20.5.1 Management and strategy
In a broad perspective, the problems surrounding water productivity in industry and the related problems
surrounding water globally are inter-related, not isolated, and as such need management, a strategy, planning and action that interconnect solutions for greater
effectiveness. Overarching these considerations are
the concepts, ideas and visions of new and different
ways of considering water and its use that provide the
necessary guidance down the chain of implementation.
In meeting its challenges industry must ﬁrst look to
management priorities and style, company values and
culture to encourage positive response from within its

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 20.1
Water stewardship at Molson Coors
In the beer brewing process, water usage is measured as the total volume of water used for each volume unit of beer produced. Molson Coors’ water use ratio is about 4.55 hL/hL. Water is used in the brewing process (the quality of beer is directly
tied to the quality of the water used to produce it); for cleaning brew kettles and fermenting and ageing tanks; in the packaging lines (for rinsing bottles and cans before packaging); and for cooling machinery. Also included in the equation is water
used in buildings to support the needs of the workforce. The vast majority of cleaning and rinsing water is treated to meet or
exceed regulated standards, and then discharged. A small percentage is lost to evaporation.
The industry has established a working group entitled the Beverage Industry Environmental Roundtable (BIER). Formed in
August 2006, the objective of this group is to bring together leading global beverage companies to deﬁne a common framework for stewardship, drive continuous improvement in industry practices and performance, and inform public policy in the
areas of water conservation and resource protection, energy efficiency and climate change mitigation.
Molson Coors scores water usage at each of its breweries to identify strategic ways in which it can use less water in production, thus reducing its impact on the environment and helping enhance water’s sustainability. Molson Coors has set the global
target to improve water efficiency year over year by 4% (2008–2012). Water data and overall environmental performance
data are veriﬁed by an independent third party before publication.
In 2009, Molson Coors committed to conducting watershed assessments at each brewery locations. In the United Kingdom
(UK) and Canada, it commissioned studies of water resources, water use and water disposal at each facility to be fed into its
country strategies and global policy. The study in Canada covers the entire supply chain, including the overall impact Molson
has or could have in the communities where it operates.
Source: Global Compact (n.d.).

own sphere. Proactive measures by industry will not
only anticipate the future but help to shape it (Paciﬁc
Institute, 2007). Innovation, investment and collaboration are key elements; they require a strategic approach rather than the ad hoc solutions more commonly found.
Water footprint
In order to develop a truly successful water strategy industry must have the necessary data available;
to be able to evaluate water risks, it is necessary to
know the water use in an industry. The customary
approach of mass water balance is only part of the
picture; water footprints or proﬁles are increasingly
being introduced to estimate an industry’s real water
use. Estimation of footprints or proﬁles may involve
using a water diagnostic tool and water scenario
planning supports (WWAP, 2009, ch. 2, referencing
WBCSD, 2006).
The water footprint takes into account all the obvious
water content in a product as well as the less obvious
inputs and uses of water in production and consumption (virtual water). Complete water footprints can be
quite complex; for example, the concept of a water
footprint for business adds on the indirect water use

WWDR4

in the producer’s supply chain. Thus there is the operational water footprint and the supply chain water
footprint. There are also considerations up and down
the supply chain, such as the water involved in agricultural raw materials or end-use, if water is involved
in utilizing the product (e.g. soap). Therefore, a water
footprint reﬂects the true amount of water used, which
may not be immediately apparent from looking at the
end product. In addition, ‘the ecological or social impact of a water footprint obviously depends not only on
the volume of water use, but also on where and when
the water is used’ (Water Footprint Network, n.d.a). All
this knowledge can direct strategy for water use to
increase its productivity (output per drop) both on the
supply and the demand sides (Box 20.2).
Risk assessment
In developing a water strategy a company needs to
evaluate its exposure to water risks – including hydrological, economic, social and political factors in different geographical contexts – and plan for them in its
decision-making.
Water strategies
Once the issues have been evaluated a company is in
a realistic position to adopt a water policy, which is

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

493

BOX 20.2
The water footprint of Coca-Cola®
Researchers at the Twente University in the Netherlands in collaboration with Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (CCE) and Coca-Cola
Europe studied the water footprint of a 0.5 L PET bottle of Coca-Cola produced at CCE’s Dongen bottling plant in the Netherlands.
FIGURE 1

The accounting process began with water used in
the supply chain to produce ingredients and other
components (e.g. bottles, labels, packing materials).
Ingredients include sugar made from sugar beets grown
in the Netherlands, carbon dioxide, caramel, phosphoric
acid and caffeine. The supply chain water footprint also
included overheads, which account for water used to
produce the energy that powers the plants and for water used for building materials, vehicles, fuel, office paper and other items not directly related to operations.
Water used in operations is the water incorporated into
the product as an ingredient and water used in production processes.

Indirect water Use
in the Supply Chain
PET Bottle,
Closure, Label,
Tray Carton, Tray
Shrink Film,
Pallet Stretch
Wrap, Pallet

Direct Operational
Water Use

Water
Footprint

Cleaning, Mixing,
Blending, Filling

Packaging
Bottling Plant
Beet Sugar,
Phosphoric Acid,
Caramel, 2
Caffeine, C0

Ingredients

Indirect and direct water footprint components of 0.5 L of
Coca-Cola in a PET bottle

The results, including all components, are shown in the second ﬁgure. The estimates are that the green water footprint of the
0.5 L Coca-Cola beverage is 15 L, the blue water footprint is 8 L and the grey water footprint is 12 L.
More than two-thirds of the total water footprint comes from green and blue water. The green and blue (consumptive) water
footprints are primarily associated with sugar beet production in the supply chain. The sugar beets are largely rainfed (green
water) in this water-rich temperate climate, but some external (blue) water supply is required for irrigation. Green water
makes up approximately two-thirds of the consumptive water footprint and nearly half of the total water footprint. Blue water accounts for approximately one-quarter (or much less according to a subsequent study) of the total water footprint.
Approximately one-third of the total water footprint is grey water, which is associated with the supply chain. A portion of the
nitrogen applied as fertilizer to the sugar beet ﬁelds is released to receiving waters. Cooling water associated with PET bottle
production results in a thermal load, which was considered in the grey water component.
The operational water footprint, 0.4 L, equates
to only about 1% of the total water footprint. It
is entirely blue water, representing water added
as an ingredient. The grey water footprint
associated with operations (water used for
domestic purposes in the Dongen plant) was
determined to be zero because all wastewater
is treated to meet or exceed wastewater treatment standards in a public wastewater treatment plant and returned to the environment
under The Coca-Cola Company’s ‘Recycle’
commitment.
The supply chain overhead water footprint
was calculated and found to be negligible.
Before the study, there was recognition that
the overhead component is a part of the overall water footprint of a product, but it was unclear how relevant it was.

Supply Chain

Operational

Water Footprint

Water Footprint

Total
Water Footprint

Green | 13%
Blue | 4%

Packaging
(7 litres)

(15 litres)

(12 litres)

Grey | 83%

Blue | 100%

Grey
34%

Green
43%

Blue
23%
Grey
20%
Blue
28%

Green
52%

(0.4 litres)

(8 litres)

Ingredients
(28 litres)

Water footprint of 0.5 L of Coca-Cola in a PET bottle produced in Dongen,
the Netherlands. The green water footprint refers to the consumption of
green water resources (rainwater stored in the soil as moisture); the blue
water footprint refers to consumption of blue water sources (surface and
groundwater); and the grey water footprint refers to pollution and is deﬁned as the volume of freshwater that is required to assimilate the load of
pollutants based on existing ambient water quality standards.

Source: The Coca-Cola Company and The Nature Conservancy (2010, pp. 11, 12 [ﬁgures, and pp. 11-15 text adapted]).

494

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

likely to embrace strategies for everything from corporate values to communication. These strategies may
include:
đƫ Promoting CSR and environmental sustainability
(Figure 20.10). These principles include recognizing environmental inter-relationships such as those
between water and energy and links to air emissions
and climate change.
đƫ Encouraging a paradigm shift to ‘cradle-to-cradle’
industrial operations – providing a service to customers to allow them to use a product and return
it to the manufacturer for recycling (McDonough
and Braungart, 2002; WWAP, 2006, ch. 8). Waste
then has value as raw material for other production
processes.
đƫ Using the Precautionary Principle to promote action,
develop options and assist decisions.
đƫ Introducing EMS. The company culture should be
such that it promotes the use of ISO 14000, best
environmental practices (BEP) and best available
techniques (BAT). Internal documents should reﬂect
clarity and certainty in their application and they
require regular updating with the latest science. A
commitment to continuous improvement on water
issues makes a strong statement, as does regularly
reporting performance.
đƫ Setting measurable goals and targets with respect
to water efficiency, conservation and impacts.
đƫ Decoupling material and energy consumption and
integrating the need for energy with the requirements for water.
đƫ Communicating frequently and effectively with the
public and local stakeholders regarding the economic and environmental beneﬁts of various industrial policies, strategies and measures to increase
awareness, encourage conﬁdence, and gain support and cooperation in issues surrounding water
(Marsalek et al., 2002). Successful implementation
of policies depends on a proactive, rather than a
reactive, response from industry. Stakeholder engagement and direct participation can moderate
conﬂicts.
đƫ Collaborating with government agencies. In the attempt to implement better management and more
productive ways of using water in industry, it is not
the technical know-how that is the main impediment, but the framework within which to promote,
encourage and accomplish increased water productivity. Alignment of corporate strategy with
local, regional and national agencies is beneﬁcial
(Paciﬁc Institute, 2007). If industrial growth and

WWDR4

environmental protection are seen as compatible
then industry may adopt such measures for better
business rather than compliance reasons (WWAP,
2003, ch. 9). Beneﬁcial actions may then be taken
at a plant or company scale, with or without regulations (Box 20.3).
đƫ Becoming involved with organizations such as
the CEO Water Mandate (UN Global Compact,
2011) the World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD, 2006), and, through the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO)’s role in the United Nations (UN) Global
Compact Inter-Agency Team, to assist particularly in the area of Supply Chain and Watershed
Management (UN Global Compact, 2011), which
involves:
° Encouraging and engaging suppliers to improve
their water conservation, quality monitoring,
wastewater treatment and recycling practices
° Building capacities to analyse and respond to
watershed risk
° Encouraging and facilitating suppliers in conducting assessments of water usage and impacts
° Sharing water sustainability practices –
established and emerging – with suppliers

FIGURE 20.10
The evolution of sustainable manufacturing
concepts and practices

Pollution control
Treat

Implementation of non-essential
technologies
End-of-pipe solutions

Cleaner
production

Modify products, production methods
Prevent

Process optimization; lower resource
input and output.
Substitution of materials; non-toxic
and renewable

Manage

Systematic environmental management

Eco-efficiency

Environmental strategies and monitoring
Environmental management systems

Life-cycle thinking
Expand

Extending environmental responsibility
Green supply chain management
Corporate social responsibility

Closed-loop
production
Revitalize

Restructing of production methods
Minimizing or eliminating virgin materials

Industrial ecology
Synergize

Integrate systems of production
Environmental partnerships
Eco-industrial parks

Source: OECD (2009, p. 10).

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

495

BOX 20.3
Industry–government collaboration: Rio Tinto and
the Western Australian Water Corporation
The Rio Tinto HIsmelt® site is just south of Perth in
Western Australia. The new iron smelting technology is
more efficient than conventional methods but requires
cooling water. An agreement was made with the state
water utility to use treated wastewater rather than obtain
potable water from the city’s system, which supplies water to 1.5 million people.
The Water Corporation was considering the feasibility of
building an effluent treatment plant and Rio Tinto’s offer
to buy the treated water for the HIsmelt facility ensured
enough demand to make this plant viable. As a result, the
Water Corporation was able to commission the project.
The HIsmelt facility runs on the community’s recycled wastewater, which is ﬁnally evaporated. The Water
Corporation has a long-term client and Rio Tinto has access to a ready supply of water, cleaned and treated to a
high industrial standard. Moreover, local water supply is
preserved and there is reduced effluent discharge to the
ocean.
Sources: Paciﬁc Institute (2007, p. 35); Rio Tinto (n.d.b).

đƫ

° Encouraging major suppliers to report regularly
on progress achieved related to goals
Partnering with intergovernmental organizations
such as the UN to beneﬁt regions in distress and
promote advances in technology.

20.5.2 Implementation and innovation
Industry has many opportunities to address the challenges it faces and turn them into win–win situations
with other major stakeholders such as governments,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), the private investment sector,
academia and the public. In this context, the following
are some of the initiatives that industry has underway
and should be reinforced and others that might be
brought into play.
Decreasing water use and increasing water productivity
The obvious ﬁrst step for industry is to reduce water
use by conservation and recycling as well as by discharge reduction and quality improvement. Measures
to these ends include:
đƫ Conducting a water audit and developing a water
footprint.

496

CHAPTER 20

đƫ Using zero discharge and water optimization techniques to drive industrial processes (Das, 2005).
This involves integrating supply side and demand
side needs and considerations. Zero discharge is
used to nullify water footprints by full recycling and
no waste and changes the balance of the water productivity equation (Water Footprint Network, n.d.b).
In moving towards zero discharge, wastewater
streams are converted into useful inputs for other
industries and industrial clusters. Zero discharge is
a step-by-step process that industry implements
through strategic corporate planning leading to
design and implementation. It not only inﬂuences
industry on a local scale (cleaner production and
increased proﬁts), the accumulated results also have
basin, transboundary and wider impacts.
đƫ Employing water recycling and the use of reclaimed water where possible to dovetail with zero
discharge.
đƫ Using water loss management to locate, measure
and repair the sometimes huge water losses from
old underground infrastructure. This might include
development of surface leak detection systems, robotic and video pipeline monitoring technologies,
high-precision ﬂow monitoring and metering technologies, and pipeline rehabilitation systems (TSG,
2009).
đƫ Providing full and consistent monitoring and reporting of the performance of applied technologies used
in industry, in terms of both effectiveness and cost.
Real-time monitoring of processes has distinct advantages in catching problems and contamination
early and accompanying data management systems
are equally important (TSG, 2009).
Introducing new technology
BAT can incur signiﬁcant cost and may take time, so
transition periods are necessary and implementation
by regulation needs a thoughtful approach. The objective is to ﬁnd the most effective technology that is
technically viable, can be implemented economically
and is reasonably accessible. Meeting this objective
may involve:
đƫ Adopting new green technology and incorporating natural treatment systems. It is felt by some
that simpler approaches, such as sand ﬁltration and
enhanced wetland treatment, may be easier and
cheaper to implement than more common traditional treatment technologies and may play a signiﬁcant
role in helping solve the vast majority of the world’s
water shortages (TSG, 2009).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 20.4
UNIDO MED-TEST integrated approach

MED-TEST is a UNIDO green industry initiative supported by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Italian Government
to address priority hotspots of industrial pollution identiﬁed in the Mediterranean Strategic Action Plan (SAP-MED). MEDTEST is a component of the Strategic Partnership for the Mediterranean Large Marine Ecosystem (LME) of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP)-Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP) aiming to support governments in implementing national
strategies for reducing industrial discharges. The MED-TEST project (2009–2011) targets Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia, with the
potential to be extended to other countries of the MED region.
Enterprises of the South Mediterranean
Region are facing numerous challenges
in their effort to maintain or increase
their competitiveness on the local market, access international markets with
good quality products, comply with environmental standards and reduce their
operational costs. The MED-TEST project
has been designed to assist enterprises
in dealing with these challenges and in
building a long-term sustainable business strategy.
TEST (transfer of environmentally sound
technology) builds on management of
change within each level of the management pyramid: operational, management
system and strategic. The TEST approach
integrates and combines the essential elements of traditional tools such as cleaner production assessment (CPA), environmental management systems (EMS),
environmental management accounting
(EMA), technology transfer and corporate social responsibility (CSR), applied
on the basis of a comprehensive diagnosis of enterprise needs (initial review).

The introduction of the TEST integrated approach at the enterprise level follows this sequence:
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ!4%/0%*#ƫ/%010%+*ƫ%/ƫ%),.+2! ƫ
by better management of existing
processes
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ%*0.+ 10%+*ƫ+"ƫ*!3ƫ(!*!.ƫ
technology (or if not sufficient, of
optimized end-of-pipe solutions) is
considered
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ(!//+*/ƫ(!.*! ƫ".+)ƫ!$ƫƫ
project’s implementation is reﬂected
in the respective company’s business
strategy

Project task

Expected results
National capacities built and handson expericence gained by local
experts on TEST integrated approach

Capacity-building
for national partners

đ Existing processes optimized
đ Economic beneﬁts and sustainabillity
of TEST demonstrated
đ Reduction of polution discharges
into the Mediterranean Sea
đ Investment portfolio for clean
technology

Demonstration projects
at pilot industries

A motivated cadre of professionals
from the South Mediterranean region
will become engaged in commercially
based TEST replication activities

Dissemination and replication
at national and regional level

Outline of the MED-TEST project

Initial
review

Product
and
services

CPA/EST

Operation
Management system

EMS/EMA

Strategy

Vision and mission of the business

CSR

Stakeholder value

TEST tools and the management pyramid

Source: UNIDO (n.d.b).

WWDR4

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

497

đƫ Continuing and expanding the use of the transfer
of environmentally sound technology (TEST) methodology (UNIDO, n.d.a) in conjunction with environmental management accounting (EMA) (Box
20.4).
đƫ Working with government and academia in joint
research programs to develop new technology.
Employing eco-innovation
The development of industrial ecology as a part of
sustainable development is a relatively recent concept
used to look at the inter-relationship between industrial and economic systems and natural systems (Das,
2005). Industrial ecology connects with zero discharge
in restructuring industry to eliminate waste as an alternative to end-of-pipe solutions (Figure 20.11).
Some points for industry include:
đƫ Incorporate industrial ecology and design for environment (DFE) into industrial design and overall
planning (Das, 2005).
đƫ Relocate to eco-industrial parks. This mutual
grouping of industries to reuse wastewater has
many apparent advantages, but there are obstacles to be overcome, such as corporate reluctance
to partner with unrelated industries and the fear of
dependency on a single water supplier (Das, 2005).
In older areas not amenable to such groupings, the

transportation of wastewater may be a large problem. New industries with large water demands that
do not require drinking water quality may need
to locate near existing or new sewage treatment
plants.
đƫ Invest in environment and ecological restoration.
Such programmes may include investment in upstream watershed restoration and in supply chain
areas, which provides a win–win situation for business and communities and may have a more favourable cost–beneﬁt than technological solutions
(Paciﬁc Institute, 2007).
đƫ Adopt a life-cycle approach, whereby all stages of
the products life is assessed, including raw material
extraction, manufacture, distribution, use and disposal. This may be in the context of closed-loop systems. For example, the existing UNIDO programme
for chemical leasing provides a big incentive to zero
discharge (Chemical Leasing, n.d.a). It also improves
the efficient use of chemicals and has economic and
environmental beneﬁts by closing the loop between
the supplier and user of chemicals (Figure 20.12):
the supplier sells the function of the chemicals and
together with the user is involved in managing the
life cycle of the material.

FIGURE 20.11

Non-technological

Conceptual relationships between sustainable manufacturing and eco-innovation

Industrial
ecology

Organizations
and
marketing
methods

Closed-loop
production
Life-cycle
thinking

Processes
and
products

Ecoefficiency

Technological

Eco-innovation targets

Institutions

Cleaner
production
Pollution
control

Modiﬁcation

Re-design
Alternatives
Eco-innovation mechanisms

Creation

Source: OECD (2009, p. 15).

498

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 20.12
The concept of chemical leasing

supply, no sale
Chemical
producer

Chemical
user

Traditional relationship
Conﬂicting incentives
Supplier

Chemical leasing model
Aligned incentives
Buyer

Service
provider

Chemical
consumption

Chemical
consumption
Wants to
decrease

Wants to
increase

Buyer

Wants to
decrease

Wants to
increase

Environment:
emission reduction

Economy:
added value

Costs:
others
Costs:
producers
of chemicals

waste load
air pollution

tion
water pollution

Costs:
users

Source: Chemical Leasing (n.d.b).

WWDR4

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

499

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
2030 Water Resources Group. 2009. Charting our Water
Future: Executive Summary. 2030 Water Resources Group.
http://www.mckinsey.com/App_Media/Reports/Water/
Charting_Our_Water_Future_Exec%20Summary_001.pdf
CBSR (Canadian Business for Social Responsibility). 2010.
The Business Case for an Integrated Approach to Water
Management. Vancouver, BC, CBSR. http://www.cbsr.ca/
sites/default/ﬁles/ﬁle/Water%20Guide%20-%20Final%20
version-v3.pdf
Chemical Leasing. n.d.a Concept of Chemical Leasing:
Involvement of UNIDO. http://www.chemicalleasing.com/
sub/concept/invunido.htm (Accessed 8 August 2011.)
––––. n.d.b Concept of Chemical Leasing.
http://www.chemicalleasing.com/sub/concept.htm
(Accessed 8 August 2011.)
The Coca-Cola Company and The Nature Conservancy.
2010. Product Water Footprint Assessments: Practical
Application in Corporate Water Stewardship. http://www.
thecoca-colacompany.com/presscenter/TCCC_TNC_
WaterFootprintAssessments.pdf
Das, T. K. 2005. Towards Zero Discharge: Innovative
Methodology and Technologies for Process Pollution
Prevention. New York, John Wiley & Sons.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2007. Making Every Drop Count. Press Release,
14 February. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/newsroom/
en/news/2007/1000494/index.html
Grobicki, A. 2007. The Future of Water Use in Industry. Paper
presented at the UNIDO Technology Foresight Summit,
Budapest, 27–29 September 2007.
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2008. A New Virtual
Reality. Vol. 9, issue 9. http://www.globalwaterintel.com/
archive/9/9/analysis/a-new-virtual-reality.html
Mekonnen, M. M. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2010. The Green, Blue
and Grey Water Footprint of Crops and Derived Crop
Products. Value of Water Research Report Series No. 47,
Paris, UNESCO-IHE.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Chapagain, A. K. 2007. Water footprints
of nations: Water use by people as a function of their
consumption pattern. Water Resources Management,
Vol. 21, pp. 35–48.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2008.
Technical Paper on Climate Change and Water. Doc. 13.
Finalized at the 370th Session of the IPCC Bureau. Geneva,
IPCC.

(CCME). http://www.ccme.ca/assets/pdf/water_reuse_
wkshp_rpt_e.pdf
McDonough, W. and Braungart, M. 2002. Cradle to Cradle:
Remaking the Way We Make Things. New York, North Point
Press.
NCASI (National Council for Air and Stream Improvement).
2010. Water Proﬁle of the Canadian Forest Products
Industry. Technical Bulletin No. 975. Research Triangle Park,
NC, NCASI. http://www.ncasi.org//Publications/Detail.
aspx?id=3280
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2009. Sustainable Manufacturing and
Eco-Innovation: Framework, Practices and Measurement
(Synthesis Report). Paris, OECD.
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/15/58/43423689.pdf
Paciﬁc Institute. 2004. Freshwater Resources: Managing
the Risks Facing the Private Sector. Oakland, Calif., Paciﬁc
Institute. http://www.pacinst.org/reports/business_risks_
of_water/business_risks_of_water.pdf
––––. 2007. At the Crest of a Wave: A Proactive Approach to
Corporate Water Strategy. Oakland, Calif., Paciﬁc Institute.
http://www.pacinst.org/reports/crest_of_a_wave/crest_
of_a_wave.pdf
Payne, J. G. 2007. Matching Water Quality to Use
Requirements. Paper presented at the UNIDO Technology
Foresight Summit, Budapest, 27–29 September 2007.
Rio Tinto. n.d.a Water. http://www.riotinto.com/
ourapproach/17214_water_17309.asp (Accessed 8 August
2011.)
––––. n.d.b Saving Water by Running on Recycled
Waste. http://www.riotinto.com/ourapproach/17194_
features_5898.asp (Accessed 8 August 2011.)
SABMiller Plc and WWF-UK. 2009. Water Footprinting:
Identifying and Addressing Water Risks in the Value Chain.
Technical report. Woking/Surrey, UK, SABMiller Plc/World
Wide Fund for Nature UK.
Shiklomanov I. A. 1999. World Water Resources: Modern
Assessment and Outlook for the 21st Century (Summary
of World Water Resources at the Beginning of the
21st Century, prepared in the framework of the IHP
UNESCO). Saint Petersburg, Federal Service of Russia for
Hydrometeorology and Environment Monitoring, State
Hydrological Institute.
Statistics Canada. 2007. EnviroStats, Fall 2007, Vol. 1, No. 2.
Ottawa, Ont., Statistics Canada. http://www.statcan.gc.ca/
pub/16-002-x/16-002-x2007002-eng.pdf
TSG (TechKNOWLEDGEy Strategic Group). 2009. The State
of the Water Industry. Boulder, CO, TSG. http://www.techstrategy.com/index.htm

Marsalek, J., Schaefer, K., Excall, K., Brannen, L. and Aidun,
B. 2002. Water Reuse and Recycling. CCME Linking Water
Science to Policy Workshop Series, Report No. 3. Winnipeg,
Man., Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment

500

CHAPTER 20

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

UN Global Compact. 2010. Corporate Responsibility 2010.
New York, United Nations.
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/Issues/Environment/
CEO_Water_Mandate/endorsingCEOs.html
UN Global Compact. 2011. The CEO Water Mandate. New York,
United Nations (UN) Global Compact Office.
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/news_events/8.1/
Ceo_water_mandate.pdf
UN Global Compact. n.d. Website.
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/Issues/Environment/
CEO_Water_Mandate/index.html
(Accessed 8 August 2011.)
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2006.
Human Development Report 2006: Beyond Scarcity –
Power, Poverty and the Global Water Crisis. New York,
Palgrave Macmillan.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2008. Vital
Water Graphics: An Overview of the State of the World’s
Fresh and Marine Waters, 2nd edn. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/dewa/vitalwater/article48.html
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development
Organization). n.d.a Test Approach.
http://www.unido.org/index.php?id=7677 (Accessed 8
August 2011.)
––––. n.d.b Towards Clean Competitive Industry
(Brochure). http://www.unido.org/ﬁleadmin/user_
media/Services/Environmental_Management/Water_
Management/09-84752_brochure_ﬁnal.PDF
(Accessed 8 August 2011.)

WWDR4

Water Footprint Network. n.d.a Corporate Water Footprints.
http://www.waterfootprint.org/?page=ﬁles/
CorporateWaterFootprintAccountingFramework
––––. n.d.b Glossary. http://www.waterfootprint.
org/?page=ﬁles/Glossary (Accessed 8 August 2011.)
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable
Development). 2006. Business in the World of Water:
WBCSD Water Scenarios to 2025. Washington, DC, WBCSD.
http://www.wbcsd.org/Plugins/DocSearch/details.asp?Doc
TypeId=25&ObjectId=MTk2MzY&URLBack=%2Ftemplates%
2FTemplateWBCSD2%2Flayout.asp%3Ftype%3Dp%26Men
uId%3DODU%26doOpen%3D1%26ClickMenu%3DRightMen
u%26CurPage%3D11%26SortOrder%3Dpubdate%2520desc
World Bank. 2010. World Development Indicators 2010.
Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://data.worldbank.
org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators/wdi-2010
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. World
Water Development Report 1: Water for People, Water for
Life. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
––––. 2006. World Water Development Report 2: Water: A
Shared Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn
Books.
––––. 2009. World Water Development Report 3: Water in A
Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
––––. n.d. Facts and Figures: Water and Industry. http://www.
unesco.org/water/wwap/facts_ﬁgures/water_industry.
shtml (Accessed 8 August 2011.)

FRESHWATER FOR INDUSTRY

501

CHAPTER 21
Ecosystems

UNEP
—
Authors Tim Jones (DJ Environmental), Tim Davies (DJ Environmental),
Thomas Chiramba (UNEP) and Elizabeth Khaka (UNEP)
Contributors Daniele Perrot-Maitre (UNEP), Renate Fleiner (UNEP), Peter Bjoernsen
(UNEP-DHI Centre on Water and Environment), David Coates (Secretariat of the CBD),
Anne-Leonore Boffi (WBCSD) and Sarah Davidson (The Nature Conservancy)

© Shutterstock/Ammit

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Ecosystems can be managed so as to sustain water availability and its quality – services
provided by ecosystems – and thereby help achieve water security. The continued availability
of water (of sufficient quantity and quality) depends on the continued healthy functioning of
the ecosystems that supply it, while the ecosystems themselves are dependent on receiving
sufficient water. This can be summed up as ‘nature for water security; water security for nature’,
a phrase that neatly encapsulates the linkages that decision-makers have to take into account.
Ecosystems provide a wide range of services (e.g. food and ﬁbre, nutrient recycling, climate
regulation, ﬂood and drought regulation, and tourism and recreation), all of which are
underpinned by water security. Water use by all is dependent on ecosystem functioning,
as are the other natural resource-based goods and services that support human society.
Maintaining the ability of ecosystems to support ecosystem services is therefore critical for
socio-economic well-being and sustainable development.
Managing ecosystem services is about trade-offs. Trade-offs are not necessarily about
choosing one beneﬁt over another. They are as much about sustainable multiple beneﬁts and
balanced investments to achieve an optimal outcome.
Sustainable development, including water security, is dependent on maintaining ecosystem
services. Ecosystem management is therefore key.
Many ecosystem services are not generally considered in economic planning but can generate
very high economic values. They are often considered as being provided free of charge by
nature, but in many cases this is incorrect because they can be expensive to rehabilitate or
replace artiﬁcially when degraded or lost. They are also ﬁnite and can be over-used.
There is an urgent need to incorporate ecosystem-based thinking into water governance.
Water allocation needs to be based on sustainable supply, which is determined primarily by
ecosystem boundaries, and not on demand.
Sustaining and restoring ecosystems is an essential response to the increased risks and
uncertainty posed by climate change.
Risks and uncertainties arising from natural disasters such as ﬂoods, landslides and droughts
(including those triggered by extreme storms, earthquakes and tsunamis) can be reduced
by maintaining or restoring natural infrastructure. The economic beneﬁts of reducing this
vulnerability are substantial through both reducing the frequency and severity of impacts
and creating more stable conditions post impact.
As a consequence of escalating pressures, ecosystems and their services continue to be
degraded and lost. This increases risk. Freshwater ecosystems are the most threatened of all.
The ability of ecosystems to continue providing the water resources services that we depend
on is being severely compromised, with already catastrophic effects for humanity.
Sustaining or restoring ecosystems to ensure continued availability of the ecosystem services
on which we depend can be a cost-effective and more sustainable solution than traditional
approaches to achieving water security. Natural infrastructure solutions should be part of all
options considered, alongside physical infrastructure, and assessments should factor in the
co-beneﬁts on offer, which are often high with natural solutions.
The need is to make ecosystem-based approaches mainstream under an improved and more
holistic policy and management framework that capitalizes on the beneﬁts on offer to help
us achieve more sustainable solutions.

21.1 The challenges
Ecosystems are at the heart of the global water cycle.
All freshwater on earth is ultimately dependent on their
continued healthy functioning. Ecosystems provide a
spectrum of services that beneﬁt human society in all
regions of the world, including the essential regulation
of water quantity, mitigation of extremes of ﬂooding and drought, and preservation of water quality.
Ecosystems also cycle the water on which they themselves depend, thereby underpinning all terrestrial
ecosystem services, such as food production, climate
regulation, carbon storage and nutrient recycling. This
water cycle also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the functioning
of estuaries and deltas, including the signiﬁcant services they provide, such as regulating land formation,
coastal protection and food from ﬁsheries.
Ecosystem loss and degradation usually results in a reduction in the delivery of these water-related services.
The services previously provided by nature often have
to be substituted by engineered solutions (e.g. ﬂood
control structures or water treatment facilities), usually at great economic investment and operational cost
and with low sustainability. Changes in land use can
signiﬁcantly alter the availability of water; for example,
deforestation has an impact on surface water availability and quality. Likewise, land cover depends on continued water availability; for example, forests are dependent on groundwater. Maintaining the extent and
healthy functioning of ecosystems should be an integral part of dealing with water security issues. Using
natural infrastructure can offer more cost effective
and sustainable solutions either instead of, or in parallel with, hard engineered approaches. The challenge is
to integrate ecosystem-based thinking and management approaches and water and land use planning in
all sectors.
Historically, ecosystems have been treated as unproductive users of water by some groups. At the other
end of the spectrum, many groups have advocated
attention to them based on biodiversity, protection
and conservation arguments, often articulated abstractly with regard to pressing development issues.
Fortunately, perceptions are shifting towards managing human interactions with ecosystems (the environment) to support water-related development goals.
The case for ecosystem-based solutions in water policy
and land and water management is supported by considerable successful local practice. The challenge is to

504

CHAPTER 21

mainstream the approach as the provider of economically and environmentally sustainable water management solutions. As recognized by the Fifth World
Water Forum (Istanbul, March 2009), there needs to
be a paradigm shift from ‘Water for Nature’ to ‘Nature
for Water’. This requires that decision-makers:
đƫ understand that the availability of appropriate quantities of water of sufficient quality is a service provided by ecosystems and therefore sustaining or restoring ecosystem infrastructure is a tool to achieve
water security;
đƫ are fully aware of the direct or indirect dependence
of most, if not all, socio-economic sectors, on the
maintenance of sustainable ecosystem services and
the nature of those services;
đƫ understand the factors that are putting ecosystem
functioning at risk;
đƫ value ecosystem services properly, including
through calculation of the economic costs of replacing them with engineered solutions;
đƫ implement transparent and impartial policy development and management that recognizes that ecosystems can promote cost-effective solutions with
the added potential to deliver multiple beneﬁts for
sustainable development; and
đƫ implement the changes necessary to put the solutions into practice.

21.2 The role of ecosystems in regulating
water quantity and quality
A simpliﬁed introduction to water ecosystems was
provided in the ﬁrst edition of the World Water
Development Report (WWAP, 2003), with a focus on
wetlands and freshwater components of ecosystems
such as streams, rivers, lakes and marshes. This introduction needs considerable expanding to include other
ecosystem components such as forests, grasslands and
soils that also play a signiﬁcant role in the ecosystems.
Surface vegetation (land cover) regulates runoff of
water as well as soil erosion at the land surface. Plant
leaves inﬂuence how rainfall reaches the ground and
their roots help inﬁltration of water into soils. This signiﬁcantly reduces erosion, stabilizes slopes (reducing
land-slides), potentially reduces ﬂood risks, and sustains soil moisture and the recharge of groundwater.
Plants also take up water from the soil and release it
back into the atmosphere as water vapour (transpiration), which can have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on local,
regional and even global rainfall patterns. The beneﬁts of this process are most obvious in regions where

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

extensive tracts of original forest cover remain, such as
the Amazon and Congo basins. Removal of this vegetation can reduce local, regional and global rainfall. But
the relationships are complex; for example, planting of
non-native tree species with high water requirements,
particularly in dry areas, can lead to groundwater depletion. Proposals for extensive changes in vegetation
cover should always be subject to rigorous assessment
of the impacts on water cycling.
Wetlands – such as swamps, marshes, peatlands and
shallow lakes – play perhaps the most obvious role
in the water cycle, as they by deﬁnition permanently
or intermittently store water. For example, ﬂoodplain
wetlands store ﬂoodwater and slow its ﬂow, helping
reduce ﬂood risk downstream. Wetlands also regulate
nutrients, sediments and other potential pollutants,
acting as an effective natural water treatment infrastructure (Box 21.1).
Mountain ecosystems comprise a complex mosaic of
snowﬁelds, glaciers, bare rock, boulder ﬁelds, screes,
streams, rivers, lakes, grasslands and forests, and are
the source of many of the world’s major river systems.
The Himalayan massif alone supplies the Brahmaputra,
Ganges, Indus, Mekong and Yangtze rivers, among
other major river systems in Asia, providing water, year
round, to approximately one billion people (Rao et al.,
2008).

BOX 21.1
Wetlands as water treatment infrastructure:
Kolkata, India
Kolkata city generates some 600 million L of sewage
and wastewater every day. The manmade East Kolkata
Wetlands was declared a Ramsar site in 2002 for its use
of this 125 km2 (12,500 ha) area for sewage treatment, ﬁsh
farming (4,000 ha) and irrigated agriculture (6,000 ha).
Waste is pumped into the ﬁsh ponds of the East Kolkata
Wetlands where biodegradation has a cumulative efﬁciency in reducing biological oxygen demand of more
than 80% and coliform bacteria reduction exceeds 99.99%
on average. The wetlands also provide about one-third
(11,000 metric tons) of the city’s annual ﬁsh demand and
water from them is used to supply rice paddies (yielding
15,000 metric tons of rice per annum) and supports vegetable production.

Source: Department of Environment, Government of West Bengal,
India (2007).

WWDR4

21.2.1 Ecosystems as water infrastructure
The term ‘ecosystem infrastructure’ has been introduced to acknowledge that ecosystems can, and
do, perform similar functions to conventional engineered water infrastructure. Ecosystem infrastructure is now commonly used to address water quality
needs (Box 21.2). A functioning ﬂoodplain moderates
peak ﬂows by allowing the water to spread out over
a wide area, at the same time enabling sediments to
settle; removing ﬂoodplains requires their beneﬁts
to be replaced by engineered ﬂood and sediment
control measures. Investment in the maintenance of
‘soft’ ecosystem infrastructure needs to be seen as an
equally valid option to investing in ‘hard’ engineered
infrastructure. In many cases, the former will prove
to be many times more cost effective than the latter,
while also providing additional beneﬁts such as support for ﬁsheries, tourism and biodiversity. But the
interactions between landform, land cover, climate
and the water cycle are complex and location-speciﬁc,
and solutions for a particular situation require targeted investigation (Emerton and Bos, 2004).
21.2.2 Water allocation and environmental ﬂows
Ecosystems are themselves dependent on receiving
sufficient water for their continued functioning. Key
elements for water allocation to sustain that functioning include:
đƫ Assessments based on the economic values of
water-related ecosystem services and trade-offs
between users
đƫ Adequate knowledge of how local and regional
ecosystems underpin water security including water
quantity, quality and timing for both ecosystem and
direct human needs
đƫ A participatory, scale appropriate approach
đƫ Building water governance capacity
đƫ Allocation decisions to be based upon managing
and protecting supply, rather than simply responding to demand
The quantity of water needed to maintain all of the
water-dependent or water-related ecosystem services
that are required in a given area is often referred to as
the ‘environmental ﬂow’ (Dyson et al., 2008). However,
current approaches to environmental ﬂow are too often restricted to considering surface-water ﬂows, in
particular, minimum ﬂow requirements for rivers
(Box 21.3). They also need to consider groundwater,
soil moisture and evapo-transpiration components
necessary to sustain the water cycle.

ECOSYSTEMS

505

BOX 21.2

BOX 21.3

Ecosystem solutions for water quality risks

Maintaining ﬂows: The Mekong River Agreement

The use of natural infrastructure to protect water supplies,
particularly drinking water for cities, is already widespread. For example, the Water Producer Programme,
developed by the Brazilian National Water Agency,
provides compensation to farmers to safeguard critical
headwaters which supply water to nine million people in
the São Paulo metropolitan region. Success has spawned
similar approaches in other regions of Brazil (The Nature
Conservancy, 2010b). Likewise, the páramo grassland of
Chingaza National Park in the Colombian Andes plays a
crucial role in maintaining water supplies for eight million
people in the capital city, Bogotá. An innovative public–
private partnership has set up an environmental trust fund
through which payments from the water company are
transferred for managing the páramo sustainably, potentially saving the water company around US$4 million per
year (Forslund et al., 2009, p. 31).

The Mekong River Agreement (1995) between Cambodia,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Thailand and Viet Nam
provides a framework for cooperation oMaintaining ﬂows:
The Mekong River Agreement and speciﬁcally requires
minimum stream ﬂows which are to be ‘of not less than
the acceptable minimum monthly natural ﬂow during
each month of the dry season’. An Integrated Basin Flow
Management programme has been undertaken by the
Mekong River Commission Secretariat since 2004 to provide information to the riparian states regarding the predicted costs and beneﬁts of land and water development.
It also supports inter-government dialogue on the tradeoffs that may be necessary between development, social
and environmental impacts enabling agreement on a mutually acceptable framework for sustainable development
and to promote reasonable and equitable transboundary
sharing of beneﬁcial uses.

Sources: Mekong River Commission (2010) and Srinetr (2009).

21.2.3 Economic valuation of ecosystem services
Assigning economic values to water-related and
water-dependent ecosystem services is one of the most
effective means of enabling investments and operational costs to be directly compared (Box 21.4). It also
is important to shed light on the gender dimensions of
development because reliance on different ecosystem
services varies considerably between genders (and
economic classes). (See Chapter 23 for a treatment of
ecosystem services within a water valuation framework.)
The fact that water underpins all ecosystem services
generates high values when the value of water is calculated in this fashion. But amongst the full suite of
ecosystem services there are those that relate more
obviously and directly to water as a resource (e.g.
ﬂood mitigation and water quality). Valuing ecosystem services is sometimes regarded as difficult; but
for some, it is relatively simple. The costs of ﬂood impacts, for example, and the investments in, and operational costs of, artiﬁcial ﬂood-control structures are
frequently well known and often reﬂect the value of
ﬂood-mitigation services that ecosystem infrastructure previously provided. Likewise, the loss of clean
water as an ecosystem service is partly reﬂected in
costs of artiﬁcial water treatment or the economic
impacts of poor water quality.
Advances in the economic valuation of ecosystem services have been made over the past 20 years and a

506

CHAPTER 21

range of techniques can now be used in practice: these
are summarized by Emerton and Bos (2004), Emerton
(2005) and De Groot et al. (2006). TEEB (2009a) provides a comprehensive overview of the topic, including noting the reliance of the poor on these services
directly. TEEB (2009b) concluded, inter alia, that there
is a compelling cost–beneﬁt case for public investment
in ecological infrastructure (especially restoring and
conserving forests, mangroves, river basins, wetlands,
etc.), particularly because of its signiﬁcant potential as a
means of adaptation to climate change. Even for many
terrestrial ecosystems (such as forests), values related
to water services outstrip more conspicuous beneﬁts
(such as timber products and carbon storage). For example, TEEB (2009b) provides examples of the waterrelated services provided by forests, which account for
more than 44% of the total value of the forests, and
exceed the combined value of climate regulation as
well as food, raw materials, and recreation and tourism
services. The valuation of water-related ecosystem services remains an imprecise science, and although it can
provide good comparative indicators of where priorities
should lie and has led to some increased national focus
on relevant issues, it generally remains poorly applied.
However, most reports caution that many ecosystem
values, especially those relating to local beneﬁts, are
context-speciﬁc, meaning they should not necessarily
be transferred from one case to another.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

With attention turning to climate change risks and
vulnerabilities, a greater incentive is in place for valuation studies concerning water-related ecosystem
services. High values are being derived. For example,
Costanza et al. (2008) value the extreme weather mitigation services (not including other services) provided by one hectare of wetland in the United States of
America (USA) at US$33,000 for a single storm event.
In Mexico, the value of water associated with protected
areas for all human consumptive uses is estimated at
US$158 million annually, with water used directly for
human consumption valued at US$15 million annually
(The Nature Conservancy, 2010a). Globally, between
33% and 44% of cities obtain their water from forested
protected areas. These examples demonstrate an underlying convergence of interests around ecosystems
although progress remains constrained by considerable diversity in the terminology in use.
The business advantage of maintaining ecosystem
services is being more widely recognized and beyond just the bounds of corporate social responsibility. For example, the multibillion dollar Scottish whisky
industry works closely with the Scottish Environment
Protection Agency to develop and implement best
practice in managing the environment to sustain the
water resources upon which the industry depends. This
includes the conservation of fragile peatland ecosystems and active participation in river basin management planning.

BOX 21.4
Assessing ecosystem services in the Mississippi
River Delta, USA
Ecosystems of the Mississippi River Delta provide
US$12–47 billion in beneﬁts to people every year in terms
of hurricane and ﬂood protection, water supply, water
quality, recreation and ﬁsheries. If this natural capital were
treated as an economic asset, the delta’s minimum asset
value would be US$330 billion to US$1.3 trillion (at 2007
values). However, this natural capital is being squandered
through human-caused ecosystem loss and degradation.
Doing nothing to invest in natural infrastructure in the
coming decades would cost an estimated US$41 billion
per year through lost ecosystem services, whereas
protection, rehabilitation and restoration of natural
infrastructure would have an estimated net beneﬁt of
US$62 billion annually.

The World Business Council for Sustainable
Development (WBCSD), working in conjunction with
the World Resources Institute, has developed the
Corporate Ecosystem Services Review, which helps
companies identify and measure the risks and opportunities arising from their impact and dependence on
ecosystem services (WBCSD, 2010a). The WBCSD has
also developed a publicly available Global Water Tool,
which helps companies and organizations map their
water use and assess risks relative to their global operations and supply chains (WBCSD, 2010b). Building on
both tools, the WBCSD has launched the Ecosystem
Valuation Initiative, which is working to develop a
Guide to Corporate Ecosystem Valuation that makes
the case for ecosystem valuation as an integral part
of business planning and corporate decision-making
(WBCSD, 2010c). WBCSD’s Vision 2050 explores potential pathways by which a global population of nine
billion people could be living sustainably by 2050, with
particular emphasis on the role of business in relation
to drivers of change (WBCSD, 2010d).
21.2.4 Payment for ecosystem services
Making payments to land owners and users can be an
important tool for incentivizing land and water management practices that maximize ecosystem services
(payment for ecosystem services [PES]), beneﬁting
downstream users, where there is a clear cause-andeffect link between upstream management practices
and downstream beneﬁts. Cost recovery is likely to be
easiest when certain groups already pay the consequences of lost services so that ﬁnancing can be transferred from those groups to people able to reinstate a
service. The clearest examples of this are with water quality (Boxes 21.2 and 21.5) and ﬂood mitigation
(e.g. compensating farmers for increased ﬂood risks in
farmland to reduce ﬂood risk for people living in cities).
PES schemes are most likely to succeed when:
đƫ demand for ecosystem services is clear and ﬁnancially valuable to one or more players;
đƫ supply is threatened;
đƫ speciﬁc resource management actions have the potential to address supply constraints;
đƫ effective brokers or intermediaries exist;
đƫ contract laws not only exist but are enforced, and
resource tenure is clear; and
đƫ clear criteria for evaluating equitable outcomes
across partners are established, perhaps involving
the participation of independent assessors.

Source: Batker et al. (2010).

WWDR4

ECOSYSTEMS

507

BOX 21.5
Vittel, France

Nestlé S.A. produces one billion bottles of Vittel®-branded
mineral water every year at Vittel in north-east France.
To reduce contamination risk as far as possible, Nestlé
has established a payment for ecosystem services (PES)
scheme whereby farms within the protection zone for
the Vittel aquifer are provided with incentives to adopt
farming practices that contribute to nitrate reduction (e.g.
conversion of arable land to pasture). By 2004, all farms
in the area had joined the scheme. An independent study
concluded that the scheme was a cost-effective means
for Nestlé to virtually eliminate a signiﬁcant risk to its
business, while farmers were able to enter into 30-year
payment agreements, beneﬁt from debt cancellation and
acquire additional land.
Source: Perrot-Maître (2006).

Further information on PES is provided by, for example, Forest Trends, The Katoomba Group, and UNEP
(2008); Emerton (2005); Emerton and Bos (2004);
and Smith et al. (2006).

21.3 Ecosystem status and trends
The overall negative global trend in the status of
ecosystems presented in the second and third editions of the World Water Development Report
(WWAP, 2006, 2009) as well as in the fourth Global
Environment Outlook (UNEP, 2007) and third Global
Biodiversity Outlook (CBD, 2010a) continues. This is
also reﬂected in regional assessments (such as UNEP,
2008).
The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA) conducted from 2000 to 2005 remains the most comprehensive overall assessment available to date. An overall
synthesis report, a corresponding synthesis for wetlands and water (as well as for other speciﬁc sectors)
and detailed technical reports from which these syntheses were compiled are available on the MA website
(http://www.millenniumassessment.org/en/index.aspx).
Referring speciﬁcally to wetlands and water, the MA
found that (MA, 2005):
đƫ Water scarcity and inadequate access to water are
key factors limiting economic development in many
countries. However, many water-resource development schemes have not given adequate consideration to the trade-offs with other valuable services
provided by wetlands.

508

CHAPTER 21

đƫ Cross-sector, ecosystem-based approaches to natural resource management that consider the tradeoffs between different ecosystem services are more
likely to deliver sustainable development.
đƫ Particularly important trade-offs are those between
agricultural production and water quality and quantity, and between water use and biodiversity.
The third Global Biodiversity Outlook (CBD, 2010a)
provides stark evidence that the loss and degradation
of freshwater ecosystems remains the fastest of all the
major biomes. This overall decay cannot be stemmed
simply through declaring protected areas because of
the interconnected nature of these ecosystems and in
particular basin-scale interactions between land and
water. For example, data from the Ramsar Convention
on Wetlands national reports show that while wetland
protected area is increasing, most wetland sites are
degrading (CBD, 2010b). A review of the Convention
on Biological Diversity (CBD’s) work in this area (CBD,
2010b) concluded that the drivers of biodiversity loss
remain unchanged and are all escalating and include
conversion of habitat, fragmentation, the impacts of
water use (particularly by agriculture), land use and
other impacts on water quality and invasive alien species; excessive nutrient loading has emerged as an
important direct driver of ecosystem change in inland
(and coastal) waters and pollution of groundwater
remains a major concern; the surface and groundwater portions of the water cycle have been subjected to
massive changes by direct human use on local, regional and continental scales; and the global limit of ecological sustainability of water available for abstraction
has been reached and regionally, this limit has already
been exceeded for about one-third of the human population and it will rise to about half by 2030.
The Living Planet Index (LPI) measures trends in populations of more than 1,000 vertebrate species – ﬁsh,
amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals – from all around
the world, providing a useful proxy for assessing ecosystem health (WWF, 2008). Taking into account different biomes, freshwater biomes continued to show a
faster overall (global) rate of LPI decline than marine
and fully terrestrial biomes, with a particularly rapid
decline in tropical regions. Population trends in temperate (largely the developed) regions remain stable
or are possibly improving, but in tropical (largely
developing) regions they continue to decline
(Figure 21.1). This trend is mirrored speciﬁcally for
the data for freshwater dependent populations but

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 21.1
The Global Living Planet Index, all biomes (1970–2007)

1.2

Key a
Global Living Planet Index

1.0
Living Planet Index (1970=1)

Conﬁdence limits
0.8
The index shows a decline of
around 30% from 1970 to 2007,
based on 7,953 populations of
2,544 species of birds, mammals,
amphibians, reptiles and ﬁsh
(WWF/ZSL, 2010)

0.6

0,4

0.2

0,0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

Source: WWF (2010).

FIGURE 21.2
The Freshwater Living Planet Index (1970–2007)

Living Planet Index (1970=1)

2.0

Key
Freshwater index

1.5

Conﬁdence limits
1.0
The global freshwater
index shows a decline of
35% between 1970 and
2007 (WWT/ZSL, 2010)

0,5
0,0
1970

1980

1990

2000

2007

Year

Living Planet Index (1970=1)

2.0

Key
Temperate
freshwater index

1.5

Conﬁdence limits
1.0
Tropical freshwater
index
0,5

Conﬁdence limits

0,0
1970

1980

1990

Year

2000

2007

The temperate freshwater
index shows an increase
of 36% while the tropical
freshwater index shows a
decline nearly 70%
(WWF/ZSL, 2010)

Source: WWF (2010, p. 26).

WWDR4

ECOSYSTEMS

509

these show more rapid decline (Figure 21.2). This is
explained by biodiversity being higher in developing
regions and this being where the many pressures and
impacts are being felt most acutely. However, many
of the drivers of ecosystem degradation in developing
regions, and emerging economies, are determined – at
least in part – by consumption in developed countries.
While the local footprint of developed nations may appear to be stabilizing (or improving, as per Figures 21.1
and 21.2), much of their environmental footprint is now
effectively being exported to the developing world
and this is reﬂected in particular through deteriorating freshwater ecosystem conditions. The 2010 Living
Planet Report (WWF, 2010) shows a continuation of
the downward trend in the global LPI and the disproportionately adverse status of freshwater ecosystems.

21.4 Risks, vulnerabilities and uncertainties
affecting ecosystems and water security

Net beneﬁts of ecosystem conversion

The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MA, 2005) found
that the net present value of intensive farmland occupying
the site of a converted wetland in Canada was less than
half the value of the unconverted wetland, while an intensive shrimp pond in Thailand represented less than onequarter of the value of an unconverted mangrove.

is (a) to consider the impacts on water-related ecosystem services of three broad categories of change
(ecosystem conversion, ecosystem fragmentation and
ecosystem degradation) and (b) to examine the underlying indirect drivers of these changes, such as population growth, economic development and changing
consumption patterns.

Ecosystems – and their contribution to water security
– are subject to many risks, vulnerabilities and uncertainties from both natural (e.g. climate variability) and
increasingly from escalating human-caused pressures
at various scales, from local watershed degradation to
global climate change. Ecosystems have evolved to be
resilient to the impacts of extreme natural events such
as ﬂoods, droughts, hurricanes, earthquakes, volcanic
eruptions and tsunamis and to some extent can cope
with human-induced degradation. But many consequences of ecosystem decay and catastrophic disasters are triggered or made worse through their mismanagement, leading to a reduction in their capacity
to sustain the beneﬁts humans need them to supply.

Ecosystem conversion
Ecosystem conversion (e.g. draining a wetland to
grow a single crop) usually results in simpliﬁcation
of service provision and often increasing one service
(e.g. food) at the expense of others (e.g. nutrient
cycling and water regulation). In effect, this is trading other beneﬁts for food production, but usually
net ecosystem beneﬁts decline (Box 21.6). There will
also be parallel increases in other drivers of ecosystem change through, for example, signiﬁcant decrease in water quality and quantity due to runoff
of fertilizers and pesticides, abstraction of water for
irrigation, and interruption or escalation of sedimentation processes.

21.4.1 Principal pressures on ecosystems
The second and third editions of the World Water
Development Report (WWAP, 2006, 2009) reviewed
the principal pressures and impacts on ecosystems, focusing largely on freshwater components. These were
summarized under the following headings:
đƫ Habitat alteration (e.g. by drainage and conversion
of wetlands)
đƫ Fragmentation and ﬂow regulation (e.g. by dams
and reservoirs)
đƫ Pollution
đƫ Invasive species
đƫ Climate change

Ecosystem fragmentation
Ecosystem fragmentation results in reduced connectivity between once contiguous tracts of a given ecosystem. Rivers are the classic example whereby ecologically disconnected sections are created by
the construction of dams or ﬂoodplain drainage
(Box 21.7). Similarly, blocks of forest may be
clear-felled and converted to other uses, leaving
disconnected fragments of the original forest. New
transport corridors and urban expansion are additional
common causes of ecosystem fragmentation.
The remaining components will be smaller in extent,
less complex in structure, and less diverse and
consequently less resilient to external pressures. They
will deliver fewer ecosystem services less effectively
(e.g. lower capacity to regulate surface-water ﬂow
and sediment transport).

Taking a wider view of ecosystem types that play a key
role in achieving water security (e.g. forests, grasslands
and coastal wetlands), a slightly modiﬁed approach

510

BOX 21.6

CHAPTER 21

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Ecosystem degradation
Ecosystem degradation occurs when the ecological
functioning of an ecosystem – and therefore its capacity to deliver ecosystem services – is reduced, even if
its type and extent are maintained. Diffuse or pointsource pollution is one of the most serious forms of
ecosystem degradation affecting water security (Box
21.8).
21.4.2 Non-linear ecosystem change: The ‘tipping
point’ concept
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB,
2009) underlines that ecosystem loss and degradation
do not always result in an immediately detectable or
proportional response in terms of lost ecosystem services. Instead, a ‘tipping point’ may be reached, where rapid and catastrophic collapse occurs following a period
of apparent stability. CBD (2010a, p. 6) concludes that
‘there is a high risk of dramatic biodiversity loss and accompanying degradation of a broad range of ecosystem services if ecosystems are pushed beyond certain
thresholds or tipping points. The poor would face the
earliest and most severe impacts of such changes, but
ultimately all societies and communities would suffer.’
A growing concern, increasingly backed by scientiﬁc
evidence, relates to tipping points in forest ecosystems
and their ability to support the water cycle (Box 21.9).
21.4.3 Climate change
Climate change threatens water security in many regions of the world by triggering, accelerating or intensifying (or all three) changes to the water cycle. These
changes are occurring, and will continue to occur,
primarily at the ecosystem level. In turn they will alter
the availability (both quantity and quality) of water for
ecosystems, thereby adding additional stress to ecosystem services to that resulting from other humancaused pressures on ecosystems.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report (IPCC, 2007) lists
32 examples of major projected impacts of climate
change across eight regions (covering the whole
earth). Twenty-ﬁve of these include primary links to
hydrological changes. Of the other seven, water is implicated in four and two are general. Only one (coral bleaching) refers to major impacts not obviously
linked to the hydrological cycle (being caused by the
acidiﬁcation effects of carbon dioxide). Notably, most
of the impacts on terrestrial vegetation (and therefore
also on fauna) are driven largely by hydrological shifts
(changes in humidity, permafrost, snow and ice cover,
rainfall patterns and groundwater).
The IPPC technical paper Climate Change and Water
(IPCC, 2008) states that major changes in water
brought about by climate change include:
đƫ Changing precipitation patterns, intensity and
extremes
đƫ Reduced snow cover and widespread melting of ice
đƫ Changes in soil moisture and runoff
The report (pp. 7–8) also concludes unambiguously
that ‘the relationship between climate change and
freshwater resources is of primary concern and interest’, that so far ‘water resource issues have not been
adequately addressed in climate change analyses and

BOX 21.8
Groundwater nitrate contamination in the United
Kingdom

Along the Danube River more than 80% of the main river
channel has been regulated by dams, while only one-ﬁfth
of the original ﬂoodplain remains functional, with signiﬁcant impacts on the capacity of the river basin to deliver
ecosystem services.

In common with many parts of Europe, intensiﬁcation of
UK agriculture and the over-application of nitrate fertilizers during the twentieth century led in particular to the
degradation of groundwater in areas with thin or freedraining soils (or both) from which nitrates were leached
rapidly by rainfall. More than 60% of nitrate pollution in
the UK is attributable to agriculture. In conformity with
European Union (EU) and national legislation, the UK government has designated nitrate vulnerable zones within
which the application of nitrate-based fertilizers is restricted, with the aim of ensuring that groundwater nitrate
levels do not exceed the permitted drinking water limits.
Nevertheless, drinking water still needs to be subject to a
range of expensive compensatory measures, including the
mixing of groundwater from different sources (to ensure
sufficient dilution of nitrates from contaminated areas)
and denitriﬁcation.

Source: ICDPR (2010).

Sources: Defra (2010); Tompkins (2003).

BOX 21.7
Fragmentation of the Danube River basin, Central
Europe

WWDR4

ECOSYSTEMS

511

climate policy formulations’ and, according to many
experts, that ‘water and its availability and quality will
be the main pressures, and issues, on societies and the
environment under climate change’.
The IPCC (p. 4) also observes that the area of land classiﬁed as very dry has already more than doubled since
the 1970s and that ‘many semi-arid and arid areas (e.g.
the Mediterranean Basin, western USA, southern Africa
and north-eastern Brazil) are particularly exposed to the
impacts of climate change and are projected to suffer a
decrease of water resources due to climate change’.
Global climate change compounds the vulnerability
of all ecosystems, but is perhaps more noticeable, or
critical, for those where water is a key variable, such as
wetlands, deserts and forests, as well as those that are
already suffering from the adverse impacts of conversion, fragmentation and degradation. For example, a
wetland in a semi-arid region that is already stressed
due to over-abstraction of water may be lost altogether if there is a regional decrease in precipitation as a
consequence of climate change.
Adaptation responses to climate change can be
maximized by ensuring that ecosystems are as intact and healthy as possible. For example, protecting coastal ecosystems may help prevent incursion
of seawater into freshwater systems during storm

BOX 21.9
Ecosystems on the edge: the Amazon basin forests
and water
Deforestation in the Amazon basin is leading to a decrease in regional rainfall because of the loss of cloudforming evapo-transpiration from the forest. As the
climate becomes drier it is less able to support rainforest vegetation. At the same time, the loss of forest cover
removes the continuous supply of decaying vegetation
that generates the nutrients on which the forests depend.
These feedback loops mean that apparently moderate
deforestation of the Amazon basin, of the order of 20%
by surface area, could nevertheless reach a ‘tipping point’,
beyond which forest ecosystems collapse across the entire
Amazon basin, with devastating impacts on water security
and other ecosystem services. Such impacts may have
far-reaching – beyond the Amazon basin itself – effects
(e.g. on regional agriculture and global carbon storage).
Worryingly, deforestation is already at 18%.

Source: World Bank (2010).

512

CHAPTER 21

events, which are predicted to become more frequent in some parts of the world. MA (2005) concluded that the adverse effects of climate change,
such as sea level rise, coral bleaching, and changes
in hydrology and in the temperature of water bodies,
will lead to a reduction in the services provided by
wetlands. Because of their intimate and direct role
in hydrology, removing the existing pressures on
wetlands and improving their resiliency is one of the
most effective methods of coping with the adverse
effects of climate change.

21.5 Ecosystem-based approaches to the
management of water
The second edition of the World Water Development
Report (WWAP, 2006) introduced the concept of ecosystem-based management (EBM), which essentially
requires those making decisions about the allocation
and management of water to think more holistically
by including ecosystem considerations as part of water management. EBM investments and interventions
are directed at sustaining or enhancing the ecosystem
component of the water cycle through the use of ecosystem (natural) infrastructure.
As explained above, the ecosystem is the ultimate
source of all water. Both direct human use of water
and the impacts of climate change essentially involve
impacts which are delivered, either directly or indirectly, through ecosystem change. The relationship
between ecosystems and water implies that they are
impacted by water use (and climate change). This is
something that has always been known, if often articulated in different ways such as ‘environmental impact’,
and it frames the relationship negatively (although
this remains an important topic) and reinforces debate
over ‘development’ versus ‘environment’. More important, in terms of policy inﬂuence, the ecosystem–water
relationship means that ecosystems can be proactively
managed in ways that help humans achieve waterrelated development objectives. This places ecosystems as solutions (not problems) and is essentially a
cornerstone of EBM.
The Ecosystem-Based Management Tools Network
(2010) proposes that EBM is a process which:
đƫ Integrates ecological, social and economic goals
and recognizes humans as key components of the
ecosystem
đƫ Considers ecological – not only political and administrative – boundaries

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

đƫ Addresses the complexity of natural processes and
social systems and resulting uncertainties using
adaptive management
đƫ Engages multiple stakeholders in a collaborative
process to deﬁne problems and ﬁnd solutions
đƫ Incorporates understanding of ecosystem processes
and how ecosystems respond to environmental changes, whether natural or caused or inﬂuenced by humans
đƫ Is concerned with the ecological integrity of ecosystems and sustainability of human uses of ecosystems and ecosystem services
When applied to water, EBM can deliver win–win solutions that contribute to poverty alleviation and economic development. They are often more cost effective
than conventional engineering-based solutions, but not
always so. Approaches should consider EBM solutions
alongside other options (e.g. hard engineering) and
proceed on the most holistic and best evidence base
as possible, factoring in relevant uncertainties and risks.
Assessments of all optional approaches should include
beneﬁts in terms of resilience/sustainability (risk reduction) and the co-beneﬁts on offer, which for EBM can be
considerable.

BOX 21.10
Wetland restoration as a sustainable option to
address increasing ﬂood risk: The Wash, United
Kingdom
Due to the combined factors of rising sea level and land
subsidence the artiﬁcial ﬂood-protection embankment adjoining part of The Wash, an extensive estuary in eastern
England, was coming under increasing pressure from wave
attack during high tide. It was estimated that potential
breach of the current defences would result in ﬂood damage approaching £20 million. The cost of repairing and
maintaining the embankment over a period of 50 years
was estimated at £2.06 million, whereas ‘managed realignment’ (moving the ﬂood bank landward and enabling
the development of intertidal marshes and mudﬂats seaward of the realigned bank) was costed at £1.98 million,
affording ﬂood protection over a considerably longer
period of time and creating signiﬁcant beneﬁts for nature
conservation and recreation. An additional £150,000 was
added to the local economy in the ﬁrst year following restoration through increased recreational use of the area.

Source: Friess et al. (2008).

21.5.1 The role of ecosystems in enhancing water
security
EBM can deliver speciﬁc and immediate water-related
beneﬁts cost effectively. Sustaining or restoring ecosystems usually also increases resilience to change, thereby mitigating present and future risks and enhancing
sustainable water security. EBM approaches also apply
across scales, from local interventions (e.g. wetland
restoration to address localized ﬂooding) to basin scale
and beyond, and can address single or multiple waterrelated needs. Key areas in which EBM already has a
proven track record include water quality (Box 21.2) and
regulating the extremes of water, in particular ﬂooding
(Box 21.10). At all but the smallest scales, EBM is usually
multifunctional and rarely a stand-alone approach but
rather integrated into catchment level management and
included for addressing water stress under drought conditions (Box 21.11).

management tools at various scales. In principle, IWRM
involves an integrated approach to land and water management which should recognize that, from an ecosystems functioning viewpoint, any distinction between
the two is entirely artiﬁcial. In practice, many applications of IWRM do not fully incorporate ecosystem-level
approaches. IWRM is often focused on visible (surface)
water management and even where groundwater is
included (which is becoming more often the case), soil
moisture is often absent. In particular, IWRM rarely incorporates the management of evapo-transpiration (e.g.
the impacts of land cover change). The management
of wetlands, as drivers of local and often basin-scale
hydrology, is likewise included irregularly. IWRM can
indeed be complicated and its application is evolving
based on learning by doing. But because of the intimate
relationship between ecosystems and water, IWRM will
not be truly integrated, or fully effective, until applied at
the ecosystem scale.

21.5.2 Ecosystems and integrated water resources
management
As discussed in the third edition of the World Water
Development Report, integrated water resources
management (IWRM) (considered here as homologous with integrated river basin management, IRBM)
is potentially one of the most useful water resource

Rigorous ecosystem-based thinking in IWRM requires:
đƫ Identifying how relevant ecosystems, or their components that maintain water quantity and quality
in a given area and all the ecosystem services they
provide (bearing in mind they all depend on water)
– including the role of terrestrial systems, especially
vegetation and soil functions – support water security

WWDR4

ECOSYSTEMS

513

BOX 21.11
Ecosystem-based management integrated into the management of the Komadugu Yobe basin, Nigeria
The Komadugu Yobe River ecosystem, supplied by a subcatchment of the vast Lake Chad basin, is part of the natural infrastructure of northern Nigeria. In the semi-arid Sahel, rainfall variability is high and severe drought a frequent hazard. The
great majority of the basin’s human population – which has doubled in the past three decades to more than 23 million – live
in poverty. Over the same time period, ﬂow in the river fell by 35% due to construction of two dams since the 1970s, abstraction of water for large-scale irrigation and regional reduction in rainfall.
A society already in social and economic crisis was thus confronted with ever-increasing pressure on vital water resources.
The river’s natural cycle of seasonal ﬂooding and drying had been replaced by perennial low ﬂows, causing loss of beneﬁts
(ecosystem services) that communities had historically relied on. Livelihoods dependent on ﬁshing, farming and herding were
devastated. Fish habitats were silted up, the loss of seasonal ﬂoods meant that cropland remained dry, and scarcity of water
led to conﬂict. With growing impacts from climate change, the adaptive capacity of the Komadugu Yobe ecosystem and the
communities it supports became even more fragile, just when resilience was needed most. The situation was not untypical of
many river basins in Africa and elsewhere and its history typiﬁed by sector based approaches to water, lack of valuation of
the full suite of beneﬁts (services) available to be managed and the absence of any ecosystem level thinking.
However, crisis stimulated change. Restoration of the river basin’s natural infrastructure, alongside existing built infrastructure, has strengthened adaptive capacity and resilience to climate change. Beginning in 2006, the federal and state governments and other stakeholders, including dam operators and farming, ﬁshing and herding communities, came together to
negotiate a plan for coordinating and investing in restoration and management of the basin. In addition to agreeing on a
Catchment Management Plan, they drafted a Water Charter, spelling out the agreed principles for sustainable development
of the basin and the roles and responsibilities of each stakeholder. Reform of water governance is enabling transparent coordination of water resource development, including remediation of degraded ecosystems and, eventually, restoration of the
river’s ﬂow regime. Dialogue has reduced the number of cases of conﬂict to just a handful per year, and governments have
pledged millions of dollars in new investment for basin restoration. This progress offers, for once, a potentially more sustainable future. Ecosystem-based management (EBM) was not a separate approach but integrated, or rather a framework for,
more holistic and inclusive planning and management. Importantly, EBM delivered more sustainable water solutions and the
ecosystem was not regarded as a ‘user’ (competing with other uses) but its management a means to deliver greater overall
beneﬁts from water.

Source: Smith and Barchiesi (2009).

đƫ Identifying factors, including risks, vulnerabilities
and uncertainties, that affect the functioning of
those ecosystems and therefore services and how
this impacts water security
đƫ Taking measures to (a) manage the ecosystem so that
it continues to deliver, or increases delivery, of all the
beneﬁts that are required and (b) minimizes risks, vulnerabilities and uncertainties so as to try to safeguard,
as far as possible, overall ecosystem integrity and resilience (even beyond a narrow ‘water’ focus)

Further guidance on IWRM in practice has been provided by a number of initiatives; for example, the
Global Water Partnership Toolbox (2008). The Ramsar
Wise Use Handbooks (fourth edition: The Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands, 2011) provide comprehensive
guidance on integrating wetlands into IWRM –
especially River Basin Management (Handbook 9),
Water Allocation and Management (Handbook 10),
and Managing Groundwater (Handbook 11).

Tools for implementation can include, for example, removal of perverse incentives, including laws, regulations
and ﬁnancial mechanisms, that favour ecosystem degradation (such as grants for wetland drainage or conversion); payment for ecosystem services (PES); and investment in ecosystem restoration and rehabilitation (where
justiﬁed through thorough and impartial analysis).

514

CHAPTER 21

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Batker, D., de la Torre, I., Costanza, R., Swedeen, P., Day,
J., Boumans, R. and Bagstad, K. 2010. Gaining Ground
– Wetlands, Hurricanes and the Economy: The Value of
Restoring the Mississippi River Delta. Tacoma, Wash., Earth
Economics. http://www.eartheconomics.org/Page12.aspx
CBD (Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity).
2010a. Global Biodiversity Outlook 3. Montreal, Canada,
CBD. http://gbo3.cbd.int/
––––. 2010b. In-Depth Review of the Programme of Work on
the Biological Diversity of Inland Water Ecosystems. Paper
presented at the fourteenth meeting of the Subsidiary
Body on Scientiﬁc, Technical and Technological Advice,
Nairobi, 10–21 May 2010. http://www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/
sbstta/sbstta-14/official/sbstta-14-03-en.doc
Costanza, R., Pérez-Maqueo, O., Martinez, M. L., Sutton, P.,
Anderson, S. J. and Mulder, K. 2008. The value of wetlands
for hurricane protection. Ambio, Vol. 37, pp. 241–48.
Defra (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK).
2010. Nitrate Vulnerable Zones in England. London, Defra.
De Groot, R. S., Stuip, M. A. M., Finlayson, C. M. and Davidson,
N. 2006. Valuing Wetlands: Guidance for Valuing the
Beneﬁts Derived From Wetland Ecosystem Services. Ramsar
Technical Report No. 3/CBD Technical Series No. 27. Gland,
Switzerland/Montreal, Canada, Ramsar Secretariat/
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).
Department of Environment, Government of West Bengal.
2007. The Role of East Kolkata Wetlands as a Waste
Recycling Region. Kolkata, India, Government of West
Bengal. http://wbenvironment.nic.in/html/wetland_ﬁles/
wet_therolloff.htm (Accessed 26 January 2011.)
Dyson, M., Bergkamp, G. and Scanlon, J. (eds). 2008.
Flow – The Essentials of Environmental Flows, 2nd edn.
Gland, Switzerland, International Union for Conservation
of Nature (IUCN). http://www.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/
edocs/2003-021.pdf
Ecosystem-Based Management Tools Network. 2010. About
Ecosystem-Based Management (EBM). http://www.ebmtools.
org/about_ebm.html (Accessed 26 January 2011.)
Emerton, L. 2005. Values and Rewards: Counting and
Capturing Ecosystem Water Services for Sustainable
Development. IUCN, Water, Nature and Economics
Technical Paper No. 1. Gland, Switzerland, International
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Ecosystems
and Livelihoods Group Asia. http://iucn.org/about/work/
programmes/economics/econ_resources/?347/Valuesand-rewards-counting-and-capturing-ecosystem-waterservices-for-sustainable-development
Emerton, L. and Bos, E. 2004. Value: Counting Ecosystems
as an Economic Part of Water Infrastructure. Gland,
Switzerland, International Union for Conservation
of Nature (IUCN). http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/
edocs/2004-046.pdf

WWDR4

Forest Trends, The Katoomba Group, and UNEP (United
Nations Environment Programme). 2008. Payments
for Ecosystem Services – Getting Started: A Primer.
Washington, DC/Nairobi, Forest Trends and The Katoomba
Group/UNEP. http://www.katoombagroup.org/documents/
publications/GettingStarted.pdf
Forslund, A. et al. 2009. Securing Water for Ecosystems and
Human Well-Being: The Importance of Environmental Flows.
Swedish Water House Report 24. Stockholm, Stockholm
International Water Institute (SIWI). http://www.siwi.org/
documents/Resources/Reports/Report24_E-Flows-lowres.pdf
Friess, D., Möller, I. and Spencer, T. 2008. Managed
Realignment and the Re-establishment of Saltmarsh Habitat,
Freiston Shore, Lincolnshire, United Kingdom. Cambridge,
UK, Cambridge University. http://www.proactnetwork.
org/proactwebsite/en/policyresearchtoolsguidance/
environmental-management-in-drr-a-cca/98
Global Water Partnership Toolbox. 2008. IWRM – Integrated
Water Resources Management. http://www.gwptoolbox.
org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=8&It
emid=3 (Accessed 26 January 2011.)
ICDPR (International Commission for the Protection of the
Danube River). 2010. Dams & Structures. http://www.icpdr.
org/icpdr-pages/dams_structures.htm (Accessed 26
January 2011.)
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution
of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Geneva, IPCC.
––––. 2008. Technical Paper on Climate Change and Water.
IPCCXXVIII/ Doc. 13. Geneva, IPCC. http://www.ipcc. ch/
meetings/session28/doc13.pdf
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Wetlands and Water Synthesis.
Washington, DC, World Resources Institute.
Mekong River Commission. 2010. MRC Agreement,
Procedures and Technical Guidelines. http://www.
mrcmekong.org/agreement_95/Agreement-proceduresguidelines.htm (Accessed 26 January 2011.)
The Nature Conservancy. 2010a. Protected Areas for
Freshwater Conservation. Arlington, Va., The Nature
Conservancy. http://nature.vitamininc.net/water/pdfs/watermanagement/protected/Freshwater_Conservation.pdf
––––. 2010b. South America: Creating Water Funds for
People and Nature. http://www.nature.org/wherewework/
southamerica/misc/art26470.html (Accessed 26 January
2011.)
Perrot-Maître, D. 2006. The Vittel Payments for
Ecosystem Services: A ‘Perfect’ PES Case? London,
International Institute for Environment and
Development (IIED).
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. 2011. The Ramsar
Handbooks for the Wise Use of Wetlands, 4th edn.
Gland, Switzerland, Ramsar Secretariat. http://www.
ramsar.org/cda/en/ramsar-pubs-handbooks/main/
ramsar/1-30-33_4000_0

ECOSYSTEMS

515

Rao, P., Areendran, G. and Sareen, R. 2008. Potential impacts
of climate change in the Uttarakhand Himalayas. Mountain
Forum Bulletin, January 2008, pp. 28–9.
Revenga, C., Murray, S., Abramovitz, J. and Hammond, A.
1998. Watersheds of the World: Ecological Value and
Vulnerability. Washington DC, World Resources Institute.
Smith, D. and Barchiesi, S. 2009. Environment as
Infrastructure – Resilience to Climate Change Impacts on
Water Through Investments in Nature. Gland, Switzerland,
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
http://www.iucn.org/about/work/programmes/water/
resources/wp_resources_reports/
Smith, M., de Groot, D., Perrot-Maîte, D. and Bergkamp, G.
2006. Pay: Establishing Payments for Watershed Services.
Gland, Switzerland, International Union for Conservation of
Nature (IUCN). (Reprinted 2008.)
http://www.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/2006-054.pdf
Srinetr, V. 2009. Integrated Basin Flow Management for
the sustainable development of the Mekong River Basin.
eFlowNews, Vol. 6, No. 4. http://www.eﬂownet.org/
newsletter/viewarticle.cfm?nwaid=101&nwid=39&linkcategor
yid=999&siteid=1&FuseAction=display
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity).
2009a. Home page. http://www.teebweb.org (Accessed 26
January 2011.)
––––. 2009b. TEEB Climate Issues Update. Bonn, Germany,
TEEB. http://www.teebweb.org/InformationMaterial/
TEEBReports/tabid/1278/language/en-US/Default.aspx.
Tompkins, J. 2003. OH NO3! Nitrate Levels Are Rising. London,
Water UK. http://www.water.org.uk/home/news/comment/
oh-no3-nit-140503-1
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007.
Global Environment Outlook 4. Nairobi, UNEP.

WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable
Development). 2010a. The Corporate Ecosystem Services
Review – Guidelines for Identifying Business Risks and
Opportunities Arising from Ecosystem Change. Geneva,
WBCSD. http://www.wbcsd.org/web/esr.htm
––––. 2010b. The Global Water Tool. http://www.wbcsd.org/
web/watertool.htm (Accessed 26 January 2011.)
––––. 2010c. Corporate Ecosystem Valuation – Building the
Business Base. Geneva, WBCSD. http://www.wbcsd.org/
Plugins/DocSearch/details.asp?DocTypeId=25&ObjectId=
MzYwMzM
––––. 2010d. Vision 2050 Lays a Pathway to Sustainable Living
Within Planet. Geneva, WBCSD. http://www.wbcsd.org/
Plugins/DocSearch/details.asp?DocTypeId=33&ObjectId=
Mzc0MDE
World Bank. 2010. Assessment of the Risk of Amazon Dieback.
Main Report, 4 February. Washington DC, The World Bank.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2003. World
Water Development Report 1: Water for People, Water for
Life. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
––––. 2006. World Water Development Report 2: Water: A
Shared Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn
Books.
––––. 2009. World Water Development Report 3: Water in A
Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2008. Global Living
Planet Index (1970–2005). Gland, Switzerland, WWF
International. http://www.twentyten.net/lpi
––––. 2010. Living Planet Report 2010: Biodiversity,
Biocapacity and Development. Gland, Switzerland, WWF
International. http://wwf.panda.org/about_our_earth/
all_publications/living_planet_report

––––. 2008. Africa: Atlas of Our Changing Environment.
Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/dewa/Africa/
AfricaAtlas

516

CHAPTER 21

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 22
Allocating water

UNESCO-IHP and UNESCO-IHE
—
Authors Shahbaz Khan and Pieter van der Zaag
Contributors Amaury Tilmant (major contribution to Section 22.3). Case studies
provided by Lucia Scodanibbio, Heather MacKay, Sharon Megdal, Léna Salamé,
Philippus Wester, Akhtar Abbas and Frank Walker.

© UN-HABITAT/Julius Mwelu

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Water allocations in a majority of river systems and aquifers have already exceeded or are
fast approaching water availability limits. Water diversions have to be reduced, and water reallocated within sectors.
Water entitlements, water allocation, water distribution and water use are dynamically linked.
With an increasingly variable hydrological cycle and rapid socio-economic development,
there is a need for adaptive allocation mechanisms that deal with this as well as with the
accompanying uncertainties.
In regions where there are large discrepancies between where the water is and where it is
needed, the construction of large inter-basin transfer projects is likely to continue – despite
the recognized advantages of moving the products of water rather than the water itself.
Increased rainfall variability and greater pollution loads can have disastrous consequences.
New reservoirs that are built to deal with increased variability in river ﬂow may often
negatively affect water quality and aquatic ecosystems, which give rise to serious
governance issues.
In many cases, water re-allocation has been focusing on agriculture-to-urban water transfers
where farmers are compensated by urban users for increasing the availability of water
through temporary or permanent transfers. The rationale for such water transfers is often
economic.
As concern over the environment grows, some water managers are investigating innovative
ways of enhancing environmental water transfers by changing the operating rules of dams to
improve the seasonality and availability of water for ecosystems.
Water banks have been created to improve the reliability of water markets. A public
intermediary buys water from the willing sellers and sells it to buyers. Water trading markets
can make more water available for high-value uses.
When making water allocation decisions, the international community is increasingly
recognizing that access to water is a human right.
Water managers can beneﬁt from the experience of other sectors that deal with the
allocation of scarce resources. They can see how these sectors deal with uncertainty and risk
management.
Water allocation policies need to recognize and correct racial and gender inequities in water
use by addressing the expectations of all stakeholders in an equitable and transparent
manner.
Building a shared vision and trusted knowledge base is crucial for individual water users to
make responsible decisions when promoting integrated water resources management at the
river basin level.

22.1 Allocating water
22.1.1 Introduction
A water allocation system has four main aspects, of
which water allocation is one:
đƫ Water entitlements, whether they are formal or informal, confer on the holder the right to draw water
from a particular source (Le Quesne et al., 2007).
The important point here is that the entitlement is
considered legitimate by others.
đƫ Water allocation describes the process of sharing the
available water between legitimate claimants and distributing it to them (after Le Quesne et al., 2007).
đƫ Water delivery (or control) is the physical act of supplying water to those who are entitled to it, in such
a manner that they can use it.
đƫ Water use is any deliberate application of water for
a speciﬁed purpose (Perry, 2007).
Water entitlements, water allocation, water delivery
and water use are dynamically linked, and are constrained by the amount of water that is available at
a speciﬁc time. Using water creates expectations of
similar use in future. If such use is continued over time,
an entitlement emerges which may be difficult to ignore or claim back, yet the amount of water available
is prone to natural and man-made ﬂuctuations and
changes (Figure 22.1).
These four linked aspects can be characterized by
looking at the time scale over which they operate.
Water entitlements can endure for many years, while

FIGURE 22.1
Water entitlements, water allocation, water
distribution and water use are dynamically linked,
and take place within the boundary of (changing)
water availability

Water allocation

Water delivery

Water entitlements

Water use

Water availability

WWDR4

water allocation activities typically adopt a time horizon of one hydrological year, often trying to resolve
issues of water scarcity by re-allocating water between
sectors and between and within seasons. Water distribution and delivery are often based on weeks, days
and hours, and water use is an instantaneous activity.
As the hydrological cycle becomes increasingly variable, and as socio-economic development continues to
change rapidly, it is important to establish what kind of
allocation mechanisms can deal with change effectively and ﬂexibly.
This challenge area chapter reviews water allocation
issues and refers to a number of examples around the
world where change and uncertainty were dealt with
in interesting ways.
The chapter ﬁrst outlines the main issues. It then reviews new water allocation paradigms that incorporate
the role of markets and reallocation between sectors,
and some modern computational developments that
incorporate stochastic information to deal with uncertainty and risk. This chapter also highlights recent developments in the area of allocating water as a human
right. Finally, it draws the conclusion that a common
vision and a trusted knowledge base shared between
water users is key for the individual water users to
make the right decision.

22.2 Main issues
All over the world, the pressure on water resources is
increasing, leading to situations where there is not always enough water to satisfy everyone’s needs. Then
choices have to be made about how to share, allocate
and reallocate the increasingly scarce water. Water
systems are ‘closing’, giving rise to difficult decisions
about how water should be diverted, how it should be
allocated within sectors and how it should be transferred between sectors. Such dilemmas throw up debates of a normative kind: what principles guide decisions on water allocation and how can the principles
of equitable access, economic efficiency, sustainability
and customary norms and values be reconciled in speciﬁc contexts?
Water allocation has strong spatial and temporal dimensions. Decisions can span decades, years, seasons,
months, days, hours and even minutes. Think of the
granting of water rights or permits to large irrigation schemes that are expected to last for decades or
centuries; then think of hourly allocation schedules for

ALLOCATING WATER

519

short-term reservoir releases to cover peak demands in
the electricity grid. Water allocation is generally a localized activity, but it must consider larger hydrological units
and the expected inﬂows as well as the resulting outﬂows.
Many long-lasting water systems display a remarkable
capacity to cope with change. In such systems, which
often lack the physical capacity to fully control water
ﬂow, institutions evolved alongside speciﬁc physical
design principles that were able to deal with longterm variability in supply and demand. Such institutions, which have their roots in customs and traditions,
have tended to strongly embrace equity and fairness,
which gives them sufficient legitimacy to enforce decisions. Examples are quoted by Leach (1961) and Martin
and Yoder (1988) on two Asian cases. Several Latin
American examples are referred to in Van der Zaag
(1993) and Boelens and Davila (1998); while Manzungu
et al. (1999) and Mohamed-Katerere and Van der
Zaag (2003) refer to a number of African examples.
Lankford (2004) has proposed incorporating the ﬂexibility of these systems into the design of new smallholder irrigation systems (Figure 22.2).

FIGURE 22.2
Designing a ﬂexible irrigation system based on
risk sharing, proportional water allocation and an
adaptable irrigated area

Variable upstream
ﬂows

Dividing-type
abstraction point

Variable canal ﬂow, many
intakes and other sources

High risk, main canal
ﬂow and command area
are variable

Divided ﬂow (proportional)
downstream; shared risk
downstream

Source: Lankford (2004, ﬁg. 1, p. 39), with permission from Elsevier.

520

CHAPTER 22

BOX 22.1
Wicked problems in water management
As basins become closed, the interdependencies of stakeholders, the water cycle, aquatic ecosystems and institutional
arrangements increase. In such contexts, especially where
competition for water is acute, water management readily
gives rise to ‘wicked’ problems (Rittel and Webber, 1973).
Wicked problems are clusters of inter-related problems
characterized by high levels of uncertainty and a diversity of competing values and decision stakes. Wicked
problems cannot be solved by any single organization
and are intractable – since what constitutes a solution for
one group of individuals often causes a new problem for
another. Because wicked problems are characterized by
competing views and often involve power disparities, they
enter into the realm of politics (Wester et al., 2008).

But pressure on the resource is increasing everywhere,
and existing as well as new water institutions face
more frequent water allocation dilemmas that are increasingly complex and may be considered ‘wicked’
(Box 22.1). Existing rules need to be adapted and new
rules, rights and duties, and organizational arrangements may need to be crafted.
There are often large spatial discrepancies between
where the water is and where it is needed. So the construction of large inter-basin transfer projects is likely
to continue, despite the acknowledged advantages of
moving the products of water rather than the water itself (that is, the virtual water concept in the context of
proposed transfer schemes. See, for example, Ma et al.
(2006) on China and Verma et al. (2009) on India.
There is more and more demand for food, ﬁbre, feed
and biofuels. But in many river systems, large intersectoral transfers will have to be made from the agricultural to the urban and industrial sectors. The water
shortage in agriculture must lead to enhanced water
productivity, both from blue water (crops that use irrigation and supplementary irrigation) and from green
water (rainfed crops).
The increasing pressure on water resources is mainly
driven by four inter-related processes:
đƫ Population growth and mobility;
đƫ Economic growth;
đƫ Increased demand for food, feed and biofuel; and
đƫ Increased climate variability.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

The results often lead to unsustainable water use,
which manifests in drying lakes (for example, the
Lerma-Chapala case described in Box 22.7), estuaries
becoming more saline, and falling groundwater levels
(for example, the Deschutes case described in Box 22.4,
and the Andhra Pradesh case described in Box 22.8).

which are difficult to anticipate. Will water institutions
be able to adapt to shifting circumstances and changing levels of uncertainty? (Box 22.2.)

Some of the external drivers interact in unexpected
ways – as was seen with the policies and measures
aimed at mitigating climate change through subsidies
on biofuel production. The issues of water quantity
and water quality are often linked. The increased variability in rainfall combined with a growing pollution can
have disastrous consequences, for example in cases
where dry season ﬂows dwindle and chemical concentrations and water temperature surge to unprecedented levels. New reservoirs that are built to deal with
increased variability in river ﬂows affect water quality
and aquatic ecosystems, usually negatively.

22.2.1 Access to water is a human right
The allocation of water should adhere to the law and
help to implement legal conventions at national and
transboundary levels (see, for example, Wolf, 1999;
Van der Zaag et al., 2002; Drieschova et al., 2008).
The international community is increasingly recognizing water as a human right (Box 22.3). This right is
referred to – both implicitly and explicitly – in many
international and regional treaties and declarations.
Among these are the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (ICCPR), the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Geneva
Convention, and the African Charter on Human and
People’s Rights.

As a result of such developments in nearly every region of the world, institutions charged with water allocation face dilemmas that are difficult to solve, yet
they are operating under increased scrutiny and may
not have sufficient knowledge or understanding of
hydro-social system dynamics. This gives rise to serious governance issues – water institutions are charged
to make decisions, the outcomes and consequences of

After this brief overview we conclude this section by
identifying four key issues in allocating water:
đƫ How should water be allocated in times of shortage? Should certain types of use (domestic, environmental, industrial, energy and agricultural) have
more priority or should the shortage be shared in
an equitable manner? Should established uses and
users be protected from newcomers? Is there a role

BOX 22.2
Principal uncertainties related to water allocation

Uncertainty has been deﬁned as the lack of certainty about the nature of a phenomenon, process, system, quantity, estimate
or future outcome, arising from incomplete knowledge of the relevant phenomena or processes, measurement error, model
error, and imprecision associated with random factors (UNISDR, 2009).
Three types of uncertainty should be considered in water allocation decision-making:
đƫƫƫ$!ƫﬁrst uncertainty relates to water availability, and the need to be able to estimate future surface and groundwater availability at different times. This uncertainty is strongly linked to climate and our lack of understanding of hydrological processes. It not only relates to the stochastic nature of these processes (which is in fact a fairly well understood uncertainty),
but also to the non-stationarity of these stochastic processes, associated with long-term changes in climate and land use,
and the complex feedbacks between them.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫsecond uncertainty relates to our inability to predict future water demands and uses. The further we look into the future, the more this uncertainty increases. This uncertainty is strongly linked to uncertainties about future policies on a diverse spectrum of issues and in many sectors, which are difficult to anticipate and predict.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫthird, and arguably the largest uncertainty, is posed by our institutions and organizations. It relates to the risk that
our institutions may not be addressing the real issues, or might take decisions that they later come to regret. This can
occur if decisions are based on unreliable data that are taken as facts or on models that represent reality in biased ways,
or because inadequate monitoring systems were used. This type of uncertainty increases when situations that have to
be dealt with that are unique and have no historical precedent. In a changing world, these unique events will occur more
frequently.

WWDR4

ALLOCATING WATER

521

BOX 22.3
Water as a human right
In 2002, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights (2002, articles 11 and 12) deﬁned the right to water
as the right of everyone ‘to sufficient, safe, acceptable,
physically accessible and affordable water for personal
and domestic uses’. It further speciﬁed that signatories
should ensure access to ‘a minimum essential amount of
water [and] adequate sanitation,’ and should develop and
implement a national water strategy and monitor progress
made on realizing the right to water. The primary responsibility for the implementation of the right to water falls
upon national governments.
On 28 July 2010, the United Nations General Assembly
adopted a non-binding resolution, sponsored by Bolivia,
which declared that access to clean water and sanitation
is a fundamental human right. The resolution called on
member states and international organizations to offer
ﬁnancial and technical assistance, in particular to developing countries, in order to provide clean, accessible and
affordable drinking water and sanitation for everyone. The
resolution invited the UN Independent Expert to report
annually to the General Assembly. While 41 countries abstained, the resolution received the support of 122 of the
Member States.

Source: Léna Salamé, personal communication (2010).

for markets and market transactions? If so, how can
social and environmental public good values associated with water be protected?
đƫ Water rights, permits and entitlements, as well as allocation systems, provide security and predictability.
Their aim is to reduce risk. But there is a trade-off
between reliability and quantity – the more secure
the supply is, the smaller the ﬂow. How can water
allocation systems deal with uncertain inﬂows while
maximizing beneﬁcial use?
đƫ How can water institutions be transformed into
learning organizations that are forward looking, can
anticipate change and adapt?
đƫ More competition for water and tensions between
users seem inevitable. These may lead to disputes
and conﬂicts that are most likely to manifest themselves locally. How can we anticipate these rising
tensions, and what strategies exist to transform
them into enhanced cooperation?
The above key water allocation issues will be discussed
later. First, we turn to some of the new water allocation paradigms designed to deal with uncertainty.

522

CHAPTER 22

22.3 New water allocation paradigms in the
face of uncertainty
Global change, socio-economic development, new
demographics and climate change all increase competition for water. Societies face hard choices when allocating water between competing uses. Because water
is a vital resource used in multiple sectors (including
the environment), its allocation is inherently a political
and social process – which opens it to the scrutiny of
many and varied interested parties.
Because markets for this vital resource are usually absent or ineffective, allocating of water between competing demands is achieved administratively taking
into account, often conﬂicting, social objectives such
as economic efficiency, social equity and ecological
integrity. Various allocation mechanisms have been developed in order to reconcile the principles of efficiency and equity (Dinar et al., 1997).
To deal with the growing demand worldwide for energy and water, societies have augmented supply by
constructing more power plants and transmission lines
and more hydraulic infrastructures such as dams and
pumping stations. But this strategy has reached its
limit in many regions. In the energy sector, for instance,
rising concern about global warming and energy security have favoured conservation and the development
and implementation of efficiency-promoting measures.
For water, a similar trend can be observed with the
‘closure’ of river basins – that is, when available water
resources are fully committed (Molle et al., 2010). More
attention is now being given to strategies that attempt
to increase the productivity of water through temporary reallocation, either within the same sector or
across sectors. (This contrasts with permanent transfers, where water rights change hands permanently.)
A temporary reallocation strategy lends itself to a
water market and to market-like transactions where
high-value water users would compensate low-value
water users for the temporary right to use their water.
Lund and Israel (1995) review types of water transfers
such as permanent transfers, dry-year options, spot
markets, water banks, and so forth.
Most of the studies on water reallocation reported in
the literature focus on transfers from agricultural to urban use – where farmers are ﬁnancially compensated
by industries and/or municipalities for increasing the
water available to them through either temporary or
permanent transfers.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

The rationale behind agriculture-to-urban water transfer is often economic. The productivity of water in
urban uses is generally much higher than in agriculture. Agriculture can also cope better than other sectors with a larger variation in supply. For example,
Booker and Yong (1994) analysed the efficiency gains
of from intrastate and interstate water transfers in the
Colorado River basin in the United States. They found
that signiﬁcant gains were possible, especially if both
consumptive and non-consumptive use values were
considered in the reallocation process.
Ward et al. (2006) investigate the effectiveness of
market-based water transfers to deal with severe and
sustained droughts in the Rio Grande basin, also in the
United States. Using a hydro-economic model of the
basin, they found drought damage could be reduced
impressively if an interstate market program were enacted. This market would reallocate drought-induced
water losses from higher-value water uses to lowervalue uses. More speciﬁcally, farmers could reduce
their losses by trading water for money whenever the
income from the traded water is larger than the income that would have been produced using the same
water in agriculture.
Water markets are more the exception than the rule.
In fact, water markets are prone to market failure –
meaning that private property and the resultant ‘free’
market cannot be relied on to achieve efficiency or
augment supply through water reallocation. The main
reasons for market failure are: the ‘public good’ nature of some water uses, the externalities associated
with allocation decisions, and the presence of natural
monopolies. Note that transaction costs must also be
considered. If water markets are to serve society, water
rights would have to be carefully deﬁned and managed, and this would require continuous public sector
involvement, which may lead to highly regulated water
markets.
Despite these issues, incentives for water exchanges persist. The creation of water banks, such as the
California Water Bank, is an attempt to improve the reliability of water markets (Jercich, 1997). Here, a public
intermediary acts to create a population of buyers and
sellers. The public intermediary buys water from the
willing sellers and then sells it to buyers. With this system, water managers are conﬁdent they can ﬁnd the
water they need at a predictable price. It also means
that public good services, such as environmental

WWDR4

BOX 22.4
Deschutes River Basin: Water banking for surface
water and groundwater
This case is about reconciling water demands between
different uses and users, in a situation where there are
strong interconnections between groundwater and surface water. Tribal, environmental and irrigation interest
groups came together in the mid-1990s to improve stream
ﬂow and water quality in Deschutes River basin in Oregon
in the United States. This has materialized largely in restoring stream ﬂow to depleted streams. It has also assisted municipalities to meet the groundwater needs of rapidly growing populations, and helped irrigation districts to
improve their water delivery systems and maintain ﬁnancial stability in face of changing customer bases.
Water banking tools were designed speciﬁcally to respect
existing water rights, and to not jeopardize the validity of
these rights when they are temporarily transferred to the
water bank for use by other people for instream ﬂow restoration. The system is ﬂexible and offers temporary and
permanent options, which builds wider support among
water users and potential market participants. It also has
a strong regulatory foundation which provides stability
and accountability, thus meeting concerns of the regulatory agencies, especially those responsible for the administration of water rights.

Source: Heather MacKay, personal communication (2010).

ﬂows, can in principle be protected. The case of the
Deschutes River basin nicely illustrates the feasibility
of this strategy (Box 22.4).
A dry-year option (Characklis et al., 2006) is an alternative to water markets and water banks. It is a
contingent contract between a buyer and a seller. The
dry-year option gives the buyer the right, but not the
obligation, to use water owned by the seller. Usually,
the contract speciﬁes the circumstances under which
the option can be exercised. For example, it could be
a target ﬂow in the river or the water level in a reservoir. One advantage of a dry-year option is that it
deals with the problem of hoarding, which can be observed with water users who require a high reliability
of supply.
As mentioned above, most of the water reallocation
studies focus on agriculture-to-urban water transfers.
However, with growing environmental concerns, some
water managers are also investigating the option of

ALLOCATING WATER

523

environmental water transfers (see Boxes 22.4 and
22.8). For example, Hollinshead and Lund (2006)
analyse the least expensive strategies for staged seasonal water purchases for an environmental water
acquisition programme in California. Suen (2006) use
a multi-objective model to characterize the trade-off
relationship between environmental ﬂows and human
needs. Tilmant et al. (2010) determine the reservoir
operating policies and the opportunity cost for power
companies to restore ﬂoods in the Zambezi River basin (Box 22.5).

22.3.1 Risk management and hedging
Any attempts to formulate the water resources allocation problem must be made without a perfect knowledge of future water supplies. Hydrological uncertainty
exposes risk-averse water managers and users to a
volume (supply) risk, which has to be managed. The
traditional approach to the problem, which consists
of increasing supply by constructing reservoirs and
pumping stations, has reached its limit in many cases.
This is because the social, environmental and economic
costs have become so high that there are now incentives for non-structural measures such as water transfers to increase supply.

BOX 22.5
Modelling the beneﬁts of jointly operated
reservoirs in mitigating environmental impact in
the Zambezi River basin

The Zambezi River basin is one of the largest basins
in Africa. It is a largely untapped resource where water is used primarily for generating electricity. There are
four main dams on the Zambezi. The Kariba Dam (1959,
Zambia/Zimbabwe) and the Cahora Bassa Dam (1974;
Mozambique) are both located on the main stem. They
have installed capacity of 1350 MW and 2075 MW respectively. The other two are located on the Kafue River in
Zambia. The Kafue Dam has an installed capacity of
900 MW, while the Itezh Itezhi Dam acts as a storage
dam.
Signiﬁcant work is underway to plan new reservoirs in the
basin. These large storage facilities have traditionally been
designed and managed to maximize revenues from energy generation. This has altered the hydrological regime by
disrupting the ecosystems and their livelihood functions
such as ﬁsheries. Up to now, each of the reservoirs has
operated in isolation.
Implementing hydropower–to–environment water transfers in the Zambezi requires the development of new
reservoir operating policies that help to restore degraded
ecosystems in the lower Zambezi without undue adverse
effects on generating hydroelectricity. One way to achieve
this is to coordinate reservoir releases. The coordinated
operation of the reservoirs as one system could reduce
the environmental impact while minimizing the beneﬁts
that had to be foregone. Preliminary ﬁndings indicate that
the reduction in total energy output varies from 1.5% to
6%, depending on the type of ﬂood to be restored in the
lower Zambezi. The question is whether society wishes to
incur such costs (or forego such beneﬁts) in order to reduce negative environmental impacts.

Source: Tilmant et al. (2010).

524

CHAPTER 22

Where irrigated agriculture is important, this sector
can absorb some of the ﬂuctuations in climate, and
thus serve as a kind of buffer by transferring risk from
urban users to farmers using an option contract (see
above). The idea is that one party (urban users) is willing to pay a premium for transferring the supply risk.
In other words, one party seeks to secure additional
water in order to reduce its exposure to hydro-climatic
variability. The supplier (the farmers) must be able and
willing to bear further supply risks after compensation. With such a risk-transfer mechanism, the beneﬁts must of course exceed costs for both parties. A
review of agricultural production risks and their management can be found in World Bank (2005). Gomez
Ramos and Garrido (2004) design an option contract between farmers and a Spanish city. Brown and
Carriquiry (2007) propose a combined option contract–
insurance system to increase the reliability of supplying water to Manila in the Philippines. The idea is to
transform the variability from the hydrological to the
ﬁnancial space where it can be levelled out using insurance products.
Risk management is also fairly common in the hydropower sector where hydropower companies are exposed to the hydrological supply risk. Water release
decisions are combined with sophisticated ﬁnancial
products such as forward contracts and options to
limit the risk exposure of the company (Mo et al., 2001,
Kristiansen, 2004). With the liberalization of the electricity sector in many countries, hydropower companies now face a new source of risk: the price risk. This
cannot be hedged using bilateral contracts because
prices tend to increase during dry periods, which is
precisely when the hydropower companies cannot rely
on their own production to meet their commitments.
This creates a contracting dilemma for the hydropower

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

sector: if lightly contracted, it will be exposed during
low price periods which may occur frequently and last
for some time; if heavily contracted, it will be exposed
to extremely high prices in the dry periods, when it
may not produce enough to meet its contract (Barroso
et al., 2003).
Water resources allocation problems address the issue
of how water should be combined with other scarce
resources to obtain the greatest return. This in turn implies that the consequences associated with the allocation decisions can, in principle, be valued. Because there
usually are no markets, and even when there are they
are usually absent or ineffective, allocation decisions
can seldom rely on market prices. Instead, it is necessary to assess accounting or shadow prices that reﬂect
the value of water (Young, 2005). To achieve this, economists have developed and implemented various nonmarket valuation techniques to address water resources
management problems (Loomis, 2000).

22.4 Opportunities: How the key water
allocation issues can be addressed
The water allocation challenges identiﬁed in this report
are major and complex. Yet there are also opportunities that can mitigate the risks and uncertainties that
we face. In this section, we address the four key water
allocation issues: water shortages, uncertainty, anticipating change and dealing with conﬂict.

to release water stored in their reservoirs to supplement dwindling levels in Lake Chapala. This was done
to ensure Guadalajara’s water supply and to support environmental and tourism needs (Box 22.7). In
Andhra Pradesh in India, irrigators reduced groundwater abstractions in cases where recharge rates were
low as a result of low rainfall. Because they are aware
that water scarcity is a recurring problem, they have
shifted to crops that need less water to grow, but
which fetch higher market values. As a result, farm incomes have increased over time (Box 22.9).
What we learn from these cases is that water is still
being used inefficiently and wastefully. But more can
be done with less. This requires a new attitude to
water; we must become more water wise. Water demand management is central to this, and signiﬁcant
gains can still be made. In the domestic and industrial
sectors, demand-side measures are normally more
cost-effective than supply-side solutions. In irrigation, this is often not the case because a conversion
to more efficient irrigation technologies tends to be
capital intensive. Here, the ﬁrst option is to change to
growing crops that need less water, but fetch a higher
price at market. Limited and temporary water transfers from agriculture to the domestic and industrial
water sectors may create conditions that allow farmers to adapt.

22.4.1 Dealing with water shortages
How should water be allocated when there is a shortage? Should certain types of use (domestic, environmental, industrial, energy generation or agricultural)
be prioritized over others, or should the burden of
shortages be shared in an equitable manner? Should
established uses and users be protected from encroachments by new entrants? Is there a role for markets and market transactions? If so, how can social and
environmental public good values associated with water be protected?

In countries that experience ‘economic water scarcity’,
supply-side options must not be discarded. Such countries require a greater ability to physically control water.
An opportunity may present itself in the future in the
form of funds being made available to help countries
adapt to climate change. With these funds, new infrastructure can be provided that is better at buffering
societies and water systems against increased climate
variability. If properly designed and implemented, such
infrastructure could give an enormous boost to poverty
alleviation in many rural areas and could thus contribute
to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.

All the water bodies in the case studies reviewed faced
periods of severe water shortage, and they all dealt
with this in different ways. In the Murray–Darling basin
in Australia, a maximum level of water abstraction was
set and water reallocation occurred through transferring water use rights, either on a short-term basis or
over the long term (Box 22.6). In the Lerma–Chapala
basin in Mexico, irrigators had to decrease the amount
of water they were using for irrigation and were forced

These types of investment have the potential to be
‘no regrets’ measures; however, the challenge will be
for adequate policy and design decisions to be made
in the ﬁrst place. There is debate about whether water buffering infrastructure should be large and centralized or small and distributed – both of which pose
very different institutional requirements, governance
demands and environmental impacts (Van der Zaag
and Gupta, 2008). Obviously such infrastructure

WWDR4

ALLOCATING WATER

525

BOX 22.6

BOX 22.7

Sustainable diversions limits (SDLs) in the
Murray–Darling basin

Unresolved water allocation in the Lerma–Chapala
basin

The Murray–Darling River basin is the most signiﬁcant river system in Australia. The basin covers 14% of Australia’s
mainland and covers around 1 million km2 across large
parts of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia and all of the Australian Capital Territory.

The Lerma–Chapala basin straddles ﬁve Mexican states
and provides surface water and groundwater for nearly
900,000 ha of irrigation farms. It also supplements the
water needs of Mexico’s two largest cities, Mexico City and
Guadalajara, and the touristic Chapala Lake at its downstream end. The Lerma–Chapala basin is now ‘closed’
as a result of increasing human pressure on its water resources, which have depleted the levels of blue water and
made the basin very sensitive to climatic ﬂuctuations.
The lack of accurate water accounting in the basin, and
the relatively wet period in the 1960s and 1970s, resulted
in an overestimation of water availability and the ‘overbuilding’ of the basin. This is a common phenomenon in
closing basins, and makes it very difficult to reduce water
use levels once a basin has closed.

In accordance with the Water Act 2007, the Murray–
Darling Basin Authority prepared a basin plan to manage
water resources. The plan ensures that future water use
is placed on a sustainable footing so that there is enough
water for a healthy environment as well as for other uses.
The plan sets mandatory Sustainable Diversion Limits
(SDLs) for surface water and groundwater. The limits must
reﬂect an environmentally sustainable level of water withdrawal, which is deﬁned as the level at which water can
be taken without compromising key environmental assets, key ecosystem functions, the productive base or key
environmental outcomes. As well as meeting the basin’s
environmental requirements with the SDLs, the Water Act
2007 also requires the basin plan to optimize social, economic and environmental outcomes.
Source: Akhtar Abbas and Frank Walker, personal communication
(2010).

development needs to consider issues of adaptive
capacity, and robustness, as well as issues relating
to the conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water (see the Deschutes and Andhra Pradesh
cases). Various aspects associated with this are dealt
with in detail in other chapters of this World Water
Development Report.
22.4.2 Dealing with uncertainty
Water rights, permits and entitlements, as well as
allocation systems, provide security and predictability in an uncertain world. Their aim is to reduce risk.
But there is a trade-off between reliability and the
amount of water one can use – the more secure the
smaller the ﬂow. How can water allocation systems
better deal with uncertain inﬂows while maximizing
beneﬁcial use?
Such a risk-based approach needs a precise understanding of the water system –how much water is available, how much is needed, and when and where is it
needed. This requires the ability to establish accurate
water accounting systems (Molden and Sakthivadivel,
1999) that include quantiﬁed knowledge of water ﬂuxes

526

CHAPTER 22

The institutional response to basin closure has focused
on surface water allocation mechanisms, resulting in the
1991 surface water allocation agreement. The continued
decline of Lake Chapala and Guadalajara’s increasing concerns about its water supply, led to a revision of the 1989
water allocation agreement between 1999 and 2004. The
negotiations were conducted at the highest political level
between the basin states, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Mexico,
Michoacan and Queretaro and focused on achieving an
agreement on rainfall and runoff data and new formulas
for water allocation.
One of the results was the transfer of water from upstream reservoirs to Lake Chapala, which alienated irrigation farmers from the negotiation process. The water challenges in the basin remain, and water crises will inevitably
recur during periods of low rainfall.
What can be learned from this case is that difficult zerosum allocation decisions need legitimacy, both scientiﬁcally and politically. Scientiﬁc legitimacy requires reliable
data and information, and sound interpretation of these
data; political legitimacy requires an inclusive approach
that involves all those who will be affected by allocation
decisions in the decision-making process.

Source: Phillippus Wester, personal communication (2010).

(inﬂows, outﬂows, abstractions, consumption, etc.) and
the changes in groundwater and surface water stocks
in a given basin over a given period of time.1 Detailed
monitoring of water stocks and ﬂuxes can combine
conventional ways of data collection with new ways
that use remotely sensed data for rainfall, evaporation,
open water levels and changes in groundwater storage.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 22.8
Farmer managed groundwater systems in Andhra Pradesh

The Andhra Pradesh region of India faces severe problems with the over-exploitation of groundwater. In the 1990s, a project
started to promote participatory hydrological monitoring among smallholder farmers. This was followed by the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater System (APFAMGS) project, which is a community-based project that focuses on developing the
capacity of groundwater users to manage their resource in a sustainable way.
The APFAMGS has a demand-side approach to groundwater management, where farmers learn about their groundwater system in
such a way that they can make informed decisions about their water use. Sustainable groundwater management is feasible only if
users understand the occurrence, cycle and limited availability of groundwater. And they must also accept that collective decisions
taken on groundwater conservation ultimately safeguard their own interests.
Thus, the burden of controlling water extraction is transferred to individuals in communities who know the ‘why and how’ and
act on sound information rather than because they are bound by rules and regulations. The project does not offer any incentives
in the form of cash or subsidies – the assumption is that access to scientiﬁc data and knowledge will enable farmers to make the
right decisions.
This has had measurable effects:
đƫƫƫ$*#%*#ƫ0+ƫ.+,/ƫ0$0ƫ*!! ƫ(!//ƫ30!.ƫ* ƫ +,0%*#ƫ*!3ƫ%..%#0%+*ƫ)!0$+ /ƫ$2!ƫ(! ƫ0+ƫ.! 10%+*/ƫ%*ƫ0$!ƫ)+1*0ƫ+"ƫ30!.ƫ1/! ċ
đƫƫƫ.)!./ƫ$2!ƫ+*/%/0!*0(5ƫ%),.+2! ƫ0$!%.ƫ,.+ü0%(%05ƫ3%0$ƫ0$!ƫ*!0ƫ2(1!ƫ+"ƫ+10,10/ƫ,!.ƫ$ƫ*!.(5ƫ +1(%*#ċ
A combination of the following factors appears to explain the success of this approach:
đƫƫƫ,,+.01*!ƫ%*"+.)0%+*ƫ+*ƫ#.+1* 30!.ƫ2%(%(%05ƫ/ƫƫ'!5ƫ%*,10ƫ0+ƫ".)!./Ěƫ.%/'ƫ)*#!)!*0ƫ,. %#)ƫĢƫ3%0$ƫ.!(0%2!(5ƫ
small monsoons usually being followed by reduced sowing in the dry season;
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ(+3ġ/0+.#!Čƫ"/0ġ.!/,+*/!Čƫ$. ġ.+'ƫ-1%"!./ƫ0$0ƫ.!ƫ.!,(!*%/$! ƫ**1((5ƫ,.+2% !ƫƫ*01.(ƫ(%)%0ƫ+*ƫ30!.ƫ+2!.ġ1/!Ď
đƫƫƫ/0%)0!/ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ2%((!ƫ#.+1* 30!.ƫ* ƫ,.+&!0! ƫ !)* /ƫ!%*#ƫ,.+2% ! ƫ%*ƫ0%)!ƫ0+ƫ%*"+.)ƫ .5ƫ,(*0%*#Ď
đƫƫƫ!,!0%*#ƫ.+,ƫ30!.ƫ,(**%*#ƫ+2!.ƫƫ*1)!.ƫ+"ƫ5!./ƫ,.+2% !/ƫƫ/+1* ƫ".)!3+.'ƫ"+.ƫ".)!./Ěƫ !%/%+*/Ď
đƫƫƫ! 10%+*/ƫ%*ƫ#.+1* 30!.ƫ+2!.ġ1/!ƫ.!ƫ*+0ƫ+)%*#ƫ".+)ƫ(0.1%/0%ƫ+((!0%2!ƫ0%+*Čƫ10ƫ".+)ƫ)*5ƫ%* %2% 1(ƫ".)!./ƫ)'%*#ƫ%*formed risk-management decisions – hence no authoritative leadership is required for enforcement.
Source: Garduño et al. (2009).

Much can be learned from prediction of ungauged basins (PUB) experiences.
22.4.3 Anticipating change
How can water institutions be transformed into learning organizations that are forward looking and can anticipate change?
All the case studies in this chapter highlight how important it is to understand the hydro-social system and
its dynamics. The Andhra Pradesh case on groundwater management demonstrates the knowledge dimension most convincingly (Box 22.8). The most important
lesson is that stakeholders themselves need to have
an intimate knowledge of and appreciation for the resource on which they rely – which leads to an interest
in carefully monitoring system behaviour. This creates
a kind of distributed intelligence among a group of
water users that may be considered a prerequisite for
any organization to learn. The co-learning stakeholder

WWDR4

management structure can be supported by appropriate access to scientiﬁc data, expertise and knowledge
that can help to select alternative management choices and shared decision-making on how to use scarce
water resources.
22.4.4 Dealing with conﬂict
It seems inevitable that there will be a rise in competition between water users as well as differences of
opinion and other tensions. This may lead to disputes
and conﬂict. How can we anticipate these rising tensions, and what strategies are there to transform them
into enhanced cooperation?
Competition over water can escalate into conﬂict. But
where decision processes are considered legitimate
and fair, competition can also evolve into cooperative
deals. Difficult questions are raised when making allocation decisions. Two examples:

ALLOCATING WATER

527

đƫ Which is more important, the livelihood of a ﬁsherwoman living in a remote village near a river, or an
urban middle-class person who requires internet
and electricity?
đƫ Two (hypothetical) communities live on opposite
sides of a watershed divide. One is located in a
relatively water-rich basin and the other in a waterscarce basin. How does the second community’s
right to development relate to the ﬁrst community’s
right to live in a healthy and undisturbed environment? (Gupta and Van der Zaag, 2008)
These questions point at the normative and political dimensions of allocation decisions. Where stakeholders

BOX 22.9
Multi-stakeholder planning in the Alouette River in
Canada
In the late 1980s, Canada’s third-largest electricity utility, BC Hydro, came under mounting public pressure
from a number of community groups, a range of NGOs
and the media to change the ways their dams operated.
There were calls for the release of in-stream ﬂows, and
increased participation in decision-making processes surrounding water management in the province.
An opportunity to implement change came in 1994 when
BC Hydro applied for an expansion of generating capacity at its Stave Falls power plant. Yielding to demands that
ﬂows in the contiguous Alouette River (which feeds the
Stave Falls scheme) be augmented, the provincial government decided that a water use plan be conducted as a
condition for going ahead with the Stave Falls upgrade.
As a result, a multi-stakeholder process, which came to
be known as the Alouette Water Use Plan (AWUP), was
launched in 1995 to review the operating plans of the
Alouette scheme.
The AWUP was an inclusive and science-based process,
which had the potential to solve longstanding problems.
It was based on structured decision making, which combined objective, scientiﬁc data with the values people
placed on different water uses. This was crucial for its
acceptance.

528

have been involved in decision-making and where they
have been respected and receive fair treatment, then it
is likely that the outcome will be sustained and enforced.
This requires norms, such as the norm that a household
that is to be resettled due to dam construction may not
become worse off, not now but also not in the future
(WCD, 2000). Multi-stakeholder planning in the Alouette
River in Canada (Box 22.9) is an example of inclusive decision-making that has far-reaching consequences.
Another way of addressing water allocation’s conﬂict
potential focuses on promoting interdependency between the users of the shared water resource, while simultaneously unlocking the additional beneﬁts that can
be gained through cooperation. Examples are beneﬁtsharing projects and rewards for environmental services
systems, which can be developed between user groups
within countries but also between riparian countries.
Examples of how this worked between riparian countries
can be seen in the cases of the Santa Cruz River basin
(Box 22.10), the Zambezi River basin (Box 22.4) and the
Blue Nile River basin (Box 22.11).

BOX 22.10
Groundwater use and re-use in the transboundary
Santa Cruz River basin
Climate change, hydrological variability, and rapid urban
growth characterize the United States–Mexico border
region and pose signiﬁcant challenges for the planning and allocation of limited water resources. On the
Arizona–Sonora border, the upper Santa Cruz River has
only ephemeral surface ﬂows. Meeting the water needs
of 300,000 inhabitants greatly increases groundwater
dependence. The basin’s aquifer is shared by the sister cities, Nogales, Arizona, and Nogales, Sonora – but groundwater is allocated separately on either side of the border
in accordance with prevailing national and state laws and
institutions.

The process was hailed for building trust between the different parties and for gradually replacing the antagonism
that had characterized previous interactions between BC
Hydro and other stakeholders. As a consequence, the provincial government mandated BC Hydro to draw up water
use plans for all its facilities within a ﬁve-year period. This
resulted in the development of 23 WUPs, which revised
the operating plans of 30 BC Hydro dams.

Adequate wastewater treatment has enlarged the water
pie on both sides of the border. This was possible through
joint bi-national management of urban wastewater, which
is the result of years of cooperation. Two important lessons of particular relevance to bi-national groundwater
management are, ﬁrst, that informal collaboration based
on shared trust must be strengthened through international accords, and second, that scientiﬁc data and joint
studies provide the basis for operational agreements.

Source: Lucia Scodanibbio, personal communication (2010).

Source: Sharon Megdal, personal communication (2010).

CHAPTER 22

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Potential conﬂicts between water consumers and
environmental water uses can be resolved through
changing the operating rules of dams (Box 22.12).
New approaches to dam planning and operations that
optimize water allocation beneﬁts across a range of

resources and values are required to achieve more sustainable dam operations. These solutions must occur at
the level of entire systems because dams are only one
element of larger water management systems.

BOX 22.11

BOX 22.12

Triple win on the Blue Nile through transboundary
cooperation on infrastructure development

Innovative approaches for improving dam
planning and operations for optimized water
allocation beneﬁts

The upper Blue Nile River Basin in Ethiopia has a huge
potential for hydropower generation and irrigated agriculture. Controversies exist as to whether the numerous
infrastructural development projects that are on the drawing board in Ethiopia will generate positive or negative
externalities downstream in Sudan and Egypt. In order to
examine the economic beneﬁts and costs of developing
reservoirs on the Blue Nile for Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt,
Goor et al. (2010) developed a basin-wide integrated
hydro-economic model.
The model integrates essential hydrologic, economic and
institutional components of the river basin in order to
explore both the hydrologic and economic consequences
of various policy options and planned infrastructural projects. Unlike most of the deterministic economic-hydrologic models reported in the literature, a stochastic programming formulation has been adopted in order to:
đƫƫƫ* !./0* ƫ0$!ƫ!û!0ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ$5 .+(+#%ƫ1*!.0%*05ƫ+*ƫ
management decisions;
đƫƫƫ!0!.)%*!ƫ((+0%+*ƫ,+(%%!/ƫ0$0ƫ*01.((5ƫ$! #!ƫ
against the hydrological risk; and
đƫƫƫ//!//ƫ0$!ƫ.!(!2*0ƫ.%/'ƫ%* %0+./ċ
The study reveals that the development of four mega dams
in the upper part of the Blue Nile Basin would change the
drawdown reﬁll cycle of the High Aswan Dam. Should the
operation of the reservoirs be coordinated, they would enable an average saving for Egypt of at least 2.5 x 109 m3a-1
through reduced evaporation losses from the Lake Nasser.
Moreover, the new reservoirs (Karadobi, Beko-Abo,
Mandaya and Border) in Ethiopia would have signiﬁcant
positive impacts on hydropower generation and irrigation
in Ethiopia and Sudan: at the basin scale, the annual energy generation is boosted by 38.5 TWh a-1 of which 14.2
TWh a-1 due to storage. Moreover, the regulation capacity
of the above mentioned reservoirs would enable an increase of the Sudanese irrigated area by 5.5%.
Sediment ﬂuxes poses another important dimension to these
development plans, which were not considered in this study.

In several countries, changes in the way dams operate
have been prompted by re-allocating water from consumptive to environmental uses Watts et al. (2011).
In the United States, an ongoing effort known as the
Sustainable Rivers Project is changing operations at US
Army Corps of Engineers’ dams. The project currently involves twenty-nine dams in eight river systems as demonstration sites for national implementation.
In the Yangtze River, China, a proposal is being advanced
that proposes to move ﬂood-risk management out of hydropower reservoirs and to invest a portion of the consequent increased revenue from generating hydropower from
the additional store water into ﬂood-risk management on
the ﬂoodplain and ecosystem restoration and conservation.
In South Africa, the Berg River Project is the ﬁrst large instream dam that was designed according to international
best practice standards, such that it can release both low
and high ﬂows that will coincide as closely as possible
with natural inﬂows and natural ﬂood events.
In Australia, a series of trial variable ﬂow releases from
Dartmouth Dam in the Murray-Darling Basin implemented
and monitored between 2001 and 2008 demonstrate that
it is possible to reduce the negative impacts of transferring
consumptive water between reservoirs by altering established dam operation practices. The results from these trials
were used to develop new interim operating guidelines for
Dartmouth Dam.
These examples demonstrate that more sustainable approaches for dam planning and operations are possible
and require close collaboration between participating organizations and stakeholders. To achieve sustainable river
management at global scales will require considerably
more investment in trials and demonstration sites that can
illustrate new approaches, opportunities and solutions.

Source: Robyn Watts, personal communication (2010), from the
results of the UNESCO Workshop ‘Challenges and Solutions for
Planning and Operating Dams for Optimised Beneﬁts’ held in Paris,
26–28 October 2010.

Source: Goor et al. (2010), with some areas of text reproduced.

WWDR4

ALLOCATING WATER

529

In South Africa, the National Water Act (No. 36 of
1998) introduced the Water Allocation Reform (WAR)
programme to address race and gender imbalances
that had been created in the water sector as a result
of discriminatory legislation in the country in the past
(Seetal, 2005). WAR derived its mandate from the
Constitution, the National Water Policy, the National
Water Act and other related legislation. The Position
Paper for Water Allocation Reform in South Africa
outlined the rules for allocating water to promote race
and gender reform, while at the same time supporting
the government’s programmes for poverty eradication,
job creation, economic development and nation building. This included addressing the expectations of the
historically disadvantaged majority South Africans, but
also dealing with the fears and uncertainty of a historically advantaged minority – primarily by minimizing
the impact on existing lawful users and supporting the
stability of the rural economy.

Conclusion
Water allocation lies at the heart of water management. In a world that experiences gradual and sudden
changes, in terms of population, diet, land use, economic markets and climate, water allocation is an increasingly important topic.
The experiences reviewed in this chapter show that
such conditions require a sound knowledge about water availability and water use, as well as the capacity to
monitor infrastructure. Interactions between groundwater and surface water need to be understood, as do the
effects that changes in land use have on both groundwater and surface water ﬂuxes at different levels.
It is up to institutions to make sense of the status quo
and guide decision-making. This is not trivial, as in
more and more cases, allocation decisions are zerosum. Often, a large variety of sectoral interests needs
to be considered and weighted according to social,
economic, ecological, cultural and political criteria.
Such criteria are difficult to put under one encompassing metric, so it is not easy to reach consensus on preferences and priorities. The principles underlying allocation decisions should therefore be known, and be seen
to be legitimate and just.

Some of the cases reviewed in this chapter have shown
that tools, such as water accounting and integrated hydro–economic models, can assist the water allocation
process. Based on a good understanding of system
interactions, optimal decisions can be reached – which
allow fair compensation to be given to those who have
to forego some immediate water beneﬁts.
In some cases, market-like mechanisms can assist in
ﬁnding optimal solutions, for example where uncertainty and risk can be transferred differentially between the interested sectors or parties, depending on
their ability to cope.
In most cases, it was shown that building the knowledge base of water users is the essential element that
the many individual water users need to be able to
reach the right decisions.
There is a need for effective stakeholder engagement
in decision-making in order to ensure transparency
and fair treatment. The environmental sustainability,
economic viability and social acceptability of water allocation decisions, rests on true stakeholder engagement, which comes from recognizing their democratic
right to inﬂuence the management of water resources.
A distinction must be made between the commonly
practised ‘cosmetic’ stakeholder consultations and true
empowerment where a community takes control of its
water management future. True stakeholder empowerment leads to more legitimate and cost-effective solutions that have a better chance of being implemented.
It is time to rethink the operations of water infrastructure in a way that both enhances the synergy between
water users, and fosters the beneﬁts of cooperation.
Systems need to be ﬂexible, which can be achieved
through a combination of investment in both infrastructure and human resources and innovative management solutions.
The water reform process also needs to recognize and
correct racial and gender inequities in water use by
addressing the expectations of all stakeholders in an
equitable and transparent manner.

Finally, and importantly, a changing environment demands that institutions become learning organizations
that are ready to develop and implement adaptive
management practices.

530

CHAPTER 22

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

Such information will enable the inclusion of the state of the
water resource in national accounts, viz. the United Nations
Statistics Division’s Standard for Environmental–Economic
Accounting for Water (SEEA-W), and the UN’s international
recommendations for water statistics (UN, 2010); see also
Brouwer et al., 2005).

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Barroso, L. A., Granville, S., Trinkenreich, J., Pereira, M. V. and
Lino, P. 2003. Managing hydrological risks in hydro-based
portfolios. Power Engineering Society General Meeting,
2003, IEEE. doi: 10.1109/PES.2003.1270395
Boelens, R., and Dávila, G. (eds), 1998. Searching for Equity:
Conceptions of Justice and Equity in Peasant Irrigation.
Assen, the Netherlands, Van Gorcum Publishers.
Booker, J., and Young, R 1994, Modeling intrastate and
interstate markets for Colorado river water resources.
Journal of Environmental Economic. Management, Vol. 26,
pp. 66–87.
Brouwer, R., Schenaub, S. and van der Veer, R. 2005.
Integrated river basin accounting in the Netherlands and
the European Water Framework Directive. Statistical
Journal of the United NationsEconomic Commission for
Europe, ECE, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 111–31.
Brown, C.and Carriquiry, M., 2007. Managing
hydroclimatological risk to water supply with option
contracts and reservoir index insurance. Water Resources
Research, Vol. 43. doi:10.1029/2007WR006093
Characklis, G. W., Kirsch, B. R., Ramsey, J., Dillard, K. E. M.,
Kelley, C. T. 2006. Developing portfolios of water supply
transfers. Water Resources Research, Vol. 42, No.5.
doi: 10.1029/2005WR004424
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
General Comment No. 15: The right to water (arts. 11 and
12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights). 2002. Twenty-ninth session, Geneva,
Switzerland, UN OHCHR. http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/
doc.nsf/0/a5458d1d1bbd713fc1256cc400389e94/$FILE/
G0340229.pdf

Garduño, H, Foster, S, Raj, P and van Steenbergen, F. 2009.
Addressing Groundwater Depletion Through Communitybased Management Actions in the Weathered Granitic
Basement Aquifer of Drought-prone Andhra Pradesh –
India. Case Proﬁle Collection Number 19, Washington DC,
World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWAT/
Resources/GWMATE_CP_19AndhraPradesh.pdf
Gómez Ramos, A. and Garrido, A. 2004. Formal risk-sharing
mechanisms to allocate uncertain water resources: the
case of option contracts. Water Resources Research,
Vol. 40. doi: 10.1029/2004ER003340
Goor, Q., Halleux, C, Mohamed, Y and Tilmant, A. 2010.
Optimal operation of a multipurpose multireservoir system
in the Eastern Nile River Basin. Hydrology and Earth
System Sciences, Vol. 14, pp. 1895–908.
Gupta, J., and van der Zaag, P. 2008. Interbasin water
transfers and integrated water resources management:
Where engineering, science and politics interlock. Physics
and Chemistry of the Earth. Vol.33, pp. 28–40. doi:10.1016/j.
pce.2007.04.003
Hollinshead, S., and Lund, J. 2006, Optimization of
environmental water purchases with uncertainty. Water
Resources Research, Vol. 42. doi:10.1029/2005WR004228
Jercich, S. A., 1997. California’s 1995 water bank program:
Purchasing water supply options. Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management, Vol. 123, No. 1,
pp. 59–65.
Kristiansen, T. 2004. Financial risk management in the
hydropower industry using stochastic optimization.
Advanced Modeling and Optimization, Vol. 6, pp. 17–24.
Lankford, B. A., 2004. Resource-centred thinking in river
basins; should we revoke the crop water requirement
approach to irrigation planning? Agricultural Water
Management, Vol. 68, pp. 33–46.
Le Quesne, T, Pegram, G. and von der Heyden, C. 2007.
Allocating Scarce Water: A Primer on Water Allocation,
Water Rights and Water Markets. WWF Water Security
Series 1. Godalming, UK, WWF-UK.
Leach, E. R. 1961. Pul Eliya, a village in Ceylon: a study of land
tenure and kinship. New York, Cambridge University Press.
Loomis, J. 2000, Environmental valuation techniques
in water resources decision making. Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management, Vol. 126, pp. 339–44.
Lund, J. R. and Israel, M., 1995. Water transfers in water
resource systems. Journal of Water Resources Planning
and Management, Vol. 121, No. 2, pp. 193–204.

Dinar, A., Rosegrant, M. W. and Meinzen-Dick, R. S. 1997.
Water Allocation Mechanisms: Principles and Examples.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1779.
Washington DC, World Bank.

Ma, J., Hoekstra, A. Y., Wang, H., Chapagain, A. K. and Wang,
D. 2006. Virtual versus real water transfers within China.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Biological
Science, Vol. 361, pp. 835–842. http://www.waterfootprint.
org/Reports/Ma_et_al_2006.pdf

Drieschova, A., Giordano, M. and Fischhendler, I. 2008.
Governance mechanisms to address ﬂow variability in
water treaties. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 18,
pp. 285–95.

Manzungu, E., Senzanje, A. and van der Zaag, P. (eds.). 1999.
Water for Agriculture in Zimbabwe: Policy and Management
Options for the Smallholder Sector. Harare, University of
Zimbabwe Publications.

WWDR4

ALLOCATING WATER

531

Martin, E. D., and Yoder, R. 1988. A comparative description
of two farmer-managed irrigation systems in Nepal.
Irrigation and Drainage Systems, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 147–172.

Van der Zaag, P. 1993. Factors inﬂuencing the operational
ﬂexibility of three farmer-managed irrigation systems in
Mexico. Proceedings of the 15th International Congress on
Irrigation and Drainage, The Hague, ICID, pp. 65–661.

Mo, B., Gjelsvik, A. and Grundt, A. 2001. Integrated risk
management of hydropower scheduling and contract
management. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 16,
pp. 216–21. doi:10.1109/59.918289

Van der Zaag, P., and Gupta, J. 2008. Scale issues in the
governance of water storage projects. Water Resources.
Research, Vol. 44. doi:10.1029/2007WR006364

Mohamed-Katerere, J. and van der Zaag, P. 2003. Untying
the ‘Knot of Silence’: Making water policy and law
responsive to local normative systems. Hassan, F. A.,
Reuss, M., Trottier, J., Bernhardt, C., Wolf, A. T., MohamedKaterere, J. and van der Zaag, P. (eds), History and Future
of Shared Water Resources. IHP Technical Documents in
Hydrology, PCCP series No. 6. Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
Molden, D. and Sakthivadivel, R. 1999. Water accounting to
assess use and productivity of water. Water Resources
Development, Vol. 15, pp. 55–71.
Molle, F., Wester, P. and Hirsch, P. 2010 River basin closure:
Processes, implications and responses. Agricultural Water
Management, Vol. 97, pp. 569–77.
Perry, C. 2007. Efficient irrigation; inefficient communication;
ﬂawed recommendations. Irrigation and Drainage, Vol. 56,
pp. 367–78.
Rittel, H. J. W. and Webber, M. M. 1973. Dilemmas in a general
theory of planning. Policy Sciences, Vol. 4, pp. 155–69.
Seetal, A. R. 2005. Progress with water allocation reform in
South Africa. OECD Workshop on Agriculture and Water:
Sustainability, Markets and Policies, Session 5. Adelaide,
South Australia 14–18 November.
Suen J.-P. and Eheart, J. W. 2006. Reservoir management to
balance ecosystem and human needs: Incorporating the
paradigm of the ecological ﬂow regime. Water Resources
Research 42, Vol. 3. doi:10.1029/2005WR004314
Tilmant, A., Beevers, L. and Muyunda, B. 2010. Restoring
a ﬂow regime through the coordinated operation of a
multireservoir system: The case of the Zambezi River basin.
Water Resources Research, Vol. 46.
UN (United Nations) 2010. International Recommendations
for Water Statistics. New York, UN Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Statistics Division. http://unstats.
un.org/unsd/envaccounting/irws/irwswebversion.pdf

Van der Zaag, P., Seyam, I. M. and Savenije, H. H. G. 2002.
Towards measurable criteria for the equitable sharing of
international water resources. Water Policy, Vol. 4,
pp. 19–32.
Verma, S., Kampman, D. A., van der Zaag, P. and Hoekstra,
A. Y. 2009. Going against the ﬂow: A critical analysis of
virtual water trade in the context of India’s National River
Linking Program. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth,
Vol. 34, pp. 261–69.
Ward, F. A., Booker, J. F., and Michelsen, A. M., 2006.
Integrated economic, hydrologic, and institutional analysis
of policy responses to mitigate drought impacts in Rio
Grande Basin, Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management, Vol. 132, pp. 488–502.
Watts, R., Richter, B., Oppermann, J. J. and Bowmer, K. 2011
Dam reoperation in an era of climate change. Marine and
Freshwater Research, Vol. 62, No. 3, pp. 321–27.
WCD. 2000. Dams and Development: A New Framework for
Decision-making. The report of the World Commission on
Dams. London, Earthscan.
Wester, P., Vargas-Velazquez, S., Mollard, E. and Silva-Ochoa, P.
2008. Negotiating surface water allocations to achieve a
soft landing in the closed Lerma–Chapala basin, Mexico.
Water Resources Development, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 275–88.
Wolf, A. T. 1999. Criteria for equitable allocations: The heart
of international water conﬂict. Natural Resources Forum,
Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 3–30.
World Bank, 2005. Managing Agricultural Production
Risk: Innovations in Developing Countries. Washington
DC, World Bank, Agricultural and Rural Development
Department.
Young, R. A., 2005. Determining the Economic Value of Water
– Concepts and Methods. Washington DC, Resources for the
Future.

UNISDR (United Nations International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction), 2009. UNISDR Terminology for
Disaster Risk Reduction. http://unisdr.org/ﬁles/7817_
UNISDRTerminologyEnglish.pdf

532

CHAPTER 22

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 23
Valuing water

UN DESA
—
Authors Joseﬁna Maestu (UN DESA, UNW–DPAC) and Carlos Mario Gómez (University
of Alcalá and IMDEA)
Acknowledgements With the support of Jack Moss (AquaFed), David Coates (UN
CBD), Peter Borkey and Roberto Martinez-Hurtado (OECD), and Diego Rodriguez
(World Bank). Thanks to Jake Burke (FAO), Rudolph Cleveringa (IFAD), Claudio Caponi
(WMO), Ti Le-Huu (UNESCAP), Nikhil Chandavarkar (UN DESA), Thomas Chiramba
(UNEP), and William Cosgrove and Richard Connor (WWAP) for comments and materials provided and to Maria Mercedes Sanchez (UN DESA) for proofreading.

© Shutterstock/TonyV3112

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Failure to properly recognize the full value of water, including its beneﬁts and costs, is one of
the root causes of water resources mismanagement and the political neglect of water issues.
A valuation of the beneﬁts of water is essential in order to improve the decisions of
governments, international organizations, the donor community and other stakeholders.
Valuation is a powerful instrument for making the public aware of water’s many beneﬁts.
Without a doubt, it brings the less-visible beneﬁts of water into the public arena.
Providing reliable information on the beneﬁts of water development and water resources
conservation will help to convince governments and stakeholders that water needs to be
given priority in national policies. Having the right information will help to target investment,
make real differences to economies and societies – and so help to eradicate poverty.
Water valuation is central to the water-related decisions of public and private agents. It
can help water managers and stakeholders to choose between water supply and demand
alternatives and to recognize the options that will improve welfare while simultaneously
sustaining ecosystem services. Water valuation also helps water managers to design
subsidies, public incentives and economic instruments that respond to current water
challenges.
Water valuation is a tool that can be used to shape cooperative agreements to protect and
share the beneﬁts of water resources conservation.
More efforts need to be made to analyse the costs and beneﬁts of water and to incorporate
this analysis into decision-making. This helps in the move towards more integrated and
holistic socio-economic approaches. Ways of looking at the valuation of water have been
shifting from a rather limited focus on the economic beneﬁts, to a more comprehensive focus
that also takes into account social, cultural and non-market values. Valuation methods need
to be chosen and adapted so that they respond better to policy questions and management
needs.

23.1 Introducing the issues
Water is essential for human life. It is used in the production of food, the generation of energy and the manufacture of goods. It is vital to the economy and for preserving the structure and functioning of ecosystems and
all the environmental services they provide (Box 23.1).
The importance of these beneﬁts makes the provision of
water services crucially and intimately linked with development, both as an integral part of a strategy for socioeconomic progress and as a precondition for holding on
to the advances that have already been made.
However, decisions about how water is used and
managed and about how scarce resources should be
conserved are still being taken using only part of the
information on its multiple beneﬁts. The ‘non-visible’,
external and indirect beneﬁts (and costs) of using water are mostly ignored by end users when they decide
how much water to use and what to use it for. This is
often true of businesses when they make decisions
about what to invest in and produce; of farmers when
they decide what crops to grow; and of governments
and institutions when they make decisions about priorities for water investment, management and allocation.
This lack of understanding of the multiple beneﬁts of
water results in water issues being given a low political

BOX 23.1
Categories of economic values
Direct use values: The direct uses of water resources for
consumption include inputs to agriculture, manufacturing
and domestic households. Non-consumption uses include
hydroelectricity generation, recreation, navigation and
cultural activities.
Indirect use values: The indirect environmental services provided by water include waste assimilation and
the protection of habitats, biodiversity and hydrological
functions.
Option values: These refer to the value of having the option to use water directly or indirectly in the future.
Non-use values: These include water’s bequest value
(passing on this natural resource to future generations)
and the intrinsic value of water and water ecosystems,
including biodiversity, the value people place simply on
knowing that a wild river, for example, exists.

Source: UNSD (2007).

WWDR4

priority. It also causes fragmentation of resources and
underinvestment, or overinvestment, in water infrastructure. Ultimately, this results in water being given a
low priority in national development programmes and
in strategies for reducing poverty. It also leads to inefﬁciencies in how water is used in the many areas of the
economy where it is an essential production input.
Valuation, or ‘valuing’, is a process that judges the importance of water for human welfare. It refers to all
the ways that can be used to identify, assess, measure
and eventually assign a value to the importance that
each beneﬁt, and potential beneﬁt, has for human welfare. Bringing this knowledge to the policy arena can
improve water management in many signiﬁcant ways.
Valuations of the economic and social development
beneﬁts of water will push water management issues
up the political agenda and will help decision-makers
to make informed judgements about development
opportunities and challenges. Valuation is also important because there are trade-offs to be considered
when examining the various management options.
Sometimes using available water for one purpose
means forgoing the beneﬁts that another use would
bring. Valuation results in information that allows economic efficiency and political and social priorities to be
addressed more transparently. It might also have a role
in resolving water conﬂicts by indicating the potential
shared beneﬁts that come from cooperating to preserve critical water assets (such as transboundary river
basins or common pool underground waters) rather
than competing for their use.
23.1.1 Valuing the beneﬁts of water so that it can be
made a priority in the political agenda
Water is important for development. But if this is so,
why do so many poor countries still lack water infrastructures, have difficulty beneﬁting from water’s
productive uses and suffer from poor access to basic
sanitation and water supply services?
Part of the answer lies in the fact that most of the beneﬁts obtained from (and the costs incurred by) investing in water and water management are external to the
agencies and ﬁrms making the investments. Valuation
shows that the beneﬁts that countries derive from having water exceed the beneﬁts obtained from the direct
productive uses of water. In order to understand this, it
is necessary to analyse how the overall productivity of
all sectors is constrained by the availability and quality
of water facilities (Kemp, 2005).

VALUING WATER

535

Better access to and more widespread availability of
water expands the productive capacity of the economy by, for example, increasing the productivity of
land or labour, and improving the quality of crops,
energy and other products. Valuation also shows the

BOX 23.2
Valuing water’s indirect beneﬁts to support
investment decisions

The Bhakra multipurpose dam system in northern India
generated indirect beneﬁts in two ways. First, the interindustry links that were forged resulted in increases in
the demand for inputs from other sectors. Second, the
direct outputs of the dam led to higher levels of income,
increased wages and generally higher levels of economic prosperity. For every rupee of direct beneﬁt in terms
of electricity generated, farms irrigated, water supplied,
ﬂoods controlled and drought prevented, the indirect beneﬁts amounted to an additional 0.9 rupee. The gains perceived by rural workers were also higher than the gains
for other rural and urban households. This showed that
one of the beneﬁts of the project was that it led to a more
equal distribution of income (Bhatia et al., 2007).
‘The multiplier for the Sobradinho Dam in Brazil was estimated at between 2.0 and 2.4 depending on what assumptions are applied to the supply of labour and capital.
This means that for every US$1 invested, there was a total
economic return of US$2 to US$2.4.’

important beneﬁts that improved water infrastructures and services bring to production – having access to water is a cost-effective and safe way of reducing production costs. Farmers’ incomes increase
substantially when they shift from rain-fed to irrigated agriculture. Hydroelectricity provides energy for
production and reduces reliance on expensive fossil
fuels. Deliberation on the importance of these direct
beneﬁts has supported decisions to invest in multipurpose infrastructures as an effective way of fostering productivity and saving costs in all the activities to which water contributes as a production input
(Box 23.2).
Valuation also highlights the importance of the intangible health beneﬁts of improving basic sanitation
and access to safe drinking water. Improved health
means fewer lost working days – and increased productivity. The effects of better health can be seen in
people living longer and having a better quality of
life. Better services contribute to human development
by allowing people to look and plan further into the
future. They also enhance capacity so that people see
the beneﬁts of spending time acquiring an education,
in the knowledge that they will have the better health
conditions that will allow them to beneﬁt from it into
the future.
The World Health Organization believes that half
the consequences of malnutrition are caused by

Source: SIWI, WHO and NORAD (2005, p. 22).

TABLE 23.1
Overall beneﬁts of achieving the MDGs for water and sanitation
Types of beneﬁt

Breakdown

Monetized beneﬁts (in US$)

Time saved by improving water and
sanitation services

đƳƅƃƳ%((%+*Ƴ3+.'%*#Ƴ 5/ƳƳ5!.

US$63 billion a year

Productivity savings

đƳƫƆƅƃƳ)%((%+*Ƴ,.+ 10%2!Ƴ 5/Ƴ
gained in the 15–59 age group
đƳƫƅƋƅƳ)%((%+*Ƴ/$++(Ƴ00!* *!Ƴ
days a year
đƳƫƄƎƉƳ%((%+*Ƴ$!(0$5Ƴ 5/Ƴ"+.Ƴ
children under ﬁve

ƗƍƎƍƳ%((%+*ƳƳ5!.

Health-care savings

đƳƫƗƋƳ%((%+*ƳƳ5!.Ƴ"+.Ƴ
health agencies
đƳƗƆƈƃƳ)%((%+*Ƴ"+.Ƴ%* %2% 1(/

Value of deaths averted, based on
discounted future earnings

ƗƆƎƊƳ%((%+*ƳƳ5!.

Total beneﬁts

US$84 billion a year

Sources: OECD (2010); Prüss-Üstün et al. (2008); Hutton and Haller (2004).

536

CHAPTER 23

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

inadequate water, sanitation and hygiene. Providing
access to safe drinking water in poor societies is one
of the most effective labour-saving measures. For governments to consider just the ﬁnancial value of healthcare savings in their budget decisions, would be to
overlook the importance of less visible, but in many
cases more signiﬁcant, economic values (Table 23.1). In
poor countries, this is a concern because when the ﬁnancial beneﬁts are lower than the economic ones, the
effort made to improve water services is usually less
than what is required for economic development.
Information about the macroeconomic performance of
poor countries – measured in gross domestic product (GDP), employment and productivity – has helped
to conﬁrm the vital correlation between water and
economic development, and the potential that water
development has to boost economic growth: Countries
without improved water management and access to
water and sanitation services, with per capita annual income below US$750 grew on average at only
0.1% per year, which is equivalent to being trapped in
the same level of income, while countries in the same
range of income but with better access to water services grew at 3.7%, a rate that, if sustained in the long
term, might guarantee their escape from poverty and
help them converge to middle income economies
(SIWI, WHO and NORAD, 2005).

BOX 23.3
Valuing the effects that water-related diseases
have on productivity can improve investment
targeting

In a study in 2008, the World Bank presented an estimate
of the economic effects of mortality from malaria, pneumonia and acute lower respiratory illnesses in Ghana and
Pakistan. The same study also looked at the prevalence
of diarrhoea and malnutrition. A human capital approach
was applied to quantify lost wages that resulted from
environmental factors. The long-term direct and indirect
costs in Ghana and Pakistan were estimated at 9.3% and
8.8%, of their respective GDPs. At least half of this impact
is attributed to water-related environmental risks.
The 1991 cholera epidemic in Peru was treated at a cost of
US$1 billion, but could have been prevented by expending
US$100 million.

Source: Moss et al. (2003).

WWDR4

23.1.2 Valuing the beneﬁts of water can support propoor strategies and better targeting
The beneﬁts of water, when properly valued, show that
projects aimed at improving access to basic sanitation
and safe drinking water make economic sense. And
what is more important, they show that they are effective in promoting equity, in stimulating gender fairness
and in opening new windows of opportunity for the
poor and for future generations. Valuing the many nonﬁnancial beneﬁts of water is essential to enable societies to take advantage of development opportunities, to
focus on poverty alleviation and to avoid unsustainable
trends in water policy (Box 23.3 and Figure 23.1).
Valuation of the health beneﬁts of investing in water
and improving water management shows that providing basic water and sanitation services is essential to
halt the poverty spiral of low income, low savings and
low investment in human and physical capital. ‘Poor
people in Africa spend at least a third of their incomes
on the treatment of water-related diseases like malaria
and diarrhoea. … The cost of the productive time lost
due to these diseases as well as widespread human

BOX 23.4
Valuing the beneﬁts of water can deﬁne
international priorities and target support at the poor

The Copenhagen Consensus sought to compare the costs
and beneﬁts of a broad range of development interventions in order to help deﬁne international priorities. It did
this by evaluating beneﬁt–cost ratios (BCRs) using standardized methodologies across a number of sectors. In
2008, Whittington et al. carried out an exercise on a range
of low-cost water and sanitation sector interventions. Not
all water and sanitation projects would pass a beneﬁt–
cost analysis, especially because of the substantial upfront capital investment required, which yields beneﬁts
over a long period. As a result, it is vital to evaluate the
costs as well as the beneﬁts of alternative investments,
given that different service levels may yield comparable
beneﬁts at very different costs.
The Whittington study (2008, p. 3) concluded by stating:
‘the key to successful water and sanitation investments
is to discover forms of service and payment mechanisms
that will render the improvements worthwhile for those
who must pay for them. In many cases, the conventional
network technologies of water supply will fail this test
and poor households need alternative, non-networked
technologies’.

VALUING WATER

537

FIGURE 23.1
Access to water and potential gains in terms of gender, equity and education opportunities for children.
Left panel, distribution of those who usually collect drinking water; right panel, proportion of the population using
drinking water piped on premises, other improved drinking water source or an unimproved source, by wealth quintile,
sub-Saharan Africa.

Women shoulder the largest burden
in collecting drinking water

Boys

8%

4%

100

14
29

Men

24%

Women

Proportion of population (%)

Girls

The richest quintile is more than twice as likely than
the poorest quintile to use improved drinking water

80

45
54
64

51

60

40

61
52
20

36

45

0

1

3

10

Poorest

2nd

3rd

4th

35

64%
0

Richest

Unimproved sources
Other improved sources
Piped on premises

Note: For families without a drinking water source on the premises it is usually women who go to the source to collect drinking water. Surveys
from 45 developing countries show that this is the case in almost two-thirds of households, while in almost a quarter of households, it is men
who usually collect the water. In 12% of households, however, children carry the main responsibility for collecting water, with girls under 15 years
of age being twice as likely to carry this responsibility as boys under the age of 15 years. The real burden on children is likely to be higher
because, in many households the water collection burden is shared, and children – though not the main person responsible – often make several
roundtrips carrying water.
Sources: WHO and UNICEF (2010).

538

suffering must also be added to this’ (SIWI, WHO and
NORAD, 2005, p. 13).

about the greatest beneﬁts, based on levels of service
and ability of poor households to pay.

People who do not have access to water from a safe
facility that is located nearby pay a high opportunity
cost for collecting the minimum amount they need
to satisfy their basic needs. Although this cost is not
measured in monetary terms, it is effectively paid in
terms of lost time, lost school days and lost working
days. Making water available to the poor is a means
of freeing up human capital that can then be put to
creating wealth. A valuation of these beneﬁts justiﬁes
the collective provision of water because self-provision
for household consumption is proportionally more expensive for the poor than for the rich and represents
a heavier burden for women and children. But it is important to understand which interventions will bring

Halting the poverty spiral is generally possible if income earning opportunities for the poor are increased.
Improving water supply for productive uses, particularly for food production, would facilitate this (Box 23.5).
Agriculture is still the main livelihood and the engine
of growth for three-quarters of the world’s poor, who
still predominantly live in rural areas. Strategies to
reduce poverty need to focus on improving farmers’
incomes and building resilience in this sector. Valuing
the impacts of higher yields and the effects of growing a greater variety of crops can help to bring about
better poverty reduction strategies relating to the
agricultural use of water. Knowledge of the value of
higher incomes and the impact of lower food prices

CHAPTER 23

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 23.5
Valuing the beneﬁts of sanitation can foster
government action and redouble the focus on
sanitation

đƫƫƫĂĀĀĉƫ3/ƫ0$!ƫ *0!.*0%+*(ƫ!.ƫ+"ƫ*%00%+*ċƫ$%/ƫ
helped to put the neglected sanitation crisis onto the
agendas of government leaders, the donor community,
and civil society.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ*%00%+*ƫ* ƫ0!.ƫ"+.ƫ((ƫ%*%0%0%2!ƫ%)/ƫ0+ƫ!*courage donor governments and recipient countries’
ﬁnance ministers to increase the efforts being made in
the area of sanitation.
đƫƫƫ1/0%*(!ƫ*%00%+*čƫ$!ƫ%2!ġ!.ƫ.%2!ƫ0+ƫĂĀāĆƫ%/ƫ*ƫ
advocacy vehicle committed to keeping sanitation high
on the political agenda, promoting national coordination and inspiring actors in the sanitation and health
ﬁelds.
All these efforts are built, to a large extent, on the results
of valuation analysis that show the links that sanitation
and health have with economic development and environmental sustainability. The crucial information came from
the work of the World Health Organization (WHO) (which
highlights the important economic beneﬁts of appropriate sanitation actions), and the UN-Water GLAAS analysis
of existing drinking water and sanitation ﬁnancing and its
recommendations. Recommendation 1 says: ‘Developing
countries and external support agencies to demonstrate
greater political commitment to sanitation and drinking
water, given their central role in human and economic
development.’

helps to measure those effects and target strategies
appropriately.
23.1.3 Valuing the beneﬁts of water can inform water
management choices
Water valuation makes a real contribution by providing relevant information on the value of the different
types of beneﬁts and costs attached to the different
courses of action open to water managers. Some of
these courses of action complement other water and
sanitation initiatives, while others are mutually exclusive (Table 23.2).
Each alternative considered on its own can be assessed as an individual project. Nevertheless this information, while useful, is not enough to make a decision.
It requires comparing the value of its opportunity costs
with the best available alternative. Dams, for example, are used to store water for drinking, irrigation, and

WWDR4

hydroelectricity generation as well as ﬂood management. All these uses provide considerable beneﬁts to
society. However, dams have negative effects on the
hydromorphological conditions of rivers by modifying
aquatic habitats and inﬂuencing other valuable ecosystem services downstream. The impact of the value, or
the cost, of losing these services must be considered
when assessing the overall economic beneﬁts of a dam.
It is perhaps even more important to consider the alternative options for storing water, as was done in the
case of New York when the city needed to plan a new
water supply system (Box 6). Alternatives can include
using natural infrastructure such as wetlands, soil or
groundwater to store water. Each of these, along with
other options, will provide co-beneﬁts such as ﬁsheries, water puriﬁcation or ﬂood mitigation. In the case
of desalinated water, it may be more expensive to produce but its provision is more dependable. The cost of
provision, however, needs to be compared with the full
cost of using alternative sources of water. This comparison should include environmental costs that would not
occur if the overuse of resources were prevented.
The relevant comparison of opportunity costs and beneﬁts that are either obtained or foregone with each
management option in the decision-making process
are varied and context speciﬁc – for example, when
considering how new infrastructure projects may (or
may not) be more beneﬁcial than demand-management options for ensuring water security. Demand
management may be the most cost-effective way of
increasing available water, but existing arrangements
may make it ﬁnancially unviable for water distribution
managers. Managers will ‘sell’ fewer services, and so
get a reduced income. With price caps on water services and no support from governments, this may affect
the funding that is available for the operation, maintenance and replacement of infrastructures – and the
viability of the services themselves.
When assessing alternative courses of action, it is also
important to consider that the market price cannot
capture the full range of beneﬁts that water brings to
people and economies. Beneﬁts and costs that affect
peoples’ welfare through, for example, water pollution and exhaustion, are often absent in the balance
of costs and beneﬁts that individuals and ﬁrms take
into account when making decisions. For example,
when judged on the basis of their own interest, using
groundwater may be ﬁnancially cost effective for farmers. But it can exhaust water supplies and transfer the

VALUING WATER

539

TABLE 23.2
Types of beneﬁt attached to different water and sanitation interventions
Investments options

Types of beneﬁt

Providing access to safe water and sanitation
Providing access to safe water near the home
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ30!.Ƴ!//Ƴ,+%*0
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ* Ƴ+,!.0%*#Ƴ30!.Ƴ0.!0)!*0Ƴ,(*0/
đƳƳ.+2% %*#Ƴ,+%*0ġ+"ġ1/!Ƴ30!.Ƴ0.!0)!*0Ƴ)!0$+ /
Providing access to sanitation and hygiene
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ/*%00%+*Ƴ"%(%0%!/
đƳƳ.+)+0%*#Ƴ0$!Ƴ +,0%+*Ƴ+"Ƴ$5#%!*%Ƴ,.0%!/
Wastewater collection and transport
đƳƳ+((!0%*#Ƴ3/0!30!.Ƴ2%Ƴ/!3!.#!Ƴ*!03+.'/
đƳƳ+((!0%*#Ƴ* Ƴ0.*/,+.0%*#Ƴ,%0Ƴ/(1 #!Ƴ+10/% !Ƴ0$!Ƴ$+)!

Health beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 1! Ƴ%*% !*!Ƴ+"Ƴ30!.+.*!Ƴ %/!/!/ƳĨ!Ǝ#ƎƳ %..$+!ĩƳ
and of water-washed diseases
Non-health beneﬁts/economic beneﬁts
đƳƳ%)!Ƴ/2! Ƴ"+.Ƴ,.+ 10%2!Ƴ0%2%0%!/
đƳƳ! 1! Ƴ+,%*#Ƴ+/0/
Economic beneﬁts
đƳƳ *.!/!Ƴ%*Ƴ,.+ 10%2%05
đƳƳ/!Ƴ+"Ƴ1.%*!Ƴ* Ƴ"!!/Ƴ/Ƴ!+*+)%Ƴ%*,10
đƳƳ ),0Ƴ+*Ƴ0+1.%/)Ƴ".+)Ƴ%),.+2! Ƴ)!*%05
Other beneﬁts
đƳƳ *.!/!/Ƴ%*Ƴ+2!.((Ƴ(!*(%*!//ƏƳ %#*%05Ƴ* Ƴ,.% !
đƳƳ *.!/! Ƴ/$++(Ƴ00!* *!ƏƳ!/,!%((5Ƴ"+.Ƴ#%.(/

– downstream, in wastewater treatment for safe disposal
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ* Ƴ+,!.0%*#Ƴ3/0!30!.Ƴ0.!0)!*0Ƴ,(*0/
đƳƳ*/1.%*#Ƴ/"!Ƴ %/,+/(Ƴ+"Ƴ.!/% 1(Ƴ/(1 #!
đƳƳ!(5%*#Ƴ+*Ƴ*01.(Ƴ0.!0)!*0Ƴ,.+!//!/

Health beneﬁts
đƳ! 1! Ƴ%*% !*!Ƴ+"Ƴ30!.+.*!Ƴ %/!/!/ƳĨ!Ǝ#ƎƳ %..$+!ĩƳ
and of water-washed diseases
đƳƳ!*!ü0/Ƴ".+)Ƴ%),.+2! Ƴ.!.!0%+*(Ƴ30!./
Environmental beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 1! Ƴ!10.+,$%0%+*Ƴ
Economic beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 1! Ƴ,.!ġ0.!0)!*0Ƴ+/0/Ƴ +3*/0.!)ƳĨ"+.Ƴ .%*'%*#Ƴ30!.Ƴ
and industrial purposes)
đƳƳƫ.+0!0%+*Ƴ+"Ƴ+))!.%(Ƴü/$Ƴ/0+'/Ƴ* Ƴ-11(01.!
đƳƳƫ*$*! Ƴ0+1.%/)Ƴ0%2%0%!/Ƴ
đƳƳƫ*.!/! Ƴ30!.Ƴ/1,,(5Ƴ"+.Ƴ%..%#0%+*Ƴ
đƳƳƫ2%*#Ƴ+"Ƴ"!.0%(%6!./Ƴ0$.+1#$Ƴ1/!Ƴ+"Ƴ/(1 #!
Other beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ!.!0%+*(Ƴ!*!ü0/Ƴ
đƳƳƫ*.!/! Ƴ,.+,!.05Ƴ2(1!/

– upstream, in managing the supply/demand balance sustainably
Protecting water resources
đƳƳ/0(%/$%*#Ƴ0$)!*0Ƴ,.+0!0%+*Ƴ6+*!/
đƳƳ/0(%/$%*#Ƴ2+(1*0.5Ƴ#.!!)!*0/
đƳƳ/0(%/$%*#Ƴ.!#1(0%+*/
Increasing and ensuring supply
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ/0+.#!Ƴ,%05
đƳƳ1%( %*#Ƴ/0.0%+*Ƴ,%05
đƳƳƫ!2!(+,%*#Ƴ(0!.*0%2!Ƴ/+1.!/ƏƳ/1$Ƴ/Ƴ-1%"!.Ƴ.!$.#!ƏƳ
desalination, re-use of treated effluent
đƳƳƫ +,0%*#Ƴ .+1#$0Ƴ)*#!)!*0Ƴ,(*/

Environmental beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 1%*#Ƴ,.!//1.!Ƴ+*Ƴ2%((!Ƴ.!/+1.!/ƳĨ!/,!%((5Ƴ
groundwater) and improving river ﬂows
đƳƳƫ+*+)%Ƴ%),0Ƴ+*Ƴ1/!Ƴ+"Ƴ30!.Ƴ"+.Ƴ!+*+)%Ƴ0%2%0%!/
(agriculture, hydropower)
Economic beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 10%+*Ƴ%*Ƴ30!.Ƴ,.!ġ0.!0)!*0Ƴ+/0/
đƳƳƫ*%*0!..1,0! Ƴ/1,,(5Ƴ"+.Ƴ,.+ 10%+*Ƴ,.+!//!/
đƳƳƫ+3*/%6%*#Ƴ+"Ƴ"%(%0%!/
đƳƳƫ! 1! Ƴ*!! Ƴ"+.Ƴ !/(%*0%+*ƳĨ!*!.#5Ƴ/2%*#/ĩ

Managing demand
Other beneﬁts
đƳƳƫ! 1%*#Ƴ(!'#!ƳĨ+*Ƴ0$!Ƴ*!03+.'Ƴ* Ƴ3%0$%*Ƴ1/0+)!./ĚƳ đƳƳƫ*.!/! Ƴ-1(%05Ƴ+"Ƴ(%"!Ƴ 1!Ƴ0+Ƴ.!(%(!Ƴ30!.Ƴ/1,,(5Ƴ
premises)
đƳƳƫ* %.!0Ƴ!*!ü0/ƳĨ!Ǝ#ƎƳ(%*'! Ƴ0+Ƴ.!.!0%+*(Ƴ0%2%0%!/Ƴ+*Ƴ )/ĩ
đƳƳƫ*0.+ 1%*#Ƴ%*!*0%2!Ƴ,.%%*#
đƳƳƫ*/0((%*#Ƴ30!.ġ/2%*#Ƴ !2%!/
đƳƳ%/%*#Ƴ3.!*!//Ƴ* Ƴ! 10%*#Ƴ0$!Ƴ,1(%
Source: OECD (2011).

540

CHAPTER 23

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

costs to other water users. Where short-term proﬁts
are higher than real economic costs, boom and bust
outcomes result, and sustainable development may be
undermined. There are many examples of much effort
having been put into building water infrastructures
that eventually became useless when water resources
were exhausted.
The external costs incurred by the overuse and degradation of water resources often remain ignored until
a crisis is reached – by which time the value of the
infrastructure itself is usually reduced and is compromising the sustainability of services. If institutions
governing water fail to properly manage its use, there
is a danger of market incentives favouring short-term
ﬁnancial beneﬁts at the expense of the integrity of
the resource base and its long-term economic value.
Worldwide evidence of the overexploitation of surface
water and groundwater unveils this fact. It is expected
that by 2025, 1.8 billion people will live in countries or
regions with absolute water scarcity and two-thirds of
the world population could be affected by water stress
conditions (UNESCO–WWAP, 2006). In many places,
society has been willing and able to go further with investment opportunities where the short-term ﬁnancial
returns for water users are transparently inferior to the
economic beneﬁts that will be available as a result of
long-term sustainability.
23.1.4 Valuing non-market beneﬁts can prevent
critical ecosystem services from being neglected
Ecosystem services are the beneﬁts, or services, that
ecosystems bring to people. Drinking water, water

BOX 23.6
Balancing beneﬁts and costs when assessing water
management options: New ﬁltration infrastructures
versus water catchment protection in New York

‘Presented with a choice between provision of clean water through building a ﬁltration plant or managing the
watershed, New York City easily concluded that the latter
was more cost effective. It was estimated that a ﬁltration plant would cost between $6 billion and $8 billion
to build. By contrast, watershed protection efforts, which
would include not only the acquisition of critical watershed lands but also a variety of other programs designed
to reduce contamination sources in the watershed, would
cost only about $1.5 billion.’
Source: Daily and Ellison (2003).

WWDR4

for food production and the generation of hydroelectricity are all ecosystem services – as are other often
neglected services such as nutrient recycling, climate
regulation, cultural and recreational beneﬁts and
ﬂood mitigation. Most of the decisions that have to
be taken are actually about maximizing one particular service, often at the expense of others. In this way,
water decisions nearly always involve trade-offs. The
objective should be to optimize the delivery of multiple inter-related ecosystem services. The purpose of
effective valuation is two-fold. First, to identify and
recognize what services are involved in the trade-off
(even if they can’t be valued). And second, to quantify values as much as possible in order to assist in
calculating trade-offs.
Some of the non-market services provided by ecosystems can be relatively easily quantiﬁed and generate substantial values. Examples include the value of
ecosystems such as wetlands in ﬂood mitigation, and
forests in sustaining drinking water quality. It is the
growing recognition of these values that is motivating greater interest in the restoration of these services. Valuation has often shown that conserving ecosystems, or reversing their degradation, is not only
a sustainable ecological alternative (very often with
multiple beneﬁts), but is also economically beneﬁcial.
Valuation essentially provides evidence that economic
beneﬁts are relinquished when policy, management
and investment cause avoidable environmental degradation. For producers of goods and services who
use water directly, water prices and costs are the basic
criteria for water-use decisions. But prices often do not
reﬂect the real production costs or economic value of
water. In particular, prices often do not reﬂect the decline in the natural capital stocks that support the production of all ecosystem services. Therefore, decisions
taken on infrastructure investments are disconnected
from what is efficient and sustainable for the economy
and the environment as a whole.
Better awareness of the issues and more sharing of information on the economic beneﬁts of maintaining or
restoring natural capital is also important when trying
to reach collective agreements and when trying to design ﬁnancial incentives that align individual behaviour
with the common good. Valuation and better communication of the costs and beneﬁts are crucial for taking
better individual and collective decisions on the use of
water.

VALUING WATER

541

BOX 23.7
Valuing non-market ecosystem services in
the European Union can inform decisions on
environmental objectives in planning processes

In the European Water Framework Directive, valuing the
costs and beneﬁts provides the information required to
assess whether the opportunity cost of improving water
bodies – is disproportionate compared with the potential
socio-economic and environmental beneﬁts, and to then
decide on the precise objectives and timing of measures
to improve water status in the river basin management
plans. It is widely accepted that in many water bodies
there are more welfare gains to be obtained by improving the ecological status than by allowing their further
degradation.

There are now a number of examples that demonstrate
the beneﬁts of environmental improvements and inﬂuence water planning and decision-making (Box 23.7).
23.1.5 Valuing to assess trade-offs in water allocation
decisions
Water ecosystems have only a limited ability to continue to provide water services to the economy. So
it is important for economic growth that water is
used well and allocated to its various uses efficiently.
Competition can be managed and degradation prevented by having sufficient accurate information about
the economic, social and environmental value of water
in its various uses. This will also help with re-allocating water so that it provides greater beneﬁts to the
economy and to society. There will be trade-offs to be
considered too and decisions to be taken about which
beneﬁts to forgo when using water for one purpose
instead of another.
In a world of scarcity, the valuation of water productivity in agriculture also needs to be considered.
Information needed by governments so that they can
assess whether water is being used for low-yield crops
in water-scarce areas – and if so, determine alternative
crops or uses that would make the greatest contribution to the economy. Such a valuation provides a database that farmers can use to make informed decisions
about investing in improved infrastructure and crop
varieties, and that governments can use to target their
investment and to formulate incentives for improving
efficiency in water use.

542

CHAPTER 23

Legal frameworks and institutions need to be set up
and better ways of allocating water need to be found.
These need to be done using principles – such as equity and efficiency – that may be politically difficult to
implement in practice. There is also a need to improve
the mechanisms that deliver desired objectives to a
range of diverse stakeholder interests (Box 23.8). If
there are institutional arrangements that allow water
to be allocated to where its use is most valuable, this
may help in drawing up mutually beneﬁcial allocation
agreements. Establishing legal frameworks for decentralized water management is the type of institutional
arrangement that has become important in many water scarce countries. These can be used to implement
economic instruments such as water trading, licences
and rights to use water. Water trading has developed
in countries such as Australia, the United States, India,
Chile and Spain (Box 23.9).

BOX 23.8
Stakeholder-oriented valuation can support
allocation decisions water management in Tanzania

In the United Republic of Tanzania, some areas face severe water scarcity. Demand for water has been growing
and there is conﬂict between the energy and irrigation
sectors, between these sectors and conservationists, and
between upstream and downstream users. In 2005, the
government established a legal framework that decentralizes water management and increases stakeholder involvement by including local catchment area committees,
river basin associations and water-users associations. A
participatory approach to water valuation – through surveys, data collections and workshops to analyse data and
results – was implemented to enable local stakeholders to
engage in implementing IWRM.
Indicators for economic, social and environmental values
were considered including crop water productivity in different zones, value across all water sectors, income from
water-related production activities, food security (including the nutritional value of crops), access to drinking
water, conﬂict over water, environmental base ﬂows and
environmental changes. The valuing process supported
decisions to change to crops that use less water, to improve capacities to increase water productivity, to review
existing water rights and the training of water-users associations, and to coordinate farmers’ own marketing of
agricultural products in order to increase income and improve stability.

Source: Hermans et al. (2006).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

23.1.6 Valuing water can help to contain water
conﬂicts and promote cooperation in preserving
water resources
In the context of access to critical transboundary water
resources, valuing can inform governments about the
advantages of cooperation instead of competition or
conﬂict. Working towards a common vision of the value of shared water resources is a powerful instrument
for ﬁnding a way in which agreements in international
disputes over water can be self-enforced.
Countries are more likely to cooperate when the net
beneﬁts of cooperating are perceived to be greater
than those of non-cooperation – and this is even more

BOX 23.9
Valuation of scarcity in water markets

Values associated with water can be observed directly
through market activity in arid regions where there is
trading, where water is fully allocated and where irrigation
is under pressure from municipal, industrial and, in some
cases, environmental, demands. There are some basins
where rights to use water are deﬁned, enforced and tradable. Market prices in examples in the United States (in
California’s Central Valley, Colorado’s South Platte basin
and Nevada’s Truckee River basin), and in Australia (in the
Murray-Darling basin) conﬁrm that the value of water use
varies considerably and that it is driven by variations in
market conditions and supply.
Data suggest that in many river basins, market transfers are happening in line with the agricultural value of
water, but at a rate that’s below the value of water to the
domestic consumer or industrial user. Markets that don’t
have signiﬁcant urban demand see prices that reﬂect the
agricultural production value of water, which is calculated
as the difference in the price of irrigated versus dry land.
Where there is signiﬁcant urban demand, prices are driven
by this and shaped by the cost of transferring the water to
urban use through conveyances and so forth.
Market values for permanent water rights acquisitions are
roughly one order of magnitude greater than the prices
for temporary allocations. From this it can be deduced
that capitalization rates will be roughly on the order of
magnitude expected given current costs of credit. The
market value of water is intrinsically regional, or even local, because physical limitations constrain the scope of
cost-effective trade. As a result, price observations from
one context may have little relevance in another.

likely when the sharing arrangement is perceived to be
fair. The advantages of cooperation and collective action are easier to see when the beneﬁts can be made
visible to each one of the parties (Box 23.10).
Valuing provides key information that allows stakeholders to move towards cooperative agreements. It
also enables the creation of beneﬁts for all those involved in providing solutions. For example, valuing the
beneﬁts that water catchment protection can have in
securing adequate supplies of quality water can open
up solutions that were not envisaged. This can include
cost saved by reducing the need for downstream treatment. Protecting watersheds also leads to a broad
range of positive environmental effects on the quality of water in water bodies, in groundwater resources,
in soil resources and the quality of water available for
vegetation and for native ﬂora and fauna.
23.1.7 Valuing water to design appropriate subsidies
and targeted ﬁnancing
Despite the substantial economic returns involved in
providing water services to households, to industry
and for food production, the basic water needs of people in many poor countries are still not being met. This
is a result of a combination of the inability of individuals and business to pay and too few ﬁnancial incentives to invest in the required facilities. These are key
reasons why decisions should be taken to give water
operators and community service providers better access to loans and well-targeted subsidies (Box 23.11).

BOX 23.10
Valuing beneﬁts supports cooperation in
international river basins

Beneﬁt-sharing agreements exist for various international rivers, including the Danube, the Niger, the Okavango
and many others. The Organization for the Development
of the Senegal River was created in 1972. Disagreement
about the competing rights of Mali, Senegal, Guinea
and Mauritania was no impediment to the four countries
reaching an agreement to share the beneﬁts of various river projects. A common knowledge of the beneﬁts
was essential for building an institutional framework: ‘the
development of multi-purpose water resources infrastructure is expected to yield expanded opportunities for
growth, reduced immigration and poverty, and improved
health and livelihoods of the population while also preserving the environment’ (World Bank, 2009, p. 12).

Source: Aylward et al. (2010).

WWDR4

VALUING WATER

543

Valuation can help to identify when it is justiﬁable to
charge water fees that are lower than full cost of recovering the investment.
Valuation can also give society crucial information that
can be used to ﬁnd practical solutions that ease the
transition from the subsidized tariffs that are designed
to stop poverty spirals, to a set of self-ﬁnanced services that make water services ﬁnancially sustainable.
In many poor countries, only a small portion of the
beneﬁts of water services can be funded entirely by
the public or by private organizations. On purely ﬁnancial grounds, providing water is not an attractive opportunity for private businesses. This can lead to poor
maintenance and the deterioration of privately run water infrastructure and basic services. The consequence
of this is a vicious downward spiral of underinvestment
leading to poor service that undermines the ability to
capture adequate revenue to operate, maintain and invest in systems (Figure 23.2).

BOX 23.11
Valuation can support the design of subsidies and
targeted ﬁnancing
There are economic beneﬁts to be had from improving access to basic sanitation and safe drinking water. The beneﬁts of irrigation have been estimated by the World Bank
to yield average rates of return of 20%. However, ﬁnancial
problems and mismanagement can lead to the downfall of
many irrigation systems. The prices of agricultural products have been falling and some investments are now less
ﬁnancially viable. There may be a need to stabilize the income of poor farmers who are subsisting below a certain
income level and who are exposed to regular drought and
crop insecurity.
Valuing the social and environmental consequences of
abandoning ﬁnancially unsustainable systems has found
that there should be support for the implementation of
ﬁnancial packages and other capacity building programmes (such as record keeping and the collection of
fees) by international donors. Donor resources that are
already in place are being redesigned to help attract other
resources and investment. They are also focusing in providing funding to bridge the gap between investment in
infrastructure and income generation. This supports the
development of local capital and ﬁnancial markets including microcredit initiatives and local banks and is consistent with the aims of output-based aid.

Source: Grimm and Richter (2006).

544

CHAPTER 23

Changes in the provision and management of water
from being mostly self-collected to being a communally provided set of water provision services might
mean that people have more time and better health.
But they still won’t have enough money to pay the ﬁnancial cost of the services they get. In the ﬁrst stage
of this, even if the valuation exercise shows that the
expected economic beneﬁts are undeniable (particularly for the poor) people cannot afford to pay the full
ﬁnancial cost of the service. So in the absence of a
collective action, they will continue without access to
basic sanitation and safe water.
But improvements in water access might not be sustainable in the medium term if society and water institutions are not able to manage the transition from the
initial stage (where the priority is to improve access
to basic services) to an advanced stage where the ﬁnancial sustainability of providing water needs to be
ensured. New ways have to be found to transform the
new opportunity of improved access to water into effective education, crop diversiﬁcation or earning prospects for the poor.
Valuation is useful for determining what economic incentives are required to align individual behaviour with
collective targets and objectives. For example, valuing
less-visible non-market ecosystem services can provide
clearer indications of the value of preserving or restoring ecosystems. Such valuation can be simpler than is
often thought. For example, the loss of an ecosystem’s
ability to deliver clean water can be estimated from the
point of view of the cost of rectifying the problem artiﬁcially (for example, the cost of artiﬁcial water treatment)
or from the point of view of the economic cost of living
the consequences of poor quality water (for example, a
fall-off in productivity, higher health-care expenses, etc.).
In many instances, the absence of an ecosystem service
is already generating an economic, and often direct, ﬁnancial cost. Identifying where beneﬁts arise and costs
are incurred helps to ascertain how costs can be transformed into incentives that will bring more efficient economic outcomes (Box 23. 12).
23.1.8 Valuing can support decisions on what
measures to take to improve water security
There are increasing demands on water and lesspredictable rainfall patterns and water ﬂows (including a higher frequency and intensity of extreme events
such as ﬂoods and droughts). So better water security and more-resilient management options have an

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

increasingly higher value. Valuation approaches should
factor in and provide information on the beneﬁts, or
risks, of increased or decreased water security. When
done effectively, they should shed light on the costs
and beneﬁts of more resilient management options.
The information that a valuation approach provides
about the changing values of water in its various uses
can be vital for implementing adaptive planning and
management. It can also help to prevent inappropriate uncontrolled individual responses to risk and
uncertainty.
Management that makes water supplies secure has
a critical role in making the beneﬁts of development
more predictable. Poor and water-scarce societies that
are now trying to establish systems to supply water
and basic sanitation services are faced with the potential adverse effects of climate change (World Bank,
2010; Danilenko et al., 2010; Box 23.13).
Collective decisions on measures that will increase
water security and facilitate the ﬁnancial resources to
do so cannot be properly informed without a proper valuation of the beneﬁts and costs. Valuation can

improve the accuracy of the information that private
and public agents use to take better-informed decisions with full knowledge of the costs involved. Water
storage schemes and infrastructure, water conservation programmes and improvements in efficiency are
all examples of the kinds of measure that are already
considered beneﬁcial, but which are even more valuable in a climate stress context. Other measures, which
need only be considered in the face of uncertainty,
may include the diversiﬁcation of water sources (such
as desalination and non-conventional sources), the upgrading of storm water systems, the reversal of coastal
developments to reduce exposure, the recovery of
ﬂoodplains for ﬂood protection and the recovery of
aquifers for buffering security stocks.
Valuing can provide valuable information on the capital
and maintenance cost of these various options. And it
can also give an insight into the beneﬁts and opportunity costs involved in water security and other ecosystems services.
Economic incentives can have a role in enhancing
adaptive capacities. When water supply and quality

FIGURE 23.2
The vicious spiral of low funding

Potential investments
driven away by
perception of
high risk and low returns

Increased
Debt

Funds lost to system:
đƫ+*ġ.!+2!.5
đƫ+..1,0%+*
đƫ!*0/

Inadequate
Investment
Oprerational
Inefficiency
Inadequate
Maintenance

Low
Perception of
Value

Low free revenues
and low willingness
to increase tax-based
water funding

Infrastructure
degradation

Good quality human
resources driven away
by lack of opportunity
and low achievement

Low service
quality

Loss of positive
externalities and increase
of negative
externalities

Source: Adapted from Moss et al. (2003, ﬁg. 4, p. 13) by J. M. Moss.

WWDR4

VALUING WATER

545

vary unpredictably over time and from location to location, stakeholders and water users might be more
efficient than public authorities in ﬁnding the most
cost-effective and appropriate answers. For example,
valuation can support water trading and the design

BOX 23.12
Valuing compensation payments for environmental
services in China

China’s ecological compensation mechanisms are a
modern variant of traditional government payments to
providers of ecological services. The government transfers money and compensates land owners (or land users)
for speciﬁc actions that produce environmental beneﬁts.
There are various applications of the eco-compensation
approach. These include compensation paid to residents
living near water sources or reservoirs to migrate to
other areas, subsidies paid to sewage treatment plants,
compensation to support the forestry sector in upstream
areas and payments to farmers to compensate for lost
production caused by reducing the use of fertilizers and
pesticides.
At the central government level, China has developed
and implemented some of the largest public payment
schemes for ecosystem conservation in the world. These
schemes include the Sloping Land Conversion Program
(SLCP), the Natural Forest Protection Project (NFPP), and
the Forest Ecosystem Compensation Fund (FECF). The
SLCP (also called the ‘Grain for Green’ program) was initiated in 1999 to restore natural ecosystems and mitigate
the adverse impacts of farming in previously forested
areas or marginal land. Farming these lands resulted in
ﬂooding, the sedimentation of reservoirs, and dust storms.
Farmers who enrol in the scheme receive payments for
seeds, seedlings, and management expenses. It is one of
the largest public transfer schemes in the world, reaching
some 30 million farms spread over 7 million hectares (ha)
of cropland. It disburses around US$8 billion per year.
The FECF programme targets the management of privately owned forests. It compensates land owners for
the ecosystem services provided by their land and for
the land and resource use restrictions that are subject to
when they participate in the programme. The scheme currently covers 26 million ha in 11 provinces, and costs the
government about RMB 2 billion ($253 million) annually
– of which about 70% goes to farmers, who are paid an
average of US$9 per hectare. Local governments are encouraged to provide additional funds. In December 2004,
the FECF was extended to the entire country. It covers key
state-owned non-commercial forests, as well as woodlands in areas that are at risk from desertiﬁcation and soil
erosion.

Source: Jian (2009).

546

CHAPTER 23

and implementation of a weather-based insurance
scheme that may provide incentives to invest in water
saving and make water allocation and reallocation decisions acceptable, and adaptable. Such a scheme may
be contingent on changes in water supply and the stabilization of income and economic output.
The extent to which some of these measures need
to be taken depends on how individuals and governments value the increased security they provide. It also
depends on how they value the beneﬁts that have to
be foregone in each case. A higher aversion to uncertain events means a higher risk premium – that is
to say, the more people fear exposure to extreme
events, and the more likely these events are seen to
be, the more people will be willing to pay for insurance. Valuing the private willingness to pay to increase security is an important step in judging the
extent to which available measures would be ﬁnancially viable.
Valuing provides reliable evidence of the potential
damage and reduction in welfare that may result from
leaving risk responses to spontaneous individual answers instead of implementing collective and more
comprehensive anticipatory responses to water variability and climate change. Leaving risk response to
individual efforts to defend and maintain production

BOX 23.13
Valuing the economic loses of droughts and the
effects of climate change can make the case for
political action

In Kenya, droughts occur on average once every seven years. Their economic cost (as was the case on the
1999–2000 drought) was equivalent to one-sixth of the
gross domestic product (GDP). This ﬁgure suggest that if
the country could decouple its economy from rainfall variability, its annual economic growth could increase by 3.5%
(SIWI and WHO, 2005).
Nicholas Stern’s review, The Economics of Climate Change
found that climate change had a signiﬁcant impact on
economic output. In a baseline climate-change scenario,
the review estimated that climate change would be responsible for a 2.5% loss in GDP in India and South East
Asia by 2100, and would cause a 1.9% loss in GDP in Africa
and the Middle East over the same period.

Source: Stern (2007).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

activities could lead to the extension or intensiﬁcation
of existing vulnerabilities. Spontaneous answers from
people, businesses, and farmers in rural communities
depend on their perception of value and risk, the options available to them and their individual economic
incentives. The lack of a planned and coordinated response to increased scarcity and risk will favour individual answers that do not necessarily produce the
best or most sustainable outcomes. For example, they
may add more pressure to cultivate marginal land or
adopt unsustainable cultivation practices because erratic rainfall has made yields drop. All of these possibilities could reinforce water scarcity and land degradation and endanger the biodiversity of both wild and
domestic species. They might also increasing vulnerability and jeopardize the ability to respond to climate
and other risks later on.
Showing the difference between the ﬁnancial and economic costs and beneﬁts of alternative actions is a useful
way of underlining the importance of a planned, anticipatory and coordinated response to water management
challenges. Collective actions instead of spontaneous
individual responses are required as well as implementing
risk management options instead of coping with the consequences of extreme events and adapting to negative

trends. Valuation may play a critical role in showing the
advantages of cooperation, leading to better responses
and higher security, instead of individual actions.

23.2 Challenges for Valuing water
Many valuation methods already exist and, have been
tested in a variety of situations and contexts that are
relevant for policy decisions. Water valuation methods
vary according to how they obtain information about
the importance that people give to water beneﬁts.
In spite of its relevance to policy and in spite of the
growing number of successful examples, valuation is
still controversial. Among the issues most commonly
discussed are: the usefulness of the various valuation
approaches for any speciﬁc decision problem; the robustness of the results provided by valuation exercises;
the comparability of costs and beneﬁts when both are
obtained from different sources, at different geographical scales and with different valuation methods (UNSD,
2007 and Chapter 8).
Water valuation is still challenging because data is
often not available and is expensive to collect and
because assumptions sometimes need to be made to
overcome the absence of relevant information. Water

TABLE 23.3
Valuation techniques for water
Valuation techniques
1. Water as an intermediate input to production:
agriculture, manufacturing
Residual value
Change in net income
Production function approach
Mathematical programming models
Sales and rentals of water rights
Hedonic pricing
Demand functions from water utility sales
2. Water as a ﬁnal consumer good
Sales and rentals of water rights
Demand functions from water utility sales
Mathematical programming models
Alternative cost
Contingent valuation
3. Environmental services of water:
waste assimilation
Costs of actions to prevent damage
Beneﬁts from damage averted

Comments

Techniques provide average or marginal value of water based
on observed market behaviour.

All techniques execpt contingent valuation provide average or
).#%*(Ƴ2(1!Ƴ+"Ƴ30!.Ƴ/! Ƴ+*Ƴ+/!.2! Ƴ).'!0Ƴ!$2%+1.Ǝ
Contingent valuation measures total economic value based on
$5,+0$!0%(Ƴ,1.$/!/Ǝ

Both techniques provide information on average or
marginal values

Source: UNSD (2007, table 8.1, p. 120).

WWDR4

VALUING WATER

547

beneﬁts are usually site-speciﬁc and cannot be easily transferred from context to context. Methods and
assumptions are not standardized and uncertainty
in the numerical results obtained may be quite high.
Valuation methods have been developed in response
to these limitations and the results are validated by extensive scientiﬁc research. However, the assumptions,
the numerical results, and the limitations on how valuation results can be used to assess policy options, are
still difficult to communicate to stakeholders.
Decision-making contexts have favoured valuation
methods and results that are less controversial in that
they do not involve sensitive value judgments and are
easier to communicate to stakeholders (Table 23.3).
These are methods where, in the main, results are initially obtained from directly observed behaviour in
existing markets – rather than from laboratory tests or
chosen experiments in implicit markets and artiﬁcially
created decision environments. They are also methods
that can make the best possible use of the information that is already contained in existing market prices
to derive the value of other water beneﬁts. Examples
of contexts where these methods have been used are
welfare measures such as averted costs (for example
measures to value the costs that were avoided when
clean, safe drinking was obtained); averted damage
(methods to value the ﬂood mitigation services provided by the environment); the residual value (methods to show how crop yields and farmers’ incomes
increased when irrigation was made possible); and
avoided treatment cost (from the water puriﬁcation
services provided by the natural water course instead
of by manufactured systems). These methods provide
useful information about three important categories of
water beneﬁts: water as an intermediate input to produce other goods, water as a ﬁnal consumer good and
the environmental services of water.
Considering values and specially value perspectives is
of great importance in implementing measures – especially measures related to adapting to climate change
because these will necessarily mean a change to the
status quo. Managing participatory decision-making is
becoming increasingly important. In practice, valuation
and the consideration of value perspectives are fundamental when balancing trade-offs. They also support
decision-making processes where compromises need
to be reached between different stakeholders –
especially when managing water demands and
allocation decisions (Hermans et al., 2006).

548

CHAPTER 23

There is a need to develop valuation frameworks
that can be used in information gathering and policy-making. The links between ecosystems and human well-being are complex. A basic conceptual
framework has been developed by the Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment that provides a logical structure for the analysis and valuation of ecosystem
services (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).
Including information on the value of water in water
accounting frameworks would be an important step
forward. The UN Statistics SEEAW framework (System
of Environmental-Economic Accounts for Water) provides such an integrated information system to study
the interactions between the environment and the
economy (UNSD, 2007). It can provide the basis for
progress, speciﬁcally because it covers the stocks and
ﬂows associated with water. There is also a need for
further adaptation of valuation methods so that they
can better respond to policy questions and management needs.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Aylward, B., Seely, H., Hartwell, R. and Dengel, J. 2010. The
Economic Value of Water for Agricultural, Domestic and
Industrial uses: A Global Compilation of Economic Studies
and Market Prices. Rome, Italy, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Bhatia, R., Malik, R. P. S. and Bhatia, M. 2007. Direct and
indirect economic impacts of the Bhakra multipurpose
dam, India. Irrigation and Drainage, Vol. 56, Issue 2–3,
pp. 195–206. doi:10.1002/ird.315.
Daly, G. and Ellison, K. 2003. The New Economy of Nature:
The Quest to Make Conservation Proﬁtable. Washington DC,
Island Press.
Danilenko, A., Dickson, E. and Jacobsen, M. 2010. Climate
Change and Urban Water Utilities: Challenges &
Opportunities. Water Working Notes. Note No. 24.
Washington DC, World Bank.
Grimm, J. and Richter, M. 2006. Financing Small-Scale
Irrigation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Desk Study commissioned
by the World Bank. Eschborn, Germany, ETZ.
Hermans, L., Renault, D., Emerton, L., Perrot-Maître, D.,
Nguyen-Khoa, S. and Smith, L. 2006. Stakeholder-oriented
valuation to support water resources management
processes: Confronting concepts with local practice. FAO
Water Reports, 30. Rome, Italy, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs
and Beneﬁts of Water and Sanitation Improvements at
the Global Level. Geneva, Switzerland, World Health
Organization (WHO).
Jian, X. 2009. Addressing China’s Water Scarcity
Recommendations for Selected Water Management Issues.
Water, P-Notes, Issue 37, No.48725. Washington DC, World
Bank.
Kemp, R. 2005. America on the Road to Ruin? Public
Works Management & Policy Vol. 10, Issue 1, pp. 77–82.
doi:10.1177/1087724X05280384.
Moss, J., Wolff, G., Gladden, G. and Gutierrez, E. 2003.
Valuing Water for Better Governance, How to Promote
Dialogue to Balance Social, Environmental and Economic
Values? Business and Industry CEO Panel for Water.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2011. Beneﬁts of Investing in Water and
Sanitation: An OECD Perspective. Paris, France, OECD.
doi:10.1787/9789264100817-en.
Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F. and Bartram, J. 2008. Safer
Water, Better Health: Costs, Beneﬁts and Sustainability
of Interventions to Protect and Promote Health. Geneva,
Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO).
Sachs, J. D. 2001. Macroeconomics and Health: Investing
in Health for Economic Development. Report of the
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. Geneva,
Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO).

Stern, N. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern
Review. Cambridge, U. K., Cambridge University Press.
UNSD (United Nations Statistics Division). 2007. System
of Environmental-Economic Accounting for Water.
Background Document. New York, UNSD.
Whittington, D., Hanemann, W. M., Sadoff, C. and Jeuland,
M. 2008. The challenge of improving water and sanitation
services in less developed countries. Foundations and
Trends in Microeconomics. Vol. 4, Issue 6–7. Hanover,
Germany, Now Publishers Inc. DOA:10.1561/0700000030.
WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-Water: 2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
World Bank. 2008. Environmental Health and Child Survival:
Epidemiology, Economics, Experiences. Washington DC,
World Bank.
––––. 2009. IDA at Work: Water Resources – Improving
Services for the Poor. Washington, D. C., World Bank.
––––. 2010. World Development Report 2010: Development
and Climate Change. Washington DC, World Bank.
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books

SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute), WHO (World
Health Organization) and NORAD (The Norwegian Agency
for Development Cooperation). 2005. Making Water a Part
of Development: The Economic Beneﬁt of Improved Water
Management and Services. Stockholm, SIWI.

WWDR4

VALUING WATER

549

CHAPTER 24
Investing in water infrastructure,
its operation and its maintenance

The World Bank
—
Authors Diego J. Rodriguez, Caroline van den Berg and Amanda McMahon
Acknowledgements Research assistance was provided by Olusola Ikuforiji. This work
is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The ﬁndings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reﬂect the
views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they
represent.

© Shutterstock/Andrey Kekyalyaynen

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Developing countries face a growing funding gap as they try to keep up with the
rehabilitation, operation, and maintenance of aging water infrastructures. New water
systems must also be built to cope with growing populations, increasing demands for water,
changing consumption patterns and climate change.
More than 80% of water investment comes from public funds. While the international
private sector has brought vital efficiency improvements, their appetite for risk in developing
countries is low and diminishing. Public or private, availability of resources for water
infrastructure is becoming more uncertain.
This gap can only be ﬁlled by an optimal mix of funds that is different for each country. But
regardless of the formula, all countries can improve the use of money in the water sector and
all actors have a role to play.
When service providers are able to recover more costs, they can stop the vicious cycle
of degraded services, making them better equipped to mitigate the risks associated with
climate change and the volatility of ﬁnancial markets.
By improving the way funds are allocated, transferred, and used, governments can do more
with scarce resources and reach a level of governance that enables them to beneﬁt from
private sector innovation and long-term ﬁnancial sustainability.
In the meantime, development institutions can provide stopgap assistance and promote the
consideration of greener infrastructure strategies. Assessment of tradeoffs at the national
level can yield demand-side interventions that are more cost-effective than large scale
systems and decrease the ﬁscal burden on poor countries.

24.1 Water, risk and uncertainty
24.1.1 Background
Economies will not grow and poverty will not be reduced without sufficient investment in water services
and water resource infrastructure. Poor quality water
and limited access have substantial implications for the
poor, ranging from ill health caused by unsafe water and
sanitation to reduced productivity (Fay et al., 2005). But
adequate and well-managed infrastructure underpins
water’s role as a driver of socio-economic development.
The 10th Millennium Developments Goal (MDG) aims
to halve the number of people worldwide who do not
have access to improved drinking water and sanitation.
This is a necessary condition for other 2015 MDGs, including the goal of reducing poverty. According to the
World Health Organization (WHO), 80% of diseases in
the developing world are caused by unsafe water, poor
sanitation and a lack of hygiene education. Women
and girls in developing countries beneﬁt immensely
from well-sustained water supply and sanitation services. The enrolment of girls in school rises when latrines are provided, and the improvement of safe water
sources frees women from spending hours every day
drawing water and carrying it home (WaterAid, 2005).
The 2011 MDG report reveals that between 1990 and
2008, more than 1.8 billion people gained access to
improved sources of drinking water. This raises the
proportion of the population with access from 77% to
87%. Progress, however, is uneven. The ratio of rural to
urban inhabitants who don’t have access to improved
drinking water is 5:1. And meeting the sanitation target
has proved daunting. Although the number of people
with improved access to sanitation rose from 43% in
1990 to 52% in 2008, over half of the world’s developing nations are still without access to adequate sanitation (UN, 2011). And the food, energy and ﬁnancial
crises have exacerbated matters.
24.1.2 Global crises
Water is a critical input in production and services,
which means that it is directly affected by the global ﬁnancial, energy and food crises (Winpenny et al.,
2009). To guarantee water security, it is necessary to
address how these crises affect water.
According to the Global Monitoring Report 2010: The
MDGs after the Crisis, the ﬁnancial crisis left some
50 million more people in extreme poverty in 2009
and 64 million more likely to fall into that category by

552

CHAPTER 24

the end of 2010. The report also projects that an additional 100 million people may lose access to drinking
water by 2015 (Box 24.1).
The water sector is vulnerable to economic vagaries.
Levels of investment in water were already low before
the crisis in most developing countries – and these
levels are now even lower, with private sector participation in particular falling sharply. An analysis of the
World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure
(PPI) project database shows that by the end of the
ﬁrst few months of full-scale ﬁnancial crisis, the number of projects had fallen by 45% and associated investments by 29% compared with the same period in
2007 (World Bank and PPIAF, PPI Project Database).
Winpenny et al. (2009) highlights other impacts that
the crisis had on ﬁnancial ﬂows to the water sector.
In a ﬁnancial crisis, public funding is more limited and
tariff revenues fall as poverty deepens. This, in turn, reduces the ability of service providers to access private
ﬁnance (i.e. loans, bonds and equity). However, international aid agencies and multilateral development
banks have made a renewed commitment to increase
assistance to the water sector to offset these changes.
The food crisis is being driven by population growth
and a surge in energy prices. This has led to higher food prices and brought more people below the
poverty line. With the global population expected to
increase to nine billion by 2050, Hanjra and Qureshi
(2010) estimate a 3,300 km3 per year water gap for
food production. Agricultural productivity – which
accounts for over 70% of worldwide water consumption – has to be increased to meet these demands.
Food security depends on a sustainable and efficient
water management system. Rosegrant et al. (2002)
predicts a severe food crisis by 2025 unless fundamental policy changes are made to change future water use.
New investments in irrigation infrastructure and water
productivity can minimize the impact of water scarcity
and partially meet the water demands for food production (Falkenmark and Molden, 2008).
Climate change will impose an additional cost on
achieving and sustaining water security. An analysis
of the impact that climate change may have on water
resources was conducted by the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The analysis expects
serious shortages of water in semi-arid regions, which

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 24.1
The impact that the ﬁnancial crisis has had on access to improved water supply sources: Three alternative scenarios

The Global Monitoring Report 2010 created three possible scenarios to analyse the effects that the ﬁnancial crisis would have
on Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in developing countries: the post-crisis trend, the pre-crisis (high growth) trend
and the low-growth scenario. These were used in projecting the percentage of the population in developing countries who
would not have access to improved water sources.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ,+/0ġ.%/%/ƫ/!*.%+ƫ/$+3/ƫ0$!ƫ!û!0/ƫ+*ƫƫ//1)%*#ƫƫ.!(0%2!(5ƫ.,% ƫ!+*+)%ƫ.!+2!.5ƫ/0.0%*#ƫ%*ƫĂĀāĀċƫ$%/ƫ%/ƫ
the report’s base case forecast.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ,.!ġ.%/%/ƫĨ$%#$ƫ#.+30$ĩƫ/!*.%+ƫ/$+3/ƫ3$0ƫ0$!ƫ!û!0/ƫ+*ƫƫ3+1( ƫ$2!ƫ!!*ƫ$ ƫ !2!(+,%*#ƫ+1*0.%!/ƫ+*0%*1! ƫ
the impressive growth pattern that occurred between 2000 and 2007. The impact that the crisis had on the MDGs can thus
be measured by comparing the post-crisis trend with the pre-crisis trend.
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ(+3ƫ#.+30$ƫ/!*.%+ƫ//1)!/ƫ0$0ƫ0$!ƫ0$%*#/ƫ0$0ƫ#+0ƫ3+./!ƫ!1/!ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫü**%(ƫ.%/%/ƫ3%((ƫ+*0%*1!ƫ0+ƫ 2!./!(5ƫ
affect GDP in the medium-term, resulting in little or no growth for about ﬁve years, followed by a slow recovery.

(Percentage of the population without improved water source)

2015

Region

2015
Target

1990

2006

Post
crisis

Pre crisis/
High growth

Low
growth

East Asia and Paciﬁc

16

32

13

3.3

0.6

4.1

Europe and Central Asia

5

10

5

0

0

1.8

Latin America and
the Caribbean

8

16

9

5.4

4.5

7.1

Middle East and
North Africa

6

11

12

8.3

7.4

10.0

South Asia

13

27

13

9.3

5.1

10.2

Sub-Saharan Africa

26

51

42

39.1

38.8

39.8

All developing countries

12

24

14

10.1

9.6

11

Source: World Bank (2010a, table 4.2, p. 105).

will result in an increase in the frequency of droughts
(Bates et al., 2008).
Extreme water situations affect almost everyone, but
the poor will suffer most because of where they live,
their low incomes, their deﬁcient infrastructure, and the
great reliance they have on climate-sensitive sectors
such as agriculture. For example, over a three-year period, Kenya was hit by extreme ﬂoods that cost its economy 16% of its GDP and by an extreme drought that cost
11% of its GDP. Poor water management will only exacerbate these problems (World Bank, 2004). Zambia’s
economy too is prone to hydrological variability that
will cost it US$4.3 billion in lost GDP over ten years and
lower its agricultural growth by one percentage point
each year (World Bank, 2008a). Because the dominant
livelihood is rain-fed subsistence farming, droughts and
ﬂoods signiﬁcantly affect food security in these regions.

WWDR4

Between US$13 billion and US$17 billion is needed annually to help developing countries’ water resources sectors to adapt to climate change (World Bank,
2010b) – and that’s just the cost of adapting the hard
infrastructure.

24.2 Investment needs in the water sector
24.2.1 Global estimates
Water infrastructure in any country requires huge investment. And water services generally do not recover their
basic operation and maintenance costs. In developing
countries, where funds for anything are scarce and where
systems are already under tremendous pressure, funding
for water represents an enormous ﬁnancial burden.
Data on water investments are sparse and incomplete because estimating actual needs is difficult and fraught with uncertainty. This stems from
the lack of reliable data on public spending on

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

553

infrastructure, current stocks, lack of a systematic
way of monitoring spending and difficulty in tracking the ﬂow of investments. Fay et al. (2010) asserts that a thorough analysis of investment needs
requires four distinct steps:
đƫ Understand how much is being spent and how that
relates to the current quantity of infrastructure and
its quality.
đƫ Set a target and have it priced. The infrastructure
gap is the difference between current spending and
the target.
đƫ Determine how much of the gap can be bridged
through improved efficiency.
đƫ Calculate what additional spending is needed once
the improved efficiencies are in place (ﬁnancing gap).
There are difficulties at every step. Countries and ﬁnancial institutions do not account for infrastructure
investment in a clear way in national accounts, and
inefficiencies in the system are difficult to estimate.
Yepes (2008) estimates that investment requirements for
water, sanitation and wastewater treatment in low and
middle income countries will amount to US$103 billion
between 2008 and 2015.1 This is in line with the
$72 billion estimated by WHO for meeting the water
supply and sanitation (WSS) MDGs (OECD, 2010a).
On a regional level, the Africa Infrastructure Country
Diagnostic (AICD) estimates the investment needed for
water, sanitation and irrigation (Foster and BriceñoGarmendia, 2010). To close the infrastructure gap in
WSS, meet the MDGs and achieve national targets in
sub-Saharan Africa within ten years, an annual investment of approximately US$22 billion is needed.
US$3.4 billion is needed to double Africa’s irrigated area.
24.2.2 Public contributions to water
A snapshot of the current ﬂow of public funding to the
water sector
The lack of centralized and reliable information makes
estimating current public spending in the water sector challenging. It is hard to imagine such a deﬁciency
given that the public sector contributes approximately
80% of all WSS infrastructure costs (Winpenny, 2003,
from Prynn and Sunman (2000).2
Most of the limited information on public spending stems from the OECD’s Development Assistance
Committee (DAC). Aid ﬂows, known as Official
Development Assistance (ODA), has become the main

554

CHAPTER 24

source of statistics, although it includes only aid from
government sources. Aid from private sources, including from non-governmental organizations (NGOs), is
not captured.
Official development assistance (ODA) for water and
sanitation has been rising sharply. According to DAC,
average annual commitments rose from US$3.3 billion
in 2002–2003 to US$8.2 billion in 2008–2009.
24.2.3 Investment and risk
Private contributions in water
The main source of reliable information on private investment in infrastructure is the Private Participation
in Infrastructure (PPI) database. This provides information on more than 4,800 infrastructure projects dating
from 1984 to 2010, which are owned or managed by
private energy, telecommunications, transport and
water companies.
In its last reporting period (July 2011), PPI reported
that in 2010, seven low- or middle-income countries
implemented 25 water projects that involved private
investment of US$2.3 billion (Figure 24.1).3 The number of new projects with private participation that
started in 2010 was 34% lower than 2009 and was the
lowest annual number since 1995. Despite fewer new
projects starting, annual investment commitments in
2010 were 17% higher than in 2009.
New private activity in 2010 included twenty-ﬁve projects, with the three largest comprising 76% of the
investment volume. Two countries (China and Brazil)
accounted for twenty of the projects and 36% of the
investment. Fifteen of the projects were in China and
fourteen of these were small to medium sized wastewater treatment plants. Overall, private activity in 2010
focused on water and sewage treatment plants, accounting for seventeen of the projects and US$1.4 billion in investment (Figure 24.2).
Analysis of investment commitments to all sectors
(energy, telecom, transport and water) reveals water
represents 1% of total private participation in developing countries (World Bank, 2011). And the ﬁnancial
crisis is imposing new challenges for ﬁnancing. Public
resources are scarcer than ever and the private sector
is reluctant to engage in new undertakings that could
involve additional risks. International investments bring
the added risk of ﬂuctuating exchange rates, which
domestic lenders do not face. Between 1995 and 2005,

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

FIGURE 24.1
Investment in water projects with private participation (1990–2010)
15
Manila
concession
12
Malaysia’s Indah
region sewerage
concession

2010 US$ billions*

9

Chile
divestitures

Johor
concession

Buenos Aires
concession

6

Syabas
concession

3

Remaining investment

Large commitments

2010

2005

2000

1995

1990

0

Large commitments
*Adjusted by US CPI

Source: Perard (2011, ﬁg. 1, p. 1) (PPI Project database).

the portion of private international ﬂows to WSS fell by
6%, while local private ﬂows rose by 10% (Jimenez and
Perez Foguet, 2009).
Investment risk in the face of uncertainty
Even in the developed world, robust utilities are vulnerable to climate-induced risks such as drought, interstate disputes over water, and regulatory changes. A
2010 study by New York-based global equity investors,
Water Asset Management and non-proﬁt organization,
Ceres, looked at six water utilities in the United States to
assess their vulnerability to changes in water availability
up to 2030 (Leurig, 2010). The study informs investors
buying public utility bonds about the potential risks associated with changes in hydrological variability – risks
which aren’t currently reﬂected in the bond ratings issued by the three largest ratings agencies. Ceres reports
that ratings agencies endorse the over-use of water by
rewarding utilities that sell more of it, despite very real
supply constraints in the medium term.
Cities in Arizona and Nevada rely on Lake Mead as a
primary water source, but a decade-long drought is reducing available supplies. On the other side of the country, the City of Atlanta may have to reduce supplies by
40% on foot of a new judicial order to make more water

WWDR4

available for environmental services. While each utility
has a different capacity to manage such risks, their ability to attract ﬁnancing remains more or less unscathed
because these issues go unreported. The Water Asset
Management–Ceres’ analysis sheds light on the real
need to factor climate risks and uncertainty into longterm planning, ﬁnancing and tariff adjustments, in addition to developing sound adaptation plans. For developing countries, failure to address the uncertainty of water
supplies today will only exacerbate risks and curtail effective long-term strategic ﬁnancial planning.
24.2.4 Opportunities in green growth and green
economy agendas
The challenges of population growth, food and energy
security, urbanization, volatile international ﬁnancial
ﬂows, and climate change call for sustainable solutions
that reduce reliance on natural resources. The ‘green
economy’ agenda is being promoted across developed
and developing countries alike in an effort to transform business, including the planning and design of
new infrastructure. Fay et al. (2010) argue that when
planning sustainable development, it is necessary to
consider the signiﬁcant environmental implications of
expanding infrastructure and to assess the interactions
between infrastructure policy and environment policy.

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

555

FIGURE 24.2
Water projects with private participation, by subsector (1990–2010)
100

80

No. projects

60

40

20

Treatment plant

Utility

2010

2005

1991

1995

2000

0

Water transfer system

Source: Perard (2011, ﬁg. 2, p. 1) (PPI Project database).

The green economy challenges policy-makers to improve the design of our water infrastructure, and offers
an opportunity to reverse the trend of over-consumption.
But green infrastructure comes at a cost. In Korea, the
National Strategy for Green Growth and the Five Year
Plan (2009–2013) is expected to cost 2% of GDP (OECD,
2011b). For developing countries, such a price will prove
even more difficult to bear. Fostering green investment
in these countries will require solid incentives such as
expanding funding, enhancing political will, establishing a well-deﬁned institutional framework – and, most
importantly, initiating policy reforms that reduce harmful
subsidies and promote an enabling investment climate.
In addition to formulating polices to increase economic
productivity without damaging the environment, it is also
imperative to intensify global environmental research and
ease technology transfer for clean technologies.

24.3 Financing the gap
24.3.1 A Linear reform agenda
Developing countries alone need to invest US$72 billion a year to meet water sector demands. This is on
top of the estimated US$15 billion needed for climate
change adaptation measures. While investment needs
are growing exponentially, developing countries are
coming out of the ﬁnancial crises with fewer available
resources. Given the already low capacity of utilities

556

CHAPTER 24

to recover costs, what’s required is a more efficient
combination of tools that will ﬁnance the gap between
demand and supply.
Narrowing the ﬁnancing gap involves a four-step reform agenda. First, service providers must reduce a
range of inefficiencies to increase revenues and lower
costs. Second, providers should tap available public
funding (including ODA and subsidies), while governments improve the efficiency and efficacy of funds.
Third, having improved proﬁtability and the quality of
the service they provide, utilities can begin raising tariffs to reﬂect the real costs of the service. Finally, once
they have the necessary political will and institutional
capacity, providers should form public-private partnerships and apply for commercial loans.
24.3.2 Providing a more sustainable service
Inefficiencies as implicit subsidies
Inefficiencies in water provision come in many different guises. Low water productivity, high rates of drinking water consumption and the subsequent ﬂows of
wastewater that need to be collected and treated are
all the by-products of inefficiency.
In Africa alone, water utilities loose approximately US$1 billion a year as a result of operating

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

inefficiencies associated with poor maintenance,
overstaffing, high distribution losses and under-collection of revenues (Foster and Briceño-Garmendia,
2010). The AICD suggests that Africa’s water supply
resources would go considerably further if various
inefficiencies – amounting to US$2.7 billion a year –
could be addressed. In seventeen countries, these
inefficiencies – consisting of mispricing (where tariffs
are below the cost of the services), collection inefﬁciencies and water losses, are in the order of 0.6%
of GDP. Reducing inefficiencies will not entirely close
the existing ﬁnance gaps, but it will reduce them
considerably and enable systems to operate better. It
may also postpone the need for certain investments
and will certainly boost the ﬁnancial health of utilities
and pave the way to private ﬁnancial resources by
improving creditworthiness.
Examining hidden costs shows that policy decisions
are being made that are not cost-effective. Among
the main causes of losses in water agencies are tariff
regimes that don’t allow for cost recovery, an official
tolerance of arrears and low collection rates and a tolerance of pilferage. All of these mean that there is not
enough money to carry out maintenance or to invest in
new infrastructure – which is implicit borrowing from
future taxpayers or future water users.

obvious, but programmes aimed at this require strong
institutional capacity and substantial ﬁnancial resources. Reducing NRW is not only a technical issue. If water
tariffs are too low, the cost of reducing NRW may exceed the monies saved.
Billing and collection
Experience has shown that improving billing goes beyond simply delivering invoices and bills. Transferring
management to an organization that has ﬁnancial
autonomy will reassure users that their payments are
going to the service provider. Autonomous organizations that have strong user participation and are
transparent in the way they set water charges are
more likely to achieve high collection rates. Water
user associations can play an important role in this
(Box 24.3). Incentive systems that encourage the
prompt collection of fees can also contribute to improvements in cost recovery.
The role of technology choice
Choosing the right technology is important in reducing service costs. This affects initial investment costs
as well as operation and maintenance costs. And lower
capital costs don’t necessarily mean low running costs
(Box 24.4).

BOX 24.2
Efficiency improvements
Governments need to consider eliminating the technical and managerial inefficiencies associated with delivering water services. They also need to concentrate on
creating a policy and regulatory and environment that
will attract investment – and this should be done before looking for public and private ﬁnance (Beato and
Vives, 2008).
Non-revenue water (NRW) is a major source of inefﬁciency in water utilities (Box 24.2). Kingdom et al.
(2006) shows that unaccounted-for water is responsible for losses of almost US$14 billion each year. This
includes an estimated 45 million m3 of treated water
that leaks from urban water supply systems every day
and another 30 million m3 delivered to consumers but
not billed for as a result of pilferage, corruption, and
poor metering. It is estimated that about 70% of these
losses are incurred in developing countries, where
utilities urgently need additional revenues in order to
expand, and where many connected customers have
to deal with intermittent supply and poor water quality. The beneﬁts of reducing the amount of NRW are

WWDR4

Reducing the amount of non-revenue water

Inaccurate metering, unauthorized consumption and leakages all results in non-revenue water (NRW). NRW should
be considered within the broader context of utility reform
in order to ensure that appropriate funds and resources
are allocated. The full scope of the problem should be
identiﬁed at the onset by characterizing the sources of
NRW through a baseline assessment.
The private sector has much to offer here. Under a performance-based services contract, a private ﬁrm’s remuneration is based on enforced operational performance
measures. This strategy was adopted by the Companhia
de Saneamento Básico do Estado de São Paulo (SABEP)
water utility that serves the São Paulo metropolitan region in Brazil. Under a three-year contract, a private contractor assisted the utility to improve the production and
delivery of water through such activities as better micro
metering. This increased revenue and reduced the city’s
debt. The outcome led to a 45 million m3 increase in the
volume of metered consumption and increased revenues
of US$72 million.
Source: Kingdom et al. (2006).

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

557

Assumptions about technology choices can make signiﬁcant differences in total investment requirements. The
cost of supplying water and sanitation services varies
widely with the level of service provided – especially in
rural areas because of lower population densities and
higher transport costs. In view of such large cost differentials, coupled with the fact that an expensive, highquality service is likely to be used only by richer consumers – there is a rationale for providing a minimum level of
service to consumers. Then higher levels of services can
be added on and ﬁnanced by households themselves.
It is also important to standardize the technologies used in any country. Using multiple technologies makes spare parts harder to ﬁnd (and therefore
more expensive), and there is not always the local
knowledge to deal with many different technologies.
A Water Aid Study conducted in seventeen districts
in Tanzania found a negative correlation between the
number of different technologies used in these districts, and the functionality rate of rural water points.
Technology can also be transformational in ﬁlling the
water gap for a green economy (Figure 24.3). While
new treatment systems and dams can supply more
water, there are a variety of lower-cost, and often
greener, options for managing demand. For example,
large quantities of water can be saved in India through
the use of better and more drip irrigation technologies so that new raw water sources don’t have to be
exploited. In China, industrial water reuse systems can
save water and reduce the need to build expensive
transfer systems. Many of the technologies that can
make a difference already exist and are in use in developing countries. Further application needs to be supported by institutions and promoted by sector leaders.
24.3.3 The real cost of water
Water as an economic good
Pricing water to recover investment, operation, and
maintenance costs has been a contentious issue for
decades. The Dublin principles conﬁrmed that water is
a scarce resource and an economic good – so economic principles and incentives need to be used to improve
allocation and enhance quality. Yet including more
economic incentives in water pricing has proved difficult. Historically, WSS and irrigation charges have been
systematically under-priced. So achieving full cost
recovery through tariffs and user charges alone will
require price hikes that are difficult to manage politically, and may make water services unaffordable. Full

558

CHAPTER 24

cost recovery through tariffs has proved elusive even
in many developed countries.
What is cost recovery?
Water fees are collected from users for two main objectives, to cover costs and to encourage efficient water
use (Box 24.5). The ﬁrst objective is to cover the direct
ﬁnancial costs in order to guarantee a sustainable service. These direct costs cover the basic operation and
maintenance of the service, the renewal of existing infrastructure, and the possible capital expansion of water
services. In many countries, utilities and irrigation agencies pass only a fraction of these direct costs on to users.
Utilities in developing countries barely cover their basic
operation and maintenance costs – in 2008, operating
revenues covered 105% of operation and maintenance
costs (IBNET, 2010). Yet large differences exist between
utilities in terms of achieving cost recovery (Table 24.1).

BOX 24.3
Water users associations as an essential component
in improving cost recovery: An irrigation systems
example from the Kyrgyz Republic

An on- farm irrigation project was implemented in the
Kyrgyz Republic between 2000 and 2008. Its aim was
to increase crop production through reliable and sustainable water distribution across seven administrative
regions. Farm infrastructure was also rehabilitated under
the management of water users associations (WUAs).
The targeted WUAs represented 166,000 members, who
managed some 710,000 hectares, or 70% of the country’s
irrigated land.
Members from each participating WUA signed an agreement to repay 25% of the farm rehabilitation costs, raise
irrigation fees to support their WUA, and pay the water
supplier an irrigation service fee for water delivered to the
WUA’s headgate.
Considerable success was achieved:
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ,!."+.)*!ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫƫ)!)!./ƫ3/ƫ%),.+2! ċƫ
đƫƫƫ*"./0.101.!ƫ0$0ƫ"! ƫāĂĀČĀĀĀƫ$!0.!/ƫ3/ƫ.!$%(%00ed, and irrigation water delivered to farmers in 80% of
the rehabilitated systems now closely matches demand.
đƫƫƫ$.!!ƫ#.%1(01.(ƫ/!/+*/ƫ(0!.Čƫ%..%#0%+*ƫ/!.2%!ƫ"!!/ƫ
have doubled on average and collection rates by WUAs
are close to 100%.
đƫƫƫ2!.((ƫ+/0ƫ.!+2!.5ƫ.+/!ƫ".+)ƫ+10ƫĂĀŌƫ0+ƫćĀŌČƫ* ƫ
at least 80% of water users were satisﬁed with the performance of WUA management.

Source: World Bank (2008b).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

The proportion of utilities that were not able to cover
their basic operation and maintenance costs increased
from 35% in 2000 to 43% in 2008 – with most of that
increase occurring since the fuel crisis hit the sector
and increased operating costs substantially. The effect
is especially noticeable in low-income countries, where
there was a sharper increase in the number of utilities
that could not cover basic operation and maintenance
costs. In irrigation, overall cost recovery rates tend to
be even lower. Easter and Liu (2005) show that federal
irrigation projects in the United States generally do not
recover more than 20% of costs from farmers. In developing countries, the picture is even grimmer.

The second objective for charging for water involves
pricing to provide incentives to use water more efficiently. Not charging for water often results in unsustainable levels of consumption that result in early depletion of water resources – which ultimately increases
the costs of production.
Improving water use efficiency requires increasing the
value of each unit of water consumed. This is already
politically difficult, but it will become more important
as water scarcity increases. To guarantee economic sustainability, users should be charged the full supply costs,
plus the costs created by any externalities.5 Externalities

BOX 24.4
The cost of agricultural water demand

The 2009 report, Charting our Water Future: Economic Frameworks to Inform Decision-Making, is a study carried out by the
2030 Water Resources Group and led by the International Finance Corporation and McKinsey & Company. It provides an evaluation of the scale of the water challenge, estimating that by 2030, global water requirements may grow by over 40% from
4,500 billion m3 to 6,900 billion m3.
Demand for agricultural water, which currently accounts for 71% of water used, is projected to be most signiﬁcant in the poorest regions - India (1,195 billion m3), sub-Saharan Africa (820 billion m3), and China (420 billion m3). In India, closing the 2030
gap could cost between US$0.10 per m3 and US$0.50 per m3. Meeting new demand by building large infrastructure (right
side of the curve) will be costly. However, many of the demand-side interventions (left side of the curve) are not only more
cost effective, but support a green economy by focusing on resource savings over increased exploitation. By assessing the
trade-offs between new infrastructure and demand-side measures, countries can deﬁne the appropriate mix of interventions
for ﬁlling the gap between future water demand and supply.

India – Water availability cost curve

Agricultural
Industry

Cost of additional water avaiability in 2030
$/m3

0.80

Speciﬁed deﬁcit in
between supply
and water
requirements 2030

National river linking
project (NRLP)

Municipal and Domestic

Pre-harvest treatment

Supply

Municipal dams
Deep groundwater

Gap in 2030 = 755,800 million m3
Cost to close gap = US$5.9 billion

Ag. rainwater harvesting
Aquifer recharge small

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
- 0.02
- 0.04
- 0.06

Infrastructure rehabilitation
Rain-fed germplasm
Irrigated integrated plant
stress management
Irrigated germplasm
Drip irrigation
250

Large infrastructure
Shallow groundwater
Wastewater reuse

500

Industrial levers
Rain-fed drainage
Irrigated drainage
Rain-fed fertilizer balance
System of rice intensiﬁcation (SRI)
Irrigated fertilizer balance
Reduced over-irrigation
No-till farming

750

1,000

Increase fertilizer use
Reduce transport losses
Sprinkler irrigation
Artiﬁcial recharge
Small infrastructure
Genetic crop development – rainfed
Rainfed integrated plant stress management
Last mile infrastructure
Genetic crop development - irrigated

1,250

Incremental
availablity
Billion m3

Desalination (thermal)
Desalination (reverse osmosis)
On-farm canal lining
Post-harvest treatment
Rainwater harvesting
Municipal leakage

The report proposes that future demand for water could be met through cost-effective measures using existing technologies.
Source: 2030 Water Resources Group (2009, p. 12).

WWDR4

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

559

include the cost to producers and consumers (economic
externalities) and to public health and ecosystems (environmental externalities). Including externalities is likely
to substantially increase the total cost of many water
services, which is why few pricing systems in the world
include them in their pricing structures.
Inadequate cost recovery is a function not only of low
tariff levels, but also of low collection rates, unaccountedfor water and other operational efficiencies. The 2009,
evaluation of water sector projects conducted by the
Independent Evaluation Group of the World Bank concluded that for WSS projects, the factor that contributed most to successfully meeting cost recovery targets
was improving collection rates (IEG, 2009). Most often
this involved increasing the capacity and willingness
of water institutions to collect fees from beneﬁciaries.
Increasing water tariffs also had a discernible impact
on overall project results (World Bank, 2010c).
24.3.4 Improving the use of public funds
Subsidies revisited
When consumers do not pay the full cost of the service, someone else has to bridge the ﬁnance gap. This
is either future consumers, current or future taxpayers
or a combination of these.
Most of the ﬁnancing gap is paid for by government
subsidies (taxes). Subsidies are ubiquitous in the sector for funding both capital outlay and operations
and maintenance costs. There are various instruments
through which subsidies are channelled. These include
capital and operating subsidies, social safety nets, consumption subsidies, and cross-subsidies.

In developed countries, capital subsidies are relatively
common. In the United States, capital investments are
often funded through tax-free municipal bonds. This

BOX 24.5
What the European Union Water Framework
Directive says about water pricing

Article 9 of the European Union Water Framework
Directive (WFD) required Member States to adopt water
pricing policies by 2010 that provided adequate incentives
for the efficient use of water resources.
Water service costs include environmental costs, and are
based on the polluter pays principle – whether that user is
industry, agriculture or individual households. The rationale
behind the polluter pays principle is to mitigate environmental problems through reliance on economic efficiency.
The WFD’s concept of cost recovery is based on two levels of recovery, ﬁnancial recovery and environmental and
resource recovery.
đƫƫƫ%**%(ƫ+/0/ƫ+.ƫ0$!ƫ"1((ƫ+/0ƫ+"ƫ/1,,(5čƫ$%/ƫ%*(1 !/ƫ
the costs of providing and administering water services.
It includes all operation and maintenance costs, capital
costs (including initial outlay and interest payments),
and any return on equity.
đƫƫƫ!/+1.!ƫ+/0/čƫ$!/!ƫ.!,.!/!*0ƫ+,,+.01*%0%!/ƫ(+/0ƫ0+ƫ
other uses as a result of the depletion of the resource beyond its natural rate of recharge or recovery (for example, costs linked to the over-abstraction of groundwater).
đƫƫƫ*2%.+*)!*0(ƫ+/0/čƫ$!/!ƫ.!"!.ƫ0+ƫ0$!ƫ+/0ƫ+"ƫ )#!ƫ
that water use imposes on the environment and ecosystems (for example, the ecological quality of aquatic
ecosystems can be damaged and productive soils can
become saliferous and degraded).

Sources: Garrido and Calatrava (2010); Francois et al.(2010);
Commission of the European Communities (2000).

TABLE 24.1
Median operating cost coverage in utilities
Year

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Operating cost coverage
(ratio of operating revenues
over operation and
maintenance costs)

1.11

1.13

1.10

1.11

1.08

1.07

1.07

1.08

1.05

Standard deviation

0.55

0.56

0.58

0.61

0.57

0.56

0.55

0.54

0.50

Number of utilities
reporting

579

615

723

999

1 151

1 173

1 379

1 229

930

Note: The 2008 data collection cycle is not yet complete.
Source: Van den Berg and Danilenko (2011, table 3.6, p. 23).

560

CHAPTER 24

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

means that utilities are provided with an implicit subsidy.
Similarly, in the European Union, utilities receive generous capital investment grants to aid compliance with
stringent wastewater standards. In developing countries,
water sector subsidies are provided in the form of capital grants and also often in the form of operating subsidies, which creates severe distortions in the production
and consumption of services. Operating subsidies have
considerable drawbacks because they distort incentives
for more efficient use of water. Highly inefficient systems that receive operating subsidies do not have any
incentives to improve services.
In water supply and sewerage systems, where coverage is far from universal, subsidies tend to beneﬁt
those already connected to the piped system – which
tends to be better-off households. A 2007 evaluation
of thirty-two water subsidy programs showed that
quantity-based subsidies, the most common type of
subsidy, do not reach the poor customers they target
(Komives et al., 2007). Connection subsidies, as well as
consumption subsidies that are means-tested or geographically targeted, have a better record of reaching
the poor than quantity-based subsidies.
The AICD also showed that in Africa, around 90% of
beneﬁciaries with access to piped water are the richest
60% of the population. In such a context, any subsidy
for piped water is largely captured by better-off households. In irrigation, wealthier farmers tend to beneﬁt
more proportionally from subsidies than poorer farmers.
The World Panel for Financing Water Infrastructure
calls for a greater assurance that resources for subsidies are budgeted in advance, as part of a trend towards a more ‘sustainable cost recovery’ (Winpenny
2003). When large government subsidies are not provided directly and on a regular basis, water agencies
tend to postpone maintenance, which shortens the
life-span of the assets and means that infrastructure
needs to be replaced more often. Irregular and inadequate subsidies can also result in investments not being made and untreated wastewater being discharged
into water bodies, groundwater resources being overexploited, and higher pollution levels.
Cross subsidies, whereby industrial users pay more to
support the cost of residential use, are quite common
in WSS, and the direct ﬁscal repercussions are small.
Whether this instrument can work depends largely on
the tariff structure. Maxing out cross-subsidies can be

WWDR4

problematic. If costs become too expensive for nonresidential water users, they may opt out of the piped
water supply system, thereby undermining utilities’ revenue base. The International Benchmarking Network for
Water and Sanitation Utilities (IBNET) database4 shows
that in 2008, the average water company charged nonresidential users up to 1.35 times more per cubic meter
than they charged residential users. High levels of crosssubsidies tend to be more common in low-income countries than in middle-income countries.
Because subsidies distort incentives, some basic principles should be set in place. Subsidies should:
đƫ be predictable to ensure longer-term planning and
budgeting;
đƫ be transparent, and reviewed continuously to
ensure that they provide incentives to improve
performance;
đƫ be reduced over time to allow charges to take over;
and
đƫ take affordability into consideration.
Management of government transfers
Although there is sufficient scope for full cost recovery
in the short-to-medium term, the role of government
transfers is an essential element in ensuring the longterm sustainability of the sector. Although no global
data exist on the size of government transfers in the
sector, anecdotal evidence suggest that they are large.
The prevalence of capital and operating subsidies is high.
A signiﬁcant portion of these hidden costs is used to
support operation and maintenance of existing systems.
These implicit subsidies tend to be regressive, beneﬁting
a relatively small, well-off, group of consumers. In Africa,
40% of government transfers are used for operation
and maintenance, resulting in capital investment being
crowded out and limiting the capacity of countries to
invest (Foster and Briceño-Garmendia, 2010).
Larger government transfers, however, will not necessarily result in improved access to sustainable water
services. When large ﬂows of resources in the sector
are managed by the government, the efficiency and
effectiveness with which they are managed becomes
critical to the sustainability of the services. Countries
must look at the incentives and potential bottlenecks
in ﬁscal and public ﬁnance policies, and not only at the
way that ﬁnancial resources are managed.
A new tool that is proving instrumental in understanding the ﬂow of public funds in water is the Public

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

561

Expenditure Review (PER). A PER is concerned with
public-based (not always government) revenues and
expenditure as expressions of public policy and public
involvement in the economy (World Bank, 2009). It
entails a careful examination and analysis of the fundamental drivers of public ﬁnance. The recommendations
provide guidance to governments on critical reform
processes that can be taken to ensure efficiency, efﬁcacy and transparency in the use of public monies
ﬂowing to one or many sectors.
Since 2003, the World Bank has funded 40 PERs in
which the water sector featured in some capacity. A
quick assessment of some of the water sector PERs
suggests that the efficiency and effectiveness of how
governments allocate, disburse and use resources in
the sector can be improved. A number of countries
that have undertaken these exercises have adopted
comprehensive budget legislation, reduced waste in
public expenditure, given greater budget autonomy to
local governments, and attempted to open budgets to
public scrutiny (Deolalikar, 2008).
The efficiency (is the money spent on the right things?)
and effectiveness (is the money spent well in light of
the allocation decisions?) of expenditure can be affected by many factors. The World Bank is compiling
a report based on ﬁndings from 15 PERs in sub-Saharan Africa (World Bank, 2012). It documents regional
trends and provides opportunities for the more efficient use of public funds. For example, adequate regulations and institutions generally exist in the region,
but capacity is weak. By bringing line ministries into
the budgeting process, investments will be more realistic, appropriate, and responsive to needs. Countries
can also improve adherence to procurement plans,
create more bylaws to aid implementation of reforms,
and reconcentrate utility staff to local levels to realize
decentralization.
As demonstrated in many PERs, sector-speciﬁc issues play a major role in explaining the performance
of translating funds into actual outcomes. Three ways
in which efficiency can be enhanced are (i) by improving sector and investment planning; (ii) by improving
the capacity to procure, disburse, audit and monitor
resources; and (iii) maintain a sharper focus on incentives in the allocation of funds.
First, although its use has declined in recent years,
cost-beneﬁt analysis must be used to improve

562

CHAPTER 24

investment planning and prioritization. Water variability should be a key concern for long-term planning in
both developed and developing countries. Sensitivity
and risk analysis can help to determine how robust
various investments are to changes in circumstance.
Sector planning should be combined with multi-year
budgeting to ensure that short-, medium- and longterm investments can be implemented properly.
Second, governments must improve disbursement
functions, often a major source of the inefficiencies
that cause higher procurement costs. For example,
late funds result in budgets not being fully carried out,
which may have implications for future access to funds.
Many developing countries have inefficient mechanisms to transfer resources from central, to regional,
and then to local authorities. Yearly budget cycles often entail that capital works must be contracted and
completed within the cycle. Lack of capacity in procurement curtails and delays investment in the sector.
Third, by using results-based incentives, water agencies can access funds on the basis of their performance, as long as tangible and veriﬁable results are
accomplished. Results-based ﬁnancing (RBF) encompasses a range of mechanisms that are designed to
enhance the delivery of infrastructure and social services through the use of performance-based incentives,
rewards, and subsidies. A funding entity (typically a
government or sub-governmental agency) provides a
ﬁnancial incentive, on condition that the recipient undertakes pre-determined actions or achieves particular
outputs. Resources are disbursed not against individual expenditures or contracts on the input side (as is
traditionally done), but against demonstrated and independently veriﬁed results that are largely within the
control of the recipient.
RBFs can be structured in several ways depending on
the objectives and goals set by the government. There
are several types of RBF mechanism, including carbon
ﬁnance strategies, conditional cash transfers, outputbased disbursements, and advance market commitments. The application of RBFs in the water sector is
quite limited, but in recent years some projects have
been ﬁnanced through the Global Partnership on
Output-Based Aid (GPOBA). This is a donor trust fund
managed by the World Bank. OBA in the water sector
is generally a payment of a subsidy to cover pro-poor
access. Service delivery is contracted out to a service
provider (private or public utility or an NGO), with

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

payment tied to the achievement of speciﬁed performance or outputs. OBA subsidies can either buy down
the capital cost or cover the difference between an affordable user fee and a cost-recovery user fee, such as
a consumption subsidy.
GPOBA has approved close to US$4 billion in grants.
Of these, US$137 million is for WSS. There are currently
22 projects with World Bank participation with approximately US$140 million allocated to subsidies: 15 are
water supply schemes, 3 are sanitation schemes, and 4
provide both water and sanitation (Kumar and Mugabi,
2010). Many of these projects are already showing
promising results. Within less than a year, 6,700 connections were made in Cameroon (project target is
40,000); in India, 77,000 connections were completed in rural communities in Andhra Pradesh. There are,
however, criticisms of OBA, including high costs and
low leverage of commercial funds. Kumar and Mugabi
argue that countries with sound regulatory frameworks, good capacity for implementing programmes,
and experience with private sector provision have
more success than others.

providers will be able to justify increases in tariff levels,
enabling them to better save for future investments and
achieve the creditworthiness needed to access domestic
and international commercial ﬁnance in the long-run.
24.3.5 Translating reforms into revenue
Increasing tariffs
When users pay a larger share of the actual cost of
water services, there is more rational use of water.
However, raising tariffs when service quality is low is a
difficult task. In many countries, water tariff increases
are lower than inﬂation – which results in cheaper water over time. Keeping up with inﬂation is not a trivial
factor. Prices must be determined not only to guard
against further erosion of a water agency’s revenue
base, but also to ensure that no perverse incentive to
consume more water is established.
Since 2000, the average revenue per cubic meter of
water sold has more than doubled to US$0.71 in the
utilities participating in IBNET (See Table 24.2). The
variation in the revenues generated per m3 water sold
between utilities also levelled off – suggesting that
more utilities are moving in the same direction.

The role of external and internal governance in the sector
Good governance is part and parcel of the successful
implementation of ﬁnance reforms. Good governance
has several dimensions, from political stability, rule of
law, government effectiveness, and regulatory quality, to voice and accountability and corruption control.
Improving governance structures requires identifying
the main actors and clarifying their exact mandate with
regard to the key functions of: (i) policy formulation;
(ii) asset management and infrastructure development;
(iii) service provision; (iv) ﬁnancing the sector and the
development of water infrastructure; and (v) regulation
of the service. Clarifying the contractual arrangement
that allows the actors to interact with each other, and
assessing the adequacy of the instruments used by the
actors to fulﬁl their mandates are critical steps in understanding governance frameworks. Official policies are
often not fully carried out in countries that have weak
governance regimes. It is important to look at the de
facto functioning of institutions rather than at the paper
policy framework (Locussol and van Ginneken, 2010).

The role of public–private partnerships
PPPs were established in most developing countries to
bridge gaps in ﬁnancing, expertise and management
in order to improve the performance of public utilities.
These objectives can be achieved under various contractual schemes through collaborative efforts of the
private operators and contracting government.

Improved sector governance, better management of
public funds, and efficiency improvements at the utility level can improve water services for the end user.
Providers can then consider increasing tariff levels to
achieve greater (or full) cost recovery. At this stage,

Marin (2009) analysed more than sixty-ﬁve water
projects with PPPs in the urban water sector in developing countries over a ﬁfteen-year period. Results
suggest that though some projects performed better
than others, the overall performance of water PPPs

WWDR4

Such reform is helping to reduce consumption. In lowincome countries between 2000 and 2008, consumption fell sharply from 138 L per capita per day (lpcd) to
75 lpcd (Van den Berg and Danilenko, 2011).
Despite the incentive to conserve water, many countries still face signiﬁcant challenges to increasing water
tariffs. Even in OECD countries, keeping to real, rather
than nominal, levels of tariffs has been tricky (OECD
2010), with several countries showing a decreasing average annual rate of change in tariff levels over the last
decade when adjusted for inﬂation.

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

563

has been satisfactory. The urban population serviced by private operators in the developing world
rose steadily from 94 million in 2000 to more than
160 million by the end of 2007 (Marin, 2009). PPP
projects have provided to piped water to more than
24 million people in developing countries since 1990.
Some of the major ﬁndings of the study include:
đƫ The largest contribution of private operators was
through improved service quality and operational
efficiency. Improvements achieved through operational efficiency and quality service depends on
the allocation of responsibilities and risks, which
is based on multiple factors such as the incentive
structure and the nature of the arrangement.
đƫ Efficient private operators have a positive, although
mostly indirect, ﬁnancial contribution. They do this
by improving the creditworthiness of the utility
and allowing it to secure investment funding more
easily and at better terms. A better service increases customers’ willingness to pay, and this improves
collection rates and makes raising tariffs easier.
Experiences from Cote d’Ivoire and Gabon show
that operating efficiently enabled investments to
be funded through cash ﬂows for more than a decade without needing to incur new debt.
đƫ Successful water PPPs have to be implemented
within a well-conceived, broader sectoral reform. Successful experiences in countries such as,
Colombia, Cote d’Ivoire, and Morocco show that
introducing PPPs was part of a wider reform to establish a sector framework that supported ﬁnancial viability and accountability for performance.
These countries had clear policies in place to move
to cost recovery tariffs in a sustainable and socially
acceptable manner.
đƫ Establishing a good partnership that achieves tangible results takes time. It took a decade to achieve
the desired results in Senegal. The outcome of a PPP

depends heavily on solid collaboration, and government officials need to move away from old habits of
interfering in the operation of water utilities.
đƫ Traditional classiﬁcation of PPP projects as management contracts, lease-affermages, and concessions have become obsolete. The most sustainable
projects observed in the study did not ﬁt into any of
the traditional categories.
The study is the most comprehensive analysis to date in
the sector and its recommendations are instrumental in
ensuring the proper design of the next generation of PPP
arrangements particularly given the fact that local private
operators are entering the market more and more.

Conclusions and recommendations:
The way forward
Global ﬁnancial volatility and water stress have combined to bring a new set of challenges to the developing world. In the context of growing risk, more frequent ﬂoods and droughts, and uncertainty about the
availability of capital and raw water supplies for drinking, sanitation and production, countries must analyse
the trade-offs and make difficult decisions about how
to ﬁnance vital water services.
Closing the ﬁnancing gap in the water sector requires the
application of a range of instruments including higher
collection rates, more efficient service provision with
lower costs, more targeted subsidies, and higher user
charges. It is likely to be a longer-term process in which
the appropriate mix of instruments will change over time.
Such efficiencies, even in the absence of full cost recovery,
will improve the ability of utilities to adapt to future risk,
and will make them less dependent on external funding.

TABLE 24.2
Average revenues per m3 water sold (in US$) – median values
2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Average revenues

0.37

0.34

0.28

0.32

0.37

0.43

0.50

0.63

0.71

Standard deviation

0.34

0.34

0.37

0.42

0.47

0.50

0.53

0.59

0.51

Number of utilities
reporting

567

632

725

982

1 137

1 154

1 188

1 203

878

Note: The 2008 data collection cycle is not yet complete.
Source: Van den Berg and Danilenko (2011, table 3.8, p. 26).

564

CHAPTER 24

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Decisions about how to allocate the cost of water services depends on political preferences, but it also depends on the structure of the local water market. It is
important that an explicit agreement is reached on who
pays for the uncovered portion of the costs. Without
such an arrangement, the real costs of water services
may be deferred into the future, seriously hampering
short-term and medium-term sustainability. Any allocation of costs through stakeholders must take into consideration social equity and affordability. Subsidies play
a critical social function in the distribution of equity.
Because the majority of funds in the sector are public
monies, more attention should be paid to the efficiency
and efficacy of public transfers and subsides. The political costs of removing subsidies is usually very high, particularly given that better-off users are usually the main
beneﬁciaries. Tariffs that reﬂect the cost of inﬂation can
assist in maintaining the trend toward lower per capita
consumption, while those that account for environmental externalities can go one step further by addressing
water scarcity and supporting a green economy.
Trade-offs will need to be made as ﬁnancial sustainability
is likely to be only one of several objectives that form part
of a government’s agenda to improve the performance
of the water sector. Making these trade-offs more explicit
will improve accountability and transparency. They may
also incentivize much-needed reform, such as strategies
for a green economy and improved conservation.
Public Expenditure Reviews and results-based ﬁnancing are tools that can improve the functionality of a resource-constrained, inefficient sector. Similarly, publicprivate partnerships have some success in the sector
and offer opportunities for risk-sharing in today’s uncertain environment. Ensuring that institutional capacities are strengthened to implement some of the new
methods and tools should be a priority.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

2

Includes low income and low to middle income countries.
Analysis is based on a ‘top-down approach using data on
infrastructure services and parameters for construction and
maintenance costs to model investment needs’. (Yepes, 2008).
The sector’s ﬁnancial sources were estimated, in the mid-1990s,
to be: domestic public sector 65–70%, domestic private
sector 5%, international donors 10–15% and international
private companies 10–15%.

WWDR4

3

4

5

Includes a second partial divestiture of a utility in China. Chongqing
Water Affairs Company sold 6% of its capital (US$516 million) via
an initial public offering on the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
The International Benchmarking Network for Water and
Sanitation Utilities (IBNET) is the world largest database of
performance data for water and sanitation utilities.
Externalities can be positive (beneﬁts) or negative (costs).
When externalities are positive, the economic costs of the water
service are lower than the ﬁnancial costs; the opposite is true
when the externalities are negative.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
2030 Water Resources Group. 2009. Charting Our Water
Future: Economic Frameworks to Inform Decisionmaking. The Barilla Group, The Coca-Cola Company, The
International Finance Corporation, McKinsey & Company,
Nestlé S.A., New Holland Agriculture, SABMiller plc,
Standard Chartered Bank, and Syngenta AG. http://www.
mckinsey.com/App_Media/Reports/Water/Charting_Our_
Water_Future_Full_Report_001.pdf
Agrawal, P. C. 2009. Enhancing Water Services through
Performance Agreements. World Bank Water and
Sanitation Program (WSP). New Delhi, WSP. http://www.
wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/ﬁles/publications/PIP5_Press.
pdf
Bates, B. C. et al. 2008. Climate Change and Water. IPCC
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) Technical
Paper. Geneva, IPCC.
Beato, P. and Vives, A. 2008. A Primer for Water Economics
and Financing for Developing Countries. Paper prepared
for EXPO 2008 in Zaragoza. Washington DC, World Bank.
Commission of the European Communities. 2000. Pricing
policies for enhancing the sustainability of water resources.
A Communication from the Commission to the Council,
the European Parliament and the Economic and Social
Committee. COM (2000) 477, Brussels, EC.
Deolalikar, A. B. 2008. Lessons from the World Bank’s
Public Expenditure Reviews, 2000–2007, for improving
the effectiveness of public spending. Transparency and
Accountability Project. Washington, DC, The Brookings
Institute.
Easter, K. W and Liu, Y. 2005. Cost recovery and water
pricing for irrigation and drainage projects Agriculture and
Rural Development Discussion Paper 26. Washington DC,
World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTARD/
Resources/Cost_Recovery_ﬁnal.pdf
Falkenmark, M. and Molden, D. 2008. Wake up to realities of
river basin closure. Water Resources Development Vol. 24,
No. 2, pp. 201–15.
Fay, M. et al. 2005. Achieving child-health-related Millennium
Development Goals: The role of infrastructure. World
Development, Vol. 33, pp. 1267–284.
Fay, M. et al. 2010. Infrastructure and Sustainable
Development in Post Crisis Growth and Development.
Washington DC, World Bank.

INVESTING IN WATER INFRASTRUCTURE,
ITS OPERATION AND ITS MAINTENANCE

565

Foster, V. and Briceño-Garmendia, C., (eds). 2010. Africa’s
Infrastructure: A Time for Transformation. Washington DC,
World Bank.
François, D. et al. 2010. Cost recovery in the water supply and
sanitation sector: A case of competing policy objectives?
Utilities Policy, Vol. 3, pp. 135–41.
Garrido, A. and Calatrava, J. 2010. Agricultural Water
Pricing: EU and Mexico. Background report for OECD
study, Sustainable Management of Water Resources in
Agriculture. Paris, Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD).
Hanjra, M. A and Qureshi, M. E. 2010. Global Water Crisis and
Future Food Security in an era of Climate Change. Food
Policy, Vol.35, pp. 365–77
IBNET (International Benchmarking Network for Water and
Sanitation Utilities). http://www.ib-net.org
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2009. Water and
Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Support 1997–
2007 (Vol.1). Washington DC, World Bank.

Prynn, P. and Sunman, H. 2000. Getting the water to where
it is needed and getting the tariff right. Paper prepared for
the FT Energy Conference, Dublin, November 2000.
Rosegrant, M. W., Cai, X. and Cline, S. A. 2002. World Water
and Food to 2025: Dealing with Scarcity. Washington DC,
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).
UN (United Nations). 2011. The Millennium Development
Goals Report. New York, UN.
Van den Berg, C. and Danilenko, A. 2011. The IBNET Water
Supply and Sanitation Performance Blue Book: The
International Benchmarking Network for Water and
Sanitation Utilities Databook. Washington DC. World Bank
and Water and Sanitation Program.
WaterAid. 2005. Problems for women. http://www.wateraid.
org/uk/what_we_do/the_need/206.asp

Izaguirre, A. K. and Perard, E. 2010. Private activity in water
and sewerage declines for second consecutive year. PPI
data update brief. Washington DC, World Bank.

Winpenny, J. 2003. Financing Water for All. Report of the
World Panel on Financing Water Infrastructure. World
Water Council and Global Water Partnership. http://
www.worldwatercouncil.org/ﬁleadmin/wwc/Library/
Publications_and_reports/CamdessusSummary.pdf

Jimenez A., and Perez-Foguet, A. 2009. International
Investments in the Water Sector. International Journal of
Water Resources Development, Vol. 25, pp. 1–14.

Winpenny, J et al. 2009. The Global Financial and Economic
Crisis and the Water Sector. Report for the Stockholm
International Water Institute. Stockholm, SIWI.

Kingdom, W. et al. 2006. The Challenge of Reducing NonRevenue Water (NRW) in Developing Countries. How the
Private Sector can Help – A Look at Performance Based
Contracting. Washington DC, World Bank.

World Bank. 2004. Towards a Water-Secure Kenya: Water
Resources Sector Memorandum. Washington DC, The
World Bank.

Komives, K. et al. 2007. Subsidies as social transfers: an
empirical evaluation of targeting performances Development
Policy Review, Vol. 25, pp. 659–79.
Kumar, G. and Mugabi, J. 2010. Output-based aid in water
and sanitation: the experience so far OBA Approaches,
Note Number 36. Washington DC, World Bank.
Leurig, S. 2010. The Ripple Effect: Water Risk in the Municipal
Bond Market. Boston, Mass. and New York, Ceres and
Water Asset Management.
Locussol, A. and Van Ginneken, M. 2010. Template for
Assessing the Governance of Public Water Supply and
Sanitation Service Providers. Water Working Notes No. 23.
Washington DC, World Bank.
Marin, P. 2009. Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water
Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries.
Washington, DC, PPIAF, World Bank.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2010. Pricing Water Resources and Water
and Sanitation Services. Paris, OECD.
––––. 2011a. Financing Water and Sanitation in Developing
Countries: The Contribution of External Aid. Paris, OECD
Publishing. http://webnet.oecd.org/dcdgraphs/water/
––––. 2011b. Towards Green Growth: A Summary for
Policy Makers. Paris, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/32/49/48012345.pdf
Perard, E. 2011. Private activity in water and sewerage
remains subdued. Private Participation in Infrastructure
Database (PPI), Data Update Note 49. Washington, DC,

566

PPIAF–World Bank. http://ppi.worldbank.org/features/
July2011/2010-Water-note-ﬁnal.pdf

CHAPTER 24

––––. 2008a. Zambia – Managing Water for Sustainable
Growth and Poverty Reduction: A Country Water Resources
Assistance Strategy for Zambia. Washington DC, World
Bank.
––––. 2008b. Kyrgyz Republic: On-Farm Irrigation Project.
Implementation Completion and Results Report.
Washington DC, World Bank.
––––. 2009. Preparing PERs for Human Development: Core
Guidance. Washington DC, World Bank.
––––. 2010a. Global Monitoring Report 2010: The MDGs after the
Crisis. A Joint Report of the Staffs of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund. Washington DC, World Bank.
––––. 2010b. The Cost to Developing Countries of Adapting
to Climate Change. The Global Report of the Economics of
Adaptation to Climate Change Study. Consultation Draft.
Washington DC, World Bank.
––––. 2010c. Cost recovery in the water sector. Project
Concept Note. Unpublished.
––––. 2011. Private activity in infrastructure remained at peak
levels and highly selective in 2010. Private Participation
in Infrastructure Database (PPI) data update note 55.
Washington DC, PPIAG-World Bank. http://ppi/features/
September-2011/2010-Global-update-note-ﬁnal-08-31-2011.
pdf
––––. 2012, Forthcoming. Trends in Public Expenditure on Water
and Sanitation in Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington DC, World
Bank.
Yepes, T. 2008. Investment needs in infrastructure
in developing countries: 2008–2015. Unpublished.
Commissioned by World Bank, Washington DC.
CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 25
Water and institutional change:
Responding to present and future
uncertainty

UNDP Water Governance Facility at SIWI
—
Authors Håkan Tropp and John Joyce
Contributors Rose Osinde and Maja Schlüter

© Shutterstock/Markus Gebauer

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
A mounting water challenge is how to manage uncertainty of present and future variability
in precipitation, evaporation, and water uses and demands. Policy-makers and water
managers around the world grapple with water availability, water supply and water demand
uncertainties, magniﬁed by pressures such as climate change, economic growth, and
population growth and mobility. These pressures impact on the spatial and temporal
distribution of water resources. Uncertainty appears in technical, social and natural systems
(Brugnach et al., 2009). Natural systems include for example climate change impacts.
Technical systems include human interventions that affect the supply of water, such as dams
and irrigation canals. Social systems have cultural, political, economic, legal, demographic,
administrative and organizational dimensions that add to the complexities of managing
water resources. Growing populations and urbanization coupled with changing consumption
preferences contribute to uncertainty in water demands. Various and often conﬂicting water
demands have to be satisﬁed with varying levels of political will, scarce ﬁnancial resources,
and a deﬁcit of effective institutions and management approaches.
An example of the impacts of complexities and uncertainty in water-related decision-making is
illustrated by the Australian farmers who in 2007, swayed by a favourable rainfall forecast after a
multi-year drought, took out loans or sold their expected crops on futures markets. Unfortunately,
the rainfall that actually occurred was much lower than predicted, so many farmers were unable
to repay their loans or were forced to buy crops at much higher prices than the prices at which
they sold them to fulﬁl their contractual obligations (Brugnach et al., 2009).
One important aspect of managing uncertainty is the role of institutions. Institutions provide
‘the rules of the game’ and can provide incentives and disincentives for how well society can
expect to adapt to uncertainty (North, 1990). In response to increasing water supply and
demand challenges, water-related institutions are undergoing far-reaching changes worldwide.
As well as the redeﬁnition of roles and responsibilities, institutional arrangements and
frameworks have provided direction on what is needed in terms of building and strengthening
human, technological, information, knowledge and delivery capacities.
Uncertainty can be understood as a range of reasonably expectable future conditions that
need to be taken into account for decision-making at all levels, from the individual farmer to
international water and environmental negotiations (Brugnach et al., 2009). For example, the
uncertainty in assessing the probability of a once-in-ﬁfty-years ﬂood needs to be offset by
appropriate sensitivity analysis and the design of an adequate safety margin. The size of the
margin depends on the available ﬁnancial resources to invest in management and mitigation
measures as well as on the risk propensity of the decision-maker and the population of
concern. Despite some countries facing similar risks, their capacity to deal with it can differ
considerably. For example, the Netherlands and Bangladesh both face recurrent ﬂood risks,
but the Netherlands is in a stronger economic position and can afford to invest heavily in
infrastructure development and human capacity to reduce uncertainties in water management.
The purpose of this chapter is to illustrate the growing need to strengthen water-related
institutions, particularly with increasing water supply and demand uncertainties due to
growing pressures such as climate change, economic growth and population growth. The
chapter discusses what institutions are in relation to sustainable water development, and
why they matter. It looks at some current challenges in water institutional reform. Finally,
institutional responses and adaptive capacities to growing uncertainties are discussed and
examples of attributes required for effective institutional change and implementation are
provided.

25.1 Institutions: Form and function
25.1.1 Deﬁning institutions
A broad deﬁnition of institutions provided by Ostrom
(2005) is the prescription that humans use to organize all forms of repetitive and structured interactions including those within families, neighbourhoods,
markets, ﬁrms, sports leagues, religious associations,
private associations, and governments at all scales.
Individuals and groups interacting within rule-structured situations face choices regarding the actions
and strategies they take, leading to consequences for
themselves and for others. Importantly, these systems
are constructed by humans and are a complex mix of
norms, conventions, rules and behavioural characteristics (North, 2000); that is, ‘the rules of the game’ with
organizations as ‘the players of the game’. Institutions
involve rules that deﬁne roles and procedures for people; have a degree of permanency and are relatively
stable; determine what is appropriate, legitimate and
proper; and are cognitive and normative structures deﬁning perceptions, interpretations and sanctions.
While formal and informal water institutions are part
of overall institutional architecture, they affect social,
economic and political life in different ways and a distinction is made between them.1 Formal institutions are
generally created by government policy, laws, rules and
regulations, and they have the resources and authority
to coordinate large numbers of users and areas. They
are involved in the processes of extracting, distributing
and using water. Such institutions are under the purview
and responsibility of the political regime (e.g. parliament, government, courts, districts and municipalities)
and agencies are set in place to perform functions such
as water resources management, distribution of water
services, regulatory monitoring and water quality protection. Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) such
as water user associations and private water service
providers can be part of the formal institutional set-up
in addition to having watch-dog functions.
Informal institutions are part of traditional and contemporary social rules applied to water use and allocation. The ‘players-of-the game’, that is, those who
deﬁne ‘the rules of the game’, can be communitybased organizations, the local private sector, religious
associations and so forth. Informal water-related institutions are usually equated with norms and traditions
of how to allocate, distribute and use water resources.
But informal water rights systems are not just ‘customary’ or ‘archaic’ – on the contrary, they can comprise

WWDR4

a dynamic mixture of principles and organizational
forms of different origins (Boelens, 2008). They can
combine local, national and global rules and they often mix indigenous, colonial and contemporary rights.
Important sources of local rights systems tend to be
state laws, religious laws (formal or indigenous), ancestral laws, market laws, and the rights frameworks
generated or imposed by water project interventions,
each of which often sets its own regulations. Therefore,
local water rights exist under legal pluralism, where
rules and principles of different origin and legitimization co-exist and interact in the same water territory.
From the perspective of local water users in many
parts of the world, legitimate water rights and authority are not only those laid down in legislation (Boelens,
2008). One example of such a water rights system is
Aﬂaj, prevalent in many Middle Eastern countries. Aﬂaj
are traditional and well-recognized (sometimes by legislation) systems of water allocation and distribution.
Over the years Aﬂaj have set traditional practices for
inter-temporal water resources allocation and established user rights on an ownership or a rent basis.
Informal institutions also include clientelism and corruption. Such discretionary practices can distort legitimate institutions and result in unpredictable and
ineffective decision-making processes and outcomes
in allocation of water resources and services between
sectors and groups (see for example Stålgren, 2006
and Plummer, 2007). In the Central Asian Former
Soviet Union countries Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan, for example, local actors combine newly
established rules of local water management (water
user associations) with informal institutions that often
originate from institutionalized Soviet and pre-Soviet
patterns of behaviour (Sehring, 2009; Schlüter and
Herrfahrdt-Pähle, 2011). This mixing of different institutional logics changes their meaning and can signiﬁcantly limit proper implementation of the reforms.
Because informal institutions can support, disrupt and
replace formal institutions, it is important that informal institutions are incorporated into analyses of risks
and uncertainties in the context of institutional design (or change) and implementation. For example, in
Paraguay, informal private water supply systems were
recognized and agreements were developed between
local government entities and small-scale private water
vendors. The outcome was easier control and monitoring of pricing and quality of service (Phumpiu and
Gustafsson, 2009).

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

569

region and in China, water institutions are characterized
by strong government steering, top-down management
and control. In contrast, many other countries around
the world have moved towards institutions with increasing power diffusion across government, civil society
and markets, and with a strengthening of institutional
process features such as transparency, multi-stakeholder
participation and accountability.

25.1.2 Institutions matter
Current institutional systems and how they function
impose considerable constraints for doing business,
according to a survey by Kaufmann (2005). Figure 25.1
illustrates business constraints and the importance of
well-functioning institutions for effective regulation,
corruption control and so forth. Conventional wisdom
holds that insufficient infrastructure constitutes the
major market access constraint. It is therefore striking that institutional and governance issues, such as
performance of bureaucracy and corruption control,
rank higher than infrastructure in regions such as subSaharan Africa, South Asia, Latin America, and transition economies in the survey.2 Interestingly, the results
show the importance of combining so-called ‘soft’ and
‘hard’ measures to improved water development and
that institutional (soft) measures should have a higher
priority than they typically have had.

The effective performance of institutional functions can
reduce natural, technical and social uncertainties. For
example, if tensions and conﬂicts over shared water
are successfully negotiated within a particular institutional framework, uncertainties in stakeholder behaviour will be reduced and this in turn will promote more
predictable outcomes in water allocation and use. In
performing its functions it is important for any institution to do the following.

Institutions are also shaped by larger social, political and
economic contexts, and inevitably countries show great
variation in institutional design. For example, in many
countries in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)

Deﬁne roles, rights and responsibilities of stakeholders
at all levels
Institutional arrangements deﬁne who controls a resource and how it is used. In this sense, institutions

FIGURE 25.1
Key constraints to doing business in several geographic and economic regions

Firms reporting constraint among top three (%)
60

50

40

30

20

10

0
OECD

Infrastructure

East Asia
NICs

Bureaucracy

East Asia
developing

Corruption

South
Asia

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Transition

Latin
America

Tax regulations

Note: The question posed to the ﬁrm was ‘Select among the above 14 constraints the ﬁve most problematic factors for doing business in your
country’.
Source: Kaufmann (2005, ﬁg. 2, p. 85).

570

CHAPTER 25

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

are vital in establishing the working rules of rights and
duties, and in characterizing the relationship of two
or more users to one another and to a speciﬁc natural
resource. For example, property rights can determine
rights and restrictions to a resource. The efficiency and
productivity of water use can also determine rights. In
Kenya, water sector reforms have clearly delineated
institutional arrangements, highlighting the roles and responsibilities of subsectors at both the service delivery
level and the river basin management level. One outcome of these reforms is the facilitation of institutional
set-ups such as the sector-wide approach to planning
(SWAP), which provides for the delivery of institutional
mechanisms such as partnership principles, codes of
conduct and investment plans as well as coordination,
monitoring and decision-making mechanisms – all of
which are geared towards enhancing service delivery
and accountability for the sector. Some other Kenyan
reform features include the separation of the management of water resources from the provision of water
services; the separation of policy-making from day-today administration and regulation; the decentralization
of functions to lower level government agencies; and increased involvement of non-government entities in the
management of water resources and in the provision
of water services. Kenya has made progress in its water
reform but has faced serious challenges in funding and
capacity and thus has not yet been able to implement
all introduced institutional reforms (MWI, 2005, 2009).
Determine restrictions on use and mechanisms for
conﬂict mediation
Institutions set individual and collective restrictions on
water use – who can use which water, how much of it,
when, and for what purpose. Increasing the water supply–demand gap intensiﬁes competition and conﬂict
between water users, regions and economic sectors –
such a situation can demonstrate limitations in existing resource allocation and management institutions,
but importantly, these institutions can develop mechanisms to deal with such conﬂicting interests. In transboundary river contexts, water-related tensions may
have been historically contained but given current water scarcity trends caused by both environmental and
developmental changes, these tensions could escalate.
A water scarcity–water conﬂict dynamic often constitutes a justiﬁcation for institutional water reform and
for the development of clearly deﬁned regulatory and
allocation mechanisms. The reforms of water institutions and the legal instruments governing transboundary water are, however, complex and often take a long

WWDR4

time to debate and introduce; tensions could accelerate in the meantime. However, in some instances water tensions have accelerated institutional change. In
Australia, long-standing water use tensions between
environmentalists and farmers in the Murray–Darling
Basin provide backdrop to the Landcare movement
and to developing multi-stakeholder fora for managing water in its basin context. The competing water
demands of states have served as the basis for institutional development of the Murray-Darling Basin water
management framework. Conﬂicting visions of catchment management, such as the degree of stakeholder
participation, have shaped institutional approaches in
the state of New South Wales. Conﬂict avoidance can
itself be a driver of innovation in the area of water governance. In South-East Asia, the spectre of resourcebased conﬂict between the countries sharing the
Mekong River has been a strong driver for cooperation through the Mekong River Commission (MRC) and
an important justiﬁcation of official assistance to the
Commission (Boesen and Munk Ranvborg, 2004).
Reduce transaction costs and stimulate investment
The development of institutions and their effective
enforcement contributes to, among other things,
lowering the transaction costs of organizations and
investors. Put simply, a transaction cost is a cost incurred in making an economic exchange; that is, the
cost of participating in a market, such as in fee-based
systems of provision of water and water-related services. Costs involved can include the search for information, bargaining for and deciding on proper fees,
and policing and enforcement. From an economic
perspective, effective institutional change takes place
when transaction costs are less than the corresponding opportunity costs. Transaction cost analysis is
seen by many as the core of institutional economics
analysis but is seldom used in developing new water
institutions. In Kenya, for example, some stakeholders see institutional changes such as the introduction
of SWAP as potentially increasing the bureaucracy
and level of complexity of the institution and removing decision-making further from the grass roots level.
There is some concern that transaction costs could
rise with SWAP and some NGOs fear that SWAP
could result in reduced funding for them. This institutional reform is thus seen by some stakeholders as
requiring high levels of transparency and high capacity of government monitoring systems, which would
increase the probability of failure as these are weak
points in the sector.

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

571

25.2 Institutional responses to uncertainty
Conventional water planning tends to be rigid and
challenges remain regarding how to develop adaptive
governance frameworks and institutions with increasingly uncertain and changing water futures. There
are calls for more attention to be paid to resilient and
adaptive institutions and approaches (GWP, 2009).
The World Water Development Report 2 (WWAP,
2006) notes that insufficient access to water resources
and services is not necessarily driven by water shortages but by the ‘institutional resistance to change’ that
emanates from ‘lack of appropriate institutions’ to
manage and secure resources for developing human
capacity, management approaches, and provision of
technical and physical infrastructure.
Without institutions capable of accommodating to
uncertainty and shifting water supplies to where they
are needed most, climate change and other drivers will
impose signiﬁcant impacts on water users and waterdependent communities. Yet much work remains to
effectively integrate climate-related policies with water policies. This is problematic because many of the
measures to adapt to climate change will have to be
water-related (Björklund et al., 2009).
Institutional change or policy reform will be less effective unless it is coupled with enforcement of legislation
to guarantee integrity and accountability in decisionmaking at all levels. Mismanagement, corruption,
bureaucratic inertia and ‘red tapism’ all affect water
management in detrimental ways. They increase transaction costs, discourage investments and can provide
strong disincentives for water reform implementation
and amplify risks and uncertainties for users. At the
core they are symptoms of governance crisis. Recent
studies conﬁrm that for example petty corruption at
the provider–consumer interface is one key area of
risk that water projects and programmes must consider (Butterworth and de la Harpe, 2009). This calls
for, among other things, more effective enforcement
of regulatory institutions to monitor performance and
expenditures of service providers.
In this section, some examples of response to uncertainty in decision-making are highlighted and analysed
to provide snapshots of adaptive capacity of institutions; that is, to what extent are they ﬂexible and
robust to change as the social, political and ecological environment changes. Adaptive capacity has been
deﬁned as the potential or capability of a system to

572

CHAPTER 25

adjust, via changes in its characteristics or behaviours,
so as to cope better with existing and future stresses.
More speciﬁcally, adaptive capacity refers to the ‘ability of a socio-ecological system to cope with novelty
without losing options for the future’ (Folke et al., 2002)
and in a way ‘that reﬂects learning, ﬂexibility to experiment and adopt novel solutions, and development of
generalized responses to broad classes of challenges’
(Walker et al., 2002). In some cases new institutions
might need to be created to deal with speciﬁc water
challenges, as for example in the recent development
of water quality trading for diffuse pollution and eutrophication management (van Bochove, et al. , 2011;
Joyce et al., 2011).
Box 25.1 provides a detailed discussion of institutional
change and adaptation in the context of water supply
and sanitation services.
25.2.1 Evolving institutions
During the past decades many developing countries have
been facing increasing challenges of water pollution such
as those common in Western Europe and North America.
This has led to the establishment of environment ministries, but much work remains to fully develop and implement pollution monitoring, legislation and regulation. It
also seems likely that politically and ﬁnancially weak ministries will face increasing tensions with water agencies
responsible for water resources development projects.
How governments will resolve these disputes is a challenge; there seems to be very limited institutions that can
mediate water-related disputes between urban, rural and
environmental interests.
Some interesting examples of how such disputes
can be institutionally managed are found in socalled watershed markets. Put simply, watershed
services are provided by upstream water users to
downstream beneﬁciaries making some kind of payment or other compensations to those upstream.
The 1998 New York City watershed agreement is well
known (WWAP, 2009): in response to conﬂict with
upstream water users over new land use restrictions and to protect New York City’s water supply, a
model was negotiated between farmers and the City
that was built on ﬁnancial compensation to farmers and guarantees that the City could acquire land
only from willing farmers at fair market price. Similar
agreements are emerging in other places in the USA;
for example, the Cuyahoga River basin in Ohio identiﬁes trading systems for stream, wetland and

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 25.1
Institutional change in water supply and sanitation services
Urban water supply services have traditionally been provided by state-owned and managed water utilities. A common trait
in much reform around the world in the past decades has been that governments have attempted to turn state-owned water
utilities into effective and viable organizations – with mixed success. The World Bank looked at 11 case studies (from Europe,
Africa, Latin and North America, and Asia) of utilities that were well functioning and asked the question: Why have some
public utilities become more efficient service providers while others have not been able to break the vicious cycle of low performance and low cost recovery? It presents a framework of attributes of well-functioning utilities and describes how these
utilities have introduced key institutional measures.
The report concludes that water utilities are a part of the overall institutional landscape with its trends of change, which offers opportunities. The major transition of most utilities in the past decades has not been from public to private operation
but from centralized to decentralized public provision. Fiscal squeeze has hit utilities hard: as public budgets decreased in
the 1990s, infrastructure investments dropped disproportionally because governments have few discretionary spending categories. Under budgetary pressure, many public institutions have adopted new management tools, often borrowed from the
private sector, to complement more traditional bureaucratic tools. Many countries have democratized, and an emerging civil
society – including a consumer movement – has put pressure on utilities to deliver better services.

Institutional attributes
There is no perfect model for public utilities that guarantees good performance. But well-functioning utilities share these
attributes:
đƫƫƫ10+*+)5čƫ!%*#ƫ%* !,!* !*0ƫ0+ƫ)*#!ƫ,.+"!//%+*((5ƫ3%0$+10ƫ.%0..5ƫ%*0!."!.!*!ƫ5ƫ+0$!./ċƫ+3!2!.Čƫ10+*+)5ƫ.!quires transparent processes so that regulators, consumers and others can exercise accountability and consumer orientation more easily.
đƫƫƫ+1*0%(%05čƫ!%*#ƫ*/3!.(!ƫ0+ƫ+0$!.ƫ,.0%!/ƫ"+.ƫ,+(%5ƫ !%/%+*/Čƫ"+.ƫ0$!ƫ1/!ƫ+"ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ* ƫ"+.ƫ,!."+.)*!ċƫ
Accountability extends to many different groups, such as regulators and the public (consumers).
đƫƫƫ+*/1)!.ƫ+.%!*00%+*čƫ.!,+.0%*#ƫ+*ƫ,!."+.)*!ƫ* ƫ(%/0!*%*#ƫ0+ƫ(%!*0/Čƫ* ƫ3+.'%*#ƫ0+ƫ!00!.ƫ)!!0ƫ0$!%.ƫ*!! /ċ
These attributes apply to the relationship between the utility and the environment in which it operates as well as to the internal functioning of the utility.
There are still noticeable obstacles to many utilities performing independently. Politicians can see utilities as a ‘cash cow’ if, for
example, cost recovery rates increase. Many times staff is not held to account and practices of corruption and mismanagement
are poorly addressed. Many sector reforms are currently underway, but meaningful consumer participation is often overlooked.
In this respect, the launch of separate regulatory bodies has helped to some extent; for instance, Ofwat and its WaterVoice
Committees in the United Kingdom (UK); the National Water Supply and Sanitation Council (NWASCO) and the Water Watch
Group in Zambia; and the Consumer Consultative Council to be set up by the water and power regulatory body in Tanzania.

Institutional measures
The tools to achieve the above attributes can vary from case to case, but certain patterns of governance practices are emerging as being critical. Institutional measures to make public utilities more effective include corporatization, performance agreements, transparency and consumer accountability tools, and capacity-building.

Source: Baietti et al. (2006).

habitat mitigation banks as well as for water quality
and carbon. The next step will be to quantify watershed services to establish who provides particular
services and for what payment. An enabling feature for
the Cuyahoga River basin system as well as in many
other parts of the country is the existence of conservancy districts. These districts are organized along
watershed borders and have the authority to tax and
control land use (Flows, 2006).

WWDR4

25.2.2 Communication, coordination and integration
among institutions of all scales
Institutions of all scales, local to global, need to
respond to uncertainties. For an individual farm,
droughts and ﬂoods are devastating events that
threaten immediate income and future livelihood.
There are increasing efforts to manage risk through insurance and other ﬁnancial risk transfer instruments for
smallholder rainfed agriculture in developing countries.

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

573

Basing insurance payouts on an objectively measured index (e.g. rainfall amount, modelled water stress,
area-averaged production) that is correlated to loss instead of actual losses overcomes problems with moral
hazard (the incentive for farmers to let crops fail), adverse selection (when less skilled farmers preferentially
purchase insurance) and high transaction costs that
have generally made traditional insurance unviable for
smallholder farmers in developing countries (Brown
and Hansen, 2008). As discussed in Box 25.2, some
farmers in Kenya are now using ﬁnancial risk transfer
to lower crop yield risks related to rainfall variability.
Another example is the World Bank’s Commodity Risk
Management Group that works with partners in several
African and Latin American countries to implement
bundled index-based insurance, credit and production packages that can overcome barriers to adoption
of more proﬁtable, intensiﬁed production technology
by targeting the risk aversion of lenders (Brown and
Hansen, 2008).

et al., 2008). Five case studies undertaken by
the International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development (ICIMOD) look at situations where people are responding to too much water (ﬂoods, water logging) or too little water (drought, water stress)
across the greater Himalayan region: the dry mountain valleys of Chitral in Pakistan; the middle hills in
Nepal; the Koshi basin ﬂoodplains in Bihar, India; the
Brahmaputra ﬂoodplains in Assam, India; and the hill
areas of Yunnan, China. Some of the key adaptation
strategies were livelihood diversiﬁcation and making
use of and strengthening local institutions and social
networks. Cultural norms and rules affect people’s
adaptive behaviour but importantly these are dynamic
and can shift over time in response to needs. It was
acknowledged that national institutions and policies
strongly affect people’s ability to adapt at the local
level, but institutions and policies at the national level
are rarely informed by adaptation concerns and priorities (ICIMOD, 2009).

Local customary institutions can take a holistic approach to reduce uncertainties by accessing multiple water sources for multiple purposes (Sullivan

Moving higher up the scale, institutions are required
to regulate upstream and downstream water use and
allocation at the watershed or river basin level. River
basin management is not a new idea; it was applied,

BOX 25.2
Institutional adaptation at the local scale: Responding to climate uncertainties through farmer micro-insurance
schemes
Many farmers are held back from investing to increase their yields due to many factors, such as unsecure land tenure and
difficulties in accessing traditional credit markets. An increasingly important factor is the risks and uncertainties associated
with ﬂooding and drought. After a one-year drought a farmer runs the risk of not being able to repay an investment loan and
therefore of losing his or her farm. One solution is to develop insurance schemes that use new information and communication technologies to protect farmers’ investments from weather ﬂuctuations.
For example, a micro-insurance scheme is emerging in Kenya that is supported by a national insurance company, a mobile
phone network operator and an agribusiness. Farmers pay an extra 5% to insure a bag of seed, fertilizer or herbicide against
crop failure. The agribusiness involved hopes to beneﬁt from higher sales of its products and matches the farmers’ investment to meet the full 10% cost of the insurance premium. Administration costs are kept to a minimum and the system is supposed to be self-ﬁnancing. Local agents register a policy with the insurance company by using a camera phone to scan a bar
code on each bag sold. A text message is then sent to the farmer’s mobile phone that conﬁrms the insurance policy. Farmers
are registered at the nearest (solar-powered) weather station, which transmits data over the mobile phone network. If weather conditions worsen, a panel of experts uses an index system to decide if crops will no longer be viable. If they will not be, at
this point payouts are made directly to farmers’ mobile phones using the M-PESA mobile-money service. The system comes
with minimal transaction costs because it has eliminated ﬁeld surveys, most paperwork and the middleman.
During the trial, one area was hit with severe drought. This triggered compensation payments of 80% of farmers’ investments. Without this insurance, farmers would have had severe ﬁnancial difficulties to ensure seeds, fertilizers and so forth for
the next cropping season. After a successful trial of 200 farmers, the initiative is now targeting 5,000 farmers in western and
central Kenya.

Source: The Economist (2010).

574

CHAPTER 25

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

for example, in Niger in the 1970s. The drought of
the Sahel in the 1970s spurred the creation of river
basin development authorities (RBDAs), which soon
increased their responsibilities to encompass water
management for the country as a whole. Their purpose in addition to general water resources management was to assure systematic use of groundwater
and surface water, develop water for multiple purposes, supply irrigation water, control ﬂoods and
control erosion. In some countries, such as Spain
and Portugal, river basin organizations have been
around for more than 100 years (Delli Priscoli, 2008).
A recent Cap-Net study of river basin organizations
points to some positive aspects of coordination
among government agencies and water stakeholders. It also acknowledges, however, many cases where
river basin organizations have a long way to go to
manage water in equitable, sustainable and efficient
manner (Cap-Net, 2008).

BOX 25.3
Time-bound multilateral institutions: An EU
common water implementation strategy
A Common Implementation Strategy (CIS) was developed
in May 2001 at the European level to support European
Union Member States in addressing the scientiﬁc, technical and practical challenges of implementation of the EU
Water Framework Directive. Most of the challenges and
difficulties that arise during implementation will inevitably
be common to all Member States, and indeed many of the
European river basins are shared – crossing administrative
and territorial borders – so a common understanding and
approach is crucial to successful and effective implementation of the directive. A common strategy could limit the
risks of the Directive being poorly applied and disputes
subsequent to that scenario.
The focus of the CIS is to clarify and develop, where appropriate, technical and scientiﬁc information to assist in
the practical implementation of the Directive. Such documents have an informal and non-legally binding character
and are be placed at the disposal of Member States on a
voluntary basis. The CIS is an example of a multilateral institution that is time-bound and subject-speciﬁc, designed
to address the challenges faced by Member States in a cooperative and coordinated way; they are normally chaired
by one Member State and funding is generally pooled by
the Member States who manage the working groups.

Source: Common Implementation Strategy for the Water
Framework Directive (2000/60/EC) 2001.

WWDR4

Moving on to regional scales, the European Union (EU)
has developed a multilateral Common Implementation
Strategy to support the implementation (and limit the
risks and disputes related to implementation) of the
Water Framework Directive (see Box 25.3). Waterrelated responses should be integrative and supportive
of each other in a particular country or river basin. The
EU’s Common Implementation Strategy is an example
of the supranational institutional level guiding country
processes. The integrated water resources management concept provides guidance on horizontal and
vertical coordination and integration of decision-making. Meaningful communication, built on an open ﬂow
of relevant data and information, is critical for unlocking the potential of integrative approaches.

25.3 Implementation of acceptable and
workable institutions
In the earlier sections of this chapter, examples were
provided of institutional development in relation to
water resources access, use and allocation as well as
to performance and distribution of water services.
But why do some institutions work better than others? The development of institutions should be seen
as path-dependent. For example, in a context where
markets and regulatory functions are faced with severe constraints, it is not likely that water privatization
will be effective; in a context where communities have
limited resources and capacities, it is not likely that
delegation of water management will work effectively.
Institutional reform will have a greater chance of success if it has economic rationality; political willingness
and sensitivity; and pays attention to social factors and
stakeholders.
Robertson and Nielsen-Pincus (2009) suggest criteria
that increase the chances of success of institutional reform: leadership and political will; social capital and inter-personal trust among participants; committed and
cooperative participants; adequate and sustainable
ﬁnancing; participation and inclusiveness; adequate
time; well-deﬁned process rules; effective enforcement
mechanisms; effective communication; adequate scientiﬁc and technical information; adequate monitoring;
low or medium levels of conﬂict; limited (manageable)
temporal and geographical scope of activities; training
in collaborative skills; and adequate human capacities.
Importantly, blueprints cannot be applied: what works
in one context may not work in another. The factors for
successful delegation of water governance in Canada
capture some of the political, economic and social

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

575

mechanisms essential for effective institutional change
(Box 25.4).
25.3.1 Lowering transaction costs and avoiding
free-riders
Water resource institutions determine who can use
which water, how much of it, when, and for what
purpose as well as set management responsibilities,
fees and fee collection processes and so forth.
Community-based water supply projects in rural
areas have frequently proved untenable, with many
communities being unable to raise sufficient funds to
meet operation and maintenance costs of common
water resources. Typical costs of community water
projects include payment of electricity bills or for
diesel to operate pumps; purchases of spare parts
and maintenance; stationery for bookkeeping; staff
transportation costs; telephone bills; and payment
or compensation for bookkeepers and committee
members. To keep the system operational, the
members need to pay their fees.

‘Free-riding’ – when legitimate water users take more
than their allocated share of water – can impose upstream and downstream disputes of water allocation.
Free-riding also occurs when water resources are extracted by illegitimate users; that is, users who are not
part of the institution. In sum, the free-rider is a water
user who does not stick to commonly agreed rules. If
too many free-riders operate in an institution, it will
collapse because the transaction costs for monitoring
and policing water users will be so high they outweigh
the beneﬁts, particularly in rural areas where water
users can be dispersed over large areas and may lack
shared community goals of fairness in water allocation
and sharing of costs. In many places, social sanctioning serves as an effective way to minimize the number
of free-riders. Social norms can generate costly punishment of community members breaking the rules –
free-riders may run the risk of social exclusion or disrespect. Other ways to overcome the free-rider problem
are community mobilization, social intermediation and
institution building (Breier and Visser, 2006; Ostrom,
2000).

BOX 25.4
Water governance reform: Successful delegation of water governance in Canada
Water governance has undergone dramatic changes in Canada over the past decade, characterized by three key trends:
1. The introduction of new watershed-based delegated governance management models in a number of provinces.
2. Legislative and policy reform that has set higher standards for drinking water supply in a number of jurisdictions.
3. Greater citizen involvement in environmental policy-making and environmental management.
These trends have emerged due to several reasons: a shift in the view of the role and mandate of governments; new legal
requirements (particularly with respect to First Nations, and also mandated by a new generation of environmental laws);
awareness of the expertise available outside government, particularly in the context of decreased government resources; new
approaches to citizen participation; increased emphasis on integrated management of environmental issues and watershedbased management; and concern over the implications of climate change for both water resources and supply.
In the context of overall water reform in Canada, the approach of delegated water governance is considered successful
through the following factors:
đƫƫƫû!0%2!ƫ(! !./$%,čƫ(!.ƫ/0.101.%*#ƫ+"ƫ,.+!//!/Čƫ/1/0%*(!ƫü**%*#Čƫ !-10!ƫ$1)*ƫ.!/+1.!ƫ/1,,+.0ƫ* ƫ0$!ƫ%(%05ƫ
to implement recommendations.
đƫƫƫ*0!.ġ,!./+*(ƫ0.1/0čƫ0.*/,.!*5ƫ* ƫ.!/,!0ƫ"+.ƫ0$!ƫ.1(!ƫ+"ƫ(3ċ
đƫƫƫ+))%00! ƫ,.0%%,*0/čƫ+,!*ƫ+.ƫ(+/! ƫ,.0%%,0%+*ƫ* ƫ*ƫ !-10!ƫ.*#!ƫ+"ƫ,.0%%,*0/ċ
đƫƫƫ1þ%!*0ƫ/%!*0%üƫ%*"+.)0%+*čƫ*!!//.5ƫ"+.ƫ/+1* ƫ !%/%+*ġ)'%*#Čƫ0$%/ƫ*!! /ƫ0+ƫ!ƫ!//%(!ƫ0+ƫ,.0%%,*0/ċ
đƫƫƫ1þ%!*0ƫ* ƫ/1/0%*(!ƫ"1* %*#čƫ*!!//.5ƫ0+ƫ/1,,+.0ƫ+((+.0%2!ƫ+ %!/ċ
đƫƫƫ *#!(!ƫ/+,!ƫ+"ƫ0%2%0%!/čƫ%0ƫ%/ƫ%),+.0*0ƫ0+ƫ(%)%0ƫ/+,!ƫ* ƫ/!0ƫ0.#!0/ċ
đƫƫƫ+(%5ƫ"!! 'čƫƫ"+.)(ƫ)!$*%/)ƫ%/ƫ*!! ! ƫ0+ƫ !(ƫ3%0$ƫ.!+))!* 0%+*/ƫ".+)ƫ !(!#0! ƫ30!.ƫ#+2!.**!ƫ+ %!/ċ
Whereas the shift from state or centralized water management to community management and the increased participation
of marginalized groups has in some instances provided new opportunities and beneﬁts, such a shift might in some cases increase the burden on community resources and on women’s labour and time.

Source: Nowlan and Bakker (2007).

576

CHAPTER 25

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Free-riders receive beneﬁts without actually contributing anything, thus creating an unfair balance in the
distribution of revenues or other resources. The social,
political and economic dilemmas of free-riding occur
not only in rural water supply but in any area and at any
scale. Take for example urban drinking water supply
around the world: some consumers – often in collusion
with public officials – avoid paying fees by manipulating water metres or by other means. It has been noted
that drivers of change, such as water scarcity, macroeconomic developments and natural calamities, interact
to raise the opportunity cost of institutional change and
reduce the corresponding transaction cost. This creates
a conducive environment for institutional change.

It has also been observed that bureaucratic behaviour can cause disincentives for effective institutional
reform to deal with new challenges. For example, in
efforts for decentralizing water decision-making and
management, bureaucratic behaviour can lead to a
pre-occupation of roles, hierarchies and procedures
that protect the affected department from having to
respond to institutional change. On an individual basis,
staff members are concerned about employment security and station location. Clearly, the combination of
organizational inertia or resistance to change coupled
with staff concerns makes change hard unless pressure
and/or incentives are applied by higher political and
administrative levels (Holmes, 2003).

25.3.2 Moving from inertia or resistance to political will
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s message on World Water Day, 22 March, in 2008 pointed
to the lack of political will as the biggest problem in institutional reform: ‘progress is hampered by population
growth, widespread poverty, insufficient investments
to address the problem and the biggest culprit: a lack
of political will’ (Ban Ki-moon, 2008). Institutional water reform needs to be ﬁrmly anchored among stakeholders and their leadership. If institutions are considered as unacceptable in their set-up and produce
undesired outcomes, they will not receive support and
stakeholders are more likely to keep the status quo or
even develop their own informal rules rather than adhere to existing rules.

The importance of political will can be illustrated by
water reform in some countries. In Canada, effective
leadership is considered one of the required factors for
institutional change in delegating water governance
(Box 25.4). In Scotland, the transition from old to
new regulatory approaches is not without tensions
and inconsistencies, particularly at the legal and
operational levels. Water disputes in Scotland are
associated with the redesign of national administrative
responsibilities and the re-establishment of a devolved
parliament. There is still a gap in understanding the
effective possibilities and tensions associated with
the new regulatory regime based on the EU Water
Framework Directive. For example, the income from
new water charges was expected to cover 50% of the
operational costs incurred by the Scottish Environment
Protection Agency (SEPA), while the other 50% was
to come from the government in the form of general
taxation. It has been argued that despite a discursive
construction and sustainability as well as stakeholder
participation, the new institutional landscape has so
far failed to improve long-term patterns of water use
and conservation. Whereas formal changes in the
legislation created a positive space for institutional
reforms, the effective improvement of water policy and
catchment management has been curtailed by political
inertia and the hidden balance of power. The farming
sector in Scotland through the National Farmers Union
(NFUS) stated that new charges for regulating farms
that abstract water have generated a lot of heat and
debate with SEPA and the Scottish Executive (Loris,
2009; NFUS, 2006).

Because reforms change status quo, one can expect
both support for and opposition to institutional reform agendas by affected groups. In some cases, the
implementing agency may not have a reform agenda
that coincides with that of the government initiating the reform. For example, an analysis of the parties involved in a proposed water fee reform for the
capital of Honduras, Tegucigalpa, revealed that the
public agency in charge of water supply was a major opponent to the reform. Support for institutional
reform was driven by external international development agencies, but in this case, the support was not
sufficient for reform to take place – for the reform to
go forward it had to be supported by national power
centres. In Pakistan for example, some government
ministries and agencies opposed reform – part of
which was to transfer power and ﬁnancial resources
from the irrigation ministry and its regional offices to
area boards – because they felt it would affect them
negatively (WWAP, 2006).

WWDR4

25.3.3 Building trust, integrity and accountability
Several studies on institutions bring up inter-organizational trust, inter-personal trust and networks as

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

577

important for effective institutional development and
implementation. In the case of local adaptation to climate change in the greater Himalayan region, social
networks were seen as important to enhance adaptive capacities. Similarly, inter-personal trust was critical for effective delegation of water governance in
Canada (Box 25.4). Recent case studies (Ross, 2009)
suggest that trust – social trust within a community or
trust between communities and public authorities – is
more important the higher the risks and uncertainties involved. One case study area, Toowoomba in
Queensland, Australia, was set in a high perceived risk
context for a proposed water re-use scheme for potable water. Perceptions of risk had a very strong direct
effect on acceptance of the scheme, and the trust, risk
and acceptance relationship was stronger than it was
for other case study areas. Moreover, the relational variables of procedural fairness, identiﬁcation with one’s
community, in-group membership of the water authority, and shared values with the water authority were all
found to affect trust, directly or indirectly. The credibility of the authority – measured as technical competence and a lack of vested interests – was found to
have a signiﬁcant impact on trust. In sum, the results
highlight the need for water authorities and policymakers to build trust among stakeholders through
procedural fairness, developing a sense of the water
authority as a member of the community, and demonstrating technical competence and concern for the
interests of the public (Ross, 2009).
A formidable problem in many water institutions is
corruption (Transparency International, 2008; WWAP,
2009). In too many cases corrupt behaviour has become the norm and ironically, corruption can constitute an institution in its own right. Corruption not only
undercuts development and raises the stakes regarding risks and uncertainties of water availability and
allocation, it also undermines critical foundations of
trust, the rule of law, fairness, and efficiency of water
institutions. Well-functioning institutions have developed systems of accountability. Considering the
frequency of corruption in water, formal systems of
accountability are often deterred and replaced by discretionary decision-making, characterized by exclusiveness and limited transparency. This renders water
institutions less effective and less prone to adapt to
new challenges as the status quo is preferred to protect vested interests.

578

CHAPTER 25

There is a growing knowledge base on measures to
strengthen accountability and integrity and hence
reduce corruption. The simpliﬁcation of procedures,
increased transparency and participation will go a
long way in reducing corruption: this was illustrated in
the World Bank-supported Kecamatan Development
Project (KDP). This project has a scope of more than
34,000 villages across Indonesia and has supported
the country’s water sector by building 7,178 clean water
supply units, 2,904 sanitation units and 7,326 irrigation systems. Corruption was initially involved: officials
being bribed to award projects, funding cuts by upper
levels of government, illicit fees being charged to users,
and under-delivery of materials and services by suppliers. As a result the KDP built anti-corruption measures into its projects that emphasized simpliﬁcation
of procedures, transparency and information-sharing
throughout the project cycle (WIN, 2009).

25.4 Opportunities for improving water
institutions
Uncertainty in natural, technical and social systems is
relevant to institutional responses because it can distort decision-making. Decisions made under conditions
of uncertainty may underestimate or overestimate the
challenges to which they respond, resulting in toocostly or non-required measures, or conversely, insufficient measures that can threaten investments and progress already made. Institutional responses are crafted
and implemented by social systems, which can be as
hard to predict as climate change and its impacts. An
institutional response measure based on an acceptable
degree of certainty how natural systems will behave
in the near future may not go far if there are different
perceptions on what is fair as well as disparate objectives and interest among water users in the social system. It is important that risk and uncertainty associated with climate change be put into context relative
to other risks that water institutions face. Changes in
water demand may be more important for some countries than changes in actual supply.
Uncertainty can partly be overcome by better data, information and knowledge(see Chapter 26, ‘Knowledge
and capacity development’) but even so, the future will
always be unpredictable and requires ﬂexibility, hence
the imperative to develop responsive institutions
that can deal with at least some of the uncertainties.
Situations of high natural, technical or social uncertainty can create disincentives for cooperation and stakeholder participation. The probability of institutional

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

failure and thus the ability to deal with situations of
uncertainty is higher the more actors who break the
rules of the game without appropriate sanctions. For
example, new water regulatory institutions in corrupt
environments may not provide sufficient incentive for
fairer and more effective water reallocation and improved accountability. Knowledge on how institutions
can develop to better respond to present and future
risks and uncertainties is rudimentary and there needs
to be a lot more research into practical application of
institutional measures to determine what works, and
under what conditions it works. Long-term investment
to build water institutions is needed; in particular, investment for monitoring in relation to governance and
institutional performance is severely lacking.
This chapter has indicated some of the factors required
for successful water institutions and highlighted that
these vary considerably according to context. Effective
institutional change and to what degree it can deal
with uncertainty is closely related to path dependence
as well as to context speciﬁc conditions. It is important
that water decision-makers intensify their efforts to
provide incentives for meaningful institutional change
to better cope with uncertainty. Among other actions,
the following should be taken into account.
Implementation challenges remain a big obstacle to
effective water reform and management and should
be more coherently addressed as part of institutional
reform processes. Challenges such as vested political
interests and accountability systems should be more
carefully analysed and addressed as part of water related institutional reform. Many countries are plagued
with implementation problems, driven by for example
limited capacities and funding, elite capture of policy
processes, and institutional gaps and fragmentation.
As a part of overcoming some of these challenges this
it is important to:
đƫ Seek continuous alignment and implementation of
water, energy, ecosystem and land policies within
formal and informal institutions and processes that
effectively guide actions for these areas. Currently
many institutions tend to be fragmented, over-lapping and sometimes even conﬂictive. There is thus
a lot of room for continuing to develop institutional
linkages as a strategy to strengthen adaptive management. Hence, this also means increased policy
synergies between issues related to water, food, energy and ecosystems.

WWDR4

đƫ Address fundamental governance challenges – such
as limited transparency, accountability and stakeholder involvement – that provide reform implementation disincentives. It is less likely that water
institutions can perform their intended functions
(e.g. fair and efficient water allocation or water
services provision) in governance systems characterized by clientelism, corruption and vested political interests. In such cases decision-making gets
more unpredictable and increases uncertainty in for
example social systems for those that lack political
and economic inﬂuence.
đƫ Target particular capacity development, data and
information needs and promote learning-oriented
institutional processes. Experience suggests that
institutional reform is an iterative learning process
where institutional change is negotiated between
different groups. There are no perfect solutions; there
are only solutions that work in a particular context.
Others have expressed this as ‘look for the best ﬁt,
not the best practice’ (Baietti et al., 2006).
đƫ Go beyond formal regulation and incorporate informal institutions into analyses of risk and uncertainty. Water resources in many parts of the world are
allocated by informal local institutions and formal
regulatory systems may have only limited inﬂuence.
To fully understand institutional drivers and implement effective water reform it is critical to look at
the dynamics between formal and informal institutions. Meeting the challenge of reaching poor and
marginalized groups of society – who normally depend on informal systems of water allocation and
water services – will rely on water decision-makers
providing incentives to strengthen local informal
institutions and making water policies and regulations more supportive of them.
đƫ Underline that ﬁnancing remains an important
challenge to cope with present and future uncertainties in social, natural and technical systems.
Acceptable and functioning institutions underpin
increased and more effective investments in water
development. Poor institutions constitute ampliﬁed investment risk and affect the competitiveness
of countries in global markets, the attraction of
foreign direct investment, as well as impacting on
ﬁrms in national and local markets. While the need
for additional investment in water is acknowledged,
much more focus has to be put on how to make
most effective use of present funding for more informed investment decision-making to reduce risks
and cope with uncertainties. There is thus a need

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

579

to develop better cost–beneﬁt analyses of various investments options on how public and private
sectors best should use their funding, capacities
and knowledge.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

Sociological studies suggest that informal institutions at local
levels can be perceived as formal. Sometimes a distinction is
made by using statutory and customary institutions.

2

It is acknowledged that there can be big variations between
countries within a region. The results of the survey should be
perceived as relative and not suitable for regional comparison.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Baietti, A., Kingdom, W. and Van Ginneken, M. 2006.
Characteristics of Well-Performing Public Water Utilities.
Water Supply and Sanitation Working Notes No. 9, May.
Washington DC, World Bank.
Ban Ki-moon. 2008. Secretary-General, in message for
World Water Day, calls lack of political will biggest culprit
in failure to achieve basic sanitation goal. Press Release.
New York, United Nations. http://www.un.org/News/Press/
docs/2008/sgsm11451.doc.htm
Björklund, G., Tropp, H., Harlin, J., Morrison, A. and Hudson, A.
2009. Water Adaptation in National Adaptation
Programmes for Action: Freshwater in Climate Adaptation
Planning and Climate Adaptation in Freshwater Planning.
Dialogue Paper for the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP). Paris, UNESCO.
van Bochove, E., Vanrolleghem, P. A., Chambers, P. A.,
Thériault, G., Novotná, B. and Burkart, M. R. (eds). 2011.
Issues and Solutions to Diffuse Pollution: Selected Papers
from the 14th International Conference of the IWA Diffuse
Pollution Specialist Group, DIPCON 2010, Québec, Canada.
Boelens, R. A. 2008. The rules of the game and the game
of the rules. Dissertation, Wageningen University, the
Netherlands.
Boesen, J. and Munk Ranvborg, H. (eds). 2004. From Water
Wars to Water Riots? Lessons from Transboundary Water
Management. Danish Institute for International Studies
(DIIS) Working Paper No. 2004/6. Copenhagen, DIIS.
Breier, M. and Visser, M. 2006. The Free Rider Problem in
Community-based Rural Water Supply: A Game Theoretic
Analysis. SALDRU Working Paper No. 06/05. Cape Town,
Southern Africa Labour and Development Research Unit
(SALDRU), University of Cape Town.

580

CHAPTER 25

Brown, C. and Hansen, J. W. 2008. Agricultural Water
Management and Climate Risk. Report to the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. IRI Technical Report No. 08-01.
Palisades. New York, The International Research Institute
for Climate and Society (IRI).
Brugnach, M., van der Keur, P., Henriksen, H. J. and Myšiak, J.
(eds). 2009. Uncertainty and Adaptive Water Management
Concepts and Guidelines. Osnabrück, Germany, Institute of
Environmental Systems Research, University of Osnabrück.
Butterworth, J. and de la Harpe, J. 2009. Not So Petty:
Corruption Risks in Payment and Licensing Systems of
Water. Brief No. 26. Bergen, Norway, U4 Anti-Corruption
Resource Centre.
Cap-Net. 2008. Performance and Capacity of River Basin
Organizations: Cross-Case Comparison of Four RBOs.
Pretoria, South Africa, Cap-Net.
Common Implementation Strategy for the Water Framework
Directive (2000/60/EC) 2001. Strategic document. As
agreed by the Water Directors under the Swedish EU
Presidency. May 2001. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
water/water-framework/objectives/pdf/strategy.pdf
Delli Priscoli, J. 2008. Case Study of River Basin
Organizations. Corvallis, Oreg., Institute for Water and
Watersheds, Oregon State University. http://www.
transboundarywaters.orst.edu/research/case_studies/
River_Basin_Organization_New.htm
The Economist. 2010. Security for shillings: Insuring crops
with a mobile phone, 11 March, pp. 13–19.
Flows. 2006. Review: Creating 21st century institutions for
watershed markets. Flows Bulletin, No. 23.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Elmqvist, T., Gunderson, L., Holling,
C. S. and Walker, B. 2002. Resilience and sustainable
development: Building adaptive capacity in a world of
transformations. Ambio, Vol. 31, No. 5, 437–40.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2009. Institutional
Arrangements for IWRM in Eastern Africa. Policy Brief 1.
Stockholm, GWP.
Holmes, P. R. 2003. On Risky Ground: The Water Professional
in Politics. Paper presented at the Stockholm Water
Symposium, Stockholm, 11–14 August 2003.
ICIMOD (International Centre for Integrated Mountain
Development). 2009. Local Responses to Too Much
and Too Little Water in the Greater Himalayan Region.
Kathmandu, ICIMOD.
Joyce, J., Collentine, D. and Blacklocke, S. 2011. Conducting
cost-effectiveness analysis to identify potential buyers and
sellers of water pollution control credits to initiate water
quality trades. E. van Bochove, P. A. Vanrolleghem, P. A.
Chambers, G. Thériault, B. Novotná and M. R. Burkart (eds),
Issues and Solutions to Diffuse Pollution: Selected Papers
from the 14th International Conference of the IWA Diffuse
Pollution Specialist Group, DIPCON 2010, Québec, Canada.
Kaufmann, D. 2005. Myths and realities of governance and
corruption. Global Competitiveness Report 2005– 20 06.
pp. 81–98. Cologney/Geneva, World Economic Forum.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Loris, A. 2009. Water institutional reforms in Scotland:
Contested objectives and hidden disputes. Water
Alternatives, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 253–70.
MWI (Ministry of Water and Irrigation). 2005. Human
Resource Management Strategy and Capacity Building for
the Ministry of Water and Irrigation. Final Draft, November.
Nairobi, MWI, Government of Kenya.
-. 2009. Annual Water Sector Review 2009: Water Sector
Financial Turnout. Nairobi, MWI, Government of Kenya.
NFUS (National Farmers Union, Scotland). 2006. Annual
Report. Newbridge, Scotland, NFUS.
North, D. C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and
Economic Performance. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press.
––––. 2000. Understanding institutions. C. Menard (ed.),
Institutions, Contracts and Organizations: Perspectives
from New Institutional Economics. Cheltenham, UK,
Edward Elgar, pp. 7–11.
Nowlan, L. and Bakker, K. 2007. Delegating Water
Governance: Issues and Challenges in the British Columbia
(BC) Context. Report for the BC Water Governance Project.
Vancouver, BC, Program on Water Governance, University
of British Columbia. http://www.watergovernance.ca/
Institute2/PDF/FBCwatergovernanceﬁnal2.pdf
Ostrom, E. 2000. Collective action and the evolution of social
norms. Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp.
137–58.
––––. 2005. Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton,
NJ, Princeton University Press.
Phumpiu, P. and Gustafsson, J. E. 2009. When are partnerships
a viable tool for development? Institutions and partnerships
for water and sanitation service in Latin America. Water
Resources Management, Vol. 23, No. 1, pp. 19–38.
Plummer, J. 2007. Making Anti-corruption Approaches Work
for the Poor: Issues for Consideration in the Development
of Pro-poor Anti-corruption Strategies in Water Services
and Irrigation. WIN/Swedish Water House Report No. 22.
Stockholm, Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI).
Robertson, S. and Nielsen-Pincus, M. 2009. Keys to Success
for Watershed Management Organizations. EWP Working
Paper No. 21. Corvallis, Oreg., Ecosystem Workforce
Program (EWP), University of Oregon.

WWDR4

Ross, V. 2009. The role of trust in community acceptance of
urban water management schemes: A social-psychological
model of the characteristics and determinants of trust
and acceptance. Dissertation, School of Psychology, The
University of Queensland.
Schlüter, M. and Herrfahrdt-Pähle, E. 2011. Exploring
resilience and transformability of a river basin in the face
of socio-economic and ecological crisis: An example
from the Amudarya river basin, Central Asia. Ecology and
Society, Vol. 16, No. 1, p. 32.
Sehring, J. 2009. Path dependence and institutional
bricolage in post-Soviet water governance. Water
Alternatives, Vol. 2, pp. 61–81.
Stålgren, P. 2006. Corruption in the Water Sector: Causes,
Consequences and Potential Reform. Swedish Water House
Policy Brief No. 4. Stockholm, Stockholm International
Water Institute (SIWI).
Sullivan, C. A., Bonjean, M., Anton, B., Cox, D., Smits, S.,
Chonguica, E., Monggae, F., Nyagwambo, L., Pule, R.
and Berraondo, M. 2008. Making Water Work for Local
Governments and Helping Local Governments Work for
Water: Ten Top Tips for Integration in Water Management.
Cape Town, South Africa, ICLEI Africa.
Transparency International. 2008. Global Corruption Report
2008: Corruption in the Water Sector. Cambridge, UK,
Cambridge University Press.
Walker, B., Carpenter, S., Anderies, J., Abel, N., Cummings,
G., Janssen, M., Lebel, L., Norberg, J., Peterson, G.D.
and Pritchard, R. 2002. Resilience management in
social-ecological systems: A working hypothesis for a
participatory approach. Conservation Ecology, Vol. 6, No. 1,
p. 14.
WIN (Water Integrity Network). 2009. Advocacy Guide: A
Toolbox for Water Integrity Action. Berlin, WIN. http://
www.waterintegritynetwork.net/home/learn/library/
all_documents
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
––––. 2009. World Water Development Report 3: Water in A
Changing World. Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.

WATER AND INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE

581

CHAPTER 26
Developing knowledge and capacity

UNW-DPC and UNESCO-IHE
—
Authors Hani Sewilam (UNW-DPC) and Guy Alaerts (UNESCO–IHE/Delft University of
Technology)

© Shutterstock/aaleksander

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The water sector will increasingly be subject to externally driven changes, yet societies will at
the same time expect more reliable water services and less risk. Our understanding of natural
and social phenomena has gaps, and, therefore, knowledge and capacity development is a
top priority on the international agenda.
To deal with the new and dynamic challenges, the adaptive capacity of individuals, society
and institutions is to be enhanced.
Knowledge sharing and collaborative tools will become prominent. ICT will be a powerful
instrument to disseminate information and involve stakeholders in decision-making.
The existing gaps in our knowledge about how global change is going to affect us and how
all societies should continuously adjust their water sectors to new external changes and
evolving internal demands put developing knowledge and capacity as a top priority on the
international agenda.
Developing the adaptive capacity of individuals, society and institutions is needed to face the
new and dynamic challenges caused by global change.
There is a need for an increased use of knowledge sharing and collaborative tools. The power
of ICT should be used to accelerate the dissemination of information and impose social
learning within water institutions.

26.1 A changing agenda
Sustainable water management is one of humanity’s
most important challenges – today and in the future.
Rapid changes in the hydrological cycle, and increased
incidence of hazards such as extreme weather events,
are further complicating the processes of decisionmaking for stakeholders and water managers by
increasing risk and uncertainty. For example, uncertainties in water management are associated with various hydrological, hydraulic, structural and economic
aspects. Risks are also present at different levels of
water systems including the risk of natural disasters,
risks involved in the operation of water infrastructures,
drought, and risks associated with investing in water projects. The resulting adverse impacts are neither
uniform across time, space and sectors, nor fair to all
groups. Box 26.1 illustrates the impact that natural disasters have on women as a result of their intensive involvement in water management and their weak adaptive capacities.
The knowledge to address many of these challenges
does exist. However, there are still considerable gaps
in what we know. For example there are gaps in our

BOX 26.1
Gender challenges
In developing countries, women are generally responsible
for producing food. This makes them the ﬁrst to face the
risks that come with drought and uncertain rainfall. Climate
change often means that women and young girls have to
walk ever further to collect water. For instance, women in
sub-Saharan Africa spend 40 billion hours per year collecting water – equivalent to a year’s labour by the entire
workforce in France. The following are some examples that
show that women are the ﬁrst to suffer from the risk and
uncertainty of climate change:
đƫƫƫ+)!*Čƫ+5/ƫ* ƫ#%.(/ƫ.!ƫāąƫ0%)!/ƫ)+.!ƫ(%'!(5ƫ0$*ƫ)!*ƫ
to die during a disaster (Peterson, 2007).
đƫƫƫ*ƫ*#( !/$Čƫ 1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫ5(+*!ƫ %//0!./ƫ%*ƫāĊĊāČƫĊĀŌƫ
of the 140,000 fatalities were women (Zeitlin, 2007).
đƫƫƫ1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫ!)!.#!*5ƫ1/! ƫ5ƫ$1..%*!ƫ 0.%*ƫ%*ƫ
the United States, most of the victims trapped in New
Orleans were the poor African–American women with
their children (Gault et. al., 2005; Williams et al., 2006).
đƫƫƫ*ƫ.%ƫ *'Čƫ%0ƫ3/ƫ!/%!.ƫ"+.ƫ)!*ƫ0+ƫ/1.2%2!ƫ 1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫ
tsunami because boys are generally taught how to swim
and climb trees while girls are not (Oxfam, 2005).

Source: UNDP (2009).

584

CHAPTER 26

knowledge about how global change is going to affect
us and what our responses should be. There are gaps
in our understanding of how water services should be
delivered, and of how to manage the resource of water
more effectively and sustainably. This represents the
ﬁrst key challenge. But what is equally important is that
even when the appropriate knowledge is available, it
does not always get readily disseminated and shared –
and translated into proper planning or effective action.
On the one hand, the time-lapse between research ﬁndings and widespread local actions is still too long. On
the other hand, institutions are weak in certain developing nations, especially at local-government level and
in many communities. While this constraining effect is
especially noticeable in countries that are developing
into modern economies, it is a challenge for all societies as they continuously adjust their water sectors to
new external changes and evolving internal demands.
Therefore, it is the weak capacity in the water sector institutions that is the key obstacle to enhanced performance, and not the shortfall in ﬁnancial support, as was
the case in the 1970s and 1980s.
The international development banks report ongoing
problems in identifying feasible and well-prepared investment projects. For instance, in Asia, both the Asian
Development Bank and the World Bank have been
experiencing constraints over the past decade in their
attempts to increase investment in the water sector.
The European Union reports a similar situation; only a
portion of the 2002–2010 structural funding for water infrastructure in the new member states in central
and southern Europe was absorbed effectively. The
European Commission assessed that this was caused
inter alia by factors related to weak capacities in the
sector’s agencies – capacities in terms of the number
of civil servants and specialists; of the skills and experience available; and of the prevailing managerial and
policy environment in the public sector.

26.2 Developing capacity
26.2.1 Basic understanding
Capacity is an attribute of individuals, organizations
and other forms of institutions. It is not something
external to these individuals and bodies. In 2005, the
OECD deﬁned capacity as the ‘ability of people, organizations, and society as whole to manage their affairs successfully’. Capacity development (CD) furnishes the frameworks, approaches and tools needed to
carry out institutional development. By its very nature,



ƫƫ

CD is relevant only in the context of change, and it is
part and parcel of change management (Alaerts, 1999;
EuropeAid, 2005).
Capacity development and knowledge management
are two sides of the same coin. This deﬁnition allows a
measurable, operational interpretation to be given to
capacity. It also emphasizes the link between capacity and a veriﬁable, on-the-ground impact after CD
interventions have taken place. Seeing CD and knowledge management in this way also makes the case for
developing critical ‘extra’ capacity to generate fresh
'*+3(! #!ƫ0+ƫ,.!,.!ƫ"+.ƫ0$!ƫ"101.!ċƫ *+3(! #!ƫ)*agement has become a mainstream strategy used by
private businesses to remain competitive, and therefore proﬁtable, but most governments and sector
agencies, and non-governmental organizations for that
matter, still lack the structural provisions that would allow this learning to take place.
The application domain of CD is broad. However, there
are a number of common situations where CD initiatives are having an effect.

đƫ Improving technical competence Such an objective is generally readily appreciated and accepted
because it can often be addressed by targeting
the individual technical competences of staff and
the skills mix in the organization. Generally, such
programmes do not lead to structural change and
reform.
đƫ Improving overall performance and results To enable staff and other agents to build capacity and
use it, improved incentives may have to be offered
– for instance better career opportunities, higher
remuneration, and education opportunities. It is
often assumed that working on an organization’s
technical competence is enough to develop capacity. But a CD effort may also involve changes in
legal and regulatory frameworks. Examples of such
change process are the Uganda Water and Drainage
Board (Mugisha, 2009; WWAP, 2009, p. 263) and
the Netherlands Ministry of Transport, Public Works
and Water Management – now the Ministry of
Infrastructure and the Environment (Box 26.2).
đƫ Strengthening accountability and making the local
voice heard Sometimes there is a need to build the capacities of local groups and local councils to help them
update their skills and build resilience (Box 26.3)
đƫ Improving decision-making Increasingly, the aim
of decision-makers is to help sectoral agencies and

WWDR4

society at large to become better able to deal with
uncertainty in the future. This is of special relevance
when discussing geopolitical situations such as international river basin conﬂicts, health epidemics,
climate change, etc. and calls for the establishment
of a communications and information platform where

BOX 26.2
Changing tides: Change management at the
Netherlands Ministry of Transport, Public Works
and Water Management

All nations are regularly searching for better and more effective public administration systems. This is illustrated by
changes that have taken place in the Netherlands’ Ministry
of Transport, Public Works and Water Management –
which in 2010 became the Ministry of Infrastructure and
the Environment. Institutional reform was implemented
in a series of phases through capacity development and
knowledge management processes.
Phase 1: Readiness for change In the 1970s, public pressure had forced the ministry to change to integrated
water resources management and to acquire ecological
expertise. But in the late 1990s, the ministry’s decentralized structure with its regional directorates and dominant
engineering services was deemed to be unable to cope
with the new generation of national-scale projects and
demands for tighter budget discipline.
Phase 2: Developing the new capacity The new institutional structure took shape between 2004 and 2007. The
supportive capacity development included the following:
đƫƫƫ+.'/$+,/Čƫ.%*/0+.)%*#ƫ/!//%+*/Čƫ(! !./$%,ƫ0.%*%*#ƫ
and other interactive events.
đƫƫƫƫ*!3ƫ/'%((/ƫ)%4ċƫ *5ƫ!4,!.0/ƫ!)!ƫ.! 1* *0Čƫ
while personnel with new skills in the areas of contract
management, budget control and communications were
taken on.
đƫƫƫƫ+))1*%0%+*/ƫ/0.0!#5ƫ0+ƫ'!!,ƫ0$!ƫ,1(%ƫ* ƫ,+(%ticians informed about progress.
Phase 3: Lessons learned After the reform, the ministry and the executive agency were deemed to be better prepared for the new decade. The phased CD process
allowed them to pilot new ideas and generate solutions,
thus creating a fertile learning ground for learning-bydoing. At the same time, early retirement and release of
seasoned senior experts severely eroded the ministry’s
knowledge base and its capacity to train new staff.

Source: Various reports including Metze (2009).

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

585

project initiators and government can adapt their initiatives and build a broader political consensus.1
đƫ Education, research and innovation In its most traditional form, capacity development focuses on a country’s educational, research and innovation systems.
Such programmes can be narrow and speciﬁc or
broad and general.

a systemic process for improving management policies and practices. It maintains as its central objective
to improve the adaptive capacity of the management
regime in general (Pahl-Wostl et al., 2010) and particularly the actors involved. As noted by Bormann et al.
(1993), ‘Adaptive management is learning to manage
by managing to learn.’

26.2.2 Developing adaptive capacity
As discussed in Section 26.2.1, ignoring uncertainty
increases the risk of inappropriate water management decisions. adaptive water management (AWM) is
designed to address increased uncertainty and risk by
making them fundamental parts of the management
approach. AWM uses the lessons learnt from the outcomes of management strategies. It considers changes
in external factors in a proactive manner to develop

While traditional technical knowledge and the capacity to
manage water resources (as described in Section 26.2.1)
remains important in the context of AWM, the ability of
water institutions and management actors to absorb,
adopt and implement new forms of management is
dependent on additional knowledge and capacities. In
AWM, capacity development refers to the development
of the knowledge, skills and attitudes that are necessary
for managers and professional organizations to increase
their adaptive capacity and create institutions that are
ﬂexible and responsive enough to cope with risk and
uncertainty (Van Scheltinga et al., 2010).

BOX 26.3
Women’s participation in the adaptation and
mitigation processes

In many societies, women have unique climate change related skills, experiences and capacities that have been acquired over centuries of active participation in water management activities. Capacity development activities can
add even more value to this knowledge and allow them to
contribute positively to the identiﬁcation of appropriate
adaptation and mitigation techniques. The following are
three real examples:
đƫƫƫ*ƫāĊĊĉČƫ0$!ƫ+* 1.*ƫ+))1*%05ƫ+"ƫ ƫ /%ƫ3/ƫ
given gender-sensitive community training about early
warning and risk systems. During Hurricane Mitch a
"!3ƫ)+*0$/ƫ(0!.Čƫ*+0ƫƫ/%*#(!ƫ !0$ƫ3/ƫ.!,+.0! ƫ%*ƫ ƫ
Masica because the municipal government had been
able to evacuate the population in time (Sánchez del
Valle, 2000).
đƫƫƫ1.%*#ƫƫ .+1#$0ƫ+*ƫ0$!ƫ/)((ƫ%/(* /ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ! !.0! ƫ
States of Micronesia, the women’s ancestral knowledge
of the islands’ hydrology allowed them to identify places to dig wells for drinking water. (Anderson, 2002).
đƫƫƫ$!ƫƫý++ /ƫ%*ƫ*#( !/$ƫ%*ƫĂĀĀąƫ(!"0ƫĂĉĀƫ ! Čƫ.+1* ƫ
four million evacuees, and thousands of others without
food or housing. Recently, in the district of Gaibandha,
a woman named Sahena has organized a committee to
prepare the women for ﬂoods. The committee trains the
women to make portable clay ovens, raise their houses,
and use radios to hear ﬂoods warnings and news of climate change. Efforts such as Sahena’s save many lives
and empower women (Oxfam, 2008).

Source: UNDP (2009).

586

CHAPTER 26

People’s adaptive capacity needs to be analysed and
quantiﬁed to face the risk and uncertainty caused by
such sources as climate change. Therefore, the African
Climate Change Resilience Alliance (ACCRA) has identiﬁed ﬁve characteristics of adaptive capacity. These
can be used to analyse people’s own adaptive capacity
in the face of a combination of risk and stress. These
characteristics also help to analyse how different programming approaches either support or hinder adaptive capacity. The ﬁve characteristics are summarized
as follows (ACCRA, 2010):
đƫ The asset base: These are the various ﬁnancial,
physical, natural, social, political and human capitals
necessary to best prepare a system to respond to a
changing climate.
đƫ Institutions and entitlements: The ability of system
to guarantee equitable access and entitlement to
key resources and assets is a fundamental characteristic of adaptive capacity.
đƫ Knowledge and information: Successful adaptation
requires information about and understanding of
future change, knowledge about adaptation options
and the ability to assess them, and the capacity to
implement the most suitable interventions.
đƫ Innovation: A key characteristic of adaptive capacity relates to a system’s ability to support innovation
and risk taking.
đƫ Flexible forward-thinking decision-making and
governance: Informed decision-making, transparency, and prioritization each form key elements of



ƫƫ

adaptive capacity.
There are different approaches to improving the adaptive capacities of individuals and institutions. For example, the Institute of Development Studies proposed
an approach to develop adaptive capacity as one of
three pillars of a new approach to Climate Smart Disaster
Risk Management CSDRM (Mitchell et al., 2010). This
approach involved over ﬁve hundred researchers,
community leaders, non-governmental organization
(NGO) workers and government officials from ten
disaster-prone countries. The approach is outlined as
follows:
đƫ To strengthen the ability of people, organizations
and networks to experiment and innovate.
đƫ To promote regular learning and reﬂection to improve the implementation of policies and practices.
đƫ To ensure that policies and practices to tackle
changing disaster risk are ﬂexible, integrated across
sectors and scale, and have regular feedback loops.
đƫ To use tools and methods to plan for uncertainty
and unexpected events.

BOX 26.4
Enhancing adaptive capacity in the Mekong basin

In 2000, the Mekong delta faced the worst ﬂoods in
40 years. More than 800 people died, nine million
were affected, and the costs of damages exceeded
US$455 million. Since then, a range of initiatives have
been implemented under the Flood Mitigation and
Management Programme (FMMP). These included ﬂood
forecasting capacities, best practice guidelines for integrated ﬂood risk management, guidelines for integration
of ﬂood preparedness plans, ﬂood probability mapping
and land use zoning, and an annual Mekong ﬂood forum.
The FMMP’s 2009 ﬂood report highlighted how climate
change speciﬁcally inﬂuenced ﬂood risk. Climate change
was also a key theme at the FMMP annual Mekong Flood
Forum in 2010. The forum promotes learning across
the Mekong basin. It provides governments and others involved in the programme an opportunity to gather
data and to explore implications and responses by sharing their experiences. For example, the Asian Disaster
Preparedness Centre (ADPC) is giving lessons on integrating ﬂood risk management at district and provincial levels
to countries facing similar challenges.

Source: Mitchell et al. (2010).

WWDR4

In 2009, CARE International proposed four related
strategies to form an integrated approach that combines traditional knowledge with innovative strategies.
The aim was to build adaptive capacity in order to face
the new and dynamic challenges caused by climate
change. (Table 26.1):
đƫ Climate-resilient livelihood strategies in combination
with income diversiﬁcation and capacity building for
planning and improved risk management;
đƫ Disaster risk reduction strategies to reduce the impact of hazards, particularly on vulnerable households and individuals;
đƫ Capacity development strategies for local civil society and government institutions so that they can
provide better support to communities, households
and individuals in their adaptation efforts; and
đƫ Advocacy and social mobilization strategies to address the underlying causes of vulnerability; causes
such as poor governance, lack of control over resources, or limited access to basic services.

26.3 Preparing a capacity development
strategy
26.3.1 A rational comprehensive framework for
analysis
Figure 26.1 illustrates the elements of capacity development. It also provides a comprehensive analytical
framework that helps to guide assessments of CD needs
and deﬁne appropriate, case-speciﬁc CD programmes
Ĩ(!.0/ƫ* ƫ /,!./)ČƫĂĀĀĊĩċƫ$!ƫ %#.)ƫ% !*0%ü!/ƫ
four levels of attention: the individual, the organization,
the enabling environment, and civil society. It speciﬁes,
in broad terms, what capacity and knowledge imply,
how CD can take place, what the potential outcomes
are, and how the CD can be assessed after interventions.
Capacity, or the lack of it, can best be assessed
through practical and narrowly deﬁned proxies and
checklists that are tailored to suit various situations
* ƫ,1.,+/!/ƫĨ 1/0$1/ƫ!0ƫ(ċČƫĂĀĀĂĎƫ(!.0/ƫ* ƫ
/,!./)ČƫĂĀĀĊĩċƫ
The performance of the water sector and all its subsectors is the result of the effective action of individuals with the proper knowledge and capacity, who
function in larger organizations such as ministries,
local governments, water user associations and civil
society organizations. Effectiveness depends both on
the effectiveness of individuals and on the features
that shape the capacity of the organization itself – its
skills mix, its internal operational and administrative

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

587

procedures, incentives, etc. Organizations with the
right capacity and procedures still need an enabling
environment to put the facilitating factors in place.
Such an environment includes an enabling legal and
regulatory framework, ﬁscal rules that stimulate action,

and a broadly supportive parliament, electorate and
consumer base. The scope and depth of the desired
CD process will depend on the outcomes of the above
analysis and the extent of the political support for
change. The analytical frame is exhaustive and can

TABLE 26.1
CARE’s framework for community-based adaptation
Climate-resilient
livelihoods

Disaster risk reduction

Capacity development

- Government is
monitoring, analysing
and disseminating
current and future
climate information
related to livelihoods
- Climate change is
integrated into relevant
sectoral policies
- Climate change is
integrated into poverty
reduction strategies
and/or other
development policies

- Government is
monitoring, analysing
and disseminating
disaster risk information
- Government is engaged
in planning and
implementing disaster
risk management
(prevention,
preparedness, response
and recovery)
- Functional early warning
systems are in place
- Government has the
capacity to respond to
disasters

- Government
- Government has the
recognizes the
capacity to monitor,
speciﬁc vulnerability
analyse and disseminate
of women and
information on current and
marginalized groups
future climate risks
- Government has a mandate to climate change
to integrate climate change - Policy and
implementation is
into policies
focused on reducing
- National policies are rolled
these vulnerabilities
out at regional and local
- Civil society is
levels
involved in planning
- Resources are allocated
and implementation
for the implementation of
of adaptation
adaptation related policies
activities

ġƳƫ +(Ƴ%*/0%010%+*/Ƴ$2!Ƴ
Local
access to climate
government
information
and
community ġƳƫ +(Ƴ,(*/Ƴ* Ƴ,+(%%!/Ƴ
support climate-resilient
level
livelihoods
ġƳƫ +(Ƴ#+2!.*)!*0Ƴ* Ƴ
NGO extension workers
understand climate risks
and are promoting
adaptation strategies

ġƳƫ +(Ƴ%*/0%010%+*/Ƴ$2!Ƴ
access to disaster risk
information
ġƳƫ +(Ƴ %//0!.Ƴ.%/'Ƴ
management plans are
being implemented
- Functional early warning
systems are in place
ġƳƫ +(Ƴ#+2!.*)!*0Ƴ$/Ƴ
the capacity to respond
to disasters

ġƳƫ +(Ƴ%*/0%010%+*/Ƴ$2!Ƴ0$!Ƴ ġƳƫ +(Ƴ,(**%*#Ƴ
capacity to monitor, analyse processes are
and disseminate information participatory
- Women and
on current and future
marginalized groups
climate risks
have a voice in local
ġƳƫ +(Ƴ%*/0%010%+*/Ƴ$2!Ƴ0$!Ƴ
planning processes
capacity and resources
ġƳƫ +(Ƴ,+(%%!/Ƴ,.+2% !Ƴ
to plan and implement
access to and control
adaptation activities
over critical livelihoods
resources for all

- People are generating
and using climate
information for planning
- Households are
employing climateresilient agricultural
practices
- Households have
diversiﬁed livelihoods,
including nonagricultural strategies
- People are managing
risk by planning for and
investing in the future

- Households have
protected reserves of
food and agricultural
inputs
- Households have secure
shelter
ġƳƫ !5Ƴ//!0/Ƴ.!Ƴ,.+0!0!
- People have access to
early warnings for
climate hazards
- People have the mobility
to escape danger in the
event of climate hazards

- Social and economic
safety nets are available
to households
- Financial services are
available to households
- People have knowledge
and skills to employ
adaptation strategies
- People have access to
seasonal forecasts and
other climate information

National
level

Household
and
individual
level

Addressing underlying
causes of vulnerability

- Men and women are
working together to
address challenges
- Households have
control over critical
livelihood resources
- Women and
marginalized groups
have equal access to
information, skills and
services
- Women and
marginalized groups
have equal rights
and access to critical
livelihood resources

Source: CARE (2009), reproduced with permission of the CARE International Poverty, Environment and Climate Change Network (PECCN).

588

CHAPTER 26

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

help to identify the sub-set of institutions where demand, readiness and likely impact may be highest.
*+3(! #!Čƫ1* !./0* %*#ƫ* ƫ/'%((/ƫ.!ƫ#!*!.((5ƫ !veloped through knowledge transfer instruments such
as training and education. However, whether the desired capacity or knowledge is explicit or tacit dictates
which instrument should be chosen. Tacit knowledge is
eventually far more important because it shapes skills
and deeper attitudes. This is best transferred through
one-on-one interaction between junior and senior, apprentice and teacher. Organizational capacity is enhanced by educating staff and by helping the organization to learn from experiences. Technical assistance,
management advice, learning experiences, comparison
with peers, and benchmarking, are important instruments. Networks and information communication
systems (ICSs) have an increasingly important role for

improving knowledge and capacity and opening up
new avenues for disseminating knowledge.
At the level of the enabling environment, governments and other actors also learn and become able
to develop more supportive environments. Policymakers, government departments, and politicians also
learn lessons from ‘best practices’ in other countries.
Finally, the role of society is of course critically important as it shapes the nation’s consensus for the future
by electing politicians and holding its government
accountable.
Eventually, ‘capable’ individuals and organizations
possess aggregate competences to act. There are four
types of aggregate competences (Baser, 2009; Alaerts
* ƫ /,!./)ČƫĂĀĀĊĩč

FIGURE 26.1
Schematic of capacity development at different levels, showing inputs, outcomes and methods of measurement

Knowledge
and Capacity

INDIVIDUAL

Factual knowledge
Understanding
Skills
Attitudes

Knowledge
and Capacity
Development Tools
For Explicit Knowledge:
Training,
Education
For Tacit Knowledge:
Apprenticeship
Peer learning

Networking

ORGANIZATION

ENABLING
ENVIRONMENT

Strategies
Human resource
Administrative procedure
Budget frame
Accountability frame

Change management
Technical advice on
structure, management
and incentives
Human resource
development
Peer learning

Political priorities
Policies
Regulatory frame
Public administration
Fiscal frame

Press
Technical advice
Dialogue
Peer learning
Learning-by-doing

Indicator/Attribute
of Capacity
and Knowledge

Outcome
FACTUAL
KNOWLEDGE,
UNDERSTANDING,
SKILLS,
ATTITUDE

+
ORGANIZATION
PERFORMANCE

+

Competences of
the individual,
organization
and sector/society
1. Technical substance
2. Managerial
3. For governance
4. For continual
learning and
innovation

’CONDUCIVENESS’
GOOD GOVERNANCE
CIVIL SOCIETY

Water literacy
Social/indigenous capital

Awareness raising
Mass communication
Learning-by-doing

=
SECTOR
PERFORMANCE

Source: Alaerts et al. (2010), reproduced with permission from Taylor & Francis.

WWDR4

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

589

đƫ Technical or substantive competence is required to
analyse and solve technical problems in a range of
areas from construction to ﬁnancial accounting.
đƫ Organizations need a pool of leadership and management competences embodied in their senior
staff. In many developing countries, agencies may
score well on technical and civil engineering aspects
skills, but may be less effective in managing personnel and administration. Management competences
ensure that ‘things get done’.
đƫ An effective and sustainable water sector requires
organizations that are able to foster and apply the
principles of good governance – dialogue and communication with stakeholders, resource allocation
within policy frameworks that aim for equity and
poverty alleviation, sensitivity to vulnerable groups
and transparency and accountability.
đƫ Capable individuals and organizations are those who
+*0%*1+1/(5ƫ(!.*ƫ* ƫ%**+20!ċƫ !.*%*#ƫ* ƫ%**+vation do not come naturally; they require ﬁnancial
resources, personnel and managerial procedures.
26.3.2 Assessment of capacity and needs
As a ﬁrst step, decision-makers should assess the institutional performance of the water sector or subsector. This should include all the institutions that are
involved with it. A number of organizations and UN
agencies are offering guidance and checklists for use
in such assessments. Box 26.5 describes a number of
relevant sources of information and further guidance
is available in the second World Water Development
Report (WWAP, 2006, p. 454–8).
In 2007, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) compiled a collection of CD assessment experiences and it offers a framework for assessing capacity. The core issues it lists are institutional development,
leadership, knowledge, and mutual accountability.
Some of the critical functional capacities it includes are
the capacity to engage in multi-stakeholder dialogue,
situational analysis, vision creation, policy and strategy
formulation, budgeting, and monitoring and evaluation.
Once a CD assessment has been completed, a strategy
and action plan can be derived. Such strategy should
be shaped contextually through dialogue with stakeholders because there is no ‘one size ﬁts all’ strategy.
Addressing weak institutional environments is not a
straightforward or linear process. It often works best
through ‘strategic incrementalism’ where practical
steps and incremental reforms are adopted, even if

590

CHAPTER 26

they don’t fully address all the performance problems
at once (Nelson and Tejasvi, 2009).
In 2008, the World Bank developed its own
Development Results Framework to Assess Capacity.
It did this by measuring capacity through the actual
impact and performance in the ﬁeld. The World Bank
* ƫƫ".)!3+.'/ƫ !.%2!ƫ,.0(5ƫ".+)ƫ +,!/ƫ* ƫ
Theison (2003), who suggest a checklist with key
questions that should be considered in assessments
(see also WWAP, 2006, p. 456).

BOX 26.5
Sources for capacity development

đƫƫThe UNDP capacity development website (www.capacity.undp.org ) includes key sources for generic information on how to perform capacity assessments. It
includes initiatives, networks, resources and tools. It offers access to the Capacity 2015 initiative developed to
operationalize the MDGs.
đƫƫƫThe South African Capacity Initiative (SACI) (www.
undp-saci.co.za ) developed a Capacity Mobilization
Toolkit for southern African countries, which takes into
consideration the particularly complex human capacity
challenges associated with the impact of HIV/Aids, poverty and recurring disasters.
đƫƫƫThe World Bank provides an online Capacity
Development Resource Centre (www.worldbank.org/capacity), which provides an overview of case studies, lessons learned, ‘how to’ approaches and good practices
pertaining to capacity development.
đƫƫƫThe Canadian International Development Agency
(CIDA) has developed a CD toolkit (www.acdi-cida.
gc.ca) that includes reference documents for capacity
development.
đƫƫƫThe European Centre for Development Policy
Management’s capacity development website (www.
capacity.org) aims to look at policy and practice of capacity development within international development
cooperation and provides a newsletter and a comprehensive material related to capacity development in all
sectors.
đƫƫƫThe International Development Research Centre
(IDRC), the International Institute of Rural
Reconstruction (IIRR) and the International Service for
National Agricultural Research (ISNAR) implemented
a project to better understand how CD takes place and
how its results can be evaluated.
đƫƫƫƫ0!)ƫ".+)ƫ0$!ƫGerman Agency for Technical
Cooperation (GTZ) supported the Indonesian
Government in preparing guidelines on how to organize
and manage a needs assessment process. This resulted
in a medium-term regional CD action plan.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

The Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2008) provides
a practical guide to CD at the sector level. According
to this, three pre-conditions must be fulﬁlled for a
successful CD process: there must be dissatisfaction
with the current situation; a credible change process
must have been proposed; and a vision of the future
should be shared by stakeholders (Box 26.2). Again,
it appears essential that the key stakeholders, particularly the government, need to own the change
process.
At the sectoral level, many water management ministries and departments face staffing constraints
and are seeking advice on building competencies.
Two initiatives are currently mapping the water sector’s human resources needs. UNESCO-IHP and
UNESCO-IHE have been assessing water education
needs in several regions. Together, the International
0!.ƫ//+%0%+*ƫĨ ĩƫ* ƫƫ0$!ƫ ƫ!,.0)!*0ƫ
for International Development (DFID) in association with UNESCO-IHE are assessing the human
resources development requirements for achieving

the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) for water
supply and sanitation (WSS). A standardized methodological framework is being developed based on
ﬁve country-based pilot studies.
26. 3.3 Assessment of adaptive capacity
Capacity development activities should seek to enhance the ability to cope with uncertainty and risk.
The following are just some examples of abilities and
functions that should be available at each CD level to
ensure adaptive capacity:
đƫ Individuals should have information on current
problems, sources of risk and the desired direction
of change. Behaviour should be proactive, and individuals should able to learn ﬂexibly in a variety of
ways, (Fazey et al., 2007).
đƫ Organizations should have the ability to learn, to
challenge their own established ways of thinking
and acting, to react to unpredictable internal and
external changes, and to produce social change
and achieve mission impact.
đƫ An enabling environment requires the freedom to
adjust policies to the new reality of climate change

TABLE 26.2
Indicators for assessing adaptive capacity
Level

Indicators

Individual

đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ

.!Ƴ,!+,(!Ƴ#!*!.0%*#Ƴ* Ƴ1/%*#Ƴ(%)0!Ƴ%*"+.)0%+*Ƴ"+.Ƴ,(**%*#ĕ
.!Ƴ,!+,(!Ƴ)*#%*#Ƴ.%/'Ƴ5Ƴ,(**%*#Ƴ"+.Ƴ* Ƴ%*2!/0%*#Ƴ%*Ƴ0$!Ƴ"101.!ĕ
+Ƴ,!+,(!Ƴ$2!Ƴ0$!Ƴ'*+3(! #!Ƴ* Ƴ/'%((/Ƴ0+Ƴ!),(+5Ƴ ,00%+*Ƴ/0.0!#%!/ĕ
.!Ƴ)!*Ƴ* Ƴ3+)!*Ƴ3+.'%*#Ƴ0+#!0$!.Ƴ0+Ƴ .!//Ƴ$((!*#!/ĕ
+Ƴ3+)!*Ƴ* Ƴ+0$!.Ƴ).#%*(%6! Ƴ#.+1,/Ƴ$2!Ƴ!-1(Ƴ!//Ƴ0+Ƴ%*"+.)0%+*ƏƳ/'%((/Ƴ* Ƴ/!.2%!/ĕ

Organization

đƫ /Ƴ0$!Ƴ+.#*%60%+*Ƴ3.!Ƴ+"Ƴ3$%$Ƴ.!/Ƴ* Ƴ#.+1,/Ƴ.!Ƴ0Ƴ.%/'ĕƳ
đƫ *Ƴ0$!Ƴ+.#*%60%+*Ƴ% !*0%"5Ƴ* Ƴ//!//Ƴ0$!Ƴ.%/'/Ƴ0+Ƴ0$!Ƴ/!.2%!/Ƴ!%*#Ƴ,.+2% ! ĕ
đƫ /Ƴ0$!Ƴ+.#*%60%+*Ƴ .!//%*#Ƴ0$!/!Ƴ.%/'/Ƴ%*Ƴ0$!Ƴ(+(Ƴ+))1*%05Ƴ/0.0!#5Ƴ+.Ƴ+))1*%05Ƴ,(*ĕ
đƫ 
ƫ 2!Ƴ %//0!.Ƴ.%/'Ƴ)*#!)!*0Ƴ,+(%%!/Ƴ* Ƴ,.0%!/Ƴ!!*Ƴ$*#! Ƴ/ƳƳ.!/1(0Ƴ+"Ƴ.!ý!0%+*Ƴ* Ƴ
(!.*%*#ġ5ġ +%*#ĕ
đƫ ƫ/Ƴ0$!.!ƳƳ,.+!//Ƴ%*Ƴ,(!Ƴ"+.Ƴ%*"+.)0%+*Ƴ* Ƴ(!.*%*#Ƴ0+Ƴý+3Ƴ".+)Ƴ+))1*%0%!/Ƴ0+Ƴ0$!Ƴ+.#*%60%+*Ƴ
* Ƴ2%!Ƴ2!./ĕ

Enabling
Environment

đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ

.!Ƴ0$!Ƴ%*/0%010%+*(Ƴ".)!3+.'/Ƴ ,0! Ƴ0+Ƴ0$!Ƴ*!3Ƴ.!(%05Ƴ+"Ƴ.%/'/ĕ
.!Ƴ,+(%%!/Ƴ.!2%!3! Ƴ1/%*#Ƴ0$!Ƴ#(+(Ƴ$*#!Ƴę(!*/Ěĕ
/Ƴ0$!Ƴ!*2%.+*)!*0Ƴ/1,,+.0%*#Ƴ0$!Ƴ%),(!)!*00%+*Ƴ+"Ƴ(+(Ƴ %//0!.Ƴ.%/'Ƴ)*#!)!*0Ƴ,(*/ĕ
$0Ƴ%/Ƴ0$!Ƴ(!2!(Ƴ+"Ƴ,.0%%,0+.5Ƴ,(**%*#Ƴ,.+!//!/Ƴ0Ƴ(+(Ƴ(!2!(/ĕ
/Ƴ0$!.!ƳƳ)!$*%/)Ƴ"+.Ƴ0$!Ƴ+))1*%0%+*Ƴ+"Ƴ(%)0!Ƴ%*"+.)0%+*ĕ
.!Ƴ0$!Ƴ2+%!/Ƴ+"Ƴ3+)!*Ƴ* Ƴ+0$!.Ƴ).#%*(%6! Ƴ#.+1,/Ƴ/1,,+.0! Ƴ%*Ƴ(+(Ƴ,(**%*#Ƴ,.+!//!/ĕ

Civil Society

đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ

.!Ƴ%2%(Ƴ/+%!05Ƴ!*0%0%!/Ƴ(!Ƴ0+Ƴ)+%(%6!Ƴ3.!*!//Ƴ* Ƴ.!/+1.!/Ƴ0+Ƴ)*#!Ƴ0$!Ƴ,.+!//ĕƳ
*Ƴ0$!Ƴ/+%!05Ƴ(!.*Ƴ".+)Ƴ$*#!ĕƳ
+!/Ƴ0$!Ƴ/+%!05Ƴ/!!'Ƴ.!0%2!Ƴ/+(10%+*/Ƴ0+Ƴ$*#!ĕƳ
+3Ƴ(+*#Ƴ +!/Ƴ%0Ƴ0'!Ƴ0$!Ƴ/+%!05Ƴ0+Ƴ.!/,+* Ƴ0+Ƴ$*#!/ĕƳ
.!Ƴ0$!.!Ƴ/0.+*#Ƴ+))1*%0%+*Ƴ$**!(/Ƴ3%0$%*Ƴ0$!Ƴ/+%!05ĕƳ

Sources: CARE (2009); Maguire and Cartwright (2008); Urban and Mitchell (2011).

WWDR4

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

591

and other sources of uncertainty and risk. It is no
longer realistic to have stable long-term policies
for dealing with extreme weather events, ﬂood,
and drought; policies should acknowledge the
new conditions where the baseline is inherently unstable and changing (UNDP, 2007).
đƫ Civil society organizations and networks should be
entities that mobilize and raise awareness. They
should have the resources to manage processes,
have strong communications links with organizations and individuals, and be able to innovate and
create adaptive solutions using available resources
and technologies.
Table 26.2 provides selected indicators from CARE’s
handbook (CARE, 2009) for assessing adaptive capacity to risks and hazards caused by climate change at
the four levels of action.

26.4 Capacity development strategies
and approaches
26.4.1 Education and training
Capacity development, and in a more general sense,
the generation and dissemination of knowledge, can
take place through formal, non-formal and informal
education and training. The objectives of a CD initiative and the choice of processes and instruments used
depend on the context because the institutions they
focus on are the exponents of a particular set of economic, social and cultural factors.
As the global demand for managing water under
conditions of risk and uncertainty increases, the lag
between the demand for and the supply of qualiﬁed
staff is becoming signiﬁcant, especially in developing countries. The needs of the water sector in terms
of the development of individual capacities can only
be adequately addressed through the close collaboration of water and education professionals. The importance of primary and secondary education levels
should not be underestimated as most of the people
working on the water sector are formally educated
only at these levels and most of the decisions affecting water resources are taken by people who have
very limited formal water resources education. New
water-oriented education, training programmes and
approaches are needed to bridge the ever-widening
knowledge and skills gap between developed and
developing countries. A number of principal recommendations for action, made by 50 experts who
participated in the workshop ‘Education for Water

592

CHAPTER 26

Sustainability: Where Decades meet’2 are summarized as follows.
At school
đƫ Students should become aware of how precious
water is and learn about water-related global
challenges.
đƫ To foster positive attitudes and behaviour teachers
should promote the social, economic and environmental values of water through cross-curricula development and values education.
đƫ Governments, together with other stakeholders,
should develop databases of existing teaching and
learning materials. Teachers should be trained to
use these materials. Cooperation between governments and public enterprises can provide incentives
to motivate teachers.
Vocational education and training
đƫƫƫƫ!)+*/0.0%+*ƫ,.+&!0/ƫ"+.ƫ%*0!#.0%*#ƫ2+0%+*(ƫ
education and training approaches into the water
supply and sanitation (WSS) sector should be set up
with the support of UNESCO. Occupational competencies regarding WSS should be developed and

BOX 26.6
How to save water in Palestine

$!ƫ %*#ƫ((ƫ!+* .5ƫ$++(ƫ%*ƫ(1/ƫ%/ƫƫ)!)ber of the UNESCO Associated Schools Project Network
(ASPnet). It organized a series of excursions to enable
students to examine water resources under the guidance
of experts and to learn more about this precious commodity. The students then reported their experiences and
ideas to the local media so that they could share what
they had learned with the rest of the community. The
school also introduced new and creative teaching methods and students were invited to translate their ideas and
views through drawing, singing and putting on plays.
The main impact of the project is that it enhanced students’ understanding of the signiﬁcance of the water
shortage facing the Palestinian Territories, and made them
more aware of possible solutions. Students came to realize that access to water is a basic human right, as well as
an individual and collective responsibility. The project also
raised the students’ awareness of the power of peaceful
dialogue and generated cooperation between teachers and
students and helped them to respect other points of view.
Source: UNESCO (2009).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

introduced for the water workforce (especially in developing countries).
đƫ Investment in infrastructure should be complemented by training technical staff and policy-makers to
maintain and manage investments.

BOX 26.7
Adaptive water management (AWM) training helps
groups to face uncertainty and risk

Example 1: Training educators how to teach AWM
The UN Water Decade Programme on Capacity
Development (UNW–DPC) and the European Union
Integrated Project, New Approaches to Adaptive Water
Management under Uncertainty, ran a workshop in New
Delhi in 2008 to train educators to disseminate the
NeWater–GWSP (New Approaches to Uncertainty in Water
Management–Global Water System Project) curriculum on
AWM. The aim was to encourage the water managers and
policy-makers of tomorrow to adopt an AWM approach to
climate-prooﬁng WSS strategies in the face of increasing
climate-related uncertainty. By the end of the workshop,
participants had drafted designs for adapting their water
and environmental management studies curricula.
!01.!./ƫ* ƫ! 10+./ƫ".+)ƫ !2!(+,%*#ƫ+1*0.%!/ƫ%*ƫ
0%*ƫ)!.%Čƫ".%ƫ* ƫ/%ƫ3!.!ƫ0.%*! ƫ5ƫ0.%*!./ƫ
from UNW–DPC, the University of Osnabrück in Germany,
and Alterra Wageningen University and Research Centre
in the Netherlands in the didactics of passing on the skills,
knowledge and attitudes required for AWM.
Example 2: IWRM as a Tool for adapting to climate change
The Institute of Water Education (UNESCO–IHE) offers an
online course for professionals actively involved in the water and climate sectors. Such professionals include local,
regional and national policy-makers; NGO staff and representatives of the private sector dealing with adaptation;
and junior university lecturers and scientists. The course
objectives are to promote:
đƫƫƫ* !./0* %*#ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ+*!,0ƫ+"ƫ *0!#.0! ƫ0!.ƫ
Resources Management (IWRM) in relation to climate
change;
đƫƫƫ* !./0* %*#ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ(%)0!ƫ/5/0!)ƫ* ƫ0$!ƫ$5 .+(+#%cal cycle;
đƫƫƫ3.!*!//ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ%),0ƫ+"ƫ(%)0!ƫ$*#!ƫ+*ƫ/+%!05Ď
đƫƫƫ* !./0* %*#ƫ+"ƫ$+3ƫ0+ƫ !(ƫ3%0$ƫ.%/'ƫ* ƫ1*!.0%*05Ďƫ
and
đƫƫƫ* !./0* %*#ƫ+"ƫ$+3ƫ0+ƫ ,0ƫ0+ƫ30!.ƫ$*#!/ƫ* ƫ
climate change.
Source: UNESCO (http://www.unesco-ihe.org/Education/Shortcourses/Online-courses/IWRM-as-a-Tool-for-Adaptation-toClimate-Change).

WWDR4

đƫ Training should be developed with the help of
educators to bridge the gap between theory and
practice.
Higher Education
đƫ Universities should open a window to the world
by offering action research, problem-based learning and experiential learning. They should cooperate with society, and engage with the community in
teaching and research.
đƫ Universities need to develop mechanisms that ensure that teaching materials on basic water knowledge and on state-of-the-art of water management
are freely available to all practitioners.
đƫ The higher education sector should develop an academically recognized peer-review process for advanced and innovative teaching materials.
đƫ Changes in academic structures should reﬂect the
efficacy of successful university interventions in improving best practices in communities. We should
emphasise effective action programmes.
There is no single body of knowledge about the way
water should be managed. Universities must take
measures to ensure that the existing variety of paradigmatic approaches is made available to the public.
26.4.2 Networking and sharing knowledge
*+3(! #!ƫ/$.%*#ƫ%/ƫƫ".#%(!ƫ,.+!//ƫ!1/!ƫ%0ƫ.!quires individuals to share their personal beliefs with
others, without physical or psychological impediment,

BOX 26.8
Adaptive river basin management: The NeWater
online teaching curriculum

A curriculum for adaptive river basin management was
developed as part of the training and education activities of the New Approaches to Uncertainty in Water
Management (NeWater) project. NeWater’s explicit aim is
to provide an effective outreach mechanism for scientiﬁc
results, methodologies and tools to stakeholders in the
water sector, including university educators, water management practitioners and policy-makers. The curriculum
has been implemented by the Institute of Environmental
Systems Research at the University of Osnabrück, in
Germany, at Alterra Wageningen University and Research
Centre in the Netherlands and as part of the Global Water
System Project. Details on the programme can be found
at www.newatereducation.nl

Source: NeWater (n.d.).

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

593

to facilitate justiﬁcation, explanation, persuasion and
connectedness among peers. (Schenk et al., 2006). A
useful indicator for knowledge facilitation in the water
sector is the presence of formal and informal networks
among sector specialists and peers. Such networks
are of great importance when it comes to exchanging knowledge between government and other actors
%*ƫ0$!ƫ/!0+.ƫĨ 1%&!* %&'ƫ* ƫ %*'(!*ġ..%p*/ČƫĂĀĀĊĩċƫ
Networks can take many forms, for example:
đƫ Professional, formal associations of people with a
speciﬁc technical background or expertise – for example, associations of water experts, social scientists or economists such as the International Water
Association and the International Water Resources
Association.
đƫ ƫ ++/!(5ƫ+.#*%6! ƫ*!03+.'/ƫ+"ƫ%* %2% 1(ƫ/,!%(ists who are often centred around a publication or
newsletter – for example, journals such as the IRC’s
Waterlines.
đƫ Communities-of-practice (CoPs) that are organized
for a speciﬁed task. These usually operate within given time frames, have internal work agendas
and agreed outputs such as publications or policy
notes. The World Bank–UNDP Water and Sanitation
Programme has managed CoPs on topics ranging
from hand washing to low-cost sewage disposal.
đƫ Networks of government, semi-government and
non-governmental organizations that cooperate
on a declared subject and that often receive funding for meetings, research, publications, workshops,
and operational costs. Examples are Cap-Net, which
is a UNDP initiative that connects about 25 educational and capacity building institutions; PoWER,
UNESCO-IHE’s partnership for water education and
research, is a global network of about 30 research
and education institutions ; Informal and social networks that are driven by cultural or social considerations but that may often be instrumental in bringing
together people who can share both explicit and
tacit knowledge.
26.4.3 Ownership as a key to effectiveness
Water management agencies close the door on opportunities for effective integrated water management
when they don’t give a voice to relatively powerless
groups, such as women and indigenous people.
Efforts to ensure the ownership of local stakeholders are often absent. The lack of broad commitment is
systematically identiﬁed as a main reason why investments and programmes fail. For example, many WSS
programmes in developing countries throughout the

594

CHAPTER 26

1980s and 1990s proved ineffectual because the beneﬁciaries could not or did not want to use or maintain
the new water supply systems and latrines. Numerous
projects arranged for experts to assist in project preparation, but such experts were generally never mainstreamed into the engineering organizations.
International development aid too often proved ineffective because programmes were not well embedded locally. After the Paris Declaration in 2005 and the
$%. ƫ%#$ƫ !2!(ƫ+.1)ƫ+*ƫ% ƫû!0%2!*!//ƫ%*ƫ.ƫ
in 2008, it is now the norm for aid recipients to forge
their own national development strategies, which
ensure the broader ownership of policies and programmes (OECD 2005, 2008). The IWRM concept emphasizes that effective and sustainable water management requires the explicit involvement of stakeholders
in planning and decision-making (see the Global Water
Partnership Toolbox at www.gwptoolbox.org). The

BOX 26.9
Strengthening local ownership: The Lake Victoria
Region Water and Sanitation Initiative

Twenty-seven capacity development interventions support
0$!ƫġ ƫ '!ƫ%0+.%ƫ!#%+*ƫ0!.ƫ* ƫ*%00%+*ƫ
*%0%0%2!ƫĨ  ĩċƫ$%/ƫ%*%0%0%2!Čƫ3$%$ƫ%/ƫ$!(,%*#ƫ
!*5Čƫ*6*%ƫ* ƫ#* ƫ0+ƫ$%!2!ƫ0$!%.ƫ /ƫ"+.ƫ
WSS, is an example of the modern integrated approach.
$!ƫ '!ƫ%0+.%ƫ0$)!*0ƫ,.+2% !/ƫ(%2!(%$++ /ƫ"+.ƫ
about one-third of the combined populations of the three
countries (30 million people). Most of the region’s rapidly growing urban centres are experiencing unplanned
growth, poor infrastructure, and a fragile ecosystem.
Piped water leakage and low billing rates are usual and
sanitation and solid waste collection are poor.
Progress to date. Initial investments have been completed:
key water infrastructure has been rehabilitated or expanded, public latrines have been built, micro-credit for
household latrines has been provided, and solid-waste
removal equipment has been supplied – all resulting in better performance by the water utilities in the project towns.
The CD design responds to the on-the-ground issues.
Multi-disciplinary teams conducted in-depth interviews
with the stakeholders and designed 27 tailor-made CD interventions. These included interventions on environmental
services, pro-poor governance, equity and local economic
development. All concluded with a personal action plan
that requires each participant or group to identify the activities that are within their authority and capability and that
will contribute to improving water environmental services.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

European Union’s Water Framework Directive mandates that river basin management plans in which the
role of the informed and empowered stakeholders are
treated as critical, should be developed for all river basins. Targeted CD programmes may then be required
to approach and prepare these groups (Box 26.9).
In a rapidly changing world, our economies and wellbeing increasingly depend on accurate forecasting of
future events and trends. There is a growing need to
shape policies that best reﬂect the courses of action
that are most appropriate technologically as well as
representing the preferences of society. Challenges of
broad social signiﬁcance such as responses to climate
change and public health threats require that society is
informed and ‘educated’. Consultation with an informed
society can lead to policies that are owned by society – and diligently implemented by everybody in that
society.
26.4.4 Information and communications technology
(ICT)
The generation, manipulation and communication of
information are essential parts of the decision-making
process for organizations involved in water management. ICT is recognized as a strategic enabler in the
process of developing innovative solutions to address
problems such as water scarcity. ICT also facilitates
the analysis of environmental data so that researchers and climatologists can build more accurate models

for weather forecasting (ITU, 2010). The main areas in
which ICT could play a pivotal role in water management are shown in Figure 26.2.
The cost of traditional face-to-face training courses and
the time they consume signiﬁcantly restrict CD plans.
The rapid advance of ICT has made access to knowledge
0$.+1#$ƫ! !.*%*#ƫ!/%!.Čƫ)1$ƫ)+.!ƫ.! %(5ƫ2%((!ƫ
* ƫ$!,!.čƫ! !.*%*#Čƫ+.ƫ,.!"!.(5ƫblended learning,3
has helped to develop the capacity of water management stakeholders. It does this through its use of online
training, online university courses, multimedia materials for public awareness, etc. The UN–Water Decade
Programme on Capacity Development has developed
an online system called UNWAIS+ (UN Water Activity
Information System) which includes an eTraining pool
(www.ais.unwater.org).
Mobile and wireless technologies are also providing a chance for users to learn remotely. This makes
)+%(!ġ(!.*%*#ƫĨ) !.*%*#ĩƫ!2!*ƫ)+.!ƫ00.0%2!ƫ
0$*ƫ! !.*%*#ċƫ +%(!ƫ0!$*+(+#5ƫ,,(%! ƫ0+ƫƫ
activities offers cost-effective learning opportunities.
Mobile devices with expanding capabilities are now
available at signiﬁcantly reduced prices (UN DESA,
2007).
The department of Engineering Hydrology at the
RWTH Aachen University in Germany is offering several online courses covering different water management

FIGURE 26.2
Major areas for information and communications technology in water management

Mapping of water resources and weather forecasting
$  
$ "
$   "
$ ! 

Setting up early warning systems and
meeting water demand in cities of the future
$ !   
$  t
$    
$  
$ !"

Asset management for the water
distribution network
$ #   
$  
$   t

Just in time irrigation in agriculture and landscaping
$   "
$ ! 

Source: ITU (2010).

WWDR4

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

595

related topics (Box 26.10) as well as water exercises
and mobile phone app quizzes.

case for social learning implementation that enhanced
adaptive water management.

26.4.5 Social learning: ‘Learning together to manage
together’
Social learning has been described as an alternative
to transmissive expert-based teaching. It is a form of
community-based learning (Capra, 2007) that takes
place in networks or CoPs that are inﬂuenced by the
governance structure in which they are embedded.
Social learning requires relatively stable institutional
settings which are not rigid or inﬂexible. Such conditions are developed through continued processes of
social learning in which multi-level stakeholders are
connected through networks that allow them to develop the capacity and trust necessary to collaborate
in a variety of relationships both formal and informal
(Pahl-Wostl, 2007).

26.5 The way forward
đƫ There is a lack of best practice at all levels in analys-

Social learning supports the capacity development
of managers to address uncertainty and risk more effectively. Successful social learning (learning in and
with social groups through interaction) leads to new
knowledge, shared understanding, trust and, ultimately,
+((!0%2!ƫ0%+*ċƫ !.*%*#ƫ)5ƫ0'!ƫ,(!ƫ0ƫ %û!.!*0ƫ
levels from incremental improvements (single-loop)
through to reframing where assumptions are revisited (double-loop) and transforming where underlying
values and world views may be changed (triple-loop)
(Pahl-Wostl, 2007). Box 26.11 presents a good practice

BOX 26.11
Social learning and AWM in the South Indian Lower
Bhavani

$!ƫ +3!.ƫ$2*%ƫ.+&!0ƫĨ ĩƫ$/ƫ*ƫĉąČĀĀĀġ$!tare catchment area in the South Indian state of Tamil
Nadu. One of the most signiﬁcant uncertainty factors
here is rainfall variability. Farmers frequently have to cope
with unpredictable supplies of water and seasons without rainfall. The large-scale development of wells in the
area shows how farmers have successfully managed to
increase water availability during seasons when there is
no supply. They have also learned to swiftly adjust their
cropping patterns in line with the highly unpredictable
variability of seasonal canal water supply, and have even
adapted what they grow to cope with entirely rain-fed
conditions.

TOTWAT is an EU-funded project under the umbrella
of the TEMPUS programme coordinated by the RWTH
Aachen University in Germany. The project aims to devel+,ƫ*ƫ! !.*%*#ƫ/5/0!)ƫ"+.ƫ30!.ƫ,.+"!//%+*(/ƫ%*ƫ#5,0ċƫ
More than ten training courses have been developed in
the ﬁelds of modelling, water management, socio-economics, environmental engineering and interdisciplinary water management. The electronic contents of the
courses are suitable for use by other water institutions in
the Middle East and North Africa region. User feedback
shows that such online training courses have a signiﬁcant
impact on the performance of water engineers, and more
0$*ƫĊĀŌƫ+"ƫ1/!./ƫ%* %0! ƫ0$0ƫ%0ƫ$!(,! ƫ0$!)ƫ0+ƫ/$.!ƫ
knowledge and learn from each other.

The entire chain of system changes shows that social
(!.*%*#ƫ%/ƫ0'%*#ƫ,(!ƫ3%0$%*ƫ0$!ƫ ƫ/5/0!)ċƫ$!ƫ2.%ous actors have learned how to optimize the system within the limits of the technical infrastructure, the capacity
of the reservoir, the discharge capacity of the canal and
the unpredictable supply of water dictated the by erratic
rainfall. The way farmers have learned from and been inspired by each other are examples of social learning between actors. From a long-term perspective, all the actors
%*ƫ0$!ƫ ƫ/5/0!)ƫ$2!ƫ(!.*! ƫ".+)ƫ0$!ƫ!*2%.+*)!*0(ƫ
responses and from each other’s behaviour. Together they
have contributed to the alteration of governance structures and have developed new practices without being
bound by the original technical infrastructure. All actors,
thus, live with change, but few appear to remember what
caused the change in the system and why it changed.
$!ƫ ƫ*(5/%/ƫ/$+3/ƫ0$0ƫ0$!ƫ ƫ/5/0!)ƫ$/ƫ"1(ü((! ƫ
the criteria of a complex adaptive system again and again.
Several changes have taken place and earlier mistakes
and failures have been addressed step-by-step to reach
the present complex human–environmental–technological
system. Social learning takes place at both system level
and with individual farmers. The uncertainty factors have
been considered one at a time during the system change
cycles and have been included in the system design.

Source: TOTWAT project (2011).

Source: Lannerstad and Molden (2009).

BOX 26.10
The Online Training System for Water Professionals
(TOTWAT)

596

ing and assessing adaptive capacity for risk. There
is a need to conduct regular capacity assessments
including assessing the capacities of the workforce,
the institutions, the key agencies, the policy and

CHAPTER 26

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

regulatory frameworks, and the main stakeholders.
There is a need to identify realistic capacity development priorities that can be implemented within a
practical time frame and which focus on ownership.
đƫ There is a need to assess the capability of education systems and prepare adequate numbers of
sector professionals who have the appropriate skills
mix. This is particularly important for managerial
and governance skills so that there is the ability to
prepare and carry out investments. In this process, it
is necessary to promote collaboration and cooperation between organizations and water and education experts.
đƫ The water sector needs to engage in dialogue with
society about investment initiatives and major policies. This ensures that decisions reﬂect actual expectations and foster ownership. The media needs
to be taught about water issues so that their capacity to report on such issues is improved.
đƫ Social learning should be promoted to build the
adaptability of all stakeholders involved in making
decisions about water management. This helps to
increase ﬂexibility and responsiveness when dealing
with risk and uncertainty.
đƫ ICT should be used more to reduce costs and offer
more ﬂexible learning opportunities. Investments
made in high quality learning materials for adaptive
water management can be used by water professionals and students across a wide area.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

2

3

For example, Thorkilsen and Dynesen (2001) describe how an
internet-based interactive facility was at the core of a broad
knowledge sharing and communication effort to muster the
support of politicians and the community and attract funding
for one of Europe’s largest and most controversial infrastructure
projects, the rail and road bridge and tunnel across the Øresund
Strait linking Denmark to Sweden.
This workshop was jointly run during the UNESCO World
ESD Conference in Bonn, Germany in 2009 by the UNESCO
International Hydrological Programme (IHP); the German
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and
Nuclear Safety (BMU); and the UN Water Decade Programme
on Capacity Development (UNW–DPC). Its purpose was to
promote exchange between water and education stakeholders
by linking the two UN Decades – the UN Decade of Education
for Sustainable Development (UN DESD) and the UN
*0!.*0%+*(ƫ! !ƫ"+.ƫ0%+*Čƫę0!.ƫ"+.ƫ %"!Ěċƫ
Blended learning is a mix of different leaning environments, e.g.
! !.*%*#ƫ* ƫ"!ġ0+ġ"!ƫ(!.*%*#ċ

WWDR4

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2008. Practical Guide to
Capacity Development in a Sector Context. Manila, ADB.
Alaerts, G. J. 1999. Capacity Building as knowledge
management: purpose, deﬁnition and instruments.
G. J. Alaerts, F. J. A. Hartvelt and F.-M. Patorni (eds),
Water Sector Capacity Building: Concepts and Instruments.
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, A. A. Balkema Publishers.
ĢĢĢĢċƫĂĀĀĊċƫ *+3(! #!ƫ* ƫ,%05ƫ !2!(+,)!*0ƫĨ ĩƫ/ƫ
tool for institutional strengthening and change, Alaerts,
G. J. and Dickinson N. (eds), Water for a Changing World:
Developing Local Knowledge and Capacity. Boca Raton/
London, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis.
(!.0/Čƫċƫ ċƫ* ƫ /,!./)Čƫ ċƫĂĀĀĊċƫ.+#.!//ƫ* ƫ
challenges in knowledge and capacity development,
ċƫċƫ(+'(* Čƫċƫ ċƫ(!.0/Čƫ ċƫ ċƫ /,!./)ƫ* ƫ ċƫ
Hare (eds), Capacity Development for Improved Water
Management. +ƫ0+*ƫ* ƫ +* +*Čƫƫ.!//ƫ* ƫ
Taylor & Francis.
* !./+*Čƫċƫ ċƫĂĀĀĂċƫ!* !.ƫ)00!./čƫ%),(%0%+*/ƫ"+.ƫ
climate variability and climate change and disaster
management in the Paciﬁc Islands. InterCoast Newsletter,
Winter 2002, No. 41. Narragansett, RI, Coastal Resources
Center, University of Rhode Island.
Baser, H. 2009. Capacity and capacity development:
Breaking down the concepts and analysing the processes.
Alaerts, G. J., and Dickinson, N. (eds), Water for a Changing
World: Developing Local Knowledge and Capacity. Boca
Raton/London, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis.
0!/ČƫċƫċČƫ 1* 6!3%6ČƫċƫċČƫ1Čƫċƫ* ƫ(10%'+"Čƫ ċƫĂĀāĀċƫ
Consultation document, The ACCRA (Africa Climate
$*#!ƫ!/%(%!*!ƫ((%*!ĩƫ +(ƫ ,0%2!ƫ,%05ƫ
".)!3+.'ƫĨ ĩċƫ
Bormann, B. T., Cunningham, P. G., Brookes, M. H., Manning,
V. W. and Collopy, M. W. 1993. Adaptive Ecosystem
Management in the Paciﬁc Northwest: A Case Study from
Coastal Oregon. General Technical Report PNW-GTR-341.
U.S. Portland, Oreg., Forest Service Paciﬁc Northwest
Research Station.
Capra, F. 2007. Foreword. Wals, A. (ed.), Social Learning:
Towards a Sustainable World. Wageningen, the
Netherlands, Wageningen Academic Publishers.
CARE. 2009. Climate Vulnerability and Capacity Analysis. A
$* ++'ƫ,.!,.! ƫ5ƫ*#%!ƫ6hČƫ %ƫ).+/!ƫ* ƫ
Charles Ehrhart. Atlanta, Ga., CARE.
EuropeAid. 2005. Institutional Assessment and Capacity
Development: Why, What and How? Tools and Methods
!.%!/ċƫ 14!)1.#Čƫþ!ƫ"+.ƫþ%(ƫ1(%0%+*/ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ
European Communities.
6!5Čƫ ċČƫ6!5Čƫ ċƫċƫ%/$!.Čƫ ċČƫ$!..!*Čƫ ċČƫ..!*Čƫ ċČƫ+//Čƫ
R. F. and Dovers, S. R. 2007. Adaptive capacity and
learning to learn as leverage for social–ecological resilience.
Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 5, pp. 375–80.
 čāĀċāĉĊĀĥāĆąĀġĊĂĊĆĨĂĀĀĈĩĆĪăĈĆč  īĂċĀċĎĂċ

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

597

Gault, B. et al. 2005. The women of New Orleans and the Gulf
Coast: multiple disadvantages and key assets for recovery.
Part I: Poverty, Race, Gender, and Class. Washington DC,
The Gender and Disaster Sourcebook. Institute for Women’s
Policy Research.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2010. ICT as an
Enabler for Smart Water Management. Technology Watch
Report, ITU.
**!./0 Čƫ ċƫ* ƫ +( !*ČƫċƫĂĀĀĊċƫAdaptive Water
Resource Management in the South Indian Lower Bhavani
Project Command Area. +(+)+Čƫ.%ƫ *'Čƫ *0!.*0%+*(ƫ
Water Management Institute. (IWMI Research Report 129).
http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/assessment/ﬁles_new/research_
projects/RR129.pdf
+,!/Čƫċƫ* ƫ$!%/+$*ČƫċƫĂĀĀăċƫOwnership, Leadership and
Transformation: Can We Do Better for Capacity Development?
+* +*ƫ* ƫ0!.(%*#ČƫċČƫ.0$/*ƫ,1(%0%+*/ċ
1%&!* %&'ƫ ċƫ* ƫ %*'(!*ġ..%p*/ČƫċƫċƫĂĀĀĊċƫ.% #%*#ƫ
the knowledge gap: the value of knowledge networks.
(+'(* Čƫ ċƫċČƫ(!.0/Čƫċƫ ċČƫ /,!./)Čƫ ċƫ ċČƫĒƫ.!Čƫ
M. (eds), Capacity Development for Improved Water
Management.ƫ+ƫ0+*ĥ +* +*Čƫƫ.!//ĥ5(+.ƫĒƫ
Francis.
1/0$1/ČƫċČƫ .%!*Čƫ ċġċČƫ* !./+*ČƫċČƫ. !*Čƫċƫ* ƫ
Montalvan, G. P. 2002. Organizational Assessment: A
Framework for Improving Performance. Washington DC/
Ottawa, IDB/IDRC.
Maguire, B. and Cartwright, S. 2008. Assessing a
Community’s Capacity to Manage Change: A Resilience
Approach to Social Assessment. Canberra, Commonwealth
of Australia.
Metze, M. 2009. Changing Tides: The Ministry of Transport
and Water Management in Crisis. (In Dutch.) Amsterdam,
Uitgeverij Balans.
%0$!((ČƫċČƫ .$%)Čƫ ċČƫ..%/ƫƫ ċČƫ! #!.Čƫ ċČƫ+('ČƫċČƫ$)! Čƫ
ċČƫ((ČƫċČƫ3.5(5/$5*Čƫ ċČƫ%#$0%*#(!Čƫ ċČƫ*5*#+Čƫ ċČƫ
Adow, M. and Sajjad Mohammed, S. 2010. Climate Smart
Disaster Risk Management, Strengthening Climate Resilience.
.%#$0+*Čƫ Čƫ */0%010!ƫ+"ƫ!2!(+,)!*0ƫ01 %!/ċƫ$00,čĥĥ
+))1*%05ċ!( %/ċ+.#ĥċĆĊ!Ā ĂćĈĥŌĂĀ ċ, "
Mugisha, S. 2009 Capacity building and optimization of
Infrastructure operations: a case of national water and
sewerage corporation. Uganda, Blokland, M. W., Alaerts,
ċƫ ċČƫ /,!./)Čƫ ċƫ ċČƫ* ƫ.!Čƫ ċƫĨ! /ĩČƫCapacity
Development for Improved Water Management. Boca
0+*ĥ +* +*Čƫƫ.!//ĥ5(+.ƫĒƫ.*%/ċƫ
Nelson, M. and Tejasvi, A. 2009. Capacity development
in Africa: lessons of the past decade. Blokland, M. W.,
(!.0/Čƫċƫ ċČƫ /,!./)Čƫ ċƫ ċƫ* ƫ.!Čƫ ċƫĨ! /ĩČƫCapacity
Development for Improved Water Management. Boca
0+*ĥ +* +*Čƫƫ.!//ĥ5(+.ƫĒƫ.*%/ċƫ
NeWater. n.d. NeWater New Approaches to Adaptive Water
Management Under Uncertainty. Integrated Project in the
6th EU Framework Programme. Brussels, EC. http://www.
*!30!.ċ%*"+ĥ%* !4ċ,$,ĕ,% œāĀĂā
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2005. The Paris Declaration. Paris,
OECD–DAC.

598

CHAPTER 26

––––. 2006. The Challenge of Capacity Development: Working
Towards Good Practice. Paris, OECD–DAC.
––––. 2008. The Accra Agenda for Action. Paris, OECD–DAC.
Oxfam (The Oxford Committee for Famine Relief).
2005. The Tsunami’s Impact on Women. Oxfam
International Brieﬁng Note. http://www.oxfam.org.
uk/applications/blogs/campaigners/2008/03/
sahena_the_voice_of_climate_ch.html
Pahl-Wostl, C. 2007. Requirements for Adaptive Water
*#!)!*0ċƫ$(ġ+/0(ČƫċČƫ 0Čƫċƫ* ƫ ®(0#!*Čƫ ċƫĨ! /ĩČƫ
Adaptive and Integrated Water Management Coping with
Complexity and Uncertainty, pp. 1–22. Berlin, Springer Verlag.
$(ġ+/0(ČƫċČƫ+(06ČƫċČƫ /0!*/Čƫċƫ* ƫ *%!,!.ČƫċƫĂĀāĀċƫ
Analysing complex water governance regimes: the
management and transition framework. Environmental
Science & Policy, Special issue: Water governance in times
of change, Vol. 13, No. 7, pp. 571–81.
!0!./+*Čƫ ċƫĂĀĀĈċƫReaching Out to Women When Disaster
Strikes. Soroptimist White Paper. http://www.soroptimist.
org/whitepapers/wp_disaster.html
8*$!6ƫ !(ƫ((!ČƫċƫĂĀĀĀċƫ +(ƫ.%/'ƫ)*#!)!*0ƫ%*ƫ!*0.(ƫ
America: lessons learnt from the FEMID project.
http://www.crid.or.cr/digitalizacion/pdf/spa/doc12912/
doc12912-9.pdf
Schenk, M., Callahan, S. and Rixon, S. 2006. Our take on
how to talk about knowledge management. http://www.
*! +0!ċ+)ċ1ĥ3$%0!,,!./ċ,$,ĕ3,% œć
2!%5Čƫ ċƫċƫāĊĊĈċƫThe New Organizational Wealth. Managing
and Measuring Knowledge-based Assets. San Francisco,
!..!00ġ +!$(!.ċ
TERI (The Energy and Resources Institute). 2010.Water
and climate change adaptation in South Asia. New Delhi,
!#%+*(ƫ *+3(! #!ƫ1ƫ"+.ƫ0!.ƫ* ƫ(%)0!ƫ$*#!ƫ
adaptation in South Asia.
www.waterknowledgehub.org
Thorkilsen, M, and Dynesen, C. 2001. An owner’s view of
hydroinformatics: its role in realising the bridge and tunnel
connection between Denmark and Sweden. Journal of
Hydroinformatics, Vol.3, pp. 105–35.
TOTWAT Project. 2011. Training-of-Trainers Program in
Interdisciplinary Water Management. Aachen, Germany,
RWTH Aachen University. http://totwat.lﬁ.rwth-aachen.de
UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs). 2007. Compendium of ICT Applications
on Electronic Government: Volume I, Mobile Applications
on Health and Learning. New York, UNDESA. http://
unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/
unpan030003.pdf
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) 1997.
Capacity Development: Technical Advisory Paper 2. New
York, UNDP.
––––. 2007. Capacity assessment methodology: user’s guide.
Capacity Development Group. New York, Bureau for
Development Policy, UNDP.
––––. 2009. Resources Guide on Gender and Climate Change.
New York, UNDP. http://www.uneca.org/acpc/about_acpc/

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

+/ĥġġ
ġġġ
GUIDE.pdf
UNEP (The United Nations Environment Programme). 2009.
Resources Guide on Gender and Climate Change. UNEP.
UNESCO. 2009. Second Collection of Good Practices
Education for Sustainable Development. Paris, UNESCO.
Urban, F. and Mitchell, T. 2011. Climate Change, Disasters and
Electricity Generation: Strengthening Climate Resilience.
%/1//%+*ƫ,!.ƫĉċƫ.%#$0+*Čƫ Čƫ */0%010!ƫ+"ƫ!2!(+,)!*0ƫ
Studies. http://community.eldis.org/.59d5ba58/
0!/0(%)0!ŌĂĀ$*#!ŌĂĀ %//0!./ŌĂĀ* ŌĂĀ
!(!0.%%05ŌĂĀ#!*!.0%+*ċ, "
Van Scheltinga, T. C., Van Bers, C. and Hare, M. 2009.
!.*%*#ƫ/5/0!)/ƫ"+.ƫ ,0%2!ƫ30!.ƫ)*#!)!*0čƫ
experiences with the development of opencourseware
and training of trainers. Blokland, M. W, Alaerts, M. G.,
/,!./)Čƫ ċƫ ċƫ* ƫ.!Čƫ ċƫĨ! /ĩċƫCapacity Development

WWDR4

for Improved Water Management. Boca Raton/London,
CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, pp. 45–60.
Williams, E. et al. 2006. The Women of New Orleans and
the Gulf Coast: Multiple Disadvantages and Key Assets for
Recovery. Part II: Poverty, Race, Gender, and Class in the
+.ƫ .'!0ċƫ */0%010!ƫ"+.ƫ+)!*Ě/ƫ+(%5ƫ!/!.$ċƫ
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2006.
World Water Development Report 2: Water: A Shared
Responsibility. Paris/New York, UNESCO/Berghahn Books.
––––. 2009. World Water Development Report 3: Water in A
Changing World. .%/ĥ +* +*Čƫĥ.0$/*ċ
Zeitlin, J. 2007. Statement at the Informal Thematic Debate:
Climate Change as a Global Challenge.
http://www.wedo.org/learn/library/media-type/pdf/
june-zeitlins-statement-on-climate-change-as-a-globalchallenge

DEVELOPING KNOWLEDGE AND CAPACITY

599

CHAPTER 27
Water-related disasters

UNISDR
—
Authors and contributors Bina Desai (Programme Officer), John Harding (Head,
Policy) and Justin Ginnetti (Associate Programme Officer)

© UN Photo/Marco Dormino

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Countries in all regions have been successful in strengthening their capacities to address
the mortality risk associated with major weather-related hazards such as ﬂoods. Despite the
increasing number of people living in ﬂoodplains, mortality risk relative to population size
is now trending down. In East Asia and the Paciﬁc mortality risk is now at a third of its 1980
level (UNISDR, 2011).
In contrast, countries have had a far more difficult time addressing successfully other risks.
Economic loss risk due to tropical cyclones and ﬂoods is trending up because the rapidly
increasing exposure of economic assets is outstripping reductions in vulnerability.
Water management should actively engage in shaping national agendas that reduce the
risk from natural hazards and assist adaptation to climate change, in support of a coherent
planning process that targets national and local sustainable development plans.
Disaster risk reduction needs to be an integral part of integrated water resources
management (IWRM) to enhance and effectively protect water investments and to
contribute to reducing risks. Reducing the risk of ﬂoods and drought, and in particular,
promoting development practices that reduce the risk of ﬂoods and drought, will contribute
to governments’ efforts to adapt to climate change. One of the key challenges faced by
decision-makers today is the need to increase understanding of which forms of investment
are effective in reducing the risk of ﬂoods and drought – in the water management as well as
in the broader development arena.

27.1 Introduction
This chapter addresses the risks associated with waterrelated disasters, in particular, ﬂoods and drought, and
contributes to the broader topics of risk and uncertainty.
It also addresses climate change issues by examining
the impacts of climate change on extreme event trends,
in particular, natural hazards (again focusing on ﬂoods
and drought), as well as adaptation approaches based
upon the reduction of risk related to water-related hazards. It focuses on policy responses and actions and
their effectiveness, describing solutions, their applicability and their relation to risk. This component, along with
the monitoring of risk trends for ﬂoods and drought, will
be built up more systematically in future reports.
27.1.1 Disaster impacts
The most signiﬁcant water-related disasters, such as
ﬂoods, include ﬂash ﬂoods, tropical cyclones and other

storms, and ocean storm surges (Box 27.1). Other related events, including those triggered by earthquakes,
comprise tsunamis, landslides that dam rivers, breakage of levees and dams, glacial lake outbursts, coastal
ﬂooding associated with abnormal or rising sea levels,
and epidemics and pest outbreaks associated with too
little or too much water.
One water-related disaster that seldom makes it into
the impacts statistics is drought. Since 1900, more
than 11 million people have been killed and more than
2 billion affected by drought, more than any other
physical hazard (UNISDR, 2011). However, these ﬁgures
are probably lower than the real total as few countries
systematically report and record drought losses and
impacts (Box 27.2), while those that do, such as the
United States of America, report only insured losses
(Figure 27.1).

BOX 27.1
Extreme water-related disasters in 2010

Water-related disasters account for 90% of all natural hazards, and their frequency and intensity is generally rising. Some 373
natural disasters killed over 296,800 people in 2010, affected nearly 208 million others, and cost nearly US$110 billion.
In 2010, extreme disasters included storm Xynthia in Western Europe (February) and the spate of heavy ﬂooding in France
(June). Unusually, Asia experienced fewer disaster deaths that year than the Americas and Europe, accounting for just 4.7%
of total mortality. However, it remains the most greatly affected continent: some 89% of all people affected by disasters in
2010 lived in Asia, according to the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED).
Of the list of top ten disasters with the highest death counts, ﬁve occurred in Asia. In Indonesia from May to August, ﬂoods
killed 1,691 people and a further 1,765 were killed by mudslides, landslides or rock falls triggered by heavy rains and ﬂoods
in August. In Pakistan, massive ﬂoods caused by heavy rains in the north-west from July to August covered one-ﬁfth of the
country’s landmass, and caused the deaths of nearly 2,000 people.
In China, ﬂoods and landslides during the summer are estimated to have cost US$18 billion, while the Pakistan ﬂoods cost
US$9.5 billion. Yet economic losses in 2010 still do not surpass those of 2005, when damage from hurricanes Katrina, Rita
and Wilma alone amounted to US$139 billion.
Summary of ﬂood disasters, 1980–2008
Number of events
Number of people killed
Average number of people killed per year
Number of people affected
Average number of people affected per year
Economic damage (US$ × 1 000)
Economic damage per year (US$ × 1 000)

2 887
195 843
6 753
2 809 481 489
96 878 672
397 333 885
13 701 168
Source: EM-DAT (2010).

Source: CRED (2011).

602

CHAPTER 27

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

BOX 27.2
Data from a systematic registration of disaster in
Mozambique
Mozambique is one of the few countries with a disaster database that systematically records drought losses
(INGC, 2010). Here, the real scale of drought impacts becomes visible: since 1990, 8 million ha of crops have been
damaged (of which half were destroyed) during drought
events, 1,040 people have been killed, and an additional
11.5 million have been affected.
Source: UNISDR (2011).

FIGURE 27.1
Recorded drought fatalities per year, 1990–2009

1990

27.1.2 Water-related disasters impact on development
Water hazards may be a natural part of our earth system, but the disasters that sometimes arise from them
should be recognized as strongly interlinked with particular human vulnerabilities of our own making. Key
factors that increase both the intensity of the hazard
as well as the related vulnerability include environmental degradation; settlements in marginal hazard-prone
lands; inadequate buildings and water management
systems; lack of risk awareness and information; poverty and low capacities for prevention, preparedness
and early warning; and lack of political and institutional commitment to reducing risks.
Disaster risk manifests itself as high impact catastrophes, as well as an increasing number of high frequency, lower relative severity losses, almost all of which
are associated with water-related hazards. The risk of
losses from these hazards is a factor of social and economic development (WWAP, 2009).

1991

These impacts are an impediment to achieving the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), because disasters regularly destroy accumulated development gains,
in terms of damage and losses to infrastructure and
other assets. In developing countries, these losses are
generally not insured and imply a constant leakage of
resources from development budgets to deal with relief and reconstruction, as well as the steady erosion of
livelihoods, rendering vulnerable countries even more
vulnerable.

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

For example, annual average disaster losses in Mexico,
in the built environment alone, have been estimated at
US$2.9 billion per year (ERN-AL, 2010). Current analysis of MDG monitoring suggests that incremental international aid of US$35 billion will be required annually
from 2010 until 2015 to raise the standard of living of
the nearly 1 billion people who live below the US$1.25
per capita income line, as well as to achieve the other
MDGs (UNDP, 2010). Nearly US$8 billion is required to
provide access to safe drinking water to those without
access. While the current ﬁnancial crisis is constraining
abilities to increase aid ﬂows, billions of US$ of development funding are being re-directed every year to
restore development assets damaged or destroyed by
disasters.

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of fatalities (thousands)

WWDR4

Losses in agricultural production are particularly signiﬁcant (Box 27.3). The United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

603

(ECLAC) estimates that annual losses of US$1.3 billion
have been associated with drought and other climate
related hazards in Central America since 1975 (ECLAC,
2002). This represents more than 10% of the region’s
average annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and
nearly 30% of its gross capital formation (Zapata and
Madrigal, 2009).
27.1.3 Reducing the risk of disasters is intrinsic to
development practices
The Global Assessment Reports (GARs) (UNISDR, 2009,
2011) demonstrate that exposure of people and assets to ﬂoods and drought is largely determined by

historical and ongoing investments in infrastructure
and in urban and economic development. In the case
of small islands, often the entire territory is exposed.
Levels of disaster-related risk are socially constructed, often over long periods, by layers of decisions and
investments by individuals, households, communities,
private businesses and governments. Physical hazards
may be modiﬁed. For example, a decision to drain wetlands may increase ﬂood hazard in a city downstream.
Similarly, the amount of people and assets exposed
may increase due to decisions to locate economic and
urban development in hazard-prone areas. However,
choosing to live in hazard-prone areas may be the lesser evil for poor households. Older people and women
are particularly vulnerable to these factors.

BOX 27.3
Example of drought impacts
Global data on drought impacts remains uncertain.
However, local and regional examples provide a better understanding of the impacts of drought:
đƫƫƫ*ƫ0$!ƫ.%!*Čƫ 1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫĂĀĀĊĢĂĀāĀƫ .+1#$0Čƫ0$!ƫ
banana harvest on Dominica decreased from 2010 to
2009 by 43%, agricultural production in St Vincent and
the Grenadines was 20% below historic averages, while
in Antigua and Barbuda, onion and tomato crop yields
declined by 25% and 30%, respectively (UNISDR, 2011).
đƫƫƫ1/0.(%ƫ!4,!.%!*! ƫ(+//!/ƫ+"ƫĸĂċăąƫ%((%+*ƫ 1.ing the 2002–2003 drought, reducing national GDP by
1.6%; two-thirds of the losses were agricultural, while
the remaining one-third was attributed to knock-on impacts in other economic sectors (Horridge et al., 2005).
đƫƫƫ1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫĂĀĀĂƫ .+1#$0Čƫ * %Ě/ƫ"++ ƫ#.%*ƫ,.+ 10%+*ƫ
declined by 29 million tonnes, from 212 million tonnes in
2001 to 183 million tonnes in 2002 (Shaw et al., 2010).
đƫƫƫ1!ƫ0+ƫƫ/!2!.!ƫ .+1#$0ƫ%*ƫ5.%ƫ 1.%*#ƫ0$!ƫĂĀĀĈĢĂĀĀĉƫ
growing season, 75% of the country’s farmers experienced total crop failure (Erian et al., 2010); and more
than a year after the drought ended, Syria’s livestock
population was estimated to be 50% below the pre–
drought level (Erian et al., 2010).
đƫƫƫ*ƫ!.8Čƫ.6%(Čƫ#.%1(01.(ƫ .+1#$0ƫ.%/'ƫ%/ƫ+*!*0.0ed among smallholder farmers who do not hold water
.%#$0/ƫ+.ƫ$2!ƫ!//ƫ0+ƫ!.8Ě/ƫ%..%#0%+*ƫ* ƫ30!.Ģ
storage infrastructure, and whose livelihoods depend
entirely on rainfed, dryland agriculture. As a result, GDP
per capita of the rural communities is approximately
one-third that of the urban settlements situated along
the coast, and Human Development Index values of the
rural districts are below 0.65, compared to 0.699 for
.6%(ƫ/ƫƫ3$+(!ƫĨ82%+ƫ .0%*/ČƫĂĀāĀĎƫČƫĂĀāĀĩċ
Source: UNISDR (2011).

604

CHAPTER 27

While public investment usually represents only a small
proportion of total investment in any country – 14% on
average and seldom more than 20% (UNISDR, 2009)
– governments play a key role in shaping risk construction processes, through the effectiveness of planning
and regulation as well as through their own investments in infrastructure and public services.
The GAR (UNISDR, 2009) provided further evidence
that the poor are more exposed and vulnerable to natural hazards. In some countries, the areas that experience most disasters are actually those with the most
dynamic economic and urban growth, or with prosperous rural economies. However, the studies initiated
in the context of the above report provide evidence
to show that communities in poor areas lose a higher
proportion of their assets, conﬁrming that they have
higher levels of vulnerability (Table 27.1).

27.2 Anatomy of disasters: Trends in ﬂood
and drought risk
Observation of ﬂood and drought risk patterns and
trends at the global level permits visualization of the
major concentrations of risk. It also enables identiﬁcation of geographic distribution of disaster risk across
countries, trends over time and the major drivers of
these patterns and trends.
The analysis presented in this chapter was developed by UNEP/GRID Europe PREVIEW (Project for
Risk Evaluation Vulnerability Information and Early
Warning), assisted by an interdisciplinary group of researchers from around the world.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Figure 27.2 shows the updated global distribution of
mortality risk for three weather–related hazards: tropical cyclones, ﬂoods, and landslides provoked by rains
UNEP, 2010). The areas of highest risk visible correspond to areas where concentrations of vulnerable

people are exposed to severe and frequent major hazards. Flood mortality risk is highest in rural areas with
a denser and rapidly growing population in countries
with weak governance.

TABLE 27.1
Summary of case study ﬁndings on the social distribution of disaster loss
Country

Findings

Burkino Faso

The 1984–1985 drought affected the poorest third of a sample of rural households by 10% more
than the wealthier third: the former experienced crop-income losses of 69% versus a 58% drop
for the latter.

Madagascar

Tropical cyclone impacts led to a reduction of 11% in the volume of agricultural production of
the poorest 20% households, compared to a 6% reduction in the case of the richest 20%.

Mexico

Municipalities with the highest number of loss reports also had large percentages of their
population with high or very high levels of marginality, according to an Index of Municipal
Marginality developed by the National Population Council; for example, Acapulco (54.4%),
Coatzocoalcos (54.1%), Juarez (45%), Tapachula (54.1%), Tijuana (31.3%) or Veracruz (31%).
Municipalities with high or very high levels of marginality had high proportions of damaged and
destroyed housing. In one-third of these municipalities, between 10% and 25% of the housing
stock was damaged or destroyed, while in another third this proportion was more than 25%.
Over 20% had more than 50% of their housing stock affected. In contrast, only 8% of the housing
stock was affected in municipalities with low or very low levels of marginality.

Nepal

Areas affected by ﬂoods tended to have lower poverty rates and higher per capita expenditures.
Flooding incidence and impacts are concentrated in the highly productive lowland agricultural plains
of the Terai belt in south-eastern Nepal. As ﬂooding contributes to the soil fertility of the region, it
also contributes to the wealth of the area. Areas affected by landslides tend to have higher poverty
and mortality rates. Landslide impacts are heavily concentrated in districts in mountainous western
Nepal with marginal rainfed agriculture, where the country’s rural poverty is concentrated.

Orissa, India

A statistically signiﬁcant relationship was found between families living in houses with earth
walls and thatch roofs (typically the housing of the poor) and those most affected by tropical
cyclone, ﬂood, ﬁre and lightning. The incidence of extensive risk loss reports was higher in
the central-eastern coastal region, where there are higher levels of urbanization and relatively
affluent agricultural areas on ﬂoodplains and deltas. Mortality in extensive risk disasters was
concentrated in the districts of Bolangir, Kalahandi and Koraput in southern Orissa, which
are characterized by repeated droughts, ﬂoods, food insecurity, chronic income poverty and
localized near-famine conditions.

Peru

Rural households that reported a disaster impact in 2002 had on average less access to public
services, were less well integrated into the market, and had a higher proportion of agricultural
income.

Sri Lanka

A very strong correlation was found between the proportion of the population living below the
poverty line and the number of houses damaged due to ﬂoods; a less strong but signiﬁcant
correlation was found between this population group and houses damaged due to landslides.
This reinforces the case that exposed human settlements and unsafe, vulnerable housing are
poverty factors that increase the likelihood of suffering greater loss due to natural hazard.

Tamil Nadu, India

Mortality in areas with manifestations of extensive ﬂood risk was higher in areas with vulnerable
housing. Similarly, tropical cyclone housing damage was inversely related to the literacy rate. If
literacy is taken to be a proxy for poverty, again this indicates that the poor were more likely to
suffer housing damage typically because their houses are more vulnerable or situated in more
exposed locations. Mortality among the socially and economically excluded scheduled castes
was also higher in blocks with a high proportion of vulnerable housing.

Source: UNISDR (2009, table 3.5, p. 80).

WWDR4

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

605

Across all weather–related hazards, countries with low
GDP and weak governance tend to feature drastically higher mortality risk than wealthier countries with
strong governance.
27.2.1 Flood risk trends
Disaster risk for ﬂoods has been calculated for large
rural ﬂood events, although the risk calculations do
not include ﬂash ﬂoods or urban ﬂooding from inadequate drainage. The geographical distribution of
ﬂood mortality risk mirrors that for exposure (exposed
assets). It is heavily concentrated in Asia, especially
in Bangladesh, China and India. Between them these
countries concentrate 75% of the modelled annual global mortality. Viet Nam also has high absolute
and relative ﬂood risks. The top ten countries at risk
of ﬂoods (based on number of lives lost) are India,
Bangladesh, China, Viet Nam, Cambodia, Myanmar,
Sudan, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Afghanistan and Pakistan (UNEP, 2010).
Between 1970 and 2010 the world’s population increased by 87% (from 3.7 billion to 6.9 billion). In the
same period, the annual average population exposed to
ﬂood increased by 112% (from 33.3 to 70.4 million per
year) (UN-Habitat, 2010). Relatively speaking, more and
more people are living in ﬂoodplains, meaning that the

economic advantages of ﬂood-prone areas for intensive
agriculture, for example, outweigh the perceived risks.
Within income regions, relatively more people are concentrated in ﬂood-prone areas in lower middle-income
countries and, in terms of geographic regions, in East
Asia and the Paciﬁc (Figure 27.3).
As Table 27.2 shows, more than 90% of the global
population exposed to ﬂoods lives in South Asia and
East Asia and in the Paciﬁc. Exposure is growing most
rapidly in the Middle East and in North Africa and subSaharan Africa. In contrast, exposure is stable in countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD), while it is starting to trend
downwards in eastern and south-eastern Europe and
Central Asia, reﬂecting a broader trend of demographic decline.
Global vulnerability to ﬂood hazard was stable in the
1990s, but has subsequently decreased (UNISDR, 2011).
Vulnerability has declined in all regions except Europe
and Central Asia and the OECD countries, where it has
remained stable. As these are regional averages, there
may be countries with increasing vulnerability. But in
general the statistics reﬂect how improved development conditions have reduced vulnerability and led to
strengthened disaster management capacities.

FIGURE 27.2
Hazard mortality risk (ﬂoods, tropical cyclones and precipitation-triggered landslides)

Risk
High

Low

Source: Developed by the GAR team at UNISDR.

606

CHAPTER 27

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Flood mortality risk (Box 27.4) has decreased in all regions since 1990, with the exception of South Asia. In
East Asia and Paciﬁc, in particular, it has decreased by
about two-thirds (UNISDR, 2011).
This growing vulnerability is reﬂected in the challenges faced by South Asia to reduce the impact of the
August 2010 ﬂoods in Pakistan. These ﬂoods killed approximately 1,700 people and caused US$9.7 billion
in damage to infrastructure, farms and homes, as well
as other direct and indirect losses (ADB/World Bank,

2010). The map in Figure 27.4 contrasts modelled ﬂood
hazard and observed ﬂooded areas in Pakistan. As
with any ﬂood event, some areas at risk of ﬂooding did
not ﬂood in August 2010. The model did not highlight
other areas that did ﬂood.
27.2.2 Drought risk trends
Drought risks are only partly associated with deﬁcient or erratic rainfall. Instead, they are primarily triggered by a range of drivers that include poverty and
rural vulnerability; increasing water demand due to

FIGURE 27.3
People exposed to ﬂoods

Absolute: people exposed per year
20 000 000

16 000 000

12 000 000

Relative: people exposed per year, percentage
8 000 000

4 000 000

2

4

6

8

10

Bangladesh

12
Cambodia

India

Bangladesh
China

Viet Nam

Viet Nam

Bhutan

Cambodia

India

Indonesia

Thailand

Thailand
Philippines
Pakistan
Myanmar
Nepal
Brazil
Russian Federation
Nigeria

Nepal
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
Myanmar
Philippines
Benin
Haiti
Guyana
Belize

Sudan

Dominican Republic

Egypt

Mozambique

Republic of Korea
Colombia
United States of Ameria
Mexico

Sri Lanka
New Zealand
Sudan
Indonesia

Source: UNISDR (2009, ﬁg. 2.14, p. 36).

TABLE 27.2
Flood exposure by region (in millions of people per year)
Region

1970

East Asia and Paciﬁc

9.4

11.4

13.9

16.2

18.0

Europe and Central Asia

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.2

1.2

Latin America and the Caribbean

0.6

0.8

1.0

1.2

1.3

Middle East and North Africa

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.5

OECD countries

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.8

1.9

19.3

24.8

31.4

38.2

44.7

0.5

0.7

1.0

1.4

1.8

32.5

40.6

50.5

60.3

69.4

South Asia
Sub–Saharan Africa
World

1980

1990

2000

2010

Sources: Data from PREVIEW ﬂood global model: Landscan 2008 (extrapolated between 1970 to 2010 using UN world population data).

WWDR4

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

607

urbanization, industrialization and the growth of agrobusiness; poor water and soil management; weak or
ineffective governance; and climate change. Unlike
the risks associated with tropical cyclones and ﬂoods,
drought risks remain poorly understood. Drought losses and impacts are not systematically captured, standards for measuring drought hazard have only recently
being introduced, and data collection constraints make
it difficult to accurately model risk in many locations.
Meteorological droughts are usually deﬁned as deﬁciencies in rainfall, from periods ranging from a few
months to several years. Long droughts often change
in intensity over time and undergo geographic shifts,
thereby affecting different areas. Until recently, there
was no agreed global standard for identifying and
measuring meteorological drought. National weather services used different criteria, making it difficult to establish exactly when and where droughts
occur. Consequently, drought has often been confused with other climate conditions such as aridity or
desertiﬁcation.

The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has
recently adopted the Standardized Precipitation Index
(SPI) as a global standard to measure meteorological
droughts, and is encouraging its use by national meteorological and hydrological services (NMHSs), in addition to other indices currently being utilized in each
region.
The SPI (McKee et al., 1993, 1995) is a tool based on
rainfall data, which can identify wet periods/cycles as
well as dry periods/cycles. The SPI compares rainfall at
a given location and during a desired period, normally
from one to twenty-four months (Guttman, 1994), with
long–term mean precipitation at the same location
(Edwards and McKee, 1997). Positive SPI values indicate greater than normal rainfall in the chosen period
and negative SPI values indicate less than normal rainfall (Figure 27.5).
At least 20 to 30 years (optimally 50 to 60 years) of
monthly rainfall data is needed to calculate the SPI
(Guttman, 1994). Given the lack of complete data series in many locations, and the fact that many droughtprone regions do not have sufficient rainfall stations,

BOX 27.4
From the Disaster Risk Index to the Mortality Risk
Index

FIGURE 27.4
Extent of ﬂooding in Pakistan on 30 August 2010
70° E

KABUL

N

ISLAMABAD

A

I

S

Jhelum

m

h

H

N

as

T

K

CHAPTER 27

Wah

Rawalpindi

d

A

Kharian

Sialkot

Kundian
Harnoli

Tank
Dera Ismail
Khan

ir

Gujrat

Mianwali
Lakki Marwat

Gujranwala

Sargodha

Hafizabad
Shekhupura

Chiniot

Bhakkar
Jhang Sadr

Faisalabad

Zhob

Amritsar

Lahore
Kasur

Gojra

Leiah

Chaman

Faridkot

Okara

Kamalia

Taunsa

Sahiwal
Mian Channan

Quetta
Dera Ghazi Khan

0° N

Multan

Mastung

Burewala
Bahawalnager

30° N

Dhanot

Sibi

Samasata

Jacobabad

Pakistan Flood
Maximum Extent

Rahim Yar Khan

as of 30 August 2010

Shikarpur
Rohri
Larkana
Sukkur
Khairpur

Observed AND modelled
Observed NOT modelled
Model

Dadu

I N D I A

Nawabshah

Tando Adam

Hyderabad

Mirpur Khas
0

608

Srinagar

an

G
A F

5° N

Source: Peduzzi et al. (2009); UNISDR (2011).

Nowshera
Attock City

Kohat

Line of
Control

75° E

mu

Mardan
Peshawar

Kandahar

The improved estimates of global disaster risk were made
possible thanks to higher model resolutions and more
complete data on geographic and physical hazard event
characteristics, especially for ﬂoods, tropical cyclones and
earthquakes. They also beneﬁted from higher resolution
exposure data on population and economic assets (subnational GDP). The main improvement came from the
‘event per event analysis’. Previous global studies such as
the DRI used a 21-year returning period on average. This
prevented the computation of speciﬁc event intensity.
By analysing individual events and linking a hazard event
outcome (i.e. losses) with the geographic, physical and
socio-economical characteristics of the event, the model
can incorporate more adequately the contextual conditions in which each disaster occurred.

Jam

The second World Water Development Report used the
Disaster Risk Index (DRI) as the main indicator for monitoring ﬂood and drought risk. This approach was subsequently reviewed and several institutions joined their
efforts over a two-year period to develop a new methodology for the global modelling of hazards: the Mortality
Risk Index (MRI).

Karachi

50

100

70° E

200 Kilometres

Permanent
water

Elevation
Metres
2 500

Urban areas

1 000

International
boundary

250

500

Province
boundary

100

District
boundary

25

50
25° N

Source: UNISDR (2011, ﬁg. 2.13, p. 30).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

political crisis. Only weak correlations were found between the population exposed to meteorological drought
and attributed mortality (UNDP, 2004). Drought impacts
on human development provide a much more satisfactory metric than mortality for calculating human risk. But
while these impacts are captured in locally speciﬁc micro–
studies (de la Fuente and Dercon, 2008), systematic data
is not available to calibrate a global risk model.

many users have to apply interpolation techniques to
ﬁll in temporal and geographic gaps in the data.
The application of SPI will strengthen the capacity
of countries to monitor and assess meteorological
drought. Despite its simplicity, however, many countries are challenged by the low density of rainfall stations in some areas and their decline in number, given
the low priority given to hazard monitoring in government budgets. Since the mid–1970s, for example,
the number of rainfall stations maintained by Spain’s
national meteorological agency, AEMET, has declined
from 4,800 to approximately 2,600 (Mestre, 2010).

27.3 Water-related disaster risk drivers
Understanding the underlying drivers of risk for ﬂoods
and droughts is the cornerstone of any effort to reduce
risk and future impacts. The examples provided below
show that climate change, increasing poverty and inequality, and badly planned and managed urban and regional development all contribute to increasing the risk
of natural hazards.

Global drought risk models were developed in the context of earlier assessments of disaster risk (Dilley et
al., 2005; UNDP, 2004). But the mortality drought risk
index proposed by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) was unsuccessful because most
droughts do not produce fatalities and most major recorded mortality, in sub-Saharan Africa for example,
is concentrated in countries experiencing conﬂict or

27.3.1 Climate change
As the reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) have made clear, climate
change leads to gradual changes in variables such as

FIGURE 27.5

0
S

S

Latitude

N



Interpolated global map product for the six-month Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI)
(April–September 2010)

W W

W

W

W

0

E

E

E

E

E

 E

Longitude
Note: The map shows the global distribution of meteorological drought at the end of September 2010 using a six–month SPI. It highlights the
drought in Russia associated with wildﬁres, as well as droughts in western Brazil, a normally humid climate, and southern Africa.
The green shading, from light green to dark green, shows increasing SPI values from 1.0 to 3.0 (moderately wet to extremely wet). The red
shading, from light red to dark red, shows SPI values from –1.0 to –3.0 (moderately dry to extremely dry).
Source: International Research Institute for Climate and Society Data Library, Columbia University (see http://iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu/maproom/.
Global/.Precipitation/SPI.html).

WWDR4

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

609

average temperature, sea level, and the timing and
amount of precipitation. Climate change also contributes to more frequent, severe and unpredictable
hazards such as cyclones, ﬂoods and heatwaves –
‘extreme weather events’ (IPCC, 2007). Other climate
phenomena such as La Niña are thought to be linked
to the ﬂoods and landslides that occurred from April
to December 2010 in Colombia, and the ﬂoods in
Queensland, Australia, which were triggered by rains
that began in December 2010.
Economies that rely on primary resources and climatesensitive sectors like agriculture are more vulnerable
to greater climate variability and changes in average precipitation and temperature (OECD, 2010). For
example, a warming of 2°C could result in a 4%–5%
permanent reduction in annual per capita income in
Africa and South Asia, compared with minimal losses
(approximately 1%) in developed and larger developing
countries (World Bank, 2010). These economies are ill
prepared to absorb such decreases in income.
27.3.2 Weak risk governance capacities
Despite increased global awareness of disaster risk
and climate change, and greater political commitment (as reﬂected in regional ministerial declarations
in Africa [Declaration of the Second African Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, Nairobi,
14–16 April 2010] and Asia [Third Asian Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, Kuala Lumpur,
2–4 December 2008]), disaster risk reduction and
management has been only timidly incorporated into
development planning, and the institutional mechanisms required for such integration are still emerging
(UNISDR, 2009). In addition, many bilateral and multilateral country assistance strategies for countries facing well-known risks are not planned with a risk sensitive lens. The outcome is that the exposure of people
and assets to climate-related hazards is increasing
faster than many low-income countries are able to
reduce their vulnerabilities. Such countries often have
difficulties in addressing underlying risk drivers such
as ecosystem decline, poverty and badly planned and
managed urbanization. The outcome is a rapid increase in the number of and loss of assets in disasters.
27.3.3 Badly planned and managed urban
development
Informal settlements, inadequate housing, non-existent services and poor health are reﬂections of poverty.
However, they are also reﬂections of weaknesses in

610

CHAPTER 27

the way urban growth is planned and managed. One
example of an informal settlement called ‘9 October’
in Lima, Peru, shows the relationship between poverty, poor planning and disaster impact. This particular hillside was urbanized informally from the bottom
upwards by nearby agricultural workers. Multi-storey
concrete and brick houses soon replaced early constructions of bamboo matting. By the 1990s,
9 October had a population of more than 1,300, as
well as domestic electricity, water and telephone
connections, and property titles. In 1999, a local development plan classiﬁed the area as a zone of environmental risk and social vulnerability due to high
salinity in the soil which was eroding foundations
and containing walls; two and three-storey houses
occupying unstable sites without load-bearing capacity; and leaks from a deteriorated water and sanitation network, which were causing subterranean
erosion. In June 2003, part of the hillside subsided
and collapsed, damaging 280 houses of which 70
were destroyed. (UNISDR, 2009, p. 100)
Disaster risk may be increasing fastest in rapidly growing small and medium-sized urban centres than in either rural areas or larger cities. Large and megacities
generally have stronger risk governance and investment capacities than small and medium cities. This
ﬁnding is supported by the fact that in most Latin
American countries, the number of disasters reported
is increasing at a faster rate than in large urban centres
and megacities (Mansilla, 2010). More than 80% of all
reports of disaster loss in Latin America occur in urban
areas. While each country has a different urban structure, between 40% and 70% of all nationally reported
disasters occur in urban centres of less than 100,000
inhabitants, and between 14% and 36% take place in
small urban centres. This proportion is growing. In
Mexico, for example, small and medium urban centres
accounted for 45.5% of total disaster municipal loss reports in the 1980s, but 54% since 2000.
27.3.4 Poverty and rural vulnerability
Within countries, poorer areas tend to have higher
disaster risk, mirroring global patterns and illustrating
the complex interactions between poverty and disaster risk analysed in detail in the Global Assessment
Report 2009, as presented previously in the summary
of case study ﬁndings on the social distribution of disaster loss. An exercise in Colombia showed that those
municipalities with a greater proportion of unsatisﬁed

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

basic needs and lower GDP per capita were more likely
to experience a higher number of people affected and
more houses damaged in ﬂoods (OSSO, 2011).
Rural poverty is both a cause and a symptom of
drought risk in Kenya’s Mwingi district. Between 70%
and 80% of Mwingi’s population depends on rainfed
agriculture and livestock production for both food and
income, and 60% of the population subsists on US$1
per day or less (Galu et al., 2010). Therefore, when
drought occurs it can wipe out income and investments, leaving communities with limited means to
buffer losses. During the 2008–2009 drought, for
example, 70% of the population depended on food aid
(Galu et al., 2010). While this massive relief successfully
averted a food security crisis, it reveals the extreme
vulnerability of many rural agricultural and agropastoral livelihoods.
Poor rural households, whose livelihoods depend on
rainfed subsistence agriculture, are almost always the
social group most exposed and vulnerable to drought.
In many countries, they have been historically forced
to occupy marginal drought-exposed land. And they
often lack the resources to access irrigation technology
or drought-resistant seeds, which could reduce their
vulnerability. For example, sub-Saharan Africa’s water
storage facilities are severely under-developed, with a
per capita storage capacity of 200 m3 per year on average (as compared to 1,277 m3 for Thailand and 5,961
m3 for North America) (Foster and Briceno–Garmendia,
2010; Grey and Sadoff, 2006).

water management and land tenure policies date back
to the 1910 revolution, and are based on communal
ownership of land and water by smallholder farmers
known as ejido – 25% of whom live in abject poverty.
Nowadays, the ejido cannot compete with large farmers and agribusinesses. In the state of Sonora, nearly
75% of irrigation water is allocated to this sector, increasing the agricultural drought risk of the ejido (Neri
and Briones, 2010).
27.3.5 Ecosystem degradation
Many ecosystems have been intentionally or unintentionally modiﬁed to increase the supply of certain
categories of services, and institutions have been developed to govern access to, and use of, these services. However, because ecosystems produce many
services simultaneously, an increase in the supply of
one service, such as food, can frequently lead to declines in other services, such as ﬂood protection. The
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment identiﬁed modiﬁcations to ecosystems that have unintentionally led to
the decline of regulating ecosystem services, including
those responsible for reducing people’s exposure to
hazards, such as ﬁres and ﬂoods.
Water management also affects the provision of ecosystem services in ways that modify levels of disaster
risk. For example, the increasing demand on rivers for
irrigation, as well as extraction of water for industrial and domestic use, reduces the sedimentation that

BOX 27.5
Groups of countries with small and vulnerable economies, such as many small island developing states
(SIDS), land-locked developing countries (LLDCs) and
least developed countries (LDCs), would appear to
have particular difficulties in absorbing and recovering
from disaster impacts (Corrales and Miquelena, 2008;
Noy, 2009). SIDS, for example, often have higher relative disaster risk than larger countries because almost
all of their population and assets are exposed to hazards such as tropical cyclones (Kelman, 2010; UNISDR,
2009), while their economies may be concentrated
around a single vulnerable sector, such as tourism.
The expansion of intensive market agriculture and urbanization can lead to the sale of water rights, pushing
the rural poor to farm marginal lands more intensively,
and thereby increasing their drought risk further still
(Fitzhugh and Richter, 2004). For example, Mexico’s

WWDR4

The Mississippi wetlands

The drainage of approximately 4,800 km2 of wetlands
in the Mississippi Delta in the United States of America
was one of the underlying factors behind the scale of the
ﬂooding associated with hurricane Katrina. Many areas
formerly above sea level lay below sea level at the time of
Katrina as a result of wetland drainage, while the capacity of the wetlands to dissipate storm surge and absorb
ﬂoodwaters had diminished. The forested riparian wetlands adjacent to the Mississippi River during pre-settlement times had the capacity to store about sixty days
of river discharge. Today, the few remaining wetlands
have a reduced storage capacity of less than twelve days
discharge, implying an 80% reduction in ﬂood storage
capacity. This loss of wetlands also contributed substantially to the severity and damage experienced in the 1993
Mississippi Basin ﬂood.

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

611

reaches the coast. This can affect downstream agricultural yields and ﬁsh productivity, damage the health
of coastal wetlands, and increase coastal ﬂood hazard
levels. Excessive groundwater extraction is leading to
a potentially irreversible degradation of aquifers, again
with compound effects on rural livelihoods. Coastal
and inland wetlands have a critical inﬂuence on both
livelihoods and the regulation of ﬂood and drought
(Box 27.5).

27.4 Methodologies and tools for reducing
water-related hazard risk
The elements that constitute effective methods and
tools to reduce water-related hazard risk are context
speciﬁc, as well as dependant on the perspective of
the respective experts and institutions engaged.
During the analytical work undertaken for this chapter
it became apparent that the identiﬁcation of the most
appropriate and effective methods and tools is seldom
based on a sufficiently broad understanding of the underlying problem. For the meteorological community,
the best approach to ﬂoods lies in better forecasting
and issuing of early warnings, while for a ministry of
infrastructure, the optimal approach will be structural
in nature, such as the dams and levees required for
both water storage and ﬂood control. Of course,
experience shows that a combination of different
approaches is most effective. The cost–beneﬁt of
preventive investment against post-disaster ﬁnancing
mechanisms is also insufficiently taken into account.
Post-disaster approaches include catastrophic risk ﬁnancing and other insurance mechanisms, and the
disbursement of response funds.
The World Conference on Disaster Reduction in Kobe,
Japan in 2005 concluded a ground-breaking agreement that provides a clear mandate for action to reduce disaster risks; namely, the Hyogo Framework for
Action 2005–2015: Building the Resilience of Nations
and Communities to Disasters. The over-riding expected outcome of the Hyogo Framework for Action is the
‘substantial reduction of disaster losses, in lives and in
the social, economic and environmental assets of communities and states’.
The Hyogo Framework emphasizes that disaster risk
reduction is a central issue for development policies, as
well as being of interest to various scientiﬁc, humanitarian and environmental ﬁelds, stressing that without
concerted efforts to address disaster losses, disasters

612

CHAPTER 27

will become an increasingly evident obstacle to the
achievement of the MDGs.
While the Hyogo Framework for Action provides a
comprehensive set of actions that a country can take
to strengthen its risk governance capacities, it does
not provide a set of tools and methods from which
national and local authorities can establish the most
socially, environmentally and economical approaches
to reduce risk.
Methods and tools are required to correct existing risk
levels through actions such as retroﬁtting buildings,
relocating settlements and restoring ecosystems. This,
however, is more expensive than avoiding such risks in
the ﬁrst place. Given the high level of recurrent losses,
it is usually cost-effective to correct the risks related
to frequent recurrent disasters, but increasingly less so
for very high intensity but less frequent events, given
the costs involved and long periods before beneﬁts are
potentially realized. However, investments to protect
critical facilities, such as schools and health facilities,
against more extreme risks may be justiﬁed, for both
economic and political reasons. For example, if a city
government invests to relocate squatter settlements
subject to recurrent ﬂooding along a cyclone-prone
coastline, this relocation programme will not only lead
to a short-term reduction in high-frequency, low-severity losses associated with the ﬂoods, but would
also reduce the periodic cyclone losses. In contrast, in
other contexts, protecting an area against 100-year
ﬂoods may encourage greater investment in the area,
leading to increased losses in the event of a 500-year
ﬂood. Ultimately, all investments in risk reduction involve trade-offs between different social and economic
objectives.
For certain intensive risks that cannot be reduced costeffectively, risk transfer measures such as insurance
and catastrophe risk pools/bonds can mitigate disaster
impacts on physical assets and enhance the ability of
governments to respond. One model that has demonstrated some success is the Caribbean Catastrophe
Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). This risk-pooling facility is operated in the Caribbean for Caribbean governments. It is designed to limit the ﬁnancial impact of
catastrophic hurricanes and earthquakes on Caribbean
governments by quickly providing short-term liquidity
when a policy is triggered. Since 2007, 16 Caribbean
governments have included CCRIF parametric insurance policies against hurricanes and earthquakes

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

as part of their countries’ disaster risk management
portfolios. An example of the kind of payout provided
by CCRIF is the US$6.3 million paid to the Turks and
Caicos Islands after hurricane Ike made a direct hit in
September 2008 (World Bank, 2010). However, the
limited scale of the payouts in the context of growing
levels of risk is becoming a concern for governments.
The payout for Haiti following the 12 January 2010
earthquake was only US$7.75 million.
Traditional disaster management, including effective
early warning, preparedness and response, is essential
to strengthening resilience to and facilitating recovery

BOX 27.6
Micro-lending to assist watershed restoration and
development in Maharashtra State, India
In the semi-arid region of Maharashtra State in India, the
Watershed Organization Trust is assisting poor rural communities to increase their livelihood security by supporting watershed restoration projects. The combination of recurring droughts and human pressures on the surrounding
land has degraded watersheds. This decrease in soil fertility and water availability has created drought-stressed
communities vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
Working on a micro-catchment basis, rigorous watershed
restoration measures designed to regenerate and conserve micro-catchments have been undertaken, including
soil, land and water management (e.g. trench building to
control erosion, improve soil fertility and enhance groundwater recharge); crop management; afforestation and rural energy management (e.g. a ban on tree-felling, instead
planting shrubs and grass to meet household fuel needs);
and livestock management and pasture/fodder development (e.g. grazing restrictions leading to the natural regeneration of grass and shrubs). These projects have been
supported by other measures, including micro-lending,
training in new techniques and the formation of self-help
groups, to diversify livelihoods.
Increased soil cover, improved soil moisture regimes,
increased well water levels, biomass regeneration, and
dramatic increases in fodder availability, milk production
and vegetable farming are some of the results reported
by participating villages. Coupled with micro-enterprise
development and an increase in savings groups, these results have translated into more secure livelihoods, diversiﬁed asset bases and reduced exposure to climate-related
shocks.

Source: IISD et al. (2003).

WWDR4

from all manifestations of risk. A number of developing
countries have made signiﬁcant progress in this area, resulting in saved lives. Almost all households (98%) have
access to radio and TV in Cuba; consequently, these
comprise the main communication channels used by
the national meteorological service (with government
authority) to issue tropical cyclone and related ﬂood
warnings. In Bangladesh, far fewer people have televisions and radios, so the Bangladesh Meteorological
Department conveys cyclone and storm surge warnings
through multiple channels (fax, Internet, radio and TV).
But the centralized warning centre of the Bangladesh
Cyclone Preparedness Programme ensures that the
warnings reach coastal communities. The centre alerts
a network of volunteers through HF/VHF radio broadcasts, and they in turn fan out into the communities to
warn the people (WMO, 2009).
There are likely to be greater incentives for reducing
risks associated with water-related hazards when such
instruments address the needs of a number of stakeholders and competing priorities simultaneously; for example, if better water management not only addresses
drought risk, but also increases hydro-energy generation, water-storage capacity for agricultural use, and the
availability of domestic drinking water. In general, these
incentives are stronger when reduction in risk to waterrelated hazards contributes visibly to improved economic and social well–being and choice for each citizen.
A number of countries, however, are now innovating and building approaches to reducing risk related
to water-related hazards into existing development
instruments – in areas such as public investment
planning, ecosystem management, urban development and social protection (Box 27.6). While many of
these innovations are still in their early stages, they
hold the promise of exponentially increasing the impact of reducing risk related to water-related hazards.
Importantly they also contribute to other social and
economic development goals, which in turn feed back
into reduced risk. The upgrading of inefficient, ageing
water and drainage infrastructure, if planned from a
risk reduction perspective, can reduce vulnerability to
drought and ﬂoods, while improving the quality of water and sanitation.
This section of the report has presented different
methods and tools to address water-related hazard
risk and will be augmented in future with more systematic measures of effectiveness.

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

613

27.5 Emerging approaches to reduce ﬂood
and drought hazard risk
27.5.1 Land-use planning and building
The ways in which land is used in cities and how buildings, infrastructure and networks are designed and
constructed have a decisive impact on exposure, and
whether a country’s accumulated risk increases or decreases. As such, land-use planning is a prime instrument for reducing risk related to water-related hazards.
If existing and potential hazards are taken into account
in land-use decisions, new risks could be avoided and
existing risks reduced over time. Decisions on land
use underpin most risk construction, given that once
investments in infrastructure, housing and other facilities have been made in hazardous locations, the risk is
locked in place for decades or more.
In a number of cities in Colombia, disaster risk reduction has been incorporated as an integral part
of improvements in urban and local governance. In
Manizales, an innovative cross-subsidized insurance
scheme called Predio Seguro, supported by the city
government, has enabled poor households to obtain
catastrophe insurance cover. The city government, in
partnership with women’s groups in informal settlements, also invests in stabilizing slopes in landslide
prone informal settlements (Cardona, 2009).
27.5.2 Ecosystem management
Protecting ecosystems that will, in turn, reduce the risk
of natural hazards such as ﬂoods and drought, requires
actions at different scales, the participation of a wide
array of stakeholders, and different bodies of knowledge – scientiﬁc, technical, local and traditional.
Dense vegetation cover within upper watershed areas
increases inﬁltration of rainfall as opposed to surface
runoff, reducing peak ﬂow rates except in the most extreme conditions when soils are already fully saturated. Vegetation also protects against erosion, thereby
reducing soil loss and the transport of mud and rock
that greatly increase the destructive power of ﬂoodwaters. Dense vegetation also protects riverbanks and
adjacent land structures from erosion by ﬂoodwaters.
Wetlands and ﬂoodplain soils absorb water, reducing
peak ﬂow rates downstream (World Bank, 2010).
A study around Mantadia National Park, Madagascar,
concluded that conversion from primary forest to
swidden (area cleared for temporary cultivation by
cutting and burning the vegetation) can increase

614

CHAPTER 27

downstream storm ﬂow by as much as 4.5 times
(Stolton et al., 2008).
In the case of ecosystem restoration, the avoided
costs may signiﬁcantly exceed the restoration costs
(Box 27.7). In Viet Nam, for example, the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent societies (IFRC) planted and protected 12,000 ha of mangroves, an action that cost approximately US$1 million, but reduced the costs of sea dyke maintenance by
US$7.3 million per year. Moreover, the co-beneﬁts may
also greatly exceed the opportunity costs. For example, the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment estimated
that the value of healthy coastal mangroves as nurseries, pollution ﬁlters and coastal defences is US$1,000
to US$36,000 for mangrove value versus US$200 per
ha for shrimp farming (MA, 2005). ‘In Malaysia, the

BOX 27.7
Examples showing the value of ecosystem services
to reducing disaster risk
đƫƫƫ/ƫ+/0(ƫ !"!*!/Čƫ)*#.+2!ƫ"+.!/0/ƫ%*ƫ (5/%ƫ
have been estimated to have an economic value of
US$300,000 per km based on comparison with engineered alternatives (ProAct, 2008).
đƫƫƫ%*!ƫāĊĊąČƫ+))1*%0%!/ƫ$2!ƫ!!*ƫ,(*0%*#ƫ* ƫ,.+tecting mangrove forests in northern Viet Nam to buffer
against storms. An initial investment of US$1.1 million
saved an estimated US$7.3 million a year in sea dyke
maintenance and appeared to signiﬁcantly reduce losses of life and property from typhoon Wukong in 2000,
compared with other areas (WWF, 2008).
đƫƫƫ*ƫ0$!ƫ 1ö*%!ƫý++ ,(%*ƫĢƫ+*!ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ(/0ƫý++ ,(%*/ƫ
in the Czech Republic with an unaltered hydrological regime – 470 ha have monetary values per hectare
of US$11,788 for ﬂood mitigation (water retention),
US$15,000 for biodiversity, US$144 for carbon sequestration, US$78 for hay production, US$37 for ﬁsh production and US$21 for wood production (ProAct, 2008).
đƫƫƫ$!ƫ!+*+)%ƫ2(1!ƫ+"ƫ"+.!/0/ƫ"+.ƫ,.!2!*0%*#ƫ2lanches is estimated at around US$100 per ha per year
in open expanses of land in the Swiss Alps, and up to
more than US$170,000 per ha per year in areas with
valuable assets (ProAct, 2008).
đƫƫƫƫ.!!*0ƫ/01 5ƫ+*ƫ0$!ƫ.+(!ƫ+"ƫ3!0(* /ƫ%*ƫ.! 1%*#ƫ
ﬂooding associated with hurricanes in the United States
of America calculated an average value of US$8,240
per ha per year, with coastal wetlands estimated to provide US$23.2 billion per year in storm protection services (Costanza et al., 2008).
Source: World Bank (2010).

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

economic value of mangroves as coastal defences
has been estimated at US$300,000 per km, taking
into account the costs of hard engineering work to
achieve the same protective effect’ (UNISDR, 2009). In
Switzerland, the economic value of forests in preventing avalanches is valued at US$100 per ha per year in
open areas, but up to US$170,000 in areas with highvalue assets (World Bank, 2010).
At the same time, ecosystems often provide important co-beneﬁts if properly managed. Some of the
most fertile agricultural land on the planet depends
on regular ﬂooding to recharge the soil with nutrients.
Flooding can also recharge aquifers in semi-arid areas
or transport vital sediments and nutrients to sustain
coastal ﬁsheries in other areas.
27.5.3 Social protection: Increasing resilience to
disasters
There are two compelling reasons why social protection can be a strategic mechanism for the management
of water hazards. First, social protection instruments
(community cohesion, healthcare facilities, accommodation insurance, etc.) can be adapted to enhance
the disaster resilience of individuals and households,
as well as providing important beneﬁts in terms of
poverty reduction and human capital development.
Second, many of these instruments are already being
delivered on a large scale, which make them a powerful tool for reducing the risk associated with ﬂoods and
drought. Existing mechanisms for social protection can
thus usually be used to encompass large numbers of
disaster-prone households and communities through
relatively minor adaptations of targeting criteria and
timeframes, and often with relatively low additional
costs.
The countries best able to develop effective social protection for risk–prone households and individuals are
those that already have requisite social policies backed
up by a wide range of legislative provisions (ERD,
2010). They include labour market laws (including the
regulation of unemployment beneﬁts), health and safety regulations in the work place, basic entitlements and
welfare payments, and the stipulation of affirmative action for marginal groups. Countries that have strongly
developed social legislation, corresponding regulation,
and up–to–date public registries ﬁnd it easier to embed both targeted and universal social protection as an
instrument for reducing water-related hazard risks.

WWDR4

27.5.4 Adapting to climate change
Climate change adaptation can be understood in terms
of both (a) adapting development to gradual changes
in average temperature, sea level and precipitation;
and (b) reducing and managing the risks associated
with more frequent, severe and unpredictable extreme
weather events.
There is evidence that the momentum to develop
country-level adaptation programming owes more to
the perceived opportunity to access climate change
funding mechanisms than to social demand for adaptation. But given that in practice most adaptation
measures address disaster risks, adaptation provides
an additional set of instruments and mechanisms for
reducing water-related hazard risk.
As with disaster risk reduction, adaptation measures
can generate beneﬁts at the appropriate scale only
when they are integrated into mainstream development planning and public investment decisions (ECA,
2009). Unfortunately, many climate change adaptation initiatives are still conceived of and implemented
as stand–alone projects. Governments’ failure to integrate efforts to reduce water-related hazard risk and
climate change adaptation into national and sector
development planning and investment perpetuates the
misconception that climate change adaptation is predominantly an environmental issue, rather than a core
component of development, and that reducing waterrelated hazard risk is limited to early warning insurance and disaster preparedness and response (Mercer,
2010).
The inability to recognize the links between adaptation,
disaster risk reduction and development processes
leads to an inaccurate understanding of climaterelated risks. As a result, there is a tendency to emphasize the use of risk transfer measures for managing
extreme events, rather than adopting a more comprehensive approach that also reduces the extensive risks
upon which climate change will have the greatest impact in the short term.

27.6 Conclusions and required actions
27.6.1 Disaster trends
The exponential increase in the damage associated
with highly localized ﬂash and urban ﬂooding, landslides, ﬁres, storms and torrential rains in many low
and middle-income countries provide a real-time indicator of the accumulation of risk (Box 27.1). Most

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

615

of these losses disproportionately affect low-income
households and communities and go largely unaccounted for. In other words, there is a social distribution of disaster loss.
In most of the world, the risk of being killed by a tropical cyclone or a major river ﬂood is lower than in 1990.
Countries are successfully strengthening their capacities for early warning, preparedness and disaster
response. However, drought impact still goes largely
unaccounted for and falls on poor rural households. As
a result there may be little political or economic incentive to address it.

through the adoption of regulatory and other legal
measures, institutional reform, improved analytical and
methodological capabilities, appropriate technologies,
capacity-building, ﬁnancial planning, public education,
community involvement and awareness-raising. This
approach would also provide a cost-effective and ﬁrst
barrier against climate change impacts.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
In most countries drought risk management is remedial, emphasizing early warning, response and insurance rather than policies that address the underlying
risk drivers. Institutionally, drought risk reduction and
management are rarely integrated into either national disaster risk reduction or other policy frameworks
such as water management (e.g. IWRM). But given
the evidence of rapidly increasing impacts and climate
projections through the end of this century, the need
to address drought risk and its underlying drivers will
be fundamental to the sustainability of many countries
and localities over the coming decades.
27.6.2 Integrated measures
A balanced portfolio of measures and investments
that reduce ﬂood and drought risk is likely to improve
social and economic development. Such measures include development and land-use planning; targeted
investments, for example, through retroﬁtting critical
facilities such as schools and hospitals; risk transfer
schemes to protect against the most intensive risks;
and investment in social protection and disaster management. Thus, if on the one hand disaster risk reduction programmes improve development, on the other
hand development programmes should integrate a disaster risk reduction aspect, including it into their portfolio. Perhaps the most strategic of these instruments
is a country’s national planning and public investment
system (see Section 27.1.3).
Mainstreaming disaster risk reduction in national
planning and public investment system decisions is
a potentially very high impact strategy, particularly
considering the scale and volume of public investment, infrastructure and public asset, particularly in
middle-income countries. This include the incorporation of water-related disaster risk reduction into IWRM

616

CHAPTER 27

ADB (Asian Development Bank)/World Bank. 2010.
Preliminary Floods Damage and Needs Assessment.
Islamabad, Pakistan, ADB/World Bank.
Cardona, O. D. 2009. La gestión ﬁnanciera del riesgo
de desastres: Instrumentos ﬁnancieros de retención y
transferencia para la comunidad andina. Lima, PREDECAN,
Comunidad Andina.
Corrales, W. and Miquelena, T. 2008. Disasters in Developing
Countries’ Sustainable Development: A Conceptual
Framework for Strategic Action. Background paper for
the 2009 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
Costanza, R., Perez-Maqueo, O., Martinez, M. L., Sutton, P.,
Anderson, S. J. and Mulder, K. 2008. The value of coastal
wetlands for hurricane protection. AMBIO: A Journal of the
Human Environment, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 241–8.
CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology for
Disasters). 2011. Annual Disaster Statistical Review 2010:
The Numbers and Trends. Brussels, Université Catholique
de Louvain. http://www.cred.be/sites/default/ﬁles/
ADSR_2010.pdf
de la Fuente, A. and Dercon, S. 2008. Disasters, Growth and
Poverty in Africa: Revisiting the Microeconomic Evidence.
Background for the 2009 Global Assessment Report on
Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
Dilley, M., Chen, R., Deichmann, W., Lerner-Lam, A. L. and
Arnold, M. 2005. Natural Disaster Hotspots. Washington
DC, The World Bank.
ECA (Economics of Climate Adaptation). 2009. Shaping
Climate Adaptation: A Framework for Decision-making.
New York, McKinsey & Company.
ECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean). 2002. Handbook for
Estimating the Socio-economic and Environmental Effects
of Disasters. Report LC/MEX/L.519. Mexico City, ECLAC.
Edwards, D. and McKee, T. 1997. Characteristics of 20th
Century Drought in the United States at Multiple Time
Scales. Climatology Report No. 97-2. Fort Collins, Colo.,
Colorado State University.

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

EM-DAT (OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database). 2010.
Global ‘Number Killed’ and ‘Number Affected’ by Drought
Between 1900–2009. Brussels, Université Catholique de
Louvain.

Mansilla, E. 2010. Riesgo urbano y políticas públicas en
America Latina: La irregularidad y el acceso al suelo.
Background paper for the 2011 Global Assessment Report
on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.

Erian, W., Katlan, B. and Babah, O. 2010. Drought Vulnerability
in the Arab Region: Special Case Study: Syria. Background
paper for the 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster
Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.

McKee, T. B., Doesken, N. J. and Kleist, J., 1993. The
relationship of drought frequency and duration to time
scales. Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Applied
Climatology, Anaheim, Calif., 17–22 January, pp. 179–84.

ERD (European Report on Development). 2010. Social
Protection for Inclusive Development – A New Perspective
on EU Cooperation with Africa. The 2010 European report
on development. Draft. Florence, Italy, Robert Schuman
Centre for Advanced Studies, European University Institute.
ERN-AL (Evaluacion de Riescos Naturales-America Latina).
2010. Probabilistic Modelling of Natural Risks at the Global
Level. Background paper for the 2011 United Nations Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva,
UNISDR.
Fitzhugh, T. and Richter, B. 2004. Quenching urban thirst:
Growing cities and their impacts on freshwater ecosystems.
BioScience, Vol. 54, No. 8, pp. 741–54.
Foster, V. and Briceno-Garmendia, C. 2010. Africa’s
Infrastructure. A Time for Transformation. Washington DC,
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(IBRD)/The World Bank.
Galu, G., Kere, J., Funk, C. and Husak, G. 2010. Case Study
on Understanding Food Security Trends and Development
of Decision-support Tools and their Impact on Vulnerable
Livelihoods in East Africa. Background paper for the 2011
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.
Geneva, UNISDR.
Grey, D. and Sadoff, C. 2006. Water for Growth and
Development. Thematic documents of the 4th World Water
Forum. Mexico City, Comision Nacional del Agua.
Guttman, N. 1994. On the sensitivity of sample L moments to
sample size. Journal of Climatology, Vol. 7, pp. 1026–9.
Horridge, M., Madden, J. and Wittwer, G. 2005. The impacts
of the 2002–2003 drought on Australia. Journal of Policy
Modeling, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 285–308.
IISD (International Institute for Sustainable Development).
2003. Livelihoods and Climate Change: Combining Disaster
Risk Reduction, Natural Resource Management and Climate
Change Adaptation in a New Approach to the Reduction of
Vulnerability and Poverty. Winnipeg, Canada, IISD.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2007.
Summary for policymakers. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani,
J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden and C. E. Hanson
(eds) Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC. Cambridge, UK,
Cambridge University Press, pp. 7–22.
Kelman, I. 2010. Policy arena: Introduction to climate,
disasters and international development. Journal of
International Development, Vol. 22, pp. 208–17.
MA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. Washington DC, World
Resources Institute.

WWDR4

––––. 1995. Drought Monitoring with Multiple Time Scales.
Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Applied
Climatology. Boston, USA, American Meteorological
Society.
Mercer, J. 2010. Disaster risk reduction or climate change
adaptation: Are we reinventing the wheel? Journal of
International Development Vol. 22, No. 2, 247–64.
Mestre, A. 2010. Drought Monitoring and Drought
Management in Spain. Background paper for the 2011
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.
Geneva, UNISDR.
Ministerial Declaration. 2008. Third Asian Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction. Kuala Lumpur, 2–4
December 2008.
––––. 2010. Declaration of the Second African Ministerial
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction. Nairobi, 14–16 April
2010.
Neri, C. and Briones, F. 2010. Assessing Drought Risk
and Identifying Policy Alternatives for Drought Risk
Management. Risks, Impacts and Social Meaning of
Drought: Characterization of the Vulnerability in Sonora,
Mexico. Background paper for the 2011 Global Assessment
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
Noy, I. 2009. The macroeconomic consequences of disasters.
Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 88, No. 2, pp.
221–31.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co operation and
Development). 2010. Development Co-operation Report
2010. Paris, OECD Publishing.
OSSO (Observatorio Sismológico del Sur-Occidente). 2011.
Extensive risk analysis for the 2011 Global Assessment
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction: Análisis de
manifestaciones de riesgo en America Latina: Patrones y
tendencias de las manifestaciones intensivas y extensivas
de riesgo. Background paper for the 2011 Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva,
UNISDR.
Peduzzi, P., Chatenoux, B., Dao, H., De Bono, A., Deichmann,
U., Giuliani, G., Herold, C., Kalsnesm, B., Kluser, S., Løvholt,
F., Lyon, B., Maskrey, A., Mouton, F., Nadim, F. and Smebye,
H. 2009. Global Risk Analysis. 2009 Global Assessment
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction: Risk and Poverty in a
Changing Climate. Geneva, UNISDR.
ProAct. 2008. The Role of Environmental Management
and Eco-Engineering in Disaster Risk Reduction and
Climate Change Adaptation. http://proactnetwork.org/
proactwebsite/media/download/CCA_DRR_reports/em_
ecoeng_in_drr_cca.pdf

WATER-RELATED DISASTERS

617

82%+ƫ .0%*/ČƫċƫĂĀāĀċƫAssessing Drought Risk and
Identifying Policy Alternatives for Drought Risk
Management: Ceará, Brazil. Background paper for the 2011
Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction.
Geneva, UNISDR.
Shaw, R., Nguyen, H., Habiba, U. and Takeuchi, Y. 2010.
Drought in Asian Monsoon Region. Background Paper
for the 2011 Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
Stolton, S., Dudley, N. and Randall, J. 2008. Arguments for
Protection: Natural Security: Protected Areas and Hazard
Mitigation. A research report by WWF and Equilibrium.
Gland, Switzerland, World Wide Fund for Nature (WFF).
http://www.wwf.de/ﬁleadmin/fm-wwf/pdf_neu/natural_
security___protected_areas___hazard_mitigation.pdf
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004.
Reducing Disaster Risk: A Challenge for Development.
Geneva, UNDP, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery.
––––. 2010. Human Development Report 2010. The Real
Wealth of Nations: Pathways to Human Development. New
York, UNDP.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2010.
Linking Ecosystems to Risk and Vulnerability Reduction:
The Case of Jamaica. Risk and Vulnerability Assessment
Methodology Development Project (RIVAMP). Results of
the Pilot Assessment. Geneva, UNEP/GRID-Europe.
UN-Habitat. 2010. The State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011:
Cities for All: Bridging the Urban Divide. Nairobi,
UN-Habitat.

618

CHAPTER 27

UNISDR (United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction Secretariat). 2009. Global Assessment Report
on Disaster Risk Reduction: Risk and Poverty in a Changing
Climate. Geneva, UNISDR.
––––. 2011. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk
Reduction. Geneva, UNISDR.
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2009. Thematic
Progress Review Sub-component on Early Warning
Systems. Background paper for the 2009 Global
Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. Geneva,
UNISDR.
World Bank. 2010. Natural Hazards, Unnatural Disasters: The
Economics of Effective Prevention. Washington DC, The
World Bank/International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD).
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2008. Natural Security:
Protected Areas and Hazard Mitigation. Gland, Switzerland,
WWF. http://assets.panda.org/downloads/natural_
security_ﬁnal.pdf
Zapata, R. and Madrigal, B. 2009. Economic Impact of
Disasters: Evidence from DALA assessments by ECLAC
in Latin America and the Caribbean. Mexico City, ECLAC.
http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/xml/1/38101/2009S117EyP-MEX-L941.PDF_parte_1.pdf

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 28
Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and
drought and their impacts on water
resources in the drylands

UNCCD and UNU
—
Author Juliane Zeidler and Asellah David (IECN)
Contributors Sergio Zelaya Bonilla and Emmanuel Chinyamakobvu (UNCCD)
Acknowledgements Peer review was carried out by Zafar Adeel and Fabrice Renaud
(UNU).

© Shutterstock/Oleg Znamenskiy

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Water degradation in drylands will have detrimental effects for the people and the economy
of dryland countries.
Although it is clear by deﬁnition that drylands are water-scarce, human drivers and climate
change pose serious threats to water resources in drylands.
The impacts of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought (DLDD) on water resources
negatively affect development potentials in drylands.
Urgent and dedicated responses to protect drylands resources including water are needed
to support sustainable development in dryland countries.

28.1 Introduction
The key challenges: desertiﬁcation, land degradation
and drought (DLDD) are speciﬁcally, but not exclusively, related to drylands. Drylands are by deﬁnition water
limited environments. Water is a key resource that is
under high pressure from increasing demand and decreasing quality. Productivity of drylands is determined
by water availability and quality. Any further degradation of this essential resource will have detrimental effects for the people and the economy of dryland
countries.
Drivers: DLDD are caused and exacerbated by different
drivers, including (a) natural drivers, which are often
related to the geographical situation and associated
environmental and climatic settings of a site; (b) human drivers, related to unsustainable human development aspirations, which are often economic in nature
and not attuned to the environmental frame conditions, and (c) climate change, which is a new, partially
natural and partially human-induced driver.
Risks and uncertainties: There are various DLDDrelated impacts on water, including: lower recharge
of groundwater and runoff; water degradation, for
example through pollutants, and changes in turbidity, sedimentation and siltation; and salinity. All these
DLDD-related impacts have severe implications for the
development potential in drylands. They negatively
affect agricultural production, ecosystem health and
the sustainability of industrial and energy projects and
infrastructure. A major concern for sustainable development in drylands is the increasing threat of water
scarcity (Figure 28.1). Water availability and quality are
existing challenges to potential dryland development
that are expected to be exacerbated by the impacts of
climate change.

which often requires support actions (such as policy,
ﬁnancial and, structural and) and material resources.
Generally three main areas of response are considered:
Innovations in water management and technology to
cope with water scarcity, including concepts such as
cost of and payment for water; investments for sustainable ecosystem services; investment in appropriate
techniques, technologies and infrastructure; development of new water resources; and investments in water
research, management and policy-making capacities.
Promoting water use efficiency by reducing water
wastage and prioritizing water uses in the drylands.
Supporting policy changes needed in and for dryland
countries, including policy changes in water demand
management and food self-sufficiency versus food security, as well as global investments in long-term food
security in water-restricted drylands.
A dedicated international framework to act upon the
pressing issue of water scarcity in drylands as well
as DLDD-related water and land issues is urgently
required. The establishment of a ‘Water Compact for
Drylands’ has been proposed as one such international priority action. Existing United Nations (UN)
instruments – such as the UN Convention to Combat
Desertiﬁcation in those Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertiﬁcation, Particularly in Africa
(UNCCD), the UN-Water and UN-Land initiatives, and
the priority outcomes from the seventeenth session

FIGURE 28.1
The impact of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and
drought in Piali Village, India

Hotspots: Geographic hotspots of intensiﬁed DLDD
expand across the drylands of the world – countries
with a low Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and a low
Human Development Index (HDI) are particularly vulnerable, as interventions are costly. Dryland areas with
high human populations or connected high density
areas ‘downstream’ are prone to land degradation and
associated negative water impacts.
Responses: A range of speciﬁc examples of strategic
responses to the challenges exists and each has been
tested and implemented on a pilot basis. However,
these successes need to be scaled up in dryland areas,

WWDR4

© UNCCD photo award 2005/Kushal Gangopadhyay

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

621

of the UN Commission on Sustainable Development –
should be positioned to support and drive such work.

28.2 The challenge: Water as a key resource
under pressure in the drylands
The growth in the use of this water resources has tended to be much greater than the growth in the number
of people. For example, in the twentieth century, the
world’s population increased fourfold, whereas freshwater usage increased nine times over (Lean, 2009).
In addition to this increased usage, DLDD means that
natural recharge is reduced as the soil loses its water retention capacity (DG Environment – European
Commission, 2007). and Rainfall is also reduced in
times of drought. Consequently, a number of countries in the drylands are increasingly faced with water
scarcity.
Water scarcity is the imbalance between available
water resources and demands (UNCCD, 2010), occurring when water resources are insufficient to satisfy
long-term average requirements. This long-term water

imbalance is caused by a combination of low water
availability and a level of water demand exceeding the
natural recharge. Water scarcity frequently appears
in areas with low rainfall but also in areas affected by
DLDD, as well as in areas with high population density and intensive agriculture and/or industrial activity,
particularly in the drylands. Large spatial and temporal
differences in the amount of water available are observed across the drylands. Dryland problems of DLDD
and water scarcity, among others, put immense pressure on the management of water resources.
Water scarcity, whether natural or human-induced,
serves to trigger and exacerbate the effects of desertiﬁcation through direct, long-term impacts on land
and soil quality, soil structure, organic matter content,
and ultimately on soil moisture levels. The direct physical effects of land degradation include the drying up
of freshwater resources, an increased frequency of
drought and sand and dust storms, and a greater occurrence of ﬂooding due to inadequate drainage or
poor irrigation practices. Should these trends continue,

FIGURE 28.2
The extent of dryland systems worldwide

Notes: Overall 41.3% of the global terrestrial areas are categorized as drylands and 34.7% of the global population lived in drylands in 2000.
The long-term mean of the ratio of an area’s average annual precipitation to its average annual potential evapotranspiration is the Aridity Index (AI).
Source: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005, appendix A, p. 23, from data sources cited therein).

622

CHAPTER 28

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

it would bring about a sharp decline in soil nutrients,
accelerating the loss of vegetation cover. This in turn
leads to further land and water degradation, such as
pollution of surface and groundwater, siltation, and the
salinization and alkalization of soils.
28.2.1 An introduction to drylands of the world
Desertiﬁcation is land degradation, resulting from various factors including climatic variations and human activities. DLDD are concepts mainly associated with, but
not exclusive to, dryland areas around the world. Over
60 countries are characterized by dryland ecosystems
(Table 28.1) – with prevailing hyper-arid, arid and dry
subhumid climatic conditions. They are categorized using the Aridity Index (AI) which is the long-term mean
of the ratio of an area’s average annual precipitation to
its mean annual potential evapotranspiration. For 17 of
these countries, drylands account for more than 90%
of their land area. Overall, 41.3% of the global terrestrial area is categorized as drylands and 34.7% of the
global population lived in drylands in 2000 (Figure
28.2) (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005).
In drylands, water is usually the most important limiting resource – for both ecosystems and human and
economic development. Poor management of drylands
ecosystems leads to desertiﬁcation and land degradation, and to increasing and long-term loss of productivity (UNCCD, 1994). Linkages with natural water
limitation, unsuitable water management practices and
negative feedback loops, as well as interconnectivity
between land degradation and water resources, often
exacerbate unsustainable use of water.
Although several dryland countries are counted as
among the wealthiest globally, endowed as they are
with non-renewable natural resources such as oil, diamonds and uranium, most dryland countries have a low
GDP, and rank poorly in terms of their HDI (Table 28.1).
The high dependence of drylands inhabitants on the
natural resource base means that they are vulnerable
to land degradation.
28.2.2 Water sources and their sustainability in the
drylands
Sources of water in the drylands usually consist of surface water, groundwater (including fossil groundwater)
and rainfall. Average annual rainfall in the drylands is
relatively low in dry subhumid areas and is even lower
for other drylands types. In hot arid climates, much of
the precipitation is lost to evapotranspiration due to

WWDR4

extremely high temperatures. For example, data collected in southern Africa suggest that less than 3% of
precipitation actually contributes to ground or surface
water recharge, less than 1% of precipitation contributes to aquifer and groundwater recharge, and approximately 2% contributes to surface water (perennial
and ephemeral rivers, wetlands and dams) through
runoff. Hence only a small percentage (approximately
17%) is productively used for ecosystem maintenance
and rain-fed production systems (Heyns et al., 1998;
Schlesinger, 1997).
As water demand in drylands usually exceeds water availability, local inhabitants depend largely on
groundwater, obtaining their water supply through
boreholes and wells, although small-scale rainwater
harvesting also takes place. In areas where larger settlements and cities (with associated industries) are
situated, water demand frequently exceeds availability. In such cases, groundwater availability determines
whether local water supply is accessible and sustainable. In many instances excessive water mining has
already taken place and existing sources of water
have been depleted without replenishment. In certain
countries, alternative water sources are sought from
other areas, by pipeline, or through the desalination
of sea water.
Water resources in various watersheds in drylands are
already considered highly over utilized. An analysis
projecting water supply data for the year 2025 in
water catchments in drylands worldwide presents a
disturbing picture. According to the analysis, seven
major basins in the drylands – mostly in Asia, and one
large basin in Africa and another in North America
– are expected to experience water scarcity by 2025
(Figure 28.3) and fourteen major watersheds are
projected to be water stressed by 2025. In total, half of
the major watersheds investigated in the drylands are
predicted to experience some type of water shortage
in the coming years (White and Nackoney, 2003)
exacerbated by the anticipated climatic changes in
dryland areas around the world.
28.2.3 Primary human water requirement activities
and limitations in drylands
The importance of access to safe water was conﬁrmed
in the 64th UN General Assembly resolution (UN, 2010),
which explicitly recognized access to safe and clean
water and sanitation as a human right. The primary human water requirement activities are for drinking water,

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

623

TABLE 28.1
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita and Human Development Indices of countries with drylands areas

624

#

Country with
dryland areas

Total land
area (km2)

Percentage of
total dryland
surface area
(if exceeding 90%)a

1

Afghanistan

647 500

94.0

2

Albania

27 398

$6 300

0.818

3 639 453

3

Algeria

2 381 740

$7 000

0.754

34 178 188

4

Angola

1 220 000

$8 900

0.564

12 799 293

5

Argentina

2 736 690

$13 800

0.866

40 913 584

6

Armenia

28 454

$5 900

0.798

2 967 004

7

Australia

7 617 930

$38 911

0.970

21 262 641

8

Azerbaijan

86 100

$10 400

0.787

8 238 672

9

Botswana

585 370

$13 100

0.694

1 990 876

10

Bulgaria

110 550

$12 600

0.840

7 204 687

11

Burkina Faso

273 800

$1 200

0.389

15 746 232

12

Chad

1 259 200

$1 600

0.392

10 329 208

13

China

9 326 410

$6 600

0.772

1 338 612 968

14

Egypt

995 450

$6 000

0.703

78 866 635

15

El Salvador

20 720

$7 100

0.747

7 185 218

16

Eritrea

121 320

$700

0.472

5 647 168

17

Ethiopia

1 119 683

$900

0.414

85 237 338

18

Gambia

100 000

$1 400

0.456

1 778 081

19

Greece

130 800

$32 100

0.942

10 737 428

20

India

2 973 190

$3 100

0.612

1 156 897 766

21

Iran

1 636 000

90.2

$12 900

0.782

66 429 284

22

Iraq

432 162

99.9

$3 600

0.583

28 945 569

23

Israel

20 330

$28 400

0.935

7 233 701

24

Jordan

91 971

$5 300

0.770

6 269 285

25

Kazakhstan

2 669 800

$11 800

0.804

15 399 437

26

Kenya

569 250

$1 600

0.541

39 002 772

27

Kuwait

17 820

$54 100

0.916

2 692 526

28

Kyrgyzstan

191 300

$2 100

0.710

5 431 747

29

Lebanon

10 230

$13 100

0.803

4 017 095

30

Libya

1 759 540

$15 200

0.847

6 324 357

31

Macedonia

24 856

$9 000

0.817

2 066 718

32

Madagascar

581 540

$1 000

0.543

20 653 556

33

Malawi

94 080

$900

0.493

15 028 757

34

Mali

1 220 000

$1 200

0.371

13 443 225

CHAPTER 28

98.1

100.0

100.0

97.2

99.1

92.9

GDP (PPP)
per capita
(US$)

HDI

Population

$800

0.352

28 395 716

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Percentage of
total dryland
surface area
(if exceeding 90%)a

GDP (PPP)
per capita
(US$)

HDI

Population

1 030 400

$2 100

0.520

3 129 486

Mexico

1 923 040

$13 500

0.854

111 211 789

37

Moldova

33 371

$2 300

0.720

4 320 748

38

Mongolia

1 554 731

$3 200

0.727

3 041 142

39

Morocco

446 300

$4 600

0.654

31 285 174

40

Mozambique

784 090

$900

0.402

21 669 278

41

Namibia

825 418

$6 400

0.686

2 108 665

42

Niger

1 266 700

$700

0.340

15 306 252

43

Nigeria

910 768

$2 400

0.511

149 229 090

44

Oman

212 460

$23 900

0.846

3 418 085

45

Pakistan

778 720

$2 600

0.572

174 578 558

46

Romania

230 340

$11 500

0.837

22 215 421

47

Russia

16 995 800

$15 100

0.817

140 041 247

48

Saudi Arabia

2 149 690

$20 400

0.843

28 686 633

49

Senegal

192 000

$1 600

0.464

13 711 597

50

Somalia

627 337

$600

0.284

9 832 017

51

South Africa

1 219 912

$10 100

0.683

49 052 489

52

Spain

499 542

$33 700

0.955

40 525 002

53

Sudan

2 376 000

$2 300

0.531

41 087 825

54

Syria

184 050

$4 600

0.742

21 762 978

55

Tajikistan

142 700

$1 800

0.688

7 349 145

56

Tunisia

155 360

$8 000

0.769

10 486 339

57

Turkey

770 760

$11 200

0.806

76 805 524

58

Turkmenistan

488 100

$6 900

0.739

4 884 887

59

Ukraine

603 700

$6 400

0.796

45 700 395

60

Uzbekistan

425 400

$2 800

0.710

27 606 007

61

Venezuela

882 050

$13 100

0.844

26 814 843

62

Yemen

527 970

$2 500

0.575

22 858 238

63

Zimbabwe

386 670

$100

0.513

11 392 629

#

Country with
dryland areas

Total land
area (km2)

35

Mauritania

36

99.9

92.2

90.8

94.1

98.0

93.7

100.0

99.2

Note: Three countries have been added to the original listing: Senegal, Gambia and Tunisia.
a
Data not available for countries with less than 90% dryland areas.
Sources: Updated and revised after Harrison and Pearce (2000) and White and Nackoney (2003). Updated and additional information: HDI (2007)
from UNDP (HDI indices provided on Wikipedia); GDP per capita (2009 estimate) from CIA (n.d.); and population (2009 estimate) from CIA (n.d.).

WWDR4

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

625

agriculture (food production), industry and domestic
use. Where water is a limiting resource, priorities need
to be set among competing uses to meet the essential
requirements. can be met. The following key requirement activities can be speciﬁed.
Drinking water
Water is required for humans, livestock and wildlife,
and plant life (excluding crops and agricultural production). Livestock production is common in the drylands, where rangelands tend to support large herds
of herbivores if there is sufficient drinking water.
Domestic water requirements
Basic human needs include clean and safe water for
washing and sanitation. The health of people is directly linked to the availability of clean and safe water.
Water scarcity in the drylands is a major limiting factor for human habitation and its unavailability leads
to dehydration and ultimately the death of the affected people.
Agricultural water demand
In most drylands regions, food production for local
consumption or trade at a household level depends

largely on rainfed agriculture or small-scale irrigation
based on rainwater harvesting technologies. Largescale irrigation systems tend to be unsustainable in
most drylands, depending on the source and management of water. Rainfed agriculture often performs
poorly, with high production variability as determined
by the highly variable rainfall patterns.
Industrial demand
In general, water-dependent industries are not appropriate for the drylands, and this can have severe
negative impacts on national economies. Given the
prevalence of water scarcity in the drylands, promoting water-dependent industries becomes difficult, unless sustainable alternative sources of water
can be accessed and managed in an efficient way
without compromising domestic and agricultural
water needs.
28.2.4 Global and regional water management
policies in drylands
Water management is a critical aspect of dryland
development. As the local and regional water cycles
are extremely sensitive, the balance between demand
and supply has often been disturbed and severe

FIGURE 28.3
Projected water supply in major watersheds in drylands by 2025: water scarcity will be exacerbated in many
key dryland areas worldwide

Annual Renewable Water (m3/person/year)
< 1000 (Water Scarce)

1000-1700 (Water Stressed)

> 1700 (Sufficient Quantity)

Drylands

Source: White and Nackoney (2003).

626

CHAPTER 28

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

depletion of the water resources have occurred. Land
and water use conﬂicts often arise. Where transboundary disagreements occur, capacity development in collaborative management of the scarce water resources is needed in order to avoid the potential
escalation of these disagreements into major political
crises.
Migration related to DLDD and water has already
been observed and could potentially accelerate in the
future. Water management must start at the local level. In drylands, priority should be given to strong investment in locally adapted technical and technological solutions, along with appropriate policy-making at
national and international levels, to ensure improved
water use efficiency. Water policies must be based on
the availability of the resource, which has to be properly and economically valued. (See a more detailed
overview of relevant policy instruments and examples of responses that help to reduce the impacts of
DLDD on water resources and address water scarcity
later in this chapter.)
Currently there are numerous regional and global water management policies in place. These policies often

relate to transboundary agreements where watersheds
reach across national borders (Figure 28.4). Also, projects such as ‘Every River has its People’ (KCS, n.d.)
work with local communities on establishing basin
management committees that also promote sustainable land management practices along the river to curb
impacts of DLDD and its drivers (see Section 28.2 for
further details).

28.3 Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and
drought: Drivers, risks and uncertainties,
and hotspots
28.3.1 Drivers of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and
drought and water linkages
DLDD are caused and exacerbated by different drivers,
relating to natural phenomena, human activities and
climate change. The combined effects of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought result in reduced
water resources availability and accessibility. Both
ground and surface water systems are affected.
Natural phenomena
It is important to recognize that certain geographic
areas are naturally arid. It is normal for these areas to
be exposed to highly variable and extreme climates,

FIGURE 28.4
World’s major watersheds

Note: Watersheds that are situated in key dryland areas are indicated in yellow. Most of these watersheds are transboundary.
Source: World Resources Institute (http://earthtrends.wri.org/images/maps/P1_22_LG.GIF).

WWDR4

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

627

and droughts are a common phenomenon that results
in water scarcity being experienced. Such dryland areas are limited in their production potential and have
developed speciﬁc adaptive characteristics shaped by
long-term climatic conditions, geomorphological circumstances and earth history, resulting in strong variations and shifts in the evolvement and geographic position of drylands being observed through the millennia.
Human activities
Many drylands have been characterized by a culture
of human activities being in harmony with nature.
However, high human-related pressure on natural resources has increasingly led to desertiﬁcation and land
degradation symptoms, which may be irreversible or

may lead to the long-term loss of productive potential and increased water scarcity. Poor and inadequate
land management practices, that are insensitive to the
natural limitations and ecological processes of dryland
ecosystems, coupled with frequent and often severe
droughts, frequently lead to severe desertiﬁcation and
land degradation and hence water scarcity as the land
loses its water retention capacity. This phenomenon
also holds true for non-arid systems. Increased demands on the productivity of drylands – related to the
development aspirations of local people and governments and increased populations who are dependent
on the limited natural resource base – and the application of inefficient land management practices have led
to drylands that are less and less inhabitable.

FIGURE 28.5
Projected impacts of climate change on perennial drainage density

A

25% increase
no change
25% lost
50% lost
75% lost

C

no drainage
0

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800

Annual rainfall in a region (mm)

B

Drop by 10-20%
Drop by up to 10%
Increase by up to 10%
Increase by 10-20%

Less than 400 mm
Le

400–800 mm

More than 800 mm

Notes: Effects of a 10% reduction in rainfall on perennial drainage density by 2070–2099. (A) Rainfall regimes at the end of the twentieth
century; (B) map of Africa showing predicted change in precipitation; and (C) numbers indicate selected locations for which the effect on
perennial drainage density has been calculated.
Source: de Wit and Stankiewicz (2006), reproduced with permission from AAAS.

628

CHAPTER 28

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

Climate change
Globally predicted climatic changes will pose differing risks and opportunities in different dryland
regions of the world. In broad categories, climatic
change will lead to either/and/or increases/decreases
in temperatures and precipitation, affecting evaporation rates, water availability and tolerance levels of
speciﬁc livestock, crop plants, and other elements of
the natural ecosystems. The occurrence of more extreme weather events – such as prolonged and more
severe droughts, unprecedented extreme ﬂooding
events in normally arid areas, and seasonal shifts of
known weather patterns (for example changes to the
onset of rainy seasons and shortening of growing
seasons) – pose enormous challenges to ecosystems.
Essential ecosystem services are affected by climate
change, leading to DLDD. The difficulty of coping and
adapting to climatic changes often worsens desertiﬁcation and land degradation and poses a major management challenge. The impacts of climate change
on water – that is, changes in groundwater recharge
and runoff in catchment areas – are expected to be
signiﬁcant and lead to both the drying up of aquifers
and/or ﬂash ﬂoods and ﬂooding in other areas. Major
changes are predicted in the dynamics of perennial
rivers in Africa (Figure 28.5), where major ﬂooding
disasters are already occurring more frequently, while
elsewhere river courses are drying up.
28.3.2 Risks and uncertainties: The impact of
desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought on
water resources availability, quality and accessibility
DLDD directly affects and worsens already critical
water resources, especially in drylands. Overuse and
depletion of limited water resources are already an issue, but the direct effects of DLDD further negatively
impact on the resource – bringing with it the risks and
uncertainties described below.
Lower recharge of groundwater and changed runoff
Soil compaction and changes in soil, vegetation and soil
faunal parameters directly affect the recharge rate of
groundwater and water dynamics in ecosystems (FAO,
2002). It is well known that deforestation in catchment
areas leads to altered runoff regimes, disturbing the
natural water recharge and storage in ecosystems. On
a smaller scale, water inﬁltration rates are disturbed by
unsustainable land use practices, which have altered soil
faunal associations and the balance of incorporating soil
organic matter (SOM) back into soils, negatively affecting soil water holding capacities (Box 28.1).

WWDR4

The degradation of land by physical compaction of
soils – for example through trampling by livestock,
sealing of soil surfaces by buildings or industrial activities, or movements of tractors – all have negative effects on the percolation of water into the ground. Soil
compaction creates more impervious surfaces that do
not allow percolation of the water down through the
soil into the aquifer. If the inﬁltration capacity of the
soil is reduced or if vegetation has been removed on
a large scale then peak ﬂows or ﬂoods increase
(Calder, 1998).
This reduction in soil inﬁltration capacity increases surface runoff. Surface runoff causes erosion of
the earth’s surface, including splash, gully, sheet or
stream bed erosion. With increased runoff, water is
instead forced directly into streams or storm-water
runoff drains, reducing groundwater recharge, thus
lowering the water table and making droughts worse,

BOX 28.1
Role of soil fauna in maintaining soil water holding
capacities
DLDD often leads to a destruction of healthy soil biological properties, which in turn negatively affects the soil’s
water holding capacities. Water percolation and holding capacities of soils are essential for allowing rainwater to inﬁltrate into the ground and eventually contribute
to groundwater recharge. The loss of biodiversity in soil
fauna, through the occurrences of desertiﬁcation and land
degradation, leads to the disturbance of critical biogeochemical and physical soil processes such as soil water inﬁltration and holding capacity. Soil fauna improves physical soil properties such as macroporosity, thus increasing
soil water inﬁltration capacity (Leonard and Rajot, 2001;
Mando et al., 1999). For example, termites and ants, which
dominate dryland soil macrofaunal invertebrates, translocate organic material such as pieces of grass stalks, leaves
and wood into the soil, where these materials are broken
down by various soil organisms into soil organic matter (SOM). SOM is critical for enhancing the water holding capacity of soils. Soil fauna modify the soil and litter
environment playing a key role in SOM transformations
and nutrient dynamics at different spatial and temporal
scales thus affecting the soil’s physical properties, nutrient cycling, water retention capacity and plant growth
(Bhadauria and Saxena, 2010). If soil faunal assemblages
are disturbed through DLDD-related impacts (e.g. overstocking, inappropriate use of insecticides) the soil’s physical and chemical properties will be negatively affected
resulting in negative impacts on water balances.

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

629

especially for farmers and others who depend on the
water wells.
Degradation of water resources and the environment
DLDD can create important impacts on water quality, which in turn may have negative effects on downstream uses of water (FAO, 1993, 2002). These impacts
can include changes in sediment load and the concentration of nutrients, salts, metals and agrochemicals;
the inﬂux of pathogens; and a change in the temperature regime. Where poor land management practices
prevail, increased loads of nitrogen, phosphorus and
related nitrate and phosphate concentrations result in
severe eutrophication of water sources. Pathogenic
bacteria in surface waters will increase as a consequence of riparian grazing or waste inﬂux from livestock production. Pesticides and persistent organic
pollutants may ﬁnd their way into water courses in areas where DLDD effects are high, for example through
soil erosion and increased runoff.
Turbidity, sedimentation and siltation
Soil erosion is a major manifestation of desertiﬁcation and land degradation. Soil is transported by runoff
or wind into water sources, such as rivers and the sea,
causing the loss of valuable topsoil and adding sediment that can produce turbidity in surface waters. This
soil loss and sedimentation, and the effects of turbidity such as limited penetration of sunlight, destroys the
natural habitat of fauna and ﬂora in the rivers (FAO,
2002), changing biodiversity patterns and leading to
a loss of freshwater ﬁsh stocks. In extreme cases of
changed climatic conditions combined with poor management of water resources and DLDD, the complete
siltation and drying up of entire catchments and river
systems has been observed.
Salinity
Salinization of soils and water resources is a major
problem related to desertiﬁcation and land degradation. An increase in salinity of surface and groundwater tends to have detrimental effects on downstream
water uses such as irrigation or domestic water supply.
Irrigation and drainage activities can lead to increased
salinity of surface and groundwater as a consequence
of evaporation and the leaching of salts from soils. This
is of special concern in arid areas, where subsurface
drainage water always has higher salt concentrations
and higher sodium absorption rates than supply water
for irrigation. Irrigation consequently leads to a surfacing and concentration of salts.

630

CHAPTER 28

Water scarcity
Water scarcity poses a major threat to drylands.
Drylands are water-constrained ecosystems where
maintaining the balance between water demand
and supply can be very challenging. When abstracting water for human use it is always important to
allow for an ecological reserve – to retain sufficient
water resources that are needed for maintaining underlying ecosystem services. In the event of water
scarcity and the subsequent failure of water scarcity management plans, agriculture, which is often
the largest consumer of water, is the most affected,
translating into millions of dollars in lost income,
particularly in economies that have a strong agriculture base. Simultaneously, with the failure of agricultural production, food security is threatened and
hunger and malnutrition become inevitable in poor
dryland countries.
28.3.3 Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought
hotspots and degradation of water resources in
drylands
Geographic hotspots of DLDD are prevalent across
the drylands of the world (Figure 28.2). Countries
with low GDP and HDIs (Table 28.1) are particularly
vulnerable because interventions are often costly.
Dryland areas with high populations, or which are
connected to high population density areas downstream, are prone to land degradation and the associated negative water impacts. Figure 28.4 displays major watersheds situated in dryland areas.
According to White and Nackoney (2003), several
of these major watersheds are already facing water
scarcity (central and east Asia, southern and eastern
Africa, central North America) and it is projected that
in the future several of them will be further negatively affected by the impacts of climate change. For
example, Figure 28.5 projects climate change induced
impacts on drainage in Africa, negatively affecting at
least 65% of the continent. Such projections overlay
areas of DLDD in Africa, where severe interlinked impacts on ecosystems and ecosystem services, populations and economies can be foreseen.
It must be highlighted that, in addition to its scarcity,
naturally available water resources in most drylands
are often mismanaged. Exorbitant development expectations in such areas lead to unsustainable exploitation
of existing water sources. Inappropriate land uses lead
to DLDD and degradation of natural resources including water. Improving water use efficiency is a serious

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

challenge. Seeking alternative water provision
(e.g. large-scale desalination of sea water, longdistance transportation of water via canals and pipelines) has also led to an exacerbation of DLDD issues,
promoting incompatible land uses such as overstocking of livestock leading to a change in vegetation cover
and degradation of soils.

28.4 Potential responses to save the
drylands and their populations
Current major drylands challenges include (a) poverty, (b) food crises (food insecurity and famine), (c)
drought and water scarcity, (d) climate change, (e)
loss of biodiversity, (f) deforestation, (g) energy challenges, and (h) environmentally forced human migration. In light of these challenges, one cannot fail to see
that the need to address desertiﬁcation and land degradation in the drylands is imperative. Indeed, where
economic, social, political and geographic assets have
become highly virtual, mobile and dynamic, it is easy
to lose sight of the human interconnectedness of socio-economic assets such as land and water resources.
Water scarcity in the drylands has an inevitable negative impact on sustainable development, hampers local
governance and exacerbates social conﬂicts.

tandem, a number of policies and technological measures and innovations should be employed to mitigate
water scarcity in the drylands.
Innovations in water management and technology to
cope with water scarcity
Cost of and payment for water
The tradition of having free or heavily subsidized water
for livestock, irrigation and domestic use has wrongly created the impression that water is plentiful and
of low value. This brings about a need to reduce the
excessive demand and improve water use efficiency
through promoting efficient water use practices and
proper resource use planning and management, and
through the proper costing and valuation of this limited resource. Paying for water is an increasingly accepted concept, even in rural communities (see Chapter 23,
‘Valuing water’). Costs usually cover the delivery and
supply of water. External costs, such as costs associated with the sustainability of the resource, are often
not fully incorporated into existing pricing systems.
Opportunity costs, a third category of costs, refers to
the fact that we have conﬂicting water use demands
and certain people/industries may lose the opportunity to do something because the limited water has
been used in other ways.

The future productivity and development options of
the drylands are dramatically affected by both the low
and further diminishing water resources in drylands
and the DLDD impacts exacerbating water scarcity and
quality. These effects are discernible on the environment, social systems and economies of the drylands.
Although expected climate change impacts may improve water balances in some regions, other dryland
areas will certainly have to deal with worsening water
situations, and all regions will have to be able to manage change through numerous strategic response options to the water challenges. Some of these options
are outlined in the following sections.

Development of new water resources
Innovation in terms of developing and negotiating new
water resources is important for the dryland countries. Whilst investments in desalination plants and
improved transfers from other areas (e.g. by pipelines)
are one avenue, others include improved recycling and
improved transboundary management of existing resources. Some impressive examples of technological
solutions come from the Middle East, and models of
collaboration and application of new technologies are
available from elsewhere, for example Germany and
other EU-countries.

28.4.1 Strategic approaches
Securing water resources in the drylands requires an
integrated approach to the management of the natural
environment and associated natural resources, which
takes into account all factors inﬂuencing decisions on
land and water resources use at local, national and regional levels. It requires partnership building between
different sectors of governments and societies, international agencies, scientiﬁc communities, non-governmental organizations, bilateral agencies, and others to
tackle the complexity of securing water resources. In

Desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought – investing in sustainable ecosystem services
Valuation of ecosystem services has proven to be a
reasonable concept although it is not yet fully embraced by most water providers and users (Box 28.2;
see also Chapter 21, ‘Ecosystems’). Placing an adequate value/price on ecosystem services is critical
to ensuring long-term sustainable use and management of ﬁnite resources such as water (Emerton and
Bos, 2004; Smith et al., 2006). In the DLDD context,
maintenance of critical ecosystem services such as

WWDR4

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

631

those provided by watersheds and associated vegetation and soil interactions must be fully considered.
Relevant investments to curb the negative effects of
DLDD on water resources need to be made and fully
incorporated into such valuations. Ecosystem values
then need to be translated into water management
decision-making. For example, economic valuation
(of ecosystem services) is best applied to an incremental change and within a policy context such as
DLDD. To date there is mainly access to case study
materials that illustrate methods and actual values.
Investment in policy-relevant research is needed in
most countries to inform decision-making.

BOX 28.2
Approaches to introducing payment for ecosystem
services – examples from Kenya
According to Engel et al. (2007), payment for environmental services (PES) is an innovative market-based
mechanism. It is based on twin principles that those
beneﬁting from environmental services should pay for
their provision and that those who provide environmental services should be compensated for doing so. The
Pro-poor Rewards for Environmental Services in Africa
initiative supported by the World Bank (www.worldbank.
org) with the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and
partners is working with communities and governments
on introducing PES approaches including for watershed
management and conservation. Various examples of projects in their early stages exist. In Kenya, Nairobi relies
on distant forested catchments for its water supplies, like
other major cities in Africa. One such catchment is the
Sasumua watershed, which supplies 15% of Nairobi’s water demand. Land use changes in upstream areas of the
Sasumua watershed have led to increased sedimentation
and water contamination (Porras et al., 2008). Ensuring
proper hydrological functioning of the watershed is of
critical importance to the future water supply of Nairobi.
Baseline studies have recently been undertaken that will
guide decision-making and the establishment of the PES
mechanism in the watershed (Vågen, 2007). Learning
from experiences in other countries such as Costa Rica
and Columbia, which have already established very advanced PES mechanisms for water systems, is essential
(Porras et al., 2008).
One PES mechanism that has been tried is the green water credits (GWC) concept. GWC offer a tried and tested
means of providing Kenya with food, water and power
security. GWC are payments or rewards for water and land
management services provided by farmers, which in turn
beneﬁt downstream users by providing them with betterquality water and a more reliable supply.

632

CHAPTER 28

Investing in appropriate innovations, technologies
and infrastructure
Enhancing environmental ﬂow and thus curbing the
negative impacts of DLDD on water availability is one
aspect of new technology and infrastructure development. For example, South Africa introduced the
Working for Water programme (http://www.dwaf.
gov.za/wfw/), where scientists and ﬁeld workers use
a range of methods to control aquatic invasive alien
plants. This programme is one example a technological intervention. Another example is the construction
of dams, either for water storage or energy generation.
A wide range of innovations are available today that
reduce water use and/or loss, as well as improve the
soil’s moisture balance due to their improved designs.
Drylands countries experiencing water scarcity need
to invest in water use reduction techniques, technologies and infrastructures. These include household appliances such as sanitation installations that should be
researched, developed and preferentially marketed.
Incentive measures that promote the development and
use of such innovations must be rigorously supported.
Apart from investment in water-use-reduction technologies, investments in innovations that curb DLDD, particularly in drylands, must be made to reduce negative
impacts on the water base. Regularly cited examples
are the development of agricultural systems, such as
improved irrigation systems, and improved water and
soil management technologies at the farm level. The
appropriate management of water disposal and sanitation is another important issue, which can also lead to
efficient use of water through highly advanced recycling technologies.
Investing in water and production system research,
management and policy-making capacities and addressing the linkages to desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought
Many dryland countries are developing nations where
capacity development is a critical issue – as is strongly
reﬂected in the UNCCD ten-year strategy. In addition
to the need for technical capacities, which promote
advances in technical and technological development,
capacities should be developed at all levels to implement and act on water and DLDD-related issues. There
is a need to build or strengthen national water and
other related institutions with adequate support and
decentralizing. There is also a need for local level institutions to act on immediate water management requirements on the ground (Iza and Stein, 2009). Many

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

countries are devolving water management structures
and institutions – structures that are charged with managing demand, maintaining infrastructure, and coordinating payment schedules (see chapters 25, ‘Water and
institutional change: Responding to present and future
uncertainty’ and 26, ‘Developing knowledge and capacity’). These structures should also address land management and DLDD-related water issues. For example, village societies in India often address integrated agendas
and more recently have also dealt with climate change
risk and possible adaptation measures (Box 28.3). It is
clear that similar capacities need to be built in other related sectors and production systems, such as agriculture and forestry. Crop research, for example, needs to
shift from conventional agriculture to a more conservation-effective agriculture, such as adopting an eco-agriculture or agro-ecosystems approach.
Irrespective of the measures, it is critical to recognize
that outreach and engagement of the local farmers
and natural resource managers is imperative for the
success of any intervention (see Box 28.3). Adoption

BOX 28.3
Participatory watershed management: A case from
India
A watershed can be deﬁned as a catchment area from
which all water drains into a common area, making it
a suitable target for technical efforts to manage water
and soil resources (Shiferaw et al., 2008). A watershed
connects various communities sharing a speciﬁc water
resource depending on their speciﬁc position within the
catchment. In the long run this creates interdependency in
both the watershed resources and user communities.
Water scarcity and land degradation resulting from overgrazing was already a problem in Sukhomajri village in
India in the 1970s. Local villagers, with institutional support, established a village society that was responsible
for planning and implementing conservation activities in
the village and later in surrounding areas, leading to the
rehabilitation and more effective use of the farmland.
Participatory decision-making and the establishment of
formal governance structures in the village and later in
the greater watershed area have been identiﬁed as key
instruments for success. Evidence and information-based
decision-making is promoted and villagers are directly
involved in adaptive management. In this village, sustainable land management (SLM) practices were integrated
with water management practices from the beginning.

Source: Centre for Science and Environment (1998); Porras and
Neves (2006); and Porras et al. (2008).

WWDR4

pathways for technologies as well as implementation
of policies depend on the end user, and sufficient effort must be made to include such users in the design
and development of solutions. It is clear that such outreach is resource-intense, however without this extra
effort, limited progress can be made.
Water use efficiency
Water use efficiency in drylands should consider rehabilitation of degraded lands and conservation of water
catchment areas, including reducing losses by lining
channels, avoiding direct evaporation and avoiding
runoff and percolation losses due to over-irrigation.
Evaporation from the bare soil should be reduced by
appropriate practices, such as mulching and applying
weed control measures. Enhancement of crop growth
by implementing sustainable land management practices is also important, such as choosing suitable and
marketable crops, considering optimal timing for
planting and harvesting, applying optimal tillage and
green manures, and appropriate drainage systems.
Reducing water wastage
A vital contribution to managing water wisely is the reduction of water losses. At all levels of governance it is
important that leakages are reduced or prevented. This
includes support and know-how for local communities
to implement integrated strategies and for using water
resources efficiently and maintaining wells, taps and
water points in good working conditions. On a larger
scale, national water carriers, storage dams and other
infrastructure need to be well maintained, and systems
that help detect unaccounted-for water losses must be
established. Innovative recycling and integrated multiple use systems especially for larger industries need to
be designed and implemented.
Sustainable land management practices in the
drylands
Poor and unsustainable land management techniques
tend to worsen land and water resources degradation.
Recent estimates indicate that nearly 2 billion hectares
of land worldwide – an area twice the size of China –
is already seriously degraded, some of it irreversibly
(FAO, 2008). Over-cultivation, overgrazing and deforestation put great strain on water resources by reducing fertile topsoil and vegetation cover, and lead to
greater dependence on irrigated cropping. Observed
effects include siltation and reduced ﬂow in rivers that
feed large lakes such as the Aral Sea and Lake Chad,
leading to the alarmingly fast retreat of the shorelines

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

633

of these natural reservoirs in central Asia and northern
Africa, respectively.
It is fundamental therefore to promote soil, water and
vegetation conservation and to enhance measures that
rehabilitate, conserve and protect the natural environment. Sustainable land management is one of the
few options for sustaining livelihoods and generating
income without destroying the quality of the land and
the water resources which are the basis of production
(Figure 28.6).
The essence of a sustainable land management approach ﬁnds expression in the coordination of the sectoral planning and management activities concerned
with the various aspects of land, land use and water

BOX 28.4
Using sustainable land management practices to
adapt to and mitigate the effects of drought and
water scarcity

Sub-Saharan Africa is predicted to be highly affected by
drought and water scarcity in the face of climate change.
Existing environmental problems – such as desertiﬁcation,
land degradation, ﬂoods and droughts – are expected
to worsen with climate change. This will be a challenge
to farmers and communities to adjust their production
systems. Sustainable land management (SLM) strategies
and practices enable farmers and communities to become
more resilient to drought and water scarcity by increasing food production, conserving soil and water, enhancing
food security, and restoring productive natural resources.
Integrated land and water resources management tend
to prevent land degradation, restore degraded lands, and
reduce the need for further conversion of natural forests and grasslands to agricultural production (Woodﬁne,
2009), as well as enhancing the soil water retention
capacity.
Other SLM practices that are relevant to mitigating
drought and water scarcity include: crop diversiﬁcation/
intercropping; conservation tillage and conservation agriculture; organic agriculture; integrated plant nutrient
management; and integrated plan and pest management,
zero tillage farming, crop rotation, mulching and crop residues utilization and fallowing.
Sustainable land management makes it possible to minimize conﬂicts and make the most efficient trade-offs,
and to link social and economic development with environmental protection and enhancement, thus helping to
achieve the objectives of sustainable development.

resources (UNEP, 2007). Initiatives for sustainable land
management are particularly signiﬁcant for dryland
ecosystems, where the majority of people are still engaged in primary agriculture, livestock production, forestry and ﬁshery, and their livelihood and options for
economic development are directly linked to the availability and quality of the land and water resources.
Examples of sustainable land management practices
for drought and water scarcity mitigation and adaptation are presented in Box 28.4.
Prioritizing the use of water in drylands
The careful prioritization of water use is more important in the drylands than in any other ecosystems.
Different land uses place different demands on water
and other natural resources and ecosystem services.
Based on the valuation of these resources, in-country
policy decisions for water allocation, provision and
pricing have to be made. Examples from Israel and
Namibia calculate water use efficiency in terms of economic output per cubic metre of water consumed. It is
clear in both countries that irrigated agriculture consumes the majority of water supplied (in Namibia 44%,
in Israel 70%), while the economic returns measured in
contribution to the gross national product or income
generated are extremely low (Heyns et al., 1998). It is

FIGURE 28.6
The sustainable land management virtuous
circle of improvement starts with land condition
improvement

Improved
land
ecosystems
conditions

More
biomass
More food

More
water
available

Improved
rain
inﬁltration

Increased
water
storage in
soils

Source: UNCCD (2010).

634

CHAPTER 28

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

notable that Israel is regarded as having one of the
most efficient irrigation systems in the world and yet
does not reap signiﬁcant economic returns on water
investments.
Policy changes needed in and for dryland countries
A variety of solutions and strategies have been developed to mitigate the impacts of water scarcity. These
include empowering of existing institutions cooperating on transboundary river basins with the required
authority to address water scarcity impacts, through
opening consultations, pooling knowledge and initiating joint action. For years the integrated land and
water resources management (ILWRM) principles have
been promoted to enhance sustainable management
of water resources. Management of the full cycle of
water, where groundwater and surface water are linked
with land management, has also come into the fold,
with decentralization and the full participation of all
stakeholders in the water sector considered imperative.
The major goal is to ensure the delivery of enough water to all communities. Therefore, sets of policy tools
are needed to help decision-makers design tailored
programmes to deal with water scarcity. For example, in countries where demand is driven largely by
growth in the agricultural sector in the face of population growth, the most cost-effective policy solutions
should be dominated by agricultural measures, both
in irrigated and rainfed crop production. In countries
where agriculture is expected to account for less water
demand however, while household and industry demand account for higher consumption, the most costeffective policy solutions will include some agricultural
policy measures, but also a range of industrial efficiency measures and common household measures.
Water demand management
Water demand management is part of an integrated
approach towards the sustainable development and
use of water resources. This involves planning and establishing policies for efficient use of water, economic
efficiency and environmental sustainability. Managing
water demand can reduce water consumption, delay
the implementation of additional water supplies and
infrastructure, and conserve scarce water resources.
A special dryland debate: Food self-sufficiency versus
food security
As food and water needs continue to rise, it is becoming increasingly difficult to supply more water to

WWDR4

farmers. The supply of easily accessible freshwater
resources is limited both locally and globally. In arid
and semi-arid regions, in densely populated countries
and in most of the industrialized world, competition
for water resources has set in. In major food-producing
regions, scarcity of water is spreading as a result of
climate change and increased climate variability. In the
light of demographic and economic projections, the
freshwater resources not yet committed are a strategic
asset for development, food security, the health of the
aquatic environment and, in some cases, national security (Koohafkan and Steward, 2008).
Many dryland countries still pursue national policies
for food self-sufficiency. Developing dryland countries
in particular are exposed to great difficulties when it
comes to assuring food-security, especially for rural
communities threatened by frequent droughts and the
impacts of DLDD. Although these communities live
largely traditional lifestyles, which are often very well
adapted to the prevailing climatic conditions (including nomadic/migratory lifestyles), modern aspirations
and sometimes controversial government policies
(e.g. forced settlement policies) have left such communities extremely vulnerable. Relevant alternatives
and tools for planning are needed to assist with the
prioritization and selection of the most appropriate
and sustainable water and resource allocations. Under
the projected medium and long-term climate change
risks for dryland areas around the world, debates on
food self-sufficiency or food security are gaining new
signiﬁcance and must be addressed more analytically
to avoid entire nations facing aggravated DLDD and
eventually famine, deteriorating development potential
and increasing poverty.
Global investments in long-term food security in drylands with water scarcity
How to address food security in drylands experiencing water scarcity is a complex issue, and countries
are confronted with difficult policy and development
options. However as water availability, quality and accessibility are at the heart of local food production
potential – and DLDD threats – it becomes imperative
to explore and support promising alternatives. Many
countries have been advised to promote and develop
secondary and tertiary industries, a process that is
often a very difficult undertaking in already marginalized and poor countries. While it is difficult enough
to build up alternative production industries in developing countries with low human capacities, it is

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

635

also difficult to secure reliable and equitable international food and commodity trade conditions that are
conducive to the requirements of developing nations.
Relevant in-country and international responses should
be promoted to assist dryland countries in developing
long-term food security strategies – at the same time
curbing the threats of DLDD and worsening water scarcity conditions.
In tandem, meeting food security targets in the drylands requires the implementation of sustainable agricultural policies from which local populations would
beneﬁt most. As current irrigated cropping systems require the greatest share of water in most countries and
demand is expected to rise 14% in the next 30 years
(UNCCD, 2010), adaptation to this increase is vital and
will require variability and ﬂexibility. Changes to land
use and cropping patterns are one option for adaptation. Less water-demanding and drought tolerant crops
could also be an alternative. No-tillage, which is the
practice of leaving residue of the previous season’s
crops on farmland, can increase water inﬁltration while
reducing evaporation as well as controlling wind and
water erosion. The use of other soil fertilization and
techniques such as biochar – which simultaneously
increases retention of soil moisture associated with
carbon sequestration – is also promising.
Switching from annual to permanent or semi-permanent
crops could be another option. The advantages of such
farming include reducing tillage energy requirements,
limited topsoil disturbance and soil erosion prevention.
Multi-annual crops also bring the beneﬁts of easy access
to water and soil nutrients in deep soil layers. Land use
changes should be considered where current agricultural patterns are no longer sustainable in terms of water
consumption. Rehabilitation and conversion of marginal
agricultural lands into suitable alternatives, such as forests or grassland, can prevent further land degradation
and enhance soil water retention capacity and regeneration of the long-term farming potential of the land.
28.4.2 An international framework on land and water
The need to address pressing dryland-speciﬁc water issues is urgent. The impact of DLDD on water resources
is a major problem and the associated water scarcity
in the drylands is of overriding concern, especially in
the context of the projected changes in climatic conditions. While a number of expert institutions within the
UN are dealing with relevant individual issues (water,
land, food security, etc.), there is a pressing need for

636

CHAPTER 28

cooperation and agreements at the international level
to address the problems of water scarcity speciﬁcally
in the drylands. Addressing and coordinating such speciﬁc needs through establishing, for example, a water
compact for drylands and a related multi-stakeholder
dialogue can be useful.
The importance of multi-stakeholder coordination has
been recognized within the UN system, both for effective agenda setting and for the coordination of interconnected issues such as effective water and land
management for sustainable development.
Several relevant coordination mechanisms have been
launched over the past years including UN-Water (www.
unwater.org), which was established in 2003. UN-Water
strengthens coordination and coherence among UN entities dealing with issues related to all aspects of fresh
water and sanitation. Similar to the UN-Water approach,
member governments called for a coherent UN systemwide response to the land challenges (UN-Land). A UN
Issue Management Group (IMG) on land was established
in September 2009 for a period of two years. The IMG
proposed options for a coherent UN system-wide contribution to land challenges, including the implementation of the ten year strategic plan of the UNCCD. The
IMG also prepared a UN system-wide rapid response
report on drylands highlighting the importance of key
emerging issues on the global agenda, including climate change, food security and human settlements. In
addition, the IMG presented options for follow-up action on all issues that were included as priorities in the
outcomes of the 17th session of the UN Commission on
Sustainable Development.

Conclusions and recommendations
Water scarcity in the drylands is an increasingly pressing issue that needs to be recognized and addressed
on the international agenda. It is exacerbated by the
negative impacts of DLDD on the availability, quantity
and quality of water resources. As DLDD imperatives
take their toll, water crises and scarcity are expected
to continue raising ethnic and political tensions, contributing to conﬂicts where water resources straddle or
delineate country borders. In some countries, desertiﬁcation, land degradation and the associated water scarcity inevitably exacerbates internal migrations,
forcing whole villages to ﬂee their farms and move to
already overcrowded cities. In the next ten years,
50 million people are at risk of displacement if desertiﬁcation is not checked. Implementing sustainable

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

land and water management policies would help to
overcome the challenge of these increasingly extreme
situations.
The impact of water scarcity varies from region to region and from country to country. Countries that have
the technical and ﬁnancial capacity to deal with the
effects of water scarcity tend to experience less severe
impacts compared to poorer countries. The impacts of
water scarcity are also experienced differently depending on whether the scarcity is chronic and long-term,
periodic and unpredictable, or regional and local. Clear
support mechanisms are required to aid the drylands
countries, especially those with already vulnerable
economies and development challenges, to address
and invest in measures that can alleviate water scarcity
in the future. Projected climate change impacts will
pose an increasingly serious threat to human beings
and development prospects in certain drylands areas.
Hotspots in which worsening climatic conditions are
expected to affect already vulnerable water resources
must be identiﬁed and recognized, and urgent support
measures must be put into place to address the water
crises in such regions.
DLDD impacts on water resources are evident and
must be addressed in an integrated manner with ongoing SLM activities. ILWRM is a key to achieving
longer-lasting development advancements. The UN
system can play a major role in establishing and
coordinating multilateral action on the water crises in
the drylands. The UNCCD is proposing establishing a
‘Water Compact for Drylands’, which could be a
suitable tool to generate the necessary support for
addressing this priority issue – water scarcity.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Bhadauria, T. and Saxena, G. K. 2010. Role of earthworms
in soil fertility maintenance through the production of
biogenic structures. Applied and Environmental Soil
Science. doi:10.1155/2010/816073.
Calder, I. R. 1998. Water Resource and Land Use Issues.
SWIM Paper 3. Colombo, Sri Lanka, International Water
Management Institute.

indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/node/302 (Accessed April
2010.)
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency). n.d. The World Fact Book.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook (Accessed April 2010)
Emerton, L. and Bos, E. 2004. Value: Counting Ecosystems
as an Economic Part of Water Infrastructures. Gland,
Switzerland/Cambridge, UK, International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
Engel, S., Pagiola, S., and Wander, S. 2008. Designing
payments for environmental services in theory and
practice: an overview of the issues. Ecological Economics,
Vol. 65, No. 4, pp. 663–74.
DG Environment – European Commission. 2007. Water
Scarcity and Droughts Second Interim Report June 2007.
DG Environment – European Commission. http://ec.europa.
eu/environment/water/quantity/pdf/comm_droughts/2nd_
int_report.pdf
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 1993. Prevention
of water pollution by agriculture and related activities.
Proceedings of FAO Expert Consultation, Santiago, Chile,
20–23 October 1992. FAO Water Reports, No. 1. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2002. Land Water Linkages in Rural Watersheds.
Proceedings of the electronic workshop organized
by the FAO Land and Water Development Division 18
September–27 October 2000. FAO Land and Water
Bulletin, No. 9. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2008. Sustainable Land Management. NR factsheet,
produced by Natural Resources Management and
Environment Department. ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/
fao/010/ai559e/ai559e00.pdf
Harrison, P. and Pearce, F. 2000. AAAS Atlas of Population
and Environment. Berkeley, CA, University of California
Press.
Heyns, P., Montgomery, S., Pallett, J. and Seely, M. 1998.
Namibia’s Water: A Decision Makers’ Guide. Windhoek,
Namibia, Water and Rural Development, Department of
Water Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture.
Iza, A. and Stein, R. (eds). 2009. Rule – Reforming Water
Governance. Gland, Switzerland, International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
KCS (Kalahari Conservation Society). n.d. Every River has
its People. http://www.kcs.org.bw/Page.aspx?PID=58
(Accessed April 2010.)
Koohafkan, P. and Steward, B. 2008. Water and Cereals in
Drylands. Rome/London, FAO/Earthscan.
Lean, G. 2009. Water scarcity ‘now bigger threat than
ﬁnancial crisis’. The Independent, 16 March 2009. http://
www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/
water-scarcity-now-bigger-threat-than-ﬁnancialcrisis-1645358.html (Accessed April 2010.)

Centre for Science and Environment. 1998. Sukhomajri at the
crossroads. Down to Earth, Vol. 7, No. 19981215. http://www.

WWDR4

DESERTIFICATION, LAND DEGRADATION AND DROUGHT
AND THEIR IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES IN THE DRYLANDS

637

Leonard, J. and Rajot, J. L. 2001. Inﬂuence of termites
on runoff and inﬁltration: Quantiﬁcation and analysis.
Geoderma, Vol. 104, No. 1, pp. 17–40.
Mando, A., Brussaard, L. and Stroosnijder, L. 1999. Termite
and mulch-mediated rehabilitation of vegetation on
crusted soil in West Africa. Restoration Ecology, Vol. 7,
No. 1, pp. 33–41.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems
and Human Well-being: Desertiﬁcation Synthesis. World
Resources Institute, Washington, DC.
Porras, I., Grieg-Gran, M. and Neves, N. 2008. All that glitters:
A review of payments for watershed services in developing
countries. Natural Resource Issues No. 11. London, International
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
Porras, I. and Neves, N. 2006. Markets for watershed services –
country proﬁle. Watershed Markets. London, UK, International
Institute for Environment and Development (IIED).
Schlesinger, W. 1997. Biogeochemistry an Analysis of Global
Change. London, Academic Press.
Shiferaw, B. et al. 2008. Community Watershed Management
in Semi-arid India – The State of Collective Action and
its Effects on Natural Resources and Rural Livelihoods.
CAPRI Working Paper No. 85. Washington, DC, CGIAR
Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property
Rights (CAPRi), International Food Policy Research
Institute.

UNCCD (United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertiﬁcation). 1994. United Nations Convention to
Combat Desertiﬁcation in Countries Experiencing Serious
Drought and/or Desertiﬁcation, Particularly in Africa. Bonn,
Germany, UNCCD. http://www.unccd.int/convention/text/
pdf/conv-eng.pdf (Accessed 12 September 2011.)
––––. 2010. Water Scarcity and Desertiﬁcation. Thematic Fact
Sheet Series No. 2. http://www.unccd.int/documents/
Desertiﬁcationandwater.pdf (Accessed on 16 August 2011.)
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2007.
Chapter 10: Integrated approach to the planning and
management of land resources. Agenda 21. http://www.
unep.org/Documents.Multilingual/Default.asp?DocumentI
D=52&ArticleID=58&l=en (Accessed April 2010.)
Vågen, Tor-G. 2007. Assessment of Land Degradation in the
Sasumua Watershed: Baseline Report. Technical report
conducted by KAPSLM and Sasumua Local Farmers
Association. Nairobi, World Agroforestry Centre.
de Wit, M. and Stankiewicz, J. 2006. Changes in surface
water supply across Africa with predicted climate change.
Science, Vol. 311, No. 5769, pp. 1917–1921.
Woodﬁne, A. 2009. Using Sustainable Land Management
Practices to Adapt to and Mitigate Climate Change in SubSaharan Africa. TERRAFRICA Regional Sustainable Land
Management. www.terrafrica.org

Smith, M., de Groot, D., Perrot-Maître, D. and Bergkamp, G.
(eds.). 2006. Pay: Establishing Payments for Watershed
Services. Gland, Switzerland, International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).

White, R. P and Nackoney, J. 2003. Drylands, People,
and Ecosystem Goods and Services: A Webbased Geospatial Analysis. Washington, DC, World
Resources Institute. http://www.wri.org/publication/
drylands-people-and-ecosystem-goods-and-services

UN (United Nations). 1948. The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. New York, General Assembly of the United
Nations. http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html

Wikipedia. n.d. List of countries by Human Development
Index. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_
Human_Development_Index (Accessed April 2010)

––––. 2010. Resolution Recognizing Access to Clean Water,
Sanitation as Human Right. Sixty-fourth General Assembly
Plenary, 108th Meeting, New York. http://www.un.org/
News/Press/docs/2010/ga10967.doc.htm

638

CHAPTER 28

CHALLENGE AREA REPORTS

CHAPTER 29
Africa

WWAP, in consultation with UN Water/Africa, AMCOW and UNECA
—
Authors Albert Wright, Kodwo Andah and Michael Mutale
Acknowledgements Daniel Adom, Roberto Chionne, Christine Young Adjei and
Stephen Max Donkor (review)

© FAO/Giulio Napolitano

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
After decades of poor economic growth, Africa is now experiencing prospects of robust
growth. But without innovative and concerted efforts, this will not be able to be sustained.
As a result of natural and man-made challenges, the region’s water resources are vastly
underdeveloped.
Although sub-Saharan Africa uses barely 5% of its annual renewable freshwater, access to
improved water supply in both urban and rural contexts is still the lowest in the world. Lack
of sanitation facilities is an even greater challenge to water management in Africa. If MDG
Target 7c on drinking water and sanitation is to be achieved, the number of people served
must more than double, from 350 million in 2000 to 720 million in 2015.
If governments do not take immediate and radical action, the urban slum population in subSaharan African countries is expected to double, from 200 million in 2005, by 2020.
The lack of access to adequate and safe drinking water and food security is not necessarily
tied to the availability of water itself but rather to low adaptive capacity, lack of effective
development strategies, lack of effective regional and subregional institutional frameworks,
and economic and ﬁnancial constraints.
Transboundary river basin management must ﬁnd ways of turning potential conﬂicts
into constructive cooperation and ‘zero-sum predicaments‘ – in which one party’s gain is
another’s loss – into win–win situations.

29.1 Regional issues and recent
developments
Africa is home to 54 countries. It is a region characterized by transboundary waters, with international river
basins covering about 62% of its land area. The region
is also endowed with precious industrial and strategic
minerals. Yet these resources remain largely under-exploited, leaving Africa as one of the poorest and least
developed regions of the world. In fact, economic performance from the mid-1970s to the early 1990s was
so poor the period was dubbed the ‘lost decade’.
However, in recent years this situation has changed for
the better. Analysis by The Economist (2011) reveals that
in the ﬁrst decade of the new millennium, leading up to
2010, ten of the fastest growing economies in the world
were in Africa. There are also positive indicators showing
that far-reaching economic reforms adopted across the
region have begun to yield positive results in many of its
countries. Negative GDP growths have given way to progressively increasing growth across the region, averaging
around the mean ﬁgures for developing countries
(Figure 29.1). In terms of per capita GDP growth, however,
Africa is still far behind all other regions (Figure 29.2).
Hence, in its Outlook for Africa document Africa’s Pulse,
the World Bank (2011) reports that, prior to the present

worldwide economic crisis, more than a decade of
steady growth and debt relief had strengthened African
countries’ ﬁscal balances. By 2008, 72% of African countries had positive primary ﬁscal balances compared with
28% in the early 1990s. Figure 29.3 shows the dynamics of economic growth in the region, and, as depicted
in Figure 29.4, among the 15 fastest growing economies
of the world, 12 are in Africa. All this shows that in spite
of the perturbations in the global economy, as well as
drought in the eastern parts of the continent, Africa’s
growth prospects for the forecast horizon remain robust.
Africa appears to be endowed with abundant water resources. It has 17 rivers with a total estimated
catchment area of over 100,000 km2, 160 lakes larger
than 27 km2. It has vast wetlands and a limited but
widespread groundwater resource. In addition, it
has a huge potential for energy production through
hydropower production… [However], there are natural and man-made challenges that make it difficult
to capture the inherent beneﬁts and the full potential in Africa’s water resources to support sustainable developments in Africa. (SARPN, 2002, p. 13)
As is the case with other natural resources in the region, the water resources of Africa are vastly underdeveloped; however, it is now generally recognized

FIGURE 29.1

FIGURE 29.2

Annual GDP growth rate

Per capita GDP (constant $US)

6,000

10

5,000

GPD (US$)

Rate (%)

5

0

4,000

3,000

-5
2,000
-10

1,000

0

-15
Middle East
and North
Africa
2006

SubSaharan
Africa
2005

World

2000

1990

Sources: Prepared by K. Andah from data from World Bank (2008)
and the EarthTrends database (no longer active) from the World
Resources Institute.

WWDR4

Middle East
and North
Africa
2006

SubSaharan
Africa
2005

World

2000

1990

Sources: Prepared by K. Andah from data from World Bank (2008)
and the EarthTrends database (no longer active) from the World
Resources Institute.

AFRICA

641

FIGURE 29.3
Dynamics of sub-Saharan Africa economic growth

Per cent growth in GDP
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Pre-Crisis Average

Sub-Saharan Africa

2011

2012

2013

Forecast

Sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa

Source: World Bank (2011, ﬁg. 2, p.3).

FIGURE 29.4
Fastest growing economies of sub-Saharan Africa

Ghana
China
Congo
Ethiopia
India
Mozambique
Nigeria
Rwanda
Democratic Republic of Congo
Zimbabwe
Angola
Botswana
Tanzania
Brazil
Russia
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Source: World Bank (2011, ﬁg, 3, p. 3).

642

CHAPTER 29

REGIONAL REPORTS

that water has a vital role to play in the development
agenda for the region. It is understood that although
water can become an instrument for sustainable development, it can also become a constraint, ‘capable of
wiping away the gains of development either progressively or overnight, as happened in Mozambique in
the ﬂoods of 2000’ (SARPN, 2002, p. 2). Its improper
management can result in degradation of productive
soils, as has been happening in the Sahel region; or in
the loss of valuable ecosystem use, as is occurring in
the Lake Chad basin. In addition, unless appropriate
approaches are followed, economic and social development could negatively impact on the availability and
quality of water resources, thereby limiting their value
for future development. There is therefore a concerted
effort to address challenges that may hamper the effective development and management of the region’s
water resources. These efforts are enshrined in the
African Water Vision 2025, which was endorsed by
the African Union in 2004 and serves as the basis for
water development and management by the African
Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW), the African
Development Bank (AfDB) and the UN system organized as UN Water/Africa.
This chapter reviews some of the drivers and challenges being encountered in water resources management
in the region. It reviews the risks and uncertainties they
pose, and presents some of the response measures being followed.

29.2 External drivers
29.2.1 Climate change
Africa is characterized by extreme climatic zones;
from humid equatorial and tropical zones through
the semi-arid to the arid North, creating about
seven distinct hydro-climatic zones. The distribution
of rainfall over Africa therefore exhibits extreme
unevenness, both spatially and temporally.
(UNECA, 2001, p. 1)
On a continental basis, Africa has a relatively plentiful
supply of rainwater: a total of 20,359 km3 per year or
678 mm per year (FAO, 2005). The variation in precipitation is determined by climate variability, which
is in turn driven by the movement of the Inter-Tropical
Convergence Zone (ITCZ). Average precipitation is
distributed over the continent from the equator towards the northern and southern fringes in a diminishing manner. Risks due to uncertainties inherent in

WWDR4

movement of the ITCZ are manifested in high seasonality in rainfall, uncertain timing of the onset and duration of the rainfall season, and frequent hydrometeorological extremes of ﬂoods and droughts.
Rainfall anomalies, both positive and negative, are
very frequent over the continent. Most freshwater comes from seasonal rains, which vary with the
climatic zone. The greatest rainfall occurs along the
equator, especially the area from the Niger Delta
to the Congo River Basin. The Sahara Desert has
virtually no rain … Southern Africa receive[s] 12% …
of the region’s rainfall (FAO, 1995). In Western and
Central Africa, rainfall is exceptionally variable and
unpredictable. (UNECA, 2001, p. 3)
Several factors inﬂuence climate variability in the
region. The most dominant is the El Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), which is responsible for inter-annual climate variability over eastern and southern Africa.
The 1997–1998 ENSO event resulted in extreme weather conditions over eastern Africa; and the 1999–2000
La Niña is suspected to have caused the devastating
ﬂoods in Mozambique. In the Sahel, ENSO appears to
inﬂuence annual variation and reduces rainfall. Rainfall
variability in the area is also inﬂuenced by factors
like sea surface temperature (SST) and atmospheric
dynamics. Across western Africa, the Atlantic Ocean
plays a key role in year-to-year changes in seasonal climatic variations.
The climate in the region also displays high interdecadal variability. It appears that aerosols and dust may
also play important roles in modulating climate variability in the region, indicating the presence of extremely dense and deep dust layers in the Sahel/Sudan
area (reaching several kilometres) during the main
Harmattan or dust season from November to April.
29.2.2 Transboundary water basins
Transboundary water basins cover two-thirds of the
total land area in the region. They are ‘home to threequarters of the entire African population and account
for a staggering 93% of the total surface water resource
base of the continent’ (Turton et al., 2006, p. 23).
Some of them are shared by as many as ten countries.
The continent has over 80 major river/lake basins,
some of which are among the largest in the world.
About 55 of the world’s 200 major international
rivers are in Africa – a number greater than in any

AFRICA

643

other continent. …The political boundaries of fourteen African countries almost entirely fall within
the catchment areas of one or more transboundary
river systems. (UNECA, 2006, p. 201)
Ten major river basins are shared by more than four
African countries:
The Nile Basin, for instance, has 10 riparian countries [9 within sub-Saharan Africa]; the Congo
has 9, the Niger has 11, and the Zambezi has 9.
The Volta has 6 and the Chad has 8. Then there are
countries through which several international
rivers pass. One extreme case is Guinea, which
has 12 such rivers.
Water interdependency is accentuated by the fact
that high percentages of total ﬂows in downstream
countries originate from outside their borders. For
example, … in Mauritania and Botswana, the corresponding ﬁgures are 95% and 94%, respectively;
in the Gambia it is 86% and in the Sudan it is 77%.
(Mwanza, 2005, p. 99)
Of great importance is the transboundary Nubian
Sandstone Aquifer System beneath the north-eastern
Sahara, with a total extension of over 2.2 million km2.

29.2.3 Demographic pressures
Pressures emanating from the region’s population
dynamics, especially rapid rural migration into periurban areas, constitute a major challenge to the provision of water and sanitation services, coupled with
fast growing urban centres. An estimated 61% of the
region’s population lives in rural areas, exceeding the
world average of 50%, and the average population
density is 29 inhabitants per km2, with very high variations at national and subregional levels. The region’s
urban population grew at 3.4% between 2005 and
2010, which is 1.1% faster than the rural population
growth rate (UNEP, 2010). The urban slum population in African countries is expected to double by
2020, from 200 million in 2005, if governments do

FIGURE 29.5

FIGURE 29.6

Population distribution in Africa

Comparative population growth rate

800,000

2.5

Rate (%)

3.0

Population (x1,000)

1,000,000

600,000

2.0

1.5

400,000
1.0

200,000

0.5
0.0

0
North
Africa

SubSaharan
Africa

1990
Total pop. (x1,000)

North
Africa

SubSaharan
Africa

2000
Urban pop. (x1,000)

North
Africa

SubSaharan
Africa

2008

CHAPTER 29

World

Middle East
and North
Africa

2010–2015

2000–2005

SubSaharan
Africa
1990-1995

Rural pop. (x1,000)

Sources: Prepared by K. Andah from data from WHO/UNICEF
(2010), UNDESA (2007), and the EarthTrends database (no longer
active) from the World Resources Institute.

644

This is shared between four countries: Chad, Egypt,
Libya and Sudan. It is the world’s biggest repository of
fossil water with a volume estimated from 150,000 km3
to 457,550 km3. The most important sub-basins are
the western Kufra Basin and the eastern Dahkla Basin.
Actual withdrawal rates by the main riparian countries
have been estimated (Bakhbakhi, 2004) as:
đ Egypt: 1,029 mm3 per year
đ Libya: 857 mm3 per year
đ Sudan: 407 mm3 per year
đ Chad: very low rate

Sources: Prepared by K. Andah from data from UNDESA (2007)
and the EarthTrends database (no longer active) from the World
Resources Institute.

REGIONAL REPORTS

not take immediate and radical action (UN-Habitat,
2005). However, urban slum populations are highly
mobile and the numbers are difficult to assess. It is
clear, though, that improvements are not keeping
pace with the rapid urbanization of slum populations
(UN-Habitat, 2010). This rapid and poorly managed
growth of urban areas, especially in peri-urban slums,
has overwhelmed most municipal water services and
constitutes a major challenge to water and sanitation
development.
In 2004, Africa’s population was estimated at 868 million inhabitants, representing about 14% of the world’s
population. At the time that total population growth
in Africa appeared to be stabilizing (Figure 29.5), the
global population growth rate was progressively decreasing, from about 2.8% in 1990–1995 to a projected
value of about 2.3% in 2010–2015 (Figure 29.6). This
trend, coupled with an increasing trend of economic
growth, is likely to contribute to increased prospects
for socioeconomic development.

29.3 Principal risks, uncertainties and
opportunities
29.3.1 Principal risks
Principal risks in Africa include water scarcity, extreme
hydrological events, water quality degradation, and
loss of water-related ecosystems.
Water scarcity
Although blessed with an abundant water supply,
Africa is the second driest continent in the world, after
Australia. It is estimated that around 200 million people in sub-Saharan Africa face serious water shortages, and that by 2025 nearly 230 million will face water
scarcity (UNEP, 2008). One of the consequences of
this is the prevalence of aridity and drought conditions.
About 16% of the population in the region lives in semiarid areas. In Niger, severe drought resulted in famine
in 2005, causing food insecurity for 2.5 million people
(WFP, 2005). According to Sharma et al. (1996) eight
countries in sub-Saharan Africa were suffering from
water stress or water scarcity in 1990, and the World
Bank estimates that by 2025, the number of countries
experiencing water stress will rise to 18, affecting 600
million people.
There are many contributing factors to the increase in
water scarcity in the region. Climate change is a major
factor. In the case of the long-term drought that afflicted the Sahel from the 1960s to the 1990s, and caused

WWDR4

widespread disasters, sea surface temperature changes
were implicated. Other likely contributing factors were
under-investment in water storage infrastructure, use
of inefficient systems, rapid population growth, expanding urbanization, and increased economic and
industrial development. Additional factors include
changes in lifestyles, as well as poor and unsustainable
land management practices like over-grazing, over-cultivation and deforestation.
In addition to drought and aridity, risks from water
scarcity include conﬂict between sectors and between countries, land and water quality degradation,
eutrophication, siltation, salination, alkalinization of
soils, reduced ﬂows in rivers and adverse impacts on
business.
29.3.2 Uncertainty
The two basic sources of uncertainty in water resources
management in Africa are natural variability in physical
phenomena and incomplete knowledge.
An example of natural variability is the distribution
of rainfall, which exhibits extreme unevenness, both
spatially and temporally over the region (see Section
29.2.1). As regards incomplete knowledge, the major
cause in the region is two-fold, namely inadequate
historical hydrometeorological data, and lack of scientiﬁc understanding of the nature of the physical
phenomena and processes. Inadequate past investment in hydrometeorological data collection and
analysis has led to hydrological, hydraulic and structural uncertainties. This, combined with the lack of
scientiﬁc understanding of the systems and processes
taking place, has resulted in inadequate knowledge
about the present and past states of the resource being managed. There is also a lack of knowledge about
how the water resource systems will change over
time. In effect, it is impossible to adequately model
current situations and predict future conditions, or to
construct appropriate probabilities necessary to understand the nature of the hazards facing vulnerable
groups so that appropriate strategies for addressing the risks they face can be developed. As a result
of the complexity of the physical phenomena, both
types of uncertainties are expected to remain in the
foreseeable future. This highlights a need for water
resources management, including integrated water
resources management (IWRM) practices, to adapt to
reﬂect these uncertainties.

AFRICA

645

29.3.3 Opportunities
Some of these transboundary water basins in the
region hold tremendous potential for mutually beneﬁcial uses, including cross-boundary hydropower
generation, large-scale multi-country irrigation
schemes, inter- and intra-country navigation, joint
inland ﬁsheries development, joint water supply
projects, environmental protection, wildlife conservation, recreation and eco-tourism development.
The Congo River Basin alone holds almost 30% of
Africa’s total fresh surface water reserves and the
world’s largest hydropower potential in any one single river basin [an estimated 100,000 MW of power
production capacity] …
The main thrust of the management of transboundary river basins is to ﬁnd ways of turning potential
conﬂicts into constructive cooperation, and to turn
what is often perceived as a zero-sum predicament
– in which one party’s gain is another’s loss – into a
win-win situation. (UNECA, 2006, pp. 201–4)
The challenge is to adopt a paradigm shift from water
sharing to beneﬁts sharing.
Integrated development of these transboundary
natural resources will not only contribute signiﬁcantly
to the socio-economic development of the Riparian
countries sharing these rivers and lakes, they will also
promote and enhance sub regional and regional cooperation for economic integration in Africa. However, integrated development of these resources on the basis
of win-win principles needs enhanced and concerted
cooperation among the Riparian countries sharing
these resources. (UNECA, 2006, pp. 202)
The SADC example
As a vivid example, under the auspices of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), falling within the framework of the Revised Protocol on Shared
Water Courses in SADC, South Africa has entered into
various cooperation agreements on multilateral projects with relevant riparian countries on subregional integration, including the following (Turton et al., 2006):
đ The Lesotho Highlands Water Project, comprising
dams, tunnels and pipelines for transferring water
from rivers in Lesotho, through the divide onto the
Vaal river catchment in South Africa
đ The Komati River Development Project, consisting
currently of the Maguga and Driekoppies Dams for

646

CHAPTER 29

đ

đ

đ
đ

storing water mainly for irrigation development in
Swaziland and South Africa
The Noord-Oewer Irrigation Project, which uses
South African infrastructure for a development in
Namibia
The Barberton Water Supply Project, which draws
water from the Lomati River in Swaziland for use in
South Africa
The Phongolo Poort Dam where Swaziland has
granted South Africa a storage servitude
The Gaberone Water Supply Project, which transfers
water from South Africa to the capital of Botswana

The most pressing challenge is the lack of complete,
reliable and consistent data about the transboundary water resources, especially groundwater; followed
by weak institutional frameworks. Thus, there is the
potential for conﬂicts over these waters. Nevertheless,
there are also over 90 international water agreements
to help manage shared water basins on the African
continent (UNEP, 2010).
Inter-basin water transfer schemes
The Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), listed
above, is an example of an inter-basin water-transfer scheme. The Congo Cross-Border Water Pipeline
Project (CWPP) is another such example. As envisaged, the latter project will involve diverting water
from one of the river’s southern tributaries by pumping it over the Angolan highlands to boost the ﬂow of
a tributary of the Kavango River. The CWPP is expected
to be the biggest water project in sub-Saharan Africa.
It is estimated to cost US$6 billion and will generate thousands of jobs for local economies in Angola,
Botswana, Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), Namibia and the Sudan.
It will also generate huge business opportunities such
as electricity and communications supplies resulting
from the ﬁbre optics that will be positioned along the
pipelines.
Namibia sees the water from Congo as an ideal opportunity to have ‘irrigation schemes in the Namib
Desert, modelled on similar projects undertaken
by Sahara desert countries’. To do that, however,
Namibia will pump the water from the Kavango
River (250 km) to deliver it to the capital, Windhoek.
Botswana, on the other hand, intends to pump the
water from the Kavango Delta (300 km) to the
nearest agricultural area, or a further 700 km to its
capital, Gaborone. (Ngurare, 2001; Tennyson, n.d.)

REGIONAL REPORTS

29.4 Geographical hotspots
29.4.1 The Sahel
One of the hotspots in Africa is the Sahel. The term
refers both to an eco-climatic zone and to a geopolitical entity. The eco-climatic zone refers to the semi-arid
transition region between the Sahara desert and the
wetter regions of equatorial Africa. It extends from the
Atlantic to the Indian Ocean, and it is characterized by
dryness, intense heat and sporadic irregular rainfall,
as well as periodic ﬂooding and prolonged droughts
that are often accompanied by widespread famine and
large-scale deaths as well as the displacement of people
and livestock.
Rainfall records, archaeological and other forms of
evidence suggest that drought and ﬂoods, as well as
consequent famines and other forms of widespread
devastation that are characteristic of the Sahel in our
time, are not a recent phenomenon. On the contrary,
they have been a recurring feature in the region from
time immemorial; what is more, they seem to be recurring with increasing intensity and frequency.
A major drought occurred in the Sahel from June to
August 2010. There was also a major drought during
the early 1970s, which caught the world unprepared
and resulted in disasters of major proportions and resulted in costly international interventions. The nature
of this experience raised questions about how best
to coordinate the multitude of assistance efforts by
donors and recipients. It also raised questions about
the optimal balance between relief, recovery and
development.
Consideration of these questions led to the establishment of a new organization in 1973 by heads of state
and governments of countries in West Africa that
have parts of their territories falling within the Sahel
region. This organization is known as the Permanent
Inter-State Committee for Drought Control in the
Sahel (CILSS). The part of the broader eco-climatic
Sahel zone that falls within the territorial boundaries
of member states of the CILSS is what constitutes the
geopolitical ‘Sahel’ region of West Africa.
There are nine Member States in the CILSS of which
four are coastal countries (The Gambia, Guinea Bissau,
Mauritania and Senegal), four are landlocked countries
(Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and Niger), and one is an island state (Cape Verde).

WWDR4

There are approximately 58 million people in the CILSS
countries, which cover an area of 5.7 million km2. In addition to having similar climatic conditions – the Sahel
climate – the people of these countries:
have a lot in common in terms of cultures and livelihood systems. These livelihood systems include
agriculture, livestock herding, ﬁshing, short and
long-distance trading, and a variety of urban occupations. Dryland crops such as millet, sorghum and
cowpeas constitute the staple foods of the populations while groundnut and cotton are the major
cash crops. Farming in this region is almost entirely
reliant on three to four months of summer rainfall,
except along the banks of the major rivers, lakes,
and other seasonal water courses, where some irrigation activities are undertaken. Livestock herding
is a very important aspect of life in the region, and
constitutes the major source of income in some
areas. (UNEP, 2006, p. 2)
The mandate of CILSS is to invest in research in food
security and in the ﬁght against the effects of drought
and desertiﬁcation. Recognizing the crucial role water
plays in its mandate, the members of CILLS have decided to form a complementary global coalition on water to address speciﬁc problems at a local level.
29.4.2 Lake Chad
Lake Chad is the fourth largest lake in Africa, after
lakes Victoria, Tangayika and Nyasa. It is a very shallow
freshwater lake, averaging about 1.5 m deep even in
normal years. Its four riparian countries are Cameroon,
Chad, Niger and Nigeria, who collectively comprise the
original members of the Lake Chad Basin Commission
(LCBC). The Central African Republic (CAR) became
a member in 1994, Libya joined in 2008, and Sudan
and the Republic of Congo were accepted as observer
countries. The basin extends over an area of 2,397,423
km2 distributed over eight countries as follows: Chad
(46.3% of the basin), Niger (28%), CAR (9.1%), Nigeria
(7.5%), Algeria (3.7%), Sudan (3.4%), Cameroon (1.9%)
and Libya (0.1%).
The lake, ﬁrst surveyed in 1823, is believed to be a remnant of a former inland sea that has grown and shrunk
with changes in climate over the past 13,000 years. In
1964, when the LCBC was established, the lake covered
an area of 25,000 km2. Today, it covers an area of less
than 1000 km2 during the annual lowest water levels in
the region.

AFRICA

647

The shrinkage has been attributed to many causes
such as overgrazing in the area surrounding the lake,
which triggers a process of desertiﬁcation and the decline of vegetation. Some have placed the blame on
human water use such as irrigation; others highlight
climate change as a key factor.
The shrinkage is also reported to have given rise to disputes between countries over rights to the remaining
water. Violence is also emerging between farmers and
herders over the use of water.
[The lake is] fringed by a zone of swampy vegetation dominated by reeds (Phragmites spp.), papyrus (Cyperus papyrus) and cattail (Typha australis) …
There are many small islands formed by the invasion
of moving sand dunes near the northeastern coast;
some of them are inhabited or utilized as bases for
ﬁshing. Besides the products of agriculture, livestock grazing and ﬁshery, the drainage basin of L.
Chad is known for its yield of natural soda, an activity that contributes to keeping the lake water fresh.
(ILEC, n.d.)
The lake is home to many ﬂora and fauna including
over 44 species of algae, and has large areas of
swamp and reed beds covered with Yaere grassland
of Echinoclora pyramidalis, Vetiveria nigritana, Oryza
longistminata and Hyparrhenia rufa varieties. Its
ﬂoating islands host a wide variety of wildlife and
large communities of migratory and near endemic
birds. It is feared that the shrinking of the lake is
threatening nesting sites of the Black Crowned Crane
(Bolearica pavonia pavonina). The lake is also a good
source of ﬁsh.
Environmental problems
A transboundary diagnostic analysis conducted in 1989
and 2007 by LCBC identiﬁed the following seven regional environmental problems (LCBC, 2008):
đ Variability of the hydrological regime and availability
of freshwater
đ Water pollution
đ Low variability of biological resources
đ Loss of biodiversity
đ Destruction and modiﬁcation of ecosystems
đ Sedimentation of rivers and water courses
đ Invading species
They were all determined to be products of the combined effects of global climate change and the use of

648

CHAPTER 29

unsustainable practices and resources by the evergrowing basin populations.
Saving the lake and its basin
The LCBC has launched a programme to save the lake.
A key feature of this effort is the Inter-Basin-Water
Transfer Project (IBWT). This entails the transfer of water from the Congo/Oubangui Rivers into Lake Chad.
Member States of the LCBC have already contributed
the US$6.07 needed for the project’s feasibility study.
A complementary effort includes the following:
đ The 2008 adoption by the LCBC Council of Ministers
of a Strategic Action Plan developed within the
framework of a GEF project. The aim of this Action
Plan is to reverse the general ecosystem degradation
trends in the area.
đ The development of national action plans to meet
the priorities of the national portions of the lake.
The proposed inter-basin water transfer project is envisaged as the solution to the problems of underdevelopment, food insecurity and poverty in the West and
Central African subregion.
29.4.3 The Horn of Africa: Macroeconomic effects of
drought
In addition to the turmoil in the global economy, parts
of Africa are facing speciﬁc challenges, the most severe of which is the drought in the Horn of Africa – the
worst in over 50 years. The most affected economy
is Somalia, but parts of Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya and
Tanzania are also suffering from poor rains and dry
weather conditions. An estimated 13.3 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance across the Horn.
With agriculture accounting for about 20% to 40% of
GDP in most African countries, and with about 93%
dependent on good rains, the impact of poor rains on
GDP growth in sub-Saharan African economies can be
signiﬁcant.
Initial estimates suggest that in the average subSaharan African economy, every percentage decline in
growth in the agricultural sector cuts GDP growth by
0.26 percentage points. However, the decline in GDP
will differ by country, depending on the size of the
agricultural sector in the country’s economy and the
strength of the agricultural sector’s linkages with the
rest of the economy. First quarter 2011 GDP ﬁgures for
Kenya already show that growth in the agriculture sector slowed down to 2.2% compared to 5.7% over the
same quarter in 2010. Coffee delivery fell by some 28%

REGIONAL REPORTS

in the ﬁrst quarter of 2011 in Kenya and, for the ﬁrst half
of 2011, tea production fell by 16% (year-on-year) on account of the unseasonal hot and dry weather conditions
and poorly distributed rainfall in tea-growing areas.
A simulated 10% reduction in crop and livestock production in the pastoralist areas in Ethiopia – the areas most
affected by the current drought – shows agricultural
growth declining by 0.6 percentage points and industry
and services sectors by about 0.2 percentage points (for
2010–2011). The overall effect would be to dampen GDP
growth by 0.4 percentage points. Households directly impacted by drought-related production shocks are likely to
be severely affected as they lose income and livelihoods.
To the extent that these shocks are reﬂected in prices
at the local and national level, net consumers of food in
both rural and urban areas lose. Persistence of drought
or worsening of the severity of the drought would have
more adverse effects. For example, a shock simulating
three years of drought (i.e. through 2012–2013) would
shave 0.3 percentage points off GDP growth in 2012 and
2013. Poor rains would reduce hydroelectric power generation in an environment where lack of adequate power
supply is already a binding constraint on economic activity. Tanzania has carried out extensive power rationing in
2011. Some 90% of large ﬁrms in the country have their
own generators which, being much more expensive, signiﬁcantly reduce the proﬁt margins of ﬁrms. In Tanzania,
growth forecasts have already been lowered by some
0.3% on account of the lower rains, power outages and
higher inﬂation rates.
There has also been some power rationing in Kenya.
The Kenya Manufacturers Association estimates that
generator power costs alone could account for some
40% of overall costs. The estimated impact of the
drought and high food and fuel prices, combined with
below normal rainfall, is a 1 percentage point reduction in GDP growth in Kenya. The GDP impact of the
drought does not adequately capture the effects on
households. In general, droughts affect poorer households disproportionately. For instance, in Kenya where
some 3.8 million people are estimated to have been affected, the poverty head count in the drought-affected
areas averages 70% compared with a national poverty
rate of 47%. Similarly, in Ethiopia the majority of the
4.8 million people affected by the drought live below
the poverty line. In both countries, cereal prices have
risen sharply, signiﬁcantly reducing the purchasing
power of poor households, who spend 60–70% of their
incomes on food (World Bank, 2011).

WWDR4

29.5 Response measures
Using the Africa Water Vision 2025 as the regional
policy framework, a number of initiatives have been
undertaken since 2000 to respond to these regional
challenges. They include initiatives at regional level
(by such organizations as the African Union, the UN
Economic Commission for Africa, AfDB, UN Water/
Africa, AMCOW, the Africa Water Task Force, the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development [NEPAD] and
the Africa Water Facility); initiatives at basin level (by
various water basin authorities) and actions at country
level. Other responses include collaborations between
regional and international water resources agencies
like the Global Water Partnership (GWP)/AMCOW
programme to support climate change adaptation in
Africa region. In addition, a number of special and regular meetings on water have been introduced. These
include the annual Africa Water Week series, AfricaSan
meetings, and the Sharm el-Sheikh and Sirte Summits
of the African Union, dedicated to discussion of water
and agriculture, respectively.
29.5.1 Concerted African response to regional and
international commitments
Political and institutional perspectives increasingly
acknowledge that regional and subregional concerted
efforts can go a long way to ensure that African countries can face the challenging task of mobilizing their
water resources for sustainable development in the
face of climate variability and change and other uncertainties. It is therefore important to pool all human and
institutional resources at local, national, subregional
and continental scales to tackle the common challenges by improving:
đ Understanding and quantitative knowledge of the
various sources of uncertainty
đ The way in which this is communicated to water resource managers and other stakeholders
đ The way in which uncertainty is incorporated into
water resource management decision-making
(Hughes, 2008)
The challenges include the need for early warning systems for the prediction of:
đ Onset and duration of rainfall seasons
đ Intra seasonal dry spells
đ Rainfall anomalies based on inter-hemispherical
teleconnections
đ Lead time of impacts of El Niño and La Niña

AFRICA

649

African Union initiatives, AMCOW, the African Water
Facility and the increasing role of the AfDB in water
resources development and management, with special
reference to the rural water and sanitation sector, all
testify to ongoing high commitments to water resources development and management. The meetings of
the 2nd Extraordinary Session of Heads of State and
Governments of the African Union, in Sirte, Libya in
2004 dedicated to agriculture, and the African Union
Summit of Heads of State on Water and Sanitation
held at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt in 2008, in particular,
reﬂect political support at the highest level. The annual Africa Water Week series, held under the auspices
of AMCOW and launched in 2007, have added further
impetus to the platform for information sharing and
awareness on water resources development and management. There is now an urgent need for wider international cooperation to augment regional and subregional efforts. This can be through collaborative efforts
such as the EU-Africa Strategic Initiative and others to
be developed with other development partners, such
as the growing relationships with developing Asian
partners, in particular Japan.
These continental and subregional institutional frameworks are necessary for ‘strengthening specialized
institutional capacities in order to provide useful and
reliable data-information-knowledge and services in
support of more effective development policies, economic plans, socio-economic activities and investments
across the African continent’ (UNECA, 2010, p. 2), which
take into account the uncertainties in climate change.
For example:
African climate institutions like the African Centre
for Meteorological Applications for Development
(ACMAD), the IGAD Climate Prediction and
Applications Centre (ICPAC), the SADC Drought
Monitoring Centre (SADC-DMC) have worked on the
CRM [Climate Risk Management] approach in conjunction with the International Research Institute for
Climate and Society (IRI) and are building capacities
for its smooth integration within sectoral decisionmaking processes, such as agricultural production,
food security, water resource management, health
protection and disaster risk management. (UNECA,
2010, p. 3)
They can also facilitate the harmonization of legal
frameworks at the regional level for protecting shared
water resources and for making their use sustainable

650

CHAPTER 29

through a beneﬁt-sharing paradigm. Feasible arrangements can also be made for inter-basin water
transfer schemes that involve saving dying water ecosystems such as Lake Chad, and initiating transfers
from water-rich basins to drier zones like the Sahel.
Many such projects are being studied across the continent (UN Water/Africa, 2007).
29.5.2 Implementation of targets under the African
Water Vision and the MDGs
During 1999–2000, the Organisation of African Unity
(OAU) (now the African Union), together with the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
(UNECA), GWP branches in Africa and the AfDB mobilized human and material resources for the drafting
and adoption of the African Water Vision 2025 along
with its Framework for Action, and towards Africa’s
full participation in the 2nd World Water Forum in
The Hague in 2000. Financed by the secretariat of
the 2nd World Water Forum, the ﬁnal document was
published by UNECA. Implementation of the provisions of the Vision include: the Accra conference on
Sustainable Development in 2002, the ﬁrst Pan African
Water Conference in 2003 (Box 29.1), the development
of the Africa Water Facility in 2004, and the publication in 2006 of the ﬁrst edition of the African Water
Development Report (Box 29.2).
The Accra Conference on Sustainable Development
The ﬁrst, most signiﬁcant activity to ﬂow from the
Africa Water Vision was the Accra Conference on
Water and Sustainable Development, held in April
2002. The conference was organized by the Africa
Water Task Force (AWTF) with ﬁnancial support from
the Government of the Netherlands. Its success was
followed by the organization of the Water Dome
event by the AWTF during the World Conference on
Sustainable Development, held in Johannesburg later
in 2002. The Water Dome enabled all water-related
activities to be conducted at a single venue during the
conference.
African Water Facility
The African Water Facility (AWF) is an initiative developed by AWTF, and developed under the leadership of AMCOW and AfDB. It is hosted by AfDB, at
the request of AMCOW, and is designed to mobilize
resources to ﬁnance water resources development
activities in Africa within the framework of building
African capacity for effective water resources project development, preparation and implementation.

REGIONAL REPORTS

Within this context it has been estimated ‘that on
aggregate, US$20 billion per year will be required to
achieve the targets of the African Water Vision 2025’
(NEPAD, 2006). Out of this amount, it is estimated

BOX 29.1
The Pan African Water Conference

The ﬁrst Pan African Implementation and Partnership
Conference on Water was convened by AMCOW, UNWater/Africa and the AfDB and was held at the United
Nations Conference Centre in Addis Ababa from 8–13
December 2003. The second was held in November 2009
at Addis Ababa.
‘The [ﬁrst] Conference attracted more than 1400 delegates and 45 ministers in charge of water, environment
and housing. The participants included national delegates,
key stakeholders, intergovernmental organizations, cooperation development partners and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs)’ (UNECA, 2006, p. 293). The
Conference conﬁrmed the determination of African countries in ‘confronting issues of integrated water resources
management (IWRM) and in meeting the targets of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), both at national
and subregional levels, and also through partnerships at
the international level, by placing water and sanitation at
the centre of their strategies for socio-economic development. … The Conference provided a platform for African
countries, the international community and UN agencies
to reaffirm their commitment to solving Africa’s water crisis and to collectively implement the actions envisaged in
the African Water Vision 2025, the Water Agenda of the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), the
World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) targets and the MDGs on water…. The thematic sessions were
dedicated to the challenge areas, including: water, sanitation and human settlements; water and food security;
protecting ecosystems and livelihoods; water and climate;
ﬁnancing water infrastructure; integrated water resources
management (IWRM); water allocation; water wisdom;
and water governance. Each session came out with recommendations, which were discussed at a joint ministerial and stakeholders plenary sessions. One of the main
outcomes of the Conference was the presentation and
adoption of subregional project portfolios to the ministerial segment. These projects have been prepared through
national and subregional consultations and meetings, addressing the implication of the outcomes of the WSSD
on regional water initiatives and setting up a concrete
agenda in implementing the targets of the African Water
Vision and the MDGs, with special emphasis on water supply and sanitation and the strategic application of IWRM.’
(UNECA, 2006, pp. 293–4)

WWDR4

that about US$10 billion is required to meet urgent
water needs. The AWF therefore focuses its operational support on the attainment of the following
main strategic objectives:
đ Strengthen water governance
đ Mobilize and apply resources to meet urgent water
and sanitation needs
đ Strengthen the ﬁnancial base
đ Improve water knowledge
Since it became operational in 2006, the AWF has approved 66 projects at a total investment of €79 million.
The African Water Information Clearing House (AWICH)
UNECA has been entrusted by UN Water/Africa with
setting up an information clearing house for waterrelated issues in Africa. A technical group was created
to discuss in detail the modalities and technicalities
of the clearing house. The African Water Information
Clearing House was ﬁnally established in 2005 as part
of the UNECA website, and covers the following water
and environmental components:
đ Rainfall and climatic data
đ Environment
đ Rivers
đ Lakes
đ Groundwater
đ Seas/oceans
đ Water quality

BOX 29.2
The African Water Development Report (AWDR)

Due to the particular problems of water resources
development and management in Africa, the InterAgency Group on Water in Africa (now referred to as
UN Water/Africa), decided in April 2001 in Niamey to
develop an African Water Development Report (AWDR).
It was conceived along the framework of the World
Water Development Report (WWDR), and is intended
to serve as an input to the preparation of the WWDRs.
The ﬁrst edition was published in 2006 and launched at
the 4th World Water Forum in Mexico under the aegis
of AMCOW. The aim of the AWDR is to afford African
countries and other stakeholders the necessary tools
and skills to monitor the goals and targets of the African
Water Vision. The World Water Assessment Programme
(WWAP), UN Water/Africa and AMCOW initiated contact
in 2011 to revitalize this report as a part of a broader
monitoring and assessment effort.

AFRICA

651

UN Water/Africa
In 1992, the United Nations (UN) family organizations
operating in the water and environmental sectors in
Africa decided to pool resources together under the
name Inter Agency Group on Water (IGWA), with the
objective of placing Africa at the forefront of international water concerns. The Secretariat is provided
by UNECA in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Other strategic
partners do participate in meetings of UN Water/Africa,
and take part in some of its initiatives. These include:
AMCOW, the NEPAD Secretariat, inter-governmental
bodies such as subregional economic groupings
(ECOWAS, IGAD, SADC, etc.), and reputable research
institutions, centres and networks.
The principal objective of UN Water/Africa is to contribute to the UN system-wide response to the challenges and opportunities connected with pursuing
the MDGs, and participation in the World Summit on
Sustainable Development (WSSD) and other major
inter-governmental conferences and summits through

technical support to the African Union. Speciﬁcally,
UN Water/Africa seeks to facilitate:
(i) The adoption of effective national and regional
policies and institutional frameworks based on the
principle of integrated water resources management (IWRM); (ii) the establishment of collaborative
framework on agreements to facilitate the management and development of shared water resources;
(iii) capacity building; and the urgent need for improved water wisdom. (NEPAD, 2006, p. 4)

Conclusion
Africa has made signiﬁcant progress in mobilizing its
vast water resources potential. The nature of these
resources is inﬂuenced by natural and human external
drivers that are complex and characterized by inherent
uncertainties. The uncertainties arise from both natural
variability and lack of knowledge. Good progress has
been made in resolving the current uncertainties. New
ones are likely to emerge so coping strategies should

BOX 29.3
Financing water: The role of AfDB

The African Development Bank has placed high priority on the water sector as a way of assisting Regional Member Countries
(RMCs) to achieve the objectives of poverty reduction and economic growth because of the unique potential of this sector
to contribute to achieving the other MDGs on poverty, health, education and gender. The Bank’s portfolio of interventions in
the water and sanitation sector spans drinking water supply, water resources management, sanitation and hygiene, capacity building and policy reform among others. The Bank is currently ﬁnancing more than 50 active projects in 29 countries
amounting to about US$2 billion.
The Bank aims at signiﬁcantly increasing its interventions in rural water supply and sanitation while continuing to support urban and peri-urban water supply and sanitation, and promoting integrated management of water resources. In summary, the
strategy seeks to:
đƫƫƫ*.!/!ƫ30!.ƫ/1,,(5ƫ* ƫ/*%00%+*ƫü**%*#ƫ
đƫƫƫ+1/ƫ,.%).%(5ƫ+*ƫ,++.!/0ƫćĆŌƫ+"ƫ,+,1(0%+*ƫ(%2%*#ƫ%*ƫ.1.(ƫ.!/
đƫƫƫ.+2% !ƫ/+)!ƫ/1,,+.0ƫ"+.ƫ,!.%ġ1.*ƫ.!/Čƫ/)((ƫ* ƫ)! %1)ƫ0+3*/Ďƫ* ƫ/,!%ü((5ƫ"+.ƫ1.*ƫ/*%00%+*
đƫƫƫ.+)+0!ƫ0.*/+1* .5ƫ30!.ƫ.!/+1.!/ƫ)*#!)!*0
đƫƫƫ1,,+.0ƫ0$!ƫ!*(%*#ƫ!*2%.+*)!*0ƫ0+ƫ00.0ƫ)+.!ƫ.!/+1.!/
Moreover, the AfDB is also hosting a number of complementary initiatives which together enhance the effectiveness of the
Bank’s work and provides vital resources for scaling up and for promoting innovation and supporting knowledge management activities. The four main initiatives underpinning the Bank strategy in the water sector are the:
đƫƫƫ1.(ƫ0!.ƫ1,,(5ƫ* ƫ*%00%+*ƫ *%0%0%2!ƫĨ ĩ
đƫƫƫ".%*ƫ0!.ƫ%(%05ƫĨĩƫ
đƫƫƫƫ0!.ƫ* ƫ*%00%+*ƫ.+#.))!ƫ
đƫƫƫ 1(0%ġ +*+.ƫ0!.ƫ.0*!./$%,ƫ.+#.))!ƫĨ ĩ

Source: Reproduced from AfDB (2011).

652

CHAPTER 29

REGIONAL REPORTS

be ﬂexible and adaptive in design, and approaches
need to be modiﬁed to beneﬁt from adaptive strategies. At present much action is taking place to address
the problems in the water resources management
area and in meeting the urgent needs deﬁned in the
African Water Vision 2025. To be fruitful, coping strategies should emphasize the importance of addressing
knowledge gaps but most importantly the mobilization of sustainable ﬁnancing to achieve the target of
the African Water Vision 2025.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
AfDB (African Development Bank Group). 2011. Water
Supply and Sanitation. (Webpage). Tunis, AfDB
http://www.afdb.org/en/topics-and-sectors/sectors/
water-supply-sanitation/angola/
Bakhbakhi, M. 2004. Hydrogeological framework of the
Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System. B. Appelgren (ed.)
Managing Shared Aquifer Resources in Africa. IHP-VI,
Series on Groundwater No. 8, UNESCO. http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0013/001385/138581m.pdf (Accessed
16 December 2011.)
The Economist. 2011. Africa’s impressive growth. The
Economist online, January 2011. http://www.economist.
com/blogs/dailychart/2011/01/daily_chart.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 1995. Irrigation in Africa in Figures: Water Reports.
Rome, FAO.
––––. 2005. Irrigation in Africa in Figures: AQUASTAT Survey.
Rome, FAO.
––––. 2007. The State of Food and Agriculture. Rome, FAO.
Hughes, D. 2008. Water Resource Assessment Uncertainty
Analysis: Project Inception Report. Water Research
Commission Project (K5/1838). Grahamstown, South Africa,
Rhodes University.
ILEC (International Lake Environment Committee). n.d. Lake
Chad. (Web Page). Shiga, Japan, ILEC.
LCBC (Lake Chad Basin Commission). 2008. Roundtable to
Save Lake Chad. Background Paper. Prepared for the ‘Highlevel Conference on Water for Agriculture and Energy
in Africa: The Challenges of Climate’, Sirte, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, 15–17 December 2008. Chad, LCBC.
Mwanza, D. 2005. Water for Sustainable Development in
Africa. L Hens and B. Nath (eds) The World Summit on
Sustainable Development: The Johannesburg Conference.
Dordrecht, Netherlands, Springer, pp. 91–111.

WWDR4

NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2006.
Water in Africa: Management Options to Enhance Survival
and Growth. Johannesburg, NEPAD.
http://www.uneca.org/awich/nepadwater.pdf.
Ngurare, T. E. 2001. Legal and Institutional Implications of
Cross-Border Water Pipelines in International Law: The
Congo Cross-Border Water Pipeline Project (CWPP) Case
Study. Centre for Energy, Petroleum and Mineral Law and
Policy (CEPMLP) Annual Review 2001, Article 10. Dundee,
CEPMLP. http://www.dundee.ac.uk/cepmlp/car/html/
car5arti10.htm
SARPN (South African Regional Poverty Network). 2002.
Water and Sustainable Development in Africa: An African
Position Paper. World Summit on Sustainable Development
in Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August – 4 September
2002. Pretoria, SARPN. http://www.sarpn.org/wssd/
may2002/water/position_paper.pdf
Sharma, N. P., Dambaug, T., Gilgan-Hunt, E., Grey, D. and
Rothberg, D. 1996. African Water Resources: Challenges and
Opportunities for Sustainable Development. World Bank
Technical Paper No. 331. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Tennyson, R. n.d, Trans Africa Pipeline: Sustainable
Water for Sub-Saharan Africa. Trans-Africa
Pipeline Inc. http://transafricapipeline.org/PDFs/
SustainableWaterAcademyPaper.pdf
Turton, A. R., W.R., Patrick, M. J. and Julien, F. 2006.
Transboundary water resources in Southern Africa: conﬂict
or cooperation? Development, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 22–31.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Population Division). 2007. World Population
Prospects. New York, UN.
UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa).
2000. African Water Vision 2025. Addis Ababa, UN Water/
Africa and UNECA.
––––. 2001. Freshwater Resources in Africa. Addis Ababa,
UNECA.
––––. 2006. African Water Development Report (AWDR).
Addis Ababa, UN Water/Africa and UNECA.
––––. 2010. Climate Risk Management: Monitoring, Assessment,
Early Warning and Response; Issues Paper 4. Seventh
African Development Forum: Acting on Climate Change for
Sustainable Development in Africa. ADF VII, 10–15 October
2010, United Nations Conference Centre, Addis Ababa.
UNEP. 2006. Climate Change and Variability in the Sahel
Region: Impacts and Adaptation Strategies in the
Agricultural Sector. Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2008. Vital Water Graphics: An Overview of the State
of the World’s Fresh Water and Marine Water (2nd edn).
Nairobi, UNEP.
––––. 2010. Africa Water Atlas. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://na.unep.net/atlas/africaWater/book.php.
UN-Habitat. 2005. Habitat Debate, Vol. 11, No. 3.

AFRICA

653

––––. 2010. The State of African Cities 2010: Governance,
Inequality and Urban Land Markets. Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
UN Water/Africa. 2007. Guidelines On Inter-Basin Water
Transfers (IBWTs) In Africa. Report of the Regional
Workshop on ‘Developing Guidelines for Inter-Basin Water
Transfers for Policy Makers In Africa’, held in Accra, Ghana,
25-29 September 2006. UNECA, Addis Ababa
WHO/UNICEF. 2010. Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) for
Water and Sanitation. Geneva, WHO.

654

CHAPTER 29

World Bank. 2008. The 2008 World Development Indicators
Online. Washington DC, Development Data Group, The
World Bank. http://go.worldbank.org/U0FSM7AQ40.
World Bank. 2011. Africa’s Pulse: An Analysis of Issues
Shaping Africa’s Economic Future. Washington DC, The
World Bank. http://www.worldbank.org/africaspulse
WFP (United Nations World Food Programme). 2005. WPF’s
Niger Appeal Triples to Help 2.5 million People Facing
Extreme Hunger. Rome, WFP. http://reliefweb.int/sites/
reliefweb.int/ﬁles/reliefweb_pdf/node-180661.pdf

REGIONAL REPORTS

CHAPTER 30
Europe and North America

UNECE
—
Authors Francesca Bernardini, Rainer Enderlein, Sonja Koeppel and Annukka Lipponen
in consultation with EEA and GWP/CACENA

© Shutterstock/Andy Z

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Speciﬁc water quality and quantity problems arise from pressures placed on water resources
by agriculture, manufacturing industries, and sewerage and wastewaters. Climate change
and economic development aggravate these pressures. Distinct subregional water problems
(e.g. in Central Asia, Western Europe and North America) need tailor-made solutions.
Although many issues are yet to be solved, over the last two decades the status of water
resources has been improved and integrated water resources management plans have been
developed at local, national and transboundary levels.
The region’s surface waters and groundwaters contain pollutants, such as nutrients, metals,
pesticides, microbes, industrial chemicals and pharmaceutical products. These have adverse
effects on freshwater ecosystems. Prevention, control and reduction of water pollution are
of utmost priority. Pollution sources are extremely diverse and vary considerably over river
basins. Agriculture and urban sources (e.g. industries, urban wastewaters) contribute most of
the freshwater pollution.
Climate change is projected to increase the risks of ﬂoods and droughts in many areas of
the region. Costly water infrastructures designed to serve for decades in stationary climatic
conditions are vulnerable to climate change. Concern over water scarcity is also increasing.
Citizens and economic sectors are directly affected by abstraction pressures to satisfy urban
needs and needs for irrigated agriculture, and especially in arid and semi-arid areas by
diminishing water availability due to climate change.
Re-naturalization of watercourses is a challenge. Past structural measures (e.g. building
dams and reservoirs for hydropower generation and irrigational water supply, constructing
dykes, straightening waterways and enforcing river banks) have caused signiﬁcant hydromorphological changes in river basins in Europe and North America.
Insufficient wastewater treatment and its adverse effects on sources of drinking water and
recreational waters are further priorities for action. The health impact of ﬂoods and heat
waves add to the burden of water-related diseases.
Due the large numbers of transboundary rivers, lakes and groundwaters in the region, there
is an understanding that transboundary cooperation for their management is necessary. This
has led to strengthened bilateral and multilateral cooperation on shared waters, supported
by bilateral and multilateral agreements, in many cases underpinned by UNECE Water
Convention.
National and international response measures have been agreed upon, including European
Union (EU) environmental legislation and United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) conventions and protocols, supplemented by recommendations and guidelines
for action. EU assistance programmes and bilateral assistance programmes for countries in
Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia are important for putting in place legal and
other response measures, and contribute to strengthening water management.

30.1 Introduction
More than 1.2 billion people live in the 56 countries of the
UNECE region (Table 30.1).1 Western and Central Europe
is one of the most densely populated areas of the world,
with an average of nearly 110 people per km2. This is
in contrast to the relatively small populations in other
parts of the world, where the average density is below
20 people per km2. Between 1960 and 2000, Central
Asia (more than 120% population increase) and the
Caucasus (60% increase) have experienced considerably higher growth rates than other countries. For most
countries in Western and Central Europe and in North
America, there is a trend towards stable or even declining populations.
Migration of people has been increasing since the
1990s, including migration along gradients of political

stability or economic prospects, in-country migration
from rural to urban areas and seasonal migration of
workers and retirees. These are among the reasons for
increased abstraction pressure to satisfy water needs in
major Western cities. Migration along gradients of economic prospects also gives rise to a mostly unconsidered effect on data about domestic water consumption
and sanitation ﬁgures: the water statistics in some countries is based on the number of people officially registered to apartments and not the number of people actually living there – as in Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan
and the Republic of Moldova, many residents of which
work for most of their time abroad.
Economic development is also highly diverse in the
region. Some of the countries are among the richest in the world, while others, particularly those whose

TABLE 30.1
Grouping of the 56 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) Member States
Group

Subgroup

Countries

EU countries

Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, Bulgaria,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia

Western Europe

Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom
EU-15 countries

Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Czech Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro, Poland, Romania, Serbia,
Slovakia,
Slovenia, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey

Central and
Eastern
Europe

Countries that became
EU Member States in
the course of the EU
enlargement process

Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan

Eastern Europe,
Caucasus and
Central
Asia
Caucasus

Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia

Central Asia

Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan

Pan-European
region

UNECE countries, except Canada, Israel and the United States

North America

Canada, United States

WWDR4

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

657

economies have been in transition since the 1990s, are
still catching up. Per capita levels of gross domestic
product (GDP) vary widely, from well over US$20,000
reported in EU-15, the United States, Canada, Norway,
Switzerland and other countries, to less than one-eighth
of this ﬁgure in the Caucasus and Central Asia. By 2009,
two decades after the transition period began, some
countries in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia had increased their per capita incomes approximately 50% above their 1989 levels, most had only returned to something similar to their 1989 level, while
a few economies (Georgia, the Republic of Moldova,
Serbia, Tajikistan, and Ukraine) remained 30% or more
below this earlier level (UNECE, 2010).
Demographic patterns and migration, economic development and – as analysed further below – climate
change are key external drivers in the UNECE region
(EEA, 2007; EEA, 2010a; EEA, 2010b; UNECE, 2011b).
National legislation (e.g. the US Clean Water Act),
EU legislation and UNECE environmental conventions
and protocols are designed to counteract the many
adverse effects of external driving forces, prevent water pollution and the degradation of ecosystems, and
mitigate climate change. A large number of states are
bound by UNECE environmental conventions and protocols, and half of the Member States are under the obligations of the EU legislation. International assistances
rendered under national and EU assistance programmes
are decisive for achieving response measures and contribute to strengthening water governance.

A particular challenge stems from the large number of
transboundary waters, whose status is comprehensively assessed on a regular basis by UNECE in collaboration with governments and international organizations
(UNECE, 2007a; UNECE 2011b). More than
100 ﬁrst-order transboundary rivers, with a basin
area of over 1,000 km2 and many of their tributaries
run along or cross the border between two and more
states. One of these rivers, the Danube, has 19 countries in its basin. Around 40 large lakes are shared by
two countries (e.g. Lake Geneva, Lake Peipsi, the Great
Lakes) or even three countries (e.g. Lake Constance),
and over 100 transboundary groundwater aquifers
have been identiﬁed. This has led to strengthened
cooperation, supported by bilateral and multilateral
agreements in Europe and North America.

30.2 Water management and response
measures
The key external drivers in the region lead to pressures on water resources, inﬂuence in a multifaceted
way the status of water bodies, impact on human
health and call for response measures. Tables 30.2
and 30.3 summarize the relative importance of pressures on water resources over typical subregions and
provide response measures depending on external
drivers (UNECE, 2007a; UNECE 2011b). With the revival
of economy in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and in
Central Asia, a shift in the relative importance of some
pressure factors might occur.

TABLE 30.2
Main pressures on water resources in order of priority (from high to low)
Countries in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia

EU-15 countries and North America

Pressures on water quality
Municipal sewage treatment, non-sewered population, old
industrial installations, illegal wastewater discharges, illegal
disposal of household and industrial wastes in river basins,
tailing dams and dangerous landﬁlls

Agriculture and urban sources

Abstraction pressures
Agricultural water use

Agricultural water use (particularly in Southern Europe),
major urban centres

Hydromorphological alterations
Hydropower dams, irrigation channels, river alterations

Hydropower dams, river alterations

Other pressures
Agriculture (with a trend to become more severe),
mining and quarrying

658

CHAPTER 30

Selected industries discharging hazardous substances,
mining and quarrying

REGIONAL REPORTS

30.2.1 Water and agriculture
Agricultural practice in the region has changed considerably over the past four decades: mechanization, increased use of fertilizers and pesticides, farm
specialization, growth of farm size, land drainage and
developments in animal husbandry have led to adverse
impacts on the aquatic environment with some speciﬁc subregional differentiation of water use and water
pollution. Water use for crop and animal production,
for example, in Central Asia, Greece, Italy, Portugal and
Spain accounts for 50–60% of the total use. In other
countries, agriculture only accounts for around 20%,
while the bulk is used by manufacturing industries and
for cooling purposes.

excessive levels and give rise to detrimental impacts
on the aquatic environment (e.g. eutrophication) and
human health (UNECE, 2011b). Campylobacter and
Cryptosporidium excreted by livestock grazing next to
waterways make waters unﬁt for recreation or contaminate sources of drinking water. Certain features of
the rural landscape, such as small ponds, brooks and
wetlands, have disappeared, thus one of their important roles in the water cycle – attenuation of pollutants – has been lost because of intensiﬁed agricultural
production. In some basins, particularly in Central Asia,
the predominant consumptive water use (i.e. irrigation) has also led to problems, such as salinization of
soils and high mineral salt contents in water bodies.

In many river basins, nitrogen and phosphorus from
fertilizers as well as pesticides are often detected at

The legal framework to cut down pollution from agriculture was established in the 1990s (e.g. EU Nitrates

TABLE 30.3
Selected water management issues and responses
Main issues

Possible water management responsesa

Pressures by nutrients and pesticides from agriculture with
economic development as main driver

Coordination of objectives, coordination of measures and
combined approach for pollution control from agriculture
(e.g. good agricultural practice, payments for ecosystem
services)

Pressures by speciﬁc substances from manufacturing industries
with economic development as main driver

Inventory of existing and potential polluters, coordination
of objectives, coordination of measures and combined
approach for pollution control from industrial installations
(e.g. best available technology for hazardous substances,
pollution reduction through installation of closed water
systems)

Pressures by organic matter and bacteriological pollution with
economic development, demographic patterns, and migration as
main drivers

Inventory of existing and potential polluters, coordination
of objectives, coordination of measures and combined
approach for pollution control from municipal wastewater
treatment plants (at least biological treatment or equivalent
processes)

Flooding with climate change and economic development as
main drivers

Climate change adaptation, holistic approach to ﬂood
management (combination of non-structural and structural
measures)

Pressures due to hydromorphological alterations with economic
development as main driver

Re-naturalization of small and medium-sized rivers,
payment for ecosystem services

Water scarcity and/or abstraction pressures with economic
development, demographic patterns, migration and climate
change as main drivers

Climate change adaptation, conjunctive management of
surface waters and groundwaters, licensing groundwater
use

Water management in a transboundary context with political
transitions and security concerns, economic development,
demographic patterns, migration and climate change as main
drivers

Transboundary cooperation as stipulated by applicable
bilateral and multilateral agreements, implementation
of the UNECE Water Convention (UNECE, 1992) and its
Protocols

a

Terminology according to the Water Framework Directive (European Commission, 2000) and UNECE (2007a, 2007b, 2009d).

WWDR4

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

659

Directive and national legislation in EU countries,
Norway and Switzerland, Canada and the USA) and
good practice guidance to control water pollution
by fertilizers and pesticides in agriculture is broadly
available and applied. However, agriculture remains a
major concern as the relative importance of agricultural pollution over industrial pollution grew, mainly
from cutting down of pollution by industrial enterprises in many countries over the last three decades.
In EU countries located in the drainage basins of the
Mediterranean Sea, the East Atlantic Ocean, the Baltic
Sea and the Black Sea, the impact of agriculture on
the quality of water resources is still striking, mostly
because the implementation of the above-mentioned
pieces of legislation and recommended practices
as well as the recovery of water bodies takes more
time than expected (UNECE, 2011b). Experience has
also shown that ‘command and control’ approaches
promulgated through legislation need to be supplemented by voluntary measures and innovative ﬁnancing schemes, such as payments for ecosystem services
(UNECE, 2007b).

In Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, if diffuse pressures from the use of pesticides and fertilizers
in agriculture increase in the future alongside the revival
of countries’ economies, their use will be much higher
than in the last decade and will cause growing negative
effects on national and transboundary waters and human health.
Apart from the implementation of legal–regulatory,
institutional and management measures, it is important to focus on education, training and advice to promote understanding of good agricultural practice and
respect for existing legislation by various economic
entities. The establishment of Nitrate Vulnerable Zones
and the implementation of action programmes in areas
where agricultural sources of nitrates have led to excessive concentrations in freshwater are other positive
examples from Western Europe. The idea of conservation agriculture, developed under the auspices of Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) is another example that should be taken up in the agricultural practices of Central Asia and other countries.

BOX 30.1
Water quality of rivers and lakes in the United States
In the United States, the National Water Quality Inventory
Report to Congress (USEPA, 2009a; the next report was due in
2011) covers 16% of the total river length and 39% of the lakes
areas (with the exception of the Great Lakes). In general, the inventory shows an improvement of the water quality: the waters
were generally suitable for irrigation, supplying drinking water,
and domestic and recreational uses. However, the report also
stated that about half of the assessed stream miles and 64%
of assessed lake acres (see the ﬁrst table) were still not clean
enough to support uses such as ﬁshing and swimming, and require enforcement of existing legal requirements and improvement of management practices, awareness raising and training.

Leading causes of impairment in assessed watercourses
Rivers

Lakes and reservoirs

Pathogens

Mercury

Habitat alterations

PCBs

Organic enrichment

Nutrients

Leading causes of impairment included pathogens, mercury, nutrients, and organic enrichment/low dissolved oxygen. The
main pressure factors were agriculture and hydromorphological modiﬁcations. In areas with signiﬁcant agricultural and urban development, the quality of surface waters and groundwaters has been degraded by contaminants such as pesticides
(insecticides in urban areas, herbicides in agricultural areas), nutrients, metals, and gasoline-related compounds. However,
concentrations of contaminants in water samples from wells were almost always lower than current Environment Protection
Authority drinking water standards.
Water body

660

Assessed

Conditions (% of assessed water bodies)
Good

Good but threatened

Impaired

Rivers

16%

53

3

44

Lakes

39%

35

1

64

CHAPTER 30

REGIONAL REPORTS

30.2.2 Industries and municipal wastewater treatment
Most water pollution problems in the region seem to
originate from the great number of small and medium-sized industries, and small municipal wastewater treatment plants, rather than big undertakings,
mostly equipped with modern pollution abatement
technologies.
The biggest area of concern is Eastern Europe, the
Caucasus and Central Asia. The aftermath of the economic decline in the 1990s, which often caused a breakdown of essential infrastructure, is still visible, despite
many assistance programmes from Western European
countries. Apart from some major enterprises, wastewaters are usually discharged into collective sanitation
systems for treatment at municipal wastewater treatment plants, which do not operate according to standards, as the infrastructure is worn out. In addition to pollution by heavy metals, phosphorus and nitrogen, a few
watercourses show increased levels of pollution by oil
products, speciﬁcally discharges from oil reﬁneries and
surface runoff from reﬁnery sites. Accidental pollution
from industrial installations and unauthorized discharges of hazardous substances (mostly at night and during
holidays) are still major concerns. Illegal waste disposal
along rivers, as well as old and uncontrolled waste disposal sites in many transboundary river basins are additional pollution sources.
Regarding pressures from industries in basins in
Western Europe and North America (Box 30.1), a particular challenge that needs proper response measures
is the control and reduction of pollution by new substances produced by the chemical industry, including
new pharmaceuticals – which are difficult to eliminate
in wastewater treatment processes – as well as the
control of pollution by priority substances given provisions of the Water Framework Directive and other applicable directives of the EU (EEA, 2010b) and other
relevant regulation.
In most of the countries that became EU Member
States in the course of the enlargement process
(e.g. Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, Slovakia) as well as
in transboundary and national rivers draining to the
East Atlantic Ocean, untreated or insufficiently treated
industrial wastewater remains a concern and breakdowns of municipal wastewater treatment systems
result in signiﬁcant discharges of polluted waters into
rivers (UNECE, 2007a; UNECE 2011b).

WWDR4

30.2.3 Abstraction pressures, water scarcity and
droughts
Over-abstraction, water scarcity and drought have a
direct impact on citizens and economic sectors, and
large areas of the UNECE region are already affected.
There are three principal areas of concern in the region: abstraction pressures to satisfy urban needs (Box
30.2); growing abstraction pressures from irrigated
agriculture in many Southern European countries,
Ukraine, Russia, in Central Asia and parts of Canada
and the United States; and reduced water availability
and increased pressure on water resources because of
anticipated climate change. A particular challenge for
countries in Eastern Europe and Central Asia is water use efficiency in irrigated agriculture (Box 30.3).
Abstraction of water for industrial use has largely decreased over the last three decades in parts of the region, partly from a general decline in water-intensive
heavy industry in Western Europe and North America,
partly from an increase in water use efficiency.

BOX 30.2
Abstraction pressure to satisfy water needs in
major cities

In the past, with growing populations and increasing demand for water, Europe’s larger cities have relied on the
surrounding region for water. Athens, Paris and Istanbul
have all developed wide water networks for transporting
water, often over more than 100–200 km. Growing urban
populations, improved lifestyles, reduced water availability due to climate change and the introduction of drinking
water quality standards (the water around large cities is
often polluted and cannot be used for drinking water) are
all factors that should be taken into account when seeking
to reduce the vulnerability of large cities to water stress.
In dry years, there have been problems supplying sufficient water to the 12 million people living in Istanbul and
the four million Ankara, and water supplies have been
rationed. During the 2008 drought, Barcelona turned off
civic fountains and beachside showers, brought in hosepipe bans, and banned the ﬁlling of swimming pools. In
the same year, Cyprus applied emergency measures that
included cutting water supply by 30%; and households
were supplied with water for around 12 hours a day, 3 times
a week (EEA, 2007; EEA, 2010b).
In a growing number of cases, such severe restrictions in
emergency situations became part of a consultative process with stakeholders; this was also inﬂuenced by the requirements of the Aarhus Convention (UNECE, 1998).

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

661

Abstraction for cooling water has also decreased, given advanced cooling technologies.
A comparison of the impacts of droughts in the EU
area between 1976–1990 and 1991–2006 has both
shown a doubling in the affected area and a doubling
in the number of affected people. For example, an
intense drought throughout the Iberian Peninsula in
the hydrological year 2004–2005 led to a 40% average
decrease of cereals production and hydroelectric power
production was heavily impacted. During summer 2006,
rainfall in Lithuania was only half the long-term average
and agricultural production fell by 30% with an estimated loss of around €200 million. Increasing water scarcity also limits access to water for sanitation purposes
and hygiene, which may result in increased adverse
health impacts, and water scarcity is reducing the selfpuriﬁcation capacities of water bodies (EEA, 2010b).

BOX 30.3
Agriculture in Central Asia

In Central Asia, the agricultural sector ensures livelihoods
of half of Central Asia’s population. Agriculture consumes
more than 90% of surface water and 43% of groundwater.
It produces US$13.54 billion of the annual domestic product and plays a critical role in the generation of Central
Asia’s total gross domestic product of US$58.5 billion
(Stulina, 2009).
Despite what was learned from the Aral Sea disaster, the
use of water resources is still geared to meet the water
requirements of agriculture and hydropower generation
without paying proper attention to the needs of other
sectors and nature. As a result, drinking water quality and health of local population are deteriorating; land
productivity and crop yields are decreasing; and poverty,
unemployment, migration, and risks of conﬂicts are rising
(GWP/CACENA, 2006).
Measures are being progressively implemented to reduce
water losses by redesigning irrigation systems, improving
irrigation techniques, and applying technologies for the
reuse of drainage water. However, scarce ﬁnancial means
often delay the implementation of measures. Therefore
it was recognized that in addition to the implementation of technical measures, a major objectiveshould be
the involvement of stakeholders and relevant sectors in
negotiations (coordinating water allocation) and development of acceptable for all rules for water allocation. The
Interstate Commission for Water Coordination (ICWC) of
Central Asia is the regional institution responsible for water allocation between the countries.

662

CHAPTER 30

Drought management has become an essential element of water resource policy and strategies, and
drought management plans (European Commission,
2009) were already drawn up or are under preparationin, for example, Spain, Portugal, England and
Wales, Finland and the USA to mitigate the consequences of droughts and water scarcity. To address
the impact of drought and water scarcity on human
health, UNECE and WHO/EURO have developed speciﬁc guidance and recommendations, which include
adaptation measures for drainage, sewerage and
wastewater treatment (WHO, 2010).
30.2.4 Hydromorphological alterations
Structural measures (e.g. building dams and reservoirs
for hydropower and irrigational agriculture, constructing dykes, straightening waterways and enforcing river
banks) have caused signiﬁcant hydromorphological
changes in the UNECE region. This includes changes in
the hydrological regime of many rivers, interruption of
river and habitat continuity, disconnection of rivers from
adjacent wetlands and ﬂoodplains, and change of the
erosion process and sediment transport. For many rivers,
restoring former ﬂoodplains and wetlands would both
reduce ﬂood risk and improve their ecological status
(Box 30.4). At the same time, however, many European
countries are still developing plans and studies for new
dams, reservoirs and small hydropower projects.
30.2.5 Floods
Since the beginning of this century, more than three
million people have been affected in the UNECE region by ﬂoods – almost two million in Eastern Europe
alone – exposing people to various health hazards
and causing deaths, displacement of people and large
economic losses. Major ﬂoods have included those
along the Danube in spring 2006 and in summer 2009
in rivers shared between Romania and Ukraine, and
the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine; and in 2010 in
the Oder basin, Southern France, and the Prut River
(Romania and the Republic of Moldova). In the USA,
signiﬁcant ﬂood events during the twentieth century were comprehensively documented (Perry, 2000).
The recent ﬂoods include those in 2008 in Nebraska,
Indiana and Illinois and the June 2010 ﬂood in Arkansas.
In the region, the costs of ﬂoods have increased rapidly.
Flood damage is mostly attributed to socio-economic
factors, such as an increase in population, urbanization in ﬂood-prone areas, and to unfavourable changes
in land use such as deforestation and loss of wetlands.

REGIONAL REPORTS

BOX 30.4
Hydromorphological alterations in the Danube
Basin

Like many other European rivers, the Danube is heavily
inﬂuenced by human activities, such as intensive navigation and hydraulic engineering. On many stretches the
natural structure of the river has been changed, including
its depth and width, ﬂow regime, natural sediment transport and ﬁsh migration routes. Dams have been built in
mountain areas and some lowland regions of the Danube
basin; and navigation channels, dykes and irrigation networks are widespread along the middle and lower reaches
of the Danube:
đƫƫƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫ"+1.ġü"0$/ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ*1!ƫ%/ƫ.!#1(0! ƫ"+.ƫ
ﬂood protection, and about 30% of its length is impounded for hydropower generation.
đƫƫƫ+10ƫ$("ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ*1!ƫ0.%10.%!/ƫ.!ƫ1/! ƫ0+ƫ#!*!.ate hydropower of around 30,000 MW.
đƫƫƫ +.!ƫ0$*ƫĈĀĀƫ )/ƫ* ƫ3!%./ƫ$2!ƫ!!*ƫ1%(0ƫ(+*#ƫ
the main tributaries of the Danube.
The Danube River Basin Management Plan addresses hydromorphological alterations. Basin-wide objectives by
2015 include the construction of ﬁsh migration aids and
other measures to achieve and improve river continuity in
the Danube River and in respective tributaries to ensure
reproducing and self-sustaining of sturgeon species and
speciﬁed other migratory species, as well as the restoration, conservation and improvement of habitats and
their continuity for sturgeon species and speciﬁed other
migratory species in the Danube River and its tributaries
(ICPDR, 2007).
In Western Europe, initiatives to enhance the natural environment and improve its capacity to perform ecosystem services have been brought forward under the Water
Framework Directive (e.g. the Dutch ‘Room for the River’
programme, the Spanish ‘National Strategy for Restoring
Rivers’) or under national legislation (e.g. the Swiss
‘Guiding Principles for Sustainable Water Management’).
An innovative approach in the UNECE region is ‘payment
for ecosystem services’ (PES), which is widely used in
Latin America (Wunder, 2005) and explored in the UNECE
region (UNECE, 2005). Prominent examples from the
UNECE region (UNECE, 2007b) include the water supply of New York City (Catskill/Delaware basin management programme), the nitrate strategy of Switzerland,
agro-environmental measures as part of the EU Common
Agricultural Policy, and the management of natural mineral water springs in France (Nestlé/Vittel). Under the
UNECE Water Convention, pilot projects on payments for
ecosystem services have been carried out in Kyrgyzstan
(Lake Issyk Kul basin) and in Armenia.

WWDR4

However, ﬂoods are natural phenomena that can also
bring beneﬁts: seasonal ﬂoodplain inundation is essential to maintaining healthy rivers, creating new habitats,
depositing silts and fertile organic material, and sustaining wetlands. Therefore, an integrated approach to
ﬂood management – one that recognizes both the opportunities provided by ﬂoodplains for socio-economic
activities and that manages the associated risks – is
being implemented in many countries (e.g. Austria,
Czech Republic, Germany, France, the Netherlands,
Slovakia and Switzerland). The lessons learned from
these events, particularly related to transboundary watercourses, have recently been summarized by UNECE
and the World Meteorological Organization (UNECE,
2009e) and are now in pilot applications in in transboundary river basins such as the Dniester, shared by
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova.
30.2.6 Impact on human health
In parts of the region, inadequate sanitation, improper wastewater treatment, unsafe disposal methods
for chemicals, and fertilizers and pesticides that leak
into sources of water supply threaten human health.
Microbial contamination of the sources of drinking
water and water used for recreational purposes is one
of the consequences as it is the case with man-made
chemical pollution of the sources of drinking water
supply; in some cases the natural background pollution
causes immense problems, for example, in Hungary
(naturally occurring arsenic) and the Caucasus (relatively high background concentration of some metals
due to the weathering of rocks).
One hundred and twenty million people2 in the
European region do not have access to safe drinking
water. Even more lack access to sanitation, resulting
in water-related diseases like diarrhoea, typhoid fever
(170,000 reported cases in 2006, which is probably an
underestimate) and hepatitis A. In Eastern and Southeastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, access
to improved sources of drinking water and improved
sanitation is particularly inadequate in rural areas. In
Western Europe and North America, outbreaks of water-related diseases occur occasionally despite state-ofthe-art of water puriﬁcation and wastewater treatment
technology. For example, the USA reported that chemicals (16%), viruses (6%), bacteria (18%), and parasitic
protozoa (21%) were identiﬁed as causes of outbreaks
whereas in the remaining 39% of cases, it was not possible to identify the exact source (Greer et al., 2008;
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, 2011).

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

663

During ﬂoods, people may be exposed to health hazards, such as freshwater pollution (particularly the
contamination of the sources of drinking water by
pathogens and waste), lack of household hygiene, and
reduction of food safety. Water supply and sanitation
utilities are also key health determinants during heat
and cold waves.
The safety of the water supply and sanitation sector clearly relies on close inter-sectoral cooperation;
however, it was not until the end of the 1990s before
Governments in the region undertook concerted international action to prevent, control and reduce waterrelated diseases, including response systems to counteract health hazards due to incidents and outbreaks
of water-related diseases. These international efforts
culminated in the Protocol on Water and Health to the
UNECE Water Convention. It is the ﬁrst international
agreement, which – by linking water management and
health issues – aims to ensure the adequate supply of
safe drinking water and adequate sanitation for everyone. It complements the UNECE Water Convention
with further measures to strengthen the protection
of public health, particularly at the national level, for
example, by establishing or maintaining comprehensive national and/or local surveillance and early warning systems to prevent and respond to water-related
diseases. From its entry into force in 2005 until now,
it has already yielded positive results: the parties to
the Protocol not only strengthened their measures to
achieve the water-related and health-related MDGs,
but also initiated measures to achieve water supply and sanitation for everyone beyond 2015 (UNECE,
2010; UNECE, 2011a). International assistance through
inter alia providing access to sources of ﬁnance for infrastructure projects is also part of this instrument, and
is already being rendered for the Republic of Moldova
and Ukraine.

30.3 Uncertainties and risks
Water management adapts continuously to uncertainties and responds to risks that are posed by external
driving forces and/or political, economic and technical responses. This requires new kinds of action from
all stakeholders, including national and local governments and, for transboundary waters, from the parties
to agreements.
30.3.1 Non-climatic drivers
The fact that many water bodies cross boundaries between two or more states means that challenges and

664

CHAPTER 30

risks are shared and that solutions need to be coordinated. Since the 1970s and early 1980s, countries
have been engaging in a growing number of multilateral and bilateral agreements to regulate the use and
protection of transboundary waters, and since the
1990s, the countries that evolved after the dissolution
of the former Soviet Union have been taking measures
to establish transboundary water cooperation. Many
have joined international conventions and agreements
and/or have entered into new bilateral and multilateral
agreements and established joint bodies (e.g. river or
lake commissions, meetings of plenipotentiaries) to
facilitate transboundary water cooperation. As a result, the status of many watercourses in the region has
been considerably improved and there are far fewer
disputes over shared waters compared to the earlier
1990s (UNECE, 2009b; 2011b). The UNECE Convention
on the Protection and Use of Transboundary
Watercourses and International Lakes (UNECE Water
Convention) adopted in 1992 and entered into force
in 1996 (UNECE, 1992) has played an important role in
this process.
However, a few ﬁrst- and second-order transboundary rivers and many transboundary aquifers (UNECE,
2011b) in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central
Asia, as well as in South-Eastern Europe are not yet
covered by agreements, and in some cases existing
agreements and joint bodies do not effectively address
such current challenges as economic development. In
addition, some states – either inside the region or bordering it – resist participating in agreements on transboundary watercourses, whether framework agreements or those for speciﬁc watercourses. This leads to
uncertainties and risks in transboundary water management where there are no formal channels for joint
action.
While a prerequisite for effective cooperation is political will, joint bodies must also have, from the onset,
the right structures and mechanisms to effectively address their tasks. To cope with uncertainties and risks
in transboundary cooperation, the many existing joint
bodies in countries in transition improve their activities by strengthening institutional mechanisms. This
implies achieving better representation of national
authorities in the joint body and improving coordination at the national level, and eliciting greater ﬁnancial
commitments by riparian states to cover implementation of joint programmes and expenses of organizational structure.

REGIONAL REPORTS

Insufficient access to, and cumbersome conditions
for, the exchange of water quality and water quantity data and information in a transboundary context
as well as information about drivers and their impact
on water management also pose uncertainties and
risks. In some cases, official communication lines go
through the ministries of foreign affairs, although the
environment ministries or state water committees are
increasingly empowered with transboundary data
exchange. In recent years, joint bodies established
by countries in Eastern Europe and Central Asia have
taken some steps towards improving access to information and stakeholder participation. Participation
of non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders in the activities of joint bodies exists for many
joint bodies in North America and Western Europe
(e.g. the International Joint Commission (Great Lakes,
North America) and the Rhine, Meuse and Scheldt river
commissions). At the end of 2007, the plenipotentiaries of the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine adopted
a Regulation on Stakeholder Participation. This is the
ﬁrst example of formalized procedure for the dissemination of information and promotion of public participation in the activities of the joint bodies in Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Lack of ﬁnances is often one of the barriers to broadening access to
information and public participation.
Coping with the increasing water demands of different sectors of economy poses particular challenges
and has led or may lead to uncertainties about proper
response measures. An example is water allocation
among riparian countries, as disagreement remains
over use quotas for the upstream and downstream users belonging to different states, as it is the case for
some rivers in the discharge area of the Caspian Sea.
A similar issue arose in water allocation between different sectors of economy, such as the ‘classical conﬂict’ between hydropower production (high releases of
water during winter to produce energy often associated with man-made ﬂooding of downstream areas)
and irrigated agriculture (with high water demands in
the growing season when the upstream reservoirs are
being ﬁlled up), which is particularly obvious in Central
Asia (Amu Darya and Syr Darya basins). This has not
yet been solved satisfactorily; however, the existing
joint bodies, under the umbrella of International Fund
for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS) (Box 30.3), are now
approaching the problem as the water demand from
other sectors is also growing (including an expected
growth of water demand in Afghanistan – an upstream

WWDR4

country outside the UNECE region) over the next two
decades, and in the Aral Sea basin a reduction from
around 2,500 m3 per capita and year to 1,800 m3 or
even 1,300 m3 depending on development scenarios.
Other examples of uncertainties and risks refer to the
conﬂict between water use for economic activities and
water for the maintenance of aquatic ecosystems. Lake
Balqash, located in Kazakhstan and mainly fed by the
transboundary river Ili with its source in China, may
suffer the same fate of the Aral Sea if Kazakhstan and
China fail to agree on sustainable water use and pollution control. The joint Kazakhstan–China Commission
has recognized this issue and is approaching a solution to the problem with extreme caution owing to the
many (scientiﬁc) uncertainties involved about the impact of response measures on the aquatic ecosystem
of the Lake.
Growing abstraction pressures, including from groundwater aquifers, is another concern of transboundary
cooperation. The work of many joint bodies in the area
of transboundary groundwaters is still insufficient; this
applies across the region, perhaps with some exemptions in Western Europe and North America. The staffs
of joint bodies, often trained in the management of
surface waters rather than groundwaters, do not supervise water supply from groundwaters and the licensing of groundwater abstraction.
In some countries, the aftermath of the political changes of the 1990s and the 2008–2009 global economic
crisis continues to impact the stability and security situation, even today, with adverse effects on water and
the environment as well as international cooperation
on transboundary waters (Box 30.5).
In areas that witnessed armed conﬂicts, infrastructure was destroyed, causing pollution, and internally
displaced people and refugees have put additional
pressure on water supply and sanitation. Examples
include the armed conﬂicts in the Balkans (1990s)
and in the Caucasus (Armenia and Azerbaijan in the
1990s; Georgia and the Russian Federation in 2009).
The internal political conﬂicts and ethnic tensions in
Kyrgyzstan in the summer of 2010, causing death
among its own population and large numbers of refugees, poses uncertainties and risks: it may not only
have negative effects on transboundary water management in the Ferghana Valley (Aral Sea basin) as it
was the case with the country’s rural water supply and

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

665

sanitation systems, but also negatively impact the solution of transboundary issues in the entire basin.
30.3.2 Climate change
The need to address climate change is a major concern
as the entire UNECE region accounts for approximately one-half of the global greenhouse gas emissions.
Climate change impact will vary considerably from
region to region and even from basin to basin. These
will include increased risk of inland ﬂash ﬂoods, and
more frequent coastal ﬂooding, intensiﬁed erosion and
extensive species losses (EEA, 2008; UNECE, 2009a,
UNECE, 2011b); it may also affect hydropower, shipping,
tourism and recreation, shoreline structures and human health (Greer et al., 2008; USEPA, 2007).
Governments in Europe (EEA, 2010a) are at different
stages of preparing, developing and implementing
national adaptation strategies, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency released in 2008
the National Water Programme Strategy with speciﬁc
actions to adapt programme implementation in light
of climate change (USEPA, 2009b). The adaptation

BOX 30.5
Impact of the 2008–2009 global economic crisis

The Emerging Europe and Central Asia region3 was the
most affected by the global ﬁnancial and economic crisis
beginning in mid-2008, with declines in economic output
in 2009 averaging about 6%. The economic declines had
major socio-economic implications, for example, the number of unemployed during the ﬁrst six months of 2009
grew by almost half in Russia and Turkey compared to
the same period in 2008. As most countries can expect
at best a mild growth in the coming years, the crisis will
continue to hinder the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) and human development in
the region. In particular, there are limited prospects for increasing social protection because of the expected weakness of the economic recovery and the accumulation of
public debt (UNECE, 2010). The ﬁnancial crisis presents
risks to further developing the water sector; however, it
also provides opportunities to reinforce commitments to
invest in water services and infrastructure as part of ﬁscal stimulus packages. The European Union and United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Member States play a crucial role in these policy areas,
using public spending and grants to create and maintain
necessary infrastructure, promote technological innovation, support behavioural change and render further assistance to countries in transition (OECD, 2009).

666

CHAPTER 30

strategies depend on the magnitude and nature of the
observed and predicted impacts, assessments of current and future vulnerability and the countries’ capacity to adapt. In addition, some actions and measures
are increasingly being taken at regional and local levels. However, the strategies are long-term programmes
whose immediate effects are difficult to assess.
Ensuring adequate ﬁnancial means to implement adaptation measures is an important precondition for success; however, there are still many uncertainties about
the ability of a number of countries to adapt water management to climate change. For example, in Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, uncertainties remain as to investment and funding for adaptation measures and there is a lack of capacity (including human
resources) for adaptation. Widespread poverty in these
countries also limits their adaptive capacity. Moreover,
policy makers are not used to uncertainty and risk considerations when taking decisions related to water management, water supply and sanitation.
There is another challenge for water managers (UNECE,
2009a): climate mitigation measures may produce
adverse side-effects for water management. One example is ‘water for food production versus water for
bio-energy crops’. Large-scale biofuel production may
increase water demand and may contaminate freshwater from enhanced leaching of pesticides and nutrients,
and in conﬂicts with food production. Hydroelectric
power plants adversely affect the existing river ecosystems and ﬁsheries, for example, due to changes in ﬂow
regime, water temperature regime, and oxygen concentrations. Conversely, they help to regulate ﬂow and
are needed for irrigation.
Another example is inland waterway transport, which
plays an important role in the transport of goods in
Central Europe and is generally seen as more environmentally friendly than road transport. However, navigation activities and infrastructure works are typically
associated with a range of hydromorphological changes with potentially adverse ecological consequences.
Thus, despite the advantage of mitigation policies for
society and for reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
there is a need to strike a balance between the beneﬁts and the impacts on the ecological status of water
bodies, adjacent land ecosystems and wetlands.
Many river basins that are already stressed due to nonclimatic drivers are likely to become more stressed

REGIONAL REPORTS

because of their vulnerability to climate change. Of
particular relevance is the vulnerability to climate
change of costly water infrastructures (e.g. ﬂood defence structures, water supply and sanitation infrastructure), which have to serve for decades but were
designed on the assumption of stationary climatic
conditions. Moreover, policy tools such as land planning are based on stable ‘old’ climate scenarios, which
did not take into account variability and change. Other
uncertainties related to climate change include the still
insufficient knowledge base.
Uncertainties of climate predictions and predictions
of precipitation patterns at the river-basin scale make
scenario development particularly difficult for smaller river basins (UNECE, 2011b). Pilot projects were
recently initiated, with ﬁnance from donor countries from Western Europe, in the Chu-Talas basin
(Kazakhstan/Kyrgyzstan) and the Sava basin (Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia, Slovenia). Other joint
bodies, such as those for the Rhine, Meuse, Scheldt
and Danube, also challenge the basin countries to develop a more coordinated approach and address the
effects that pose the highest risk and uncertainties to
human health and water management, and to develop
appropriate adaptation measures to new risks as they
become better understood.

30.4 Water governance
Water governance is well recognized in the UNECE
region as a means for effective water management at
the local, national and transboundary levels. Strategies,
policies, legislation and assistance initiatives – designed as response measures – are at the same time
‘political drivers’ to achieve water governance.
Problems remain: in many countries in Eastern Europe,
the Caucasus and Central Asia, capacities of institutions tend to be weak due to the institutional collapse
and economic dislocation that marked the early years
of the transition. While many of these countries have
made great strides in reforming public administration
and developing a dynamic civil society, the new institutions are not yet stable or well-rooted, nor have they
completely moved away from the old mode of functioning. The political will to ﬁnance environmental protection is also weak; regular cuts in budgetary funding indicate that environmental protection receives
little attention, and sometimes, the allocated funds are
not even enough to ensure the normal functioning of
state agencies. Moreover, it is difficult to recruit highly

WWDR4

qualiﬁed staff because salaries are low and public authorities are not held in high esteem (UNECE, 2007c;
Mott MacDonald, 2010).
The new EU Member States have accomplished greater
progress in building new institutional structures. They
were assisted on multiple fronts by the acceptance
of the European model offered by EU membership
as a powerful incentive for collective action, and by
massive ﬁnancial and knowledge assistance (UNECE,
2010). Notwithstanding the focus of UNECE and the
European Commission on water governance in countries in transition, there are also challenges in governance in other countries, particularly those with a federal structure (e.g. Germany, USA) with multiple actors
within each jurisdiction (Rogers and Hall, 2003; Moss,
2004; Norman and Bakker, 2009; and Cohen, 2010).
30.4.1 Legislation and assistance initiatives
The EU legislation is an important response measure
to the external drivers and addresses inter alia water
problems in the EU area and beyond. A comprehensive
range of legislation has been established for this purpose, including Directives related to urban wastewater
treatment (1991), to control and limit nitrate pollution
from agriculture (1991), to regulate the quality of drinking water (1998) other areas related to water-andhealth issues. The most important piece of legislation
is the Water Framework Directive (WFD), concluded
in 2000 (European Commission, 2000). This Directive
expands the scope of water protection to all waters,
and requires the achievement of a ‘good status’ for all
waters in EU countries by 2015. The WFD is a direct response of the European Communities and the Member
States to fulﬁll their obligations under international conventions on water protection and management, particularly the UNECE Water Convention (UNECE, 1992). The
WFD includes a strong economic component: it requires that EU Member States implement full recovery
of the environmental and resource costs of water services; and water pricing policies are to be established
that provide adequate incentives for the efficient use
of water resources. More recently, ‘daughter’ directives,
such as those on environmental quality standards,
ﬂoods and groundwaters, supplement the WFD.
Apart from its effect to improve water management in
EU countries, the application of principles of the WFD
is of immense importance to improving water management and cutting down pollution in countries at
the Eastern border of the EU (Belarus, the Republic of

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

667

Moldova, Ukraine, Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia).
This is the reason for the EU (European Commission,
2007) to support these countries under the European
Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI).
UNECE Environmental Conventions and Protocols are
another response to the external drivers to resolve
national and transboundary issues of water management, air pollution, industrial accidents, impact assessment and public participation. For what concerns
water management, the central aim of the 1992 UNECE
Water Convention is to strengthen local, national and
regional measures to protect and ensure the quantity,
quality and sustainable use of transboundary waters.
It stipulates managing shared waters in a reasonable
and equitable manner and calls for action guided by
the precautionary principle and based on the polluterpays principle. The Convention requires parties to enter
into speciﬁc bilateral or multilateral agreements and to
create institutions – joint bodies such as river and lake
commissions – to meet these responsibilities.
The Environment for Europe process, including its
ministerial conferences, became another prominent
response measure to the external drivers in the region.
UNECE Member States, UN system organizations and
other intergovernmental organizations represented
in the region, regional environment centres, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and other
major groups act in partnership to help countries in
transition to raise their environmental standards towards a common regional benchmark, provide access
to sources of ﬁnance, and share experience and good
practice.
30.4.2 National Policy Dialogues
International support to strengthen water governance should be a process that involves and supports
two distinct levels of decision-making: decision-making on technical and managerial issues and decisionmaking on policy issues. This gave rise to the National
Policy Dialogues on integrated water resources management, water supply and sanitation as part of the
EU Water Initiative, launched at the World Summit on
Sustainable Development in Johannesburg in 2002,
which covers nine of the 12 countries in Eastern Europe,
the Caucasus and Central Asia.
On the one hand, technical assistance programmes by
the EU and Western European Countries enhance the
expertise of staff in the water–environment ministries

668

CHAPTER 30

and improve legislation, institutions and management
practices. On the other, National Policy Dialogues –
led by the ministers for environment – enhance the
political support of water management by key ministries such as economy, ﬁnance, justice, emergency
situations, and foreign affairs, and involve additional
stakeholders (e.g. academia, non-governmental organizations, parliamentary bodies responsible for
environment, and international organizations and ﬁnancial institutions). The production of highly policyrelevant outputs, such as new pieces of legislation
(Box 30.6) in line with the principles of the UNECE
Water Convention, the Protocol on Water and Health,
the EU Water Framework Directive and other UNECE
and EU instruments, the strong country commitment
and the cooperation with other international organizations are among the strengths of the National Policy
Dialogues in the region, and a means to strengthen
water governance.

BOX 30.6
Wastewater treatment infrastructure in the
Republic of Moldova
Of the 623 municipal wastewater treatment plants constructed in major cities and other settlements in The
Republic of Moldova, only 24% were operational in 2010.
This has led to a growing amount of untreated wastewater being discharged into the river system and only 4%
of plants treat wastewater according to existing legal
requirements. In addition, sanitation is unsatisfactorily in
rural areas, where 70% of houses are not connected to the
sewerage system.
An assistance programme is being developed, supported
by European Union (EU) funds, and funds provided by
other West European countries, to rehabilitate infrastructure in municipalities and improve sanitation in rural
areas. New wastewater treatment legislation, modeled
on the basis of EU legislation, was drawn up under the
National Policy Dialogue process and entered into force in
October 2008. This new legislation provides a sound basis for the rehabilitation of existing and the construction
of new municipal wastewater treatment plants, as it no
longer relies on the outdated Soviet-style requirements.
Thus, the treatment performance of the state-of-the-art
Western treatment technology no longer clashes with former Soviet-style Moldovan standards and no longer forces
the Minister for Environment to apply to the Government
for exceptions from the law to install these technologies
(UNECE, 2011a).

REGIONAL REPORTS

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

2

3

Eight hundred and seventy million people live in the ’panEuropean region’, a term which does not include North America
and Israel. The USA has a total resident population of about 310
million; Canada 34 million and Israel 7 million (UNECE Statistical
Division Database at http://www.unece.org and UNECE, 2010).
North America is not included in these ﬁgures, which were
compiled by the Regional Office for Europe of the World Health
Organization (WHO/EURO)
Countries in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia
and South-Eastern Europe, including Turkey, and the new
EU Member States (Table 30.1).

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention. 2011. Waterrelated data and statistics. http://www.waterandhealth.org/
newsletter/new/spring_2003/waterborne.html (Accessed
12 October 2011.)
Cohen, K. and Bakker, K. 2010. Groundwater governance:
explaining regulatory non-compliance. International
Journal of Water. Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 246–66.
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2007. Europe’s
Environment – The Fourth Assessment. State of the
Environment Report No. 1/2007. Copenhagen, EEA.
––––. 2010a. National Adaptation Strategies. http://www.eea.
europa.eu/themes/climate/national-adaptation-strategies
(Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. 2010b. The European Environment – State and Outlook
2010: synthesis. Copenhagen, EEA.
EEA (European Environment Agency), JRC (Joint Research
Centre of the European Union) and WHO (World Health
Organization). 2008. Impacts of Europe’s Changing
Climate – 2008 Indicator-based Assessment. EEA Report
No. 4/2008, JRC Reference Report No. JRC47756.
EEA (European Environment Agency), Copenhagen,
Denmark. http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/
eea_report_2008_4
European Commission. 2000. Directive 2000/60/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October
2000 Establishing a Framework for the Community
Action in the Field Of Water. policy. Official Journal of
the European Communities. http://eurlex.europa.eu/
LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2000:327:0001:0072:
EN:PDF
––––. 2007. Development and Cooperation – EuropeAid.
http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/where/neighbourhood/
index_en.htm (Accessed 12 October 2011.)

WWDR4

––––. 2009. The 1st River Basin Management Plans for
2009–2015. http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/index_
en.htm (Accessed 12 October 2011.)
Greer, A., Ng, V. and Fisman, D. 2008. Climate change and
infectious diseases in North America: the road ahead.
Canadian Medical Association Journal, Vol. 178, No. 6,
pp. 715–22. http://www.cmaj.ca/content/178/6/715.full
GWP/CACENA (Global Water Partnership in Caucasus and
Central Asia). 2006. Implementing the UN Millennium
Development Goals in Central Asia and the South. Tashkent,
Uzbekistan, GWP-CACENA.
ICPDR (International Commission for the Protection of the
Danube River). 2007. Issue Paper on Hydromorphological
Alterations in the Danube River Basin. ICPDR, Vienna,
Austria. (http://www.icpdr.org/icpdr-pages/dams_
structures.htm). (Accessed 12 October 2011.)
Moss, T. 2004. The governance of land use in river basins:
prospects for overcoming problems of institutional
interplay with the EU Water Framework Directive. Land
Use Policy, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 85–94.
Mott MacDonald. 2010. Project Completion Report:
Water Governance in the Western EECCA Countries.
TACIS/2008/137-153 (EC), Brussels, European Commission.
Norman, E. S. and Bakker, K. 2009. Governing water
across the Canada–U.S. borderland. Gattinger, M. and
Hale, G. (eds), Borders and Bridges: Navigating Canada’s
International Policy Relations in a North American Context.
Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 194–212.
http://www.oup.com/us/catalog/general/subject/Politics/
AmericanPolitics/ForeignDefensePolicy/~~/dmlldz11c2E
mY2k9OTc4MDE5NTQzMjAwOA==?view=usa&sf=toc&
ci=9780195432008
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2009. Managing Water for All: An OECD
Perspective on Pricing and Financing – Key Messages for
Policy Makers. Paris, France, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/
dataoecd/53/34/42350563.pdf
Perry, C. A. 2000. Signiﬁcant Floods in the United States
During the 20th Century – USGS Measures a Century of
Floods. USGS Fact Sheet 024-00, March 2000.
http://ks.water.usgs.gov/pubs/fact-sheets/fs.024-00.html
(Accessed 12 October 2011.)
Rogers, P. and Hall, A. W. 2003. Effective Water Governance.
TEC Background Papers No. 7. Sweden, Global Water
Partnership, Sweden. http://eagri.cz/public/web/
ﬁle/30598/Effective_Water_Governance_1_.pdf
Stulina, G. 2009: Climate change and adaptation to it in the
water and land management of Central Asia. G Tashkent,
Uzbekistan, Global Water Partnership in Caucasus and
Central Asia.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
1992. UNECE Convention on the Protection and Use of
Transboundary Watercourses and International Lakes,
17th March 1992, Helsinki. New York and Geneva, United
Nations.. http://live.unece.org/ﬁleadmin/DAM/env/water/
pdf/watercon.pdf

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

669

––––. 1998. UNECE Convention on Access to Information,
Public Participation in Decision-Making and Access to
Justice in Environmental Matters, 25th June 1998, Aarhus.
New York and Geneva. http://www.unece.org/env/pp/
welcome.html
––––. 2005. Seminar on Environmental Services and Financing
for the Protection and Sustainable Use of Ecosystems, 10–11
October 2005. http://www.unece.org/env/water/meetings/
payment_ecosystems/seminar.htm (Accessed 12 October
2011.)
––––. 2007a: First Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes
and Groundwaters. United Nations, New York and Geneva.
http://www.unece.org/env/water/publications/pub76.htm
(Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. 2007b: Recommendations on Payments for Ecosystem
Services in Integrated Water Resources Management.
United Nations, New York and Geneva. http://
unece.org/env/water/publications/documents/PES_
Recommendations_web.pdf (Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. 2007c. From Intentions to Actions: Overcoming
Bottlenecks – Critical Issues in Implementation of
Environmental Policies Highlighted by the UNECE
Environmental Performance Review Programme. United
Nations, New York and Geneva. http://unece.org/env/epr/
publications/Critical%20issues%20implementation%20
EPR.pdf
––––. 2009a. Guidance on Water and Adaptation to Climate
Change. United Nations, Geneva, Switzerland. http://www.
unece.org/env/water/publications/documents/Guidance_
water_climate.pdf
––––. 2009b. River Basin Commissions and other Institutions
for Transboundary Water Cooperation: Capacity for Water
Cooperation in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia.
United Nations, New York and Geneva. http://unece.org/
env/water/documents/CWC_publication_joint_bodies.pdf
––––. 2009c. Progress Report on National Policy Dialogues
in Countries in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central
Asia. New York and Geneva, United Nations. ECE/
MP.WAT/2009/6, Geneva, Switzerland. http://unece.
org/env/documents/2009/Wat/mp_wat/ECE_
MP.WAT_2009_6_e.pdf
––––. 2009d. Transboundary Flood Risk Management:
Experiences from the UNECE Region. New York and Geneva,
United Nations. http://www.unece.org/env/water/mop5/
Transboundary_Flood_Risk_Managment.pdf

670

CHAPTER 30

––––. 2010. The MDGs in Europe and Central Asia:
Achievements, Challenges and the Way Forward. Prepared
by UNECE in collaboration with UNDP, ILO, FAO, WFP,
UNESCO, UNIFEM, WHO/Euro, UNICEF, UNPFA, UNAIDS,
UNEP, UNIDO, UNCTAD, and the International Trade Centre.
UNew York and Geneva, United Nations, 126 pp.
––––. 2011a. Setting Targets and Target Dates under the
Protocol on Water and Health in the Republic of Moldova.
In collaboration with the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation and the Government of the Republic of
Moldova. Chisinau, Moldavia, Eco-TIRAS, Elan INC SRL.
http://www.eco-tiras.org/books/W&H-book-MD-En-2011.
pdf
––––. 2011b. Second Assessment of Transboundary Rivers,
Lakes and Groundwaters. New York and Geneva, United
Nations. ECE/MP.WAT/33. http://www.unece.org/env/
water/publications/pub/second_assessment.html
(Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. UNECE Statistical Division Database. New York and
Geneva, United Nations. n.d. http://www.unece.org (select
Statistical Database) or http://w3.unece.org/pxweb/
(Accessed 12 October 2011.)
USEPA (US Environmental Protection Agency). 2007.
Possible Water Resource Impacts in North America
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/effects/water/
northamerica.html (Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. 2009a: National Water Quality Inventory Report to
Congress. USEPA Office of Water, EPA 841-F-08-003,
January 2009. http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/guidance/
cwa/305b/upload/2009_01_22_305b_2004report_
factsheet2004305b.pdf (Accessed 12 October 2011.)
––––. 2009b: National Water Program Strategy: Response to
Climate Change. National Water Program Climate Change
Strategy: Key Action Update for 2010–2011. Washington DC,
USEPA. http://www.epa.gov/ow/climatechange/strategy.
html
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Guidance on Water
Supply and Sanitation in Extreme Weather Events. Geneva,
UNECE and WHO/EURO.
Wunder, S. 2005. Payments for Environmental Services:
Some Nuts and Bolts. Occasional Paper No. 42. Jakarta,
Indonesia, Center for International Forestry Research.
http://www.cifor.cgiar.org/publications/pdf_ﬁles/
OccPapers/OP-42.pdf

REGIONAL REPORTS

CHAPTER 31
Asia and the Paciﬁc

UNESCAP (Energy Security and Water Resources Section, Environment and
Development Division)
—
Authors Ti Le-Huu and Ermina Sokou1
Contributors Felix Seebacher, Salmah Zakaria and Marina Korzenevica
Acknowledgements Inputs were provided from Felix Seebacher on wastewater
management, Salmah Zakaria on climate change adaptation and Marina Korzenevica
on country-speciﬁc policies.

© FAO/Giulio Napolitano

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Trends and major challenges
Millions of people in the Asia-Paciﬁc region are still not connected to improved water
infrastructure for personal and productive uses, placing them in a state of human insecurity.
In 2008, about 480 million people lacked access to improved water resources, while 1.9 billion
had no access to improved sanitation facilities.
Population size, rapid urbanization, industrialization and economic development put pressure
on freshwater resources. The region’s water resources are also increasingly vulnerable to and
threatened by natural disasters and pollution.
Natural water-related disasters such as ﬂoods and droughts undermine economic
development. Coastal and ﬂood-prone areas, where much economic growth is generated,
are often struck by typhoons and rainstorms.
Of all wastewater generated, only 15–20% receives some level of treatment before discharge into
water resources. The total volume of domestic wastewater currently produced in urban areas
is a particular concern, estimated to be between 150 and 250 million cubic metres per day. This
wastewater either is discharged directly into open water bodies or leaches into the ground.
Richer, urban households are in a better position to secure safe water and adequate
sanitation. Inequalities in access to water between rich and poor households are evident all
over Asia, but for sanitation, the inequality is more striking.
Emerging needs
Providing water and sanitation services to all requires sizeable ﬁnancial resources – US$59 billion
to meet the Millennium Development Goal of access to water and $71 billion to provide
access to sanitation. If investment needs for all water services are included, the total annual
investment costs for water infrastructure could reach $180 billion, of which $100 billion is
needed in developing countries.
Extremes of ﬂood and drought are expected to increase in both magnitude and frequency as
a result of climate change.
Policies and solutions
To address the lack of adequate ﬁnancing, time horizons of investment assessment need
to be expanded. Environmental costs should be factored into prices charged for water and
sanitation services. Governments need to create the market conditions for the development
of sustainable and eco-efficient infrastructure.
Integrated stormwater management can prove invaluable during ﬂoods, as clean water bodies
minimize spreading of polluted water and disease. Integrated rainwater harvesting, thanks to
advances in technology, is also viewed as an integral part of water cycle management.
Central sewage treatment plants require a very large space, and are costly and difficult to
maintain. Technology for compact small wastewater treatment plants has improved and
offers many advantages.
Certain water-related challenges, such as stagnant access to sanitation, deteriorating
water quality, and climate-related risks, are common in Asia-Paciﬁc countries. Targeted,
urgent action is needed to break the developmental deadlock that many countries ﬁnd
themselves in due to poor water resources management. Promoting household water
security, recognizing the need to adapt to climate change threats and initiating a ‘Wastewater
Revolution’ are proposed priorities for regional cooperation.

31.1 Introduction
‘Asia and the Paciﬁc’ and ‘ESCAP region’ refer to the
group of members and associate members of the
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Paciﬁc (ESCAP) that fall within the region. The geographical description of the region used in this chapter
includes 55 member states of ESCAP in the ﬁve subregions: Central Asia, North-East Asia, the Paciﬁc, South
Asia and South-East Asia, as shown in Table 31.1.
31.1.1 General trends in the Asia-Paciﬁc
The Asia-Paciﬁc region has the largest share of renewable freshwater resources in the world, at 21,135 billion m2. This endowment is coupled with high water
utilization rates. On average, the region withdraws 11%
of its total renewable resources, second in the world
after the water-scarce Middle East and on par with
European utilization rates (ESCAP, 2009a).

no access to improved sanitation facilities (WHO and
UNICEF, 2010b).
The future is also uncertain. Population size, rapid urbanization, industrialization and economic development are placing pressure on freshwater resources.
Water resources are also increasingly vulnerable and
threatened by natural disasters and pollution. The
Asia-Paciﬁc is the world’s most vulnerable region with
respect to natural disasters. Pollution from industries,
agriculture and households further jeopardize future
water availability.

31.2 Issues

Despite some progress, millions in the Asia-Paciﬁc remain disconnected from improved water infrastructure
for personal and productive uses, forcing them into insecurity. In 2008, about 480 million people lacked access to improved water resources, while 1.9 billion had

31.2.1 Meeting or missing the MDG target on drinking
water and sanitation
Between 1990 and 2008, signiﬁcant achievements were made towards meeting the Millennium
Development Goals (MDG) target on access to safe
drinking water. Asia, and the Paciﬁc as a whole, is an
early achiever for halving the proportion of people
without access to safe drinking water, but not sanitation (ESCAP, ADB and UNDP, 2010). Between 1990 and
2008, the proportion of the region’s population with

TABLE 31.1
Member states of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP) in the ﬁve subregions
Subregion

ESCAP member states

North-East Asia

China, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Japan,
Mongolia, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation

Central Asia and the Caucasus

Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan

South-East Asia

Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Viet Nam

South and South-West Asia

Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan

Subregion

ESCAP member states
Sri Lanka, Turkey

Paciﬁc

American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia,
Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Northern Mariana
Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu

Source: CARE (2009).

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

673

access to improved drinking water sources increased
from 73 to 88 %, a 1.2-billion people increase (including
population size increase). The access rate increased in
all Asia-Paciﬁc subregions, except for Central Asia and
the Paciﬁc region, where it stayed the same.
Compared with water supply, sanitation coverage is
in a dire state. Only around 53% of the region’s population has access to improved sanitation. Access to
sanitation also varies considerably between subregions. The most rapid progress has been in South-East
Asia where the increase was 22 percentage points,
and in North-East Asia which between 1990 and 2008
increased access by 12 percentage points. The progress in South and South-West Asia was even weaker.
Although the number of people with access doubled
since 1990, by 2008 the average coverage was only
38% and the number of people without access was
higher than it was in 2005.
Poor drinking water quality and inadequate sanitation
threaten human health and productivity. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), 88% of diarrhoea incidents are attributed to poor sanitation
and dirty water (WHO and UNICEF, 2010a). In South
and South-East Asia, diarrhoea is responsible for up
to 8.5% of all deaths, which is the highest rate in the
world, followed by Africa, where it is responsible for
7.7% of deaths (WHO, 2010c). These numbers reveal a
grim reality, which because of lack of access to basic
infrastructure perpetuates poverty and poor health,
and conceals the region’s vast hidden potential for
development.
32.2.2 Stretched carrying capacity
Water availability
In the ESCAP region, high total and internal renewable
resources stand in sharp contrast with the per capita
availability, which is the second lowest in the world at
5,224 m2 per capita and far below the world average
of 8,349 m2 per capita – a result of the population size
(Figure 31.1).
Physical water scarcity is only one part of the equation. Water allocation is another matter. The share of
domestic water withdrawal over total withdrawal in
Asia and the Paciﬁc, the most populated region in the
world, is the lowest at 7.7%, compared with Africa at
10%. Agriculture is the principal user of water, claiming around 70% of all withdrawals. The region’s main
staple food, rice, requires two or three times more

674

CHAPTER 31

water for cultivation than other cereals. In many countries, agricultural practices are characterized by freeof-charge water abstraction, poorly managed irrigation schemes, outdated and damaged technological
infrastructure, and production of water-intensive crops
in dry regions. Many examples of over-abstraction of
ground and surface water exist. The threat of disappearance of the Aral Sea, mainly from intensive irrigation upstream, demonstrates that even the biggest
lakes of the world can be seriously affected (ESCAP,
2008).
Overall water availability for development across
the region is on a steep decline. Some countries, like
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, withdraw very close to, or
even more than, their total surface and groundwater
combined (116 and 99.6% of the total renewable water
respectively) (ESCAP, 2009a). Although critical conditions of freshwater availability appear localized in a
number of countries, analysing existing data from a
new, development angle reveals wider critical trends.
Water quality
The ecological carrying capacity of the region is further
affected by the deteriorating water quality of water
bodies. Of all wastewater generated worldwide, and in
the region, only 15–20% receives some level of treatment before discharge into water resources; the remainder is discharged with its full load of pollution and
toxic compounds (UNEP, 2002).
Domestic sewerage is of concern, as it affects ecosystems close to densely populated areas. The total
volume of wastewater produced in urban areas is estimated at 150–250 million m2 per day (UNEP, 2002).
This wastewater is either discharged directly into open
water bodies or leaches into the subsoil. In addition,
most industries in the region continue to generate water pollution, as enforcement of relevant regulations
lags behind.
Even relatively water-rich countries, such as Malaysia,
Indonesia, Bhutan and Papua New Guinea, now face
water supply and quality constraints in their major cities because of population growth, growing water consumption, environmental damage, harmful agricultural
activities, poor management of water catchment areas,
industrialization, and groundwater overuse.
Countries that are relatively less well-endowed with water, in Central Asia and in South and South-West Asia,

REGIONAL REPORTS

are even more severely affected when water quality
deteriorates. Countries with the least available water per
person also tend to have poor water quality. Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Georgia, Myanmar, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Maldives, Nepal, Tajikistan,
Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Bhutan, Papua New Guinea and Mongolia are
countries in which water quality pressures are strong.

Between 2000 and 2009, an average of 20,451 people
were killed each year by water-related disasters, excluding tsunami disasters, in the region. World’s annual
average was 23,651 deaths for the same period (Center
for Research on the Epidemidiology of Disasters, 2009).
Unprecedented ﬂoods in Pakistan killed 1,974 people,
damaged 1.65 million houses, and destroyed 2.24 million
hectares of crop land in 2010 (ESCAP, 2010b).

31.2.3 Natural disasters
Asia-Paciﬁc is a diverse region covering almost all of
the different types of climatic regions, from tropical
rain forest to more temperate areas; and from landlocked, mountain regions of the Himalayas to island
states in the Paciﬁc and Indian Oceans. Precipitation in
many countries in the region is heavily inﬂuenced by
the monsoon climate.2 Some subregions, like SouthEast Asia, suffer from both ﬂoods and droughts at the
same location, but at different times of the year.

Extreme weather conditions also jeopardize gains in
access to water and sanitation. Droughts reduce drinking water availability and ﬂoods and storms can damage basic water infrastructure and spread disease.

Natural water-related disasters, such as ﬂoods and
droughts undermine economic development. Coastal
and ﬂood-prone areas, where much economic growth
is generated, are often struck by typhoons and rainstorms. Striking and sustaining an optimal balance between the developmental needs of many Asian developing economies (especially inﬂuenced by population
growth, food and energy security issues) and the risks
associated with the use of ﬂood-prone land is a challenge, given uncertainties concerning the future state
of the water regime.

31.3 Emerging drivers
Asia-Paciﬁc is an incredibly dynamic region. Rapid urbanization, economic growth, industrialization, extensive and intensive agriculture development, as well
as climate change, have resulted in increasing and
exponential demand for water. Emanating from these
trends are the following drivers shaping the region’s
capacity to meet its water needs.
31.3.1 Economic and social drivers
Inequality in access to drinking water and sanitation
Despite impressive growth in gross domestic product
(GDP) rates and substantial improvements in access
to drinking water and sanitation, income and gender
inequalities persist. A basic typology analysis undertaken by ESCAP showed that richer, urban households are in a better position to secure safe water

FIGURE 31.1
Total renewable water per capita (total renewable/population), global regions (2007)

Latin America and Caribbean
North America
World
Africa
Europe
ESCAP
Asia-Paciﬁc, Non-ESCAP

0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

30,000

35,000

Source: ESCAP (2009a, ﬁg. 28.4, p. 206).

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

675

supply and adequate sanitation. Inequalities in access
to water between rich and poor households are evident all over Asia, but for sanitation, the gap is even
bigger. The largest discrepancies between access
of rich and poor people are in urban environments,
particularly in smaller cities (MEASURE DHS, 2004–
2008; UNICEF, 2004–2008).
Sex-disaggregated data on access to water and sanitation is not available at the international level. However,
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Committee
has underlined that the health of rural women often
depends on adequate and non-discriminatory access
to water (UN Women, 2010). Provision of segregated
toilets in schools is a necessity to increase school attendance by girls because gender inequalities in access to water and sanitation affect women disproportionally (Burrows et al., 2004).
The unfulﬁlled potential of women hampers progress.
ESCAP research reveals that women invest more
of their money in the health of their family, including water and sanitation, than men. The argument
can also be made that women value access to water more than men. In national surveys from countries as diverse as Armenia, India, Indonesia, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Kazakhstan, Mongolia,
Tajikistan and Viet Nam, female-headed households
consistently had better access to improved water and
sanitation than male-headed households (Table 31.2)
(MEASURE DHS, 2004–2008; UNICEF, 2004–2008).
However, in male-dominated environments, women’s
role in household decisions on water and sanitation
remains marginal.
Infrastructure development and investment
Providing water and sanitation services to everyone
requires sizeable ﬁnancial resources. For all of Asia
and the Paciﬁc, it is estimated that US$59 billion is
needed to meet the target of access to drinking water
and a total of US$71 billion is needed to provide access to sanitation according to the MDG target (ESCAP,
2010a). If investment needs for all water services are
included, the total annual investment cost for water
infrastructure could reach US$180 billion, including
about US$100 billion for all developing countries in the
region (ESCAP, 2006b). Poor water quality requires
vast investments, and increases in water treatment and
distribution costs.

676

CHAPTER 31

The coordinated drive to achieve the MDGs by governments, civil society and donors has boosted performance in related indicators over the past few years. In
response to international calls for increased ﬁnancing for water, the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
launched the Water Financing Program (WFP) to
double investments in the sector between 2006 and
2010 and established the Water Financing Partnership
Facility (WFPF) to mobilize co-ﬁnancing and investments from development partners, with some
US$65 million reached as of December 2008 (Asian
Development Bank, 2011).
Data from seven South-East Asian countries
(Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, the Philippines, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Viet
Nam), one country from Central Asia (Kazakhstan),
one country from North-East Asia (Mongolia) and
two countries from South Asia (Bangladesh, Nepal)
indicated a diverse level of institutional engagement in water and sanitation planning. Countries like
Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Nepal
and Thailand have adequate policies and institutions, while Cambodia and Lao People’s Democratic
Republic lack human resources and ﬁnancial planning for implementation.3 The Philippines, Cambodia,
Timor-Leste, and Viet Nam also lagged behind in
ﬁnancial planning and resources, with Viet Nam indicating the best future potential for scale-up of
resource allocation in meeting water and sanitation
goals (UN-Water, 2010).
However, even if access to adequate water and sanitation systems is established, it is important to ensure
that the built systems are ﬁnancially sustainable, functional, reliable, affordable, responsive to needs, socially
acceptable for both genders, and appropriate for children and adults. Often sanitation facilities are incompatible with women’s needs, while the size of basic
facilities is improper and even dangerous for children.
Wastewater treatment facilities in the region are also
generally lacking. In cities, many small waterways are
covered to allow more space for roads or commercial
areas, put into concrete beds, used mostly to facilitate
storm runoff or simply used as open sewers.
Irrigation facilities in the region are often old and
in poor condition, partly because of extremely low
water prices and poor management of the facilities.
Many governments have subsidized the construction
of inefficient irrigation systems, along with fuel and

REGIONAL REPORTS

electricity supplies. This has weakened price signals,
tempting farmers to withdraw too much water from
rivers, over-pump groundwater and waste freshwater
resources (ESCAP, 2008).
Water for food
The changing economic, demographic and climatic
backdrop is exacerbating difficult conditions for food
production. Producing each calorie of food requires
approximately 1 L of water. To provide each consumer with 1,800 calories per day, by 2050 Asia and the
Paciﬁc would need an additional 2.4 billion m2 of water

per day. Food security concerns aggravate the harm
inﬂicted on those who lack basic water access, whether
small-scale or large-scale producers.
31.3.2 Policies, law and ﬁnancing drivers
Water management capacity
Countries that withdraw water very close to their
internal renewable sources may face difficulties in
supporting development trends in the long-term.
Over-exploitation can modify water distribution and
cause water crises in parts of the region. Many countries in the region have moved, with various levels of

TABLE 31.2
Percentage of male and female-headed households with access to safe drinking water

Country

Year

Male-headed (%)

Female-headed (%)

How much more women
value access to water
(% points)

Armenia

2000

93.8

95.4

2

2005

95.8

96.4

1

Bangladesh

2007

97.0

97.6

1

India

1999

80.4

78.8

-2

2006

87.7

89.2

2

1997

73.9

77.5

4

2003

71.8

72.1

0

1999

92.5

96.2

4

2006

94.0

95.9

2

Kyrgyzstan

2006

88.9

93.3

4

Lao PDR

2005

58.6

70.4

12

Mongolia

2005

65.3

76.3

11

Nepal

1996

76.9

78.5

2

2006

82.3

80.3

-2

1998

85.4

87.4

2

2003

83.2

85.4

2

2000

56.1

65.8

10

2005

70.0

78.3

8

Thailand

2005

96.0

96.1

0

Uzbekistan

2006

89.5

95.9

6

Viet Nam

1997

71.5

78.6

7

2000

76.1

83.1

7

2002

77.1

84.4

7

2006

87.7

92.2

4

Indonesia

Kazakhstan

Philippines

Tajikistan

Source: ESCAP analysis based on Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) from the period
1999–2008.

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

677

on-the-ground-success, to adopt Integrated Water
Resources Management (IWRM). Tables 31.3 and 31.4
provide some examples of regional and country-level
initiatives.
Water disputes and conﬂicts
Despite increased awareness and implementation of
IWRM principles, the rapid economic growth of the region’s developing countries, accompanied by high intensity of the use of natural resources, especially water,
has led to a rapid increase in conﬂicts over water. This
poses a threat to stability and development.
Over the past two decades, the number of reported water-related incidents has risen. Conﬂicts within
countries are dominating the picture, particularly since
1990 (Table 31.5). In China alone, the number of disputes related to water reached over 120,000 during

the 1990s, according to official sources.4 In India, efforts and resources in water management are often
focused on conﬂict management between different
states. Allocation of increasingly scarce water resources has become the principal cause for water conﬂicts.
Direct conﬂicts are most likely to occur at the local
level over an ill-thought dam, ambiguous withdrawal
rights or deterioration of water quality. Against the
context of development, the biggest challenges are
balancing the different uses of water and managing
their economic, social and environmental impacts.
31.3.3 Technological drivers
Advances in technology are also changing the landscape of options for the region on water resources
management to meet its needs for water supply and
wastewater treatment coverage and socio-economic
development.

TABLE 31.3
Regional Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) initiatives
Region

IWRM initiative

Central Asia

Aral Sea Basin: framework for subregional dialogue (October 2008)
Aral Sea Basin: Executive Committee of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
(EC-IFAS)
Global Water Partnership Central Asia and Caucasus (GWP CACENA): support for IWRM

South and South-West Asia

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC): Disaster Management Center
SAARC: Comprehensive Framework on Disaster Management
Global Water Partnership (GWP) – South Asia: support for IWRM
South Asia Water Forum (SAWAF): directions for transboundary water management
National Adaptation Plan of Action (NAPA) in all countries
Political commitment for sanitation (SACOSAN)
Water Utility Network –South Asia (SAWUN)

South-East Asia

Mekong River Commission establishment (1995)
Mekong River Commission: IWRM-based Basin Development Strategy
ASEAN: Working Group on Water Resources Management and IWRM
GWP-SEA: support for IWRM

Paciﬁc Islands

Paciﬁc Wastewater Policy Statement
Paciﬁc Wastewater Framework for Action (2001)
Paciﬁc Regional Action Plan on Sustainable Water Management (2002)
Drinking Water Quality and Health Framework for Action (2005)
Paciﬁc Islands Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC)

Source: Jin Lee, Ti LeHuu and Salmah Zakaria, Energy Security and Water Resources Section, Environment and Development Division, ESCAP,
Status of IWRM Implementation in the Asia-Paciﬁc Region (unpublished report), December 2009, in cooperation with Torkil Clausen, GWP.

678

CHAPTER 31

REGIONAL REPORTS

Modular structures for water supply and wastewater
The advent of efficient modular design of water treatment using recent advances in technologies, such
as membrane technology, allows effective decentralized water supply and wastewater management.

Technology for compact, small wastewater treatment
plants (or units) has improved signiﬁcantly and the
requirement for space has been reduced, allowing
introduction of these units even in crowded urban
areas.

TABLE 31.4
Country-speciﬁc Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) initiatives
Country

IWRM initiative

Armenia

New Water Code with IWRM principles

Bangladesh

IWRM and Water Efficiency Plan, water codes

Cambodia

Law on Water Resources Management (2007)
National Water Resources Strategy (2004)

China

District management guided by IWRM
GWP and provincial GWP partnerships supporting IWRM
Water Law integrating river basin management

Indonesia

Government Regulation on Groundwater (2008)
Government Regulation on Water Supply System Development (2006)
National Water Resources Council (2008)
Revision of Government Regulation on Irrigation (2006)
Revision of Government Regulation on Water Resources Management (2008)

Japan

Revised Basic Environment Plan (2000)
Water management includes environmental sustainability

Kazakhstan

New Water Code with IWRM principles

Kyrgyzstan

New Water Code with IWRM principles

Lao PDR

Water Resources and Environment Administration

Malaysia

National Water Services Commission (2007)
Water Services Industry Act (2006)

Mongolia

Water Authority supports IWRM through river basin councils

Myanmar

Conservation of Water Resources and Rivers Law (2006)
National Commission for Environmental Affairs (2008): effluent standards for factories

Nepal

IWRM and Water Efficiency Plan, water codes

Pakistan

IWRM and Water Efficiency Plan, water codes

Philippines

Water Resources Commission to act as economic regulatory body

Republic of Korea

Comprehensive River Basin Plan revitalizes 12 rivers

Sri Lanka

IWRM and Water Efficiency Plan, water codes

Tajikistan

New Water Code with IWRM principles

Viet Nam

River basin management by Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (2007)
Water sector reform (2006–2008) separates water resources from water use management

Source: Jin Lee, Ti LeHuu and Salmah Zakaria, Energy Security and Water Resources Section, Environment and Development Division, ESCAP,
Status of IWRM Implementation in the Asia-Paciﬁc Region (unpublished report), December 2009, in cooperation with Torkil Clausen, GWP.

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

679

Water-sensitive urban design
Water-sensitive urban design is the cumulative process
of designing urban environments to accommodate human and environmental needs for water, while respecting and supporting the natural water cycle. The design
incorporates the basic water supply access and security; public health protection (e.g. through sewers); ﬂood
protection through drainage systems; environmental
protection by rehabilitating waterways; protection of
natural resources through the water cycle, paying speciﬁc attention to intergenerational equity and resilience to climate change (Brown et al., 2008).

Storm water management
Extremes of ﬂoods and droughts are expected to
increase in magnitude and frequency as a result of
climate change. Natural water bodies can turn into
water supply sources during droughts, if rehabilitated.
Integrated storm water management (ISWM), already
implemented in the more developed countries of the
region, can prove invaluable during ﬂoods, as clean
water bodies minimize spreading of polluted water
and disease.
Rainwater harvesting

TABLE 31.5
Chronology of major recent water conﬂicts in Asia, 2000–2008
Date

Countries involved

Description of conﬂicts or potential conﬂicts

2000

Central Asia:
Kyrgyzstan,
Kazakhstan,
Uzbekistan

Kyrgyzstan cuts off water to Kazakhstan until coal was delivered. Uzbekistan
cuts off water to Kazakhstan for nonpayment of debt. (Pannier, 2000)

2000

Afghanistan: Hazarajat

Violent conﬂicts broke out over water resources in the villages of Burna Legan
and Taina Legan, and in other parts of the region, as drought depleted local
resources. (Cooperation Center for Afghanistan, 2000)

2000

India: Gujarat

Water riots were reported in some areas of Gujarat to protest against failure
of the authority to arrange adequate supply of tanker water. Police shot into a
crowd at the village of Falla near Jamnagar, killing three people and injuring 20
others following protests against the diversion of water from Kankavati Dam to
the town of Jamnagar. (FTGWR, 2000)

2001

China

In protest to the destruction of ﬁsheries from uncontrolled water pollution,
ﬁshermen in northern Jiaxing City, Zhejiang Province, dammed for 23 days
the canal that carries 90 million tonnes of industrial wastewater per year. The
wastewater discharge into neighbouring Shengze, Jiangsu Province, killed ﬁsh
and threatened people’s health. (China Ministry of Water Resources, 2001)

2002

India: Kashmir

Two people were killed and 25 others injured in Kashmir when police ﬁred at a
group of villagers in Garend in a dispute over sharing water from an irrigation
stream. (The Japan Times, 2002)

2002

India: Karnataka, Tamil Nadu

Continued violence over the allocation of Cauvery River between Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu. Riots, property destruction, more than 30 injuries, and arrests
occurred through September and October. (The Hindu 2002a,b, The Times of
India 2002a)

2004

China

Tens of thousands of farmers staged a sit-in against the construction of
Pubugou Dam on Dadu River in Sichuan Province. Riot police were deployed
to quell the unrest and one person was killed. Some residents were killed. (See
China 2006 for follow-up) (BBC, 2004b; VOA, 2004)

2007

India

Thousands of farmers breached security and stormed the area of Hirakud
Dam to protest allocation of water to industry. Minor injuries resulted from the
conﬂict between the farmers and police. (News Service, 2007)

Source: Gleick (2008).

680

CHAPTER 31

REGIONAL REPORTS

Due to advances in rainwater harvesting technology, integrated rainwater harvesting is increasingly
viewed as an integral part of water cycle management. Rainwater can be captured at the city level. In
Singapore little rainwater is wasted. Rainwater is collected wherever it can - in streets and ponds, even
on tall buildings and bridges - before being taken
by drains to reservoirs, and then to treatment plants
where it is cleaned to drinking water standards. The
catchment area is being increased by the creation of
a pair of reservoirs. The ﬁrst of these reservoirs, will
expand the rainfall-catchment acreage to two-thirds of
the island’s total land area (The Economist, 2010).
Domestic rainwater harvesting systems are also simple to install and operate. Their decentralized nature
allows owners to beneﬁt from direct management
of demand and supply. With support technologies
(modern and indigenous), rainwater harvesting is
cost-effective, and can release capital in times of disaster. (Stockholm Environment Institute and UNEP,
2009).

The many threats to water resources paint a complex
picture. To better focus and prioritize regional action,
ESCAP has identiﬁed hotspots of multiple challenges. Hotspots are countries, areas or ecosystems with
overlapping challenges of poor access to water and
sanitation, deteriorating water quality, limited water
availability and increased exposure to climate change
and water-related disasters. All or some of these challenges may be of concern (Table 31.6).
As shown in Figure 31.2, countries in South-East Asia
are at a crossroads of development. High growth
rates provide ﬁnancing for better water resources
management, but development priorities ignore the
risks from disaster, climate change and poor household water and sanitation access. Uzbekistan and
India are also facing exceptional circumstances because of little preparedness for natural disasters and
climate change (India), and unsustainable patter of
water use (Uzbekistan). Basic access to sanitation remains a determining concern for Bangladesh.

31.5 Achievements through policy-making
31.4 Principal risks and uncertainties
31.4.1 Climate change
Hydrological extremes have increased in the AsiaPaciﬁc as well as around the globe. Countries in the region are expected to be severely affected by increased
climate variability. For example, in the Mekong River,
the maximum ﬂow is projected to increase by 35–42%
in the basin and by 16–19% in the delta. In contrast the
minimum ﬂow is estimated to decline by 17–24% in the
basin and by 26–29% in the delta, suggesting possible
water shortages in the dry season. Heavily populated
mega deltas in South-West, East and South-East Asia
are expected to be at greatest risk of increased river
and coastal ﬂoods. The interaction of climate change
impacts with rapid development is expected to affect
growth, including MDG gains (IPCC, 2007).
In addition to ﬂoods and droughts, saltwater intrusion
in estuaries is expected to move further inwards. Snow
melt and glaciers, as well as rising snow lines, could also
be unfavourable for downstream agriculture in South and
Central Asia. North-western China is projected to experience a 27% decline in glacier areas. Changes in runoff
could impact power output from hydropower generating
countries such as Tajikistan and increase demand for agriculture water in arid and semi-arid regions of Asia.

After decades of high economic growth, the region is
now facing severe environmental risks. Water insecurity is one manifestation of the unfolding environmental damage. Informed policy-making is the only tool to
enhance resilience while sustaining growth.
31.5.1 Policy options
Pricing in costs to the environment
The Asia-Paciﬁc development pattern has relied primarily on cheap natural and human resources. This,
however, has created economies that run in two
speeds: one of rapid advances in economic performance, and another of persisting poverty and environmental degradation. To promote more balanced
growth, prices of production factors need to reﬂect the
real cost, including costs to the environment and ecosystem services. This shift has important implications
for water resources management, including expanding
time horizons of investment assessment to more adequately incorporate beneﬁts of access to water, sanitation, and wastewater treatment; and factoring environmental costs into water and sanitation service charges.
Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) is one way of
determining the value and paying a price for these services (Box 31.1).
Eco-efficient water infrastructure development

31.4.2 Hotspots

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

681

Eco-efficient water infrastructure aims to harmonize
water infrastructure within the environment and can
be envisaged in urban and rural contexts. Eco-efficient
urban solutions include river rehabilitation, storm water management, decentralized wastewater treatment,
and water re-use and recycling while rural options include modern irrigation practices, decentralized water
and sanitation systems, water reuse and re-cycling, as
well as rainwater harvesting.
Many countries such as Cambodia, China, Malaysia, and
the Republic of Korea have already been pursuing ecoefficient water infrastructure development. Although
speciﬁc examples of large-scale eco-efficient water infrastructure are difficult to ﬁnd, some governments are
already discussing and integrating these terms in their
national planning. Indonesia integrated the eco-efficiency concept into its ﬁve-year National Development
Plan for 2010–2014, and the Philippines adopted the
eco-efficiency dimensions into its Mid-Term National
Development Plan.

To support this process, ESCAP has developed ecoefficiency water infrastructure guidelines and completed capacity-building initiatives in several developing countries, including support to the development of
guidelines for Eco-efficiency in Water Infrastructure for
Buildings in Malaysia, recommended to be implemented in all public sector buildings; the implementation of
a pilot project on an ISWM system in the Philippines;
and a river rehabilitation programme for a tributary of
the Brantas River in Indonesia.
Sustainable consumption and production
Water resources management is shifting from supplyside to demand-side management and this is increasingly recognized in the region. Non-revenue water
averages 30% of production in Asian cities, but ranges
from 4 to 65% (McIntosh, 2003). Approximately half
of this loss is from leaking distribution networks. There
are many examples of implementation of demand-side
management measures across the region and interest

TABLE 31.6
Basic framework for deﬁning water hotspots
Challenge

Measures available*

Countries at risk

Water
availability

Water utilization level (Threat* 1)
Index of Water Available for
Development (IWAD**) (Threat 2)
Water quality (Threats 3 and 4)

Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bhutan, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Georgia, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia,
Maldives†, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan‡, Papua New Guinea,
Philippines, Tajikistan, Thailand, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan‡

Vulnerability
and risk

Frequency of ﬂoods (Threat 5)
Frequency of cyclones (Threat 6)
Frequency of droughts (Threat 7)
Climate change pattern (Threat 8)

Australia, Bangladesh‡, Cambodia‡, China‡, DPRK, India‡, Indonesia‡,
Iran, Kazakhstan‡, Kyrgyzstan, Lao PDR‡, Myanmar, ‡ Malaysia‡,
Maldives†, Nepal, Paciﬁc Islands†, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea‡,
Philippines‡, Republic of Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand‡, Timor-Leste‡,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan‡, Viet Nam‡

Household
water
adequacy

Access to water (Threat 9)
Access to sanitation (Threat 10)
Disability adjusted life-years (DALY)
from diarrhoea

Afghanistan†, Bangladesh, Cambodia†, China, India, Indonesia,
Lao PDR†, Mongolia, Nepal, Paciﬁc Islands, Papua New Guinea†,
Timor-Leste

Human
development

Life expectancy at birth
Inequalities in access
People living in poverty

Cambodia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Lao
PDR, Myanmar, Paciﬁc Islands, Papua New Guinea, Philippines

*. The ‘Threat’ numbers refer to columns in Figure 31.2 and measures that were actually used to estimate water hotspots.
**. The Index of Water Available for Development (IWAD) examines the current trends of rapidly increasing water withdrawal in relation to the
limited amount of renewable freshwater resources.
†. Challenges exist in two of the indicated measures. IWAD is deﬁned as an index measuring the balance between the total internal renewable
water resources and total water withdrawals in a particular year against the base line of 1980 of this balance.
‡. Challenges exist in more than two of the indicated measures.
Note: Data not used for hotspot identiﬁcation.
Sources: Compiled from Dilley et al. (2005); ESCAP (2009a).

682

CHAPTER 31

REGIONAL REPORTS

in improving water use efficiency is growing. Bangkok
and Manila leak detection programmes have lowered
estimated Uncounted-for-Water (UFW), thus postponing the development of new infrastructure (Molle et
al., 2009). Since 2008 Sydney Water in Australia has
provided homes in the Hoxton Park area with two water supplies: recycled water and drinking water (dual
reticulation) (Sydney Water, 2011).

taken: water tariffs and water conservation tax were
restructured, maximum allowable ﬂow rates were
set, public education and awareness campaigns were
launched, and water audits to large customers were
implemented as a part of the market-oriented programme to obtain industry feedback. As a result,
Singapore now has one of the lowest UFW rates in the
world (below 5%) (Kiang, 2008).

Singapore has reduced urban domestic water demand
from 176 L per person a day in 1994 to 157 L in 2007
through the comprehensive policy, based on three
principles: voluntary, pricing and mandatory (Kiang,
2008). To apply these principles, several actions were

In Hamirpur district of India, the Department of Rural
Development and the Department of Agriculture
have embarked on a programme of Soil and Water
Conservation to reduce runoff, create ‘high efficiency life-saving irrigation’ and promote groundwater

FIGURE 31.2
Asia-Paciﬁc water hotspots

Compound hotspot in 6 categories

Compound hotspots
1

2

3

4

Cambodia
Indonesia

x

Lao PDR
x

Papua New Guinea
Philippines

x

India

x

x

6

7

8

9

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Myanmar

x

Compound hotspot in 5 categories

5

10 Total
x

6

x

6

x

x

6

x

x

6

x

x

x

x

x

x

Bangladesh

x

x

x

x

4

China

x

x

x

x

4

x

x

x

x

Malaysia
Pakistan

x

x
x

x

x

5

4
x

x

x

x

Viet Nam

x

x

x

x

x

x

4
x

x
x
x

4
4

x

Kazakhstan
Maldives

5

x

Timor-Leste
Afghanistan

5

x

x

x

3
3

x

x

Mongolia

x

x

x

3

Nepal

x

x

x

3

x

x

3

Paciﬁc Islands

x

No data or not a hotspot

5

x

Uzbekistan

Compound hotspot in 1 or 2 categories

6
x

x

x

Thailand

Compound hotspot in 3 or 4 categories

3

DPRK

x

x

Kyrgyzstan

x

x

2

Tajikistan

x

x

2

Turkmenistan

x

x

2

2 High water utilization

x

1

3 Deteriorating water quality
4 Poor water quality and low water endowment

Australia

2

Legend
1 Increasing water scarcity threat

Azerbaijan

x

1

Bhutan

x

1

5 Flood-prone countries

Georgia

x

1

6 Cyclone-prone countries

1

7 Drought-prone countries

1

8 Elevated ecosystem/Climate change risk

Iran

x

Republic of Korea

x

Sri Lanka
Prevalence
(countries affected)

x

1

9 Poor access to drinking water
10 Poor access to sanitation

6

2

5

14 15 13 17 19

4

12

Sources: Compiled from Dilley et al. (2005); ESCAP (2009a); FAO (2010) (AQUASTAT).

WWDR4

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

683

recharge. The goal of the Himachal Pradesh MidHimalayan Watershed Development Project is to
combine protection of natural resources with rural
household income increase. The project also intends to
harmonize watershed development projects and policies across the state in accordance with best practices
(Asian Development Bank, 2010b).
31.5.2 Country responses

BOX 31.1
Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) in Asia and
the Paciﬁc

Innovative policies to support payment for ecosystem
services have been established, or are under consideration, in some countries in the region, including Viet Nam,
Indonesia, the Philippines and Sri Lanka.
An example of an innovative policy to support payment
for ecosystem services is the ecosystem service fee collected from water users by the district water utility on the
island of Lombok, Indonesia, as prescribed by local government regulations. A water utility in the water catchment in which the provincial capital of Aceh is located
has agreed to pay two local communities for securing the
watershed. The fee is paid to targeted communities that
can impact water quality and supply and who then have
a contractual obligation to sustainably manage their land.
Five million Rp will be paid every year, for three years
and will be managed by a community forum. The agreement will be expanded if both sides fulﬁl their commitments and improvements in water quality and quantity
are achieved. The result is that water users enjoy cleaner
water and more sustainable supply. The payment for ecosystem services mechanism was seen as a way to address
escalating conﬂicts over water use.
ESCAP and the World Wide Fund (WWF) have been
supporting action by BAPEDAL (Badan Pengendalian
Dampak Lingkungan [Environmental Impact Management
Agency]), Aceh to lead a Payments for Ecosystem
Services project in Aceh, Indonesia for Nature Aceh programme and other partners. Under this project, a PES arrangement has been agreed to in the Krueng Aceh watershed area and is being implemented. A community forum
(FORSAKA) has been established to develop and implement an agreement between the water utility and three
communities, under which the water utility will pay for
enhanced protection against illegal logging. Sustainable
management arrangements will follow in subsequent
phases of the project, as trust is built and implementation
arrangements are reﬁned. A pilot project in the Krueng
Peusangan watershed area is also being developed by
WWF (ESCAP, 2009b).

684

CHAPTER 31

Integrated planning approach
Water resources management traditionally has been
compartmentalized in government policy-making, with
different water users – agriculture, industry, domestic
water supply and sanitation, environment – falling in
the jurisdiction of different line ministries and institutions. Over the past few decades, the momentum has
picked up across the region for introducing and implementing IWRM policies.
An indicative proﬁle report on the current status of
IWRM implementation in the region was presented
at the 5th World Water Forum held in March 2009. A
proposed framework to facilitate IWRM implementation and monitoring at the country level has also been
developed (Lee, 2009).
There are many country-speciﬁc examples that showcase the importance of IWRM. To address the problem of poor management of water resources and
high withdrawal for agricultural needs, Kazakhstan
launched a water resources management project in
2008 aiming to strengthen water management organization and institute the practice of IWRM. Stakeholders
forums with experts and the public took place to draw
feedback from major water users and providers. As a
result, River Basin Councils were established in all the
eight river basins of the country to implement national
water policy (GWP, 2010).
Decentralization and inclusiveness
Decentralization of the planning and decision-making
process for water resources management, together
with enhancement of public participation is essential
for introducing sustainable solutions.
Inclusiveness in decision-making is also a prerequisite for buy-in on water-related policy and investment
decision-making. For example, in the state of Victoria,
Australia, the Department of Sustainability and
Environment in partnership with rural and urban water
corporations, catchment management authorities, key
regional stakeholders, interest groups and communities has developed long-term sustainable water strategies in the Our Water Our Future action plan. Every
strategy aims to secure water for local growth, as well
as regulate water systems and protect rivers and other
water sources; therefore in each case, water-related
risks are evaluated and analysed, and appropriate

REGIONAL REPORTS

action is taken (Government of Australia, Department
of Sustainability and Environment, 2010).

31.6 Sectoral priorities and regional
initiatives
The identiﬁcation of hotspots revealed that certain
water-related challenges are common in Asia-Paciﬁc
countries. Among the most prominent challenges are
stagnant access to sanitation and sometimes drinking
water, deteriorating water quality, and climate-related
risks. These sectoral priorities require targeted, urgent
action to unblock the developmental deadlock that
many countries ﬁnd themselves in, due to poor water
resources management.
31.6.1 Household water security
Meeting the MDG targets remains a priority for the region, but the beneﬁts of access to water and sanitation
expand beyond the basic need for life. Adequate water
and sanitation are linked to various desirable developmental outcomes, such as healthy ecosystems and
productive livelihoods and also linked to GDP growth
through increase in tourism, foreign direct investment,
labour productivity and agricultural outputs. A study
of four South-East Asian countries estimated the total economic beneﬁts of achieving universal access to
sanitation at between US$5.4 billion and US$27 billion
(Hutton et al., 2008). The narrow deﬁnition of access to
drinking water and sanitation facilities is thus expanded
to accommodate a broader concept of household water
security linked to socio-economic development.
Better monitoring and assessment of achievements
is required to inform policy-making. The question remains whether recent progress, particularly with respect to water targets, represents a one-time event or
a real take-off for the Asia-Paciﬁc.
To improve water and sanitation services in the second
largest city in the country, Chittagong, the Government
of Bangladesh recently initiated the Chittagong
Water Supply Improvement and Sanitation Project
with the support from the International Development
Association. The project supports institutional development by enhancing the services provided by
Chittagong Water Supply and Sewerage Authority and
will focus on formulating a sewerage and drainage
master plan for Chittagong. The project targets the
poor, particularly those in urban slums, where piped
distribution networks are not available (WaterWorld,
2010).

WWDR4

Cambodia’s Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority
(PPWSA) is unlike typical water utilities in Asia. It has
an efficient service and an increasing consumer base.
With the assistance of external funding agencies, particularly the Asian Development Bank, and through internal reforms, PPWSA transformed itself into an efficient,
self-ﬁnanced, autonomous organization in a city still recovering from many years of war and civil strife. Today,
PPWSA is a model public sector water utility that provides drinking water to Phnom Penh 24 hours a day. The
main factors behind the Authority’s success are streamlining the organization’s workforce; improving collection
levels (e.g. installing meters for all connections, computerizing the billing system, updating the consumer base,
and confronting high-ranking nonpayers and cutting
off their water if they refuse to pay); rehabilitating the
whole distribution network and the treatment plants;
minimizing illegal connections and unaccounted-for
water (e.g. setting up inspection teams to stop illegal
connections, penalizing those with illegal connections,
and giving the public incentives to report illegal connections); and increasing water tariffs to cover maintenance and operating costs by proposing a three-step
increase in tariffs over seven years, although the third
step was ultimately not required because revenues began to cover costs (Asian Development Bank, 2007).
Sanitation is also increasingly understood as expanding beyond toilets. There is a need for behavioural
change and for institutional reforms to address sanitation in its broader interpretation, which includes
hygienic disposal of human excreta and grey water
management. The momentum of the International
Year for Sanitation (2008), for example, urged regional
leaders to assert that sanitation improves not just human health (access to toilets), but also environmental
health, as domestic wastewater is a major contributor
of bacterial contamination to groundwater supplies
and rivers across the region (Asian Development Bank,
2010c).
Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority has been
implementing the Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation
Project for Bangladesh through rehabilitating and
strengthening sewerage systems and stormwater
drainage, as well as implementing environmental and
social safeguards. It has been also planned to provide
local communities with services after strengthening institutional capacity and extending mainstream services
(World Bank, 2011a).

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

685

Governments and international organizations need to
work together to generate demand and ultimately willingness to pay for these services. For the poorest, governments need to step in and subsidize a transition to
sustainable, adequate, eco-efficient infrastructure.
An example of potential demand generation initiative can be found in Cambodia. The Ministry of Rural
Development and the Government of Cambodia have
acknowledged that the market can play an important
role in sanitation improvements. In the new Sanitation
Marketing Project (launched in 2009), market forces
and demand creation activities have been widely used
to install 10,000 toilets in rural village households.
Unlike previous projects, the focus is on changing behaviour within communities to create demand for sanitation facilities. As part of the market-based solutions,
an affordable and simple latrine core was designed
and branded as Easy Latrine, and introduced to the
market through local producers. The innovative pourﬂush latrine sells for as low as US$25, and producers
are receiving training in sanitation and hygiene education, latrine production, and basic business and sales
management (Water and Sanitation Program, 2011).
An additional example of market creation for water
and sanitation activities is the WaterSHED programme
(Box 31.2).
31.6.2 Green growth and wastewater revolution in the
Asia-Paciﬁc
Water quality in the region is at a critical stage as more
wastewater is continuously being released into the natural environment. The wastewater revolution initiative,
which was begun and promoted by the UN SecretaryGeneral’s Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation’s
(UNSGAB) with the launching of Hashimoto Action
Plan II (HAPII) in late January 2010 looks at the rapidly
deteriorating water environment in the Asia-Paciﬁc
and the need to revolutionize the way wastewater is
being handled and treated.
Recognizing the critical stage of water pollution challenges, ESCAP convened the Regional Dialogue on
Wastewater Management in Kuala Lumpur, held on
15–16 June 2010, within the context of eco-efficient
water infrastructure development of the Green Growth
approach in the region. The Regional Dialogue reviewed regional experiences and issues related to
wastewater management and various initiatives and
recent developments, including decentralization efforts and advances in technologies.

686

CHAPTER 31

In Malaysia, the Government has introduced new
wastewater regulations. Taking into account shortcomings in the 1979 Regulations, a comprehensive review
was initiated and culminated in the enforcement of
three new sets of regulations on 10 December 2009:
Environmental Quality (Industrial Effluents, Sewage,
Control of Pollution from Solid Waste Transfer Station
and Landﬁll) Regulations 2009 (Lee, 2010).
The National Ganga River Basin Authority in India, with
the ﬁnancial support of the World Bank, launched a
programme in 2009 to clean the Ganges, to ensure
that ‘no untreated municipal sewage or industrial efﬂuents would be discharged into the river by 2020’.
Previous action plans did not improve the health of the
river, in which almost 95% of the pollution is caused by
sewers and open drains (World Bank, 2011b). This time
the governmental approach has moved from a towncentric approach to a broader river basin approach,
focussing on strengthening the newly formed National
Ganga River Basin Authority, and ﬁnancing the estimated US$4 billion needed to stop all discharge of untreated sewage and effluent into the Ganges by 2020
(World Bank, 2009).
Finally, the Regional Dialogue recommended support
for the Wastewater Revolution in Asia of UNSGAB,
to be implemented in collaboration with the Green
Growth initiative of ESCAP. The regional initiative
was subsequently presented at the Sixth Ministerial
Conference on Environment and Development
(MCED-6) in 2010, and included the Regional
Implementation Plan of the MCED-6 as part of the
Astana Green Bridge Initiative of Kazakhstan.
31.6.3 Adapting to climate change
The Asia-Paciﬁc region is home to two-thirds of the
world’s poor, and as the poor are generally the least
resilient to and least prepared for climate change impacts, the region faces challenges in achieving its
MDG targets, as well as the potential for some erosion
of its past MDG achievements. Despite efforts to understand the extent of climate change impacts, effective adaptation and adaptive capacity in developing
Asian countries will continue to be limited by various
ecological, social and economic, technical, institutional
and political constraints.
To address this multitude of problems, a knowledge
hub on climate change was recently established

REGIONAL REPORTS

within the framework of the Asia-Paciﬁc Water Forum
(APWF) to promote more effective regional cooperation, including more targeted research to identify
types of vulnerability, appropriate policies, strategies,
and action plans on adaptation. It is expected that the
knowledge hub would promote the mainstreaming of
these policies and strategies into national development
agendas and enhance the needed capacity building.
Bhutan has been developing mitigation and adaptation
policies, while incorporating them in strategies for economic growth and national plans. For many years the
main tool for mitigation of climate change has been
hydropower, which is also the largest driving factor
of the country’s pro-poor economic growth, as it accounts for 25% of GDP and more than 40% for national
revenues. Adaptation strategies have been included
in the government’s 10th Five-Year Plan (2008–2013)
with the special note for potential adverse impacts
on hydrological ﬂows for power plants and irrigation,
which may affect national energy and food security,
and ﬂood hazards, such as glacial lake outburst ﬂoods
(GLOF). Climate change risks are additionally addressed in the Disaster Risk Management Framework
(Asian Development Bank, 2010a). Formulation of the
Water Act following principles of IWRM has been at
the core of these strategies. Despite this effort to address climate change-related risks, Bhutan does not
have a comprehensive climate change policy (National
Environment Commission Royal Government of
Bhutan, UNEP, 2009).
Several globally sponsored adaptation projects were
recently initiated in Bhutan. The GLOF Risk Reduction
Project focused on the development of a regional
GLOF database and risk management strategies in the
Himalayan region for climatic and meteorological risk
reduction and mitigation (UNDP, 2010). International
partners are helping Bhutan reduce GLOF risks arising from climate change in the Punakha-Wangdi and
Chamkhar valleys including plans for an early warning
system for the Punakha-Wangdi Valley (UNDP, 2011).
A midpoint assessment in 2010 showed that mitigation action so far focused on lowering the water levels
of the Thorthormi Lake, to reduce the risk of glacial
ﬂoods in the valley resulting in lowering the water level
by 67 cm while the aim is to lower it by 5 m (Meenawat
and Sovacool, 2010). Early warning systems have also
improved: while previously only one warning station
was operated manually by two employees, in 2010
representatives of 21 vulnerable communities were

WWDR4

BOX 31.2
WaterSHED: Using markets to bring water,
sanitation, and hygiene to Asia’s poor
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Enterprise Development
(WaterSHED) is a USAID-funded project implemented
in Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic republic and Viet
Nam as a public–private partnership led by the University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in the United States. The
programme is designed to bring effective, affordable water
and sanitation to poor and disadvantaged consumers in
Asia. Providing affordable and desirable water and sanitation products increases consumer demand and encourages
adequate use among the poor. Using proven market-based
principles, WaterSHED leverages the power of private enterprise to bring water, health, and wealth to the poor.
An enterprise development programme supports the
market creation initiative. The enterprise development
programme focuses on manufacturing, marketing, and
distributing household water treatment and storage products, as well as hygiene and sanitation products, such as
latrines. This ‘business incubator’ approach aims to create
private, for-proﬁt companies and develop a well-functioning supply chain to ensure programme sustainability long
after the development dollars are gone.
The success behind such programmes relies on two main
business principles: (a) offering products consumers want
at prices based on full cost and (b) selling to local retailers and consumers at full cost, instead of providing free
or subsidized products, which can distort the natural business environment.
A second factor of success is building on the existing efforts of nongovernment organizations to develop transformational technologies, provide training and education,
and drive demand for clean water solutions. The for-proﬁt
business model needs to be driven by sustainability and
efficiency rather than being based on permanent donor
funding. By creating new distribution channels for clean
water products, such as microfranchises, the overall supply chain is strengthened and local entrepreneurs are
empowered to determine community-speciﬁc needs.
Engaging local microﬁnance institutions is also crucial,
as these provide ﬁnance options for consumers, allowing
for monthly payments (over 12–24 months) on the part of
creditworthy borrowers whose cash ﬂow patterns do not
allow them to incur a single lump expense.
Through this programme, WaterSHED has provided water
ﬁlters to over 100,000 people and new latrines to over
25,000. In addition, design innovations include a low-cost
aspirational water ﬁlter and a low-cost, build-it-yourself
latrine costing less than US$100.
Source: Adapted from USAID (2010).

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

687

provided with mobile phones to contact national authorities in case of ﬂood events. The replacement of
the manual system by gauges and sensors for monitoring glacial lake depth and rivers is planned.
In 2009, India embarked on the National Water Mission
as a part of the National Action Plan on Climate
Change (2008), identifying several strategies to tackle
climate change and achieve water-related goals. The
main goals are to create a comprehensive water database and proper public awareness and education
campaigns, shift focus on overexploited areas, increase
water use efficiency by 20% and promote IWRM on a
basin level. Key strategies include regulatory mechanisms with differential entitlements and pricing, promotion of environmentally friendly solutions and
behavioural change, efficiency improvement of existing facilities, and implementation of programmes for
groundwater recharge (Box 31.3) (Government of India,
Ministry of Water Resources, 2011).

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reﬂect the views of the United Nations.

2

Affected by the oceanic air current in summer and controlled by
the continental air current in winter, resulting in dry winter and
wet summer.

3

Kazakhstan is a very low performer in all categories, possibly
because of the scarce and limited data provided through the
survey.

4

For the purpose of this analysis, conﬂict is not limited to
armed conﬂict, but includes all water-related disputes that
have necessitated mediation. Whether violent or not, these
disputes have threatened the stability of the socio-economic
development process.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Asian Development Bank. 2007. Phnom Penh Water Supply
Authority: An Exemplary Water Utility in Asia. http://www.adb.
org/water/actions/CAM/PPWSA.asp (Accessed 10 October
2011.)
––––. 2010a. Capacity Building of the National Environment
Commission in Climate Change: Bhutan. http://pid.adb.

org/pid/TaView.htm?projNo=43021&seqNo=01&typeCd=2
(Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2010b. Climate Change Adaptation in Himachal
Pradesh: Sustainable Strategies for Water Resource. Asian
Development Bank, India. (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
http://www.adb.org/documents/books/cca-himachalpradesh/cca-himachal-pradesh-3.pdf#page=12
––––. 2010c. Follow-up Conference of the International
Year for Sanitation, Tokyo, January 2010. http://beta.adb.
org/news/events/follow-conference-international-yearsanitation (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2011. Water Financing Programme 2006–2010. http://
www.adb.org/water/wfp/default.asp (Accessed 10 October
2011.)
Brown, R., Keith, N., and Wong, T. (2008). Transitioning
to Water Sensitive Cities: Historical, Current and Future
Transition States, 11th International Conference on Urban
Drainage, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, p. 5.
Burrows, G., Acton, J., and Maunder, T. 2004. Water and
Sanitation: The Education Drain. Education Media Report 3.
WaterAid, London, UK. http://www.wateraid.org/documents/
education20report.pdf (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters. 2009.
EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International Disaster Database.
Université Catholique de Louvain, Belgium. http://www.
em-dat.net (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
Dilley, M., Chen., R. S., Deichmann, U., Lerner-Lam, A. L.,
Arnold, M. and Agwe J. et al. 2005. Natural Disaster
Hotspots: Global Risk Analysis. Synthesis Report. The World
Bank and Columbia University.
The Economist. 2010. Every drop counts: and in Singapore
every drop is counted. Special report: Water. (20 May
2010). Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.economist.com/
node/16136324
ESCAP (Economic and Social Commission for Asia and
the Paciﬁc). 2006a. State of Environment in Asia and the
Paciﬁc 2005 Synthesis. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.
unescap.org/esd/environment/soe/2005/download/
SOE%202005%20Synthesis.pdf (Accessed 10 October
2011.)
––––. 2006b. Enhancing Regional Cooperation in
Infrastructure Development Including That Related to
Disaster Management. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.
unescap.org/pdd/publications/themestudy2006/
themestudy_2006_full.pdf (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2008. Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security in Asia
and the Paciﬁc. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.unescap.
org/65/documents/Theme-Study/st-escap-2535.pdf
(Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2009a. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Paciﬁc
2009. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://www.unescap.org/stat/data/
syb2009/index.asp (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2009b. Turning Crisis into Opportunity: Greening
Economic Recovery Strategies. Bangkok, ESCAP. http://
www.unescap.org/EDC/English/Commissions/E65/
E65_6E.pdf (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
ESCAP, ADB and UNDP (Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Paciﬁc; Asian Development Bank; and

688

CHAPTER 31

REGIONAL REPORTS

United Nations Development Programme) 2010. Achieving
the Millennium Development Goals in an Era of Global
Uncertainty, Asia-Paciﬁc Regional Report 2009/10. Bangkok,
ESCAP. Available at http://content.undp.org/go/cmsservice/stream/asset/?asset_id=2269033 (Accessed 10
October 2011).
––––. 2010a. Financing an Inclusive and Green Future. Bangkok,
ESCAP.
––––. 2010b. UN and Government of Pakistan Working
Together to Protect Against Future Flood Damage, UN
Press Release No: G/58/2010. Bangkok, ESCAP.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2010. Global
Information System on Water and Agriculture (AQUASTAT)
database. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/
index.stm (Accessed 10 October 2010). Rome, FAO.
Gleick, P. H. 2008. Water Conﬂict Chronology, database
updated on 11/10/08. Oakland, USA, Paciﬁc Institute for
Studies in Development, Environment, and Security. http://
www.worldwater.org/conﬂictchronology.pdf
Government of Australia, Department of Sustainability
and Environment. Our Water: Government programs:
Sustainable Water Strategies. http://www.ourwater.vic.gov.
au/programs/sws (Accessed 11 November 2010).
Government of India. Ministry of Water Resources. 2009.
National Water Mission under National Action Plan on
Climate Change. Comprehensive Mission Document. Vol.
I. New Delhi, India. http://www.india.gov.in/allimpfrms/
alldocs/15658.pdf
Global Water Partnership. 2010. Kazakhstan: Institutional
Reform in Water Sector to Implement IWRM Plan.
http://www.gwptoolbox.org/index.php?option=com_
case&id=238&Itemid=44 (Accessed 10 November 2010).
Hutton G, Rodriguez UE, Napitupulu L, Thang P, Kov P. 2008.
Economic Impacts of Sanitation in Southeast Asia. Water
and Sanitation Program (WSP). Jakarta, Indonesia.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).
2007. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability.
Kiang, Tay Teck. 2008. Singapore’s Experience in Water
Demand Management. Paper presented at the 13th
International Water Resources Association World Water
Congress, 1–4 September 2008, Montpellier, France.
Lee, Heng Keng. 2010. New wastewater regulations. MyWP,
Malaysian Water Partnership Newsletter, Department of
Environment Management, Government of Malaysia. Issue
No.7, September 2010.
Lee J., LeHuu T. and Zakaria S . 2009. Status of IWRM
Implementation in the Asia Paciﬁc Region. ESCAP,
unpublished report.
MEASURE DHS (Monitoring and Evaluation to Assess and
Use Results Demographic and Health Surveys). 2004–
2008. http://www.measuredhs.com (Accessed 10 October
2009).
McIntosh, Arthur C. 2003. Asian Water Supplies: Reaching
the Urban Poor. Manila, Asian Development Bank and
International Water Association. http://www.adb.org/

WWDR4

documents/books/asian_water_supplies/asian_water_
supplies.pdf (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
Meenawat H., Sovacool B. 2010. Improving adaptive capacity
and resilience in Bhutan. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change. Vol. 16, No. 5. pp. 515–533.
Climate Adaptation to Protect Human Health. Bhutan.
http://www.adaptationlearning.net/sites/default/ﬁles/
Bhutan%20Country%20Proﬁle%20_10.2.11.pdf (Accessed
10 October 2011.)
Molle, F. and Valle D. 2009. Managing competition for water
and the pressure on ecosystems. WWAP (World Water
Assessment Programme), World Water Development
Report 3: Water in a Changing World. Paris/London,
UNESCO/Earthscan.
National Environment Commission Royal Government
of Bhutan and UNEP (United Nations Environment
Programme). 2009. Strategizing Climate Change for
Bhutan. http://www.rrcap.unep.org/nsds/uploadedﬁles/
ﬁle/bhutan.pdf
Stockholm Environment Institute and UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme). 2009. Rainwater Harvesting:
A Lifeline for Human Well-being. Nairobi, Kenya , UNEP..
http://www.unep.org/Themes/Freshwater/PDF/Rainwater_
Harvesting_090310b.pdf
Sydney Water. 2011. Hoxton Park Recycled Water Scheme.
www.sydneywater.com.au/Majorprojects/SouthWest/
HoxtonPark/(Accessed 10 October 2011.)
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2010.
Project Facts – Himalayas: Glacial Outburst Flood (GLOF)
Risk Reduction in the Himalayas. Disaster Risk Reduction
and Recovery. http://www.undp.org/cpr/documents/
disaster/asia_paciﬁc/Regional_Glacial%20Lake%20
Outburst%20Flood%20(GLOF)%20Risk%20Reduction%20
Himalayas.pdf (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2011. Project Database – Bhutan: Reducing Climate
Change-induced Risks and Vulnerabilities from Glacial Lake
Outburst Floods in the Punakha-Wangdi and Chamkhar
Valleys. http://www.undp.org.bt/150.htm (Accessed 10
October 2011.)
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2002.
Environmentally Sound Technologies in Wastewater
Treatment for the Implementation of the UNEP Global
Programme of Action (GPA). Guidance on Municipal
Wastewater.
––––. 2010. Environmentally Sound Technologies in
Wastewater Treatment for the Implementation of the UNEP
Global Programme of Action (GPA). Guidance on Municipal
Wastewater. http://www.unep.or.jp/ietc/Publications/
Freshwater/SB_summary/index.asp (Accessed 10 October
2011.)
UNICEF. 2004-2008. Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
(MICS). http://www.unicef.org/statistics/index_24302.html
(Accessed 15 November 2009.)
UN-Water and WHO (World Health Organization). 2010.
UN-Water Global Annual Assessment of Sanitation and
Drinking-Water (GLAAS): Targeting Resources for Better
Results. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland.

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

689

UN Women. 2010. At a Glance – Women and Water. UNIFEM
Fact Sheet. http://www.unifem.org/materials/fact_sheets.
php?StoryID=289 (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
USAID (United States Agency for International
Development). 2010. WaterSHED programme. hhtp://www.
watershedasia.org (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
Water and Sanitation Program. 2011. Sanitation Marketing
Takes Off in Cambodia. http://www.wsp.org/wsp/
node/230 (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
WaterWorld. 2010. Water, Sanitation Improvements
in Bangladesh get World Bank Funding. http://
www.waterworld.com/index/display/articledisplay/5090805031/articles/waterworld/worldregions/india-central_asia/2010/07/Water-sanitationimprovements-in-Bangladesh.html (Accessed 10 October
2011.)
World Bank. 2009. World Bank Support to Ganga River
Basin Authority. Washington DC, World Bank. http://
www.worldbank.org.in/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/

SOUTHASIAEXT/INDIAEXTN/0,,contentMDK:22405084~
pagePK:1497618~piPK:217854~theSitePK:295584,00.html
(Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2011a. Dhaka Water Supply and Sanitation Project.
http://web.worldbank.org/external/projects/main?pagePK
=64312881&piPK=64302848&theSitePK=40941&Projectid
=P093988 (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
––––. 2011b. World Bank Press Release No: 2011/518/SAR:
US$1 Billion Support from World Bank for Ganga Clean-up.
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/NEWS/0,,
contentMDK:22928173~pagePK:34370~piPK:34424~theSite
PK:4607,00.html (Accessed 10 October 2011.)
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. Water-related
Diseases. www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/diseases/
diarrhoea/en/ (Accessed 15 June 2010).
WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization and United
Nations Children’s Fund. 2010a. Diarrhoea: Why Children
Are Still Dying and What Can Be Done. New York/Geneva,
WHO/UNICEF. http://www.who.int/child_adolescent_
health/documents/9789241598415/en/index.html
––––. 2010b. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water 2010
Update. New York/Geneva, WHO/UNICEF. http://www.
wssinfo.org/data-estimates/introduction/

690

CHAPTER 31

REGIONAL REPORTS

CHAPTER 32
Latin America and the Caribbean

UNECLAC
—
Author Terence Lee
Contributors Andrei Jouravlev (Coordinator), Caridad Canales, Jean Aquatella,
Andrian Cashman, Colin Herron, Enrique Aguilar, Jorge Ducci, Michael Hankte-Domas,
Fernando Miralles-Wilhelm and Humberto Peña

© UN Photo/Gill Fickling

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
till taught by pain, Men really know not what good Water’s worth
— Don Juan, Lord Byron
There is a long tradition of water management in Latin America and the Caribbean, and it
has gone through many changes. In the 1960s and 1970s, water resources development was
among the leading development priorities with projects such as dams for hydroelectricity
generation and irrigation.1 These developments slowed with the serious economic crisis that
affected most countries in the 1980s. More recently the emphasis in water management
has changed as the priorities of governments have changed. The focus of the governments
of the countries of the region is now primarily on fulﬁlling the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) for the reduction of poverty, which for water management translates to a
concentration on improvements in drinking water supply and sanitation, as exempliﬁed by
such major projects as the Water for All Programme in Peru. Water supply and sanitation
are not, however, the only concern: there is a growing preoccupation with improving water
governance as well with strengthening the role of water management in environmental
protection. The concern for governance, in particular, is based on the perception that water
management remains fragmented and inadequate and this could jeopardize progress in the
reduction of poverty and in the achievement of sustainable development.
As in almost every other area of economic activity and social conditions, there are both
marked contrasts as well as many commonalities in the water sectors of the countries of the
region. Commonality can be seen in the advances that have occurred in water management
in all countries, and in the fact that these advances have not yet translated into universal
increases in water use efficiency, any overall change in the levels of water quality, or regionwide sustained increases in the contribution of water to social and economic development.
Local advances can be observed in many aspects of water management. A few countries
have undertaken large-scale reforms of their water management institutions, notably Mexico
and Brazil, but these efforts have so far had only partial success.2
The main issues facing the countries of the region in water management have not changed
signiﬁcantly over the last two decades. There has been a widespread inability to establish
institutions that are able to deal with water allocation issues under conditions of scarcity
and conﬂict. Various segments of the water sector still exhibit many examples of poor
management, and there is a general absence of self-ﬁnancing and a consequent dependence
on ﬂuctuating political support. In general, there is an inability to respond to crises. Despite
much improvement, reliable information is often missing, including on the resource itself, on
the infrastructure, on institutional responsibilities, and especially on water uses and users and
on future needs.
Contrasts also abound in the region, however, and are not just due to variations in climate
and hydrology or to the scale at which water management must operate – Brazil is 10,000
times the area of Dominica, for example. Equally or more so the contrasts are due to
differences in the nature, stability and potency of institutional systems, dissimilarities in the
distribution and demographic structure of the population, and sizeable variations in levels of
income. Some impressive advances in speciﬁc water management activities – such as the
substantial, sustainable and nationwide development of urban water supply, sewerage and
wastewater treatment in Chile – have also contributed to the differences among the countries.
The issues that water management in Latin America and the Caribbean has had to confront
do not all come from within the ‘water box’. There have always been strong external drivers
or forces affecting both the water resource and its management. The more signiﬁcant of
these come from general social change, but they also include macroeconomic policies, often
a negative inﬂuence, stemming from abrupt changes in domestic policies and from outside

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
(such as the global ﬁnancial crisis of 2008–2009), but they are sometimes positive:
macroeconomic administration has improved domestically and globally, as with the recent
expansion of participation in world markets and adoption of countercyclical macroeconomic
policies. Political instability – for example the turmoil in Honduras in 2009 – can hamper the
sustainability of water management policies. There are also important, if subtle, pressures
on the sector produced by gradual economic and social change that can produce issues
difficult for water managers to resolve. Extreme climatic events, especially hurricanes in
the Caribbean, have long had a negative inﬂuence on water management, particularly the
destruction of infrastructure. Recently, the complex of uncertainties related to and derived
from climate change has become a looming challenge.
This chapter will examine the risks, uncertainties and opportunities offered by the most
important contemporary external drivers, as well as focus on a number of areas of particular
concern within water management itself. The examination will be illustrated by references to
both positive and negative experiences in the region.

32.1 External drivers and their effects
Only those external inﬂuences or drivers with the most
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on water management are discussed here. Naturally, there are others that may have
inﬂuence on occasion – particularly events stemming
from the endemic political instability in many countries.
A more permanent negative driver is the inefficiency
and weakness in the wider public sector, which can
hamper seriously even well-planned and well-managed water management policies and projects. The
inﬂuence of the state of the wider public sector can
be seen in many of the examples of innovative policies
and programmes cited here.

more sustainable water management, but also has resulted in the emergence of new demands for waterrelated services as growth has wrought notable
changes in the economic and social structure of Latin
American and Caribbean societies. The growth and
greater stability in the economies of the countries
of the region has caused many apparently disparate
changes in demand for water services, such as that for
tourism in the Caribbean and for energy almost everywhere, both of which tend to be closely related to per
capita income within the countries themselves and in
the rest of the world.

32.1.1 The changing economic and social environment
Obviously, there are consequences for water use and
the demand placed on the water resource as the economic and social environment, in which water management is immersed, changes. The inﬂuence of economic
and social change goes beyond the short-term effect
of global ﬁnancial crises, such as that of 2008–2009,
and national crises, such as the Mexican peso crisis
of 1994 or the collapse of the Argentinean economy
in 2001 (Klein and Coutiño, 1996). Crises can and do
interrupt ongoing programmes, but they rarely have
more than short-term consequences. Of more farreaching inﬂuence has been the historical volatility in
the rates of economic growth in the region
(Figure 32.1).

Poverty and the related unequal distribution of income remain unresolved issues in all countries of Latin
America and in most of those of the English-speaking
Caribbean. Although one-third of the population is estimated to still be living in poverty – some 180 million
people – the average rates of poverty have fallen
steadily over the past 20 years (ECLAC, 2009c). Less
progress has been made in reducing income inequality.
The water resource sector has a major role to play in
poverty reduction programmes through the provision
of drinking water supply and sanitation services, which
governments have increasingly recognized. Demands
for improved services can be expected to continue
to increase between now and 2015 as the countries
of the region attempt to meet the MDGs for poverty
reduction.

Fortunately, volatility has markedly lessened recently
and the trend in rates of growth has been positive. The
greater stability in the general economy has permitted

As levels of poverty have declined there has been a
large increase in that part of the population that can
be considered to be middle class due to increasing

WWDR4

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

693

FIGURE 32.1
Latin America and the Caribbean: GDP at constant 2005 prices, 1951–2010 (variation rates)
10
8
6
4
2
0
1953

1956

1959

1962

1965

1968

1971

1974

1977

1980

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

2007

2010

-2
-4

Source: From ECLAC CEPALSTAT ((http://www.eclac.cl/estadisticas, accessed in 2011).

levels of income and some improvement in the very
unequal income distribution characteristic of the region.3 One consequence of this emergence of a larger
middle class has been the increasing demands to give
more emphasis to the resolution of environmental issues, illustrated by the controversies arising from dam
construction or over the construction of pulp mills
on the River Uruguay. There are a number of examples in the region related to the increasing concern for
the social and environmental repercussions of water
projects, particularly the construction of large hydroelectricity generation plants, such as the controversies
surrounding the decision of the Brazilian government
to approve the building of the Belo Monte Dam on the
Xingu tributary of the Amazon and over the proposed
construction of hydroelectricity generation plants in
the Río Baker basin in Chile.4 Overall, there has been
an abandonment of reservoir-based hydroelectricity
generation plants in favour of run-of-the-river plants.
A subtler example of the inﬂuence of rising expectations among the new middle class can be deduced
from the popular acceptance in Chile of a very signiﬁcant increase in water supply and sewerage tariffs.
Tariffs were increased substantially following the decision of the government to place greater emphasis
on health and environmental concerns as well as to
protect the export of agricultural products through
the development of an ambitious programme for the
treatment of domestic sewage discharges. By 2010,
almost 90% of urban sewage was receiving treatment
(SISS, 2011).

694

CHAPTER 32

32.1.2 External demands for natural resources
With the exceptions of Mexico and some of the small
countries of Central America, the countries of Latin
America base their economies on the export of natural resources. The global demand for these products,
whether minerals, food crops or other agricultural
products, timber, ﬁsh or tourism, has increased notably
in recent years. Moreover, much of the production of
these goods and services is ﬁnanced by external capital and many of the facilities are foreign owned. The
result is that the major engine of economic growth in
the region, with heavy demands on the water resource,
is subject to factors outside the direct control of the
governments of the countries of the region. This is so
even when the producing companies are locally owned,
as it is the world markets that determine demand.
For water management, the dependence on natural resources is complicated by the physical location
of many of the activities to obtain them. For example, the expansion of copper and gold mining in Chile
and Peru has mainly occurred in arid areas and has led
to competition for scarce water resources both with
export agriculture dependent on irrigation, and with
the needs of the indigenous population. Tourism demand has increased water stress on many Caribbean
islands as tourists consume far more water than local
residents. Coffee production uses large quantities of
water and can seriously affect water quality. One potential future demand for irrigation could come from
the production of biofuels. However, in Brazil, the only
current signiﬁcant producer in the region,5 sugar cane

REGIONAL REPORTS

production is rain fed and only 3.5% of irrigation demand at present is used for biofuel production (de
Fraiture et al., 2008).
The uncertainty in the level of demands of the global
market and the changing nature of these demands
have always considerably complicated water management decision-making in the region as local economies
expand and contract according to the demands of the
global economy.
32.1.3 Macroeconomic policies
‘Macroeconomic policy has a pervasive inﬂuence on the
structure of incentives and performance in the entire
water sector’ (Donoso and Melo, 2004, p. 4): this has
been very evident in the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean. For example, high rates of inﬂation can
destroy any attempts to develop effective charging systems for water use or to protect water quality.
Successful macroeconomic policies leading to high
rates of growth, as in Chile in the 1990s and in
Argentina and Peru more recently, also impose challenges on water managers as new demands can
emerge more rapidly than water management policies
can be adapted.
At the same time, rapid economic growth offers many
opportunities. Strong water institutions can attract
investment not just for expansion of and improvement in water-related infrastructure, but also for water
management itself. There are examples of this in Brazil,
Mexico and Chile where, as the respective economies
have grown, the political decision has been taken to
strengthen water management institutions.
What is required most of all, however, is not just periods of economic growth, but stability in policies over
time. Many water management programmes can take
decades to mature. For example, the current urban
drinking water supply and sanitation system in Chile
grew out of decisions taken in the mid-1970s, and the
regional environmental authorities (CARs) in Colombia
were ﬁrst created in 1961.
32.1.4 Social policies
In recent years most governments in Latin America
and the Caribbean have placed great stress on improving the social conditions of their populations. The programmes and projects carried out under their policies
are of the most diverse nature, but many have direct

WWDR4

bearing on water management and on decisions made
within the water sector. This is obvious with the recent
stress on policies to increase the provision of drinking water supply and sanitation services. However, it
is not always obvious what the impact of any set of
social polices might be. For example, efforts to extend
coverage of drinking water supply and sanitation may
raise issues related to water quality at both ends of the
pipe. The need can arise to protect all water sources
– whether streams and lakes or groundwater – while
at the same time there is the need to protect drinking
water sources from pollution caused by the disposal of
untreated wastewaters. This is, perhaps, a fairly obvious external driver on water management. An example
of a less obvious driver is the results of the improvement in living standards. In resort areas close to major
population centres, this has generated both increased
wastewater ﬂows and demands for greater pollution
control. Protecting popular beaches from pollution
has driven a number of decisions to develop sewage
treatment, including the Clean Beaches programme
in Mexico (CONAGUA, 2009). In Uruguay, protecting beaches of the La Plata estuary was a major driver
of the decision to build sewage treatment plants in
Montevideo (IDB, 2010).
Housing policies too can provide a different kind of
boost for the water sector. Improving housing means
not only providing drinking water and sanitation,
but can also lead to the adoption of programmes to
control urban ﬂooding in the new residential areas.
Urban ﬂooding remains a perennial problem in all
large urban areas in Latin America, often worsened
by the building of informal residential developments
in ﬂood-prone areas sometimes in areas set aside for
ﬂood mitigation.
32.1.5 Extreme events and climate change
Any impact of climate change on the water resources will be conditioned by their abundance in Latin
America and the Caribbean. About 35% of the world’s
continental waters (freshwater) are found in the region, but the distribution within and across countries
is highly variable. Many areas (e.g. northern Mexico,
North eastern Brazil, coastal Peru, northern Chile) have
great difficulty meeting their water needs. Moreover,
large portions of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Peru, north
eastern Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, and central and
northern Mexico are semi-arid and subject to wide
variations in rainfall. Often, as in Peru, much of the
population and economic activity is concentrated in

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

695

water-scarce areas. For the region as a whole it is estimated that 30% of the population live in arid or semiarid areas.
Water managers in Latin America and the Caribbean
have long faced the challenges posed by increased
climate variability and change and related extreme
events, such as the extreme events recurrent in Haiti
and the annual havoc caused by hurricanes in the
Caribbean, Central America and Mexico.
Examples include tackling the problems associated
with El Niño/La Niña-Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
events in Peru and with the cycle of dry and wet years
in the drought polygon of North Eastern Brazil, dominated by a large semi-arid expanse, the sertão, which
encompasses about 900,000 km2. The sertão is subject to recurrent droughts, which are often followed by
ﬂoods. These events may not affect the entire semiarid region at any one time, but have been of sufficient
recurrence, intensity and magnitude to warrant permanent protective policies and programmes, not just
emergency measures.
32.1.6 Demographic change
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are
going through a new period of rapid demographic
change. Following the great migration to the cities
in the 1960s and 1970s, the last major demographic

event, the main characteristic of the current demographic situation in the region is a rapid decline in
birth rates resulting in a rapidly slowing rate of population growth: 1.3% in the 1980s and expected to fall to a
rate, for Latin America as a whole, of less than 0.5% by
2050 (Figure 32.2). The region has a relatively clean
energy matrix due to its high share of hydroelectricity, which at 11% of total primary energy supply almost
doubles the world average. In terms of carbon dioxide
emissions from fossil fuel combustion per capita, Latin
America and the Caribbean is still four times bellow
the OECD average and less than half that of China although slightly above the level of India. The decline is
so great that if current trends continue, the population
will begin to fall absolutely in some countries, notably
in Cuba and Uruguay (CELADE, 2007).
The decline in birth rates also means that, even if the
total national population remains stable, many regions
will lose population, especially rural and isolated ones.
Maintaining services for smaller populations raises new
issues. In the case of water supply and sewerage it can
also mean that facilities may end up over-designed,
hampering their operations and undermining ﬁnancial
stability.
The fall in birth rates has been accompanied recently by an even faster increase in longevity. It is estimated that the number of people over the age of

FIGURE 32.2
Annual average rate of population growth for Latin America and selected single countries (1950–2050)
4

3

2

1

0
18501955

19551960

1960- 19651965 1970

19701975

19751980

19801985

19851990

1990- 19951995 2000

2000- 2005- 20102005 2010 2015

20152020

2020- 2025- 2030- 2035- 2040- 20452025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050

-1
Latin America

Cuba

Guatemala

Costa Rica

-2

Source: CELADE (2009).

696

CHAPTER 32

REGIONAL REPORTS

65 in Latin America and the Caribbean will triple by
2050 (CELADE, 2007); again, this can be expected
to change the nature of the demand for many services related to water, such as increased recreational demands and lower water supply demands as a
higher proportion of the population live in apartment
complexes.
Latin America is already the world’s most urbanized
developing region, with more than 80% of the population living in towns and cities (ECLAC, 2010). There

BOX 32.1
Latin America and the Caribbean and the global
ﬁnancial crisis

Given the magnitude of the global ﬁnancial crisis, the
Latin American and Caribbean region has not been spared
its impacts. Yet this crisis has differed from those the region has experienced in the past, not only because the
epicentre lay in developed countries, although this played
no small part in accounting for recent economic trends,
but, above all, because of the juncture at which the crisis
broke out in the region and how the region was affected.
The combination of highly favourable external conditions
and more prudent management of macroeconomic policy
have enabled the region to reduce its outstanding debt
and to renegotiate it on advantageous terms, while also
building up international reserves. The Latin American
economies thus went into the crisis with unprecedented
liquidity and solvency. The countries’ ﬁnancial systems
have not deteriorated and there has been no ﬂight from
local currencies, which has helped to maintain calm in
the region’s currency markets. However, a number of
Caribbean countries are carrying hefty external debts and
facing rather more complex exchange rate situations.
Also unlike the situation during previous crises, the broadened macroeconomic policy space in many of the region’s
countries has given them substantial capacity for anti-crisis policy-making.
Although poverty levels in the region have remained high,
and the impact of the crisis on social variables was predictably negative, the deterioration was not as great as
had initially been projected. The rise in social spending
in the past few years and the increase in the number and
effectiveness of social programmes played an important
role in containing the social costs of the crisis. Learning
the lessons from previous crises, the countries in the region have sought to maintain – and expand – the coverage of these programmes, even in the context of a gradually tightening ﬁscal space.

has been a massive shift of population from rural to
urban areas and increasingly large inter-city migratory ﬂows, resulting in the establishment of an urban
system characterized by a high percentage of large
cities (with more than one million inhabitants) and
by a high concentration of the population in some
countries living in the largest (or two largest) cities. However, urbanization is not the only signiﬁcant
characteristic of changes in the spatial distribution
of the population. There has also been the progressive – and sometimes aggressive – settlement of
what has historically been sparsely populated land
in the heart of the region, particularly in the Amazon
and Orinoco river basins. These changes have played
their part in the new priorities of the governments of
the region. The emphasis on urban water problems
has arisen from the heavy weight of the urban populations in the political process and, in general, their
more active role in politics. In Brazil, the growing
economic importance of settlements in the Amazon
basin is playing and expected to continue to play a
crucial role in the policies adopted towards the development of the basin. In fact, the die has probably
been already cast in the decision between development and conservation to the advantage of the former, as the rate of growth of population in the basin
accelerates.

32.2 Risks, uncertainties and opportunities
The most signiﬁcant risks and uncertainties facing water management in Latin America and the Caribbean
appear likely to stem from global economic events,
climate change and domestic demands for continuing improvement in the provision of water services –
all three will provide signiﬁcant challenges for water
managers and decision makers in the broader frames
alike. Moreover, there is a complex inter-relationship
among them. One obvious example: global economic
events will play a large part in guiding development
and associated domestic prosperity (or not) in the
countries of the region which, in turn, through changes in income, will inﬂuence the demands for waterrelated goods and services, and consequently water
management. Another example: climate change will
introduce a basket of unexpected factors – directly
through its impact on the water resource and indirectly through its inﬂuence on many aspects of the
economy.

Source: ECLAC (2009b).

WWDR4

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

697

32.2.1 Global economic events
The recent global ﬁnancial crisis noticeably affected the economies of the countries in the region, but
compared with similar occurrences in the recent past,
the countries withstood the problems well (Box 32.1).
Moreover, the economies are now recuperating fairly
rapidly and seem set to resume the period of rapid
expansion that the crisis interrupted. This will provide
a positive environment for investment in the region.
This investment, given the structure of the economies
of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean,
will increase water demands. In continental Latin
America, however, overall demand on the regions’ water resources remains low and spatially very concentrated. It is estimated that water abstractions amount
to only about 1% of available water; in contrast, in
the Caribbean, 14% of the available water is abstracted. This compares with a world average of some 9%
(United Nations, 2010). However, there are signiﬁcant
restrictions on access to this abundance, as the location of the population and economic activities in the
region does not coincide with plentiful water sources:
approximately one-third of the population live in arid
and semi-arid areas.
The Copiapo valley in northern Chile provides an example of the potential conﬂicts that can arise from largescale investments related to serving global markets
in areas of water scarcity. This is a region that produces large volumes of export crops, particularly table
grapes, but at the same time the valley is the site of
an increasing number of copper and other mines. The
surface waters of the valley have long been committed and increasing reliance is placed on groundwater.
The result has been the drilling of increasingly deeper
wells by the fruit farmers and consequently the mining
of the groundwater as rates of extraction have exceeded any capacity for recharge (El Mercurio, 2010). This
problem has arisen despite the generally high level of
governance in Chile and the existence of water markets. Deﬁciencies in the deﬁnition of water rights and
weakness of water management institutions, have
contributed to the current over-exploitation of water
resources in the region.
32.2.2 Climate change
The region makes only a minor contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions (GHG): in 2008, Latin
America and the Caribbean accounted for 8.6% of
the world’s population, 8.2% of global gross domestic product (GDP) and 7.6% of global GHG emissions,

698

CHAPTER 32

excluding those from changes in land use (Figure
32.3). However, on a per capita basis and when emissions from land use changes are included, the region
contributes more GHG emissions than do all other
developing countries, including China and India. The
main source of emissions comes from deforestation,
accounting for almost half of total emissions (WRI,
2009). Vast forest areas, equivalent to 4 million hectares per year since 2000, are being lost in the region
as the agricultural frontier expands, and many forest
areas remain under threat despite the efforts that
are being made to control deforestation (FAO, 2010).
Efforts to address changes in land use and reduce the
emissions from deforestation are a priority for the
region as a contribution to the global effort to reduce
greenhouse gases.
At the same time, many parts of the region are highly
vulnerable to the adverse consequences of climate
change, and climate change threatens the progress
made in recent decades in development and in the
achievement of the MDGs.
The countries estimated to be in areas of high or extreme risk from global climate change are often the
poorest countries of the region – those in Central
America, the Caribbean and the Andes. It is in these
countries with relatively weak water management capacities that the greatest challenges will be faced.
The most serious challenges arising from climate
change for the management of water resources in
Latin America and the Caribbean can be expected to
lie in the following areas:
đƫ Signiﬁcant deterioration in the quality, quantity and
availability of water for all uses in many areas.
đƫ Damage to coastal areas owing to a potential rise in
sea levels, which in turn will affect river regimes.
đƫ Increased economic damage from the greater intensity and frequency of hurricanes and tropical storms
due to higher ocean surface and air temperatures
(ECLAC/IDB, 2010).
Climate change will also bring signiﬁcant opportunities
for the wider application of imaginative innovations
in many aspects of water management, particularly in
hydrometeorology. There are already examples of successful innovation, such as the development of a national meteorological system providing local forecasts
speciﬁcally directed at agriculture in Chile, and the use
of weather forecasts in Peru to counteract the negative

REGIONAL REPORTS

FIGURE 32.3
Greenhouse gas emissions from Latin America
and the Caribbean as a share of the global total
(1990–2005)

Megatons of CO2 equivalent
40,000

37,767
35,000

30,000

33,190
30,056

31,055

25,000

20,000

15,000

10,000

5,000

1,997.7

2,196.6

2,612.4

2,840.1

1995

2000

2005

0
1990

World

Latin America and the Caribbean

Note: Emissions include CO2, CH4, SF6, N2O, PFCs and HFCs, but
exclude those from land use changes.
Source: WRI (2009).

consequences of El Niño events (Box 32.2). While, as
yet, there is little sign of major changes in water management policies in Latin America because of the perceived consequences of climate change, there is more
realization of the potential negative effects among
the governments of the islands of the Caribbean and
Andean countries, as in Bolivia and Peru, particularly in
relation to urban water supply.
32.2.3 The demand for better water management
It is very likely, given the economic and social environment in many countries of the region, that pressure
to improve water management as a result of changing social priorities and alterations in patterns of water availability and use will increase. New demands
and priorities can be expected to arise, including the
need to protect the increased investment in urban
infrastructure from ﬂooding; improve the efficiency
of water use in irrigation farming; address the greater use of water resources for recreation; respond to

WWDR4

awareness of environmental issues and conﬂicts over
greener energy and construction of dams; and improve
water pollution control. Many countries are discussing
the reform of water laws, some have already changed
them or adopted new ones (as for e.g. Brazil, Chile,
Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Paraguay),
virtually all have reformed drinking water supply and
sanitation sector legislation, and some are modifying
it again. Only in few cases have these changes already
produced extensive innovation in practice (Solanes
and Jouravelev, 2006).
Rising expectations for better water management create risks and pose challenges, but also offer great opportunities. In many areas, there has been noticeable
improvement in irrigation efficiency, as the area under
irrigation has slowed its expansion, through the adoption of advanced irrigation techniques (drip irrigation,
for example) and the use of new crop varieties that
demand less water; however, more than 95% of the
cultivated area remains under surface irrigation (FAO,
2009). There remains, therefore, much room for better,
more efficient irrigation. This is especially so given the
intention announced by a number of countries to play
a major role in satisfying the increased global demands
for food and biofuels.
Water issues are not well understood by the public at
large. Prominent examples of improved water management, such as the construction of large dams in
the 1960s and 1970s or the recent clean-up of the
Mapocho River in Santiago, Chile, have not been sufﬁcient to raise public awareness of the importance of
water management over the long term.
Traditionally, there has been a widespread political interference in water management affecting even technical decisions. There are favourable signs of attempts to
isolate water institutions from political interference as
seen in the institutional design of the National Water
Agency (ANA) in Brazil.

32.3 Areas of particular concern
Within Latin America and the Caribbean, there are
major areas of concern that affect all countries in the
region and touch on all issues likely to face the water
sector in the near future, but there are also geographical areas with their own particular water management
scenarios. Some of these follow.

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

699

BOX 32.2
Use of weather forecasts in Peru

In Peru, since 1983, forecasts of the upcoming rainy season have been issued each November based on observations of wind and water temperatures in the tropical
Paciﬁc region and the output of numerical prediction
models.
Once the forecast is issued, farmer representatives and
government officials meet to decide the appropriate
combination of crops to sow to maximize the overall
yield. Rice and cotton, two of the primary crops grown in
northern Peru, are highly sensitive to the quantities and
timing of rainfall. Rice thrives on wet conditions during
the growing season followed by drier conditions during
the ripening phase. Cotton, with its deeper root system,
can tolerate drier weather. Hence, a forecast of El Niño
weather might induce farmers to switch from rice to cotton or vice versa.

Source: NOAA (2010).

đƫ Around 80% of the population of Latin America
and the Caribbean lives in cities and almost half in
cities of more than one million inhabitants. Many of
these large urban conglomerations have precarious
drinking water supply and sewerage networks and
nearly all lack sewage treatment. There is also little
regulation or control of industrial waste discharges and many urban areas are subject to episodic
ﬂooding.
đƫ The poorer countries of Central America, many of
the smaller islands of the Caribbean, and Bolivia and
Paraguay face grave problems of water management and are among the most exposed to the negative consequences of climate change. They tend to
have only a limited capacity to respond to challenges due to weak institutions and a lack of ﬁnancial
resources and trained personnel.
đƫ Latin America and the Caribbean is the world’s most
humid region, but, as already mentioned, there are
large arid and semi-arid areas in northern Mexico,
Peru, Chile, Argentina and Northern Brazil that will
likely be the most susceptible to any negative repercussions from climate change.
đƫ The shrinking of glaciers and the reduction of available water resources represent a major concern for
the Andean countries. This will have considerable
effects on the region’s water sources, hydroelectric

700

CHAPTER 32

power and agriculture, as well as the conservation of natural ecosystems – in the Amazon in
particular.
32.3.1 Improving water governance
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (ECLAC) has long maintained that any ‘reference to a water shortage in our region in the absolute physical sense is not very appropriate … There is
no denying, however, that water management systems are often poorly organised if not non-existent’
(ECLAC, 1997, p. 1), so that in Latin America and the
Caribbean the ‘water crisis’ is more an institutional
one than one of water scarcity (ECLAC, 2001). All the
countries of the region will continue to face constant
challenges in water management and, therefore, need
to ﬁnd legislative and institutional answers that can
help prevent and resolve growing conﬂicts over water
use, as well as mitigate extreme natural phenomena.
Regional associations and the interaction of motivated
and informed professional groups may prove decisive in improving sector governance problems and
in giving technical viability to proposals for change.
Fundamental is the dissemination and opening up of
the debate to the public and a wide range of decisionmakers. In Brazil, the discussion process leading to the
National Water Act of 1997 was opened to different
sectors of society. Organizations of water professionals played a key role in leading the discussion (Porto et
al., 1999). For instance, the Brazilian Water Resources
Association produced formal statements, approved by
its members that helped introduce novel concepts into
the discussion of the law. The Brazilian example shows
the signiﬁcance of the existence of a basic consensus if
solid progress is to be made in governance.
It can be very difficult to implement reform even when
it receives widespread political support and is legally
enforced. For example, in Brazil, one of the central features of the 1997 water law was establishing user fees
for water use, but these are not being collected on a
regular basis (Benjamin et al., 2005); in Colombia, the
collection of fees from polluters by CARs has been
hampered by the reluctance of municipalities to pay;
and in Mexico, few of the new river basin agencies
created under the National Water Law of 2004 are
fully functioning.
Poor governance in many countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean runs from the top to the bottom of
the sector. It is not restricted to the management of the

REGIONAL REPORTS

water resource but is rife in the management of most
water-based services (Solanes and Jouravlev, 2006).
A serious constraint on improving management stems
from the absence of any large-scale formal education
for water management at either the university or technical level. There is a plentiful supply of well-educated
water professionals in most ﬁelds of a more technical nature and many courses in almost all countries to
prepare them. However, there is little offered for the
formation of professionals with a wider and integrated
view of the water management process. The training of professionals with such skills remains largely a
process of learning through experience. There have
been a number of attempts by international agencies, including ECLAC, to establish water management training programmes, but these have tended to
be short lived. A number of institutions, such as the
Tropical Agricultural Research and Higher Education
Center (CATIE) in Costa Rica, offer regular short courses to reinforce the work experience of water management professions, but these by their very nature can
only offer a relatively general review of the knowledge
available. A few universities do offer programmes, for
example, the masters’ degree in integrated river basin
management at the University of Querétaro in Mexico
and the similar degree programme at the Universidad
de La Plata, Argentina. A growing number of Latin
American professionals have studied the concepts and
skills of integrated river basin management outside the
region, but any regular and accessible means of obtaining the necessary knowledge within the countries
of Latin America is still absent.
32.3.2 Water supply and sanitation
Over the past two decades there has been a slow but
steady increase in most countries of Latin America
and the Caribbean in the provision of both drinking
water and sanitation. By 2008, piped water supply
was available to more than 90% of the urban population and almost 60% of the rural population, exceeding the MDGs at the regional level (WHO/UNICEF,
2010). These aggregate statistics, however, do not
show the variations in the quality of the services. In
many countries, water supply and sanitation services are plagued by what has been deﬁned as a vicious circle of low quality. Political interference, poor
management and low tariffs all conspire to produce
low levels of coverage, low quality services and poor
maintenance leading to constant interruptions in
supply, as well as periods of low pressure leading to

WWDR4

contamination within the drinking water supply system. A large number of wastewater treatment plants
have been abandoned or function precariously. All
produce a high level of dissatisfaction in the populations served (Corrales, 2004).
The overall national statistics also hide the large regional variations in access within countries. For example, in central and southern Mexico, Honduras and
Nicaragua, there are many municipalities where less
than 10% of the population has access to drinking water. In water supply and sanitation, the deﬁnition of
what constitutes improved access, used in compiling
international statistics, is very general and lax, so the
published statistics provide little guidance to the real
situation in many countries of the region (ECLAC, 1999;
Jouravlev, 2009; United Nations, 2010).
Undeniably, there has been an expansion of water supply and sewerage networks in most countries, but this
in turn has brought to the fore other issues.6 It is estimated for the region as a whole that at most only 28%
of sewage is treated before discharge - which constitutes very signiﬁcant progress in comparison with the
situation of only a decade or two ago - leading to serious contamination of watercourses, including the sea,
from both sewage outfalls and industrial discharges
from urban areas (Lentini, 2008). Too often the introduction of measures to control pollution has produced
mixed results due to political and technical complexity. For example, it is not clear that the introduction
of charges for wastewater discharges in Colombia has
been the sole or the main determining factor in reducing water pollution (Box 32.3).
There remain many problems to be resolved in water
supply and sanitation, including the recurring issue
of the failure to ensure adequate and sustainable ﬁnancing for utilities, so that any gains in provision are
negated, or at least reduced, by lack of maintenance
and through low levels of operating efficiency. Lack of
maintenance leads to large losses in piped water systems; for example, in Cuba, losses in distribution are
estimated to amount to at least half the water leaving
the treatment plants (Business News Americas, 2010).
Even in Chile, few systems have unaccounted for water
under 30 % (SISS, 2011).
32.3.3 Climate change and natural hazards
According to a recent ECLAC study, between 1970
and 2008 extreme hydro-meteorological events likely

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

701

to be exacerbated by climate change (storms, ﬂoods,
drought, landslides, extreme temperatures and forest
ﬁres) cost the region over US$80 billion (Samaniego,
2009). If the region fails to take action to mitigate the
impact of extreme events, many of which are water
related, costs could rise to as high as US$250 billion in
2100 or 1% of the regional GDP (ECLAC/IDB, 2010).
Estimates of what repercussions climate change may
have on economic activity vary widely and depend
crucially on factors such as the discount rate applied
to estimates of future costs, the sectors considered,
and the methodology and assumptions used in developing climate scenarios. The Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates that freshwater

BOX 32.3
The Colombian experience with wastewater
discharge fees

Various regional authorities in Colombia have used discharge fees for more than 30 years, but it was Law 99
of 1993 that established the present national discharge
fee system. It mandated the 33 regional environmental
authorities (CARs) to develop comprehensive inventories
of all organic waste discharges and to estimate baseline quantities. Each CAR was to map major basins and
set ﬁve-year targets for reduction in discharges and then
charge each polluter a fee for each unit discharged.
Despite the efforts of the environmental ministry the implementation of the programme encountered a number of
obstacles:
đƫƫƫ*(5ƫ*%*!ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ/ƫ$ ƫ"1((5ƫ%),(!)!*0! ƫ0$!ƫ,.+gramme by 2003 and eleven had not even begun to
collect fees
đƫƫƫ*ƫ2!.#!ƫ+*(5ƫ$("ƫ+"ƫ0$!ƫ %/$.#!./ƫ3!.!ƫ!%*#ƫ
charged
đƫƫƫ!!ƫ+((!0%+*ƫ.0!/ƫ3!.!ƫ(+3čƫ+*ƫ2!.#!Čƫ+*(5ƫĂĈŌƫ
were collected
đƫƫƫ$!.!ƫ3/ƫ+*/%/0!*0ƫ*+*ġ+),(%*!ƫ5ƫ)1*%%,(ƫ
sewage agencies, which caused many basins to be unable to meet reduction targets
Even with these problems, between 1997 and 2003 discharges dropped signiﬁcantly in many river basins. The reasons for this seem to have been the existing pollution controls based on a command and control approach; the need
to catalogue dischargers; the fact that the programme
demanded greater transparency and accountability; and
the fact that the CARs kept the fees, which gave them an
economic incentive to make the programme work.
Source: Blackman (2006).

702

CHAPTER 32

systems in Latin America and the Caribbean are potentially very sensitive to climate change and vulnerable
to inter-annual ﬂuctuations in climate, such as those
associated with the ENSO phenomenon.
Excess rainfall is already a common problem, particularly in Central America and the Caribbean, which are
subject to tropical storm and hurricane events. One
speciﬁc issue that plagues most large metropolitan areas is ﬂooding due to the lack of storm sewers, except
in the older central parts of cities. In Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil, more than 200 people died as a result of a
rainfall induced landslide in March 2010. But ﬂooding
is a severe problem even in relatively ﬂat cities, such
as Buenos Aires, Argentina. If climate change leads
to higher rainfall or more concentrated storms, urban
ﬂooding can only become more common and more
costly.
The ability of water management to react to the challenge of climate change will be hampered by the inadequate hydrological and meteorological observation
networks of most countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Large, sparsely or uninhabited areas have
no surface observation systems, and the densities and
operational practices of existing networks – which
were very negatively affected following the 1980s economic crisis – generally do not meet the recommended
international and regional standards.
32.3.4 Water pollution and water quality
The region has a major deﬁcit in water pollution control and overcoming this involves implementing successful institutional arrangements for the setting of
standards, creating control and inspection mechanisms,
and mobilizing signiﬁcant ﬁnancial resources, which
may have alternative social or economic destinations.
The failure is evident in the case of pollution from urban wastewater discharges where only a minor portion
of wastes are treated and where it is difficult to place
emphasis on waste treatment when so many people
lack connection to sewage systems. Similarly, it has
proved difficult to impose controls on industrial pollution, especially on small or medium-sized industries
with low levels of technological development. Other
difficulties in building effective governance in water
pollution control include administrative limitations for
dealing with matters such as monitoring watercourses,
controlling and supervising clandestine dumps (especially concerning discharge into aquifers) and controlling diffuse non-point source pollution.

REGIONAL REPORTS

The implementation of water pollution control and
water quality policies is an expensive process, involving far more than the direct control and regulation of
water pollution, and, if water quality is to be improved,
the funding issue must be resolved (Box 32.4).

32.4 The challenge ahead
The greatest challenge for water management in
Latin America and the Caribbean is without any
doubt to continue to improve overall governance.
The needs are many, including establishing a clear
separation of policy and regulatory activities from
day-to-day operations, improving incentives for
efficiency, formalizing water institutions, strengthening
their operational capacity, improving management
training, adopting greater transparency in decisionmaking, and developing better systems for conﬂict
resolution through a clear deliberative framework
while increasing the participation of stakeholders in
management decisions.
Among the major drivers or exogenous factors that will
condition challenges in water management, the water
sector can only hope to inﬂuence directly its weight
in the deﬁnition and implementation of national development strategies. The others are likely to remain
beyond any direct inﬂuence from water management
institutions. The water sector must continually adjust
to taking these major external drivers into account as
it deﬁnes water strategies, and make a maximum contribution to more rational economic policies and to the
improvement of institutional quality, governance and
transparency while reducing corruption.
Challenges do not end with being prepared to tackle
the most signiﬁcant external drivers. There is a great

BOX 32.4
Investment in sanitation infrastructure in Chile

The total investment in sanitation infrastructure in Chile
between 1999 and 2008 has been estimated at more than
US$2.8 billion in the water supply and sanitation sector
alone – in addition to huge investments in industrial pollution control and separated storm drainage networks.
The investment can be estimated to equate to more than
US$2,000 per capita. Yet even before 1999, the provision
of sanitation in Chile was above the regional average.

deal to be done to improve management and governance within the ‘water box’ itself but there are no
simple and universal ways to do this. One limitation
that all water management systems seem to share is
a notorious lack of operational capacity, due to a variety of factors, including the well-recognized limited
ﬁnancial, legal and human resources and, too often,
the lack of importance given to the role of regulation and management in water resource policies. For
example, a recent article on irrigation management in
Latin America concluded that ‘large amounts of water
are inefficiently supplied to farmers because the right
tools are not available for irrigation managers that
allow them to schedule water deliveries and satisfy
crop water requirements in an effective way’
(de Oliveira et al, 2009, p. 13).
One emerging issue is the need for the management
of transboundary water resources. Few of the river
basins that are shared have formal agreements that
regulate their use or active institutions to focus on issues arising from this situation. In the case of groundwater, the countries sharing the immense Guarani
Aquifer (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay), have
recently entered into a binding agreement regulating
some key aspects of management and protection of
this resource, setting an unprecedented example at
the global level.
The size of the challenges ahead, however, should not
deter water managers from confronting them and
making every effort to further strengthen management within the sector. There have been a number of
interesting experiences in the region over the past
few decades regarding the establishment of water
institutions outside sector ministries. For example, in
Mexico, water resources are managed by the National
Water Commission (CONAGUA) and in Brazil, the
National Water Agency (ANA) was set up in 2000
with the principal objective of achieving the sustainable use of water by overcoming traditional conﬂicts
and limitations imposed by a system in which water had been under the responsibility of functional
ministries. Other examples of institutions that are
not linked to speciﬁc sectors of water use include
the Ministry of Environment, Housing and Territorial
Development in Colombia, the Water Resources
Authority in Jamaica, the Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources in Venezuela, and the General Water
Directorate of the Ministry of Public Works in Chile.

Source: Yarur (2009).

WWDR4

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

703

These initiatives provide examples of attempts at reform in water management. However, it would be a
mistake to think that complex problems can be resolved only by top-down initiatives, through the mere
creation of new organizations, or by extrapolating
from the experience of effective legislation and organizational structures that were achieved elsewhere
only after a signiﬁcant effort of coordination and capacity building. One of the most powerful is to introduce charges for water use or for waste disposal. The
imposition of charges has been a part of reforms in
a number of countries, including through the ANA in
Brazil, the CARs in Colombia and CONAGUA in Mexico.
One interesting new proposal is the trust fund established for water conservation and protection in Quito,
Ecuador (FONAG). The idea behind FONAG is to create a system of payment for environmental services
to be placed in a capital fund for water protection
(ECLAC, 2009a).
If reform is to be placed on the political agenda it is
not sufficient to have proposals that are supported
only by experts – it is essential that any initiative have
the widest public support. This means opening up
decision-making processes to wide participation
among stakeholders, but this has to be done in a
meaningful manner so as not to drown the possibility of reaching decisions. Mechanisms, as proposed in
much recent legislation, should be developed within
the water sector to allow the creation of a consensus
on the direction to be followed. If such a consensus
does not exist, no true climate of conﬁdence can be
created for reform and any proposed reform, or even
adopted legislation, will never produce results. The
challenge is to open water management to society as
a whole. In doing so the water sector can build on its
previous achievements to continue to make a sustainable contribution to the betterment of society in all
countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.

for bulk water abstraction. However, the restricted legal nature
of the river basin agencies has hindered the introduction of
charging in most states (Porto and Kelman, 2000).
3

ECLAC estimates that in Uruguay, Chile and Costa Rica 60% or
more of the population is not vulnerable to poverty – that is,
they have incomes 1.8 times the poverty level – and a number of
other countries have over half their population with this level of
income (ECLAC, 2009c, p.35).

4

There is strong opposition in Chile, with wide international
support, to the building of hydroelectricity generation plants on
the Río Baker and its tributaries in Chilean Patagonia, a popular
area for adventure tourism (Chilean Patagonia Without Dams!,
http://www.patagoniasinrepresas.cl/ﬁnal/)

5

In 2007, 98.6% of biofuel production in Latin America and the
Caribbean was in Brazil (OLADE, 2008).

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Benjamin, A. H., Marques, C. L. and Tinker, C. 2005. The water
giant awakes: an overview of. water law in Brazil. Texas
Law Review, Vol. 83, October, 2005, pp. 2186-90.
Blackman, A. 2006. Economic incentives to control water
pollution in developing countries. Resources Magazine,
Issue 161 (Spring).
Business News Americas. 2010. INRH to repair water network
over 10–15 years, Cuba, Business News Americas.. 12
January www.bnamericas.com.
CELADE (Latin American & Caribbean Demographic Centre).
2007. Proyección de Población. Observatorio Demográﬁco
No. 3, LC7G.2348-P. Santiago, CELADE.
––––. 2009. Population Projection. Demographic Observatory.
No. 7, LC/G.2414-P. Santiago, CELADE.
CONAGUA (National Water Commission, Mexico). 2009.
Playas Limpias. Mexico City, CONAGUA. www.cna.gob.mx/
Espaniol/TmpContenido.aspx?id=b78c2fbd-d1ee-47ec87d7-0a5ff08ed386|%20%20%20%20%20Playas%20
Limpias|0|25|0|0|0
Corrales, M. E. 2004. Gobernabilidad de los servicios de agua
potable y saneamiento en América Latina. Rega, Vol. 1,
No. 1, pp. 47–58.
Donoso, G. and Melo, O. 2004. Water Institutional Reform:
Its Relationship with the Institutional and Macroeconomic
Environment. Santiago, Pontiﬁcia Universidad Católica de Chile.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes

704

1

The World Bank had no active loans for large dams in Latin
America and the Caribbean in the ﬁrst decade of the twentyﬁrst century (Independent Evaluation Group, 2010).

2

The objective of the reforms in Brazil is to establish autonomous
river basin agencies that will have both stakeholder
representation and their own sources of revenues from charges

CHAPTER 32

ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean). 1997. Editorial remarks. Circular of the Network
for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management
for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, No. 6, p. 1.
––––. 1999. Tendencias actuales de la gestión del agua en
América Latina y el Caribe (avances en la implementación
de las recomendaciones contenidas en el capítulo 18 del
Programa 21). LC/L.1180. Santiago, ECLAC. http://www.
cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/1/19751/lcl1180s.pdf

REGIONAL REPORTS

––––. 2001. Editorial remarks. Circular of the Network for
Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management
for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the
Caribbean, No. 12, January, pp.1.
––––. 2009a. Water Protection Fund (FONAG). Circular of
the Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource
Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America
and the Caribbean, No. 29, pp. 5–6.
––––. 2009b. Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin
America and the Caribbean. Santiago, ECLAC.
––––. 2009c. Social Panorama of Latin America. Santiago,
ECLAC.
––––. 2010. Statistical Yearbook for Latin America and the
Caribbean, 2009. Santiago, ECLAC.
ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and
the Caribbean)/IDB (Inter-American Development
Bank). 2010. Climate Change: A Regional Perspective.
Document prepared for the Unity Summit of Latin
America and the Caribbean, Riviera Maya, Mexico, 22–23
February 2010.

OLADE (Latin American Energy Organization). 2008.
Informe de Estadísticas Energéticas, 2007 [Energy
Statistics Report, 2007]. Quito, OLADE.
de Oliveira, A. S., Trezza, R., Holzapfel, E. A. Lorite, I. and Paz,
V. P. S Eds). 2009. Irrigation water management in Latin
America. Chilean Journal of Agricultural Research, Vol. 69
(Suppl. 1) (special issue).
Porto, M., La Laina Porto, R. and Azevedo, L. G. T. 1999. A
participatory approach to watershed management. Journal
of the American Water Resources Association, Volume 35,
Issue 3, pp. 675–83.
Porto, M. and Kelman, J. 2000. Water Resources
Policy in Brazil. www.kelman.com.br/pdf/
Water_Resources_Policy_In_Brazil
Samaniego, J. (coordinator). 2009. Cambio climático y
desarrollo en América Latina y el Caribe: una reseña.
LC/W.232. Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/5/35435/28-W-232-Cambio_ClimaticoWEB.pdf

El Mercurio. 2010. Opciones para mejorar el accesso al agua:
Revista del campo. El Mercurio, No. 1759, 29 March.

SISS (Superintendencia de Servicios Sanitarios). 2011.
Informe de Gestión del Sector Sanitario 2010. Santiago, SISS.
http://www.siss.gob.cl/577/articles-8333_recurso_1.pdf

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). 2009. CLIMPAG: Climate Impact on Agriculture.
Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/climpag/index_en.asp

Solanes, M. and Jouravlev, A. 2006. Water Governance for
Development and Sustainability. Santiago, ECLAC.

––––. 2010. The Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010.
Rome, FAO.
de Fraiture, C., Giordano, M. and Liao, Y. 2008. Biofuels and
implications for agricultural water use: Blue impacts of
green energy. Water Policy, Vol. 10, Supplement 1, pp. 67–81.
IDB (Inter-American Development Bank). 2010. Montevideo:
Etudio de caso. Washington, DC, IDB. http://idbdocs.iadb.
org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?docnum=35143635
Independent Evaluation Group. 2010. An Evaluation of
World Bank Support, 1997–2007, Water and Development.
Washington, DC, World Bank.
Jouravlev, A. 2009. Introducción. D. Fernández, A. Jouravlev,
E. Lentini and A. Yurquina (eds), Contabilidad regulatoria,
sustentabilidad ﬁnanciera y gestión mancomunada:
temas relevantes en servicios de agua y saneamiento.
LC/L.3098-P. Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/7/37447/lcl3098e.pdf

United Nations (under the coordination of A. Bárcena, A.
Prado and A. León). 2010. Achieving the Millennium
Development Goals with Equality in Latin America and
the Caribbean: Progress and Challenges. LC/G.2460.
Santiago, United Nations Publications. http://www.eclac.cl/
publicaciones/xml/5/39995/portada-indice-intro-en.pdf
WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF (United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-Water: 2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
WRI (World Resources Institute). 2009. Climate Analysis
Indicators Tool (CAIT) Version 6.0. Washington, DC, WRI.
http:// www.cait.wri.org.
Yarur, I. 2009. The Financial Crisis and its Implication for
Infrastructure in Water Production and Sanitation: The
Case of Chile. Presentation to the PECC General Assembly,
Washington, DC, May 13 2009.

Klein, L. R. and Coutiño, A. 1996. The Mexican Financial
Crisis of December 1994 and lessons to be learned. Open
Economics Review, Vol. 7, pp. 501–10.
Lentini, E. 2008. Servicios de agua potable y saneamiento:
lecciones de experiencias relevantes. Document presented
at the regional conference on Políticas para servicios de
agua potable y alcantarillado económicamente eﬁcientes,
ambientalmente sustentables y socialmente equitativos,
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(ECLAC), Santiago, Chile, 23–24 September 2008.
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
USA). 2010. El Niño Theme Page. Washington, DC, NOAA.
www.pmel.noaa.gov/tao/elnino/impacts.html

WWDR4

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

705

CHAPTER 33
Arab region and Western Asia

UNESCWA
—
Authors Carol Chouchani Cherfane and Sung Eun Kim
Contributors Julie Abouarab and Hanan Atallah

© Shutterstock/Aleksandar Todorovic

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The Arab region is facing multiple water challenges due to population growth, food security,
overconsumption of water resources, climate change, extreme weather events, damage to
water infrastructure caused by regional conﬂicts, and risks posed by the potential for conﬂict
over shared water resources.
Arab countries have responded to these challenges by improving water resources
management, increasing access to water supply and sanitation services, strengthening
resilience and preparedness, and expanding the use of non-conventional water resources.
However, these measures are insufficient to overcome water scarcity constraints facing most
countries in the region.

33.1 Regional developments
The 22 countries of the Arab region,1 which include the
14 member states of the United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA),2 are
among the most water-scarce countries in the world.
At least 12 Arab countries suffer from acute water
scarcity with less than 500 m3 of renewable water resources available per capita per year (FAO, 2011). Arab
countries that are relatively better endowed with water
resources are either least developed countries or countries in crisis.
While the Arab region has long suffered from water
scarcity, several drivers and challenges have increased
strains on freshwater resources over recent decades,
including population growth, migration, changing consumption patterns, regional conﬂicts, climate change
and governance. These pressures have increased risks
and uncertainty associated with water quantity and
quality, as well as the realization of policies seeking to promote rural development and food security
objectives.
In recognition of these challenges, and the need to address them in a coordinated and regional manner, Arab
governments established the Arab Ministerial Water
Council (AMWC) under the auspices of the League
of Arab States. At its ﬁrst session in June 2009, the
AMWC responded to the request of heads of state
convened at the Arab Economic and Social Summit
(Kuwait, January 2009) to prepare an Arab strategy to
help confront current and future challenges needed to
ensure water security and sustainable development in
the region.
The resulting Arab Water Security Strategy (2010–
2030) was adopted in June 2011 and proposes a series
of measures to respond to these challenges, and is
complemented by a set of implementation projects focused on water use efficiency, non-conventional water
resources, climate change, integrated water resources
management, and water security. Arab countries are
also seeking to reduce risks at the national level by developing water sector strategies, incorporating water
considerations into national development plans, pursuing institutional and legal reforms, and addressing uncertainties related to the management of shared water
resources.
This chapter examines some of the drivers and challenges raised in the Arab Water Security Strategy in

708

CHAPTER 33

view of identifying the risks and uncertainties they
pose for the management of water resources, and
elaborates on selected response measures and approaches adopted to overcome these challenges in the
Arab region.

33.2 Drivers
33.2.1 Demographics, migration and urbanization
The total population of the Arab region stood at
352 million in 2009, and it is expected to reach
461 million by 2025 (UNESCWA, 2009a). Rapid population growth for the last a few decades has increased
the demand for freshwater as well as water stress
in urban and rural areas. Over 55% of the region’s
population lives in cities, with rural-to-urban migration trends observed in Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Tunisia (UNDESA, 2007)
largely due to reduced income and employment opportunities in the agricultural sector and the burgeoning youth demographic. To stem this tide, Arab governments have pursued rural livelihoods policies that
link agricultural production to rural development, even
though this has skewed the allocation of water resources to the agricultural sector in most of the region.
Demand for water services has also grown in urban
centres from migration associated with economic development and the movement of displaced persons
due to regional conﬂicts, while adequate water services are not provided in several countries facing intermittent water supplies (Box 33.1). Displaced Iraqis led
to an unanticipated spike in new housing development
in Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, and increased
pressures on already strained water networks and
freshwater resources. Interregional and intraregional labour migration to otherwise sparsely populated
countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) is inﬂuencing water supply and sanitation decision-making,
particularly in view of the aggressive investments being made to stimulate economic growth.
Additionally, most urbanization in the Arab region is
concentrated along the coastline, which is vulnerable
to ﬂoods, sea level rise, and saltwater intrusion into
coastal aquifers. Urbanization is fuelling settlement
in reclaimed deserts, expanded coastlines and urban
peripheries, with new satellite cities emerging around
Cairo, Abu Dhabi and along the Red Sea. This has increased public and private sector investment in nonconventional water resources, particularly desalination,
to ensure adequate access to water.

REGIONAL REPORTS

BOX 33.1
Access to Water Supply and Sanitation in the Arab
Region

According to the World Health Organization and United
Nations Children’s Fund Joint Monitoring Programme
(WHO/UNICEF JMP) for Water Supply and Sanitation,
Arab countries are generally on track to meet the
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) targets on water
supply and sanitation, with the exception of the region’s
least developed countries and countries in conﬂict.
However, ﬁeld assessments reveal that these ﬁgures do
not adequately reﬂect that state of access to water services in the region. For instance, while access to an improved
water source in Jordan and Lebanon is reported to be
100% and 96% respectively (WHO/UNICEF JMP for Water
Supply and Sanitation, 2010), many consumers only receive water once or twice a week and rely heavily on bottled water and the delivery of water through tanker trucks
to meet basic needs. Palestinian achievements towards
the MDG targets are now mitigated by damage, destruction and the inability to install or maintain water infrastructure due to the ongoing conﬂict and Israeli security
restrictions (World Bank, 2009).
The Arab Ministerial Water Council (AMWC) accordingly mandated the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) to establish a
regional mechanism to identify and report on the two
MDG 7 targets and an additional set of water supply
and sanitation indicators to determine the actual quantity and quality of water services available in the Arab
region. ESCWA is implementing this MDG+ initiative in
collaboration with the Arab Countries Water Utilities
Association (ACWUA), the Arab Water Council (AWC),
the Center for Environment and Development in the Arab
Region (CEDARE), the Arab Network for Environment and
Development (RAED), and WHO, with support provided
by the Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency (SIDA).

33.2.2 Water consumption trends
Water consumption levels in ESCWA countries is largely tied to gross domestic product (GDP), as illustrated
in Figure 33.1, although this is only possible due to the
heavy reliance on desalination. In other parts of the
Arab region, water consumption is largely tied to the
agricultural sector, which only contributes marginally
to GDP.
Domestic water demand in GCC countries is signiﬁcant and increasing, largely due to changing lifestyles

WWDR4

resulting from high economic growth rates, proliferation of real estate development projects, and availability of energy for desalination. Meanwhile, tourism
growth is creating seasonal peaks in water demand
in the Gulf and Arab Mediterranean countries. The
Environmental Agency of Abu Dhabi reports that the
United Arab Emirates water usage is 24 times greater
than its total annual renewable water resource availability (Al Bowardi, 2010). While Dubai signalled in 2011
that there would be no changes to its water or electricity tariffs in the coming years, graduated water tariffs
have been instituted in Jordan and Tunisia, and revisions to tariff schedules are under way in Egypt and
Lebanon to stem excess consumption and generate
revenue to improve water services.
Agricultural water consumption is characterized
by low productivity in the region, while drought
has plagued agricultural heartlands in recent years.
Irrigated agriculture has led to the exploitation of
deeper groundwater resources at a cost to sustainability and income. Small-scale farmers in South
Lebanon pump groundwater from a depth of over
350 m to irrigate patches of land that have become
parched from shifts and reductions in seasonal precipitation patterns; 4–6.5% of gross revenues are allocated to cover the cost of diesel to operate pumps,
which has reduced net income in rural areas not connected to irrigation networks (UNESCWA, 2010a).
Increased exploitation of non-renewable aquifer
systems is also witnessed in the Disi Aquifer, shared
by Jordan and Saudi Arabia, as well as in the North
Western Sahara Aquifer System, shared by Algeria,
Libya and Tunisia where 80% of withdrawals are
used for agricultural purposes (Sahara and Sahel
Observatory, 2011). This is raising concerns about the
depletion of fossil aquifers, and the trade-offs to
consider when balancing food security, food selfsufficiency, regional cooperation and rural development priorities.
33.2.3 Regional conﬂicts and the Arab Spring
Cycles of conﬂict manifested by instability, civil strife,
war and occupation have characterized the Arab region for decades. This has generated large numbers
of internally displaced persons and increased migration at national and regional levels. As a result, 36%
of displaced persons in the world are now found in
the ESCWA region (UNESCWA, 2009c), imposing additional demands on water networks and on already
strained freshwater resources. For instance, most of

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

709

FIGURE 33.1
Domestic water consumption relative to gross domestic product (GDP) per capita
GDP per capita ($PPP)
$80,000

Qatar

$70,000

$60,000

UAE

$50,000

$40,000

Kuwait
Bahrain

$30,000

Saudi Arabia

Oman
$20,000

$10,000

Lebanon

Jordan
Sudan

Yemen
0

Iraq

Egypt

$0

Palestine Syria
100

200

300

400

500

600

700

Domestic water consumption (litres/capita/day)

Source: UNESCWA (2009b, p. 7), based on data on domestic water consumption from FAO AQUASTAT and GDP per capita data from the United
Nations Population Division.

Iraq’s two million refugees found safe haven in Jordan
and the Syrian Arab Republic, although Amman and
Damascus already suffer from high rates of unaccounted-for water and intermittent water supplies.
Crippling drought in Somalia led to a ﬂood of refugees into neighbouring countries, including Djibouti
and Yemen, despite civil strife in Yemen and projections that Sana’a will become the ﬁrst capital city in
the world to run dry. Women and children are among
the most vulnerable in Sudan’s internally displaced
communities, and are not able to access clean water
despite the wealth of freshwater resources in Sudan
and its southern neighbours.
Ongoing conﬂicts and instability are also reversing
progress towards water supply and sanitation targets. For instance, despite being once the most waterand oil-rich countries in the region, Iraq experienced
water shortages in displacement camps (IRIN, 2007)
and water services remain intermittent in urban centres and peripheries. Reduced surface water ﬂows in
the Tigris, Euphrates, Karoun and Karkeh rivers from
growing demand and diversions upstream in Iraq, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and

710

CHAPTER 33

Turkey have increased saltwater intrusion through
the Shatt al-Arab and reduced freshwater outﬂows
to the Gulf (UNESCWA-BGR, 2012). This has affected
water supply in Basra where water salinity – even after ﬁltration – now exceeds drinking water standards.
Increasing salinity in the Gulf also affects desalination operations and ﬁsheries, and may contribute to
renewed tensions between Iraq, Kuwait and nearby
countries.
Water infrastructure is also damaged or destroyed
by violent conﬂicts. Israel cut off water supplies to
Beirut during the siege of 1982, while Iraq destroyed
much of Kuwait’s desalination capacity as it withdrew from Kuwait in 1991. A damage assessment after
the 2006 Israeli offensive into Lebanon estimated
US$80 million worth of damage to the water sector
(Council for Development and Reconstruction, 2006).
The ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip has prevented the entry of materials and expertise needed
to maintain water pumps and installations, and is affecting the ability of donors to invest in a new desalinization plant that is considered a strategic project
for cooperation by the Union for the Mediterranean.

REGIONAL REPORTS

Meanwhile, Palestinian refugees are scattered in
camps throughout the region with inadequate water supply and sanitation, and limited prospect for
improvement.

data and information on water quality and quantity are cross-cutting factors that increase risks
and uncertainty associated with managing these
challenges.

Concurrently, the public uprisings that have swept
through the Arab region since December 2010 offer
opportunities to revisit water governance structures
and foster greater consultation at the community
level. While a relatively recent phenomenon driving
change in the region, government officials in Tunisia
and Egypt are already engaging with water user associations and local constituencies in renewed dialogue aimed at fostering greater public participation
in planning and decision-making related to the water
sector.

33.3.1 Water scarcity
Nearly all Arab countries can be characterized as
water-scarce, while those formally endowed with rich
water resources have seen their total annual per capita
share of renewable water resources drop by half over
the past four decades (Figure 33.2). This declining
trend presents the most signiﬁcant challenge to the
water sector in the Arab region.
Water quantity
As the availability of freshwater resources in the region
has become scarcer relative to its population, efficient
and integrated management of water resources has
become more critical. Risks and uncertainties associated with the management of surface and groundwater
resources must thus be considered jointly and based
on local circumstances. For instance, countries with

33.3 Challenges, risks and uncertainties
Four major challenges affect water resources management in the Arab region: water scarcity, dependency on shared water resources, climate change and
food security. Financial and technical constraints,
as well as poor access to and availability of reliable

FIGURE 33.2
Renewable water resources in the Arab region per capita
m3 per person per year
9,000

Mauritania
Iraq
Comoros

8,000

Somalia
Sudan*

7,000

Lebanon
Morocco

6,000

Syria
Egypt

5,000

Oman
Tunisia

4,000

Djibouti
Algeria

3,000

Palestine
Jordan
Bahrain

2,000

Libya
Yemen

1,000

Saudi Arabia
Qatar

0

UAE
1977

1987

1997

2009
Kuwait

Note: *Area covering South Sudan and Sudan.
Source: Based on FAO AQUASTAT data (2011).

WWDR4

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

711

perennial rivers in which surface water constitutes the
primary conventional source for freshwater and over
70% of the renewable water resources include Egypt,
Iraq, Lebanon and Sudan (FAO, AQUASTAT, 2011). In
other Arab countries, groundwater constitutes at least
one-third of the total volume obtained from conventional sources, but surface water remains the primary
source of freshwater, such as in Oman, Saudi Arabia,
UAE and Yemen; ironically these four water-scarce
countries are also characterized by intermittent rivers, or wadi systems, and are subject to seasonal ﬂash
ﬂoods. Some countries are thus considering ways to
recharge aquifers with these ﬂoodwaters to increase
the quantity of water available during dry periods.
As surface waters can no longer satisfy water needs in
some parts of the region, the extraction of groundwater has increased and is threatening the sustainability of
many national and shared aquifer systems and increasing the risk of conﬂict (UNESCWA, 2007a). However, as
some groundwater resources are non-renewable, their
very use challenges frameworks that seek their sustainable management. An integrated management
framework is necessary where conventional and nonconventional approaches are applied to address water
scarcity constraints in the region. Non-renewable shared
aquifers that include fossil water include the Nubian
Sandstone Aquifer shared by Chad, Egypt and Libya;
the North Western Sahara Aquifer shared by Algeria,
Libya and Tunisia; and the Basalt Aquifer underlying
Jordan and Saudi Arabia. Additional deep nonrenewable aquifers underlie Kuwait, Iraq and Saudi
Arabia; Iraq and Jordan; and Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic (UNESCWA, 2009d).
Water quality
Differences in freshwater regimes inﬂuence the response patterns of governments to water-scarce conditions and how countries consider water quality a
priority. Coastal aquifers pose a major challenge for
many Arab countries due to seawater intrusion resulting from over-pumping of groundwater for domestic
or agricultural use. This is evident along the northern
coast of Egypt, the Lebanese coastline, in the Gaza
Strip and around several coastal cities along the eastern Gulf. Sea level rise is expected to increase stresses
on coastal aquifers and river outlets, such as the Nile
Delta and at the Shatt Al-Arab, increasing the salinity
of these freshwater resources.

712

CHAPTER 33

Pesticides and fertilizers mixed with agricultural
runoff are contaminating surface and groundwater
resources in rural and peri-urban areas, and have
even become a source of contention in some shared
surface water systems in the region, such as between
Turkey and the Syrian Arab Republic. Post-harvest
processes associated with agro-industries, garments
production (leather tanneries and textiles) and
domestic sewage pollute surface and groundwater
resources throughout the region. For instance, river
disposal of olive residues (Lebanon), sugar beet
pulp (Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic) and
sugar cane (Egypt, Sudan) increases biological
oxygen demand (BOD) levels and eutrophication of
some inland water bodies causing ﬁsh kills. Nutrient
pollution from sewage has reduced ﬁsh stocks in
Lake Tunis in Northern Tunisia (Harbridge et al.,
2007). Untreated effluents released in Cairo have
affected aquaculture and agriculture in the Nile
Delta. Oil production pollutes freshwater resources
in the region, although marine ecosystems are more
frequently affected by oil spills.
Watershed protection and management challenges
are exacerbated by unregulated urban development,
poor sanitation and sewage infrastructure, and the
rapidity with which urban expansion is taking place.
Inadequate urban planning and enforcement fuelled by
bifurcated water governance structures and overlapping jurisdictional mandates between ministries and
municipal bodies involved in permitting, testing and
compliance contribute to the difficulty of protecting
water resources in the region.
33.3.2 Dependency on shared water resources
A big challenge to water resources management in the
Arab region is that the major international river systems in the region are shared by two or more countries. The challenge is magniﬁed where institutional
regimes are not in place to reduce the risk and uncertainty associated with the management and allocation of water resources under water-scarce conditions
at the basin level. The major shared surface water
systems in the region include the (a) Tigris and the
Euphrates river basin, shared by the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey;
(b) Orontes (or Al-Assi) river, shared by Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey; (c) Jordan (including the Yarmouk) river, shared by Jordan, Lebanon,
the Occupied Palestinian Territory, the Syrian Arab
Republic and Israel; (d) Nile river basin covering

REGIONAL REPORTS

11 countries, of which Egypt and Sudan are Arab
States; (e) Senegal River with four riparian countries,
including Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Senegal; and
(f) Lake Chad, with eight riparian countries namely
Algeria, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Libya, Niger, Nigeria and Sudan.
The Arab Water Security Strategy estimates that 66%
of surface water resources in the Arab region originates outside of the region and enters through the
Euphrates, Nile, Senegal and Tigris rivers. This has
become at times a source of political conﬂict with the
upstream countries. There are also many smaller surface water resources (rivers, streams, seasonal spate
ﬂows) that cross into the region and between Arab
countries on a regular and intermittent basis, which
have sparked localized disputes regarding water resources and fuelled border tensions. For instance,
reduced ﬂows from intermittent rivers originating in
the Islamic Republic of Iran affect border communities and agriculture in eastern Iraq. Many Arab countries have thus turned to groundwater to complement
dwindling domestic freshwater supplies and increase
water for irrigation and development. However, with
shallow aquifers under threat of total exploitation,
countries are exploring possibilities to develop deeper and farther aquifers, which, in many cases, are part
of more extensive regional cross-boundary aquifer
systems.
Additionally, water conﬂicts can also exist at the subnational level between administrative districts, communities and tribes. Tensions emerge in water-scarce
environments and stakeholders with competing

BOX 33.2
Water conﬂicts in Yemen
With acute water scarcity in Sana’a and Taiz, access to
water has become an issue of survival.
Stresses on the delivery of water service come from water
scarcity, the dependent relationship between water and
energy resources for service delivery, internal strife manifested in urban–rural divides, and tensions over scarce
resources. Challenges in balancing socio-economic
priorities with sustainable water allocation for the agricultural sector complicate decision-making in this least
developed country under conﬂict.

Source: UNESCWA (2010b).

WWDR4

interests, which are then manifested through local level
conﬂicts, such as in Yemen (Box 33.2).
In recognition of the importance of reducing conﬂict, countries in the region have tried to conclude
international agreements and establish shared water
resources institutions. However, despite efforts to establish formal agreements, those that exist require increased capacity and improved institutional and legal
frameworks to support the integrated management of
shared water resources, particularly when political will
and commitments are absent or insufficient. Prevailing
political tensions and ongoing conﬂicts also frustrate
efforts to collaborate at the technical level. For instance, despite years of efforts to strengthen cooperation in the Nile River basin, countries have failed to
reach agreement on a common management scheme.
The establishment of the Republic of South Sudan in
July 2011 increases to 11 the number of countries requiring agreement on this shared resource.
However, while water scarcity and ongoing conﬂicts
are key drivers inﬂuencing shared water resources
management, opportunities for collaboration can still
emerge. For instance, the divergent interests of riparian countries in the Senegal River basin allowed for
constructive compromise, mutual beneﬁts and the
prevention of a potential conﬂict. The resulting establishment of the Organization for the Development of
the Senegal River in 1972, the adoption of the Senegal
River Charter in 2002, and the tie-in to a ﬁnancing
mechanism for ensuring the generation of revenues
and beneﬁts among the four basin countries has reinforced conﬁdence in cooperation and generated income and energy for development.
33.3.3 Climate change and climate variability
Although climate change is a global phenomenon, its
impacts are felt differently throughout the world. The
Arab region is particularly sensitive to climate change
and variability as it already suffers from water scarcity; small changes in climate patterns can thus result
in dramatic impacts on the ground. Climate scenarios
predict an increase in temperature in the region, which
several impact assessments expect to contribute to
increased aridity, lower soil humidity, higher evaporation–transpiration rates and shifts in seasonal rainfall
patterns. Reduced snowfall and snow melt is projected in the High Atlas Mountains and Anti-Lebanon
Mountains. Reduced surface water runoff and sea
level rise is expected to reduce groundwater recharge

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

713

rates and increase the salinity of coastal aquifers,
respectively.
Some climate scenarios also anticipate increased climate variability and more frequent extreme weather
events, such as ﬂoods and droughts. As a transitional
climate zone, precipitation has already been ﬂuctuating signiﬁcantly in Morocco and Tunisia to the west,
and Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic to the east.
Evidence that climate change is affecting freshwater
quantity and quality in the region is becoming stronger, although the expected intensity of these changes
remains uncertain.
Droughts and land degradation
The increasing frequency of drought in the Arab region
is a very important challenge facing the Arab region.
Algeria, Morocco, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Tunisia have experienced signiﬁcant droughts over
the last 20 years, and the frequency and intensity of
these events seem to be increasing. In Morocco, the
drought cycle changed from an average of one year of
drought in every ﬁve-year period before 1990, to one
year of drought for each two-year period in the following decade (Karrou, 2002). The Horn of Africa is experiencing one of the worst droughts in decades.
Despite repeat experience, Arab countries remain vulnerable to drought. Socio-economic vulnerability to
drought in ESCWA countries has intensiﬁed due to
demographic and economic growth, increasing water
scarcity, unsustainable water consumption patterns
and land use practices (UNESCWA, 2005). The vulnerability of some Arab countries to droughts comes from
their high dependency on agriculture, and particularly
rainfed agriculture, as a main contributor to GDP and
employment. An extended hydrological drought in
north-eastern Syria from 2006 to 2009 drove an estimated one million people to abandon their homes and
seek refuge in larger cities. A former Syrian Deputy
Prime Minister has attributed this mass migration to
having set in motion the popular uprisings initiated in
Syrian secondary cities in 2011 (A. Dardari, personal
communication, November 2011). In Somalia, where
large segments of the population are economically
dependent on pastoral and subsistence farming, prolonged drought has decimated families and caused
widespread famine displacing communities in a conﬂict-ridden country that has faced droughts of varying
intensity every year for over a decade.

714

CHAPTER 33

Drought also contributes to increased land degradation and desertiﬁcation, which is a regional phenomenon poignantly witnessed in Mauritania when it faced
repeated cycles of drought during the 1960s, 1970s
and 1980s. Dams erected along the Senegal River
helped mitigate the effects of drought and introduce
more certainty in water availability for development.
Nevertheless, drought in the Sahel region in 2009 and
2010 has reduced water availability for agriculture and
again increased food insecurity levels in Mauritania
(CILSS et al., 2010).
Floods and extreme events
Extreme weather events have increased in the region,
including greater frequency and intensity of ﬂooding. In January 2010, heavy rainfall caused ﬂash ﬂoods
in Egypt in the Sinai Peninsula, Hurghada, and Aswan
along the Red Sea – resulting in 12 deaths, the evacuation of over 3,500 people and the destruction of electricity towers, telephone lines and roads (DREF operation, 2010). The same storm caused ﬂooding in the
area of Wadi Gaza in the Gaza Strip, where the ﬂoods
cut off roads and the bridge connecting Gaza City with
southern parts of the Gaza Strip, causing a state of
emergency.
Cyclone activity is also intensifying in the region.
The three strongest tropical cyclones recorded in
the Arabian Sea have occurred since 2001 (Gulfnews,
2010). Super Cyclonic Storm Gonu was the strongest
and hit Oman, Yemen and Somalia in August 2007.
Storm surges caused coastal damage and wadi
ﬂooding as rainfall reached 610 mm; the high water
mark peaked at Ras al Hadd at the eastern tip of
Oman and exceeded 5 m in what is normally an
arid area. The cyclone resulted in an estimated
US$4 billion worth of damage and at least 49 deaths,
and is considered the worst natural disaster in the
history of Oman. Saudi Arabia suffered devastating
ﬂoods in Jeddah in November 2009 which killed
100 people and caused mortalities in Rabigh and
Mecca (BBC News, 2009). Yemen has been experiencing landslides and rock slides caused by increasingly intensive seasonal ﬂash ﬂood events through
mountainous valleys.
These high-consequence ﬂood events are not only due
to the increasing intensity of rainfalls, but also to the
rapid and often haphazard development of high-risk
areas such as wadis which are natural drainage areas
for ﬂash ﬂoods. Lax building codes and infrastructure

REGIONAL REPORTS

standards, as well as weak regulation and enforcement, also permit the construction of buildings and
infrastructure that are ill-prepared to sustain damage
during major ﬂoods, such as those in Jeddah in 2009
(Assaf, 2010). These extreme events, however, led to
increased public investment in storm water systems
and preparedness planning that reduced risks in subsequent years.
33.3.4 Food security
Agricultural cultivation consumes the largest share of
water in the Arab region and is a primary source of
water stress. While per capita arable land and permanent croplands account for a small share of land in
most ESCWA member countries, agriculture accounts
for over 70% of total water demand; in Somalia and
Yemen, the share exceeds 90% of total water demand
(FAO, AQUASTAT, 2011).
Despite high usage rates, Arab countries are not able
to produce sufficient quantities of food to meet basic
needs. Accordingly, ESCWA member countries import
40–50% of their total cereal consumption, and this
rate reaches up to 70% in Iraq and Yemen, despite the
signiﬁcant size of their agricultural sectors (UNESCWA,
2010b). This situation is likely to worsen with climate
change.
Agricultural export bans have also been instituted in
response to the recent food crises in an effort to increase domestic food security, prevent hording for sale
in international markets and reduce price inﬂation for
basic foodstuffs at the national level, such as in Egypt
with rice exports. The ﬂuctuations in the global cereal
market during the past few years, and the instability
of supplies, witnessed when Russia banned the export
of grains in August 2010, proved problematic for the
region as Egypt and the Syrian Arab Republic imported approximately half of their total wheat imports
from Russia in 2008 and 2009. However, wheat and
barley imports have become a necessity as the region
does not have enough water to meet growing demand.
Globalization, trade dependency and the global food
crisis have thus added new dimensions to the food security challenge in the Arab region.
Further, the Arab region has a vulnerable social structure. While there is a concentration of wealth in some
countries, a large share of the population is clustered
around the poverty line, with many people living
well below the poverty line in the Comoros, Djibouti,

WWDR4

Mauritania, Somalia and Yemen. Increased drought
frequency, complemented by dependency on food imports and population growth, leaves the Arab region
highly vulnerable to food insecurity.
To address the challenge, Arab countries initially tried
to increase domestic cereal production and encouraged cultivation in strategic commodities through subsidies and guaranteed price supports (Egypt, Jordan,
Saudi Arabia). Investments in irrigation networks and
reservoir capacity increased (Lebanon, Syrian Arab
Republic), as well as the pumping of groundwater resources for the production of cereals (Morocco, Saudi
Arabia). Intraregional agricultural trade was encouraged through the Greater Arab Free Trade Agreement.
However, limited agricultural productivity, continued land degradation and water scarcity made food
self-sufficiency goals unachievable at the national or
regional level. As a result, Arab food self-sufficiency
policies shifted towards a broader concept of food security. Governments with the ﬁnancial resources have
been able to pursue alternative measures within the
global marketplace to achieve this goal, while others
are re-examining their development and trade policies.
Some have also turned to emergency relief to overcome food crises, such as those experienced in the
Horn of Africa and Sahel due to drought.
Biofuels
Global research and development has demonstrated
that biofuels provide opportunities for increased energy security and rural development through a reliable
market for certain agricultural commodities. Investors
encouraged by the emerging biofuel market have thus
sought to cultivate jatropha in Egypt and Sudan, as
it is a drought-resistant non-food crop that can be
grown in saline soils. However, a range of stakeholders
have expressed concern that Arab farmers might shift
cultivation to more proﬁtable commercial biofuel crops
instead of food crops, despite growing water scarcity
and food insecurity in the region.
Arab governments responded by encouraging the
development of second-generation biofuel instead.
The Arab Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change
(CAMRE, 2007, p. 4) warns of the ‘consequences of the
encouragement of developed countries to developing countries to cultivate agricultural crops that produce bio-fuel instead of food; while encouraging its
production from bio-waste’. Meanwhile, the Strategy
for Sustainable Arab Agricultural Development for

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

715

the Upcoming Two Decades (2005–2025) adopted through the Arab Organization for Agricultural
Development recognizes the added value for farmers
of using agricultural residues for biofuel production
and the positive impact this will have on the environment and on securing fuel. Assessments have also
found the potential for expanding second-generation
biofuel production in Egypt, Lebanon, Morocco, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Sudan from residues resulting from sugar cane, sugar beet and olive processing, as well as from the livestock and dairy sectors
(UNESCWA, 2009e).
33.3.5 Data and information
The difficulty of collecting consistent and credible data
and information on water resources in the Arab region
impedes accurate analyses and well-informed decision-making processes. It also prevents the establishment of coherent and cooperative policy frameworks
for shared water resources management as well as observing changes and assessing progress.
Several initiatives have been launched to increase the
knowledge base of water resources in the region, including intergovernmental processes tied to statistical
reporting at the global level, and others at the regional
and national levels through regional reporting mechanisms or as academic initiatives.
However, the difficulty of reducing the gaps and uncertainty associated with the knowledge base rests with
the political sensitivity and national security considerations that are sometimes tied to this information. This
results in a patchwork of information from different
sources that is used by the research and professional
community, while official data remains a coveted resource that is sometimes reserved for use by certain
governmental institutions.

33.4 Response measures
In view of these drivers and challenges, Arab countries
are seeking to improve water resources management
and capacity, strengthen resilience and preparedness,
and expand the use of non-conventional water resources as a means to ensure a water-secure future.
33.4.1 Improving water resources management
At the regional level
Arab countries clearly recognize the need for a common approach towards water resources management
to achieve sustainable development of the region.

716

CHAPTER 33

This led to the adoption of the Arab Water Security
Strategy by the AMWC in 2011. The strategy lays out
key issues facing the Arab region and identiﬁes various
priorities for action focused on:
đƫ Socio-economic development priorities – namely
access to water supply and sanitation, water for agriculture, ﬁnance and investment, technology, nonconventional water resources and Integrated Water
and Resources Management (IWRM);
đƫ Political priorities – related to the management of
shared water resources and the protection of Arab
water rights, particularly those under occupation; and
đƫ Institutional priorities – associated with capacity
building, awareness raising, research, and participatory approaches involving civil society.
Regional institutions and initiatives launched in recent
years respond to these priorities. For instance, the
Arab Countries Water Utilities Association (ACWUA)
established its secretariat in 2009 and provides a
platform for dialogue and capacity building on water
supply and sanitation for public and private sector
operators on various topics, including unaccounted-for water, tariffs and benchmarking. The Center
for Water Studies and Arab Water Security, affiliated with the League of Arab States, convenes intergovernmental meetings on agreements and resolutions on shared water resources and Arab water
rights. This includes deliberations on a legal framework on shared waters in the Arab Region, which the
Center, and UNESCWA drafted at the request of the
AMWC (2010) in consultation with Arab governments
and with support provided by the Bundesanstalt für
Geowissenschaften und Rohstoffe (Federal Institute for
Geosciences and Natural Resources, BGR, Germany).
The legal framework seeks to foster consensus on a
core set of principles that can support bilateral and
basin-level agreements on water resources shared
by Arab countries (UNESCWA, 2011). The framework
draws upon a vision that fosters cooperation and participation; equitable, reasonable, and sustainable use;
and conﬂict prevention and resolution through peaceful means (UNESCWA and BGR, 2010). Regional capacity-building programmes have also been conducted
in response to the strategy, such as training on negotiations by the Arab Water Academy and workshops on
water governance by the AWC and CEDARE.
At the national level
At the national level, different ministries and authorities are responsible for managing water resources and

REGIONAL REPORTS

delivering water services in Arab region. Only a handful of joint committees or units have been established
to support shared water resources. However, efforts to
improve institutional and legal frameworks in the water
sector have been enacted or are under way, and are
increasingly incorporating issues previously limited to
IWRM planning.
For example, Law 10-95 in Morocco sets forth an institutional framework for managing water resources, with a view towards environmental protection as
well as monitoring and responding to extreme events,
such as droughts (Makboul, 2009). Egypt prepared a
2005 National Water Resources Plan, which includes
many institutional procedures aimed at decentralization, public–private partnerships and engaging water
users in water system management. A new draft water
law seeks to empower the Egyptian Water Regulatory
Agency (EWRA), differentiate between social and
economic tariffs, and establish a set of performance
indicators for utilities. Yemen devised a national strategy and investment programme for the water sector
(2005–2009), which addresses water resource management, water and sanitation in urban areas, water
and sanitation in rural areas, irrigation management,
and the environment. Palestine is working to integrate
water resource management into development planning, and examined the implications of climate change
for groundwater resources as a means to inform the
process. Jordan developed a national strategy that includes policies on groundwater management, irrigation, infrastructure, sanitation, water resource management and investment (UNESCWA, 2007b). Lebanon
prepared a new National Water Sector Strategy focused on water supply and sanitation that is supported through a Water Sector Coordination Group that
contributed social impact analysis, health assessments
and climate change impact scenarios to the preparatory process. Nevertheless, there remains a need to
strengthen legal and institutional frameworks and
inter-ministerial coordination for IWRM to push forward progress in this area throughout the region.
33.4.2 Strengthening resilience and preparedness
Improving food security
As with most countries in the world, Arab countries
seek to ensure their food security through trade, investment and contractual arrangements with other countries. Long-term leasing of agricultural land
in other countries has emerged as another tool for
overcoming shortcomings and shortfalls in domestic

WWDR4

agricultural production due to water, land, energy or
technological constraints. These investments are designed to ensure access to staple commodities and
reduce exposure to global food price ﬂuctuations and
export bans, which often occur during food crises.
Through these arrangements, investors reduce risk by
leasing land to grow needed primary commodities in
countries with suitable land and water resources, while
host countries secure investments over an agreed time
horizon that can allow for the development of transport, water and energy infrastructure in the targeted
area. Employment and income generation is also fostered through primary and secondary agro-industries
(fertilizers, packaging, shipping) given that these
investments tend to be large in size. However, while
these contracts offer the opportunity for mutual beneﬁts, the operationalization of these investments has
been controversial where indigenous communities and
pastoralists have traditionally used the lands that are
being opened to joint ventures or leased to investors
by central governments or absentee landowners.
Several Arab countries are engaged in agricultural investments and land deals with other Arab countries
and in neighbouring regions, and their numbers have
increased in recent years as water scarcity and land
degradation have become more evident. Jordan engaged in land deal talks with Sudan for livestock and
crop cultivation (Hazaimeh, 2008), and the Abu Dhabi
Fund for Development invested in the cultivation of
28,000 ha of farmland in Sudan (Rice, 2008). The King
Abdullah Initiative for Saudi Agricultural Investment
Abroad was established to maintain food security in
the Kingdom given the Government’s decision to reduce price supports for domestic wheat production
and other commodities because of water constraints.
The initiative encourages the private sector to invest
in agriculture abroad and received its ﬁrst rice imports
in 2009. Staple goods are targeted, particularly wheat,
barley, corn, sorghum, soybeans, rice, sugar, oil seeds,
green fodder, livestock and ﬁshery goods, which are
all water-intensive products (Al-Obaid, 2010); Egypt,
Sudan, Turkey, Ethiopia, the Philippines, and Brazil
among other countries are targeted for investments.
One study reports that ﬁve African countries (Ethiopia,
Ghana, Madagascar, Mali and Sudan) approved a total
of 2,492,684 ha of land for foreign investments in
agriculture since 2004, excluding allocations below
1,000 ha and pending land applications, and that
Arab countries contribute signiﬁcantly to this total
(Cotula et al., 2009).

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

717

Sovereign wealth funds, like the Qatar Investment
Authority and Kuwait Investment Authority are engaged in these types of investments directly or
through state-owned enterprises in Arab and South
East Asian countries (Reuters, 2008a). The private
sector is also engaged. Jenat, a consortium of Saudi
agricultural companies, produces wheat, barley and
livestock feed in Egypt, and announced plans to invest
in Sudan and Ethiopia (Reuters, 2008b; 2009). Private
investment funds, such as the Abu Dhabi-based Al
Qudra Holding are also active in this sector (Blas,
2008). This demonstrates the market’s recognition
that investments abroad will help satisfy growing food
demand given the lack of opportunity to invest in this
sector at home because of increased natural resource
constraints.
Nevertheless, the rapid rise of foreign land acquisitions
in developing and least developed countries has raised
concern that they may further reduce food security
in these countries in face of global food crises, particularly among the least privileged and marginalized
communities. As a consequence some Arab countries such as Qatar are now targeting more developed
countries with signiﬁcant food surplus for their agricultural investments (Reuters, 2010), while others are also
supporting food programmes in countries under stress,
such as Saudi Arabia through its donations to Somalia,
Sudan and Mauritania.
Pursuing climate change adaptation and disaster
preparedness
The Arab Ministerial Declaration on Climate Change
(2007) expresses Arab commitment to move towards
climate change adaptation and mitigation, and was
followed by the preparation of the Arab Framework
Action Plan on Climate Change for 2010–2020. Arab
countries have concurrently sought to assess the impact of climate change on national water resources to
inform their national adaptation plans and communications to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). In view of providing a uniﬁed assessment for informing regional policies on climate change
adaptation, the Regional Initiative for the Assessment
of the Impact of Climate Change on Water Resources
and Socio-Economic Vulnerability in the Arab Region
was launched as coordinated UN-LAS effort under the umbrella of the AMWC and the UN Regional
Coordination Mechanism.

718

CHAPTER 33

Risks and uncertainty associated with climate change
and extreme weather events have pushed forward
national and regional efforts in the area of disaster risk reduction, planning and preparedness. The
Arab Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction 2020 was
adopted in 2010 and is being supported by the United
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR) and partners through the preparation of
national disaster inventories, regional platforms, and
capacity-building programmes aimed at improving
land use planning, regulatory frameworks, ﬁnancing
and access to user-friendly information and communication tools.
Arab countries are also responding to climate change
nationally. For example, a drought insurance programme based on rainfall contracts in Morocco is an
important climate change adaptation measure that has
the potential to reduce the effect of drought hazards
and has helped to safeguard the production of cereals
(Medany, 2008). Programmes to implement no-regret
measures are also proliferating in water use efficiency
and non-conventional water resource management.
Management strategies focused on dam construction
and aquifer recharge are increasingly visible in the region as a way to respond to ﬂood risk and store water
for future use. During the ﬂash ﬂoods that hit Egypt in
January 2010, the Government reported that the dams
established in Sinai and Aswan played a positive role in
protecting Na’ama Bay, Nuweiba’a and Dahab, while also
allowing for the storage of storm water in aquifers; this
raised the groundwater table along the coastline and has
helped prevent saltwater intrusion and contributed to
improving water quality in those areas (Government of
Egypt, 2010). Dams built around Jeddah helped minimize
damage caused by the ﬂoods and associated landslides
in the city in 2009 (Saud, 2010).
While dams can have both positive and negative impacts on natural and urban ecosystems, some Arab
countries have increased their total dam capacity.
Egypt stands at the forefront with a capacity of at
least 169 km3 since 2003. However, total dam capacity
in Iraq almost tripled from 50.2 km3 to 139.7 km3
between 1990 and 2000. Syrian dam capacity increased from 15.85 km3 in 1994 to 19.65 km3 in 2007,
with new dams under development along the Al-Assi
River to help regulate river ﬂow and reduce ﬂood
risk. Lebanon is proposing a series of new dams in its
National Water Sector Strategy.

REGIONAL REPORTS

Managed aquifer recharge is also being considered
more closely, for two reasons: (a) to stave off saltwater
intrusion into coastal aquifers from over-pumping and
sea level rise, which affects Mediterranean and Arabian
Gulf coastlines; and (b) to store excess production of
desalinated water as a risk buffer to prepare for future
peaks in demand or desalination plant failures in GCC
countries.
33.4.3 Expanding use of non-conventional water
resources
Non-conventional water resources have become a
mainstream response to water scarcity in the Arab
region. Desaliniation is the primary source of water in
GCC countries, while the reuse of wastewater is common practice in Jordan and the UAE. Nevertheless, the
sustainability of these measures requires further action by Arab Governments as they pursue research and
investment in new non-conventional water resources
under development.
Desalination
Growing water demand has increased investment in
desalination throughout the Arab region. Saudi Arabia
has the greatest desalination capacity in the world and
produces over 10 MCM per day, while the UAE is the
second largest producer; jointly their desalination capacity accounts for over 30% of global freshwater production (UNESCWA, 2009b). Outside of the GCC, desalination represents a growing share of water supply
in Algeria, Egypt, Iraq and Jordan, with efforts to expand capacity in Palestine underway. Tourism growth
along the Egyptian coastline is dependent upon desalination, as pipelines transferring Nile River water to the
Red Sea coast are no longer sufficient to satisfy needs.
Co-generation is also expanding in the Gulf, where
power and desalinated water are produced at a joint
facility. For instance, in 2011, the Power and Water Utility
Company for Jubail and Yanbu (Maraﬁq) in Saudi Arabia
started construction on Yanbu 2, which aims to produce
850 MW of electricity and 60,000 m3 of desalinated
water per day (Zawya, 2011). However, desalination
and co-generation are not cost-effective solutions in
energy-poor countries and poses a problem for climate
change due to their energy intensity. Universities and
research centres in the region are thus piloting renewable energy desalination facilities based on solar or wind
energy (UNESCWA, 2009b), which are gaining currency in Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and the
UAE. Prospects for nuclear desalination are also being

WWDR4

advanced in Jordan, Morocco, Saudi Arabia and the
UAE.
Desalination also emerged as a local response and
community-based resilience scheme in the the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, where access to water
is limited and groundwater has become increasingly
saline. Driven by the private sector, small reverse osmosis desalination units can now be found in about
100,000 households in the Gaza Strip, as a secondary source of drinking water when municipal supplies are not delivered (World Bank, 2009). However,
a new challenge has been the false sense of security
that these small household desalination units provide
as the units continue to be used despite the difficulty
of securing replacement ﬁlters, which has resulted in
associated health risks and challenges caused by continued use of systems that require maintenance.
Reuse of wastewater
The reuse of domestic wastewater for urban landscaping and greenbelts to combat land degradation and
desertiﬁcation has been practiced in Arab countries for
decades. Some Arab countries adopted quality standards to regulate wastewater reuse for certain purposes (WHO-EM/CEH, 2006). However, increasing water
scarcity and development pressures have increased interest in the use of treated sewage. As a result, treated
wastewater is now used in the urban, agricultural, industrial and environmental sectors.
Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and the UAE produce a
relatively large amount of treated wastewater, with
direct use of treated wastewater representing nearly
1% and 3% of total water withdrawal in Saudi Arabia
and Oman respectively in 2006,and nearly 9% and 10%
of total water withdrawal in Jordan and Qatar respectively in 2005 (FAO, 2011). Jordan and the UAE have
established classiﬁcation systems for regulating the
reuse of treated wastewater for different purposes, including the cultivation of food and non-food products.
Bahrain Airport uses treated grey water for cooling
and landscaping. Abu Dhabi contracted Veolia Water
to tertiary treat sewage from its capital city at a desert
location, where the treated wastewater will be used to
green the desert and support the establishment of a
new community and biodiversity reserve. The use of
treated wastewater is also being considered as part
of managed aquifer recharge schemes in some Gulf
countries. However, increased investment in sanitation,
sufficient access to energy to fuel tertiary treatment

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

719

facilities, and the adoption of harmonized quality
standards and classiﬁcation systems are needed to
generate further beneﬁts from treated wastewater reuse in the region.
Water harvesting and fog collection
Water harvesting has been up-scaled and expanded in the Arab region based on traditional practices.
Household and farm level rainwater collection is already common practice in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, Tunisia and Yemen, and is usually captured
in storage tanks and reservoirs for watering residential gardens or meeting domestic water needs. Water
harvesting through condensation by forests has been
piloted to facilitate groundwater recharge in Oman,
while other methods are in place to recharge aquifers along the northern coast of Egypt. Fog collection
is another option. In Yemen, 25 large fog collectors
were constructed in 2004 with an area of 40 m2 each,
estimated to provide 4500 L of drinking water per
day during the dry winter season (Schemenauer et al,
2004). In 2006, three standard fog collectors spanning 1 m2 each were installed in the south-western
region of Saudi Arabia. During the winter season, the
best average daily water production of 11.5 L/m2 was
obtained, which encourages the development of further application of this technology in the region (AlHassan, 2009). However, fog collection facilities need
to be carefully introduced based on comprehensive
feasibility studies as they only work where certain
weather conditions are met.
Pilots and prospects for new non-conventional water
resources
While cloud seeding became popular after its successful demonstration by China prior to the 2008
Beijing Olympic Games, several Arab countries, including Algeria, Libya, Morocco, Jordan, Iraq, Saudi
Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and UAE have been
piloting cloud seeding programmes since its introduction (Al-Fenadi, n.d.). Between 2001 and 2002,
the UAE conducted cloud seeding ﬁeld programmes
and found that the characteristics of clouds differ
from season to season; new cloud seeding experiments were successfully conducted by meteorological authorities in the UAE in 2008 (Gulfnews, 2008).
However, cloud seeding has fostered debate in the region regarding who owns the clouds, particularly when
they cross between countries (Majzoub et al., 2009).

720

CHAPTER 33

Capturing freshwater from newly identiﬁed underwater
springs in the region offers another way to overcome
water deﬁcits thanks to the introduction of advanced
remote sensing techniques (Shaban, 2009). However,
this may introduce new territorial conﬂicts regarding
sea and submarine resources shared by countries, and
may potentially affect salinity levels needed to maintain coastal marine ecosystems.

Conclusion
Despite the risks and uncertainties discussed in this
chapter, water ﬂows at the core of Arab culture and
consciousness. A national Egyptian holiday commemorates the ﬂooding of the River Nile every spring, even
though seasonal ﬂooding has stopped since the Aswan
Dam was built in the 1950s. Most Arabs live in cities situated along the coastline or a riverbed. Islamic
cleansing with water is practiced by millions of Arabs
every day prior to prayer, while threats to Arab water
rights remain a touchstone for solidarity throughout
the region.
Nonetheless, water scarcity, population growth, food
security, climate change, extreme weather events,
regional conﬂicts and the potential for new conﬂict
over shared resources inﬂuence the ability to manage
surface water and groundwater resources in the Arab
region. The future will show how assessing these risks
and engaging stakeholders in constructive and participatory processes will stimulate action at the national
and regional levels to overcome these challenges despite continuing conditions of uncertainty.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

The 22 countries of the Arab region are identiﬁed as those that
are members of the League of Arab States, namely Algeria,
Bahrain, the Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen.

2

The 14 ESCWA member countries are Bahrain, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic,
United Arab Emirates and Yemen.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

REGIONAL REPORTS

References
Al Bowardi. 2010. Statement of H.E. Mohammed Al Bowardi,
Secretary General, Abu Dhabi Executive Council and
Managing Director, Environment Agency Abu Dhabi to the
Arab Water Academy Water Leaders Forum. Abu Dhabi,
UAE, 11 July 2010.
Al-Fenadi, Y. n.d. Cloud Seeding Experiments in Arab
countries: History and Results. Tripoli , Libya, Libyan
National Meteorological Centre (LNMC). http://www.
wmo.int/pages/prog/arep/wmp/documents/Cloud%20
seeding%20experiments%20in%20Arab%20countries.pdf
(Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Al-Hassan, G. 2009. Fog Water collection evaluation in Asir
Region – Saudi Arabia, Water Resources Management,
23(13), pp. 2805–13.
Al-Obaid, A.A. 2010. King Abdullah’s Initiative for Saudi
Agricultural Investment Abroad: A Way of Enhancing
Saudi Food Security, delivered by Mr Al-Obaid, Deputy
Minister for Agricultural Research and Development
Affairs, to Expert Group Meeting on Achieving Food
Security in Member Countries in Post-crisis World,
Islamic Development Bank, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia,
2–3 May 2010. http://www.isdb.org/irj/go/km/docs/
documents/IDBDevelopments/Internet/English/IDB/CM/
Publications/IDB_AnnualSymposium/20thSymposium/8AbdullaAlobaid.pdf (Accessed 3 October 2011).
AMWC (Arab Ministerial Water Council). 2010. Session 2,
Resolution 4, Item 3. Cairo, Egypt, League of Arab States,
01 July 2010.
Assaf, H. 2010. Water resources and climate change (Ch. 2),
M. , El-Ashry, N. Saab, and B. Zeitoon (eds.), Arab Forum for
Environment and Development (AFED), Water: Sustainable
Management of a Scarce Resource. Beirut, Lebanon, pp. 25–38.
BBC News. 2009. Flood deaths in Saudi Arabia rise to
around 100. 28 November 2009. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/8384832.stm (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Blas, J. 2008. Land leased to secure crops for South
Korea, Financial Times, 18 November, http://www.ft.com/
cms/s/0/98a81b9c-b59f-11dd-ab71-0000779fd18c.html
(Accessed 6 September 2011.)
CAMRE (Council of Arab Ministers Responsible for the
Environment ). 2007. Arab Ministerial Declaration on
Climate Change. Adopted at 19th Session of CAMRE. LAS,
Cairo, Egypt, 5–6 December 2007.
CILSS (Comité Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la
Sécheresse dans le Sahel), FAO, Famine Early Warning
Systems Network, World Food Program. 2010. Commerce
Transfrontalier et Sécurité Alimentaire en Afrique de l’Ouest:
Cas du Bassin Ouest: Gambie, Guinée-Bissau, Guinée, Mali,
Mauritanie, Sénégal. Report funded by USAID. http://
documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/
ena/wfp219290.pdf (Accessed 3 October 2011.)
Cotula, L., Vermeulen, S., Leonard, R., and Keeley, J. 2009.
Land Grab or Development Opportunity? Agricultural
Investment and International Land Deals in Africa. London/
Rome, IIED/FAO/IFAD.

WWDR4

Council for Development and Reconstruction. 2006. Impact
of the July Offensive on the Public Finances in 2006: Brief
Preliminary Report. Government of Lebanon, Ministry of
Finance, p. 22.
DREF Operation, 2010. Egypt: Flash Floods, 21 January.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies. http://www.ifrc.org/docs/appeals/10/
MDREG009do.pdf
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2011. AQUASTAT
Online Database. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/
dbase/index.stm (Accessed 9 November 2011.)
Government of Egypt. 2010. Mubarak receives report on facing
ﬂoods in future. Press Release. 13 February 2010. http://
reliefweb.int/node/345133 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Gulfnews. 2008. Cloud seeding experiment has thundering
success. 8 May, http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/
environment/cloud-seeding-experiment-has-thunderingsuccess-1.104086 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
––––. 2010. Facts about Tropical Cyclone Phet. 6 June. http://
gulfnews.com/news/gulf/oman/facts-about-tropicalcyclone-phet-1.636372 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Harbridge, W., Pilkey, O.H., Whaling, P. and Swetland, P.
2007. Sedimentation in the Lake of Tunis: A lagoon
strongly inﬂuenced by man. Environmental Geology,
1(4), pp. 215–225. http://www.springerlink.com/
content/452745427631420p/
Hazaimeh, H. 2008. Private company to run Sudan venture,
Jordan Times, 13 July, http://www.zawya.com/printstory.
cfm?storyid=ZAWYA20080713031509&l=031500080713
(Accessed 6 September 2011.)
IRIN. 2007. IRAQ: Water Shortage Leads People to Drink
from Rivers, 18 February. http://www.irinnews.org/report.
aspx?reportid=70243 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Karrou, M. 2002. Climatic Change and Drought Mitigation:
Case of Morocco. INRA, Rabat, Morocco. Presented to
the First CLIMAGRImed Workshop, Session 3, FAO,
Rome, 25–27 September 2002. http://www.fao.org/sd/
climagrimed/c_1_01_01.html
Majzoub T., Quilleré-Majzoub, F., Abdel Raouf, M., El-Majzoub,
M., 2009. ‘Cloud busters’: Reﬂections on the right to water
in clouds and a search for international law rules.” Vol. 20,
No. 3, Colorado Journal of International Environmental Law
and Policy, p. 321-54..
Makboul, M. 2009. Loi 10-95 sur l’eau: acquis et perspectives.
UNESCO Country Office in Rabat/Cluster Office for the
Maghreb, L’Etat des Resources en Eau au Maghreb en 2009,
Morocco, pp. 47–59.
Medany, M. 2008. Impact of climate change on Arab countries,
Chapter 9. M.K. Tolba and N.W. Saab (eds). 2008 Report of
the Arab Forum for Environment and Development: Arab
Environment Future Challenges. http://www.afedonline.org/
afedreport (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Reuters. 2008a. Kuwait signed $27bln of deals in asian tour, 17
August, http://uk.reuters.com/article/2008/08/17/kuwaitasia-idUKLH49515120080817 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)

ARAB REGION AND WESTERN ASIA

721

––––. 2008b. GEM BioFuels Plc – Offtake agreement signed.
Press Release. 14 February, http://www.reuters.com/article/
pressRelease/idUS80349+14-Feb-2008+RNS20080214
(Accessed 6 September 2011.)

––––. 2009c. Trends and Impacts in Conﬂict Settings: The
Socio-Economic Impact of Conﬂict-Driven Displacement in
the ESCWA Region. Issue No. 1, E/ESCWA/ECRI/2009/2.
New York, United Nations.

––––. 2009. Saudi ﬁrm in $400 million farm investment in
Africa. 15 April, http://af.reuters.com/article/investingNews/
idAFJOE53E02F20090415 [Accessed 6 September 2011]

––––. 2009d. Knowledge Mapping and Analysis of ESCWA
Member Countries Capacities in Managing Shared Water
Resources. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2009/7. New York, United
Nations.

––––. 2010. Interview – Qatar in talks to buy Argentina, Ukraine
farmland. 1 October, http://af.reuters.com/article/sudanNews/
idAFLDE69C1P420101013 (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Rice, X. 2008. Abu Dhabi Develops Food Farms in Sudan.
The Guardian, 2 July, http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/
2008/jul/02/food.sudan (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Sahara and Sahel Observatory. 2011. The North-Western
Sahara Aquifer System, Tunis, Tunisia. http://www.ossonline.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=
33&Itemid=443&lang=en. (Accessed 13 September 2011.)
Saud, M.A. 2010. Use of Space Techniques and GIS for
Mapping Transported Sediments: The Case of Jeddah Flood
2009, King Abdel Aziz City for Science and Technology,
Saudi Arabia, Posters for Workshop 6.
Schemenauer, R., Osses, P., and Leibbrand, M. 2004. Fog
Collection Evaluation and Operational Projects in the Hajja
Governorate, Yemen. http://www.geo.puc.cl/observatorio/
cereceda/C38.pdf (Accessed 6 September 2011.)
Shaban, A. 2009. Monitoring Groundwater Discharge in the
Coastal Zone of Lebanon Using Remotely Sensed Data.
Remote Sensing Center, National Council for Scientiﬁc
Research, Beirut, Lebanon, Poster 4 presented to
Stockholm World Water Week 2009.
UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs). 2007. World Population Prospects: The
2006 Revision – Highlights. ESA/P/WP.202. New York,
United Nations.
UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Western Asia). 2005. ESCWA Water Development Report
1: Vulnerability of the Region to Socio-Economic Drought. E/
ESCWA/SDPD/2005/9. New York, United Nations.
––––. 2007a. ESCWA Water Development Report 2: State
of Water Resources in the ESCWA Region. E/ESCWA/
SDPD/2007/6. New York, United Nations.
––––. 2007b. Guidelines with Regard to Developing Legislative
and Institutional Frameworks Needed to Implement IWRM
at the National Level in the ESCWA Region. (Arabic). E/
ESCWA/SDPD/2007/1 New York, United Nations, 9 June
2007.
––––. 2009a. The Demographic Proﬁle of the Arab Countries.
E/ESCWA/SDD/2009/Technical Paper.9. New York, United
Nations, 26 November 2009. http://www.escwa.un.org/
information/publications/edit/upload/sdd-09-TP9.pdf
––––. 2009b. ESCWA Water Development Report 3: Role
of Desalination in Addressing Water Scarcity. E/ESCWA/
SDPD/2009/4. New York, United Nations.

722

CHAPTER 33

––––. 2009e. Increasing the Competitiveness of Small
and Medium-sized Enterprises through the Use of
Environmentally Sound Technologies: Assessing the
Potential for the Development of Second-generation
Biofuels in the ESCWA Region, E/ESCWA/SDPD/2009/5,
New York, United Nations.
––––. 2010a. Best Practices and Tools for Increasing
Productivity and Competitiveness in the Production
Sectors: Assessment of Zaatar Productivity and
Competitiveness in Lebanon. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2010/
Technical Paper 3. New York, United Nations.
––––. 2010b. Food Security and Conﬂict in the ESCWA Region.
E/ESCWA/ECRI/2010/1, 13 September 2010. New York,
United Nations.
––––. 2011. ESCWA Water Development Report 4: National
Capacities for the Management of Shared Water Resources
in ESCWA Member Countries. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2011/4.
New York, United Nations.
UNESCWA and BGR (United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia and the Federal Institute
for Geosciences and Natural Resources, Germany). 2010.
Report of the Expert Group Meeting on Applying IWRM
Principles in Managing Shared Water Resources: Towards
A Regional Vision, Beirut, Lebanon 1-3 December 2009; E/
ESCWA/SDPD/2009/WG.5/1/Report issued 11 June 2010
(English).
––––. 2012. Inventory of Shared Water Resources in Western
Asia. Beirut, Lebanon, UNESCWA-BGR Cooperation, 2012
(forthcoming).
WHO/EMRO/CEHA (World Health Organization Regional
Office for the Eastern Mediterranean Regional Center for
Environmental Health Activities). 2006. A Compendium
of Standards for Wastewater Reuse in the Eastern
Mediterranean Region. Document. WHO-EM/CEH/142/E.
WHO/UNICEF JMP (World Health Organization/United
Nations Children’s Fund Joint Monitoring Programme) for
Water Supply and Sanitation. 2010. Progress on Sanitation
and Drinking-water: 2010 Update. New York, UNICEF.
World Bank. 2009. West Bank and Gaza: Assessment of
Restrictions on Palestinian Water Sector Development.
Sector Note, April 2009. Report No. 47657-GZ,
Washington, World Bank.
Zawya, 2011. MARAFIQ - Yanbu Power and Desalination
Plant - Phase 2. Projects Monitor, 29 April 2011. http://
www.zawya.com/projects/project.cfm/pid150710103455/
MARAFIQ--Yanbu-Power-and-Desalination-Plant--Phase2?cc (Accessed 9 November 2011.)

REGIONAL REPORTS

CHAPTER 34
Water and health

WHO and UNICEF
—
Authors Jennifer Gentry-Shields and Jamie Bartram
Contributors Robert Bos, Claire-Lise Chaignat, Bruce Allan Gordon, Dominique Maison,
Yves Chartier, Chee Keong Chew and Margaret Montgomery (WHO) and Peter Harvey
(UNICEF)

© Taco Anema

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
The global drivers predicted to have the greatest effect on disease rates via the water
environment are population growth and urbanization, agriculture, infrastructure, and global
climate change. Trends in these drivers directly and indirectly affect the global burden of
disease, largely adversely, and increase the overall uncertainty in future human health.
There are numerous non-water-related environmental determinants of health, as well as nonenvironmental determinants of health, that make the identiﬁcation of trends and hotspots in
water and health challenging.
By outlining the environment–health nexus for each of the major water-related disease
groups, ﬁve key solutions were identiﬁed: access to safe drinking water and sanitation,
improved hygiene, environmental management and the use of health impact assessments.
Implementation of these actions serves to reduce the burden of multiple diseases and
improve quality of life for billions of individuals.
In-depth studies are required to more accurately identify the risks and opportunities related
to water and health, such as The 2030 Vision Study which determined the major risks,
uncertainties and opportunities related to the resilience of water supply and sanitation in the
face of climate change.
Protection of human health requires collaboration among multiple sectors, including those in
non-water and non-health sectors.

34.1 Introduction
Improving water resource management, drinking water supply, sanitation and hygiene has the potential to
prevent 9.1% of the global disease burden or 6.3% of
all deaths (Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008). Understanding
the nature and magnitude of the burden of waterassociated diseases provides the basis for effective
interventions.
This report examines the diseases that contribute signiﬁcantly to this global burden (in disability-adjusted
life years, or DALYs, a weighted measure of deaths
and disability; see Figure 34.1) and that are realistically
preventable using available technologies, policies and
public health measures.
Mapping the environment–health causal pathway
provides insights that inform effective public health
interventions. The driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model, developed by the
World Health Organization (WHO) provides a simple

FIGURE 34.1
Diseases with the largest water, sanitation and
hygiene contribution in 2000
Fraction of total global burden of disease in DALYs
Diarrhocal diseases
Consequences of malnutrition
Malaria

illustration of the way in which the environment inﬂuences health and how the environmental state is
inﬂuenced by higher causes (Kjellström and Corvalán,
1995). The model allows for a clear understanding
of the factors contributing to the burden of disease
and supports the development of effective intervention strategies. Yet this process is complicated by the
fact that each disease is associated with a variety of
economic, societal and natural driving forces. We have
used the DPSEEA model to determine the linkages
for the disease groups, deﬁned by Bradley (2008) as
waterborne diseases, water-washed diseases, water-based diseases and water-related insect vector
diseases.

34.2 Water-related disease groups,
environment–health pathway and promising
interventions
34.2.1 Waterborne diseases
Waterborne diseases are contracted by drinking contaminated water. The most predominant include diarrhoeal disease, from which over 2 million people die
every year (WHO and UNICEF, 2010), and arsenic and
ﬂuoride poisoning, for which the global impacts are
unknown. These diseases are driven by ﬂuctuations in
extreme weather events (e.g. inland ﬂooding), climate
change, deforestation, population growth and agriculture, as shown in Figure 34.2 which outlines the
environment–health pathway for waterborne diseases.
Promising interventions for waterborne diseases include the provision of safe drinking water (Box 34.1),
improved sanitation (Box 34.2) and health impact assessments (Box 34.3).

Drownings

Access to safe drinking water can prevent waterborne
diseases by avoiding consumption of unsafe drinking
water. Some strategies for providing access to safe
drinking water are given in Box 34.1.

Malnutrition (only PEM)
Limphatic ﬁlariasis
Intestinal nematode infections
Trachoma
Schistosomiasis

0%

1%
Environmental fraction

2%

3%

4%

5%

Non-environmental fraction

Note: DALY, disability-adjusted life year (which measures the years
of life lost to premature mortality and the years lost to disability);
PEM, protein-energy malnutrition (which is malnutrition that
develops in adults and children whose consumption of protein and
energy is insufficient to satisfy the body’s nutritional needs).
Source: Prüss-Üstün et al. (2008).

WWDR4

Access to water via a piped infrastructure can lead to
substantive reductions in mortality due to diarrhoeal
disease and arsenic and ﬂuoride poisoning. Studies
from the United States (Cutler and Miller, 2005;
Watson, 2006) and India (Jalan and Ravallion, 2003)
have shown that combined improvements in water access and quality can have enormous health returns. As
the proportion of the global population that relies on
improved sources of drinking water (including piped
systems) increases, the quality of water received from
these sources will become increasingly signiﬁcant for
health. Piped water is not necessarily safe – for example,

WATER AND HEALTH

725

FIGURE 34.2
Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model for waterborne diseases

Driver

Pressure

State

Exposure

Health Effect

Extreme
weather events

Climate change

Diarrhoeal diseases
Deforestation
Uncontained
and untreated
excreta

Concentration
of pathogens

Consumption of
unsafe drinking water

Population
growth

Concentration
of toxic chemicals

Agriculture

Action

Line Thickness

Health Impact
Assessment

Improved
sanitation

Arsenic poisoning
and ﬂuorosis

Point-of-use water
treatment

Piped safe water
to the home

Strength of association
Strong
Intermediate
Fair

Note: The size of the health effect boxes varies with the corresponding global burden of disease in disability-adjusted life years: diarrhoeal
diseases, 52,460,000 (including waterborne and water-washed diarrhoeal disease); arsenic poisoning and ﬂuorosis, unknown (disease burden
estimates from Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).

BOX 34.1
Safe drinking water strategies for reducing waterborne disease

Safe drinking water, as deﬁned in the third edition of the WHO guidelines for drinking-water quality, does not represent ‘any
signiﬁcant risk to health over a lifetime of consumption, including different sensitivities that may occur between life stages’ (WHO, 2008b). Solutions for providing safe drinking water include piped water infrastructure (through standpipes and
household connections), wells and point-of-use (PoU) water treatment. Piped water supply has been shown to drastically
reduce child mortality (Cutler and Miller, 2005; Watson, 2006). However, piped water services to some, especially dispersed
rural, populations may not be readily achievable. The majority (84%) of the global population who do not have an improved
drinking water source resides in rural areas (WHO and UNICEF, 2010), despite an increased rural coverage from 64% in 1990
to 78% in 2008. In rural regions, drinking water access is often outside the home, such as communal taps, wells and protected
springs. Such protected sources may make water available closer to the home, but quantities transported are moderate, and
water is readily and frequently contaminated. PoU water treatment and improved water storage practices can reduce pathogen contamination. Numerous PoU technologies are available, including chlorination, the use of ﬂocculants, adsorption, ﬁltration, boiling or solar disinfection.

726

CHAPTER 34

SPECIAL REPORTS

insufficient treatment and interruptions to treatment
and service can result in the consumption of unsafe
water (Hunter et al., 2005). In aging systems, failure
will likely become a principal risk related to water and
health issues (USEPA, 2007) (see Chapter 24 for infrastructure tools and options).
Conversely, studies report little evidence for substantial health effects from rural water infrastructures
(Esrey, 1996; Fewtrell et al., 2005). Small, especially rural, systems are frequently contaminated and improperly maintained. Water carried into the home frequently becomes contaminated in transport and storage
(Wang and Hunter, 2010). Countless anecdotes exist
about infrastructures that are poorly constructed, improperly maintained and eventually abandoned.

Point-of-use (PoU) water treatment is a promising way
to counter contamination of water during transport
and storage. Some evaluations of PoU water treatment
systems found reductions of 20–30% in diarrhoeal incidence at the household level (Quick et al., 1999; Reller
et al., 2003). Some PoUs remove arsenic and ﬂuoride.
Nevertheless, health beneﬁts of PoU treatment depend
on individual decisions to adopt and consistently adhere to certain behaviours. The introduction of water
treatment technology without consideration for the
sociocultural aspects of the community and without
behavioural, motivational, educational and participatory activities within the community is unlikely to
be successful or sustainable (as reviewed in Sobsey,
2006). Determining effective promotion strategies and

FIGURE 34.3
Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model for water-washed diseases

Driver

Pressure

State

Exposure
Exposure to
contaminated soils

Eating contaminated
food

Population
growth
Uncontained
and untreated
excreta

Health Effect
Intestinal
nematodes

Malnutrition

Concentration
of pathogens
Person to person
contact

Agriculture

Diarrhoeal diseases
Contact with
fomite

Contact with
infected vector

Action

Line Thickness

Improved
sanitation

Trachoma

Hygiene

Strength of association
Strong
Intermediate
Fair

Note: The size of the health effect boxes varies with the burden of disease in disability-adjusted life years: diarrhoeal diseases, 52,460,000
(including waterborne and water-washed diarrhoeal disease); intestinal nematodes, 2,948,000; malnutrition, 35,849,000; trachoma, 2,320,000
(disease burden estimates from Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).

WWDR4

WATER AND HEALTH

727

BOX 34.2

BOX 34.3

Sanitation strategies for disease prevention

Hygiene promotion

Sanitation is the safe disposal of human excreta (WHO
and UNICEF, 2010), where ‘safe disposal’ means that excreta is contained or treated to avoid adversely affecting
the health of the individual or that of other people (Mara
et al., 2010). Improved sanitation can prevent disease by
eliminating the source of contamination, by preventing
pathogen spread by ﬂies, and by preventing exposure to
pathogens in contaminated ﬁelds. Most (99%) people in
developed countries have access to improved sanitation,
while only 53% have access in developing countries
(WHO and UNICEF, 2010). Two-thirds of the approximately 2.6 billion people who lack access to improved sanitation live in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, and approximately 1.2 billion people, over half of whom live in India,
defecate in the open (WHO and UNICEF, 2010). Most of
those lacking improved sanitation in developing countries
are located in rural areas: urban sanitation coverage is 71%
in developing countries, while rural coverage is only 39%
(WHO and UNICEF, 2010). Sewerage systems, septic tanks
with drainage beds, pour-ﬂush latrines and pit latrines can
effectively prevent disease if maintained and used consistently (WHO and UNICEF, 2000).

Hygiene refers to practices that prevent the spread of disease-causing organisms. Means to achieve hygiene include
cleaning, such as hand washing, which removes infectious
microbes in addition to dirt and soil. Along with improved
sanitation and storing and using safe drinking water, washing hands correctly and at the right times is a key behaviour for reducing the spread of pathogens (EHP, 2004).

how to sustain behavioural changes should be a priority in PoU initiatives.
In addition to safe drinking water, actions to combat waterborne diarrhoeal disease include sanitation
(eliminating the source of pathogen contamination
of drinking water – see Box 34.2); hygiene improvements (see Section 34.2.2); and health impact assessments (HIAs) (to evaluate the potential health effects
of projects or policies before they are built or implemented to provide recommendations to minimize adverse health outcomes – see Box 34.4).
34.2.2 Water-washed diseases
In contrast to waterborne diseases, water-washed
diseases are transmitted when the quantity of water available is insufficient for washing and personal
hygiene. Predominant water-washed diseases include
diarrhoeal diseases (which are also waterborne – see
Section 34.2.1), intestinal nematodes and trachoma.
Intestinal nematode infections – including ascariasis,
trichuriasis and hookworm – cause approximately
2 billion infections and affect one third of the world’s
population (de Silva et al., 2003). Approximately
40 million people are infected with Chlamydia trachomatis, the etiologic agent of trachoma, and 8.2 million have

728

CHAPTER 34

Hygiene promotion is ‘a planned approach to preventing … diseases through the widespread adoption of safe
hygiene practices. It begins with, and is built on what local
people know, do and want’ (UNICEF, 1999, p. 10).

blinding trachomatous trichiasis (Mariotti et al., 2009).
Figure 34.3 outlines the environment–health pathway
for water-washed diseases. The dominant drivers are
population growth and agriculture. Improved sanitation (Box 34.2) and hygiene (Box 34.3) would serve to
signiﬁcantly reduce the disease burdens.
These interventions contribute to reducing childhood undernutrition, as diarrhoeal diseases and intestinal nematode infections are closely tied to childhood undernutrition (Figure 34.3). Repeated diarrhoea and intestinal
nematode infections are responsible for approximately
half of all childhood underweight or undernutrition.
Approximately 70,000 children under ﬁve years old die
annually from malnutrition, and an additional 790,000
die from infectious diseases to which they are more vulnerable because of their nutritional status. Thus repeated
diarrhoea or intestinal nematode infections are responsible for 860,000 deaths due to malnutrition per year in
children under the age of ﬁve (Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).
Sanitation interacts with both waterborne and waterwashed disease groups and is a necessary component of effective prevention of the associated disease
burdens, especially diarrhoea. Improved sanitation
has been shown to reduce diarrhoeal disease rates
(Fewtrell et al., 2005; Moraes et al., 2003), intestinal
nematode transmission (Moraes et al., 2004) and trachoma prevalence (Emerson et al., 2004).
Hygiene reduces diarrhoeal disease (e.g. Luby et al.,
2004) and trachoma (West et al., 1995), and is promoted as a public health intervention (Box 34.3).

SPECIAL REPORTS

BOX 34.4
Health impact assessments promote health across diverse sectors

A health impact assessment (HIA) ‘is a combination of procedures, methods and tools by which a policy, program or projects
may be judged as to its potential effects on the health of a population, and the distribution of those effects within the population (WHO, 1999, p. 4).
An HIA objectively evaluates the potential health effects of a project or policy before it is built or implemented and can identify means to increase positive health outcomes and minimize adverse health outcomes. The HIA framework brings potential
public health impacts and considerations to the decision-making process for plans, projects and policies that fall outside traditional public health arenas, such as transportation, agriculture, land use and construction. These activities can greatly affect
disease transmission, but are often planned without public health consequences in mind. Cooperation between health, agricultural and development sectors can lead to reduced pathogen transmission.
The major steps in conducting an HIA include:
1. Screen – identify projects or policies for which an HIA would be useful
2. Scope – identify which health effects to consider
3. Assess risks and beneﬁts – identify which people may be affected and how they may be affected
4. Develop recommendations – suggest changes to proposals to promote positive or mitigate adverse health effects
5. Report – present the results to decision-makers
6. Evaluate – determine the effect of the HIA

FIGURE 34.4
Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of water-based diseases

Driver

Pressure

State

Exposure

Uncontained
and untreated
excreta

Concentration
of pathogens

Exposure to
contaminated waters
(e.g. bathing)

Health Effect

Population
growth
Schistosomiasis

Agriculture

Concentration
of intermediate host

Climate change
Changing
environmental
characteristics
Dams and irrigation
projects

Action

Line Thickness

Health Impact
Assessment

Environmental
modiﬁcation

Environmental
manipulation

Improved
sanitation

Modify or manipulate
human behaviour

Strength of association
Strong
Intermediate
Fair

Note: The size of the health effect box varies with the corresponding global burden of disease in disability-adjusted life years: schistosomiasis,
1,698,000 (disease burden estimates from Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).

WWDR4

WATER AND HEALTH

729

FIGURE 34.5
Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of the water-related insect vector diseases
malaria, onchocerciasis, Japanese encephalitis and lymphatic ﬁlariasis in Africa

Driver

Pressure

State

Exposure

Health Effect

Agriculture
Malaria

Runoff
Climate change

Host populations

Onchocerciasis
Concentration
of vectors

Deforestation

Bitten by
infected vector

Warming
temperatures

Japanese
encephalitis

Inland ﬂooding
Favourable breeding
grounds

Lympahitic
ﬁlariasis

Infrastructure:
dams, irrigation
projects

Population growth
Line Thickness

Action

Environmental
modiﬁcation

Environmental
manipulation

Modify or manipulate
human habitation
or behaviour

Strength of association
Strong
Intermediate
Fair

Note: The size of the health effect boxes varies with the corresponding global burden of disease in disability-adjusted life years: malaria,
19,241,000; onchocerciasis, 51,000; Japanese encephalitis, 671,000; lymphatic ﬁlariasis, 3,784,000 (disease burden estimates from Prüss-Üstün
et al., 2008).

34.2.3 Water-based diseases
Water-based diseases are transmitted by hosts that
live in water or require water for part of their life cycle. Schistosomiasis has the largest disease burden of
these diseases; at any one given time, approximately
200 million people are infected with the trematodes
of the species Schistosoma, which cause schistosomiasis. Schistosomiasis is principally driven by population growth, agriculture, climate change, deforestation
and infrastructure such as dams and irrigation projects
(Figure 34.4).
Effective interventions include sanitation (Box 34.2),
environmental management (Box 34.5) and the use
of HIAs (Box 34.4). Sanitation can reduce schistosomiasis prevalence by 57–87% (Esrey et al., 1991).
Environmental management reduces transmission by
eradicating host snail populations (e.g. by eliminating

730

CHAPTER 34

marshes and ponds, draining irrigation areas, cleaning and removing vegetation from canals, introducing
predators and pathogens, or using molluscicides) and
by limiting human contact with infested waters. HIA
applied to the design and planning of irrigation or dam
projects enables incorporation of preventative safeguards rather than retroﬁtting responses.
34.2.4 Water-related insect vector diseases
Water-related insect vector-borne diseases (VBDs)
are spread by insects that breed or feed near water.
The major water-related insect VBDs (malaria, onchocerciasis, Japanese encephalitis, lymphatic ﬁlariasis
and dengue) are responsible for more than 1.5 million
deaths per year. Drivers of these diseases include agriculture, climate change, deforestation, inland ﬂooding,
infrastructure projects such as dams and irrigation projects, and population growth (Figures 34.5 and 34.6).

SPECIAL REPORTS

Historically, some of the most effective public health
measures against water-related insect VBDs have
been targeted at the vector (to interrupt transmission), particularly for diseases lacking vaccines such
as malaria and dengue (Gubler, 1998). Such programmes are regaining favour due to environmental
problems with chemical insecticide programmes and

insecticide resistance. Environmental management of
water-related insect VBDs is promoted by the WHO
(Box 34.5).
Environmental management has been used to successfully control the transmission of malaria (Baer et al.,
1999; Dua et al., 1997; Heierli and Lengeler, 2008),

BOX 34.5
Environmental management strategies to reduce and prevent vector-borne diseases

Environmental management for vector control is ‘the planning, organization, carrying out and monitoring of activities for the
modiﬁcation and/or manipulation of environmental factors or their interaction with man with a view to preventing or minimizing vector propagation and reducing man-vector-pathogen contact’ (WHO, 1980, p. 9). The three strategies are:
1. Modiﬁcation of the environment: permanently changing land, water or vegetation conditions to reduce vector habitats,
often using infrastructure. Examples include draining or ﬁlling-in water bodies or depressions; modifying river boundaries;
lining canals; designing small dams as cascading systems; and covering overhead tanks and other water storage structures
(Fewtrell et al., 2007).
2. Manipulation of the environment: recurrent activities, often with community involvement, to create temporarily unfavourable
conditions for vector propagation. Examples include removal of aquatic plants from water bodies where mosquito larvae
may ﬁnd shelter (de-weeding); alternate wetting and drying of irrigated ﬁelds (intermittent irrigation); periodic ﬂushing of
waterways where mosquito breeding occurs in standing pools; screening or ﬁtting household water storage containers with
proper lids to exclude mosquitoes; and introduction of predators such as larvivorous ﬁsh (Fewtrell et al., 2007).
3. Modiﬁcation or manipulation of human habitation or behaviour: reduce contact between humans and vectors. Examples
include vaccination; zooprophylaxis; vector trapping and collection; bednets; door and window screens; and better housing construction.

FIGURE 34.6
Drivers, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of the water-related insect vector
diseases lymphatic ﬁlariasis (Asia and the Americas) and dengue

Driver

Pressure

Climate change

Warming
temperatures

Uncontained and
untreated excreta

State

Exposure

Health Effect
Lymphatic ﬁlariasis

Concentration
of vectors

Bitten by
infected vector

Population growth
Dengue

Generation of
solid waste

Line Thickness

Action

Environmental
modiﬁcation

Improved
sanitation

Modify or manipulate
human habitation
or behaviour

Strength of association
Strong
Intermediate
Fair

Note: The size of the health effect boxes varies with the corresponding global burden of disease in disability-adjusted life years: lymphatic
ﬁlariasis, 3,784,000; dengue, 586,000 (disease burden estimates from Prüss-Üstün et al., 2008).

WWDR4

WATER AND HEALTH

731

nutrition, education, governance, socio-economic
status and resource availability. Non-environmental
determinants of health – a person’s individual
characteristics and behaviours – also determine
disease trends. Some characteristics, including age
and sex, can be easily obtained. Others, such as
health status and genetic make-up, are not readily
available.

FIGURE 34.7
Cholera cases reported to the World Health
Organization between 2000 and 2010
Number of cases
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Year

The inability to identify trends and hotspots impairs
our ability to make well-informed policy and resource management decisions. Nevertheless, available insights give a basis for action. Some disease
risks are rising (e.g. see Figure 34.7), and reasons
for these increases can be addressed. Three examples are provided below that illustrate the complex
nature of disease risk and highlight how prevention,
control and mitigation are being investigated and
implemented.

Source: Adapted from WHO (2011a).

onchocerciasis (Walsh, 1970), Japanese encephalitis
(Keiser et al., 2005), dengue and lymphatic ﬁlariasis.
Sanitation and drinking water also contribute to
water-related insect VBD control. In urban areas of
south and South-East Asia and the Americas, the
mosquito vector of lymphatic ﬁlariasis breeds in
organically-polluted water, including open sewerage
drains and wastewater treatment ponds (Erlanger
et al., 2005; Meyrowitsch et al., 1998). Piped water
supplies contribute to dengue control by eliminating
the need for water storage containers in which the
mosquito vector breeds.

34.3 Trends and hotspots
Identifying trends and hotspots in water and health is
challenging. There are difficulties in monitoring and
reporting; information on determinants is lacking; and
the interplay between environmental and other determinants is insufficiently understood. Current monitoring and reporting limitations make it impossible
to quantify the water-related disease burden in most
countries. Reporting constraints include a lack of reliable morbidity and mortality data; variations within
and between countries in the coverage and quality
of case reporting; as well as variations in access to
health care services and the thoroughness of disease
surveillance. There are also multiple environmental
determinants concurrently affecting human health
within the social, economic and physical environment.
These include access to and quality of health care,

732

CHAPTER 34

34.3.1 Cholera
Cholera is an acute diarrhoeal disease caused by the
ingestion of food or water contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. There are an estimated 3–5 million
cholera cases and 100,000–120,000 deaths due to
cholera each year (the WHO estimates that 5–10% of
cases are reported). The number of cases reported to
the WHO increased by 43% in 2010 compared to 2009,
and this number has increased by 130% over the last
decade (Figure 34.7) (WHO, 2010a). Cholera occurs in
regions with poor socio-economic conditions, rudimentary sanitary systems, and where public hygiene
and safe drinking water is lacking (Huq et al., 1996). It
is endemic in parts of Africa, Asia and the Americas.
Risk factors in endemic regions can include proximity
to surface waters, high population densities and educational levels (Ali et al., 2001), while temperature, salinity, sunlight, pH levels, iron, as well as phytoplankton
and zooplankton growth factors affect V. cholerae itself
(Lipp et al., 2002). Figure 34.8 describes environmental cholera transmission (Lipp et al., 2002). The risk
of cholera outbreaks is intensiﬁed during humanitarian crises, such as conﬂicts and ﬂoods, and when large
populations are displaced. The 2010 increase is largely
due to the outbreak that started in Haiti in October
2010. At-risk areas include peri-urban slums without
basic water and sanitation infrastructure, and refugee
camps, where minimum requirements for safe water
and sanitation are not met. The re-emergence of cholera has coincided with increasing populations living in
unsanitary conditions (Barrett et al., 1998).

SPECIAL REPORTS

FIGURE 34.8
Hierarchical model for environmental cholera transmission

Ingestion of
infectious dose
of V. cholerae

Transmission to humans

Seasonal Effects
Sunlight
Temperature
Precipitation
Monsoons

V. cholerae
proliferate in
association with
commensal copepods

Algae promote survival
of V. cholerae and provide food
for zooplankton

Abiotic conditions favour growth of
V. cholerae and/or plankton and
expression of virulence

Zooplankton: copepods,
other crustaceans
Vibrio cholerae

Human
socio-economics,
demographics,
sanitation

Phytoplankton and
aquatic plants

Climate Variability
Temperature, pH
Fe3+, salinity,
sunlight

Climate change
El Niño-Southern Oscillation
North Atlantic Oscillation

Source: Lipp et al. (2002, ﬁg. 1, p. 763, reproduced with permission from The American Society for Microbiology).

Up to 80% of cholera cases can be effectively treated
using oral rehydration salts. However prevention relies
on availability and use of safe water and improved sanitation and hygiene. Prevention strategies are critical to
averting or mitigating cholera outbreaks. In the case of
the Haiti outbreak, the country’s health response – led
by the Ministry of Public Health and Population and
supported by the WHO and other partners – incorporates multiple public health solutions: delivery of soap
for hand washing; delivery of chlorine and other products or devices for household water treatment; construction of latrines; improved hygiene in public places
(markets, schools, health care facilities and prisons); and
health education through various media including community mobilizers (WHO, 2010b). In fact, the availability
of safe water supplies may prove to be more important
for combating cholera than antibiotics or vaccines. A
recent study showed that provision of safe water may
avert 105,000 cases of cholera (95% conﬁdence interval
[CI] 88,000–116,000) and 1,500 deaths (95% CI 1,100–
2,300) in Haiti between March 2011 and November 2011,
more than the estimated individual effects of antibiotics
or vaccines (Andrews and Basu, 2011).
With increasing populations living in peri-urban slums
and refugee camps, as well as increasing numbers of
people exposed to the impacts of humanitarian crises,

WWDR4

the risk from cholera will likely increase worldwide, reinforcing the need for safe drinking water, adequate
sanitation and improved hygiene behaviour under
these conditions.
34.3.2 Harmful algal blooms
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) comprise algae that are
harmful to humans, plants or animals (most algal species are non-toxic natural components of marine and
freshwater ecosystems). While HABs do not represent
a major global disease burden, bloom detection is increasing and it is likely that disease incidence will similarly increase. The causes of increased bloom detection
include natural and anthropogenic species dispersal,
nutrient pollution, climate change, as well as increased
surveillance (Granéli and Turner, 2006). Approximately
60,000 cases and clusters of human intoxication occur
annually (Van Dolah et al., 2001). Although is not fully
understood how HABs affect human health, authorities
monitor HABs and develop guidelines to mitigate their
impacts. For example, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency has added speciﬁc HAB-related algae to its Drinking Water Contaminant Candidate List,
which identiﬁes priority organisms and toxins for investigation. Direct control (biological, chemical, genetic and environmental manipulation) of HABs is more
difficult and controversial than mitigation, and HAB

WATER AND HEALTH

733

prevention is hampered by a lack of understanding of
the causes of HAB blooms and an inability to modify
or control determinants. For example, nutrients (from
agriculture, households and industry) contribute to the
growth of HABs, and much of the nutrient input comes
from non-point sources (Anderson et al., 2002), which
are difficult to control. Effective strategies include land
use management, maintaining landscape integrity and
reducing non-point source pollution (Piehler, 2008).
34.3.3 Dengue
In 2004, approximately 9 million people contracted
the febrile illness dengue (WHO, 2008a), the global
incidence of which is rising. Approximately 2.5 billion
people are now at risk. Because there is no drug or
vaccine for the virus, prevention is key. Dengue is
transmitted by the Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus
mosquitoes, which breed in temporary water storage
containers. Thus safe storage of household water supplies is critical for dengue prevention, especially where
rainwater harvesting is practised and where large
household storage vessels are used (e.g. Mariappan,
2008). Household water containers can be ﬁtted with
screens or lids to exclude mosquitoes, but scrupulous
maintenance and consistent use is hard to achieve.
Covers treated with insecticide can reduce vector
density and potentially impact dengue transmission
(Kroeger et al., 2006; Seng et al., 2008). Water containers can also be eliminated with piped water supplies; however, extension of piped water supplies to
villages has expanded the range of dengue, where unreliable piped water has forced people to store water
in their homes for longer periods of time than when
they relied on well water (e.g. Nguyen et al., 2011). An
integrated approach, incorporating household water
treatment and safe storage for reduction of diarrhoeal
as well as other water-associated diseases (e.g. dengue and malaria) is needed.

34.4 Solution options
Modelling the environment–health pathway for each
of the major threats associated with water and health
(Section 34.2) assists in determining the effectiveness
of public health solutions for combating water-related
disease risks. However, further determination of the
populations at greatest risk for each of these threats
would allow resources to be targeted more effectively.
In this section, regions susceptible to ﬁve of the diseases described above are used to illustrate how governments, communities and organizations apply public
health solutions to these challenges.

734

CHAPTER 34

34.4.1 Diarrhoeal diseases in India
Diarrhoeal diseases are a global problem. They are especially prevalent in low income countries, where they
are the third leading cause of death, and among children under ﬁve years, for who diarrhoeal diseases are
responsible for 17% of all deaths (Mathers et al., 2008).
Diarrhoeal diseases cause 454,000 deaths annually in
India alone (NCMH, 2005), despite the fact that the
population using improved water sources has risen
from 72% in 1990 to 88% in 2008 (WHO and UNICEF,
2010). Urban dwellers have more access to improved
water sources (WHO and UNICEF, 2010) and piped
water supplies 69% of households in large cities
(McKenzie and Ray, 2009). Nevertheless, water supply in most Indian cities is available for a few hours
per day and water quality is questionable (McKenzie
and Ray, 2009). Problems with access and quality are mainly attributed to poor management and
inadequate regulation (Planning Commission, 2002).
Water supply is a state responsibility, but various ministries share responsibility at central and state levels.
Institutional arrangements for water supply vary within
cities: a state-level agency is responsible for planning
and investment, and local government is responsible
for operation and maintenance. Local governments are
increasingly turning operating and maintenance responsibilities to private companies. This fragmentation
results in duplication and ambiguity of functions; poor
coordination between the water supply programme
and health and education programmes; and a water
system that does not aim to reduce disease and poverty, nor to improve hygiene and education (Planning
Commission, 2002).
34.4.2 Intestinal nematode infections in Brazil
Intestinal nematode infections are frequent in low income countries, especially in children under 15 years,
with high intensity infections common in Africa, SouthEast Asia and the western Paciﬁc (WHO, 2008a).
Salvador is the largest city on the north-east coast
of Brazil and the capital of the north-eastern state of
Bahia. In 1997, 26% of households were connected to
an improved sanitation system, and most of these were
in upper and middle socio-economic areas (Barreto et
al., 2007). Other areas used septic tanks or insanitary
methods such as discharging sewage into the street
(Barreto et al., 2007). Intestinal nematode prevalence
was 43% for Trichuris trichuria, 33% for Ascaris lumbricoides and 10% for hookworms (Mascarini-Serra
et al., 2010). A large sanitation project (Bahia Azul
or Blue Bay), mainly ﬁnanced by a loan from the

SPECIAL REPORTS

Inter-American Development Bank, was initiated to
increase the number of households with adequate
sewerage systems from 26% to 80% and hence control
the pollution of marine waters by domestic wastewater.
Approximately half the total budget of US$440 million
was allocated for constructing 2,000 km of sewer pipes,
86 pumping stations and over 300,000 household
connections between 1996 and 2004 (Barreto et al.,
2010). The prevalence of A. lumbricoides, T. trichuria
and hookworm in schoolchildren was reduced by 25%,
33% and 82%, respectively (Barreto et al., 2010).
34.4.3 Trachoma and trichiasis in Morocco
The highest prevalence of active trachoma and trichiasis is in Africa, predominantly in the savannah regions of East and Central Africa and the Sahel of West
Africa (Polack et al., 2005). Morocco was the ﬁrst
country to eliminate trachoma in the ‘Alliance for the
Global Elimination of Blinding Trachoma by the year
2020’ (GET 2020) campaign. Trachoma was largely
eradicated from urban areas in the 1970s and 1980s
by increased standards of living and antibiotic treatment of schoolchildren, but the disease persisted in
poorer rural regions. Incorporation of the SAFE (surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness and environmental improvement) strategy into the National Blindness
Control Program enabled Morocco to eradicate trachoma (Montgomery and Bartram, 2010). Poor facial
cleanliness is consistently associated with trachoma
(Taylor et al., 1989; West et al., 1991; West et al., 1996)
and is likely the most important modiﬁable risk factor
(Wright et al., 2008). Key to the success of Morocco’s
programme was its aggressive approach to provide
safe drinking water and improved sanitation for at-risk
populations (Kumaresan and Mecaskey, 2003).
34.4.4 Malaria in Africa
Malaria is widespread in tropical and subtropical regions, including most of sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and
the Americas. Approximately 3.3 billion people are at
risk. In Africa, malaria is responsible for 27% of deaths
in children under ﬁve (Black et al., 2010). The ‘Roll
Back Malaria’ campaign focuses on controlling malaria
in sub-Saharan Africa with prevention and case management. The principal interventions are long lasting
insecticide treated mosquito nets (LLINs) and indoor
residual spraying (IRS) (WHO, 2010c). Environmental
management is rarely applied. Nevertheless, environmental management can be efficacious and cost-effective. Utzinger and others (2001) reviewed a malaria control programme at copper mines in the former

WWDR4

Northern Rhodesia (now Zambia), a hyperendemic
area, between 1929 and 1949. The programme implemented multiple control methods, many of which were
environmental management methods, including vegetation clearance, modiﬁcation of river boundaries, draining swamps, oil application to open water bodies, house
screening, as well as quinine administration and bednet
provision (Watson, 1953). Utzinger and others determined efficacy and cost-effectiveness compared to current malaria control. Within the ﬁrst three to ﬁve years
of the programme it was observed that malaria-related
mortality, morbidity and incidence rates reduced by 70–
95%, and between 1929 and 1949 the programme averted 4,173 deaths and 161,205 malaria attacks (Utzinger
et al., 2001). The cost per death averted (US$858) is
similar to that for insecticide treated nets in Gambia,
Ghana, Kenya and South Africa (US$219–US$2,958)
(Goodman and Mills, 1999; Goodman et al., 2001),
and the cost per malaria attack averted (US$22.20)
is slightly higher than the cost for insecticide treated
nets in Gambia (US$15.75) (Graves, 1998). Currently,
environmental management is viewed as complementary to other malaria control methods in a minority of
settings – where mosquito breeding sites are few, ﬁxed,
and easy to identify, map and treat (WHO, 2010c) –
but it may be beneﬁcial to further integrate environmental management with pharmacological, insecticidal and bednet interventions to decrease adverse
ecological effects from chemical spraying and increase
sustainability of malaria programmes.
34.4.5 Schistosomiasis in Lao PDR
Schistosomiasis is predominant in tropical and subtropical areas, especially in poor communities without
access to safe drinking water and adequate sanitation. It is most prevalent in Africa (88% of all cases)
(WHO, 2008a). A signiﬁcant risk factor for schistosomiasis is proximity to irrigation schemes or dams. Of
the estimated 779 million people at risk for schistosomiasis, 13.6% live in irrigation schemes or close to large
dam reservoirs (Steinmann et al., 2006). The health
impacts of development projects such as these were
rarely addressed because health was considered the
responsibility of the health sector. The spread and intensiﬁcation of diseases such as schistosomiasis and
malaria were unintended consequences of hydropower
and irrigation projects (Jobin, 1999; Scudder, 2005;
Southgate, 1997; Steinmann et al., 2006). There is an
opportunity to improve public health by incorporating HIAs into non-health sector policies (Fewtrell et al.,
2008). Use of HIAs for development projects has been

WATER AND HEALTH

735

increasing, but their inﬂuence on decision-making is
limited by various challenges. One challenge is the
availability of data for quantitative HIAs, especially for
projects, programmes and policies within developing
countries (Fewtrell et al., 2008). Nevertheless, an HIA
was used in drafting the public health management
plan for the Nam Theun 2 hydroelectric project in Lao
PDR (Krieger et al., 2008). Through site visits, discussions with stakeholders, and gathering and analysis of
(mainly qualitative) health and economic data, groups
most at risk for speciﬁc adverse health effects were
identiﬁed and mitigation strategies suggested (Krieger
et al., 2008). Schistosomiasis was not considered to
pose a great risk, and now that the dam is operating, the HIA’s ability to predict and avert this disease
(and others) can be evaluated. HIAs should be part of
the planning, implementation and operation of development projects to efficiently avert adverse health
effects.
Protection of public health requires practitioners to act
outside the narrowly deﬁned ‘health sector’ (Rehfuess
et al., 2009). Public health professionals must collaborate widely to change the way energy is generated,
land is managed, food is produced and transportation
is managed in order to improve the health of both the
population and the environment (Bartram and Platt,
2010). Policy-makers and project managers in diverse
sectors must incorporate health concerns into decision-making. The beneﬁts and disadvantages of development projects could be more thoroughly assessed
if decision-making were better coordinated across
agencies.

Conclusions
This report examines the water-related diseases that
contribute the greatest burden of disease globally and
that are realistically amenable to change: diarrhoeal
diseases, arsenic and ﬂuoride poisoning, intestinal
nematodes, trachoma, schistosomiasis, malaria, onchocerciasis, Japanese encephalitis, lymphatic ﬁlariasis and dengue. Using an environment–health pathway
and the DPSEEA framework, the drivers predicted to
have the greatest effect on disease via the water environment are identiﬁed as population growth, agriculture, infrastructure development and climate change.
These affect disease rates both directly and indirectly,
and increase uncertainty for human health.
There are numerous other environmental and nonenvironmental determinants of health. The interplay of

736

CHAPTER 34

these with the drivers investigated here may drastically
alter predicted morbidity and mortality rates. These
determinants will not be proportional between geographic areas or between various populations, making
the identiﬁcation of trends and hotspots in water and
health nearly impossible.
While this knowledge gap somewhat impairs our ability to make well-informed policy and resource management decisions, it cannot be used as an excuse for
complacency. By outlining the environment–health
pathway for each of the major water-related disease
groups, ﬁve key public health interventions were identiﬁed: access to safe drinking water and sanitation, improved hygiene, environmental management and the
use of HIAs. Implementation of these actions would
contribute to reducing the burdens of diverse diseases
and improve the quality of life for billions of people.
This was reaffirmed in May 2011, when resolutions on
‘drinking-water, sanitation and health’ and on ‘Cholera:
mechanism for prevention and control’ were unanimously adopted at the sixty-fourth World Health
Assembly (WHO, 2011c). These resolutions ﬁx the policy framework for the WHO, its sister United Nations
agencies, in particular UNICEF, and the ministries of
health in its 193 Member States to take determined action to promote access to safe and clean drinking water, and to promote basic sanitation and hygiene practices. Member States were urged to re-affirm a strong
role for drinking water, sanitation and hygiene in their
public health strategies.
Actions for combating the major water-related disease
burdens can be pursued at different levels:
đƫ The formulation of policies and the creation of institutional arrangements resulting in an enabling environment (e.g. HIAs).
đƫ Networking to bring together professionals – as
promoted by WHO-hosted international networks
(drinking water regulators network; small community water supplies management network), the WHO/
UNICEF network on household water treatment
and safe storage, and the WHO/International Water
Association network on operation and maintenance.
đƫ Strengthening normative capacities – such as the
fourth edition of the WHO guidelines for drinking
water quality (WHO, 2011b) and the water safety
planning approach as the instrument to implement
them (Bartram et al., 2009).

SPECIAL REPORTS

đƫ Monitoring and surveillance – including global
monitoring by the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme on Water Supply and Sanitation
and by the UN-Water/WHO Global Analysis and
Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-water to
guide policies, resource allocation, and actions to
achieve the millennium development goals target
and provide a platform for the development of indicators and targets for post-2015 monitoring linked
to criteria for the human right to water and sanitation (WHO and UNICEF, 2011).
In addition to reinforcing these public health solutions,
outlining the environment–health pathway for each
disease also enabled the identiﬁcation of major risks,
uncertainties and opportunities. These include the risk
of increasing failures of ageing water infrastructure
and, conversely, the opportunity to increase the overall
impact of water resource, water supply and sanitation
infrastructure through improved management. The impact of such actions improves use of limited ﬁnancial
resources thereby enhancing both access to water and
sanitation and associated service quality, and leads
indirectly to improvements in wider health indicators
such as malnutrition. In-depth studies are required to
more accurately identify the risks and opportunities
related to water and health. The 2030 Vision Study,
commissioned by the United Kingdom Department for
International Development (DFID) and the WHO, performed such an analysis of the major risks, uncertainties and opportunities related to the resilience of water
supply and sanitation in the face of climate change
(WHO and DFID, 2009). The study brought together
evidence from projections on climate change, trends
in technology application, and developing knowledge
about drinking water and sanitation adaptability and
resilience to identify key policy, planning and operational changes that will be required to adapt to climate
change, particularly in low and middle income countries where access to water supply and sanitation services are more limited. Five key conclusions resulted
from this study:
1. Climate change is widely perceived as a threat rather
than an opportunity. There may be signiﬁcant overall beneﬁts to health and development in adapting
to climate change.
2. Major changes in policy and planning are needed
if ongoing and future investments are not to be
wasted.
3. Potential adaptive capacity is high but rarely
achieved. Resilience needs to be integrated into

WWDR4

drinking water and sanitation management to cope
with present climate variability. It will be critical in
controlling adverse effects of future variability.
4. Although some of the climate trends at regional
levels are uncertain, there is sufficient knowledge
to inform urgent and prudent changes in policy and
planning in most regions.
5. There are important gaps in our knowledge that already or soon will impede effective action. Targeted
research is urgently needed to ﬁll gaps in technology and basic information, to develop simple tools,
and to provide regional information on climate
change.
The relationship between the drivers of water-related
diseases and human health is complex. Protection of
human health cannot be accomplished without intersectoral collaboration. Policies and projects in non-water or non-health sectors must incorporate health into
decision-making to avoid unintended public health
consequences and to increase overall beneﬁts. In the
case of drinking water quality, addressing the root
causes of water contamination is more effective and
sustainable then reacting to problems. The guidelines
for drinking water quality (WHO, 2011b) emphasize
collaboration between stakeholders, including land
users or householders who may discharge industrial,
agricultural or domestic waste; policy-makers from
various ministries overseeing the implementation and
enforcement of environmental regulations; practitioners delivering water; and consumers. This preventive
and collaborative approach towards water safety planning yields cost-savings and sustainable improvements.
Experience has also shown, most recently from south
and east Asia, that while progress is being made, it
remains a challenge to implement such a rigorous ‘no
short-cut’ approach – each risk management solution
needs to be tailor-made to the water supply in question, and demands that key stakeholders become engaged and committed to a common goal.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Ali, M., Emch, M., Donnay, J. P., Yunus, M. and Sack, R. B. 2001.
Identifying environmental risk factors for endemic cholera:
a raster GIS approach. Health & Place, Vol. 8, pp. 201–10.
Anderson, D. M., Gilbert, P. M. and Burkholder, J. M. 2002. Harmful
Algal blooms and eutrophication: nutrient sources, composition,
and consequences. Estuaries, Vol. 25, pp. 704–26.

WATER AND HEALTH

737

Andrews, J. R. and Basu, S. 2011. Transmission dynamics and
control of cholera in Haiti: an epidemic model. Lancet,
Vol. 377, pp. 1248–55.

and provision of latrines in trachoma control: clusterrandomised controlled trial. Lancet, Vol. 363, No. 9415,
pp. 1093–98.

Baer, F., McGahey, C and Wijeyaratne, P. 1999. Summary of
EHP Activities in Kitwe, Zambia 1997–1999. Arlington, Va.,
USAID Environmental Health Project.

Erlanger, T. E., Keiser, J., Caldas de Castro, M., Bos, R., Singer, B. H.,
Tanner, M. and Utzinger J. 2005. Effect of water resource
development and management on lymphatic ﬁlariasis,
and estimates of populations at risk. American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 73, No. 3, pp. 523–33.

Barreto, M. L, Genser, B., Strina, A., Teixeira, M. G., Assis, A. M. O.,
Rego, R. F., Teles, C.A., Prado, M. S., Matos, S. M. A., AlcântaraNeves, N. M. and Cairncross, S. 2010. Impact of a citywide
sanitation program in northeast Brazil on intestinal parasites
infection in young children. Environmental Health Perspectives,
Vol. 118, No. 11, pp. 1637–42.
Barreto, M. L, Genser, B., Strina, A., Teixeira, M. G., Assis, A. M. O.,
Rego, R. F., Teles, C.A., Prado, M. S., Matos, S. M. A., Santos,
D. N., dos Santos L. A. and Cairncross, S. 2007. Effect of citywide sanitation programme on reduction in rate of childhood
diarrhoea in northeast Brazil: assessment by two cohort
studies. Lancet, Vol. 370, No. 9599, pp. 1622–28.
Barrett, R., Kuzawa, C. W., McDade, T. and Armelagos, G. J.
1998. Emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases:
the third epidemiologic transition. Annual Review of
Anthropology, Vol. 27, pp. 247–71.
Bartram, J., Corrales, L., Davison, A., Deere, D., Drury,
D., Gordon, B., Howard, G., Rinehold, A., Stevens, M.
2009. Water Safety Plan Manual: Step-By-Step Risk
Management for Drinking-Water Suppliers. Geneva,
World Health Organization. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/
publications/2009/9789241562638_eng.pdf
Bartram, J. K. and Platt, J. L. How health professionals can
leverage health gains from improved water, sanitation and
hygiene practices. 2010. Perspectives in Public Health,
Vol. 130, No. 5, pp. 215–21.
Black, R. E., Cousens, S., Johnson, H. L, Lawn, J. E., Rudan, I.,
Bassani, D. G., Jha, P., Campbell, H., Walker, C. F., Cibulskis, R.,
Eisele, T., Liu, L., Mathers, C. and the Child Health Epidemiology
Reference Group of WMO and UNICEF. 2010. Global, regional,
and national causes of child mortality in 2008: a systematic
analysis. Lancet, Vol. 375, No. 9730, pp. 1969–87.
Bradley, D. J. 2008. Water supplies: the consequences of
change. C. Elliott and J. Knight (eds), Ciba Foundation
Symposium 23 – Human Rights in Health. Chichester, UK,
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 81–98.
Cutler, D. M. and Miller, G. 2005. The Role of public health
improvements in health advances: the 20th century United
States. Demography, Vol. 42, No. 1, pp. 1–22.
Dua, V. K., Sharma, S. K., Srivastava, A. and Sharma, V. P. 1997.
Bioenvironmental control of industrial malaria at Bharat
Heavy Electricals Ltd., Hardwar, India – results of a nineyear study (1987–95). Journal of the American Mosquito
Control Association, Vol. 13, No. 3, pp. 278–85.

738

Esrey, S. A. 1996. Waster, water, and well-being: a
multicountry study. American Journal of Epidemiology,
Vol. 143, No. 6, pp. 608–23.
Esrey, S. A., Potash, J. B., Roberts, L. and Shiff, C. 1991.
Effects of improved water supply and sanitation on
ascariasis, diarrhea, dracunculiasis, hookworm infection,
schistosomiasis, and trachoma. Bulletin of the World
Health Organization, Vol. 69, No. 5, pp. 609–21.
Fewtrell, L, Kay, D., Matthews, I., Utzinger, J., Singer, B. H. and
Bos, R. 2008. Health impact assessment for sustainable
water management: the lay of the land. L. Fewtrell and
D. Kay (eds), Health Impact Assessment. London, IWA
Publishing, pp. 1–28.
Fewtrell, L., Kaufmann, R. B., Kay, D., Enanoria, W., Haller, L.
and Colford, J. M. Jr. 2005. Water, sanitation, and hygiene
interventions to reduce diarrhoea in less developed
countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Infectious Diseases, Vol. 5, pp. 42–52.
Fewtrell, L., Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F. and Bartram,
J. 2007. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Quantifying the
Health Impact at National and Local Levels in Countries
with Incomplete Water Supply and Sanitation Coverage.
Geneva, World Health Organization. (WMO Environmental
Burden of Disease Series, No. 15.)
Goodman, C. A. and Mills, A. J. 1999. The evidence base
on the cost-effectiveness of malaria control measures in
Africa. Health Policy and Planning, Vol. 14, pp. 301–12.
Goodman, C. A., Mnzava, A. E. P., Dlamini, S. S., Sharp, B. L.,
Mthembu, D. J. and Gumede, J. K. 2001. Comparison of the
cost and cost-effectiveness of insecticide-treated bednets
and residual house-spraying in KwaZulu-Natal, South
Africa. Tropical Medicine & International Health, Vol. 6,
pp. 280–95.
Granéli, E. and Turner, J. T. (eds). 2006. Ecology of Harmful
Algae. Berlin, Springer. (Ecological Studies, Vol. 189.)
Graves, P. M. 1998. Comparison of the cost-effectiveness of
vaccines and insecticide impregnation of mosquito nets for
the prevention of malaria. Annals of Tropical Medicine and
Parasitology, Vol. 92 pp. 399–410.
Gubler, D. J. 1998. Resurgent vector-borne diseases as a
global health problem. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 442–50.

EHP (Environmental Health Project). 2004. The Hygiene
Improvement Framework – A Comprehensive Approach
for Preventing Childhood Diarrhea. Joint Publication 8.
Prepared by EHP, UNICEF/WES, USAID, World Bank/WSP,
WSSCC. Washington, DC, EHP.

Heierli, U. and Lengeler, C. 2008. Should Bednets Be
Sold, or Given Free? The Role of the Private Sector in
Malaria Control. Berne, Switzerland, Swiss Agency for
Development and Cooperation.

Emerson, P. M., Lindsay, S.W., Alexander, N., Bah, M., Dibba,
S. M., Faal, H. B., Lowe, K. O., McAdam, K. P., Ratcliffe, A.
A., Walraven, G. E. and Bailey, R. L. 2004. Role of ﬂies

Hunter, P. R, Chalmers, R. M., Hughes, S. and Syed, Q. 2005. Selfreported diarrhea in a control group: a strong association
with reporting of low-pressure events in tap water. Clinical
Infectious Diseases, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. e32–e34.

CHAPTER 34

SPECIAL REPORTS

Huq, A., Xu, B., Chowdhury, A. R., Islam, M. S., Montilla, R. and
Colwell, R.R. 1996. A simple ﬁltration method to remove
plankton-associated Vibrio cholerae in raw water supplies
in developing countries. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, Vol. 62, No. 7, pp. 2508–12.
Jalan, J. and Ravallion , M. 2003. Does piped water reduce
diarrhea for children in rural India? Journal of Econometrics,
Vol. 112, No. 1, pp. 153–73.
Jobin, W R. 1999. Dams and Disease: Ecological Design
and Health Impacts of Large Dams, Canals and Irrigation
Systems. London, E & F N Spon.
Keiser, J., Maltese, M. F., Erlanger, T. E., Bos, R., Tanner, M.,
Singer, B. H. and Utzinger, J. 2005. Effect of irrigated rice
agriculture on Japanese encephalitis, including challenges
and opportunities for integrated vector management. Acta
Tropica, Vol. 95, pp. 40–57.
Kjellström, T. and Corvalán, C. 1995. Framework for the
development of environmental health indicators. World
Health Statistics Quarterly, Vol. 48, No. 2, pp. 144–54.
Krieger, G. R., Balge, M. Z., Chanthaphone, S., Tanner, M.,
Singer, B. H., Fewtrell, L. Kaul, S., Sananikhom, P., Odermatt,
P. and Utzinger, J. 2008. Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric
Project, Lao PDR. L. Fewtrell and D. Kay (eds). Health
Impact Assessment for Sustainable Water Management.
London, IWA Publishing, pp. 199–232.
Kroeger, A., Lenhart, A., Ochoa, M., Villegas, E., Levy, M.,
Alexander, N. and McCall, P. J. 2006. Effective control of
dengue vectors with curtains and water container covers
treated with insecticide in Mexico and Venezuela: cluster
randomised trials. British Medical Journal, Vol. 332,
pp. 1247–52.
Kumaresan, J. and Mecaskey, J. 2003. The global elimination
of blinding trachoma: progress and promise. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 69, Suppl. 5,
pp. 24–8.
Lipp, E. K., Huq, A. and Colwell, R. R. 2002. Effects of Global
climate on infectious disease: the cholera model. Clinical
Microbiology Reviews, doi: 10.1128/CMR.15.4.757-770.2002.
Luby, S., Agboatwalla, M., Painter, J., Altaf, A., Billhimer, W.
and Hoekstra, R. 2004. Effect of intensive hand washing
promotion on childhood diarrhea in high-risk communities
in Pakistan: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the
American Medical Association, Vol. 291, No. 21, pp. 2547–54.
Mara, D., Lane, J., Scott, B. and Trouba, D. 2010. Sanitation
and health. PLoS Medicine, Vol. 7, No. 11, e1000363.
Mariappan, T. A. 2008. Comprehensive Plan for Controlling
Dengue Vectors in Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Pondicherry, India: Vector Control Research Centre.
Mariotti, S. P., Pascolini, D., and Rose-Nussbaumer, J. 2009.
Trachoma: global magnitude of a preventable cause of
blindness. British Journal of Ophthalmology, Vol. 93,
pp. 563–68
Mascarini-Serra, L. M., Telles, C.A., Prado, M.S., Mattos, S.A.,
Strina, A., Alcantara-Neves, N. M. and Barreto, M. L.
2010. Reductions in the prevalence and incidence of
geohelminth infections following a city-wide sanitation
program in a Brazilian urban centre. PLoS Neglected
Tropical Diseases, Vol. 4, No. 2, e588.

WWDR4

Mathers, C. D., Boerma. T. and Fat, D. M. 2008. The Global
Burden of Disease: 2004 Update. Geneva, World Health
Organization.
McKenzie, D. and Ray, I. 2009. Urban Water supply in India:
status, reform options and possible lessons. Water Policy,
Vol. 11, No. 4, pp. 442–60.
Meyrowitsch, D. W., Nguyen, D. T., Hoang, T. H., Nguyen, T. D.
and Michael, E. 1998. A review of the present status of
lymphatic ﬁlariasis in Vietnam. Acta Tropica, Vol. 70, No. 3,
pp. 335–47.
Montgomery, M. A. and Bartram, J. 2010. Short-sightedness
in sight-saving: half a strategy will not eliminate blinding
trachoma. Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
Vol. 88, No. 2, pp. 82.
Moraes, L. R. S., Cancio, J. A. and Cairncross, S. 2004.
Impact of drainage and sewerage on intestinal nematodes
infections in poor urban areas in Salvador, Brazil.
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, Vol. 98, pp. 197–204.
Moraes, L. R. S., Cancio, J. A., Cairncross, S. and Huttly, S. 2003.
Impact of drainage and sewerage on diarrhoea in poor
urban areas in Salvador, Brazil. Transactions of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 97, pp. 153–58.
NCMH (National Commission on Macroeconomics and
Health). 2005. National Commission on Macroeconomics
and Health Background Papers: Burden of Disease in India.
New Delhi, NCMH, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India.
Nguyen, L. A. P., Clements, A. C. A., Jeffrey, J. A. L., Yen, N. T.,
Nam, V. S., Vaughan, G. V., Shinkﬁeld, R., Kutcher, S. C.,
Gatton, M. L., Kay, B. H. and Ryan, P.A. 2011. Abundance
and prevalence of Aedes aegypti immatures and
relationships with household water storage in rural areas
of southern Viet Nam. International Health, Vol. 3, No. 2,
pp. 115–25.
Piehler, M. F. 2008. Watershed management strategies to
prevent and control cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms.
H. K. Hudnell (ed.), Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal Blooms:
State of the Science and Research Needs. New York,
Springer, pp. 259–73. (Advances in Experimental Medicine
and Biology, Vol. 619.)
Planning Commission. 2002. India Assessment 2002: Water
Supply and Sanitation. New Delhi, Planning Commission,
Government of India.
Polack, S., Brooker, S., Kuper, H., Mariotti, S., Mabey, D.
and Foster, A. 2005. Mapping the global distribution of
trachoma. Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
Vol. 83, pp. 913–19.
Prüss-Üstün, A., Bos, R., Gore, F. and Bartram, J. 2008. Safer
Water, Better Health: Costs, Beneﬁts and Sustainability
of Interventions to Protect and Promote Health. Geneva,
World Health Organization.
Quick, R. E., Venczel, L., Mintz, E., Soleto, L., Aparicio, J.,
Gironaz, M., Hutwagner, L., Greene, K., Bopp, C., Maloney, K.,
Chavez, D., Sobsey, M. and Tauxe, R.V. 1999. Diarrhea
prevention in Bolivia through point-of-use disinfection and
safe storage: a promising new strategy. Epidemiology and
Infection, Vol. 122, No. 1, pp. 83–90.

WATER AND HEALTH

739

Rehfuess, E. A., Bruce, N. and Bartram, J. K. 2009. More
health for your buck: health sector functions to secure
environmental health. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, Vol. 87, pp. 880–82.
Reller, E., Mendoza, C., Lopez, M., Alvarez, M., Hoekstra, R.,
Olson, C., Baier, K., Keswick, B. and Luby, S. 2003.
A randomized controlled trial of household-based
ﬂocculant-disinfectant drinking water treatment for
diarrhea prevention in rural Guatemala. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 69, No. 4, pp. 411–19.
de Silva, N., Brooker, S., Hotez, P., Montresor, A., Engels, D.
and Savioli, L. 2003. Soil-transmitted helminthic infections:
updating the global picture. Disease Control Priorities
Project. Trends in Parasitology, Vol. 19, No. 12, pp. 547–51.
Scudder, T. 2005. The Future of Large Dams. London,
Earthscan.
Seng, C. M., Setha, T., Nealon, J., Chantha, N., Socheat, D. and
Nathan, M. B. 2008. The effect of long-lasting insecticidal
water container covers on ﬁeld populations of Aedes
aegypti (L.) mosquitoes in Cambodia. Journal of Vector
Ecology, Vol. 33, No. 2, pp. 333–41.
Sobsey, M. D. 2006. Drinking water and health research: a
look to the future in the United States and globally. Journal
of Water and Health, Suppl. 4, pp. 17–21.
Southgate, V. R. 1997. Schistosomiasis in the Senegal River
Basin: before and after the construction of the dams at
Diama, Senegal and Manantali, Mali and future prospects.
Journal of Helminthology, Vol. 71, pp. 125–32.
Steinmann, P., Keiser, J., Bos, R., Tanner, M. and Utzinger, J.
2006. Schistosomiasis and water resources development:
systematic review, meta-analysis, and estimates of people
at risk. Lancet Infectious Diseases, Vol. 6, pp. 411–25.
Taylor, H. R, West, S. K., Mmbaga, B. B., Katala, S. J., Turner,
V., Lynch, M., Muñoz, B. and Rapoza, P. A. 1989. Hygiene
factors and increased risk of trachoma in central Tanzania.
Archives of Ophthalmology, Vol. 107, pp. 1821–25.
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 1999. Towards
Better Programming: A Manual on Hygiene Promotion.
New York, UNICEF. (Water, Environment and Sanitation
Technical Guidelines Series, No. 6.)
USEPA (National Service Center for Environmental
Publications). 2007. Addressing the Challenge Through
Innovation. Aging Water Infrastructure Research Program.
Cincinnati, Ohio, Office of Research and Development,
National Risk Management Research Laboratory.
Utzinger, J., Tozan, Y. and Singer, B. H. 2001. Efficacy and
cost-effectiveness of environmental management for
malaria control. Tropical Medicine & International Health,
Vol. 6, No. 9, pp. 677–87.
Van Dolah, F. M., Roelke, D. L. and Greene, R. M. 2001. Health
and ecological impacts of harmful algal blooms: risk
assessment needs. Human and Ecological Risk Assessment,
Vol. 7, pp. 1329–45.
Walsh, J. F. 1970. Evidence of reduced susceptibility to DDT
in controlling Simulium damnosum (Diptera: Simuliidae) on
the River Niger. Bulletin of the World Health Organization,
Vol. 43, No. 2, pp. 316–18.

740

CHAPTER 34

Wang, X., and Hunter, P. R. 2010. A systematic review and
meta-analysis of the association between self-reported
diarrheal disease and distance from home to water source.
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Vol. 83,
No. 3, pp. 582–4.
Watson, M. 1953. African Highway: The Battle for Health in
Central Africa. London, J. Murray.
Watson, T. 2006. Public health investments and the
infant mortality gap: evidence from federal sanitation
interventions and hospitals on U.S. Indian Reservations.
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 90, No. 8–9, pp. 1537–60.
West, S., Muñoz, B., Lynch, M., Kayongoya, A., Chilangwa, Z.,
Mmbaga, B. B. O. and Taylor, H. R. 1995. Impact of facewashing on trachoma in Kongwa, Tanzania. Lancet, Vol.
345, No. 8943, pp. 155–58.
West, S. K., Congdon, N., Katala, S. and Mele, L. 1991. Facial
cleanliness and risk of trachoma in families. Archives of
Ophthalmology, Vol. 190, pp. 855–57.
West, S. K., Munoz, B., Lynch, M., Kayongoya, A., Mmbaga, B.
B. and Taylor, H.R. 1996. Risk factors for constant, severe
trachoma among preschool children in Kongwa, Tanzania.
American Journal of Epidemiology, Vol. 143, pp. 73–8.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1980. Environmental
Management for Vector Control. Fourth Report of the
WHO Expert Committee on Vector Biology and Control.
Geneva, World Health Organization (WHO) Technical
Report Series, No. 649. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/
WHO_TRS_649.pdf
––––. 1999. Health Impact Assessment: Main Concepts
and Suggested Approach. Gothenburg consensus
paper, December 1999. (ed.). Copenhagen/Brussels,
WHO Regional Office for Europe/European Centre for
Health Policy. http://www.apho.org.uk/resource/view.
aspx?RID=44163
––––. 2008a. The Global Burden of Disease: 2004 Update.
Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_
burden_disease/GBD_report_2004update_full.pdf
––––. 2008b. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 3rd
edn, incorporating ﬁrst and second addenda. Geneva,
WHO. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/
GDWPRecomdrev1and2.pdf
––––. 2010a. Cholera, 2009. Weekly Epidemiological Record,
Vol. 85, pp. 293–308.
––––. 2010b. Haiti: Cholera Response Update. 13 December
2010. Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/hac/donorinfo/
haiti_donor_alert_cholera_response_13dec10.pdf
––––. 2010c. World Malaria Report: 2010. WHO Global Malaria
Programme. Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/malaria/
world_malaria_report_2010/worldmalariareport2010.pdf
––––. 2011a. Cholera, 2010. Weekly Epidemiological Record,
Vol. 86, pp. 325–40.
––––. 2011b. Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 4th edn.
Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_
health/publications/2011/9789241548151_toc.pdf
––––. 2011c. Drinking-Water, Sanitation and Health. Resolution
WHA64.2. Sixty-fourth World Health Assembly, 24 May

SPECIAL REPORTS

2011, Geneva. http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_ﬁles/
WHA64/A64_R24-en.pdf
WHO and DFID (World Health Organization/UK Department
for International Development). 2009. Vision 2030: The
Resilience of Water Supply and Sanitation in the Face of
Climate Change. Geneva, WHO. http://www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health/vision_2030_9789241598422.pdf
WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization/United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2000. Global Water Supply and
Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report. WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
Geneva, WHO/UNICEF. http://www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health/monitoring/jmp2000.pdf

WWDR4

––––. 2010. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking-Water:
2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.
––––. 2011. Post-2015 Monitoring of Water and Sanitation:
Report of a First WHO/UNICEF Consultation. Geneva/New
York, WHO/UNICEF.
Wright, H. R., Turner, V. and Taylor, H. R. 2008. Seminar:
trachoma. Lancet, Vol. 371, No. 9628, pp. 1945–54.

WATER AND HEALTH

741

CHAPTER 35
Water and gender

WWAP, with special thanks to the WWAP Gender Advisory Group
—
Author Vasudha Pangare
Acknowledgements Feedback received from the WWAP Advisory Group on Gender
Equality was useful in ﬁnalizing the chapter. The author would like to acknowledge
Gülser Corat, Kusum Athukorala and Marcia Brewster.

© Shutterstock/PavelSvoboda

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Improving women’s access to safe water for productive and consumptive uses will not only
help increase food production globally, but also improve food, health and livelihood security
at community and household levels.

35.1 Introduction
The gender gap in water arises from gender divisions
in society, which allocate many water responsibilities to women but vest most water-related powers
and rights in men. To improve the balance between
responsibilities and powers and rights, changes need
to be made in water policy, planning and management.
The gender gap will be reduced when both men and
women are able to challenge gender-based unequal
water roles and allocations, and participate in decisionmaking at different levels.
Among the many challenges in water faced across the
world, scarcity, deteriorating water quality, the linkages between water and food security and the need for
improved governance are most signiﬁcant in the context of gender differences in the access to and control
over water resources. These challenges are expected
to become more intense due to the growing uncertainty and risk associated with the availability and quality
of freshwater resources arising from increasing demand for various uses, climate variability and natural
disasters.
Water is used for a wide range of social and economic
activities, including public health, agriculture, energy
and industry. Water has different values for different
uses and purposes, and the same source of water can
be used for social as well as economic purposes. Social
and environmental valuation is more prevalent at the
local level, where water sources may be designated for
different uses, such as for drinking, or for common use,
such as bathing and washing, depending on the quality of water, or regarded as sacred for religious purposes. In fact, water that has been valued as an economic
good, such as irrigation water supplied through an
irrigation scheme, also has a social value for local communities, especially for women, who may use the same
irrigation water source for both domestic and farming
purposes. Opportunities for improving access to water
for women and improving their water security can be
found by analysing water values through the gender lens.
Water policies based on broad, generalized perspectives are more likely to miss out local knowledge, and
social and gender dimensions and their implications.
Recognizing the various purposes for which these local water resources are used by different groups of
men and women in the community would help successfully integrate gender considerations not only in
water resource management, but also in sectors such

744

CHAPTER 35

as urban water supply, agriculture, industry and energy that depend upon water resources, and which
are often in conﬂict over water allocations and their
demand for freshwater resources. By working together
in partnership with these sectors, synergies and tradeoffs in providing access to different groups of men and
women in local communities can be understood and
addressed by decision-makers in government bodies, private sectors and civil society. This would help
in anticipating risks and uncertainties and planning for
safe-guards to be put in place for the most vulnerable
groups in the community.

35.2 Challenges and opportunities
35.2.1 Gender dimensions of water scarcity
About a third of the world’s population is experiencing some kind of physical or economic water scarcity
(IFAD, 2007). Among the many causes of scarcity, the
growing competition for water from different sectors,
including industry, agriculture, power generation, domestic use and the environment, is creating an acute
crisis for poor people, making it difficult for them to
access water for consumptive, productive and social
uses. The scarcity created at the local level from this
crisis is increasing inequity within local communities
with regard to access and control over local water resources, affecting poor people, and poor women the
most. Physical scarcity, especially in arid and semiarid regions is increasing due to climate variability,
droughts and population pressures. The drudgery and
health consequences for women in these regions, especially for poor women, and their increased work

BOX 35.1
Women carry the water burden

There are 884 million people in the world who still do
not get their water from improved sources, almost all of
them in developing regions. For families without a drinking water source on the premises, it is usually women who
go to the source to collect drinking water. Surveys from
45 developing countries show that this is the case in almost two thirds of households, while in almost a quarter
of households it is men who usually collect the water. In
12% of households, children carry the main responsibility
for collecting water, with girls under 15 years of age being
twice as likely to carry this responsibility as boys under
the age of 15 years.

Source: WHO and UNICEF (2010).

SPECIAL REPORTS

burden in acquiring water for home consumption is
very well-documented.
Water scarcity can occur or be experienced due to
‘social and gender constructs’ or social and economic
differences within the society, and customary behaviour that discriminates against women and the socially
disadvantaged. When access to local water sources
is denied to a section of the population, those people
experience scarcity. Access can be denied due to caste
(as in India) and class differences or because of conﬂict between ethnic communities. Women may also
be denied access to water where the community water
supply is located on the property of the village headman or a local official.
Scarcity can also be caused by the deteriorating quality of freshwater resources. When water sources are
polluted, the quantity of clean water or safe drinking water in a particular location is reduced. Although
there are accepted minimum standards for water quality, there are also concerns and cultural beliefs that
determine and inﬂuence the use of different sources of
water for different purposes, such as drinking, cooking and bathing. These cultural beliefs, which are often
more signiﬁcant for women, need to be kept in mind
when water sources are being exploited for different
purposes. If women need to travel long distances to
fetch safe and clean water, then the time and energy
costs of fetching water are likely to govern their perceptions of hygiene in disease prevention, resulting in
lower hygiene levels in the home.
While scarcity affects the lives of all people in the community, these effects manifest themselves differently
for men and women of different ages and socio-economic status. Scarcity aggravates the water poverty of
women and of young girls who are expected to help
their mothers to collect water, often missing school
when the water shortage is acute. Research indicates
that girls under the age of 15 are twice as likely to
carry this responsibility than boys under the age of 15
(WHO/UNICEF, 2010) (Box 35.1). Women from economically well-off or ‘upper class’ families experience
scarcity less intensely than women from poor and socially disadvantaged families.
35.2.2 Gender dimensions of water governance
‘Water governance encompasses the political, economic and social processes and institutions by which
government, civil society and the private sectors make

WWDR4

decisions about how best to use, develop and manage
water resources’ (UNDP, 2004, p. 10). Water governance is more than national-level legislations, regulations and institutions, and refers to the processes that
exist to promote stakeholder participation and mechanisms for decision-making.
Accessibility and availability of safe and sufficient water is therefore often determined by governance, which
in turn is affected by social structures and gender relations. There is a close link between water governance,
gender and power divides in society. Who takes decisions and at what levels, and the types of decisions
taken are greatly inﬂuenced by the culture of social
relations. Gender relations and social structures will
determine at what level women, and which group of
women, can participate in decision-making and what
that mechanism will be. To make water governance
more effective, existing formal and informal mechanisms for decision-making, including power structures
within the society which are governed by class, gender
and ethnicity need to be challenged. When traditional roles are challenged, power relations are likely to
change therefore reducing the gender gap is a process
that is accompanied by women’s empowerment.1
Debates around gender dimensions of water governance tend to delegate gender considerations to the
realm of the ‘grassroots’. Keeping the focus of discussion on women’s physical burden of fetching water for
household purposes is politically comfortable and does
not challenge the larger and broader access and power
issues that increase women’s water burden in the ﬁrst
place. It is easier to bring the drinking water pipeline
to the community than to challenge the gender divide
that places the responsibility of fetching water for the
household on the woman. Although it may be true that
gender concerns become more pronounced closer to
the grassroots, where people interact directly with water and natural resources, it is important to understand
that national and international policy affects access
and control over local water resources as well.
Decisions about water sharing, allocation and distribution between different uses and across regions are
most often made at higher levels where economic and
political considerations play a more important role
than social concerns. These decisions impact water resources locally available to communities that are likely
to lose access to the very resources that sustained
their livelihoods and fulﬁlled their needs. Rural women

WATER AND GENDER

745

often rely upon common water resources, such as
small water bodies, ponds and streams to meet their
water needs, but in many regions these sources have
either been eroded or have disappeared due to changes in land use or have been appropriated for development by the state or industry.
Water policies based on broad, generalized perspectives are more likely to miss out local knowledge, and
social and gender dimensions and their implications.
Social and gender analysis conducted at the lowest
possible level to capture the local context, such as the
community water source, the sub-basin level, or microwatershed level can help in understanding the problems and potential impact of the policy on different
groups of women. Community water sources, whether natural or man-made lakes, ponds and irrigation
schemes, serve many purposes, including ﬁshing, agriculture, kitchen gardens, washing and bathing. Women
use water for many different purposes, including domestic, agriculture, health and sanitation, whereas men
are generally concerned only with water use for agriculture and livestock. Recognizing the various purposes for which these local water resources are used by
different groups of men and women in the community
would help successfully integrate gender considerations in water management.
This analysis can inform broad national, regional and
international policies, not only related to water management, but also to other sectors, such as agriculture,
energy and industry. An evaluation of the Food and
Agricultural Organization’s (FAO) work and role in water found that irrigation and agriculture policy statements with the clearest description of local farmer
typologies and the challenges faced by them succeeded best in developing strategies responsive to circumstances in the country (FAO, 2010a). By identifying
different farmer groups, the policies were able to develop action plans for addressing the concerns of men
and women farmers in Zambia, Malawi and Swaziland
and to a lesser degree in Mozambique, Kenya and the
United Republic of Tanzania (FAO, 2010a) (Box 35.2).
Climate change impacts, increasing population pressures on water resources, and competition from different uses are likely to increase women’s water poverty
in the future. Women depend upon and use water to
sustain the food security, health and economic stability
of their families and communities. To reduce women’s
water poverty, changes would need to be made at

746

CHAPTER 35

many different levels. The decision-making and policy
processes would need to be opened up to include consultation with or active participation of the appropriate
group of women in the given context and to support
their right to water. Recent trends in governance in
various aspects of water management which use multistakeholder platforms for increasing participation and
transparency can provide a space for women to express their views and opinions, and encourage a gender perspective in policy making and implementation.
At the ﬁeld level, appropriate groups of women need
to be consulted during the design and implementation
of water projects to maximize the beneﬁt of these projects. Wives of rich farmers, for example, are less likely
to be interested in community irrigation or drinking
water schemes than poorer women, but may participate for political reasons. Therefore it would be necessary to identify and involve women whose interests are
directly affected by the project or intervention; if this is
not done the project could have a negative impact on
those women who need the intervention the most.
Women are generally not recognized as decision-makers or as contributors to the household economy; in

BOX 35.2
Gender mainstreaming through effective policy
formulation

An evaluation of the Food and Agricultural Organization’s
role and work in water in 2010 highlighted that for effective policy development, it was important to clearly
identify the relevant target populations for whom the
policy was meant. An analysis of irrigation and agriculture policies in seven countries from a gender and social
inclusion perspective found that policy statements with
the clearest description of local farmer typologies and the
challenges faced by them in the context of the country’s
food security and poverty goals generally succeeded best
in developing strategies responsive to circumstances in
the country and took into account and addressed the issues and concerns of smallholder farmers and socially
disadvantaged groups. Agriculture and irrigation policies in Zambia, Malawi and Swaziland identiﬁed gender
disparities among farmers and developed strategies to
address them, whereas although gender disparities were
identiﬁed in Mozambique, Kenya and the United Republic
of Tanzania, the strategies for addressing these were still
being developed.

Source: FAO (2010a).

SPECIAL REPORTS

many aspects they are still viewed as family labourers
or unpaid labour, especially in agricultural households.
On one hand these cultural constraints usually hinder
women’s participation in water management organizations and decision-making, and on the other, women’s
engagement in domestic household chores usually
prevents them from active participation in local water
management organizations.
However, gender sensitization for men and women in the community, and capacity development for
women could make their participation more effective. Women’s groups, such as self-help groups, could
also provide a collective voice for participation. Other
interventions could include creating greater gender
awareness among water managers, including gender
expertise in water projects, providing technical training
to women to enable them to participate in technical
discussions, and developing and disseminating tools
for gender mainstreaming in water management and
governance.
35.2.3 Agriculture, food security and gender
dimensions
According to latest estimates by FAO, 925 million people are undernourished, of which 62% live in Asia and
the Paciﬁc, the world’s most populous region, followed
by sub-Saharan Africa, which is home to 26% of the
world’s undernourished population. The rise in global
undernourishment is a combined result of declining
investments in agriculture, increased production costs
and rising food prices, in particular the continued increase in prices of staple cereals and oil crops (FAO,
2010b).
Food production would have to increase by 70% to
feed a population of 9 billion people by 2050. Of the
1.5 billion hectares (ha) of cropland worldwide, only
277 million ha (or 18%) is irrigated land; the remaining
82% is rainfed land. Recent research indicates that to
meet the demand for food, water productivity needs
to be improved, not only in irrigated, but also in rainfed areas (FAO, 2010b). This is because, due to the
high investment costs and the growing competition for
water, the scope for further expansion in irrigation is
limited in many countries.
Women play an important role in irrigated as well
as non-irrigated agriculture, and a larger number of
women than men is engaged in rainfed agriculture,
producing ‘two-thirds of the food in most developing

WWDR4

countries’ (World Bank, 2006). It is important to note
that ‘the vast majority of the world’s farms are small;
85% of them are less than 2 hectares, and 97% less
than 10. In Africa, 80% of farmed land is cultivated by
smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are women’
(UN, 2009, p. 8). According to the World Development
Report 2008 (World Bank, 2007, p. 7), ‘where women
are the majority of smallholder farmers, failure to realize their full potential in agriculture is a contributing
factor to low growth and food insecurity’.
Women comprise an average of 43% of the agricultural labour force in developing countries (FAO, 2011).
Eighty% of the basic food in sub-Saharan Africa is produced by women (FAO, 2006). In Africa, Europe and
Central Asia, and some East Asian countries, men and
women work equally in agricultural self-employment
(World Bank, 2007). ‘In Mozambique, Rwanda, Uganda,
and Egypt, women are even more likely to participate in agricultural self-employment, whereas in Latin
America and South Asia, women reportedly work less
in agricultural self-employment.’ (World Bank, 2007,
p. 79). In all these regions, as well as in Africa, women
have broadened and deepened their involvement in
agricultural production in recent decades (World Bank,
2007). In spite of this, agriculture and water policies
continue to wrongly assume that farmers are men, reinforcing many of the constraints faced by women in
agricultural production.
Gender inequalities exist all along the food production
chain, beginning with asymmetries in ownership of, access to, and control of livelihood assets, such as land,
water, energy, credit, knowledge and labour. Women
in general have less access to productive resources
than men.
Across the regions, less than 5% to about 15% women
own agricultural land (FAO, 2011). In nearly all regions
of the world, water rights and access to water are tied
to land ownership. Land ownership is also associated
with recognition as farmers. When women lack this
recognition they cannot access other services important for food production, such as extension services,
credit and subsidies, and are denied participation in
decision-making processes. As membership to water users associations (WUAs) in formal and informal
irrigation schemes is restricted to landowners, most
women do not have access to irrigation.

WATER AND GENDER

747

In the developing world, men tend to focus on marketoriented or cash crop production, whereas women
work with subsistence agriculture, minor crops and
vegetable gardens, and often grow a wider diversity
of crops (World Bank et al., 2009). Consequently, the
use and management of irrigation water is likely to
be different for men and women farmers (World Bank
et al., 2009). For example, in gender-based farming
systems in sub-Saharan Africa, where men and women
often cultivate separate ﬁelds (Van Koppen, 2002),
this reality has often been ignored in irrigation projects.
As a result, while men could irrigate their cash crops,
women did not have access to irrigation systems for
vegetable gardens and subsistence crops.
The lack of recognition of the different needs of men
and women has often resulted in the partial or total
failure of irrigation schemes. As key decisions in site
selection, beneﬁciaries, land (re)allocation and water
rights are made during the planning phase of waterrelated investment projects, the lack of recognition of
women’s irrigation needs at the planning stage itself
forms the basis of gender inclusion or exclusion in the
projects (Van Koppen, 2002). As more men out-migrate, leaving women in charge of managing the farms,
it becomes even more important to involve women in
managing irrigation. It is also important to acknowledge and plan for the fact that women use ‘irrigation’
water for productive and domestic purposes. Multiple
use systems therefore provide better opportunities for
women to participate in irrigation management and
decision-making, thereby improving the sustainability
of the systems (Box 35. 3).
Technical interventions for improving rainfed agriculture, such as rainwater harvesting, which are also good
climate change adaptation measures, access to smallscale irrigation technologies, and developing the capacity of women farmers for conserving water and soil
moisture, would provide an opportunity for women
to play an important role in increasing food production, securing livelihoods and improving food security.
By improving the agricultural yields of women farmers, the number of undernourished people could be
reduced by as much as 100–150 million (FAO, 2011).
Improving women’s agricultural productivity would
not only make more food available to their families,
but also provide much-needed cash income for securing the health, education and food security of their
households. Food and nutrition security varies within

748

CHAPTER 35

the household as family members have differential access to food. In many cultures women and girls eat last
and therefore in poorer households women may be
deprived of adequate food and nutrition. Improved incomes and economic empowerment may help women
improve their own food and nutrition security, as well
as that of their children.
35.2.4 Gender dimensions of biofuel production
As water rights are closely linked to land rights, and both
land and water are required for crop production, any
debate on the production of bio-fuels for energy would
need to address the impacts of diverting land and water
resources from food production to the production of biofuel, and the gender dimensions of food security.

BOX 35.3
Making participatory irrigation development
beneﬁcial for women in the United Republic of
Tanzania

In an International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD)-supported Participatory Irrigation Development
Programme (1997–2007) in the United Republic of
Tanzania, farmers are encouraged to take responsibility
for irrigation development so that schemes reﬂect their
needs and not those of planners.
Water supply schemes are built for multiple uses besides
irrigation, to address women’s concerns about water availability for domestic uses. Thus, shallow tubewell schemes
have been constructed to provide water for horticultural
crops, rice seedling nurseries and domestic use. This is
particularly aimed at reducing workloads by reducing the
time women spend in fetching water for domestic use.
Women are actively involved in the water users associations (WUAs), sometimes even more than the male
members. The responsibilities of the WUA committees are
shared equally by male and female members. Although
most plot owners are men, the proportion of women with
plots and membership in WUAs is over 30%. Women
manage shallow wells and have access to irrigation for
growing vegetables for both food and income. As a result
of gender training and sensitization, women have also
taken up leadership roles in WUAs and district councils,
and participate in savings groups and credit associations.

Source: IFAD (2005).

SPECIAL REPORTS

‘FAO estimates that, in sub-Saharan Africa and the
Caribbean, women produce as much as 80% of basic foods, while in South and Southeast Asia, 60%
of cultivation work and other food production is
done by women.’ (FAO, 2006, p. 2). ‘Furthermore,
although FAO projections to 2010 indicate a continued reduction in the overall female participation in
agriculture globally, the percentage of economically
active women working in agriculture in LDCs (least
developed countries) is projected to remain above
70%.’ (FAO, 2006, p. 5).
The potential depletion (or degradation) of natural
resources associated with biofuel production, such
as increased soil and water pollution, soil erosion and
water runoff, with subsequent loss of biodiversity and
reduced production of food crops is therefore more
likely to impact women’s agricultural and rural livelihoods. In addition to decreasing food security, competition for land and water resources between food and
energy crop production could displace farming communities from traditional farmlands and reduce access
to common lands which provided fuel and fodder for
rural households and their animals. This in turn would
mean that women would have to spend longer hours
in accessing fodder and ﬁrewood as it is traditionally
their responsibility to do so. Further, ‘the replacement
of local crops with energy crop plantations could also
threaten the extensive knowledge and the traditional
set of skills of smallholder farmers in the management
of local crops. It would also threaten the knowledge
related to the selection and storage of seeds and crops,
all activities traditionally performed mainly by women.’
(FAO, 1999).
A growing concern about the possible impacts of biofuel production has initiated efforts to understand how
biofuel production can be pro-poor, and pro-women,
helping to not only safeguard women’s livelihoods but
also to alleviate their work burden. Research by the
International Food Policy Research Institute (Arndt
et al., 2009) shows that positive technological spillover effects from the cultivation of biofuel, particularly
when key staple crops are cultivated, could beneﬁt
subsistence, smallholder agriculture. To address potential conﬂict between the goals of poverty reduction
and agro-business,2 industry type of biofuel production, some countries have begun to adopt strategies
that integrate subsistence crop systems with energy
crop production to ‘avoid complete domination by
mono-crop plantation systems and allow for a more

WWDR4

varied agricultural landscape and the ability to capture
pro-poor beneﬁts.’ (Arndt et al., 2009).
A review of local biofuel projects in Africa and Asia
conducted by the International Network on Gender
and Sustainable Energy (ENERGIA)3 found that ‘village
level projects have great potential in terms of sustainable fuel production and increased access to energy
in rural areas of developing countries – if participatory
processes are employed in the development and implementation of the projects. On a small scale, locally
produced plant oils and biodiesel can successfully be

BOX 35.4
Extraction and use of Jatropha oil by a village
women’s group to power shea butter processing
equipment in Ghana

A women’s group in Gbimsi, Ghana is producing biofuel
to run shea butter processing equipment and to use it
as a kerosene substitute in lanterns. The women grow
Jatropha plants, extract oil from the seeds and mix it with
diesel (70% plant oil/30% diesel) to produce fuel. The
project serves as a model for village level biofuel production linked to the empowerment of women, and efforts are being made to ﬁnance similar projects in other
villages.
For the members of the women’s group, much of the
drudgery involved in the shea butter processing has been
eliminated, resulting in increased production and improved access to credit from the local bank. The processing time is reduced by six hours, making more time
available for household interaction; more relaxation for
improved health, entertainment, community peace and
harmony; and increased attention to other income generating activities.
‘Regular group interaction and participation in meetings
and workshops has broadened the outlook of the women.
… Over all, they have more ability to make their own
choices, and have gained in terms of improved self-esteem, better negotiating skills, more time for volunteering,
and greater opportunities for contributing to the household budget.’

Note: This project has been undertaken by a women’s group in
Gbimsi, a town about 2 km from Walewale in the West Mamprusi
District of the northern region of Ghana, with support from the
United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), the
GRATIS Foundation in Ghana, and the United Nations Development
Programme – Global Environment Facility (UNDP-GEF) Small
Grants Programme.
Source: Karlsson and Banda (2009, p. 15).

WATER AND GENDER

749

used to power diesel engines and generators in rural
villages – for agricultural processing, enterprises, and
income generation’ (Box 35.4), and contribute to reducing the work burden of women. Women could then
engage in new income-generating activities that could
enable them to ‘send their children to school, feed
their families nutritious food, provide better health
care and living conditions, and have more power to
make decisions within their households and communities’ (Karlsson and Banda, 2009, pp. 4–5).
It was also found that unlike the threats related to biofuel production which come from the operation of big
plantations run on an agro-business model, in villagebased models, it is possible to protect the interests of
small landowners and engage them as producers and
processors of biofuel as part of a larger value production and supply chain without compromising food and
water security. By utilizing land and water resources
effectively, production and use of biofuel locally can
improve the livelihoods of women.
35.2.5 Gender dimensions of urban water security
It is expected that by 2020, the developing countries
of Africa, Asia and Latin America will have the largest
number of people living in urban areas. Seventy-ﬁve%
(FAO, 2008) of all urban dwellers worldwide will be in
these regions, and 85% of the poor in Latin America,
and about 40–45% of the poor in Africa and Asia
will be concentrated in towns and cities (FAO, 2008).
Providing safe and secure water for this fast growing urban population is one of the greatest challenges
for the present and the future. An even bigger challenge is to provide safe, secure and affordable water
to the poor communities that live within these urban
conglomerates.
An estimated 40% of people living in Asian cities with
a population of over 1 million, most of whom are poor,
do not have access to piped water (Das et al., 2010).
Access to piped water within the household averages
about 85% for the wealthiest 20% of the population,
compared with 25% for the poorest 20% (UNDP, 2006).
In most developing countries, the poorest people not
only have access to less water, and to less clean water,
but they also pay some of the world’s highest prices.
Poor people living in slums often pay 5–10 times more
per litre of water than wealthy people living in the
same city (UNDP, 2006). For example, ‘people living in
the slums of Jakarta, Indonesia; Manila, the Philippines;
and Nairobi, Kenya, pay 5–10 times more for water per

750

CHAPTER 35

unit than those in high-income areas of their own cities—and more than consumers pay in London or New
York; and the poorest 20% of households in El Salvador,
Jamaica and Nicaragua spend on average more than
10% of their household income on water. In the United
Kingdom a 3% threshold is seen as an indicator of
hardship.’ (UNDP, 2006, p. 7).
Being able to access piped water supply depends
upon the household’s ﬁnancial ability to connect to
the pipeline. Connection fees are generally high and
can exceed $100 even in the poorest countries (UNDP,
2006), making it difficult for poor people to have access to piped water supply. For example, in Manila
the cost of connecting to the utility ‘represents about
three months’ income for the poorest 20% of households’, and ‘about six months’ income for the poorest
in urban Kenya’. (UNDP, 2006, p. 10). In addition, utilities in many cities refuse to connect households that
lack formal property titles, which again are often the
poorest. (UNDP, 2006). Location is another barrier to
connecting to the water utility. Slums or informal settlements are often situated in difficult-to-connect locations in terms of distance and topography (Pangare
and Pangare, 2008).
As water passes through intermediaries and each adds
transport and marketing costs, prices increase. The
rising block tariff system being implemented by most
utilities aims to combine equity with efficiency by raising the price with the volume of water used. However,
distance from utilities tends to inﬂate prices, and in
practice, the poorest households are often locked into
the higher tariff bands as the intermediaries serving
poor households are buying water in bulk at the highest rate. In Dakar, poor households using standpipes
pay more than three times the price paid by households connected to the utility (UNDP, 2006).
Efforts to improve urban water supply through private sector participation have not been as successful
as expected in improving access for poor households
and women. The Cochabamba experience (in Bolivia)
showed that social differences, inequities and vulnerabilities can increase if the approach is not pro-poor
(Ledo, 2004). However the success of the reform
process undertaken in Cambodia by the Phnom Penh
Water Supply Authority (PPWSA) showed that the
poor can gain access to piped water supply if the efﬁciency and effectiveness of public water utilities is
improved (Box 35.5). Not only did the water supply in

SPECIAL REPORTS

Phnom Penh improve as a result of these reforms, but
cost recovery measures were also successful because
stratiﬁed subsidies were made available to the poor
(Das et al., 2010).
When poor households or communities living in slums
or informal settlements do not have access to piped
water networks, they tend to meet their water needs
through a combination of different sources and means.
They (most likely women and girls) either collect water
freely from public or private protected or unprotected
sources and/or purchase water from formal or informal vendors, depending upon the quantity and quality
of water available (Pangare and Pangare, 2008). As a
result, the poorest, especially the women, often pay
the most for water, particularly taking into account the
smaller quantities of water they are able to purchase
(such as paying for each bucket of water) and the additional indirect cost of poor quality water in terms of
waterborne diseases and health care.
A recent study on urban water vending in Uganda
found that water vendors by re-selling piped water to
the poor who are unable to invest in obtaining a private or yard tap connection for their households, are

BOX 35.5
Improving access for the poor: Phnom Penh Water
Supply Authority, Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Soy Najy, whose household consists of seven members, received her Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority
(PPWSA) connection in 2005. She used it to purchase
three drums (20 L per drum) of water from vendors every
day at a price of 2000 Riel per drum, amounting to Riel
150,000 or US$37.5 per month. She has a sewing and
tailoring shop, and requires more water than is normally
used for domestic consumption. In 2005, residents from
the squatter colony in which she lives urged PPWSA to
extend their network to their locality. Now that Soy Najy
has access to the water supplied by the public utility, she
pays 15,000 Riel or US$4 per month for water – that is,
one-tenth of what she paid before. It has helped her reduce expenses to a great extent.
Prior to the PPWSA connection, the locality received water only at night because the slum was located at a higher
elevation. Now residents have 24-hour water supply and
at a much lower cost.
Source: Das et al. (2010).

WWDR4

actually extending the National Water and Sewerage
Corporation (NWSC) coverage to the urban poor
(Pangare and Pangare, 2008). A majority of the water vendors in Uganda had employed young children
or women to manage the taps or water-selling points,
because they could be employed at very low salaries
(Pangare and Pangare, 2008).
35.2.6 Gender concerns in health and sanitation
Access to water for life is a basic human need and a
fundamental human right. Yet 884 million people are
denied the right to clean water and 2.6 billion people
lack access to adequate sanitation (WHO and UNICEF,
2010). Every day, almost 5,000 children, (about
1.8 million children per year), die as a result of diarrhoea
and other diseases caused by unclean water and lack
of sanitation, making it the second largest cause of
child mortality. Easier access to clean water and sanitation improves hygiene behaviour and can reduce the
risk of a child dying by as much as 50% (UNDP, 2006).
‘Every day millions of women and young girls collect
water for their families, a ritual that reinforces gender inequalities in employment and education.’ (UNDP,
2006). Women often spend up to six hours every day
fetching water, the time calculated includes walking to
the source of water, waiting in queues and then carrying back the heavy containers ﬁlled with water (UNDP,
2006). In addition, carrying water in large containers
on their heads is more likely to have severe health implications for women and girls, such as backache and
headaches, and other problems, such as anxiety, stress,
light-headedness, vomiting and vertigo after walking
many hours with a huge gallon of water (UN-HABITAT/
GWA, 2006).
With increasing contamination of surface water and
groundwater sources, women, as primary collectors
of water, are the ﬁrst to be exposed to waterborne
diseases. This not only affects their own health and reproductive health but also often results in birth defects
and high infant mortality. Also the stigma attached to
waterborne diseases, such as urinary schistosomiasis
in women affects their own health-seeking behaviour
and access to health care.
Both men and women suffer indignity and ill health
from inadequate sanitation. However, men, women
and children have different sanitation needs, and these
need to be kept in mind when designing sanitation
facilities. It is also important to facilitate privacy and

WATER AND GENDER

751

security in common facilities for young children and
women.
Lack of water and sanitation perpetuates gender inequality and disempowers women in different ways.
Particularly in water-scarce regions, millions of girls
are unable to attend school because they must fetch
water for their households. In addition, lack of sanitation facilities in schools keeps young girls out of school,
especially during puberty, limiting their opportunity for
continuing their education, consequently limiting their
life and livelihood choices. The time spent fetching
and collecting water and caring for children and family members made ill by waterborne diseases and their
own associated health problems reduces women’s opportunities to engage in productive work.
In general, not having access to clean water and adequate sanitation is a major cause of poverty and
malnutrition; the associated ill health traps vulnerable
households in cycles of poverty, undermining the productivity of the poor people and reinforcing economic
inequalities.
35.2.7 Gender dimensions of water-related disasters
Thousands of women and men die worldwide every
year as a result of water-related disasters. It is predicted that climate change will further increase the number of human deaths from heat waves, ﬂoods, storms
and droughts, as these extreme weather events will
increase in frequency and intensity. Although there is
not enough sex-disaggregated data available on how
these disasters affect men and women, there are indications that mortality differences by sex may vary
from one country to another and by type of hazard.
Recent information on the impact of the tsunami in
December 2004 suggests that women and girls may
be more vulnerable to some natural disasters as a result of less access to information and life skills development, and culturally constrained mobility of women
outside of their homes. Many more women than men
died in several locations hit by the tsunami, and a large
number of them were between 19–29 years of age,
suggesting a combination of increased vulnerability
of women staying home with children at the time of
the sea level rise and the more fortunate situation of
some of the young men who were far away from the
coastline, ﬁshing at sea or out in the agricultural ﬁelds
(Oxfam International, 2005).

752

CHAPTER 35

Strategies and responses developed to mitigate the
impacts of water-related disasters are usually designed for the entire population of the vulnerable area,
and use existing social structures for decision-making
and communicating information. Responses would be
more effective if the different needs, constraints and
strengths of different groups of men and women in
the local community were identiﬁed and this information was used while preparing mitigation and response
strategies and plans.
As the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
points out on the basis of its experience, natural disasters often offer women the opportunity to challenge
their gendered status in society. Not only do women
take up traditionally male tasks outside their domestic
spheres, but often do so against the wishes of the men
in the community, thus challenging their perceived
roles in society. Women are ‘most effective at mobilizing the community to respond to disasters’, and as a
result of their response efforts, women are developing new skills, such as natural resource and agricultural
management, which in the presence of appropriate
enabling frameworks, could represent opportunities for
income generation (PAHO, 2001).

35.3 The way forward
Over many decades, the UN has made signiﬁcant progress in advancing gender equality, including through
landmark agreements, such as the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action, and the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (CEDAW), and setting up of UN Women to accelerate progress in achieving gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Water and Gender is listed as one of
UN-Water’s Thematic Priority Areas in its 2010–2011 Work
Programme and promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women worldwide is one of UNESCO’s
two global priorities for 2008–2013 (UNESCO, 2009).
There is enough evidence to show that integrating a
gender-sensitive approach to development can have a
positive impact on the effectiveness and sustainability
of water interventions and on the conservation of water
resources. Involving both men and women in the design
and implementation of interventions leads to effective
new solutions to water problems; helps governments
avoid poor investments and expensive mistakes; makes
projects more sustainable; ensures that infrastructure
development yields the maximum social and economic returns; and furthers development goals, such as

SPECIAL REPORTS

reducing hunger, child mortality, and improving gender
equality (Oxfam International, 2005 and 2007).

đƫ
Although it is true that many socially constructed barriers need to be overcome to facilitate the involvement of both men and women in decision-making and
management of water resources, it is also true that
traditional gender roles have often been challenged
successfully by developing women’s capacities to
manage water interventions and providing them with
opportunities to play leadership roles and improve
their economic conditions. However, these successes
are more often limited to the local context as the larger
issues, such as providing water rights to women, are
governed by externalities which are not only outside
the purview of these interventions, but involve traditional, cultural and political realities that are difficult to
change in the short-term, and require long-term commitment from policy-makers, governments, politicians
and advocacy groups.
It is clear that to meet future challenges in water in all
its uses it is necessary to decrease the gender gap in
water. Opportunities for addressing these challenges
call for greater participation by women for which new
methods of water governance would be required, actions would need to be taken to improve women’s
access to productive resources and capacities would
need to be built to facilitate these changes and make
them effective. Suggested below are action points in
three areas.
35.3.1 Mainstreaming gender considerations in water
governance
đƫ Recognize women as important decision-makers in
water governance.
đƫ Recognize the diversity of women, and social and
gender constructs in society. Identify the speciﬁc
groups of women who form the relevant stakeholder
group in a given context and enable them to participate in decision-making. Some of these speciﬁc
groups include, but are not limited to, poor women,
rural women, women in peri-urban areas, women
farmers, and women who have been denied access
to a water source due to social constructs, such
as class, ethnicity and cultural constraints in the
community.
đƫ Enable women to become members of water management institutions, such as water user organizations through by detaching water rights from land
rights, reducing membership fees and broadening

WWDR4

đƫ
đƫ
đƫ
đƫ

đƫ

the mandate of irrigation schemes to acknowledge
and include multiple water use.
Enable women to participate in the decision-making
process by organizing meetings and forums, keeping in mind the convenience of time and space for
women to attend.
Facilitate the development of the capacity of men
and women to participate in joint meetings at different levels and to listen to each other’s views.
Facilitate the development of the capacity of
women to express their views in multi-stakeholder
meetings
Establish accountability measures and indicators to
ensure that the participation of women is encouraged and facilitated.
Establish gender indicators and conduct gender audits to strengthen women’s participation in governance processes. Collection and analysis of gender
disaggregated data would need to be made mandatory for developing effective gender indicators and
conducting gender audits.
Ensure that the budgets provide for gender
mainstreaming.

35.3.2 Improving women’s access to water and other
productive resources
đƫ Recognize women as independent users of water.
đƫ Enable women to access water rights, regardless of
land ownership.
đƫ Recognize women as farmers and irrigators.
đƫ Ensure women have access to extension services,
credit and other resources for improving livelihoods.
đƫ Identify constraints that prevent different groups
of women from accessing water resources, such as
social and gender constructs, and power relations in
the community, and facilitate the removal of these
constraints.
đƫ Provide technical training to women on water management, irrigation, rainwater harvesting, other
small holder irrigation technologies and rainfed
agriculture.
đƫ Improve water supply services to cover the needs
of the poorer sections of the population by initiating reforms that make water affordable to the
poor families in urban and peri-urban areas, such
as instalment schemes for connection charges and
subsidies.
đƫ Introduce new targets for improving gender sensitive sanitation: put gender equity in water and sanitation at the centre of national poverty reduction
strategies.

WATER AND GENDER

753

35.3.3 Enhancing capacities of men and women to
understand and address gender differences and
concerns in water management
đƫ Gender sensitization for different levels of government, project and civil society staff.
đƫ Gender sensitization for men and women in the
community.
đƫ Improve, adapt and use existing tools for gender
mainstreaming in water management and governance, and provide training in how these can be used
effectively.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

2

3

While women’s access to education and employment has
improved in recent decades, the transformative potential of
those changes has been curtailed by persisting inequalities
in the gender distribution of resources. There is an implicit
assumption that as economic opportunities for women expand,
households will adjust the gender division of unpaid labour
in ways that allow women to respond to changing market
incentives on an equal basis with men. Experience has not
borne this assumption out. Women’s increasing participation
in paid work has not been accompanied by a commensurate
increase in men’s share of unpaid work within the home. The
gender division of unpaid domestic work has displayed a
remarkable resilience and continues to shape the terms on
which women are able to take up paid work. It limits the
transformative potential of employment for the position of
women within the home and in the wider society (UNDESA,
2009).
Agro-business refers to modern economic activities devoted to
the production, processing and distribution of food and ﬁbre
products and by-products (as opposed to family farms). In highly
industrialized countries, many activities essential to agriculture
are carried out separately from the farm. Many of these farms use
extensive mechanization and computer technology to increase
production (Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2011).
The International Network on Gender and Sustainable Energy
(ENERGIA) has recommended that environmental and social
impact assessments of proposed biofuel projects or programs
should include an evaluation of gender-differentiated impacts –
through consultative processes designed to ensure substantial
participation of women – and that gender equity should be one
of the principles considered in those assessments.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Arndt, C., Benﬁca, R., Tarp, F., Thurlow, J., Uaiene, R. 2009.
Biofuels, poverty, and growth: a computable general
equilibrium analysis of Mozambique. IOP Conference
Series: Earth and Environmental Science, Vol. 6 (2009)
102008. doi:10.1088/1755-1307/6/0/102008

754

CHAPTER 35

Das, B., Chan E. K., Visoth C., Pangare G., Simpson, R. 2010.
Sharing the Reform Process: Learning from the Phnom
Penh Water Supply Authority. Gland, Switzerland/Bangkok/
Phnom Penh, IUCN/PPWSA.
Encyclopaedia Britannica. 2011. http://www.britannica.com/
EBchecked/topic/9513/agribusiness (Accessed 14 November
2011.)
FAO (Food and Agricultural Organization). 1999. Women –
Users, Preservers and Managers of Agrobiodiversity. Rome,
FAO.
––––. 2006. Agriculture, Trade Negotiations and Gender.
Prepared by Zoraida García with contributions from
Jennifer Nyberg and Shayma Owaise Saadat, FAO
Gender and Population Division, Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
––––. 2008. Urban Agriculture for Sustainable Poverty
Alleviation and Food Security. Rome, FAO. http://www.
fao.org/ﬁleadmin/templates/FCIT/PDF/UPA_-WBpaperFinal_Draft-3_October_2008-FG-WOB.pdf (Accessed 14
November 2011.)
––––. 2010a. Evaluation of FAO’s Role and Work Related to
Water, Final Report. Rome, FAO Office of Evaluation. http://
typo3.fao.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/oed/docs/FAO_
Role_Related_to_Water_2010_ER_.zip
––––. 2010b. FAO at Work 2009–2010: Growing Food for Nine
Billion. Rome, FAO.
––––. 2011. The State of Food and Agriculture: Women in
Agriculture, Closing the Gender Gap for Development.
Rome, FAO.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development).
2005. Participatory Irrigation Development Programme
(PIDP) in the United Republic of Tanzania: Supervision
Report. Rome, IFAD.
––––. 2007. Gender and Water: Securing Water for Improved
Rural Livelihoods: The Multiple-uses Systems Approach.
Rome, IFAD, p. 2.
Karlsson, G., and Banda, K. (eds.). 2009. Biofuels for
Sustainable Rural Development and Empowerment
of Women: Case Studies from Africa and Asia. The
Netherlands, ENERGIA Secretariat.
Lambrou, Y., and Laub, R. 2006. Gender, Local Knowledge,
and Lessons Learnt in Documenting and Conserving
Agrobiodiversity. Research Paper 2006/69. United Nations
University, Helsinki, UNU-WIDER (World Institute for
Development Economics Research).
Ledo, C. 2004. Inequality and Access to Water in the Cities of
Cochabamba and La Paz-El Alto. Case Study prepared for
the research project on Commercialization, Privatization
and Universal Access to Water. United Nations Research
Institute for Sustainable Development. http://www.unrisd.
org/unrisd/website/projects.nsf/(httpAuxPages)/3810D5F
1B5474815C1256F41003D49D1?OpenDocument&category=
Case+Studies (Accessed 14 November 2011.)
Oxfam International. 2005. The Tsunami’s Impact on Women.
Oxfam Brieﬁng Note. UK, Oxfam. http://www.oxfam.org.
uk/what_we_do/issues/conﬂict_disasters/downloads/bn_
tsunami_women.pdf (Accessed 14 November 2011.)

SPECIAL REPORTS

Oxfam International. 2007. Climate Alarm – Disasters Increase
as Climate Change Bites. Oxfam Brieﬁng Paper 108. UK,
Oxfam. http://www.oxfam.org.uk/resources/policy/climate_
change/downloads/bp108_weather_alert.pdf. (Accessed
14 November 2011.)
PAHO (Pan-American Health Organization). 2001. Gender and
Natural Disasters. Fact Sheet of the Program on Women,
Health and Development. Washington DC, PAHO.
Pangare G., and Pangare, V. 2008. Informal Water
Vendors and Service Providers in Uganda: The Ground
Reality. Research Paper for The Water Dialogues,
UK. http://www.waterdialogues.org/documents/
InformalWaterVendorsandServiceProvidersinUganda.pdf
World Bank. 2006. Reengaging in Agricultural Water
Management: Challenges and Options. Washington DC,
World Bank.
––––. 2007. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for
Development. Washington DC, World Bank.
––––. 2010. Rainfed Agriculture. http://water.worldbank.org/
water/topics/agricultural-water-management/rainfedagriculture (Accessed 14 November 2011.)
World Bank, FAO and IFAD (World Bank; Food and Agriculture
Organization; International Fund for Agricultural Development).
2009. Gender and Agriculture Sourcebook. Washington DC,
World Bank.
UN (United Nations). 2009. Agriculture Development and
Food Security. Report of the Secretary-General, 64th Session,
Item 62 of the provisional agenda, 3 August 2009. http://
daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N09/439/03/
PDF/N0943903.pdf?OpenElement (Accessed 14 November
2011.)

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2004.
Water Governance for Poverty Reduction: Key Issues and
the UNDP Response to the Millennium Development Goals.
New York, UNDP, p. 10.
––––. 2006. Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty and the Global
Water Crisis. Human Development Report 2006. New York,
UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/en/media/HDR06-complete.pdf
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization). 2009. Priority Gender Equality Action Plan
2008–2013. Paris, France, UNESCO Division for Gender
Equality, Bureau of Strategic Planning. http://www.unesco.
org/genderequality
UN-HABITAT/GWA (United Nations Settlement Programme/
Gender Water Alliance). 2006. Navigating Gender in
African Cities: Synthesis Report on Rapid Gender and ProPoor Assessment in 17 African Cities. Nairobi, UN-HABITAT.
Van Koppen, B. 2002. A Gender Performance Indicator for
Irrigation: Concepts, Tools, and Applications. International
Water Management Institute (IWMI) Research Report 59.
Colombo, Sri Lanka, IWMI.
Van Koppen, B., Moriarty, P. and Boelee, E. 2006. MultipleUse Water Services to Advance the Millennium
Development Goals. International Water Management
Institute (IWMI) Research Report 98. Colombo, Sri Lanka,
IWMI.
WHO and UNICEF (World Health Organization and United
Nations Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking-Water: 2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation.

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and
Social Affairs). 2009. World Survey on the Role of Women
in Development. Report of the Secretary General, Women’s
Control over Economic Resources and Access to Financial
Resources, Including Microﬁnance. New York, UN, Chapter III.

WWDR4

WATER AND GENDER

755

CHAPTER 36
Groundwater

WWAP, in collaboration with UNESCO-IHP
—
Author Jac van der Gun
Contributors Frank van Weert (UNESCO IGRAC) and Cheryl van Kempen (UNESCO
IGRAC)
Acknowledgements Comments on successive drafts: Michela Miletto (WWAP),
Alice Aureli (UNESCO-IHP), Olcay Ünver (WWAP), Richard Connor (WWAP), Holger
Treidel (UNESCO-IHP), Alexandros Makarigakis (UNESCO-IHP) and Lucilla Minelli
(UNESCO-IHP)

© Shutterstock/OPIS

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Knowledge on the world’s groundwater resources, their functions and their use is quickly
increasing and views on groundwater and its interlinkages are changing accordingly.
Groundwater is globally a resource in transition: during the twentieth century, groundwater
exploitation started booming (the ‘silent revolution’), resulting in much higher beneﬁts
from groundwater than ever before, but triggering unprecedented changes in the state of
groundwater as well.
The key issues to be addressed to ensure the sustainability of groundwater resources are
groundwater storage depletion (declining water levels) and groundwater pollution.
Climate change will affect groundwater, but groundwater is more resilient than surface water,
due to its characteristic buffer capacity. Therefore, in areas where climate change will cause
water resources to become scarcer, the relative role of groundwater may become more
prominent.
Groundwater governance is complex and needs to be tailored to local conditions. In
transboundary aquifer systems, the international dimension adds complexity.

36.1 Groundwater in a web of
interdependencies
Addressing groundwater in a separate chapter of
WWDR4 underlines the importance of groundwater
in relation to coping with risks and uncertainties in a
changing world, but should not suggest that groundwater systems can be understood and properly managed on the basis of hydrogeological information
only, nor in isolation from surface water. On the contrary, groundwater is a component of the hydrological cycle and interacts closely with other components
of this cycle, at various temporal and spatial scales. It
is also involved in various other cycles, such as chemical cycles (solute transport) and biochemical cycles
(biosphere), and is affected by climate change resulting from changes in the carbon cycle. In addition,
groundwater interactions and interdependencies are
not limited to physical systems, such as surface waters,
soils, ecosystems, oceans, lithosphere and atmosphere,
but are related as well to socio-economic, legal, institutional and political systems. Hence, groundwater is
entrenched in a web of interdependencies. Changes
in the state of groundwater systems are taking place
due to these interdependencies, and causal chains link
these changes to the drivers of change (root causes).

36.2 Panorama of change

The total volume of fresh groundwater stored on Earth
is believed to be 8–10 million km3 (Margat, 2008),
which is more than two thousand times the current
annual withdrawal of surface water and groundwater
combined. This is a huge volume, but where are these
freshwater buffers located and what fraction of their
stock is available for depletion? Figure 36.1 answers
the ﬁrst question by showing the geographic distribution of the world’s major groundwater basins (blue
map units – covering 36% of the area of the continents). This is where the main groundwater buffers
are located. Additional ones, but less continuous and
smaller, are present in the areas with complex hydrogeological structure (green map units – 18%) and to a
lesser extent even in the remaining 46% of the area of
the continents. The groundwater buffers allow the convenient bridging of periodic, seasonal or multi-annual
dry periods, without the risk of sudden unexpected
water shortages. In large parts of the globe, sustainable groundwater development is possible by the alternation of storage depletion during dry periods and
storage recovery during wet periods. The groundwater reservoirs are rather insensitive for variations in the
length of the dry periods and therefore resilient to this
aspect of climate variation and climate change. In principle it is possible to ignore the sustainability criterion
and exploit a large part of the stored groundwater volumes, but in practice it is unattractive and difficult to
do so, because depletion comes at a cost, as explained
in Section 36.3.

36.2.1 Increasing knowledge of the world’s
groundwater
Signiﬁcant advances in the knowledge of the world’s
groundwater have been witnessed in recent years.
While they are observed at all scale levels, the focus in

Recent outcomes of the Gravity Recovery and Climate
Experiment (GRACE) mark a major step forward in assessing groundwater storage variations in some of the
world’s major aquifer systems (Famiglietti et al., 2009;

Different categories of drivers are behind the processes
of change in groundwater systems. Demographic drivers
and socio-economic drivers explain to a large extent water demands, pollution loads and people’s behaviour with
respect to groundwater. Science and technological innovation have put their footmarks as well on the use and
state of many groundwater systems around the world
(e.g. by systematic aquifer exploration and improved drilling and pumping technologies). Policy, law and ﬁnance
form an important category of drivers behind planned
change, in the context of groundwater resources development and management. Climate variability and change
affect in particular aquifers in arid and semi-arid regions
(changes in groundwater recharge, water demands and
availability of alternative sources of fresh water) and in
coastal zones (sea level rise). Finally, natural and anthropogenic hazards may cause sudden rather than gradual
changes in the state of groundwater systems.

758

this World Water Development Report is on the global
and regional scales. Important achievements are the
consolidated version of the Groundwater Resources
Map of the World (WHYMAP, 2008; Figure 36.1); the
outcomes of global-scale hydrological modelling,
such as on worldwide groundwater recharge with
the WaterGAP Global Hydrological Model (Döll and
Fiedler, 2008) and on groundwater depletion with
PCR-GLOBWB (Wada et al., 2010); a global assessment of current groundwater use for irrigation (Siebert
et al., 2010) and a comprehensive monograph on the
geography of the world’s groundwater (Margat, 2008).
Special attention for transboundary aquifers has resulted in rapidly increasing documentation and tools on
transboundary aquifers (Section 36.4).

CHAPTER 36

SPECIAL REPORTS

FIGURE 36.1
Groundwater resources of the world

120°

150°

90°

60°

0°

30°

30°

60°

90°

120°

180°

150°

St. Petersburg
Moscow

60°

60°

London
Paris
Shenyang
Beijing
Seoul
Tianjin
Tokyo
Shanghai
Osaka

Chicago
Istanbul

New York

Tehran

Los Angeles
30°

Lahore

Cairo
Mexico City

Calcutta Dhaka

Mumbai
Bangalore
Bogota

30°

Delhi

Karachi

Hong Kong
Hyderabad

Madras Bangkok

Manila

Lagos

0°

0°

Kinshasa
Jakarta
Lima
Rio de Janeiro
Sao Paulo
30°

30°

Santiago

Sydney

Buenos Aires

60°

60°

0

1000

Groundwater resources and recharge (mm/year)
very high

high
300

medium
100

low
20

2000

3000

4000

5000 km

Surface water and geography
very low

2

0

major river
in major groundwater basins

large freshwater lake

in areas with complex
hydrogeological structure

large saltwater lake

!

selected city
country boundary

continuous ice sheet

in areas with local and shallow aquifers

Source: BGR and UNESCO, from WHYMAP (2008).

Rodell et al., 2009; Tiwari et al., 2009; Muskett and
Romanovsky, 2009; Moiwo et al., 2009; Bonsor et al.,
2010; Chen et al., 2009). The results of the experiment
suggest that satellite mapping of the Earth’s gravity
ﬁeld (satellite gravimetry) is a promising innovative
technique for hydrogeological investigations in the
near future1, for monitoring long-term trends, seasonal variations and variations during droughts. Global
simulation models linking the terrestrial and atmospheric components of the hydrological cycle are likely
to become another important tool to enhance the
knowledge of groundwater regimes, in particular for
exploring how they may respond to climate change
(Döll, 2009).
36.2.2 The ‘silent revolution’
Driven by population growth, technological and scientiﬁc progress, economic development and the need for
food and income, groundwater abstraction across the
world has explosively increased during the twentieth

WWDR4

century. By far the largest share of the additional abstracted volumes has been allocated to irrigated agriculture. The boom in groundwater development for
irrigation started in Italy, Mexico, Spain and the United
States during the early part of the twentieth century
(Shah et al., 2007). A second wave began in South
Asia, the North China Plain, and parts of the Middle
East and North Africa during the 1970s, and still continues. The authors perceive a likely third wave of increasing abstractions in many regions of Africa and in
some South and Southeast Asian countries such as Sri
Lanka and Viet Nam. This worldwide boom in groundwater abstraction has resulted largely from numerous
individual decisions by farmers, without centralized
planning or coordination, and has been named the ’silent revolution’ (Llamas and Martínez-Santos, 2005).
Based on recent estimates at country level (IGRAC,
2010; Margat; 2008; Siebert et al., 2010, AQUASTAT,
2011; EUROSTAT, 2011), the world’s aggregated

GROUNDWATER

759

FIGURE 36.2

TABLE 36.1

Groundwater abstraction trends in selected
countries (in cubic kilometres per year)

Top 10 groundwater abstracting countries
(as at 2010)

km3 per year

Country

300

250

Abstraction (km3/year)

1 India

251

2 China

112

3 USA

112

4 Pakistan

64

5 Iran

60

6 Bangladesh

35

7 Mexico

29

8 Saudi Arabia

23

9 Indonesia

14

10 Italy

14

200

150

100

Note: Around 72% of the global groundwater abstraction takes
place in these ten countries only.

50

global consumptive use of water in irrigation3 (Siebert
et al., 2010).

0
1950

1960

India
Mexico

1970

USA

China

Saudi Arabia

1980
Pakistan
Russia

1990

2000

2010

Iran
France

Source: Adapted from Margat (2008, ﬁg. 4.6, p. 107).

groundwater abstraction as at 2010 is estimated to
be approximately 1000 km3 per year, of which about
67% is used for irrigation, 22% for domestic and 11%
for industrial purposes (IGRAC, 2010)2. The lion’s share
of the total quantity (two-thirds) is abstracted in Asia,
with India, China, Pakistan, Iran and Bangladesh as
major consumers (Tables 36.1 and 36.2). The global
groundwater abstraction rate has at least tripled over
the last 50 years and is increasing at an annual rate between 1 and 2%. Nevertheless, in some countries where
intensive groundwater development started early,
abstraction rates have peaked and now are stable or
even decreasing (Shah et al., 2007), as is illustrated
in Figure 36.2. Although the global estimates are not
accurate, they suggest that the current global abstraction of groundwater represents approximately 26%
of total fresh water withdrawal on Earth (Table 36.2)
and that its rate corresponds to some 8% of the mean
globally aggregated rate of groundwater recharge.
Groundwater is supplying almost half of all drinking water in the world (WWAP, 2009) and 43% of the

760

CHAPTER 36

The silent revolution has contributed tremendously to economic development and welfare in many
countries of the world, especially in the rural areas.
Nevertheless, it has also introduced unprecedented
problems that are in some areas difficult to control
(Section 36.3).
36.2.3 Changing views on groundwater
Groundwater has become an interdisciplinary subject,
no longer the exclusive domain of hydrogeologists and
engineers, but also addressed by economists, sociologists, ecologists, climatologists, lawyers, institutional experts and communication specialists. Analysing groundwater from different angles puts it in a wider context,
resulting in changing views on this natural resource.
There are changing views regarding the value and
functions of groundwater. Measuring the importance
of groundwater by comparing its recharge rate, withdrawal or stored volume to those of surface water is
gradually being replaced by more economically oriented approaches, focused on the ‘added value’ produced by groundwater. Groundwater often produces
higher economic returns per unit of water used in irrigation than surface water (Llamas and Garrido, 2007;
Shah, 2007), because its stored volume reduces risk.
Awareness is growing that functions and services of a

SPECIAL REPORTS

TABLE 36.2
Key estimates on global groundwater abstraction (2010)

Continent

Groundwater abstraction1

Compared to total water
abstraction

Irrigation
(km3/year)

Domestic
(km3/year)

Industrial
(km3/year)

99

26

18

143

5

7

2

South America

12

8

Europe (including
Russian Federation)

23

Africa

North America
Central America
and the Caribbean

Asia
Oceania
World

1
2

Total water
abstraction2
(km3/year)

Share of
groundwater
(%)

15

524

27

14

1

149

9

6

26

3

182

14

37

16

76

8

497

15

27

15

2

44

4

196

23

497

116

63

676

68

2 257

30

4

2

1

7

1

26

25

666

212

108

986

100

3 831

26

Total
(km3/year)

%

Estimated on the basis of IGRAC (2010), AQUASTAT (2011), EUROSTAT (2011), Margat (2008) and Siebert et al. (2010).
Average of the 1995 and 2025 ‘business as usual scenario’ estimates presented by Alcamo et al. (2003).

groundwater system go beyond water withdrawal and
include a number of in situ services as well, such as
the support of ecosystems, phreatophytic agriculture,
spring ﬂow and base ﬂow; the prevention of land subsidence and seawater intrusion; and the potential for
exploiting geothermal energy or storing heat.
A second category of changing views refers to the role
of people. Not long ago, diagnostic analysis and management of groundwater resources was based almost
exclusively on the analysis of the physical components
(groundwater systems and related ecosystems). There
is wide consensus now that socio-economic aspects
deserve ample attention as well and that groundwater
resources management is likely to be successful only if
stakeholders are involved and if adequate groundwater
institutions, legislation and related regulatory frameworks exist.

36.2.4 Conjunctive management, Integrated Water
Resources Management and beyond
Groundwater is no longer explored and exploited as
an isolated resource. After the advantages of conjunctive use of groundwater and surface water were recognized, already long ago (Todd, 1959), the notion of
conjunctive management has been embraced. Under
this paradigm the water resources are not only used
but also managed, whereby surface water and groundwater are managed jointly as components of a single
system. It may include Managed Aquifer Recharge
(MAR), the intentional storage of water in aquifers for
subsequent recovery or environmental beneﬁt, applied
in countless small and large schemes around the world
(Dillon, 2009). MAR includes groundwater level control
in ﬂat areas by manipulating surface water levels, such
as widely practiced in The Netherlands.

Further, the debate on climate change has made clear
that hydrogeologists and hydrologists have to abandon their traditional implicit assumption of stochastic
stationarity of natural hydrological ﬂuxes. The assumption that groundwater recharge rates assessed in the
past would provide an unbiased estimate for future
conditions is no longer appropriate.

A next step is integration across water use sectors, as advocated by Integrated Water Resources
Management (IWRM): the coordinated development
and management of water, land and related resources, aiming for maximum economic and social welfare
without compromising the sustainability of ecosystems
and the environment (GWP, 2011). This cross-sectoral

WWDR4

GROUNDWATER

761

approach to water has replaced in many countries the
previous traditional, fragmented sectoral approaches
that ignored the interconnection between the different
water uses and services. There are tendencies towards
a higher level of integration of area-speciﬁc strategic
planning, in search of better coherence between policy
domains, such as water resources management, land
use planning, nature conservation, environmental management and economic development.
36.2.5 Increasing international focus on groundwater
Groundwater, a local natural resource producing
mainly local beneﬁts, is progressively subject to initiatives at the international level. Initiatives such as the
World-wide Hydrogeological Mapping and Assessment
Programme (WHYMAP), International Groundwater
Resources Assessment Centre (IGRAC), Groundwater
Management Advisory Team (GWMATE), International
Waters Learning Exchange and Resource Network
(IW:LEARN), Internationally Shared Aquifers Resources
Management Programme (ISARM) and global hydrological modelling are based on the idea that exchanging, sharing, compiling and analysing area-speciﬁc
information on groundwater contribute to dissemination of knowledge and produce added value by
providing views at a higher level of spatial aggregation. Several international initiatives are triggering or
guiding action in the ﬁeld of groundwater assessment,
monitoring or management. Examples not speciﬁc for
groundwater are the Millennium Development Goals
and the European Water Framework Directive (WFD).
Recent groundwater-speciﬁc initiatives in this category are transboundary aquifer projects in the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) International Waters (IW)
portfolio, the new European Groundwater Directive
(‘daughter directive’ of the WFD), the Draft Articles
on the Law of Transboundary Aquifers and the establishment of the African Groundwater Commission.
Several recent international declarations, including
the Alicante Declaration (IGME, 2006) and the African
Groundwater Declaration demonstrate growing awareness on the relevance of groundwater and the willingness to address it.

36.3 Key issues on groundwater
36.3.1 Declining groundwater levels and storage
depletion
The silent revolution caused an unprecedented increase in groundwater withdrawal across the globe.
It has produced enormous socio-economic beneﬁts around the world, but not without modifying

762

CHAPTER 36

drastically the hydrogeological regimes of many aquifers, in particular poorly recharged aquifers. The
stress placed on groundwater systems by groundwater
abstraction builds up when the ratio of abstraction to
mean recharge increases. Figure 36.3 shows the geographical variation of the corresponding groundwater development stress indicator. The highest stresses occur in the more arid parts of the world. As the
groundwater development stress indicator is averaged over entire countries, it cannot reveal stressed
aquifer systems much smaller in size. As a result of
intensive groundwater development, steady depletion of groundwater storage, accompanied by continuously declining groundwater levels, has spread over
signiﬁcant parts of the arid and semi-arid zones. This
produces a wide range of problems (Van der Gun and
Lipponen, 2010) and in many areas a lack of control
threatens to result in a complete loss of the groundwater resource as an affordable source of irrigation and
domestic water supply. In the more seriously affected
aquifer zones, multi-annual groundwater level declines
are typically in the range of one to several metres per
year (Margat, 2008).
Prominent aquifers characterized by very signiﬁcant
long-term groundwater level declines are almost all
located in the world’s arid and semi-arid zones. In
North America they include the Californian Central
Valley (Famiglietti, 2009) and the High Plains aquifer
(McGuire, 2009; Sophocleus, 2010) in the USA, as well
as aquifers scattered over Mexico, including the Basin
of Mexico aquifer (Carrera-Hernández and Gaskin,
2007). In Europe, the aquifers of the Upper Guadiana
basin, the Segura basin and the volcanics of Gran
Canaria and Tenerife can be mentioned, all belonging
to Spain (Custodio, 2002; Llamas and Custodio, 2003;
Molinero et al., 2008). Various zones of the huge
non-renewable North-Western Sahara Aquifer System
(Mamou et al., 2006; OSS, 2008) and the Nubian
Sandstone Aquifer System in North Africa (Bakhbakhi,
2006) are affected by signiﬁcant groundwater level
declines. On the Arabian Peninsula, there are unprecedented trends of strongly declining groundwater levels
in the Tertiary aquifer system of the Arabian Platform
(mainly in Saudi Arabia; Brown, 2011) and in the Yemen
Highland basins (Van der Gun et al., 1995). More eastward, the Varamin, Zarand and many other mountain
basins of Iran suffer from steadily declining groundwater levels (Vali-Khodjeini, 1995; Motagh et al., 2008)
as do parts of the extensive aquifer systems of the
Indus basin, especially in the Indian states of Rajasthan,

SPECIAL REPORTS

Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi (Rodell et al., 2009;
Centre for Water Policy, 2005). The North China Plain
aquifer has become notorious for severe groundwater
level declines (Jia and You, 2010; Kendy et al., 2004;
Sakura et al., 2003; Liu et al., 2001; Endersbee, 2006).
Finally, continuous groundwater outﬂow through numerous artesian wells has produced groundwater level
declines in excess of 100 m in parts of the Australian
Great Artesian Basin (Habermehl, 2006). There are numerous other aquifers around the world where levels
have declined or are still declining, with variable impacts on society and the environment.
New, useful information on the magnitude of groundwater storage depletion has become available in recent
years. Konikow and Kendy (2005) estimate that about
700–800 km3 of groundwater has been depleted from
aquifers in the USA during the twentieth century. Recent
assessments by GRACE of the massive groundwater
storage depletion observed in California’s Central Valley
and in north-western India have produced groundwater storage depletion estimates for some large groundwater systems (Rodell et al., 2009; Famiglietti et al.,
2009; Tiwari et al., 2009). These estimates are shown in
Table 36.3, together with estimated depletion rates for
other large aquifer systems around the world. A model

study by Wada et al. (2010) provides a global picture.
The model estimates that by the year 2000 the world’s
groundwater was being depleted at a rate of 283 km3
per year, corresponding with 39% of the global abstraction rate as estimated by the authors4. The global pattern of groundwater depletion produced by this model
matches existing knowledge on areas notorious for
large and persistent groundwater level declines, such as
in western North America, the Middle East, South and
Central Asia and North China.
Depleting groundwater storage comes at a cost. This
cost is not limited to a permanently higher unit cost
of pumped groundwater, but may also include negative impacts on environmental and other in situ functions of the groundwater system, water quality degradation and even, in the long run, physical exhaustion
of the aquifer. In some cases, however, there may be
good reasons for planned groundwater depletion
during a ﬁnite period and for accepting the associated negative impacts. This may be so in case of sudden disasters or if there is a need to buy time for a
smooth transition to sustainable groundwater development after dynamic equilibrium conditions have
been disturbed by exploding pumping intensities or
by climate change.

FIGURE 36.3
Groundwater development stress indicator at country level (based on groundwater abstraction estimates for 2010)

© 2011

Abstraction (2010) as a percentage
of mean annual recharge

0-2
2 - 20
20 - 50
50 - 100
>100
no data

Source: Prepared by IGRAC for this chapter.

WWDR4

GROUNDWATER

763

The risks and problems resulting from declining water
levels vary from aquifer to aquifer, as do options and
current practices for control. The situation on the High
Plains is typical for numerous intensively exploited
aquifers in the world, large and small. On the one
hand there is a growing awareness of the need to stop
depleting the resource; on the other hand, reducing
groundwater abstraction to a sustainable level seems
disastrous for the local economy and is not readily
accepted by many individual stakeholders who risk to
lose part of their income if groundwater abstractions
are curtailed (Peck, 2007; McGuire, 2009; Sophocleous,
2010). A similar dilemma is present in the much smaller
Sana’a basin in Yemen: effective partnerships with
water users seem the only way to prevent catastrophic
water shortages in the near future (Hydrosult et al.,
2010). In the Umatilla basin (Oregon) a communitybased approach is attempted to manage conﬂicts
resulting from aquifer depletion (Jarvis, 2010). The
Great Artesian Basin (Australia) is completely
different: massive waste of water freely ﬂowing
from artesian wells can be eliminated by technical
solutions. Although their implementation is expensive,
these measures are less controversial because there
is no explicit conﬂict of interests (Habermehl, 2006;
Herczeg and Love, 2007; SKM, 2008; GABCC, 2009).
Shallow alluvial aquifers in arid and semi-arid zones
form a special category. Due to their limited storage
capacity, they are affected by seasonal rather than

long-term depletion problems. Increasing abstraction rates shorten the period between the recharge
season and the moment that wells run seasonally
dry. Awareness of this phenomenon motivates people
to conserve, even more so if springs and qanats5 are
linked to the system. Although groundwater depletion
risks tend to be insigniﬁcant for groundwater systems
in humid climates, control of groundwater levels may
still be important, especially to prevent undesired environmental impacts, such as sea water intrusion, land
subsidence and wetland degradation.
Fundamental options for controlling declining groundwater levels and storage are augmenting the groundwater resource and restricting its discharge. Resource
augmentation measures are of a technical nature and
include MAR techniques (artiﬁcial recharge) and land
use management. Once decided upon, their implementation is relatively straightforward. Different types
of measures are available for restricting pumping
from aquifers (demand management). Enforcement
of regulations (e.g. licensing well drilling and abstractions) based on groundwater legislation forms the ﬁrst
type. Alternatively, groundwater abstraction is discouraged selectively by ﬁnancial disincentives, restricting energy supply or enhancing people’s awareness
on sustainability problems. A third type of measures
for restricting groundwater outﬂow is the reduction
of water losses at the well head and in transport (as in
the Great Artesian Basin), or where it is used (e.g. by

TABLE 36.3
Groundwater depletion rates in large aquifer systems
Aquifer or region

Lateral
extent km2

Rate of depletion
(in recent years)
km3 per year

Period
or year

Reference

mm water per year1

Renewable groundwater
High Plains, USA

483 844

12.4

26

2000–2007

McGuire (2003, 2009)

58 000

3.7

64

2003–2009

Famiglietti et al. (2009)

438 000

17.7

40

2003–2009

Rodell et al. (2009)

2 700 000

54

20

2003–2009

Tiwari et al. (2009)

131 000

6.12

47

2004

Jia and You (2010)

NW Sahara Aquifer System

1 019 000

1.5

1.5

2000

Margat (2008)

Great Artesian basin

1 700 000

0.311

0.2

1965–2000

Welsh (2006)

Central Valley, California, USA
NW India
Northern India and surroundings
North China Plain
Non-renewable groundwater

1

Expressed as depth of an equivalent layer of water over the total horizontal extent of the aquifer system (scale-independent depletion
indicator).

764

CHAPTER 36

SPECIAL REPORTS

enhancing irrigation efficiency or recycling used water). Worldwide experiences show that successfully implementing measures is difficult, especially if existing
withdrawals need to be reduced and alternative sources of water are not available. A common understanding of the problem among stakeholders and their ﬁrm
commitment to support a chosen solution are crucial.
36.3.2 Groundwater quality and pollution
Although most groundwater around the globe at conventional well drilling depths is of good quality, it remains a major concern to protect this water against
quality degradation and prevent poor quality groundwater from entering active freshwater cycles.
Trivial but important is the occurrence of brackish and
saline groundwater, unﬁt for most intended groundwater uses. Most groundwater at great depths is saline.
According to a recent global inventory (Van Weert et
al., 2009), at shallow and intermediate depths (upper
500 m below surface, approximately) bodies of brackish
or saline groundwater are found under 13% of the area
of the continents. Only 8% of the identiﬁed brackish or
saline bodies has an anthropogenic origin, with mineralization by irrigation return ﬂows as the predominant
mechanism. Risks of adding ‘new’ saline or brackish water to fresh groundwater domains are present near the
coast (sea water intrusion), in zones of irrigated lands
and at locations where liquid waste is dumped. As most
of the saline or brackish groundwater bodies are immobile, it is a good strategy to keep them in that state. The
same is true for bodies of groundwater with excessive
concentrations of other natural constituents, such as
ﬂuoride or arsenic (Appelo, 2008).
Anthropogenic groundwater pollution and its control
has been a major issue already for many decennia. It is
a complex ﬁeld due to the many sources of pollution,
the myriad of substances that may be involved, large
variations in vulnerability of aquifers, lack of monitoring data and uncertainties on impacts of excessive
concentrations of pollutants, in addition to the usual
dilemmas and problems in designing and effectively
implementing programmes for protection and control
(Morris et al., 2003; Schmoll et al., 2006). As groundwater usually is moving very slowly, groundwater pollution is almost irreversible or at least very persistent
and, therefore, preventing and monitoring pollution
inﬂuxes are basic components of any control strategy. In Europe, an important step forward is the new
Groundwater Directive (GWD), introduced in 2006

WWDR4

as an integral part of the Water Framework Directive
(WFD). GWD obliges European Union member states
to take steps leading towards compliance with good
chemical status criteria by the end of 2015. Reporting
until 2010 reveals that 30% of all groundwater bodies
is unlikely to achieve the envisaged ‘good quality status’ by 2015. However, GWD is ﬂexible and offers the
member states two options: adjusting the targets to
more feasible values and delaying the compliance until
2021 or 2027 (European Commission, 2006 and 2008;
European Environmental Agency, 2010).
Groundwater quality is also an important aspect in managed aquifer recharge. This management tool is in some
cases even purposely used to improve or control water
quality, making use of the aquifer’s capacity for attenuation and decomposition of substances, or using the injected water to prevent excessive shrinking of exploited
freshwater lenses overlaying saline groundwater. In all
cases, however, there should be an awareness that
managed aquifer recharge may also introduce risks,
including groundwater pollution risks. Page et al. (2010)
present an approach for assessing such risks.
In recent years there is growing attention for micropollutants, in particular for pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) and for endocrine disruptive compounds (EDCs) (Schmoll et al., 2006; Musolff,
2009; SIWI, 2010). Disseminated by sewage, landﬁlls
and manure, these substances occur in natural waters
in very low concentrations only (pg per L to ng per L
range) and are not removed by conventional wastewater treatment plants. There is still much uncertainty on
their possible impacts. Pharmaceuticals are designed to
be bioactive and although in groundwater they are too
diluted to provide therapeutic doses to humans and animals on the short-term, it is unknown what their effects
may be after long-term exposure. EDCs – present in
steroid-based food supplements, drugs, fungicides, herbicides and a range of household and industrial products – have the capacity to interfere with the functions
of hormones that control growth and reproduction in
humans and animals. PPCPs and EDCs are ubiquitous in
surface water and shallow groundwater, and progress in
analytical methods is likely to reveal them more widely
in future years.
36.3.3 Climate change, climate variability and sea
level rise
Climate change modiﬁes groundwater recharge. Global
hydrological models recently have produced estimates

GROUNDWATER

765

of mean annual global groundwater recharge, ranging from 12,700 km3 per year (Döll and Fiedler, 2008)
to 15,200 km3 per year (Wada et al., 2010), which is
at least three orders of magnitude smaller than the
estimated total groundwater storage. These estimates
and the corresponding spatial patterns, however, are
based on mean climatic conditions prevailing during
the second half of the twentieth century. For periods
ahead, new estimates have to be produced, taking into
account the possible inﬂuence of climate change. The
latter has been subject of model investigations by Döll
(2009), using four Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) climate change scenarios and comparing the model outcomes with those of the reference
period 1961–1990. She concludes that by the 2050s
groundwater recharge is likely to have increased in the
northern latitudes, but strongly decreased (by 30–70%
or even more) in some currently semi-arid zones, including the Mediterranean, north-eastern Brazil and
south-western Africa (Figure 36.4). Simulations for ten
other climate scenarios produced different trends for
some regions, except for the Mediterranean region and
the high northern latitudes. The four simulated scenarios in Figure 36.4 suggest a decrease of the longterm mean global groundwater recharge by more than
10%. Climate change is difficult to predict and at the
scale of tens of years it is hard to distinguish it from
the climate variability as produced by El Niño Southern
Oscillation (ENSO), Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO),
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) and other inter-annual to multi-decadal climate oscillations
(Gurdak et al., 2009).
Climate change will not only change mean annual
groundwater recharge and surface water ﬂow, it is
expected to also affect their distribution in time. Wet
episodes may become more concentrated in time in
many regions, while dry periods tend to become longer. However, this will not signiﬁcantly affect the water
supply capacity of most groundwater systems, due to
their buffer capacity. The buffers cannot prevent longterm groundwater availability to decrease if climate
change reduces the mean recharge rates, but they facilitate a gradual adaptation to new conditions.
Climate change will also modify water demands and
water use. As the patterns of change in mean groundwater recharge shown in Figure 36.4 show positive
correlation with patterns of change in mean precipitation and mean runoff as predicted by IPCC (Bates
et al., 2008), it may be concluded that higher water

766

CHAPTER 36

demands will particularly affect areas where mean
groundwater recharge is expected to decrease. This
will produce severe problems, in the numerous small
and shallow wadi aquifer systems scattered over arid
and semi-arid regions probably more than anywhere
else (Van der Gun, 2009). Nevertheless, it is expected
that in many increasingly water-scarce areas around
the world, dependency on groundwater will increase
as the storage buffer renders groundwater more resilient than surface water sources. This is one more reason to manage groundwater carefully in such regions.
Ongoing and predicted sea level rise is largely caused
by climate change, but progressive groundwater depletion contributes to it as well. Konikow and Kendy
(2005) argue that the ultimate sink for groundwater
removed from the aquifers by depletion is the oceans.
They calculate that the total volume depleted from the
High Plains aquifer in the USA during the twentieth
century contributed 0.75 mm to sea level rise, which
is 0.5% of the total sea level rise observed during the
twentieth century. For all USA aquifers combined, the
corresponding estimates are 2.03 mm and 1.3%, respectively (Konikow, 2009). Wada et al. (2010) estimated that global groundwater storage depletion by
the year 2000 would have contributed 0.8 mm a year
to sea level rise, which is 25% of the current rate of sea
level rise according to the latest IPCC data. Assuming
this estimated depletion to be reasonably reliable, thus
a signiﬁcant part of observed sea level rise is likely to
be produced by causes other than climate change. In
relation to groundwater, the main impact of sea level
rise is intrusion of saline water into coastal aquifers.
Worldwide, sea water intrusion is a real threat to coastal aquifers and may have huge repercussions as a large
percentage of the world’s population lives in coastal zones. A series of papers in a recent issue of the
Hydrogeology Journal provides a geographic overview
of saltwater–freshwater interactions in coastal aquifers
(Barlow, 2010; Bocanegra et al., 2010; Custodio, 2010;
Steyl and Dennis, 2010; White and Falkland, 2010). A
recent study on the impact of sea level rise on coastal
groundwater in the Netherlands (Oude Essink et al.,
2010) concluded that expected sea level rise will affect
the Dutch coastal groundwater systems and trigger
saline water intrusion, but only in a narrow zone within
10 km from the coastline and the main lowland rivers.
36.3.4 Transboundary groundwater resources
Behaviour and functions of transboundary aquifers do not differ from those of other aquifers, but

SPECIAL REPORTS

FIGURE 36.4
Global pattern of estimated mean groundwater recharge in 1961–1990 and percentage change from 1961–1990
to 2041–2070 for four Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios
GWR 1961 - 1990

Groundwater recharge in mm per year
0

2

20

100 300 1050

Change of groundwater recharge in %
-100 - 70 - 30

A2 - ECHAM4

A2 - HadCM3

B2 - ECHAM4

B2 - HadCM3

-10

10

30

70

100

increase from 0

Note: Climate scenarios were computed using climate models ECHAM4 (Röckner et al., 1996) and HadCM3 (Gordon et al., 2000) on the basis
of IPCC greenhouse gas emission scenarios A2 (emissions increase during 1990–2050 from 11 to 25 Gt C per year) and B2 (from 11 to 16 Gt C per
year), respectively.
Source: Döll (2009, ﬁg. 1, p. 6).

administrative borders that cross them render coordinated development and management of their groundwater resources more complex. Borders complicate the
acquisition of consistent information on the entire aquifer, while allocating aquifer segments to different jurisdictions is at odds with the transboundary effects of
pressures within each of these segments. Information
gaps, conﬂicting interests and lack of coordination
across the boundaries easily lead to problems that are
avoidable if transboundary aquifer management approaches are adopted.
Enormous progress has been made since transboundary aquifers were put on the international agenda at
the end of the twentieth century. Regional inventories
and characterization of transboundary aquifer systems

WWDR4

have been conducted under the umbrella of the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) in
Europe (UNECE, 1999) as well as in the Caucasus, Central
Asia and South-East Europe (UNECE, 2007); and under
the ISARM programme in the Americas (UNESCO, 2007
and 2008), Africa (UNESCO, 2010a) and Asia (UNESCO,
2010b). The map Transboundary Aquifers of the World
(IGRAC, 2009), showing the locations and selected properties of 318 identiﬁed transboundary aquifers in the
world, and ISARM’s Atlas of Transboundary Aquifers (Puri
and Aureli, 2009) are both largely based on the outcomes of these regional activities.
At the level of individual aquifers, important projects
have been carried out or are ongoing in the framework of GEF’s IW focal area. As an example, the

GROUNDWATER

767

Guaraní Aquifer project (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay
and Uruguay) developed agreed transboundary aquifer management instruments and the four countries
involved signed in August 2010 an agreement on this
aquifer system.
Institutional arrangements and legal instruments are
integral parts of transboundary aquifer resources management. A study on groundwater in international law
by Burchi and Mechlem (2005) shows that international
law until recently has rarely taken account of groundwater and that only few legal instruments exist exclusively
designed for groundwater: for the Geneva aquifer, the
Nubian Sandstone aquifer and the NW Sahara aquifer
system. The development of such instruments is expected to be catalysed by the Draft Articles on the Law
of Transboundary Aquifers, jointly elaborated by the
United Nations International Law Commission (UNILC)
and the UNESCO International Hydrological Programme
(IHP) during 2002–2008 and adopted by resolution A/
RES/63/124 of the UN General Assembly in December
2008 (Stephan, 2009). Important principles included in
these Draft Articles are the obligation to cooperate and
exchange information, the no-harm principle and the
intention to protect, preserve and manage the aquifer
resources.
The UN General Assembly reaffirmed in its sixty-sixth
session on 9 December 2011 the importance of transboundary aquifers and the related Draft Articles.
It adopted a resolution in which States are encouraged
to make proper arrangements for transboundary aquifer
management and UNESCO-IHP to continue its related
scientiﬁc and technical support to the States. In addition, the General Assembly decided to put ‘The Law
of Transboundary Aquifers’ on the provisional agenda
of its sixty-eight session, in order to examine - among
others - the ﬁnal form to be given to the Draft Articles.
The momentum produced by all ongoing transboundary aquifer activities are transforming transboundary
aquifers from potential problems into opportunities for
international cooperation.

Conclusions
Groundwater – by far the largest volume of unfrozen
fresh water on Earth – is a natural resource of enormous importance, but it is hidden to the eye and poorly known and understood among the general public.
Hydrogeologists and other scientists have made signiﬁcant progress over the last few decades in collecting information on the world’s groundwater systems,

768

CHAPTER 36

understanding their role and functions, observing
changes over time, and identifying options for enhancing beneﬁts from groundwater as well as threats that
need to be addressed to safeguard the resource’s sustainability. Gradually it has become clear how strongly
the development and state of groundwater systems
are interrelated with other systems and external drivers. It has also become clear that the value of groundwater is not limited to its abstraction for multiple uses,
but includes a range of valuable in situ services, such
as support of wetlands, springs, baseﬂows and stability
of the land surface. As a result, groundwater resources management has evolved into a multi-disciplinary
activity, addressing multiple objectives and not only
focusing on physical systems and technical measures,
but also paying signiﬁcant attention to demography,
socio-economics and governance. Modern groundwater resources management approaches incorporate the
principles of conjunctive management and integrated
water resources management.
Globally aggregated values and shares in total water
supply are indicators of the relevance of groundwater,
but it is worth looking beyond the volumes of water
used. Without groundwater with its storage buffer,
many parts of the dryer regions on Earth would be inhabitable due to seasonal or permanent lack of fresh
water, and water supply in rural areas distant from permanent streams would be extremely expensive. The
economic returns per unit of water used for irrigation
and in other economic water use sectors tend to be
higher for groundwater than for other sources of water
because of groundwater’s higher reliability.
Groundwater is in transition throughout the world.
Current stresses on groundwater systems are in many
parts of the world without precedent in history, as a
result of the silent revolution and of progressive pollution inherent to modern lifestyles. These stresses are
increasing and produce considerable risk and uncertainty. Will there be enough groundwater in the future,
and will its quality meet the requirements of intended
uses? After deﬁning how to strike a balance between
using and conserving groundwater, how should a
corresponding behaviour of people be established
in relation to this open-access resource that often is
considered as common property? How should the
inﬂow of anthropogenic pollutants into aquifers be
reduced? Such questions pose enormous challenges
to the groundwater community, water managers and
local stakeholders. Solutions have to be tailored to the

SPECIAL REPORTS

speciﬁc conditions of each area. Basic to the success
of these solutions are a good understanding of the
trade-offs between groundwater abstraction and other
services of the aquifer, and the selection of measures
compatible with the socio-political setting. The risks
are in principle manageable, but their control is not
easy and requires signiﬁcant management efforts.
The buffer capacity of groundwater systems, on the
other hand, offers unique opportunities for the overall reduction of risk and uncertainty regarding water
availability, now and in the future. Changes over time
of the availability and quality of groundwater proceed
very slowly compared to those of the components of
the water cycle with smaller mean residence times,
and the predictability of these changes is much better
for groundwater. This enables groundwater to bridge
prolonged dry periods and allows time to smoothly
adjust overall water use in areas where reduced levels
of sustainable water availability are expected to result
from intensiﬁcation of water use upﬂow or from climate change.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

In June 2010 NASA and DLR signed an agreement to continue
the current GRACE mission through 2015 (NASA, 2010).

2

Most values mentioned in this paragraph are globally
aggregated or averaged and therefore cannot be used to draw
conclusions on conditions at a local or regional scale.

3

Siebert et al. (2010) estimate global consumptive irrigation
water use to be 1277 km3 per year, being 48% of the global
agricultural water withdrawals. Their estimate for the share
of groundwater in this ﬁgure (545 km3 per year), is fairly
consistent with the estimated global groundwater abstraction
for irrigation, taking into account irrigation water losses.

4

5

The accuracy of this global depletion ﬁgure obtained by
modelling is signiﬁcantly lower than most of the estimates
shown in Table 36.3. While the latter are based on observation,
the global ﬁgure is affected by groundwater abstraction data
of variable quality, highly simplifying model assumptions and
averaging over large spatial units.
A qanat is a slightly sloping tunnel, designed for tapping
groundwater and conveying it under gravity, often over a large
distance, into an open section, from where it can be diverted for use.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

References
Alcamo, J., Döll, P., Henrichs, T., Kaspar, F., Lehner, B.,
Rösch, T. and Siebert, S. 2003. Global estimates of water
withdrawals and availability under current and future
‘business-as-usual’ conditions. Hydrological Sciences
Journal, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp 339–48.
Appelo, T. (ed), 2008. Arsenic in Groundwater: A World
Problem. Proceeding Seminar Utrecht, 29 November 2006.
Netherlands National Committee of the IAH (NNC-IAH),
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
AQUASTAT. On-line database of FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/
water/aquastat/data/query/index.html (Accessed 28 August
2011.)
Bakhbahki, M. 2006. Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System.
In: Foster, S., and Loucks, D. P. 2006. Non-Renewable
Groundwater Resources. A Guidebook on Sociallysustainable Management for Water-policy Makers.
UNESCO-IHP, IHPVI, Series on Groundwater No. 10.
UNESCO, Paris, France, pp 75–81.
Barlow, P. M. and Reichard, E. G. 2010. Saltwater intrusion in
coastal regions of North America. Hydrogeology Journal,
Vol. 18, No. 1, pp 247–60.
Bates, B., Kundzewicz, Z., Wu, S. and Palutikof, J. (ed.) 2008.
Climate Change and Water. IPCC Technical Paper VI, IPCC
Secretariat, Geneva.
Bocanegra, E., Cardoso da Silva, G., Custodio, E., Manzano,
M. and Montenegro, S. 2010. State of knowledge of coastal
aquifer management in South America. Hydrogeology
Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp 261–68.
Bonsor, H. C., Mansour, M. M., MacDonald, A. M., Hughes,
A. G., Hipkin, R. G. and Bedada, T. 2010. Interpretation
of GRACE data of the Nile Basin using a groundwater
recharge model. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 7,
pp. 4501–33.
Brown, L. R. 2011. Falling water tables and shrinking harvests.
World on the Edge: How to Prevent Environmental and
Economic Collapse, Earth Policy Institute, Washington DC,
USA, pp. 21–33.
Burchi, S. and Mechlem, K. 2005. Groundwater in
International Law. Compilation of Treaties and Other Legal
Instruments. FAO Legislative Study 86. FAO, Rome, Italy,
and UNESCO, Paris, France.
Carrera-Hernández, J. J. and Gaskin, S.J. 2007. The Basin
of Mexico aquifer system: regional groundwater level
dynamics and database development. Hydrogeology
Journal, Vol. 15, No.8, pp. 1577–90.
Centre for Water Policy. 2005. Some Critical Issues on
Groundwater in India. CWP, Delhi, India.
Chen, J. L., Wilson, C. R., Tapley, B. D., Yang, Z. L. and Niu, G. Y.
2009. 2005 drought event in the Amazon River basin as
measured by GRACE and estimated by climate models.
Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 114, B05404, pp 9.
Custodio, E. 2002. Aquifer overexploitation: what does it
mean? Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 254–77.
––––. 2010. Coastal aquifers of Europe: an overview.
Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 269–80.

WWDR4

GROUNDWATER

769

Dillon, P., Pavelic, P., Page, D., Beringen, H, and Ward, J. 2009.
Managed Aquifer Recharge: An Introduction. Waterlines
Report Series No. 13, Australian Government, National
Water Commission, Canberra, Australia.

Herczeg, A. L. and Love, A. J. 2007. Review of Recharge
Mechanisms for the Great Artesian Basin. Report to the
Great Artesian Basin Coordinating Committee, CSIRO,
Australia.

Döll, P. 2009. Vulnerability to the impact of climate
change on renewable groundwater resources: a globalscale assessment. Environmental Research Letters
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/3/035006.

Hydrosult, TNO and WEC. 2010. Hydro-geological and Water
Resources Monitoring and Investigations. Project report,
Sana’a, Republic of Yemen.

Döll, P. and Fiedler, K. 2008. Global-scale modelling of
groundwater recharge. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences, 12, pp 863–885.
Endersbee, L. 2006. World’s water wells are drying up! EIR,
Vol. 33, No. 10, 10 March 2006, pp. 22–29. http://www.
larouchepub.com/other/2006/3310endersbee_water.html
European Commission. 2006. Directive 2006/118/EC of the
European Parliament of the Council of 12 December 2006
on the protection of groundwater against pollution and
deterioration. Official Journal of the European Union,
27 December 2006.
––––. 2008. Groundwater Protection in Europe. The new
Groundwater Directive – Consolidating the EU Regulatory
Framework. European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
European Environmental Agency. 2010. The European
Environment, State and Outlook 2010 – Freshwater quality.
EEA, Copenhagen, Denmark.
EUROSTAT. On-line database of the European Commission.
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
eurostat/home/ (Accessed 28 August 2011.)
Famiglietti, J., Swenson, S. and Rodell, M. 2009. Water
Storage Changes in California’s Sacramento and San
Joaquin River Basins, Including Groundwater Depletion
in the Central Valley. PowerPoint presentation, American
Geophysical Union Press Conference, 14 December 2009,
CSR, GFZ, DLR and JPL.
GABCC (Great Artesian Basin Coordinating Committee).
2008. Great Artesian Basin Strategic Management Plan:
Progress and Achievements to 2008. GABCC Secretariat,
Manuka, Australia.
Gordon, C., Cooper, C., Senior, C. A., Banks, H., Gregory, J.
M., Johns, T. C., Mitchel, J. F. B. and Wood, R. A. 2000.
The simulation of SST, sea ice extents and ocean heat
transports in a version of the Hadley Centre coupled
model without ﬂux adjustments. Climate Dynamics Vol. 16,
No. 2–3, pp. 147–168.
Gurdak, J. J., Hanson, R. T. and Green, T. R. 2009. Effects of
Climate Variability and Change on Groundwater Resources
in the United States. U. S. Geological Survey Factsheet
2009–3074. USGS, Office of Global Change, Idaho Falls,
Idaho, USA.
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2011. What is IWRM?
http://www.gwp.org/en/The-Challenge/What-is-IWRM/
(Accessed 28 February 2011.)
Habermehl, M., 2006. The Great Artesian Basin, Australia.
In: Foster, S. and D. Loucks, 2006. Non-renewable
Groundwater Resources. A Guidebook on Socially
Sustainable Management for Water-policy Makers.
UNESCO-IHP, IHPVI, Series on Groundwater No. 10,
pp. 82–88(103). UNESCO, Paris, France.

770

CHAPTER 36

IGME (Instituto Geológico y Minero de España). 2006.
The Alicante Declaration. International Symposium on
Groundwater Sustainability. Alicante, Spain, 23–27 January
2006. http://aguas.igme.es/igme/isgwas/ing/The%20
Alicante%20Declaration%20-%20Final%20Document.pdf
IGRAC (International Groundwater Resources Assessment
Centre). 2009. Transboundary Aquifers of the World. Map
at scale 1: 50 M. Special edition for the 5th World Water
Forum, Istanbul, March 2009.
IGRAC (International Groundwater Resources Assessment
Centre). 2010. Global Groundwater Information System
(GGIS). http://www.igrac.net (Accessed 23 November 2010.)
Jarvis, T. 2010. Community-based approaches to conﬂict
management: Umatilla County critical groundwater
areas, Umatilla County, Oregon, USA: NEGOTIATE Toolkit:
case studies. In NEGOTIATE – Reaching Fairer and More
Effective Water Agreements. International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Gland, Switzerland. http://
cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/northwestern.pdf
Jia, Y., and J. You. 2010. Sustainable Groundwater
Management in the North China Plain: Main Issues,
Practices and Foresights. Extended abstracts XXXVIIIrd
IAH Congress, Krakow, Poland, 12–17 Sept 2010, no 517,
pp 855–862.
Kendy, L., Zhang, Y., Liu, C., Wang, J. and Steenhuis, T. 2004.
Groundwater recharge from irrigated cropland in the
North China Plain: case study of Luancheng County, Hebei
Province, 1949–2000. Hydrological Processes 18,
pp. 2289–302.
Konikow, L., 2009. Groundwater Depletion: A National
Assessment and Global Perspective. The Californian
Colloquium on Water, 5 May 2009. http://youtube.com/
watch?v=Q5s0Uit8V6s
Konikow L. and Kendy, E. 2005. Groundwater depletion: a
global problem. Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 13, pp. 317–20.
Liu, Ch., Yu, J. and Kendy, E. 2001. Groundwater exploitation
and its impact on the environment in the North China
Plain. International Water Resource Association. Water
International, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 265–72.
Llamas, M. R. and Custodio, E. 2003. Intensive use of
groundwater: a new situation which demands proactive
action. Llamas, M.R. and Custodio, E. (eds) Intensive Use
of Groundwater: Challenges and Opportunities. Balkema
Publishers, Dordrecht.
Llamas, M. R. and Garrido, A. 2007. Lessons from intensive
groundwater use in Spain: Economic and social beneﬁts
and conﬂicts. Giordano, M. and Vilholth, K. G. (eds). 2007.
The Agricultural Groundwater Revolution: Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. CABI,
Wallingford, UK, pp. 266–95.

SPECIAL REPORTS

Llamas, M. and Martínez-Santos, P. 2005. Intensive
groundwater use: a silent revolution that cannot be
ignored. Water Science and Technology Series, Vol. 51,
No. 8, pp. 167–74.
Mamou, A., Besbes, M., Abdous, B., Latrech, D. and Fezzani, C.
2006. North Western Sahara Aquifer System. Foster, S. and
D. Loucks. 2006. Non-renewable Groundwater Resources.
A Guidebook on Socially Sustainable Management for
Water-policy Makers. UNESCO-IHP, IHPVI, Series on
Groundwater No. 10, UNESCO, Paris, France, pp. 68–74.
Margat, J. 2008. Les eaux souterraines dans le monde. Paris,
BGRM Editions/UNESCO.
McGuire, V. L. 2003. Water-level Changes in the High Plains
Aquifer, Predevelopment to 2001, 1999 to 2000, and 2000
to 2001. USGS Fact Sheet FS-078-03, 4p, USGS, Reston,
Virginia, USA.
––––. 2009. Water-level Changes in the High Plains Aquifer,
Predevelopment to 2007, 2005–06 and 2006-07. Scientiﬁc
Investigations Report 2009-5019, USGS, Reston, Virginia.
Moiwo, J. P., Yang, Y., Li, H., Han, S. and Hu, Y. 2009.
Comparison if GRACE with in siu hydrological
measurement data shows storage depletion in Hai River
basin, Northern China. Water SA, Vo. 35, No. 5, pp. 663–70.
Molinero, J., Custodio, E., Sahuquillo, A. and Llamas, M. R.
2008. Groundwater in Spain: Overview and Management
Practices. IAHR International Groundwater Symposium,
Istanbul, June 18-20, 2008. CD of proceedings.
Morris, B. L., Lawrence, A. R., Chilton, J., Adams, B., Calow, R.
and Klinck, B. A. 2003. Groundwater and its Susceptibility
to Degradation: A Global Assessment of the Problem and
Options for Management. Early Warning and Assessment
Report Series, RS 03-03, UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya.
Motagh, M., Walter, T. R., Sahriﬁ, M., Fielding, E.,
Schenk, A., Anderssohn, J. and Zschau, J. 2008. Land
subsidence in Iran caused by widespread water reservoir
overexploitation. Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 35,
L16403.
Muskett, R. D. and Romanovsky, V. E. 2009. Groundwater
storage changes in arctic permafrost watersheds from
GRACE and in situ measurements. Environmenal Research
Letters, 4 (2009) 045009, pp. 1–8.
Musolff, A. 2009. Micropollutants: challenges in hydrogeology.
Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp 763–66.
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration).
2010. NASA and DLR Sign Agreement to Continue Grace
Mission Through 2015. News and Features. Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, NASA.
10 June 2010. http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.
cfm?release=2010-195
Oude Essink, G.H.P., van Baaren, E. S. and de Louw, P.G.B.
2010. Effects of climate change on coastal groundwater
systems: A modelling study in the Netherlands. Water
Resources Research, Vol. 46, W00F04, pp. 1–16.
Page, D., Dillon, P., Vanderzalm, J., Toze, S., Sidhu, J., Barry, K.,
Levett, K., Kremer, S., and Regel, R. 2010. Risk Assessment
of aquifer storage transfer and recovery with urban
stormwater for producing water of a potable quality.
Journal of Environmental Quality, Vol. 39 (6), pp. 2029–39.

WWDR4

Peck, J. 2007. Groundwater management in the High Plains
aquifer in the USA: Legal Problems and Innovations. The
Agricultural Groundwater Revolution: Opportunities and
Threats to Development. M. Giordano and K.G. Villholth,
IWMI, (eds), Colombo, Sri Lanka. CABI, Wallingford, UK,
2007, pp 296–319.
Puri, S. and Aureli, A. 2010. Atlas of Transboundary Aquifers,
UNESCO-IHP ISARM Programme, Paris, France.
Röckner, E., Arpe, K., Bengtsson, L., Chistoph, M., Claussen,
M., Dümenil, L., Esch, M., Giogetta, M., Schlese, U. and
Schulzweida, U. 1996. The Atmospheric General Circulation
Model ECHAM-4: Model Description and Simulation
of Present Day Climate. MPI-Report No 218. MPI für
Meteorologie, Hamburg, Germany.
Rodell, M., Velicogna, I. and Famiglietti, J. S. 2009. Satellitebased estimates of groundwater depletion in India. Nature,
Vol. 460, pp. 999–1002.
Sahara and Sahel Observatory (OSS). 2008. The NorthWestern Sahara Aquifer System: Concerted Management of
a Transboundary Water Basin. Synthesis Collection, No. 1.
OSS, Tunis, Tunisia.
Sakura, Y., Tang, C., Yokishioka, R., Ishibashi, H. 2003.
Intensive use of groundwater in some areas of China and
Japan. Llamas, M.R. and Custodio, E. (eds) Intensive Use
of Groundwater: Challenges and Opportunities. Balkema
Publishers. Dordrecht, pp. 337–53.
Schmoll, O., Howard, G., Chilton, J. and Chorus, I. 2006.
Protecting Groundwater for Health – Managing the Quality
of Drinking-water Sources. WHO Drinking-water Quality
Series. WHO, Geneva, Switzerland, and IWA, London, UK.
Siebert, S., Burke, J., Faures, J., Frenken, K., Hoogeveen,
J., Döll, P. and Portmann, T. 2010. Groundwater use for
irrigation – a global inventory. Hydrology and Earth System
Sciences, 14, pp. 1863–80
Sinclair Knight Merz (SKM). 2008. Great Artesian Basin
Sustainability Initiative. Mid-term Review of Phase 2.
Report prepared for Australian Government, Department
of the Environment and Water Resources. SKM, Brisbane,
Australia.
Shah, T. 2007. The Groundwater Economy of South Asia:
An Assessment of Size, Signiﬁcance and Socio-ecological
Impacts. The agricultural groundwater revolution:
opportunities and threats to development. M. Giordano
and K.G. Villholth (eds). IWMI, Colombo, Sri Lanka. CABI,
Wallingford, UK, 2007, pp 7–36.
Shah, T., Burke, J. and Villholth, K. 2007. Groundwater:
A global assessment of scale and signiﬁcance.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture, Water for Food, Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in
Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International
Water Management Institute, pp. 395–423.
SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute). 2010. The
Malin Falkenmark Seminar: Emerging Pollutants in Water
Resources – A New Challenge to Water Quality. World
Water Week 2010. http://www.worldwaterweek.org/sa/
node.asp?node=750&sa_content_url=%2Fplugins%2FEve
ntFinder%2Fevent%2Easp&id=3&event=239 (Accessed 4
March 2011)

GROUNDWATER

771

Sophocleous, M. 2010. Review: groundwater management
practices, challenges and innovations in the High Plains
aquifer, USA – lessons and recommended actions.
Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 559–75.

Vali-Khodjeini, A. 1995. Human impacts on groundwater
resources in Iran. Man’s Inﬂuence on Freshwater
Ecosystems and Water Use. Proceedings of a Boulder
Symposium. IAHS Publ. No. 230.

Stephan, R. M. 2009. Transboundary aquifers: Managing
a vital resource. The UNILC Draft Articles on the Law of
Transboundary Aquifers. UNESCO-IHP, Paris, France.

Van der Gun, J. A.M. 2009. Climate change and alluvial
aquifers in arid regions: Examples from Yemen. Climate
Change and Adaptation in the Water Sector. CPWC,
Earthscan, London, UK, pp 143–58.

Steyl, G., and Dennis, I. 2010. Review of coastal-area aquifers
in Africa. Hydrogeology Journal, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp 217–26.
Tiwari, V., Wahr, J. and Swenson, S. 2009. Dwindling
groundwater resources in northern India, from satellite
gravity observations. Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 36,
L18401.
Todd, D.K. 1959. Ground Water Hydrology. New York and
London. John Wiley & Sons.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe).
1999. Inventory of Transboundary Groundwater. UN-ECE
Task Force on Monitoring and Assessment, Vol. 1, RIZA,
Lelystad, The Netherlands, ISBN: 9036953154.
––––. 2007. Our Waters: Joining Hands Across Borders.
First Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and
groundwaters. United Nations, New York and Geneva.
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural
Organization). 2007. Sistemas acuíferos transfronterizos
en las Américas. UNESCO-PHI and OEA, Series ISARM
Americas no.1, Montevideo/Washington.
––––. 2008. Marco legal e institucional en la gestión de
los sistemas acuíferos transfronterizos en las Américas.
UNESCO-PHI and OEA, Series ISARM Americas no.2,
Montevideo/Washington.
––––. 2010a. Managing Shared Aquifer Resources in Africa.
Proceedings of theThird International ISARM Conference,
Tripoli, 25–27 May 2008. IHP-VII Series on Groundwater
No. 1, UNESCO, Paris, France.
––––. 2010b. Transboundary Aquifer in Asia. IHP-VII Technical
Document in Hydrology, UNESCO, Beijing and Jakarta.

772

CHAPTER 36

Van der Gun, J.A.M. and Abdul Aziz Ahmed. 1995. The Water
Resources of Yemen. A Summary and Digest of Available
Information. WRAY project, Delft and Sana’a.
Van der Gun, J. and Lipponen, A. 2010. Reconciling storage
depletion due to groundwater pumping with sustainability.
Sustainability, Special Issue Sustainability of Groundwater, 2(11).
Van Weert, F., van der Gun, J. and Reckman, J. 2009. Global
Overview of Saline Groundwater Occurrence and Genesis.
IGRAC, Report nr GP-2009-1, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Wada, Y., Van Beek, L. P. H., Van Kempen, C. M., Reckman, G. W.,
Vasak, S. and Bierkens, M. F. P. 2010. Global depletion of
groundwater resources. Geophysical Research Letters,
Vol. 37, L20402.
Welsh, W. D. 2006. Great Artesian Basin Transient
Groundwater Model. Australian Government, Bureau of
Rural Sciences, Canberra, Australia.
White, I. and Falkland, T. 2010. Management of fresh-water
lenses on small Paciﬁc Islands. Hydrogeology Journal,
Vol. 18, No. 1, pp. 227–46.
WHYMAP (World-wide Hydrogeological Mapping and
Assessment Programme). 2008. Groundwater Resources of
the World, Map 1: 25 M. UNESCO, IAH, BGR, CGMW, IAEA.
http://www.whymap.org/whymap/EN/Downloads/Global_
maps/gwrm_2008_pdf.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. World
Water Development Report 3: Water in a Changing World.
Paris/London, UNESCO/Earthscan.

SPECIAL REPORTS

BOXES, TABLES AND FIGURES

BOXES
15.1

Conservation and demand hardening

389

15.2

Decision-making under climate uncertainty

396

16.1

Risks of salinity intrusion threaten the water supply of Adelaide, Australia

404

16.2

Financing and cost recovery

407

16.3

Water quality and quantity impacts of mining in Peru

408

16.4

Reduced water quantity equals reduced water quality: Fluorosis in India

408

16.5

Risk of hormonal modiﬁcations in ecosystem populations

411

16.6

Bang Pakong pollution destroys valuable ecosystem assets and income opportunities

412

16.7

Lake eutrophication in China

413

16.8

The Basel Convention

414

16.9

Chilika Lake: Slow deterioration and rapid recovery

415

17.1

Water-saving sanitation methods: Reviewing the options

430

17.2

Singapore: A model of integrated water management

433

17.3

Policies and legislation on rainwater harvesting from around the world

434

17.4

Decentralized and community-based sanitation systems

435

17.5

The Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management Toolbox

436

20.1

Water stewardship at Molson Coors

493

20.2 The water footprint of Coca-Cola®

494

20.3 Industry–government collaboration: Rio Tinto and the Western Australian Water Corporation

496

20.4 UNIDO MED-TEST integrated approach

497

21.1

Wetlands as water treatment infrastructure: Kolkata, India

505

21.2

Ecosystem solutions for water quality risks

506

21.3

Maintaining ﬂows: The Mekong River Agreement

506

21.4

Assessing ecosystem services in the Mississippi River Delta, USA

507

21.5

Vittel, France

508

21.6

Net beneﬁts of ecosystem conversion

510

21.7

Fragmentation of the Danube River basin, Central Europe

511

21.8

Groundwater nitrate contamination in the United Kingdom

511

21.9

Ecosystems on the edge: The Amazon basin forests and water

512

21.10 Wetland restoration as a sustainable option to address increasing ﬂood risk: The Wash, United Kingdom

513

21.11

Ecosystem-based management integrated into the management of the Komadugu Yobe basin, Nigeria

514

22.1

Wicked problems in water management

520

22.2 Principal uncertainties related to water allocation

521

22.3 Water as a human right

522

22.4 Deschutes River Basin: Water banking for surface water and groundwater

523

22.5 Modelling the beneﬁts of jointly operated reservoirs in mitigating environmental impact in the Zambezi River basin

524

22.6 Sustainable diversions limits (SDLs) in the Murray–Darling basin

526

22.7 Unresolved water allocation in the Lerma–Chapala basin

526

22.8 Farmer managed groundwater systems in Andhra Pradesh

527

22.9 Multi-stakeholder planning in the Alouette River in Canada

528

22.10 Groundwater use and re-use in the transboundary Santa Cruz River basin

528

22.11 Triple win on the Blue Nile through transboundary cooperation on infrastructure development

529

22.12 Innovative approaches for improving dam planning and operations for optimized water allocation beneﬁts

529

23.1

535

Categories of economic values

WWDR4

BOXES, TABLES
GROUNDWATER
AND FIGURES

773

23.2 Valuing water’s indirect beneﬁts to support investment decisions

536

23.3 Valuing the effects that water-related diseases have on productivity can improve investment targeting

537

23.4 Valuing the beneﬁts of water can deﬁne international priorities and target support at the poor

537

23.5 Valuing the beneﬁts of sanitation can foster government action and redouble the focus on sanitation

539

23.6 Balancing beneﬁts and costs when assessing water management options:
New ﬁltration infrastructures versus water catchment protection in New York

541

23.7 Valuing non-market ecosystem services in the European Union can inform decisions on environmental
objectives in planning processes

542

23.8 Stakeholder-oriented valuation can support allocation decisions water management in Tanzania

542

23.9 Valuation of scarcity in water markets

543

23.10 Valuing beneﬁts supports cooperation in international river basins

543

23.11 Valuation can support the design of subsidies and targeted ﬁnancing

544

23.12 Valuing compensation payments for environmental services in China

546

23.13 Valuing the economic loses of droughts and the effects of climate change can make the case for political action

546

24.1

The impact that the ﬁnancial crisis has had on access to improved water supply sources:
Three alternative scenarios

553

24.2 Reducing the amount of non-revenue water

557

24.3 Water users associations as an essential component in improving cost recovery:
An irrigation systems example from the Kyrgyz Republic

558

24.4 The cost of agricultural water demand

559

24.5 What the European Union Water Framework Directive says about water pricing

560

25.1

573

Institutional change in water supply and sanitation services

25.2 Institutional adaptation at the local scale: Responding to climate uncertainties
through farmer micro-insurance schemes

574

25.3 Time-bound multilateral institutions: An EU common water implementation strategy

575

25.4 Water governance reform: Successful delegation of water governance in Canada

576

26.1

584

Gender challenges

26.2 Changing tides: Change management at the Netherlands Ministry of Transport, Public Works
and Water Management

585

26.3 Women’s participation in the adaptation and mitigation processes

586

26.4 Enhancing adaptive capacity in the Mekong basin

587

26.5 Sources for capacity development

590

26.6 How to save water in Palestine

592

26.7 Adaptive water management (AWM) training helps groups to face uncertainty and risk

593

26.8 Adaptive river basin management: The NeWater online teaching curriculum

593

26.9 Strengthening local ownership: The Lake Victoria Region Water and Sanitation Initiative

594

26.10 The Online Training System for Water Professionals (TOTWAT)

596

26.11 Social learning and AWM in the South Indian Lower Bhavani

596

27.1

Extreme water-related disasters in 2010

602

27.2

Data from a systematic registration of disaster in Mozambique

603

27.3

Example of drought impacts

604

27.4 From the Disaster Risk Index to the Mortality Risk Index
27.5

608

The Mississippi wetlands

611

27.6 Micro-lending to assist watershed restoration and development in Maharashtra State, India

613

27.7

Examples showing the value of ecosystem services to reducing disaster risk

614

28.1

Role of soil fauna in maintaining soil water holding capacities

629

28.2 Approaches to introducing payment for ecosystem services – examples from Kenya
28.3 Participatory watershed management: A case from India

633

28.4 Using sustainable land management practices to adapt to and mitigate the effects of drought and water scarcity

634

29.1

The Pan African Water Conference

29.2 The African Water Development Report (AWDR)

774

632

CHAPTER 30
36

651
651

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY
KNOWLEDGE
SPECIAL AND
REPORTS
BASE
RISK

29.3 Financing water: The role of AfDB

652

30.1

660

Water quality of rivers and lakes in the United States

30.2 Abstraction pressure to satisfy water needs in major cities

661

30.3 Agriculture in Central Asia

662

30.4 Hydromorphological alterations in the Danube Basin

663

30.5 Impact of the 2008–2009 global economic crisis

666

30.6 Wastewater treatment infrastructure in the Republic of Moldova

668

31.1

Payments for Ecosystem Services (PES) in Asia and the Paciﬁc

684

31.2

WaterSHED: Using markets to bring water, sanitation, and hygiene to Asia’s poor

687

32.1

Latin America and the Caribbean and the global ﬁnancial crisis

697

32.2 Use of weather forecasts in Peru

700

32.3 The Colombian experience with wastewater discharge fees

702

32.4 Investment in sanitation infrastructure in Chile

703

33.1

709

Access to Water Supply and Sanitation in the Arab Region

33.2 Water conﬂicts in Yemen
34.1

713

Safe drinking water strategies for reducing waterborne disease

726

34.2 Sanitation strategies for disease prevention

728

34.3 Hygiene promotion

728

34.4 Health impact assessments promote health across diverse sectors

729

34.5 Environmental management strategies to reduce and prevent vector-borne diseases

731

35.1

744

Women carry the water burden

35.2 Gender mainstreaming through effective policy formulation

746

35.3 Making participatory irrigation development beneﬁcial for women in the United Republic of Tanzania

748

35.4 Extraction and use of Jatropha oil by a village women’s group to power shea butter processing equipment in Ghana

749

35.5 Improving access for the poor: Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority, Phnom Penh, Cambodia

751

TABLES
15.1

Estimates of renewable water supply, the renewable supply accessible to humans, and
the population served by the renewable supply in different ecosystems and regions

384

16.1

Estimated deaths of children under the age of ﬁve

409

16.2

Estimated impacts of toxic pollution

410

16.3

Summary of major risks and their main drivers

416

16.4

Countries least likely to express satisfaction with the quality of water in their communities

418

16.5

Summary of possible water quality interventions by scale

418

17.1

Ten largest urban conurbations, 1960–2025

425

18.1

Water withdrawal by sector and freshwater withdrawal by region (2005)

443

18.2

Country groupings

444

18.3

Relative water footprints of various industry sectors

445

18.4

Precipitation and renewable freshwater resources by region

447

18.5

Net changes in major land use

448

18.6

Population, areas and gross domestic product (GDP) by region

449

18.7

Pressure on water resources due to irrigation

450

18.8

Evolution of area equipped for irrigation, groundwater irrigation and percentage of cultivated land

451

18.9

Water requirements for biofuel crops

455

18.10 Estimated global annual water consumption of grazing, fodder and feed production for livestock

457

18.11 Water use and emission data in Danish and Norwegian slaughterhouses

460

18.12 Estimated nitrogen and phosphorous emissions in water systems

460

19.1

Water used varies for different fuels, power cycles and cooling methods

469

19.2

Water and wastewater treatment and conveyance requires vast amounts of energy

23.1

Overall beneﬁts of achieving the MDGs for water and sanitation

23.2 Types of beneﬁt attached to different water and sanitation interventions

WWDR4

471
536
540

EUROPE
BOXES, AND
TABLES
NORTH
GROUNDWATER
ANDAMERICA
FIGURES

775

23.3 Valuation techniques for water

547

24.1

560

Median operating cost coverage in utilities

24.2 Average revenues per m3 water sold (in US$)

564

26.1

588

CARE’s framework for community-based adaptation

26.2 Indicators for assessing adaptive capacity

591

27.1

Summary of case study ﬁndings on the social distribution of disaster loss

605

27.2

Flood exposure by region (in millions of people per year)

607

28.1

Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita and Human Development Indices of countries with drylands areas

624

30.1

Grouping of the 56 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) Member States

657

30.2 Main pressures on water resources in order of priority

658

30.3 Selected water management issues and responses

659

31.1

Member states of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc (ESCAP) in the ﬁve subregions

673

31.2

Percentage of male and female-headed households with access to safe drinking water

677

31.3

Regional Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) initiatives

678

31.4

Country-speciﬁc Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) initiatives

679

31.5

Chronology of major recent water conﬂicts in Asia, 2000–2008

680

31.6

Basic framework for deﬁning water hotspots

682

36.1

Top 10 groundwater abstracting countries (as at 2010)

760

36.2 Key estimates on global groundwater abstraction (2010)

761

36.3 Groundwater depletion rates in large aquifer systems

764

FIGURES

776

15.1

Cumulative distribution of the population with respect to freshwater services, 1995–2000

385

15.2

Per capita water requirements for food

386

15.3

National per capita water footprint and the contribution of different consumption categories for selected countries

387

15.4

Contribution of major consumers to the global water footprint

388

15.5

Global physical and economic water scarcity

390

15.6

Projected per capita water availability in 2050

391

15.7

Paleo reconstruction of the Colorado River streamﬂow

393

15.8

Example reservoir rule curve

395

16.1

Hazardous waste generation in 2001 as reported by the Parties to the Basel Convention

405

16.2

Hazardous industrial site, water pollution and mining hot spots in the Balkans

406

16.3

Probability of occurrence of excessively high arsenic concentrations in groundwater

410

16.4

Modelled organic loading based on different types of sewage treatment

412

16.5

World hypoxic and eutrophic coastal areas

413

16.6

Annual cost of the environmental degradation of water

415

16.7

Wastewater: A global problem with differing regional issues

17.1

Proportion of world population living in urban areas, 1960–2050

424

417

17.2

Slum population by region, 1990–2020

426

17.3

Issues and solutions related to water and urbanization

427

17.4

Changes in global water use, by sector

428

17.5

Urban freshwater and wastewater cycle: Water withdrawal and pollutant discharge

429

17.6

Ratio of treated to untreated wastewater discharged into water bodies (March 2010)

429

18.1

Millions of rural people living in extreme poverty (less than US$1.25 per day) by region

442

18.2

Water withdrawal by sector by region (2005)

442

18.3

Renewable water resources per person in 2008

446

18.4

Wetlands water quality state changes by continent

448

18.5

Sources of agricultural greenhouse gases excluding land use change

453

18.6

Total greenhouse gas emissions from the agricultural sector by source

454

18.7

Water use along the value chain, from production to recycling

456

18.8

Global annual water consumption for livestock grazing, fodder and feed production

458

CHAPTER 30
36

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY
KNOWLEDGE
SPECIAL AND
REPORTS
BASE
RISK

18.9

Data for water consumption in a typical Italian pig slaughterhouse

459

18.10 Typical water use by a market milk processor in Australia

459

18.11 Nitrogen associated with the production of pigs and chickens in Japan

461

19.1

The energy–water nexus

467

19.2

Power plants typically use three types of cooling

468

19.3

Energy ﬂows for the public water supply system in the USA

472

19.4

The energy–climate–water cycle creates a self-reinforcing challenge

474

19.5

Water intensity of transportation

476

20.1

Global freshwater use by sector at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century

483

20.2 Water proﬁle for the Canadian forest products industry

484

20.3 Water costs in Canadian manufacturing industries by cost component, 2005

485

20.4 Inter-relationship of water risks between business, government and society

487

20.5 Aggregated global gap between existing accessible, reliable supply and 2030 water withdrawals,
assuming no efficiency gains

488

20.6 The production chain for cotton

489

20.7 Business-as-usual approaches will not meet demand for raw water

490

20.8 Rio Tinto’s water balance (2009)

491

20.9 The closed-loop production system

492

20.10 The evolution of sustainable manufacturing concepts and practices

495

20.11 Conceptual relationships between sustainable manufacturing and eco-innovation

498

20.12 The concept of chemical leasing

499

21.1

The Global Living Planet Index, all biomes (1970–2007)

509

21.2

The Freshwater Living Planet Index (1970–2007)

509

22.1

Water entitlements, water allocation, water distribution and water use are dynamically
linked, and take place within the boundary of (changing) water availability

519

22.2 Designing a ﬂexible irrigation system based on risk sharing, proportional water allocation
and an adaptable irrigated area
23.1

520

Access to water and potential gains in terms of gender, equity and education opportunities for children

23.2 The vicious spiral of low funding
24.1

538
545

Investment in water projects with private participation (1990–2010)

555

24.2 Water projects with private participation, by subsector (1990–2010)

556

25.1

Key constraints to doing business in several geographic and economic regions

570

26.1

Schematic of capacity development at different levels, showing inputs, outcomes and methods of measurement

589

26.2 Major areas for information and communications technology in water management

595

27.1

Recorded drought fatalities per year, 1990–2009

603

27.2

Hazard mortality risk (ﬂood, tropical cyclones and precipitation-triggered landslides)

606

27.3

People exposed to ﬂoods

607

27.4 Extent of ﬂooding in Pakistan on 30 August 2010

608

27.5 Interpolated global map product for the six–month Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI)

609

28.1

The impact of desertiﬁcation, land degradation and drought in Piali Village, India

621

28.2 The extent of dryland systems worldwide

622

28.3 Projected water supply in major watersheds in drylands by 2025: Water scarcity
will be exacerbated in many key dryland areas worldwide

626

28.4 World’s major watersheds

627

28.5 Projected impacts of climate change on perennial drainage density

628

28.6 The sustainable land management virtuous circle of improvement starts with land condition improvement

634

29.1

641

Annual GDP growth rate

29.2 Per capita GDP (constant $US)

641

29.3 Dynamics of sub-Saharan Africa economic growth

642

29.4 Fastest growing economies of sub-Saharan Africa

642

29.5 Population distribution in Africa

644

WWDR4

EUROPE
BOXES, AND
TABLES
NORTH
GROUNDWATER
ANDAMERICA
FIGURES

777

29.6 Comparative population growth rate

644

31.1

Total renewable water per capita (total renewable/population), global regions (2007)

675

31.2

Asia-Paciﬁc water hotspots

683

32.1

Latin America and the Caribbean: GDP at constant 2005 prices, 1951–2010 (variation rates)

694

32.2 Annual average rate of population growth for Latin America and selected single
countries (1950–2050)

696

32.3 Greenhouse gas emissions from Latin America and the Caribbean as a share
33.1

of the global total (1990–2005)

699

Domestic water consumption relative to gross domestic product (GDP) per capita

710

33.2 Renewable water resources in the Arab region per capita
34.1

711

Diseases with the largest water, sanitation and hygiene contribution in 2000

725

34.2 Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model for waterborne diseases

726

34.3 Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model for water-washed diseases

727

34.4 Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of water-based diseases

729

34.5 Driver, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of the water-related insect
vector diseases malaria, onchocerciasis, Japanese encephalitis and lymphatic ﬁlariasis in Africa

730

34.6 Drivers, pressure, state, exposure, effect and action (DPSEEA) model of the water-related
insect vector diseases lymphatic ﬁlariasis (Asia and the Americas) and dengue

731

34.7 Cholera cases reported to the World Health Organization between 2000 and 2010

732

34.8 Hierarchical model for environmental cholera transmission

733

36.1

Groundwater resources of the world

759

36.2 Groundwater abstraction trends in selected countries

760

36.3 Groundwater development stress indicator at country level

763

36.4 Global pattern of estimated mean groundwater recharge in 1961–1990 and percentage change from 1961–1990
to 2041–2070 for four Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) scenarios

778

CHAPTER 30
36

767

MANAGING WATER UNDER UNCERTAINTY
KNOWLEDGE
SPECIAL AND
REPORTS
BASE
RISK

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted by UNESCO and brings together the
work of 28 UN-Water members and partners in the triennial World Water Development Report (WWDR).
This ﬂagship report is a comprehensive review that gives an overall picture of the world’s freshwater resources. It
analyses pressures from decisions that drive demand for water and affect its availability. It offers tools and response
options to help leaders in government, the private sector and civil society address current and future challenges. It
suggests ways in which institutions can be reformed and their behaviour modiﬁed, and explores possible sources of
ﬁnancing for the urgently needed investment in water.
The WWDR4 is a milestone within the WWDR series, reporting directly on regions and highlighting hotspots, and it
has been mainstreamed for gender equality. It introduces a thematic approach – ‘Managing Water under Uncertainty
and Risk’ – in the context of a world which is changing faster than ever in often unforeseeable ways, with increasing
uncertainties and risks. It highlights that historical experience will no longer be sufficient to approximate the
relationship between the quantities of available water and shifting future demands. Like the earlier editions, the
WWDR4 also contains country-level case studies describing the progress made in meeting water-related objectives.
The WWDR4 also seeks to show that water has a central role in all aspects of economic development and social
welfare, and that concerted action via a collective approach of the water-using sectors is needed to ensure water’s
many beneﬁts are maximized and shared equitably and that water-related development goals are achieved.
—
UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for all freshwater related issues. It was
formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. It currently counts 29 UN
Members and 25 other international Partners. UN-Water complements and adds value to existing UN initiatives by
facilitating synergies and joint efforts among the implementing agencies. See www.unwater.org

9 789231 042355

Facing
the Challenges
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 3

Report

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

Facing
the Challenges
—
THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 4
VOLUME 3

Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France

WWDR4 has been published on behalf of the United Nations World
Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) with the support of the
following organizations:

© UNESCO 2012
All rights reserved

United Nations Funds and Programmes
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA)
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT)
United Nations University (UNU)

Chapter 24, ‘Investing in water infrastructure, its operation and its
maintenance’, © The International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA
ISBN 978-92-3-104235-5
e-book ISBN 978-92-3-001045-4
Original title: The United Nations World Water Development
Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk (Vol. 1),
Knowledge Base (Vol. 2) and Facing the Challenges (Vol. 3).
Published in 2012 by the United Nations Educational,
Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
UNESCO Publishing: http://publishing.unesco.org/
Suggested citation:
WWAP (World Water Assessment Programme). 2012. The United
Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under
Uncertainty and Risk. Paris, UNESCO.
The designations employed and the presentation of material
throughout this publication do not imply the expression of any
opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal
status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of
the authors; they are not necessarily those of UNESCO and do not
commit the Organization.

—
The contents of Volume 2 were contributed by the UN-Water
members and partners listed on the title pages of the chapters
therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content
provided or for discrepancies in data and content between
contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as
authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in Volume 2.
WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.

—
Cover and interior design and typesetting by Phoenix Design Aid
A/S, an ISO 14001 (environmental management) and a DS 49001
(corporate social responsibility) certiﬁed and approved carbon
neutral company.
Printed by Imprimerie Centrale S. A. (Imprim’Vert certiﬁed) for
UNESCO CLD, Paris.
This publication is printed with vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources
paper, supporting responsible use of forest reserves. This is a carbon
neutral print product. Imprimerie Centrale will contribute funds to a
project replanting trees in Panama for this publication.
Printed in Luxembourg

Specialized UN Agencies
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(World Bank)
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
International Labour Organization (ILO)
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
United Nations Institute for Training and Research (UNITAR)
World Health Organization (WHO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Tourism Organization (UNWTO)
United Nations Regional Commissions
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Paciﬁc
(UNESCAP)
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA)
Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA)
Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC)
Secretariats of United Nations Conventions and Decades
Secretariat of the Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation (UNCCD)
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
(UNISDR)
United Nations Climate Change Secretariat (UNFCCC)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Foreword

iii

by Olcay Ünver, Coordinator, United Nations World Water Assessment Programme

Summary

iv

Case study development process and highlights of the ﬁndings

AFRICA
Chapter 37. Ghana
Chapter 38. Mara River basin, Kenya and Tanzania

779
786

ARAB STATES
Chapter 39. Jordan
Chapter 40. Morocco

792
798

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
Chapter 41. Murray-Darling basin, Australia
Chapter 42. Yellow River basin, China
Chapter 43. Jeju Island, Korea
Chapter 44. Pakistan, with special reference to the Indus River basin

803
809
814
820

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA
Chapter 45. Czech Republic
Chapter 46. Marseille Provence Métropole Urban Community, France
Chapter 47. Tiber River basin, Italy
Chapter 48. Tagus River basin, Portugal
Chapter 49. St Johns River basin, Florida, United States of America

826
830
835
842
847

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Chapter 50. Costa Rica
Chapter 51. Lerma-Chapala basin, Mexico

853
860

Boxes, tables, ﬁgures and maps

866

WWDR4

TABLE OF CONTENTS

i

“We can’t solve problems by using
the same kind of thinking we used
when we created them.”
Albert Einstein

ii

FACING THE CHALLENGES

FOREWORD
by Olcay Ünver, Coordinator, United Nations
World Water Assessment Programme
—
From its ﬁrst edition in 2003, the United Nations World Water Development Report
(WWDR) has shown how decisions made in every realm of life and work can have
an impact on our water resources. Rapidly changing conditions across the globe are
creating new pressures on water, and introducing new uncertainties and risks for
its use and management. The resilience of societies to cope with these challenges
varies greatly, largely determined by their institutional and legal frameworks and the
availability of ﬁnancial and human resources.
Case studies are a signiﬁcant part of each WWDR. Collectively, they illustrate the
challenges that confront policy-makers and water managers around the globe, and
how they are responding to them. The present volume, Facing the Challenges, features
concise summaries of ﬁfteen case studies compiled over a period of three years,
providing ‘snapshots’ of water management and use today in diverse regions of the
world. These case studies, by design, closely complement the other volumes of the
2012 World Water Development Report 4, as most of the factors inﬂuencing water
resources management discussed in those volumes can be observed, in one form or
another, in the pages presented here.
Since the launch of the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
in 2000, the number of case studies has continuously risen. Overall, 58 regional
studies at the basin or national level have been completed so far, through partnerships
with national bodies worldwide. The mobilization of key stakeholders is also important
to the development of case study projects. As we move forward, WWAP will continue
working with national partners and other stakeholders to develop further case studies
of water management and use in diverse countries and river basins, to achieve as wide
a regional coverage as possible.
This volume constitutes a valuable contribution to the international community. The
experiences and policies it describes provide different perspectives for all those
working towards sustainable development – not only water professionals, but
managers and decision makers at all levels, and researchers from within or outside the
‘water box’1 – helping all to make informed decisions with better knowledge.

Olcay Ünver
Coordinator, United Nations World Water Assessment Programme

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Note
1

WWDR4

The concept of the ‘water box’ is used in the third edition of the World Water Development Report to
describe the speciﬁc sphere (the ‘water sector’) to which questions of water management are too-often
conﬁned.

FOREWORD

iii

SUMMARY
CHAPTER 37
Case study development
Loremprocess
ipsum dolor
and
highlights of the ﬁndings

UNEP
—
Authors Xxxxxxxx Xxxxxxxxxxxx
Contributors
Xxxxxxxx
Xxxxxxxxxxxx
This fourth edition of the United Nations World Water
Eight
of these
pilot projects (See map below,
Acknowledgements
Xxxxxxxx
Development Report (WWDR) features 15 case
studies
case
studies Xxxxxxxxxxxx
2, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 15) have been
from different geographies of the world. For the ﬁrst
conducted at the river basin level, while the others
time, there are pilot studies from North America (St
showcase national efforts. Although the majority of the
Johns River Basin, Florida, USA) and the Middle East
countries that participated in the development of these
(Jordan). As with previous volumes of the WWDR,
case studies are new WWAP partners, ﬁve of them –
the focus continues to be on the common challenges
China, France, Italy, Mexico and the Republic of Korea –
that the countries and regions included are facing: the
have also contributed to earlier volumes of the WWDR.
management and allocation of freshwater resources,
We would like to express our deep appreciation to all
shortcomings in institutional and legal frameworks,
our country partners for their signiﬁcant input.
environmental degradation, declining water quality, and
the risks posed by climatic variations and climate change.
This volume presents concise summaries of these
15 case study reports, the original versions of which
The regional distribution of case studies that are
represent approximately one thousand pages. The
amount of work that went into preparing the full
featured in this volume is shown in the map below.

Regional distribution of the case studies

9
10

12

11

6
3

13

4

7
8

PA C IFIC
OCEAN

15
14

ATLANTIC
OCEAN

1
2

PA C IFIC
OCEAN
INDIAN
OCEAN

5

AFRICA
1. Ghana
2. Kenya-Tanzania
(Mara River basin)

iv

ARAB STATES
3. Jordan
4. Morocco

ASIA and the PACIFIC
5. Australia (Murray-Darling basin)
6. China (Yellow River basin)
7. Korea (Jeju Island)
8. Pakistan (with special reference
to the Indus River basin)

EUROPE and NORTH AMERICA
9. Czech Republic
10. France (Marseille Provence
Métropole Urban Community)
11. Italy (Tiber River basin)
12. Portugal (Tagus River basin)
13. United States of America
(St Johns River basin, Florida)

LATIN AMERICA and the CARIBBEAN
14. Costa Rica
15. Mexico (Lerma-Chapala basin)
Countries included in both Africa and Arab States
Regions of UNESCO
Countries included in both Europe/North America
and Asia/Paciﬁc Regions of UNESCO

FACING THE CHALLENGES

case study reports and their concise summaries is
noteworthy: on average each report went through two
iterations to ensure the quality of the ﬁnal studies.
The areas covered by the case studies vary greatly. In
this edition, Jeju Island, Korea is the smallest in size
(approximately 1,850 km2) whereas the Yellow River
basin, China (approximately 795,000 km2) and the
Murray–Darling River basin, Australia (more than a
million km2) are the two largest.
The concise summaries provide a snapshot of reality.
They present the current situation of water resources
and their use in each area covered through a common
framework that includes the state of the resource,
how water resources are utilized, competition among
sectors, legal and administrative frameworks, the
status of ecosystems, impacts of climate change
and climatic variations, water related disasters, and
more. Boxes highlight important recent events (the
catastrophic ﬂood in Pakistan, the recent drought in
the Murray–Darling basin), key water-related projects
(ecosystem conservation efforts in Jordan, sediment
load reduction in the Yellow River basin, attempts
to introduce payment for ecosystem services in the
Mara River basin) and the structure and functioning
of river basin organizations (the Lerma–Chapala Basin
Council in Mexico, river basin district administrations in
Portugal).
Regardless of a country’s level of development, water
resources management and protection are areas
where constant improvement is sought. Australia has
produced a blueprint for water reform in its 2004
National Water Initiative, while on Jeju Island (Republic
of Korea) there is a clear understanding of the
importance of integrated water resource management
for effective planning. Strict control of water allocation
at the district level in the Yellow River basin ensures

WWDR4

the ﬂow of the river throughout its course, and
especially to its lower reaches. The government
of Pakistan is working to reform irrigation water
management in the Indus River basin, and in the
St Johns River basin (Florida, USA) the Watershed
Restoration Act has helped control problems of
pollution. The 2000 EU Water Framework Directive
is being implemented by all European nations, with
different countries currently at different stages of
completing its requirements.
Climate change and climatic variations are likely to
pose challenges of varying degree and intensity.
While several models suggest likely scenarios,
some countries have already started experiencing
the effects of climate change in the shape of more
frequent and intense water-related natural disasters
(e.g. ﬂoods, droughts, mudslides, tornados).
Almost all of our case study partners reported
increasing variability in the occurrence of such
events. All of these countries, without exception,
have mechanisms and legislations in place for
disaster mitigation, however, their institutional and
ﬁnancial capacity to respond when such disasters
strike are closely linked to their level of economic
development.
Cooperation among riparian countries in the
context of international water resources is critical
for the sharing and protection of scarce water
resources in an era of increasing climatic variability
and climate change. Jordan and Israel reached
an agreement on water rights in the Jordan River
basin in their 1994 peace treaty. In the case of Spain
and Portugal, the Albufeira Convention applies to
several transboundary rivers and covers issues such
as the exchange of information, pollution control
and prevention, the evaluation of the transboundary
impacts of water uses, and conﬂict resolution and

SUMMARY

v

the assignment of rights. The Convention allows
for future revisions to ensure the achievement of
environmental objectives set at basin level and to
integrate climate change adaptation measures.
Cooperation is vital for shared water resources in the
national context, too. The Yellow River basin crosses
nine provinces of China, however the 1987 Water
Allocation Scheme and 2006 ordinance have created
the basis for regulating water use to satisfy demand in
all provinces and improve environmental conditions,
especially in the lower reaches of the basin.
Water and food security are among the most
important issues of concern not only in arid regions,
such as Jordan and Morocco, but also in regions
that are well endowed in terms of water resources.
In Ghana, for example, the absence of adequate
storage and agro-processing facilities leads to losses
of perishable crops. Overall, increasing demographic
pressures and climatic variations, such as ﬂoods and
droughts, that affect crop yields are other drivers that
diminish food security.

vi

The case studies reveal that approaches towards
sustainable utilization of water resources are evolving
in the direction of integrated water resources
management (IWRM). The need to integrate surface
water and groundwater resources within basins and to
balance competing sectoral interests with the needs
of ecosystems are increasingly accepted at all levels
of governance. However, considerable progress is
necessary to make the IWRM approach a mainstream
objective at the global level. The same observation
applies to the attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), for which there are
blatant regional disparities.
The case studies clearly highlight the diversity of
circumstances, challenges and priorities facing
different regions. Consequently, efforts towards
attaining wider coverage will continue in subsequent
editions of the WWDR, as additional case study
partners are sought.

FACING THE CHALLENGES

CHAPTER 37
Ghana

—
Acknowledgements Kodwo Andah, Ben Ampomah,
Christine Young Adjei, Winston Ekow Andah

© Shutterstock/Steve Heap

Location and general characteristics

in the extreme north. The highest annual rainfall is
2,150 mm in the extreme south-west of the country,
and this reduces progressively to a low of 800 mm in
the south-east and about 1,000 mm in the north-east.
Disparity in the geographical and seasonal distribution
of precipitation causes water stress at the local and
regional levels. For example, even in the high rainfall belt
in the south and west, water scarcity in the dry season
can last three to ﬁve months. In the northern and the
south-eastern regions, where rainfall is the lowest, the dry
season continues over eight to nine months.

The Republic of Ghana (Ghana from here on) is located
in West Africa. It is bounded to the north by Burkina
Faso, to the east by Togo, to the west by Côte d’Ivoire
and to the south by the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic
Ocean (Map 37.1). The country extends over an area of
238,540 km2, and it has 24.3 million inhabitants (2010).
The national capital, Accra, is home to about 2 million
people (2009).
The topography consists mainly of rolling plains,
escarpments and low hill ranges. The highest
elevation in Ghana, Mount Afadjato in the Akwapim–
Togo Ranges, rises 880 m above sea level. Ghana
has a warm, humid tropical climate. Mean annual
temperatures range from 26°C near the coast to 29°C

Ghana has a relatively diverse and rich natural resource
base – principally gold, diamonds, manganese ore, and
bauxite. Gold and cocoa are Ghana’s top two exports,
and the country has been an oil exporter since 2010.

MAP 37.1
Ghana

B U R K I N A

F A S O

Kol p a

Bolgatanga

wn

B E N I N

W
h

Blac k Volta

Wa

Basin

ite

ta
Vol

Tamale

National park

T O G O

Oti

D

CÔTE
D'IVOIRE

Black V

Hydroelectric
power plant

ak

a

Ramsar site
olta

P

City
International boundary

ru

Tai n

Sunyani

Afr
a

m

Lake
Volta

m

m

Keta
Lagoon

ri

A nu

Tano

Ho

Bi

Bia

Kumasi
Lake
Bosumtwi

Volt
a

A TLANTIC
OCEAN

780

CHAPTER 37

Pra

Ankobra

Koforidua

Cape Coast
Sekondi-Takoradi

Accra

GULF
OF GUINEA
0

25

50

75

100 km

AFRICA

Water resources availability, their use
and management
Ghana is drained by three main river systems. These
are the Volta, South-Western and Coastal river systems,
which respectively cover 70%, 22% and 8% of the
country. The Volta river system consists of the Oti and
Daka rivers, the White and Black Volta, and the Pru,
Sene and Afram rivers. The south-western river system
comprises the Bia, Tano, Ankobra and Pra rivers. The
coastal river system includes the Ochi-Nakwa, Ochi
Amissah, Ayensu, Densu and Tordzie rivers. The
total annual runoff from all the rivers combined is
56.5 billion m3 of water, of which 40 billion m3 is
accounted for by the Volta River. Approximately 40%
of total water resources availability originates outside
Ghana’s territory.
The only signiﬁcant natural freshwater lake is Lake
Bosumtwi, which has a surface area of 50 km2, and a
depth of 78 m. Lake Volta, which is the reservoir of the
Akosombo Dam, is one of the world’s largest artiﬁcial
lakes, and it covers an area of 8,500 km2.
In 2000, total water withdrawal was approximately
980 million m3. Of this, about 652 million m3 (66%)
was used for irrigation and raising livestock,
235 million m3 (24%) was used for water supply and
sanitation, and 95 million m3 (10%) was used by
industry. Non-consumptive water use for generating
hydroelectricity (only at the Akosombo Dam), is
around 38 billion m3 per year (FAO-Aquastat, n.d.).
The consumptive water demand for 2020 is projected
to reach 5 billion m3.
Agriculture forms the most important segment of
the economy (Box 37.1), accounting for about 30%
of gross domestic product (GDP) and about 55%
of formal employment. Industry, including mining,
manufacturing, construction and electricity generation,
accounts for about 20% of GDP. The services sector
has been growing fast, and now generates half of
national GDP (2010). Poverty rates in the country are
not evenly dispersed.
While Ghana has over 50,000 boreholes and handdug wells, the country’s groundwater resources are
not well studied. However, annual renewable capacity
is estimated to be around 26 billion m3 (2005). In the
Volta basin, annual groundwater use is approximately
90 million m3. Measurements in other basins similarly
showed that actual use is well below groundwater

WWDR4

recharge. Groundwater abstraction is projected to
increase by approximately 70% in order to meet the
water demand in 2020.
Since the beginning of the 1980s, the Government
of Ghana has introduced a number of policy reforms
that were specially intended to improve efficiency
in rural, urban and irrigation water use as well as to
attain measures of environmental protection and
conservation. The key problem was the absence of
a holistic water policy that included all aspects of
water resources management. The Water Resources
Commission, which was established in 1996 to regulate
and manage the use of freshwater resources and to
coordinate policies in relation to them, responded to
this challenge by introducing the draft Water Policy in
2002. A wider consultative process was initiated later
in 2004 to incorporate policies that were speciﬁc to
water supply and sanitation services. The draft Policy
was further enhanced through integration of the
principles of environmental assessment to promote
the sustainability of natural resources. In 2007, the
National Water Policy – which took an integrated
water resources management approach as one of its
core principles – was approved. The policy recognizes
the various cross-sectoral issues related to water
use, and the links to other relevant sectoral policies
such as those on sanitation, agriculture, transport
and energy (MWRWH, 2007). This holistic approach
makes the water policy complementary to the national
Poverty Reduction Strategy and the ‘Africa Water
Vision’ put forward by the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development (NEPAD).
In terms of institutional framework, water sector
reforms that started in the 1990s led to the
establishment of Ghana's Environmental Protection
Agency in 1994, and the Water Resources Commission
in 1996. The Public Utilities Regulatory Commission
was launched in 1997 to regulate and oversee the
provision of utilities. Ghana Water Company Limited
was set up in 1998 to provide water supply to urban
areas. The same year, the Community Water and
Sanitation Agency was established to administer rural
water supplies.

Climate change, water-related disasters and
risk management
Ghana often experiences ﬂoods and droughts,
particularly in the northern Savannah belt. The country
faced widespread ﬂoods in 1962 and 1963. Then

GHANA

781

BOX 37.1
Agriculture and food security

In Ghana, overall sustained economic and agricultural growth has been accompanied by rapid poverty reduction. Growth has
created a vibrant market for local farmers, and higher incomes have reduced poverty and led to increases in food demand.
Thanks to economic reforms that began in 1983, Ghana was able to turn its agriculture sector around. A stable economy,
market liberalization, and improved infrastructure have restored incentives to farm, which has both beneﬁted small farmers
and encouraged some large-scale investment in cash crops such as pineapples and palm oil. After 1983, agriculture grew at
an average annual rate of 5.1%. Food supply has been growing faster than the population growth rate, making Ghana largely
self-sufficient in terms of staples. At the same time, food prices have fallen. More accessible food helped to lower the rate
of undernourishment from 34% in 1991 down to 8% by 2003. Child malnutrition also declined, with the proportion of underweight infants falling from 30% in 1988 to 17% in 2008. The proportion of the population living in poverty fell from 52% in 1991
to 28.5% in 2006, with rural poverty falling from 64% to 40% over the same period. The most recent estimates suggest that
only 10% of the urban population lives below the poverty line (IFAD, n.d.). Overall, Ghana is on track to achieve the Millennium
Development Goal of halving poverty and hunger (MDG 1).
However, in spite of these developments, food security is not in place in Ghana. Of 19,000 km2 of potentially irrigable land,
only 338 km2 is irrigated (2007). In addition, the rehabilitation of many of the irrigation schemes is long overdue. Another
challenge facing Ghana is losses in perishable crops as a result of the absence of adequate storage and agro-processing facilities. Climatic variations, such as ﬂoods and droughts that affect the crop yield, and a rapidly growing population also have
a negative impact on food security.

Source: FAO-Aquastat (n.d.).

between 1991 and 2008, there were six major ﬂoods.
The 1991 ﬂood affected approximately 2 million
people and the catastrophic ﬂoods in the north in
2007 affected more than 325,000 Ghanaians, with
close to 100,000 requiring assistance to restore
their livelihoods (UN-ISDR/WB, 2009). In 2011, there
were many ﬂoods across the country, especially in
the eastern and northern regions. Scientiﬁc studies
suggest that the periodicity of 5.6 years is highly
signiﬁcant for ﬂood occurrence. At the opposite end
of the spectrum, Ghana also experienced signiﬁcant
droughts in 1977, 1983 and 1992. In fact, the 2007
ﬂood was followed immediately by a period of
drought that damaged the initial maize harvest. The
economic impact of water-related disasters at the
national and regional levels is not well documented.
With international support, Ghana developed national
climate change scenarios and climate change
vulnerability assessment studies for water resources
and the coastal zone. Major ﬁndings were that over
a 30-year period from 1961 to 1990, temperatures
rose by about 1°C, rainfall was reduced by 20%, and
stream ﬂows dropped by 30%. Flow reductions of
between 15% and 20% were observed for simulations
using climate change scenarios for 2020; and

782

CHAPTER 37

reductions of between 30% and 40% were observed
for simulations using climate change scenarios for
2050. The simulations predicted that the reduction in
groundwater recharge would be between 5% and 22%
by 2020, and between 30% and 40% by 2050. The
maize yield was predicted to decrease by about 7%
in 2020. It was found that millet yield would probably
not be affected because it is more tolerant of higher
temperatures.
It was found too that irrigation water demand could
be affected considerably by climate change. The
simulations revealed that in the humid part of the
country, the increase in irrigation water demand could
range from about 40% (2020) and 150% (2050) of
the base period water demand. For the dry interior
Savannah, the corresponding increase in irrigation
water demand in 2020 and 2050 could be about
150% and 1200% respectively. Hydropower generation
could also be seriously affected by climate change.
The projected reduction of the amount of electricity
generated by 2020 can be about 60%. In the coastal
zone, over 1,000 km2 of land may be lost due to
sea level rise, which could be as high as one metre.
Consequently, over 130,000 residents living along
the east coast are considered to be at risk. Important

AFRICA

wetlands, especially in the Volta Delta, may be lost
as a result of land erosion and inundation. Increased
water depths and the salinization of lagoons as a
result of sea level rise could have a negative impact
on the feeding of migratory and local birds.
Confronted with water-related and other natural
hazards, the Government of Ghana, with the help
of donor support, is in the process of developing
strategies and strengthening its institutional capacity
in disaster risk management. Disaster risk reduction is
the responsibility of the National Disaster Management
Organization (NADMO), established in the Ministry
of the Interior. NADMO functions under a national
secretariat and comprises a network of ten regional
secretariats, 168 district/municipal secretariats
and 900 local offices. Since its inception under
parliamentary Act 517 in 1996, NADMO has contributed
considerably to disaster management across the
country. However, its activities and response capacity
on the ground are constrained by a lack of adequate
funding (NADMO, 2011). The 1997 National Disaster
Management Plan was revised in 2009 along with
a parliamentary amendment to Act 517. In order to
accomplish its objectives, NADMO has set up technical
sub-committees to cover all types of disasters
including geological and hydro-meteorological events,
pest and insect infestations, bushﬁres and lightning,
disease outbreaks and epidemics.

Water and health
Even though 90% of people in urban areas have access
to safe drinking water, only about 32% had home
connections in 2008 – compared to about 40% in
2000. This drop in coverage is because infrastructural
development is falling behind the rate of population
growth and urbanization. The coverage in rural areas in
2008 was 60%.
The portion of population that has access to improved
sanitation facilities is very low. In 2008, it was only 18%
in urban areas and 7% in rural areas (UNICEF, n.d.a).
Close to 40% of all public schools have no access to
safe drinking water; and about 50% of public schools
have no toilet facilities (2011). As a result, waterrelated diseases, such as malaria, schistosomiasis,
guinea worm and lymphatic ﬁlariasis are common.
According to the World Malaria Report (WHO, 2009)
there were 3.2 million reported malaria cases in 2008.
Of those cases, approximately 1 million affected
children under the age of ﬁve. Malaria is a nationwide

WWDR4

problem that claims the lives of approximately 20,000
children every year. The annual economic burden of
malaria is estimated 1% to 2% of GDP (UNICEF, n.d.b).
Other communicable diseases such as cholera and
yellow fever are also widespread in Ghana and cause
epidemics from time to time. As a combined result of
these problems, life expectancy is about 58 years.
It is estimated that 51.5% of the population lives
in urban settlements, and in 2007, approximately
5 million people were living in slums with limited or
no water supply (UN-HABITAT, 2008). This led to the
emergence of water vendors to service such deprived
areas, who are now grouped under the Private Water
Tanker Owners Association. Unfortunately, those
who rely on water tankers usually pay more than ten
times the official rate for piped water and end up
spending over 10% of their income on potable water.
To improve the situation, a Water Sector Rehabilitation
Project was initiated in 1992. Furthermore, the
Water Sector Restructuring Programme (2003–
2009) was implemented to improve the provision of
water by building new production and transmission
facilities and rehabilitating the existing ones in
urban areas. Consequently, water production by
Ghana Water Company Limited increased steadily
from 205.2 million m3 to 231.77 million m3 between
2003 and 2009. Since 2006, it has carried out major
expansion and rehabilitation works on a number of
urban water supply systems throughout the country.
It must be noted that the unaccounted for water (i.e.
non-revenue water) in the water supply network is still
around 50% (MWRWH, 2009).

Environment and ecosystems
There is a lack of information on the wealth of
Ghana’s biodiversity. So far, about 2,974 indigenous
plant species, 504 ﬁsh species, 728 bird species,
225 different types of mammals, and 221 species of
amphibians and reptiles have been recorded. Some
16% of Ghana’s land has been designated as forest
reserve, national park or other wildlife reserve. Five
wetland areas – the Densu Delta, the Songor, the
Keta Lagoon Complex, the Muni-Pomadze coastal
wetlands and the Sakumo Lagoon – are Ramsar sites
of international importance. Other wetlands located
in the forest and wildlife reserves of the Mole National
Park, the Black Volta, the Sene, the Bia and the Owabi
Wildlife Sanctuaries are also protected (FAO-Aquastat,
n.d.). Despite these efforts, increasing pressure from
agricultural expansion, mining, timber extraction and

GHANA

783

other socio-economic factors have had a negative
impact on the environment and the ecosystems. It
is estimated that the country is experiencing a rapid
deforestation at about 220 km2 per year. In economic
terms, the loss of biodiversity through deforestation
and land degradation is estimated to cost about
US$1.2 billion annually (Agyemang, 2011). This is
partially the result of uncoordinated implementation
of sectoral socio-economic development policies.
The situation warrants urgent action if further
environmental degradation is to be averted (Ministry
of Environment and Science, 2002).
Even though industrial water demand accounts for
around 10% of annual water use, industrial activities
are the main source of pollution. This adds to water
stress and impairs the health of society. Mining is the
industrial activity that contributes most to pollution.
The 2008 report of Ghana's Commission for Human
Rights and Administrative Justice stressed that 82
rivers and streams in ﬁve mining communities in
Ghana had either been polluted, destroyed, diverted
or dried-up as a result of mining companies. In
its 2010 evaluation report, Ghana's Environmental
Protection Agency concluded that mining companies’
observation of environmental standards is poor.
This is caused by environmental laws that are not
sufficiently strict on pollution prevention. The major
concern lies not with the big mining ﬁrms, whose
activities are easy to monitor, but with illegal smallscale miners whose activities are neither registered
nor monitored.

Water and energy
Ghana has one of the highest rates of electriﬁcation
in Africa. Access to electricity in urban areas is
close to 70%, and almost 30% of rural households
are connected. On average, access to electricity in
Ghana is about 60% (IEA, 2009). There are two main
large dams in operation in Ghana with a combined
hydropower generation capacity of 1,072 MW: the
Akosombo Dam (134 m high) and the Kpong Dam
(29 m high). These plants harness approximately
58% of the country’s 10,600 GWh/year hydropower
potential. The construction of the 400 MW Bui
hydropower plant on the Black Volta began in 2005
and is expected to commence energy production
towards the end of 2012. Sites for a further 17
potential hydroelectric power plants have been
identiﬁed, and feasibility studies have been carried
out. Once these projects are phased in, ﬂuctuations

784

CHAPTER 37

in the supply of electricity caused by droughts will
stabilize.

Conclusions
Ghana is well endowed with freshwater resources.
However, disparity in distribution causes water stress,
which is further worsened by the uncertainties posed
by climate change, climatic variation, rapid population
growth, environmental degradation and pollution.
Thanks to continuous economic growth, the country
is on track to meet the Millennium Development Goal
(MDG) on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger.
However, roughly 40% of rural dwellers remain poor.
One of the most critical challenges facing the country
is very poor access to improved sanitation facilities.
Combined with a less than ideal water supply network,
diseases such as malaria, cholera and yellow fever are
widespread, causing signiﬁcant numbers of casualties.
Food security is another concern that leaves the
country at the mercy of climatic variations and makes
it dependent on imported food to feed its growing
population. Increasing the amount of cultivated land
(both rainfed and irrigated), improving the irrigation
infrastructure and developing the agro-industry are
crucial issues that require both national investment
and international donor support. Mining activities,
while creating considerable amount of income, are
among the main causes of water quality degradation.
Strengthening environmental protection laws and
enforcing them requires urgent action. Inadequate and
unreliable data on water resources and their use is the
major roadblock to sustainable development.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Case Study
Report of Ghana prepared in 2011 by Kodwoh Andah
(unpublished).
Agyemang, I. 2011. Analysis of the socio-economic and
cultural implications of environmental degradation in
Northern Ghana using qualitative approach. African
Journal of History and Culture, Vol. 3, No. 7, pp. 113–22.
www.academicjournals.org/ajhc/PDF/pdf2011/Aug/
Agyemang.pdf
FAO-Aquastat. n.d. Ghana Country Proﬁle. Rome, FAO. http://
www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/ghana/
index.stm. (Accessed 14 December 2011.)

AFRICA

IEA (International Energy Agency) 2010. 2009. The Electricity
Access Debate. Paris, IEA. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.
org/database_electricity10/electricity_database_
web_2010.htm.
IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). n.d.
Rural Poverty Portal, Rural poverty in Ghana. Rome, IFAD.
http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/web/guest/country/
home/tags/ghana. (Accessed 15 December 2011.
Ministry of Environment and Science, Ghana. 2002. National
Biodiversity Strategy for Ghana. Accra, Ministry of
Environment and Science. http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/
gh/gh-nbsap-01-en.pdf
MWRWH (Ministry of Water Resources, Works and Housing,
Ghana). 2007. National Water Policy. Accra, Ministry of
Water Resources, Works and Housing. www.water-mwrwh.
com/WaterPolicy.pdf
––––. 2009. Ghana Water and Sanitation Sector
Performance Report. Accra, MWRWH. wsmp.org/
downloads/4d8ca15ec1a12.pdf
NADMO (National Disaster Management Organization). 2011.
Ghana National Progress Report on the Implementation
of the Hyogo Framework for Action (2009–2011).
Geneva, PreventionWeb. http://www.preventionweb.net/
ﬁles/15600_gha_NationalHFAprogress_2009-11.pdf

WWDR4

UN-HABITAT (United Nations Agency for Human Settlement).
2008. State of the World’s Cities 2010/2011: Bridging
the Urban Divide. London/Nairobi, Earthscan/UNHABITAT. http://www.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.
aspx?publicationID=2917
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). n.d.a. At a Glance:
Ghana, Statistics. New York, UNICEF. http://www.unicef.
org/infobycountry/ghana_statistics.html (Accessed 14
December 2011.)
––––. n.d.b. Ghana Fact Sheet, July 2007. Accra, UNICEF
http://www.unicef.org/wcaro/WCARO_Ghana_Factsheet_
malaria.pdf
UN-ISDR/WB (International Strategy for Disaster Reduction/
World Bank). 2009. Disaster Risk Management Programs
for Priority Countries: Summary, 2009. Geneva/
Washington DC, UNISDR/World Bank. www.unisdr.org/ﬁles
/14757_6thCGCountryProgramSummaries1.pdf
WHO (World Health Organization). 2009. World Malaria
Report 2009: 31 High-Burden Countries. Geneva, WHO.
http://www.who.int/entity/malaria/world_malaria_
report_2009/all_mal2009_proﬁles.pdf.

GHANA

785

CHAPTER 38
Mara River Basin,
Kenya and Tanzania

—
Acknowledgements Nathan Karres,
Iman Yazdani, Maria C. Donoso, Michael McClain

© Shutterstock/Eric Isselée

Location and general characteristics

Water resources and their use

The Amala and Nyangores rivers originate in Kenya’s
Mau Forest and converge to form the Mara River
(Map 38.1). Other tributaries, the Engare, Talek and
Sand also ﬂow into the Mara to form the transboundary
Mara River basin.

As a result of insufficient data, there are only rough
estimates of the water potential of the Mara River.
The lower estimate is approximately 475 million m3
per year, which only takes into account the ﬂow rates
of its two main perennial tributaries, the Amala and
the Nyangores. A higher, and probably more accurate
estimate based on data from more of the tributaries and
a gauging station, is around 950 million m3 per year. The
total annual water demand in the Mara River basin is
approximately 23.8 million m3 per year (2006). Irrigated
agriculture is the major user of water throughout the
basin followed by domestic consumption and livestock
production (Table 38.1).

The Mara River is about 400 km long and drains into
Lake Victoria in Tanzania, which makes the river part
of the larger Nile basin. The Mara River basin covers
an area of approximately 13,750 km2, of which 65% is
located in Kenya and 35% in Tanzania. The amount of
annual rainfall in the basin varies from 1,400 mm in the
hills of the Mau Forest to 500–700 mm in the dry plains
of north-west Tanzania.

TABLE 38.1

Approximately 840,000 people live in the basin (2010)
– the majority of whom are have settled in rural areas.
The Kenyan part of the basin is home to 558,000 and
the remaining 282,000 inhabitants live in the Tanzanian
portion of the basin. According to projections, by 2030,
the overall population in the basin could almost double
to as much as 1.35 million.

Water use in the Mara River basin (2006)
Use

Water demand (m3/year)

Large-scale irrigation

Poverty is a major concern in the basin. In Kenya, nearly
half of the basin’s population lives below the poverty
line1. On the Tanzanian side, the rate of poverty is
around 40%. In general, those living in the basin earn
their living from growing food crops (36.1%), cash crops
(9.6%), livestock production (5.9%), ﬁshing (9.5%) and
business enterprises (11.4%).

12,323,400

Domestic

4,820,336

Livestock production

4,054,566

Wildlife

1,836,711

Mining

624,807

Tourism

152,634

Total

23,812,454

MAP 38.1

go
r

Mara River basin

Thimjope

National park

Mara

Musoma

WWDR4

M

Ngoreme
0

a
ar

En

g ar

a la

e

Masai Mara Tale
k
National Reserve

Mara

City
International boundary

Am

Ronda

Basin
Wetlands

Ny

an

Lake
Victoria

es

25

50 km

Serengeti
National Park

KENYA
Naro
Sura

Sand

TANZANIA

MARA RIVER BASIN, KENYA AND TANZANIA

787

While water use is signiﬁcantly less than the basin’s
potential, the intra-annual variability in supply and
poor and outdated agronomic practices, lead to
problems meeting the demand. Furthermore, the
frequency of water shortages and their severity is
likely to increase in parallel with the expansion of
irrigated land in the basin. Presently, 51% of the water
demand is linked to a few big farms in Kenya. These
farms produce mainly maize, beans, gum trees and
wheat.

Biodiversity, tourism and the potential
impact of climate change
Within the basin, there are important habitats that
support the region’s vibrant biodiversity. Among
the most important of these are the Mau Forest, the
Mara Swamp and the Mara–Serengeti eco-region,
which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Mara–
Serengeti alone contains over 90 mammals and more
than 450 bird species. There have been conservation
programmes in the basin implemented by the Kenyan
and Tanzanian governments as well as regional and
international institutions. However, despite these
efforts, the condition of the habitats continues to
decline. For example, over the past few decades, the
Mau Forest has been reduced by 23% as a result of
forest clearing for tea plantations, farming and timber
harvesting. Even though there are laws protecting the
buffer zones, the corridor of riverine forest along the
Mara River has been greatly degraded by grazing and
cultivation in both Kenya and Tanzania.
Socio-economic demands such as a growing tourism
sector are adding to the problem. The number of
tourists visiting the Masai Mara National Reserve in
Kenya and the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania
rose from approximately 190,000 in the 1990s to over
600,000 in the early 2000s. The growing concerns
are clearly highlighted in the management plan of the
Masai Mara National Reserve, which states:
The Reserve is faced by unprecedented challenges.
Inside the Reserve, escalating pressures from
tourism development and growing visitor
numbers … are leading to a ... deterioration of the
natural habitats on which the Reserve’s tourism
product is based ... Outside the Reserve, there
is growing pressure from local communities to
use the Reserve’s pastures and water sources for
livestock, because of the diminishing supplies

788

CHAPTER 38

of these resources in the wider ecosystem and
deteriorating community livelihoods ...
All these issues point to a need for an integrated
transboundary strategic planning approach to
biodiversity conservation and water resources
management in the basin.
Protecting the environment and ecosystems is
essential for ensuring the sustainable development
of both nations. Consequently, Florida International
University within the framework of the Global Water
for Sustainability (GLOWS) programme conducted an
environmental ﬂow assessment in three pilot sites in
the basin. The study concluded that in the years when
precipitation is normal (compared to the long-term
average of mean annual rainfall), sufficient water
exists to satisfy the needs of the human population
and nature. However, during periods of drought,
especially in the upper and middle reaches of the
river, natural ﬂow is well below the threshold required
to meet the established reserve for environmental
needs. This means that no water can be allocated for
other uses (domestic, industrial, tourism, agriculture,
etc.) and it is necessary to construct reservoirs to
meet these demands. While the study is limited in
scale, it clearly demonstrates the vulnerability of both
the human and the wildlife populations in the basin.
Climate change can complicate matters further.
Scenarios predict that the ﬂow in the Upper Mara
River may decrease signiﬁcantly as a result of
increased ambient temperature and less rainfall. This
can have a serious impact on both human livelihoods
and ecosystems. In fact, the importance of the Mara
River is that it is the main source of water for the
migrating animals of the Mara–Serengeti eco-region,
especially during the dry season. Statistical analysis
of rainfall data reveals that droughts are likely to
occur every seven years in the basin. Depending on
the severity of the conditions, 20% to 80% of the
migrating wildebeest may die. With a 50% die-off
rate, it will take approximately 20 years for the animal
population to recover, while with an 80% die-off rate,
there may be no population recovery at all. Such
ecologically disastrous conditions would have severe
repercussions for tourism in the Mara River basin
as well, which in turn would affect the Kenyan and
Tanzanian economies. The climate change scenarios
also predict an increase in periods of intense rainfall

AFRICA

which would result in an increased erosion and a drop
in water quality caused by higher sediment content
in the river. The best management practices that are
proposed as a part of the ‘Payment for Ecosystem
Services (PES)’ schemes (Box 38.1) include preserving
riparian buffers, reinforcing river banks by planting
trees and decreasing grazing as potential remedies to
alleviate erosion problem.

water from water points that are between 1 km and
5 km away. Only 36% of households in Bomet reported
any form of water treatment prior to consumption. As
a consequence of over-reliance on unprotected water
sources and poor hygiene practices, rates of diarrheal
disease and intestinal worms are very high in both
districts. Unfortunately, the unfavourable conditions
described above are similar on the Tanzanian side of
the basin.

Water and health
A large percentage of the population in the Mara River
basin does not have access to a safe drinking water
supply or adequate sanitation facilities (Table 38.2 and
Table 38.3). Surveys conducted in the Trans Mara and
Bomet districts of Kenya’s Rift Valley Province revealed
the lack of sewer infrastructure, with pit latrines being
the only faecal disposal method available to the
population. In general, the majority did not have any
knowledge of basic sanitation or hygiene.
In Bomet, approximately 56% of households draw
their drinking water from the Mara River during the
dry season and 46% of households are forced to fetch

Water resources management and
regulations
Kenya’s most recent constitution, adopted in August
2010, sets the foundation for the sustainable use
and efficient management of natural resources. It
articulates the obligations that the individual and
the state have to the environment. Moreover, it also
enables the formation of a National Land Commission
which, among its other duties, has supervisory
responsibility for land use planning throughout
Kenya. The new constitution mandates the
decentralization of government, allowing for effective
governance at the district or basin level.

TABLE 38.2
Rate of access to water resources in the Mara River basin
Piped
water
(%)

Spring/well
(%)

Rain
harvesting
(%)

River/stream
(%)

Pond/dam/
lake
(%)

Other
(%)

Kenya:
Rift Valley Province*

22.8

36.3

1.2

29.3

4.7

5.5

Tanzania:
Mara Region

14.2

63.2

-

6.6

15.6

-

*The Mara River basin lies within the southern section of the Rift Valley Province

TABLE 38.3
Rate of access to sanitation facilities in the Mara River basin
Conventional
sewerage
(%)

Pit latrine
(%)

Septic tank
(%)

No latrine (i.e.
open defecation)
(%)

Other
(%)

Kenya:
Rift Valley Province*

3.3

73.3

2.2

20.7

0.4

Tanzania:
Mara Region

1.9

77.6

-

20.3

-

*The Mara River basin lies within the southern section of the Rift Valley Province

WWDR4

MARA RIVER BASIN, KENYA AND TANZANIA

789

Kenya Vision 2030 (formulated in 2007) and the
Water Act (2002) constitute the main elements of the
country’s national water policy. Kenya Vision deﬁnes
the goals and strategies of the country between 2007
and 2030 with particular attention to compensation for
environmental services and the provision of incentives
for environmental compliance. The Water Act allows for
the establishment of the Water Resources Management
Authority, which has a mandate to manage and
protect river basins. It also encourages communities to
participate in water management at the basin level and
aims to ensure that sufficient and good-quality water
is available to satisfy basic human needs and to protect
ecosystems. The 1999 Environment Management and
Coordination Act and the 2009 National Land Policy
also play a part in water and biodiversity conservation
in Kenya.
But Tanzania’s constitution, unlike Kenya’s, does
not explicitly contain provisions for land and the
environment. However, there are other major national
legal instruments such as the Tanzania Development
Vision 2025 (launched in 2000), the National Water
Policy (2002), the Water Resources Management Act
(2009) and the National Environmental Policy (1997).

All these underpin the conservation of biodiversity and
the regulation of water resources in the country.
Vision 2025 is Tanzania’s national development
blueprint. It projects fast growth while effectively
reversing current adverse trends in environmental
resources such as forests, ﬁsheries, biodiversity as well
as fresh water and land resources. Universal access to
safe water is also a part of Vision 2025. The National
Water Policy promotes decentralizing water resource
management through integrated water resources
management, involving water user associations and
the private sector in decision making, ensuring the
sustainable use of water resources through economic
incentives such as appropriate pricing mechanisms,
and establishing institutions such as the National Water
Board, the Basin Water Boards and Basin and Sub-basin
Water Committees.
The National Environmental Policy emphasizes
sustainability and the conservation of natural resources
and allows for economic instruments (such as PES,
potentially) as approaches to environmental resource
protection. The Water Resources Management Act gives
effect to the 2002 National Water Policy and includes

BOX 38.1
Payment for ecosystem services
The ecosystems in the Mara River basin contribute signiﬁcantly to the region’s economy by providing valuable services without the need for any direct human labour or input. Payment for Ecosystem – or Environmental – Services (PES) is a mechanism to integrate this intrinsic wealth or productivity within an economic system.
In principle, the PES mechanism would allow for sustainable land use within the basin without the need for outside funding.
The Mara River basin presents an ideal scenario for implementing a PES scheme because of the conﬂict of interest between
the farmers upstream and wildlife tourism downstream. This ‘vying for beneﬁts’ creates an opportunity for the transfer of
ecosystem-based beneﬁts to the upstream farmers in the form of economic support for the improvement of agricultural
practices.
The ﬁrst step towards a PES mechanism was taken in 2006 as a part of the project, Transboundary Water for Biodiversity and
Human Health in the Mara River Basin. A feasibility study identiﬁed market-ﬁnanced PES as the most appropriate methodology for economically incentivizing conservation efforts.
Thanks to surveys, analyses, and stakeholder meetings, the project has made considerable progress towards the development
and eventual implementation of a PES mechanism. A ﬁnal document is expected in 2012, which would present the culmination of the consensus-building process. However, while current policies in Kenya and Tanzania are generally supportive of PES
schemes, they lack any concrete instruments in terms of laws and regulations for PES agreements. This observation presents
an important challenge for translating a theoretical PES mechanism into a functional market-based system. Although existing
legal and contractual mechanisms in both countries may enable the formation of a basic framework for a PES scheme, the introduction of supplemental regulations seems necessary.

790

CHAPTER 38

AFRICA

legislation related to transboundary water resources
management. This Act also allows for the creation of the
Lake Victoria Basin Water Office, which is responsible
for management of the Mara River.

Conclusions
The Mara River Basin is facing the mounting challenges
of water scarcity, pollution and environmental degradation as a result of agricultural expansion, intensiﬁcation
of irrigation, population growth and the increasing
impact of tourism. The main competition for water
resources in the basin is between irrigated agriculture
and the Masai Mara and Serengeti Wildlife areas.
Limited access to safe drinking water supply and
practically the absence of a sanitation infrastructure
add to widespread poverty through a heavy burden
of disease. Legislation to address issues related to
water and other natural resources is gradually being
developed and put in place in both Kenya and Tanzania.
Their implementation can help to operationalize
mechanisms such as Payment for Ecosystem Services
(PES), which can create sustainable ﬁnancial support for
efforts to conserve and protect natural resources.

WWDR4

Unless appropriate action is taken, growing problems
will have a direct impact on the livelihoods of local
people as well as on the national economies of both
countries.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

The Kenyan poverty line is set at approximately US$1.50 per day
for rural populations and US$3.50 per day for urban populations.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Case Study
Report of the Mara River Basin in Kenya and Tanzania,
prepared in 2011 by the Global Water for Sustainability
(GLOWS) Programme, Florida International University,
supported by USAID (forthcoming).

MARA RIVER BASIN, KENYA AND TANZANIA

791

CHAPTER 39
Jordan

—
Acknowledgements Maysoon Al-Zubi

© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Altitude-Paris
Jordan: Gardens created in the middle of the Wadi Rum desert (29°33' N, 35°39' E)

Location and general characteristics

steppe and the steppe desert regions have a continental
climate with large variations in temperature.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan from
here on) is located in the eastern Mediterranean and
bordered by Syria to the north, Iraq to the north-east,
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to the east and south,
and the West Bank and Israel to the west (Map 39.1).
Jordan’s population is around 6.3 million and it has
a surface area of approximately 90,000 km2. The
Jordan Rift Valley, a narrow strip of highlands (with a
maximum elevation of 1,600 m above sea level), the
steppe, the desert zone and the Dead Sea (426 m
below sea level in 2010) are the most distinctive
topographical features.

Precipitation in the country is very limited and ranges
from 30 mm to 600 mm annually. Some 93.5% of the
country has less than 200 mm of rainfall, and only
0.7% of the country has annual precipitation of more
than 500 mm. Most of the rainfall occurs between
November and April, and, in general, decreases
considerably from west to east and from north to
south. Overall, 83% of the country is composed of
desert and desert steppe.

Water resources availability and their use
Climate varies signiﬁcantly from one region to another.
The west of Jordan has a Mediterranean climate,
characterized by dry hot summers, mild wet winters
and extreme variability in rainfall during the year as
well as from year to year. The climate in the highlands is
characterized by mild summers and cold winters. Aqaba
Governorate and the Jordan Rift Valley have a subtropical climate – hot in summer and warm in winter. The

Jordan is one of the most arid countries in the world.
While the average annual rainfall is approximately
8.2 billion m3, 92% of this is lost through evaporation.
Total internal renewable water resources are seriously
limited. At an estimated 682 million m3/year, the country
is far below the water poverty line. Developed surface
water potential was approximately 295 million m3 in
2007, and is projected to reach 365 million m3 by 2022.

MAP 39.1
Jordan River basin

NEAN S
EA






Lake
Tiberias

Ya r m

DI




Dam



National park






City
International boundary

Jordan

RRA
TE

Ramsar site

ou

Wadi
al Mirba

Wadi
Ruwaishid al Satill

Al-Mafraq
Z a rqa

Amman

JORDAN
Wadi
el Janab


Dead
Sea

Wadi el
Moujib

Al-Karak
Wadi






k

Irbid



ME

Basin

SYRIA

SAUDI
ARABIA

Wadi
Maghar

Al Jafr

Ma’an

Aqaba
GULF
OF
AQABA

WWDR4

0

20

40

60

80 100 km

JORDAN

793

On average, rivers constitute 37% of the national
water supply. Jordan’s most important surface water
resources, the Jordan River and its main tributary, the
Yarmouk, are shared with neighbouring countries. The
Zarqa River, the second main tributary of the Jordan
River, ﬂows entirely within the territory of Jordan. The
Yarmouk River is particularly critical as it accounts for
almost 50% of the country’s surface water resources.
Allocation of these trans-boundary water resources
has been one of the most difficult regional issues.
Jordan and Israel reached an agreement on water
rights in the Jordan River basin in their 1994 peace
treaty. A joint water committee was also formed as a
permanent institution charged with implementing the
agreement.
Total internal renewable groundwater resources are
approximately 450 million m3/year, with a safe yield
of 275.5 million m3 (FAO, n.d.). At present, aquifers
are being exploited at about twice their recharge
rate. In particular, groundwater abstraction for
agriculture is beyond sustainable limits, resulting in an
annual groundwater deﬁcit of 151 million m3 (2007).
The problem is worsened by the fact that there are
hundreds of illegal wells. The protection of aquifers is
critical as groundwater constitutes approximately 54%
of the national water supply.
Agriculture is practised over 3% of the national
territory (2005), whereas potentially cultivatable
land is estimated at around 10% or 8,800 km2 (FAO,
n.d.). Water availability and soil quality are the main
obstacles to the further expansion of agriculture. As a
result of scarcity, only about 800 km2 of land, mainly
conﬁned to the Jordan Rift Valley, is irrigated (2006).
In an effort to maximize water-use efficiency, improved
irrigation systems are being introduced. In fact, 60% of
the irrigation in the Jordan Rift Valley, and about 85%
in the highlands is through micro-irrigation. Even so,
the agricultural sector still uses about 574 million m3
of water, which corresponds to 60% of annual water
use in Jordan (2009). In spite of consuming large
quantities of water, agriculture contributes just 3% of
Jordan’s gross domestic product (GDP). Municipal water
demand accounts for about 33% of overall consumption
(approximately 315 million m3). This demand is met
largely from aquifers. Water use by industry and
for livestock production is relatively insigniﬁcant at
39 million m3 and 7.5 million m3 respectively. While
tourism accounts for approximately 1% of water use, the
contribution of the sector to GDP was 10.6% in 2009
(Kreishan, 2010).

794

CHAPTER 39

In addition to surface water and groundwater, other
sources, such as fossil water, treated wastewater
(110 million m3 in 2009) and brackish water, are also
used in Jordan. Overall, revenue collection systems are
weak and more than 42% of the water delivered to the
municipal water supply system cannot be accounted
for. In addition, tariffs are low and do not cover total
operation and maintenance costs.
A signiﬁcant increase in population has led to a
sharp decrease in per-capita water availability, which
dropped from 3,600 m3 in 1946 to 145 m3 in 2008.
It is projected that by 2022, the population may
exceed 7.8 million, and total water demand may reach
1,673 million m3. If current and planned projects are
fully implemented, including the Disi water conveyance
plan, the Red Sea-Dead Sea canal project, and plans
to increase the use of treated wastewater, Jordan's
current water deﬁcit of 659 million m3 (2009) could be
reduced to 457 million m3 by 2022.
In order to cope with water scarcity, 28 dams with
a total storage capacity of 368 million m3 were
constructed between 1950 and 2008. At the same
time, locations were identiﬁed for a number of
reservoirs that would give the potential to add
444 million m3 to Jordan’s water storage capacity.

Climate change and its likely impact
Water is a scarce resource in Jordan, and a high
population growth rate of approximately 2.3% per year
is leading to growing demands from both agriculture
and the municipalities.
Analyses of climate change scenarios indicate that
Jordan will experience more frequent droughts during
the twenty-ﬁrst century as a consequence of yearround increases in temperature that may reach as high
as 3°C (±0.5°C) in winter and 4.5°C (±1°C) in summer
by the end of the century. The same climate change
simulations show little or no change in precipitation to
offset these big increases in temperature. In addition
to this, runoff is expected to decrease over most of the
country, except for the region south of the Dead Sea
(RSCN, 2010). This could have a serious impact on water
and food security. In fact, the results of a vulnerability
assessment showed that climate change could have a
signiﬁcant impact on agriculture, particularly on wheat
and barley production, which depend heavily on rainfall.
The expansion of arid rangelands with decreased
vegetation will have implications for grazing, as well.
This will affect livestock production, and will have a

ARAB STATES

consequent negative impact on the diet and income of
poor farming households.

Water and settlements, water reuse
Over the past 60 years Jordan has become highly
urbanized. The percentage of the population living in
cities increased from 39.6% in 1952 to 78% in 2009
(UNICEF, n.d.). This increase is largely the result of
internal migration, combined with an inﬂux of refugees
and migrants, mainly from Palestine and Iraq. Out of
Jordan’s twelve governorates, 65% of the population
lives in Amman, Zarqa and Irbid. In terms of its
regions, 91% of the population lives either in the north
(Irbid, Jerash, Ajlum and Mafraq) or in central Jordan
(Amman, Zarqa, Balqa and Madaba).
During the International Drinking Water Supply and
Sanitation Decade (1981–1990), Jordan's government
carried out a number of signiﬁcant wastewater
management projects. These were primarily related
to the improvement of sanitation. This has raised the
level of sanitation services, improved public health,
and strengthened pollution control of surface water
and groundwater in the areas served by wastewater
facilities. According to the WHO/UNICEF Joint
Monitoring Report (WHO/UNICEF, 2010), 96% of
the population had access to a safe water supply,
and 98% had access to improved sanitation in 2008.
Approximately 64% of the population is connected
to a sewerage network that collects wastewater
for treatment and re-use. In 2008, approximately
100 million m3 of effluent was processed in treatment
plants. As a result of low water availability, treated
wastewater represents a signiﬁcant portion of the river
ﬂow in various parts of the country.
Sewerage systems for collecting a greater quantity
of wastewater are expanding in parallel with
population growth and increased water consumption.
It is estimated that by 2022, approximately
250 million m3 of wastewater will be generated.
With proper treatment, this represents an important
source of water that can be used for purposes other
than for drinking.

chemicals, and demographic pressure. Because of
the diminishing per-capita water supply and quality
issues, wastewater reuse has been an effective
method of reclaiming a percentage of scarce water
sources. Since the early 1980s, the general approach
has been to treat the wastewater and then either
discharge it into the environment – where it mixes
with freshwater ﬂows and is indirectly reused
downstream – or to use the resulting effluent
to irrigate restricted, relatively low-value crops
(USAID, n.d.). However, the increasing dominance of
effluent in the water balance, and the overloading
of wastewater treatment plants, has raised concerns
about the health risks and environmental hazards
associated with wastewater reuse. To minimize such
risks and their implications, effluent quality standards
were set in 1995 and revised in 2003 (MEDAWARE,
2005), and most wastewater treatment plants have
been upgraded to meet these standards. However,
there is still a constant need to monitor the treatment
plants and improve their capacity.
Because of its arid climate there are only a few large
natural wetlands in Jordan, the best known being
Azraq Oasis in the eastern desert. This large desert
oasis, which formerly covered some 120 km2, has
diminished signiﬁcantly as a result of over-exploitation
of groundwater and the construction of dams on the
major wadis. Similarly, the seasonal marshes in the Al
Jafr area are also diminishing because of agricultural
activities. Consequently, many aquatic species are
endangered in Jordan (Budieri, 1995). Deforestation and
desertiﬁcation are other important environmental issues
that require attention. To raise awareness about water
use and environmental degradation, new literature is
being introduced into the school curriculum (HKJ, n.d.).
In terms of legislation, the Environment Protection Law
No. 52 (2006) and the National Environmental Strategy
(1992) form the main pillars of environmental protection
in the country. As a novel approach, eco-tourism has
also been introduced in Jordan to demonstrate that
local development and efforts for conservation of
nature can go hand-in-hand (Box 39.1).

Water quality, environment and ecosystems

Water resources management and the
national strategy

The quality of surface water and groundwater has
deteriorated signiﬁcantly because of pollution. This is
most notably the result of overuse of agrochemicals,
over-pumping of aquifers, seepage from landﬁll sites
and septic tanks, improper disposal of dangerous

Jordan’s National Water Strategy is a set of guidelines
that deﬁne the country’s vision up to 2022. The Strategy
aims to ensure the sustainability of water resources
by balancing supply and demand through improved
water resources management. The over-arching priority

WWDR4

JORDAN

795

BOX 39.1
A new era in conservational thinking
The development of the eco-tourism sector is being spearheaded by a long-established non-governmental organization,
the Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature (RSCN). The RSCN is entrusted by the government with the protection and
management of Jordan’s special ecosystems. For several decades, the RSCN managed its protected areas as isolated, fenced
sanctuaries that were guarded from the general public and had little involvement from local communities.
This all changed in 1992 with the Rio Summit and the Biodiversity Convention. As a signatory to the Convention, Jordan was
the ﬁrst country in the Middle East to be awarded a multi-million dollar pilot project under the Global Environment Facility
(GEF). The project was to develop a regional model of integrated conservation and development. It was focused on the Dana
Nature Reserve in southern Jordan, where the creation of the protected area in 1994 was linked to the socio-economic development of the local community. This pioneering initiative ushered in a new era in conservation thinking, which the RSCN
continues to lead today.
The number of tourists to RSCN sites exceeded 137,000 in 2010, generating approximately US$1.7 million in revenue. In the
same year, over 16,000 people from poor rural communities were supported by this tourism for nature conservation scheme.
This revenue stream also covered over 50% of 2010’s conservation costs.
Source: From Aziz and Szivas (2011)

of the National Water Strategy is ‘to achieve national
water security and to serve the overall development
objectives’ set out in the Strategy (HKJ, n.d.). Priority
is given to the further development of land and water
resources in the Jordan Rift Valley, which is the food
basket of the country. The strategy recognizes the
critical problem of the excessive use of aquifers, and
highlights the need for limiting water abstraction
to levels that are sustainable over the long term.
Controlling, and even reducing, water consumption in all
sectors is also one of the main pillars of the strategy.
In this context, farmers’ water user associations play a
key role in protecting water resources from pollution,
increasing the efficiency of the irrigation infrastructure,
and minimizing operation and maintenance costs –
all of which are part of the National Water Strategy.
As a speciﬁc response to the over-consumption of
groundwater resources, the Highland Water Forum
was created in 2010 with the aim of achieving the
sustainable management of aquifers in the highlands.
Moreover, as an overarching target the Forum
promotes stakeholder dialogue focusing on sustainable
groundwater management in Jordan.
Because Jordan shares all of its surface water
resources with riparian countries, pursuing bilateral
and multilateral cooperation with neighbouring states,
and advocating regional cooperation are among the
issues that are highlighted in the water strategy.

796

CHAPTER 39

A number of policy papers have been drawn up
within the framework of the National Water Strategy.
These identify the main threads of water resources
management. The four policy papers are the Water
Utility Policy, Irrigation Water Policy, Groundwater
Management Policy, and Wastewater Management
Policy. The National Water Strategy and the four policy
papers, coupled with a comprehensive investment
programme, chart a road map for sustainable
development (HKJ, n.d.).
Until 1987, water resources were managed by two
independent authorities, the Water Authority of
Jordan for water supply and sewerage, and the Jordan
Valley Authority for irrigation and development in the
Jordan Rift Valley. In 1987, the two authorities were
brought together under the umbrella of the Ministry of
Water and Irrigation. The National Water Strategy sets
out the mission and key priorities of the Ministry.

Conclusions
Jordan is among the poorest countries in the world
in terms of water resources. Consequently, priority is
given to structural investments which help to develop
more of its water potential. However, increasing
demand and a growing population have pushed water
consumption beyond sustainable limits and have
led to over-use of groundwater resources. Climate
change projections point to the possibility of a
further reduction in water availability. As things stand,

ARAB STATES

adequately addressing the challenge of an increasing
water deﬁcit requires both supply-side and demandside measures, such as better water management,
enhancing water use efficiency, awareness raising
to change water consumption patterns, redeﬁnition
of water allocation priorities (such as limiting or
reducing agricultural water use), and the development
of technologies for use of non-conventional water
resources (i.e. waste-water recycling). Reversing the
trend of water-quality degradation is important to
protect public health, while ensuring the sustainability
of ecosystems and protecting scarce water resources.
The National Water Strategy is a major policy
document and its priorities are undoubtedly the
correct ones. However, achievement of its goals will
require the continuation of institutional changes to
allow an integrated approach to water management
issues.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Jordan Case
Study Report, prepared in 2011 by the UNESCO Jordan
Office (unpublished).
Azis, H. and Szivas, E. 2011. Tourism. Arab Environment:
Green Economy. Fourth annual report of the Arab Forum
for Environment and Development. Beirut, AFED. http://
afedonline.org/Report2011/PDF/En/chapter%208%20
tourismC&C.pdf

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations). n.d. Irrigation in the Middle East Region in
Figures: AQUASTAT Survey 2008. Rome, FAO. www.
fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/jordan/
jordan_cp.pdf
HKJ (The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan). n.d. Jordan’s
Water Shortage. Amman, The Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan. http://www.kinghussein.gov.jo/geo_env4.html
(Accessed 21 October 2011.)
Kreishan, F. M. M. 2010. Tourism and economic growth:
the case of Jordan. European Journal of Social Sciences,
Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 229–34. http://www.eurojournals.com/
ejss_15_2_08.pdf
MEDAWARE (European Commission Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership). 2005. Development of tools and guidelines
for the promotion of sustainable urban wastewater
treatment and reuse in agricultural production in the
Mediterranean countries: Task 5: technical guidelines on
wastewater utilisation Brussels, European Commission.
http://www.uest.gr/medaware/reports/Task5_revised.doc
RSCN (Royal Society for the Conservation of Nature). 2010.
Climate Change Effects on Jordan’s Vegetation Cover,
Fire Risk and Runoff Changes. http://rscn.org.jo/orgsite/
Portals/0/Impacts_of_Future_Climate_Change_on_
Vegetation,ﬁre_and_runoff.pdf (Accessed 21 October
2011).
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). n.d. Country
information website, Jordan. http://www.unicef.org/
infobycountry/jordan_statistics.html (Accessed 20 October
2011.)
USAID (The United States Agency for International
Development). n.d. Wastewater Reuse in Jordan: A
USAID Initiative. http://jordan.usaid.gov/upload/features/
Jordan%20Wastewater%20Reuse%20Case%20Study.doc
(Accessed 23 October 2011.)
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/ United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2010. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking
Water: 2010 Update. Geneva, WHO/UNICEF.

Budieri, A. 1995. Introduction. A Directory of Wetlands in The
Middle East. Scott, D. A. Gland, Switzerland/Slimbridge,
UK, IUCN/IWRB. http://ramsar.wetlands.org/Portals/15/
JORDAN.pdf

WWDR4

JORDAN

797

CHAPTER 40
Morocco

—
Acknowledgements Abdelhamid Benabdelfadel, Youssef Filali-Meknassi

© Yann Arthus-Bertrand/Altitude-Paris
Morocco: Dades Gorges (31°26' N, 6°01' W)

Location and general characteristics
The Kingdom of Morocco (Morocco hereafter) is located
at the north-west end of the African continent. It covers
an area of 710,850 km2 and has 31.5 million inhabitants
(2009). It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the
north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west, Algeria to the
east and Mauritania to the south.
Morocco’s mountainous territory has an average
elevation of 800 m. The highest point in North Africa
(4,167 m above sea level) is found in the High Atlas
Mountains in the centre of the country. The long
coastline, alluvial lowlands, mountain chains, high
plateaus and the Sahara desert make for a wide
variety of landscape.
Most of northern and central Morocco has a
Mediterranean climate with cold winters and hot, dry
summers. The southern part of the country has semiarid to desert climate. Therefore, the rainfall regime
is highly variable both spatially and temporally.
Annual precipitation ranges from 2,000 mm in the
north to 100 mm or less in the south-east along
the Sahara. The River Draa, which rises in the Atlas
Mountains, is the longest river in the country and runs
for approximately 1,100 km before draining into the
Atlantic Ocean at Tan-Tan. Other important rivers are
the Sebou and the Moulouya.

example) which cover merely 7.3% of the country have
approximately half of its surface water resources. There
are many aquifers in Morocco with good water quality.
However, 66 out of 103 aquifers tested are considered
partially or fully brackish. Overall, brackish water
potential is estimated at about 570 million m3 per year.
Agriculture is one of the main pillars of Morocco’s
economy. The agricultural sector generates
approximately 20% of national gross domestic product
(GDP) and creates employment for up to 40% of the
population (80% in rural areas). Cereals (wheat, barley
and maize), sugar beet, sugar cane, citrus fruit, grapes
and livestock are the main agricultural products.
Approximately 95,000 km2 of land is cultivated
including 15,000 km2 of irrigated land. Groundwater
is of paramount importance to agriculture as 75%
of irrigation water is abstracted from wells. While
the renewable groundwater capacity is estimated at
3.6 billion m3/year, actual consumption has surpassed
the sustainable limits and reached approximately
5 billion m3.
Other sources of income are tourism and ﬁsheries. In
2009, 8 million tourists visited Morocco generating
approximately US$6 billion of income. While tourism
constitutes an increasingly important sector for the
national economy, the consumption of water by
touristic activities is also growing.

Water resources and their use
Morocco’s rivers are fed by rainfall and they are
torrential in nature. Other than the Moulouya in the
north which discharges into Mediterranean Sea, almost
all the major rivers ﬂow to the Atlantic or disappear in
the Sahara. The annual water resources potential of the
country is approximately 22 billion m3, of which 82%
corresponds to surface water and 18% to groundwater.
Water availability per capita is around 700 m3 – which
puts the country into the ‘water scarce’ category.
Surface water resources throughout the country are
characterized by a very large annual and inter-annual
variability which is marked by alternating wet and dry
periods, interspersed with exceptionally wet and dry
years. This means that reservoirs need to be built to
regulate river ﬂow and to store water for dry seasons.
Currently, there are 130 large dams with a total
capacity of 17 billion m3.
There is also a clear disparity in terms of distribution
of surface water resources. A few basins in the north
(the Sebou, the Loukkos, and the Tangérois, for

WWDR4

Overall, water consumption in Morocco has risen
beyond the level of the currently developed renewable
water resources potential. In 2008, annual water
demand was 13.5 billion m3. Of this, 2 billion m3 came
from non-renewable groundwater resources. As a result
of over-exploitation coupled with changes in climate,
the water level in many aquifers dropped by 20 m to
60 m. The agricultural sector is by far the largest user of
water, accounting for 90% of demand. This is followed
by municipal needs, which constitute just 8%. By 2030,
the water deﬁcit (that is the use of non-renewable
sources) is expected to reach 5 billion m3.

Climate change and disasters
Statistical analysis of hydrometeorological data shows
that rainfall increases in October and November and
decreases in spring. While winter rainfall seems to
be declining, this was not statistically signiﬁcant. An
analysis of variations in temperature between 1960
and 2000 revealed an increase of up to 1.4°C in the
south-east and in the Midelt region of central Morocco,

MOROCCO

799

As a part of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Morocco formulated its
ﬁrst national communication in 2001, and its second
in 2009. These communications provided details on
the national inventory of greenhouse gas emissions
and mitigation options including the action plan. It is
estimated that by 2030, the annual total mitigation
potential of these measures will be equivalent to
52.9 million tonnes of CO2.

but the warming trend in the north was less signiﬁcant.
A temperature increase of 1°C or higher was recorded
over two-thirds of the country in summer; and a similar
warming trend was observed in winter temperatures.
Climate observations also show that the semi-arid
zone has been progressing northwards over the past
few decades. A worrying trend is that water resources
availability has decreased by 16% since 1981 (Figure 40.1).
Estimates of possible climate change impacts on
water resources indicate an average decrease in water
resources in the order of 10% to 15% by 2050.

In 2009, the National Plan to Fight Against Global
Warming (Le Plan National de Lutte Contre le
Réchauffement Climatique) was introduced. The Plan
comprises mitigation and adaptation measures and
identiﬁes a number of priority areas for action, including
water resources, agriculture, forestry, desertiﬁcation,
ﬁsheries, coastal land use, health and tourism.

Flood and drought have also become more
pronounced. In the past 35 years, Morocco has faced
more than 20 periods of drought – the worst in recent
history – with some lasting ﬁve years or more. Floods
have also had a socio-economic impact on society
that is stronger than before. This is not only because
of the individual ﬂoods tend to be worse, but also
because of population growth, urban development,
and expanding agricultural, industrial and tourism
activities in vulnerable areas. The record rainfall of
2,685 mm at Jbel Outka and the exceptional ﬂoods
in the Ouergha River basin (maximum discharge
of 7000 m3/s), are only a few examples of extreme
events that took place between 2008 and 2011.
Frequent ﬂoods and droughts have also led to
increased land erosion.

The national water strategy includes an action plan
to ‘reduce vulnerability to water-related natural
hazards and adaptation to climate change’. The
measures covered in the plan include improving
weather forecasting, the development of warning
systems in major basins and sites vulnerable to
ﬂooding, the integration of ﬂood risk plans for land
use, urban planning and watershed management,
and the development of ﬁnancial mechanisms such
as insurance and natural disaster funds.

FIGURE 40.1
Fluctuation in water resources availability between 1945 and 2010

Water resources availability (in billion m3)

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

800

CHAPTER 40

5

9
20
0

20
0

20
01

97
19

93
19

89
19

85
19

81
19

77
19

73
19

69
19

65
19

61
19

57
19

53
19

49
19

19

45

0

ARAB STATES

Water resources management and
institutional aspects
Since the 1960’s, the National Water Policy in Morocco
has been oriented towards the development of water
resources. This has been done through constructing
the major water infrastructure projects – such as
large reservoirs and water transfer schemes – that
ensure the continuity of the water supply that the
country relies on. Increasing demand necessitated
an improvement in the way scarce water resources
were being managed. Water Law 10-95 (enacted in
1995) represents the legal basis for a forward-looking
water policy, which takes into account both supplyrelated and demand-related issues. Notably, it deﬁnes
water as a public property and calls for an integrated,
participatory and decentralized water resources
management mechanism through the establishment of
nine river basin agencies. The Water Law requires the
preparation of national water management plans and
river basin water management plans. It also addresses
the issue of cost recovery through water abstraction
charges (user-pays), and introduces a water pollution
tax (polluter-pays).
Because groundwater resources are so important, the
protection of aquifers is an important element of the
Water Law. To this end, several measures are being
planned, including pricing as an instrument; setting
protected zones where groundwater abstraction is
banned or limited; imposing strict procedures for
granting drilling permits; increasing human, ﬁnancial
and institutional capacity to be able to better enforce
the rules and control mechanisms; and improved
monitoring of groundwater availability and utilization.
Promoting scientiﬁc research and the artiﬁcial
recharge of aquifers are also among the issues that are
under consideration.
For better medium-term and long-term planning,
the National Water Plan was established to integrate
the various regional plans in order to develop a
vision of integrated water resources management.
The Plan has two overarching targets: developing a
national strategy based on the 1995 Water Law, and
formulating and adopting speciﬁc action plans and
investment programmes.
The Water Resources Division of the Ministry of
Energy, Mines, Water and Environment (de l’Energie,
des Mines, de l’Eau et de l’Environnement – SEEE)
is the lead government department responsible for

WWDR4

planning and implementing the national policy on
the development, management and preservation of
water resources. The Division is also charged with the
protection of the environment, and oversees the work
of the nine river basin agencies. The national bureau
for electricity (Office National de l’Electricité) and
the national office for drinking water (Office National
de l’Eau Potable) both come under the auspices of
the same ministry. The Supreme Council for Water
and Climate (Conseil Supérieur de l’Eau et du Climat)
formulates the general guidelines of national policy on
water and climate.
Signiﬁcant progress has been made on the
implementation of the Water Law. However, further
improvement of the regulatory and institutional
framework, including the revision of certain provisions
of the Water Law (such as wastewater discharge at
sea, desalination, recycling of wastewater and the
protection of wetlands) is anticipated. Establishing a
legal framework that aims for a more rational system of
abstraction charges and enforcement of water policy is
equally critical – especially with respect to controlling
the allocation of water and restricting its use.
To address current and imminent challenges, a new
national water strategy was launched in 2009 to
strengthen existing policies. Its main tenets are water
demand management and better valuation; further
development of water resources and an improvement
in the way they are managed; the preservation and
protection of water resources and the environment; the
mitigation of risks and a reduction in the vulnerability
to water-related hazards; regulatory and institutional
reforms; and the modernization of information systems
and capacity improvement.

The protection of the environment
and ecosystems
Morocco has many wetlands that are located mainly in
the mountains and along the coast. Studies conducted
locally and nationally on ecosystems and biodiversity
identiﬁed 160 sites of ecological and biological
signiﬁcance – including 24 internationally recognized
Ramsar sites. Morocco’s wetlands are home to many
species of amphibians, reptiles and mammals, and
they have a global importance as passageways for
migratory birds. Unfortunately, the ecosystems are
under an increasing threat caused by the degradation
of water quality, as a result of domestic, agricultural,
and industrial pollution as well as prolonged and

MOROCCO

801

recurrent droughts. To limit and reduce such threats, a
number of strategic plans have been developed – the
National Strategy for Sustainable Development, the
National Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable
Use of Biodiversity, the National Action Plan for the
Environment, the National Strategy on Water, the
Master Plan for Integrated Management of Water
Resources and the Development Strategy for Mountain
Areas.
Pollution – notably domestic and agricultural pollution
and, to a lesser extent, industrial and solid waste
– is a major concern in Morocco. In 2011, nearly
700 million m3 of wastewater from settlements was
discharged into nature without treatment. Agricultural
pollution has caused elevated nitrate concentration
in water bodies, notably aquifers. Because of this,
protecting the quality of water resources is a strategic
priority, which is strengthened through introduction of
various programmes such as the National Sanitation
and Wastewater Treatment Programme, the National
Programme for Rural Sanitation, the National
Programme for Prevention Against Industrial Pollution,
and a number of other programmes.

Water and health
Some 57% of Morocco’s population live in urban
areas where 98% have access to safe water (WHO/
UNICEF, 2010). In rural areas too, the coverage has
been increasing substantially from 14% in 1994 to over
83% in 2010. However, merely 25% of rural dwellers
enjoy piped water at home. Coverage of the sewerage
system exceeds 70% nationwide, but only 52% of
rural dwellers have access to improved sanitation. As
a result, diarrhoea and other gastrointestinal diseases
continue to be a cause of morbidity and mortality
especially among rural children in the lowest income
groups, and particularly during the summer season
(Ministère de la Sante, 2005).

participative and decentralized water resources
management. However, the scarcity of water resources
is being exacerbated by climate change and the overexploitation of aquifers. The low value attributed to
water, particularly in agriculture, and the deterioration
of water quality are important problems that remain to
be tackled. The new water strategy launched in 2009
to reinforce critical aspects of water policy is intended
to address current and imminent challenges.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Morocco
Case Study Report prepared in 2011 by Abdelhamid
Benabdelfadel, Chief of the Division of Water
Resources, Secretariat of State within the Ministry of
Energy, Mines, Water and the Environment, in charge
of Water and the Environment (unpublished).
Ministère de la Sante, Morocco. 2005. Politique de santé de
l’enfant au Maroc : Analyse de la situation. Rabat, Ministry of
Health. http://www.emro.who.int/cah/pdf/chp_mor_05.pdf
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations
Children’s Fund) Joint Monitoring Programme for
Water and Sanitation. 2010. Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking Water, 2010 Update. Geneva/New York, WHO/
UNICEF. http://www.wssinfo.org/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/
resources/1278061137-JMP_report_2010_en.pdf

Conclusions
Morocco’s complex climate and hydrology mean that
efficient water resources management is vital. Many
important water resources development projects,
including the construction of large dams and water
transfer projects, have been implemented to meet
the demand that is necessary for the country’s socioeconomic development. This is further backed by longterm national planning activities that were initiated
in 1980s, and regulatory and institutional advances
(for example, Law 10-95) that focus on integrated,

802

CHAPTER 40

ARAB STATES

CHAPTER 41
Murray–Darling basin, Australia

—
Acknowledgements Marc Leblanc, Albert van Dijk,
Sarah Tweed, Bertrand Timbal.

© Shutterstock/Phillip Minnis

Location and general characteristics

Water resources availability

The Murray–Darling basin lies in south-eastern
Australia and is formed by the Murray River (2,530 km)
and its three main tributaries: the Darling (2,750 km),
the Lachlan (1,450 km) and the Murrumbidgee
(1,700 km) (Map 41.1). Covering more than a million
km2, or approximately 14% of the continent, the
Murray–Darling basin spans most of New South Wales,
Victoria, parts of the states of Queensland and South
Australia, and the Australian Capital Territory – which
includes the country’s capital, Canberra. The basin is
home to approximately 2 million people.

Approximately 86% of the water currently used in the
basin is surface water, with groundwater providing the
rest. Water availability varies greatly across the basin
and almost 80% of the vast catchment area contributes
little or no water to the rivers. The main run-off comes
from the southern and eastern boundaries of the
basin. Average annual water consumption in the basin
is approximately 11 billion m3, which equates to 48%
of the annual surface water potential of the basin.
Currently, 84% of the water is used for agriculture
and 3% is used by the MDB’s towns and cities. The
remainder is lost during the storage and transfer of
irrigation water (Table 41.1).

The topography of the basin is dominated by vast
plains, bounded to the east and south by the Great
Dividing Range, Australia’s most substantial mountain
range, which reaches a maximum elevation of 2,228 m
above sea level.

To satisfy increases in water demand during the
second half of the twentieth century, many structural
works were built across the basin. The total water
storage capacity in reservoirs rose from 2 km3 in the
1930s to approximately 35 km3 in 2007. This latest
ﬁgure corresponds to about 150% of the average
annual water availability in the basin. Surface water
use in the basin grew with the increase in public and
private storage capacity up to the mid-1990s, when
the Murray–Darling Basin Ministerial Council imposed
an upper limit on surface water diversions (Figure 41.1).

The basin has a variety of climatic conditions and
diverse landscapes ranging from the sub-tropical
far north to the cool, humid uplands to the east, the
temperate south-east and the hot, semi-arid and arid
western plains, which account for more than two-thirds
of the basin. Rainfall is summer-dominated in the north
and winter–dominated in the south.

MAP 41.1
Murray–Darling basin

QUEENSLAND

Brisbane

AUSTRALIA

Basin
Floodplain

SOUT
AUSTRA

Da

ng

W

Menindee
Lakes

Hydroelectric
power plant
City

rl i

Lake
Victoria

Adelaide

PACIFIC
OCEAN

M u rrumbidge
e

State border
Lower
Lakes

SOUTHERN
OCEAN

Sydney

hlan
La c

M

u
A rray

Canberra

Melbourne

0

804

CHAPTER 41

100 200 300 400 500 km

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

TABLE 41.1
Surface water use in the Murray-Darling basin*
Surface water use

km3/year

% of overall

Net irrigation diversions

9.51

84

Rural stock and domestic

0.08

<1

Urban

0.32

3

Channel and pipe loss

1.24

11

Stream ﬂow loss due to groundwater
pumping

0.18

<2

* According to 2006-07 water sharing, water entitlements and irrigation portfolios

FIGURE 41.1
Total system inﬂows, surface water use and dam storage capacity in the Murray-Darling basin

50

(Values are in km3 per year)

40

30

20

average natural ﬂow to the sea
average natural ﬂow the sea
10

0
1907

1917

1927

1937

1947

total system inﬂows (10 yr mov. average)

Water and agriculture
The Murray–Darling basin is Australia’s food bowl.
Agriculture is practised approximately in 80% of its
area, accounting for about 40% of the country’s total
agricultural production. The main crops are cotton,
rice, wheat, corn, grapes, citrus fruit and other fruit
trees. Cattle and sheep production and irrigated dairy
farming are also common sources of income. The
amount of water used to maintain livestock-related

WWDR4

1957
surface water use

1967

1977

1987

1997

2007

total dam storage capacity

agricultural activities corresponds to around half of
Australia’s total water consumption and around 60% of
total agricultural water use.

Water management at the national level and
in the basin
An increase in water diversions led to concerns about
the health of the basin and its environmental ﬂows. But
because water allocations are governed by separate

MURRAY–DARLING BASIN, AUSTRALIA

805

legislation and policies in the ﬁve states that share the
basin, achieving the necessary environmental targets is
posing a real challenge.
Since the 1990s there has been a progressive shift
towards integrated water resources management in the
basin. In 1993, the Murray–Darling Basin Commission was
established to promote and coordinate the equitable
and sustainable use of water across the basin. It was
replaced in 2008 by the Murray–Darling Basin Authority,
which acts as a government statutory agency. The
basin’s water resources are managed by the Murray–
Darling Basin Authority in conjunction with the states
and territories that make up its catchment area. The
its main responsibilities are to measure and monitor
water resources in the basin; to prepare, implement
and enforce the management plan; to set surface and
groundwater abstraction limits; and to develop a water
rights information service to facilitate water trading.
Because Australia has a federal government system, it
was necessary to have national agreement to ensure
that there would be compatibility in the way each
of Australia’s state and territory governments was
measuring, planning for, pricing and trading water.
To this end, the National Water Initiative was signed
by the Council of Australian Governments in 2004.
It is an intergovernmental agreement signed by all
of Australia’s state and territory governments and is
the country’s blueprint for water reform. Established
under the National Water Initiative, the National
Water Commission is an independent statutory body
that is responsible for helping to drive national water
reform and advise governments on water issues. The
commission's speciﬁc functions in the context of the
Murray–Darling basin include monitoring the effects
of interstate trade in water access entitlements in
the southern part of the basin, advising the various
National Water Initiative signatories about these
effects, and auditing the effectiveness of the Murray–
Darling basin water management plan.

Climate change and climatic variability
The severe drought that affected most of southeastern Australia (including the southern part of the
Murray–Darling basin) began in 1997 and continued for
twelve years. This caused signiﬁcant economic losses
across the region (Box 41.1). The average annual rainfall
deﬁcit of this drought is similar to that of the 1935–
1945 drought. However, the recent drought has led to
a much stronger decrease in runoff and groundwater

806

CHAPTER 41

recharge. This can be explained by a change in rainfall
patterns during the recent drought: lower inter-annual
variability and less rainfall in autumn and winter. The
drought ended with rains that caused some of the
highest ﬂoodwaters on record in 2010–2011.
The semi-arid to arid nature of the region means that it
already has very high natural hydroclimatic variability
– adding the effects of climate change to this poses
an even greater challenge. A comprehensive project
commissioned by the federal and state governments
suggested that, under a median scenario, surface water
availability across the entire Murray–Darling basin would
decline by 11% by about 2030 as a result of climate
change. The projected reduction in water availability
would reduce surface water use by 4%. However, water
use in the driest years would be affected far more – by
up to 50% in the basin in Victoria.
The greatest impact of climate change is likely to occur
close to the mouth of the Murray River, including in the
Chowilla ﬂoodplains, the Coorong national park and
lagoon ecosystem, and the Lower Lakes. The outﬂows
from the Murray River are already affected by current
water diversions that reduce annual natural outﬂows by
40%. And these are projected to drop by an estimated
further 30% by 2030. From an ecological point of view,
the impact of water diversions on a river basin is often
greater than the effects of climate change. However,
the combined effects of both the water diversions and
climate change could more than double the average
duration between beneﬁcial ﬂoods. This would have
a signiﬁcant impact on wetlands and their associated
ecosystems. Towards the end of the twenty-ﬁrst century,
the impact of climate change could signiﬁcantly increase,
depending on emissions scenarios. What is even more
concerning is that the current trend in greenhouse gases
emission is alarmingly in excess of most scenarios that
are currently considered in climate change projections.

Water and the environment
There are nearly 30,000 wetlands in the Murray–
Darling basin that are important for native ﬁsh and
the feeding and breeding of local and migratory
water birds. The major wetlands located along
the Darling basin include the Macquarie marshes,
the Great Cumbung Swamp, the overﬂow lakes of
the Paroo River, the Narran lakes, and the Gwydir
wetlands. The largest wetlands on the Murray are the
Barmah–Millewa, Gunbower and Koondrook–Pericoota
wetlands, the Chowilla ﬂoodplains and the Lower

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Lakes and Coorong Lakes systems at the interface with
the Southern Ocean (Map 41.1).
Sixteen of the Murray–Darling basin's wetlands are
identiﬁed as internationally important and listed under
the Ramsar Convention. Similarly, the Directory of
Important Wetlands in Australia includes approximately
200 sites in the basin. There are a large number of
nationally and internationally signiﬁcant plant and
animal species in the basin. However, as a result of
pollution and modiﬁed river ﬂows associated with
large-scale water resources development, 95 species
are listed as threatened, more than half of its native

ﬁsh species are considered to be in need of attention
and ﬁsh populations are estimated to be only about
10% of predevelopment levels.
The 1997–2009 drought exacerbated the severity of
these problems. For example, the record-low ﬂows
at the outlet of the Murray–Darling led to a sharp
decline in inundated areas. It also led to a degradation
of water quality as a result of increased salinity,
which caused severe ecological and signiﬁcant socioeconomic impacts. During the drought, the water
level at Lake Alexandrina, which is the largest water
body in the Lower Lakes system (Map 41.1), dropped

BOX 41.1
Drought’s heavy toll on Australia
During the 1997–2009 drought, surface water storage dropped to less than 10% of storage capacity and groundwater declined by as much as 100 km3. This imposed severe water restrictions on both urban communities and farmers who depend
on irrigation. Overall estimates of the economic cost of this drought are not readily available, though some studies have estimated aspects of it.
Agricultural exports account for one-ﬁfth of total Australian exports. In 2002, drought was estimated to have lowered gross
domestic product (GDP) by 1.6% (more than US$10 billion), of which around 1% was the result of reduced agricultural export.
The drought was also implicated in a 1% national decline in employment and wages.
Regional impacts were much stronger, with gross regional production down by more than 15% and employment dropping
by more than 3% in the worst-affected regions of the Murray–Darling Basin. The Australian Reserve Bank estimated that the
2006–2007 dry year in Australia reduced GDP by almost 1%, whereas farm GDP fell by around 20%. More recently it was estimated that between 2000 and 2007, the gross value of irrigated agriculture fell by approximately US$ 140 million per year.
During the periods 2005–2006 and 2007–2008, the total area of irrigated land fell by 42%.
Production of cotton and rice in the Murray-Darling basin (100 = average annual production for 1990-2000)
150

Production index

120

90

60

30

0
1969

1973
rice

WWDR4

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

2009

cotton

MURRAY–DARLING BASIN, AUSTRALIA

807

by about 1.2 m and the salinity level increased sixfold. The exposure of lake beds that are naturally rich
in iron sulphides caused the production of sulphuric
acid – threatening the rich ﬂora and fauna of the lake’s
ecosystems.
The salinization of land and water resources is
also environmental problem in the basin. Salt
concentrations in soil water and groundwater are
predominantly high in the basin because of the
concentration of cyclic salts caused by millennia of
evapotranspiration. This natural condition has been
further aggravated by the extensive land clearance
that started in the nineteenth century to increase
the amount of land available for farming. Crops and
pasture allowed more groundwater recharge than did
the area’s native vegetation, which caused rising levels
of saline groundwater to contaminate the land and the
surface water. The area affected by dryland salinity
in the Murray–Darling basin states (including sites
outside the basin) was estimated at 6,400 km2 in 1997.

In recent decades, water management objectives
have shifted from large-scale development of the
water resources for irrigation to environmental
concerns. In parallel, water governance is gradually
moving to a coordinated and integrated management
that is shared between the state and the territory
governments in the basin catchment area. The severe
drought that lasted more than a decade from 1997 to
2009 caused signiﬁcant economic and environmental
damage, and brought the tension between agricultural
and environmental objectives to a head. However, the
National Water Initiative and the recently established
Murray–Darling Basin Authority give hope that water
consumption patterns will be reevaluated with a view
to improving hydrological conditions to a point where
they can sustain the social, ecological and economic
systems that depend on them.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References

Conclusions
The Murray–Darling basin covers a vast area that is
roughly equal to the size of France and Germany
combined. Extensive agricultural practices have
made the basin the food basket of Australia and a
major source of income. However, usage patterns
have put great stress on water resources and have
passed beyond the critical limit of sustainable use.
Land and water resources development have altered
the hydrological conditions, caused environmental
degradation and signiﬁcantly affected ecosystems.

808

CHAPTER 41

Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Case Study
Report, The Murray–Darling Basin: A Major Food Bowl
In Crisis – Lessons from the Past and Challenges Ahead,
prepared in 2011 by Leblanc et al. (forthcoming).

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

CHAPTER 42
Yellow River basin, China

—
Acknowledgements Hongqi Shang, Feng Sun, Yangbo Sun, Hui Pang, Wu Dong,
Ruipeng Son, Zhen Gong, Hai Jin, Zhao Hao, Jing Xu, Ramasamy Jayakumar, Ke Liu,
Hao Liu, Bing Wang

© Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC)

The Yellow River basin was covered in detail in the
case study volume of the third edition of the World
Water Development Report (WWAP, 2009). In agreement with the Yellow River Basin Commission, a
follow-up study was developed to provide up-to-date
information where possible and to further focus on
critical challenges such as climate change, erosion,
sediment transport and water quality.

Location and general characteristics
The Yellow River, the second-longest in the People’s
Republic of China (called ‘China’ from here on), rises
in the western part of the country at 4,700 m above
sea level. It runs through northern and central China,
where the temperate continental monsoon climate is
dominant. The southeastern section of the basin has
a humid climate, whereas the north-western areas
are considerably drier. The river passes through nine
provinces – Qinghai, Sichuan, Gansu, Ningxia, InnerMongolia, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Henan and Shandong
– before draining into the Bo Hai Sea (Map 42.1).
Geographically, the Yellow River traverses the Tibetan
Plateau (upper basin), the Loess Plateau (middle
basin) and the North China Plain (lower basin).
The Yellow River basin covers an area of 795,000
km2, which is home to approximately 110 million
inhabitants – or about 8.7% of China’s population in
2000. However, the population is unevenly distributed,

with about 70% living in the lower third of the basin.
Regarded as the cradle of northern Chinese civilization
and the heart of modern China’s political, economic
and social development, the Yellow River is known as
‘the mother river of China’.

Water and land resources in the basin
The average surface water potential of the Yellow
River basin is 57 billion m3 and average groundwater
potential is about 38.5 billion m3. In 2009, water
consumption in the basin was 39.3 billion m3, of which
over 78% came from surface water and almost 22%
from groundwater resources. Since 1980, the rate
of groundwater exploitation has increased rapidly,
reaching unsustainable levels. In fact, 65 locations
spread over an area of nearly 6,000km2 have relatively
large groundwater depressions.
There are 163,000 km2 of potentially cultivable land
in the basin. Of this, 120,000 km2 (or 15% of the
basin territory) is cultivated, including 75,000 km2
of irrigated land. Since the 1950s, the importance of
agriculture to the economy has declined and other
sectors are making a bigger contribution to the gross
domestic product (GDP) of the basin (Table 42.1).
Many new industrial cities have been founded: Xining,
Lanzhou, Yinchuan, Baotou, Huhehot, Taiyuan, Xi’an,
Luoyang, Zhengzhou and Jinan. However, agriculture
still accounts for 75% of water demand.

MAP 42.1
Yellow River basin
MONGOLIA
M
ONGO
O
NG
N
GO
G
OL
O
L IIA
A
Wuyuan
Huhehot
CHINA

Beijing

Baotou

Tengri
Desert

Bo Hai

Ramsar site
Dam
National park
City

Xining

Y el

Yan’an

CHAPTER 42

w

Ri

ve

r

Jinan

Lanzhou
Linfen
Tongchuan
Baoji
Xi’an

Wei

CHINA

810

ll o

Qinghai Hu

Taiyuan

e

Ye

Basin

lo w

Fen H

Ri

ver

Yinchuan

Zhengzhou
Luoyang

0

100

250 km

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

TABLE 42.1
GDP of provinces in the Yellow River basin (2006)

Agriculture
(million US$)

Industry
(million US$)

Service Industry
(million US$)

Total GDP
(million US$)

Increase since
2000
(million US$)

Qinghai

68

241

237

546

435

Sichuan

4

3

3

10

8

Gansu

224

957

846

2,027

1,736

Ningxia

101

441

354

896

705

Inner Mongolia

271

1,889

1,146

3,306

2,625

Shaanxi

455

2,822

1,792

5,069

3,969

Shanxi

218

2,406

1,277

3,901

3,164

Henan

369

1,908

1,033

3,310

2,645

Shandong

205

1,296

994

2,495

2,011

1,915

11,963

7,682

21,560

17,298

Provinces

Yellow River basin

Climate change
Between 1961 and 2005, annual average precipitation
in the basin decreased slightly – by, on average,
12 mm every ten years. However, this trend was
signiﬁcant at only nine of the 51 stations. Over the
long term, the amount of precipitation in January
may increase by less than 7 millimeter by 2100. Based
on scenarios, the rainfall in the middle and lower
reaches of the basin might be higher than in the
upper reaches. During the same period, the annual
mean air temperature across the basin increased
at a rate of 0.3°C every ten years. Over 90% of the
monitoring stations (53 of 58 stations) showed a
signiﬁcant increase in the annual mean air temperature. To give an example, at the Menyuan and
Hezuo stations, both of which are located in the
upper Yellow River basin, the average air temperature
in 2004 was 1.14°C higher than in 1960. According to
models, January mean temperatures could increase
by as much as 5.0°C by 2100. Signiﬁcant warming
could reduce the availability of the water resources
(Zhang et al., 2008). Consequently, better water
management and the adaptation of technology to
improve the efficiency of water use will need to be
considered to prevent a critical water shortage in the
basin in this century and beyond.

WWDR4

Concerns about environmental degradation
and water-related disasters
Water pollution is a severe problem in the basin. In 1997,
only 17% of the course of the Yellow River was ﬁt for
drinking water. This had a direct negative impact on
human health and the basin’s ecosystems. In 1982, more
than 80% of the 96 algae types found in the Yellow
River were either severely or moderately polluted.
Furthermore, analysis of historic data since the 1980s
shows a reduction in the number of ﬁsh species and
total ﬁsh quantity in the river (Ru et al., 2010).
The Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC),
one of seven commissions of the Ministry of Water
Resources in China, was set up to address the problem
of water quality and manage water resources in
the basin (Box 42.1). The YRCC has introduced the
following measures:
đƫ Setting a maximum pollutant discharge quantity for
the provinces according to the inﬂow of the Yellow
River;
đƫ Strengthening the water quality monitoring on the
provincial boundary; and,
đƫ Enforcing the legislation on water pollution
prevention and protection.
Thanks to these efforts, the water quality in the main
stream of the Yellow River has improved considerably.
In 2006, approximately 60% of the course of the river
was in the ‘good quality’ category. And between 2002

YELLOW RIVER BASIN, CHINA

811

and 2006, the areas of the river that were ranked as
‘bad quality’ fell from 21.1% to 3.1%.
Erosion in the basin occurs mainly along the Loess
Plateau, and is a major problem. The plateau covers
an area of 640,000 km2 with average thickness of
loess soil ranging from 50 m to 300 m. The volume
of sediment in the Yellow River that originates from
this region is about 1.2 billion tonnes per year. That
accounts for 60% of China’s total soil erosion and 10%
of the world total. In fact, it is the yellow colour of the
suspended sediments that gives the river its name.
While the erosion in the loess soil band is a natural
phenomenon, it has increased greatly as a result of
the environmental degradation caused by human
activities, especially deforestation, overgrazing, and
over-cropping (Box 42.1).
While a portion of the heavy sediment load is
transported to the sea, most of it is deposited on
the riverbed and onto the banks. Consequently, the
river ﬂows in a channel that is higher than ground
level. To give an example, the riverbed is 20 m above
ground level in Xingxiang city, 13 m above in Kaifeng
city, and 5 m above in Jinan city. The total region
where the land is lower than the riverbed covers
some 120,000 km2 and is home to approximately
90 million inhabitants. Because dike breaches
could result in devastating ﬂoods, the levees on the

Yellow River ﬂoodplain are regularly maintained
and rebuilt. However, all these efforts would not be
enough to cope with a major catastrophe such as a
100-year-ﬂood which could cause signiﬁcant socioeconomic damage. A major ﬂood in 1938 affected
12.5 million people and claimed 890,000 lives. Today,
approximately 1.9 million people living in the inner
ﬂood plain of the lower part of Yellow River basin are
facing imminent threat.

Water resources management
As a result of a substantial increase in water demand
in the upper and middle reaches of the basin, parts of
the river course were dry twenty-one times between
1972 and 1999. In 1987, in an attempt to strike a better
balance between supply and demand, China’s State
Council set up the Yellow River Water Allocation
Scheme. This was followed in 2006 by an ordinance to
regulate and control water volume in the Yellow River.
This ordinance puts water extraction from the Yellow
River under state control in order to satisfy demand
and improve environmental conditions by ensuring
ﬂow, especially in the lower reaches of the basin,
(Zhao, 2006). It also aims to promote socio-economic
development in the basin.
The ordinance foresees an integrated water allocation
scheme. It vests in the YRCC the responsibility of
drafting the annual water-use plan in consultation with

BOX 42.1
Sediment management strategies in the Yellow River basin
The Yellow River Conservancy Commission is an agency of the Ministry of Water Resources. It is in charge of managing land
and water resources in the basin, including protecting its ecosystems. The YRCC operates within an established legal and
regulatory framework to plan, implement and maintain soil and water conservation programmes.
Since the mid-1950s the Commission has put a number of large-scale land management projects into operation in the basin,
particularly in the Loess Plateau region. This has included constructing dams, afforestation and terracing efforts, and converting cropland on slopes into grazing land. In general, the key strategies aimed at managing sediment load in the Yellow River
basin include:
đ Soil conservation works – afforestation, terracing and constructing barriers;
đ Improving land use practices – regulating cropping on slopes, enhancing tillage practices, etc.; and
đ Commissioning engineering works to control ﬂows and reduce sediment deposition in the river system.
These activities coupled with ﬂood control support have been successful in reducing the sediment load of the Yellow River.
However, the soil conservation projects in the Loess Plateau are expected to reduce river runoff by as much as 2 billion m3
by 2030. Given the increasing demand for water, the reduction in water availability will add to existing competition between
sectors for this precious resource.
Source: Adapted from UNESCO and IRTCES (2011).

812

CHAPTER 42

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

eleven provinces and autonomous regions. The plan
sets the quota for each province according to river
ﬂow forecasts. These quotas are then updated on a
monthly basis taking into consideration actual water
availability in the river. The provincial governments
are responsible for the allocation of water resources in
their jurisdiction, within the limits of their quota.
To ensure that the water allocation system functions
properly, administrative and legislative measures are
backed by technical methods. For example, during
the ﬂood season, all reservoirs are operated in an
integrated manner to regulate the river ﬂow and
subsequent water distribution. In addition, online river
information systems allow accurate observation of
water availability along the course of the Yellow River.
They also allow the allocation scheme to be adapted
to guarantee the water rights of the provinces in the
lower reaches of the basin.
Since 1999, there has been no cut-off of the ﬂow in
the lower Yellow River basin, and environmental ﬂows
have increased by 1 billion m3 in the low-ﬂow season.
Overall, the total ﬂow1 reserved for sediment ﬂushing
and environmental needs has reached approximately
to 20 billion m3. Consequently, estuary wetlands have
increased in size by 253 km2, and biodiversity has
improved.

Conclusions
The challenges described in the previous World
Water Development Report have not changed in
the past three years. Consequently, water quality,
environmental degradation, the unsustainable use
of water resources (notably groundwater) and
sediment transport are still high on the agenda of
the Yellow River Conservancy Commission (YRCC).
On the positive side, measures taken by the YRCC to
limit pollutant discharge and to enforce legislation
have helped to improve water quality in the river.
As a result of the allocation scheme, river ﬂow in
the lower basin has met the minimum level required
to ﬂush the sediment and sustain basic ecosystem
needs. The physical characteristics of the Loess
Plateau mean that sediment transport will continue
to be a problem in the basin. However, management
practices, particularly afforestation and tillage, have
reduced sediment loads in the Yellow River and
its tributaries. In spite of progress made in various
ﬁelds, the growing imbalance between supply and
demand will require hard choices to be made in
order to address diverging needs and reduce water

WWDR4

consumption in agriculture, while making other
sectors more water efficient.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

The United Nations World Water Development Report 3 (WWAP,
2009) reported that the minimum ﬂow required to ﬂush out
sediment is calculated at 14 billion m3, and an additional 5
billion m3 is necessary for other environmental requirements.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Yellow River
basin Case Study Report, prepared in 2011 by the
Yellow River Conservancy Commission, Ministry
of Water Resources, People’s Republic of China
(unpublished).
Ru, H., Wang, H., Zhao, W., Shen, Y., Wang, Y. and Zhang, X.
2010. Fishes in the mainstream of the Yellow River:
assemblage characteristics and historical changes.
Biodiversity Science, Vol. 18, pp. 169–74
UNESCO and IRTCES (International Research and Training
Center on Erosion and Sedimentation). 2011. Sediment
Issues in the Yellow River Basin, China. International
Sediment Initiative. Paris/Beijing, UNESCO/IRTCES. http://
www.irtces.org/isi/isi_document/2011/ISI_Fact_Sheets.pdf
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment
Programme). 2009. China: The Yellow River basin. United
Nations World Water Development Report 3, Case Studies
Volume: Facing the Challenges. Paris, UNESCO. http://
www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/
water/wwap/case-studies/asia-the-paciﬁc/china-2009/
Zhang, Q., Xu, C.-Y., Zhang, Z., Ren, G. and Chen, Y. D. 2008.
Climate change or variability? The case of Yellow river
as indicated by extreme maximum and minimum air
temperature during 1960–2004. Theoretical and Applied
Climatology, vol. 93, Nos 1–2.
Zhao, H. 2006. Yellow River water use to be regulated.
China Daily, 2 August. http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/
china/2006-08/02/content_654981.htm

YELLOW RIVER BASIN, CHINA

813

CHAPTER 43
Jeju Island, Korea

—
Acknowledgements Yongje Kim, Gi-Won Koh, Sung Kim, Jae Heyon Park

© Jeju Special Self-Governing Province

Location and general characteristics

groundwater, as approximately half of the annual
rainfall (1.58 billion m3) permeates into the ground.

Jeju Province is the largest island in the Republic of
Korea (Korea from here on). Located off the southwest coast of the Korean peninsula in the South
Korea Strait, this self-governing province is home
to approximately 567,000 inhabitants, and has a
surface area of 1,848 km2. Right in the centre of the
island, volcanic Mount Halla is Jeju’s dominating
geographical feature (Map 43.1), and tops 1,950 metres
at its highest point. Jeju Province has two main cities,
Jeju in the north and Seogwipo in the south. In total,
there are seven towns and ﬁve districts on the island.
Jeju’s gross domestic product (GDP) is slightly lower
than that of the Korean mainland. It also has a low
population growth rate (0.45% in 2005), and is not
subject to signiﬁcant migratory movements.

Water resources and their use
While surface water potential is 260 million m3, it is
ephemeral in character. Therefore, groundwater is the
primary source of water on the island, and it is heavily
drawn on. In 2010, annual abstraction corresponded to
20% of estimated safe yield (Table 43.1).

TABLE 43.1
Groundwater development and use in Jeju Island
Amount
(m3/d)

Consumption

Although relatively small, Jeju Province has both
sub-tropical oceanic and temperate climates, with
a mean annual rainfall of 1,975 mm. About 60%
of annual precipitation occurs during the summer
monsoon between June and September. A low
evapotranspiration rate and high permeability of
geologic formations allow year-round recharge of

%

Domestic

202,000

57.1

Agriculture

144,000

40.7

8,000

2.2

354,000

100.0

Industry and others*
Total+

* Food processing, etc.
+ Estimated safe yield: 1,768,000 m3/d

MAP 43.1
Jeju Island
NORTH KOREA

SOUTH KOREA

SOUTH SEA

Jeju

JAPAN

Hw a b
uk

Ha

o

un

ed

e

g

n

National park

o

O

Ramsar site

Sa m su

D

Basin
H a ll im

G e ums

e

on

City

Hallasan
Halla
Mountain
National Park
National
Park

g

An

ja

w

C

h

e

ng

Saeg
n

ngmu

Ju

i

o

m

yo

Yerae

n

d

o

ye

gh

Seogwipo

ng

g

S ill

n

si

un

So

oj

do

0

WWDR4

Ga

Se

yo

an

g

H

S

g

G a n g je o

n

un

ha

os

C

D

el

5

10 Km

JEJU ISLAND, KOREA

815

Agriculture is practised over 31% of the island. The
most important agricultural products are oranges and
mandarins, followed by other crops such as beans,
radishes, garlic and potatoes. Rice is cultivated on
an almost negligible scale. Between 1970 and 2002,
the size of the agricultural area increased at a rate of
0.5% per year. However, since then there has been a
declining trend, which is expected to continue.
The area of irrigated land is approximately 380 km2,
which corresponds to 71% of the total cultivated area
as of 2003. Although more agricultural land can be
irrigated, the availability of water is the limiting factor.
While drip irrigation and sprinklers are used, there
is still the possibility of improving efficiency. Overall,
98.8% of irrigation water is drawn from aquifers.
Unfortunately, groundwater contamination as a result
of agricultural activity is evident in coastal areas.
Measurements indicate that 18% of groundwater
resources have increased levels of nitrates, sodium,
magnesium, calcium and sulfate, which are the
chemical components of the fertilizers used. Livestock
production also contributes to pollution levels.

Climate change, climatic variations and
water-related natural disasters
Analysis of rainfall over the past eighty years shows
a slightly increasing trend in annual precipitation and
rainfall intensity. Annual precipitation increased from
1,360 mm in the 1930s to more than 1,500 mm in the
1990s. The extreme value of daily precipitation has also
increased by 95 mm between 1951 and 2008. The daily
precipitation of 542 mm recorded during typhoon
Nari in September 2007, corresponded to the rainfall
intensity of a once-in-a-thousand-year event.
There has been a 1.6°C increase in average winter
temperatures since the 1930s. As a result, both the
depth of snow at high elevations (such as Mount
Halla) and the total number of days of snowfall have
been trending downwards. Since 1960, the average
annual rate of sea-level rise around Jeju Island has
been approximately 6 mm, which is about three
times the global average. Because of this rise and
the accompanying sea water intrusion, the quality of
groundwater is deteriorating – particularly around the
coast where the population density is the highest.
In terms of water related natural disasters, from 1991
to 2000, Jeju Island was hit 23 times by typhoons. The
seasonal variation in precipitation results in ﬂoods in

816

CHAPTER 43

summer and drought during other seasons. In fact,
heavy rainfall, often accompanied by typhoons, brings
about 70% of annual precipitation between April
and October. Over the last 30 years, the frequency
and the intensity of ﬂoods and droughts has been
increasing (Figure 43.1). The socio-economic impact
of such natural disasters is further aggravated by
land-use changes, especially due to development in
mountainous areas. For example, in September 2007,
heavy rainfall from Typhoon Nari caused a major ﬂood
necessitating the evacuation of more than 14,000
inhabitants. Thirteen people lost their lives in the
ﬂoods and the cost of property damage was around
US$120 million. This prompted local government
to revise the existing master plan to provide better
protection against extreme events (Box 43.1).
Even though the annual mean precipitation is high in
Jeju, the Island often experiences drought caused by
the large variations in rainfall. Consequently, to be able
to better manage groundwater resources and carry
out drought impact assessments, a comprehensive
real-time monitoring network has been put in place
to collect information on critical variables, notably the
groundwater level. The information collected allows
the authorities to take appropriate action, such as
limiting the use of groundwater to minimize the risk
of degradation of aquifers through sea water intrusion
and contamination.

Water resources management
All aspects of water management, from resource
development to policy making and implementation,
are the direct responsibility of the water and sewage
administration of the local government. Growing
concerns about how to protect groundwater resources
from over-pumping and potential seawater intrusion
prompted the development of a special Act in
1991, which laid the framework for groundwater
management and regulated the drilling of wells. Other
administrative measures included regular water-quality
inspections across the island, and a tax increase for
groundwater use. In 1996, the Jeju Water Resources
Development Plan led to the establishment of a multiregion water supply system. The ﬁrst phase of the
system was completed in 2000, ensuring a supply of
145,000 m3 of water a day from fourteen groundwater
abstraction sites on the east of the island. The second
phase was launched in 2002. Given the importance of
groundwater resources, in 2004 the local government
put a speciﬁc management plan in place to promote

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

FIGURE 43.1

16

120

14

~

12

60

10

50

8

40

6

30

4

20

2

10

~

0
1970

Casulaties (Persons)
Total damage (Million US$)

No. of disasters

Jeju Island: water-related disasters 1970 to 2010 *

0
1975

1980

Casualties (Persons)

1985

1990

1995

2000

Total damage (Million US$)

2005

2010

No. of disasters

* Including typhoon, ﬂood, and heavy snow; Casualties include victims, death and disappearances.

the improved maintenance of wells, more efficient use
of water in agriculture, and the diversiﬁcation of water
resources development. Following structural reforms in
2006, a heavily fragmented city and county approach
to water-resources management was abandoned
and replaced by the consolidation of all functions in
the Jeju Water Supply and Drainage Management
Headquarters. This, in addition to better management
of water supply, helped in the standardization of
environmental practices through the adoption of ISO
14001. Within this context, sewage-related operations,
previously administered by cities, were integrated
into regional systems in 2008, to ensure a more
environmentally conscious overall approach.
Water pricing is also geared towards discouraging
the misuse of scarce water resources. In line with
guidelines set by central government, those water
rates have been increasing gradually, with the
eventual aim of reaching full cost recovery. As of
2006, the unit price of water corresponded to 62.5%
of its estimated cost.

WWDR4

The local government has plans to invest over US$780
million over a time span of twenty years (2004–2025)
on water supply and infrastructure improvement. A
limited portion of these funds will come from the
private sector. In fact, public private partnerships and
privatization of certain services, such as the operation
of sewage treatment plants, are becoming more and
more common. As a result, a range of strategies is
currently under development to promote greater
involvement by the private sector.

Water and ecosystems
Jeju Province is rich in ﬂora and fauna. For example,
the Gotjawal Forest (located on the middle slopes
of Halla Mountain) covers approximately 12% of the
island and is listed as an internationally important
wetland under the Ramsar Convention. The nearshore of the island provides a thriving environment for
its 627 reported invertebrate animal species, a much
higher number than in other parts of Korea. The warm
currents and coral reef formations along the southern
shore provide an ideal habitat for some 300 different

JEJU ISLAND, KOREA

817

BOX 43.1
Management tools against extreme events
With growing population density, extended land use, and more frequent weather extremes, Jeju Island is becoming much
more vulnerable to water-related disasters. Consequently, the local government established a comprehensive master plan for
ﬂood control in 2006 which shifted the emphasis in extreme-event management to an approach which emphasized sharing
the watershed with nature. This involved the preparation of site-speciﬁc ﬂood control plans that combined both structural
(such as stream-bed dredging, building of embankments, dams, etc.) and non-structural measures (including a ﬂood forecast
and warning system), the improvement of residential land-use planning, and the introduction of a ﬂood insurance system that
took into account the effects of climate change.
However, the heavy socio-economic loss associated with Typhoon Nari prompted the expansion of that coverage to include
individual streams in 2008. For the ﬁrst stage of the plan, a general disaster prevention scheme was developed for four
streams (the Han, the Byeongmun, the Sanji, and the Doksa) in the old section of the capital, Jeju-si, where the typhoon
damage was most severe. As a result, 11 ﬂood mitigation reservoirs, with a total volume of 1,577,000 m3, were planned and
partially constructed. Near the Han stream, two of these reservoirs were connected to artiﬁcial groundwater recharge systems to augment the replenishment of this vital resource. Debris barriers and screens were also put in place to prevent the
clogging of channels in the stream.

species of ﬁsh. The island is also home to many
bird species, mammals, reptiles, and amphibians.
Unfortunately, uncontrolled hunting in the past, along
with over-use of agricultural chemicals and rapid
urbanization, has done considerable and irreversible
damage to ecosystems. In terms of eco-parks,
Mulyeongari-oreum in Seogwipo-si became the ﬁrst
protected area in Korea with the enactment of new
wetland protection laws in 1999.

Water and settlements
Since the 1990s, the number of inhabitants living
in the island's rural areas has remained the same
while its urban population has steadily increased. In
2005, approximately 70% of the island’s population
lived in urban settlements. In terms of access to safe
drinking water, almost all the population, irrespective

of whether it is urban or rural, is served (Table
43.2). Average water consumption per capita per
day is 340 litres (2005). Minimizing losses from
infrastructure is among the main priorities of the local
government.
In 2005, 72.3% of the island’s population was
connected to centralized waste-water treatment
facilities. At 96.1%, coverage in urban areas is
signiﬁcantly higher than in rural settlements,
where only 18.5% of the population is connected.
A substantial effort will be required by the local
administration to improve this service in rural
settlements while keeping up with the urban growth.
The daily capacity of all sewage treatment facilities is
178,479 m3 (2005), operating at approximately 70% of
their design capacity.

TABLE 43.2
Access to improved water supply in Jeju Province

818

Population
(person)

Water supply capacity
(m3/day)

Water supply rate
(%)

Daily water
consumption per
capita (litre)

Jeju Province

559,747

316,548

100.0

340

Urban areas

387,885

207,600

100.0

357

Rural areas

171,862

108,948

99.9

302

CHAPTER 43

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Allocating water between uses and users
With the exception of the period during the summer
monsoons, most of Jeju’s rivers and streams are
ephemeral in character. However, near the coast and
across the mid-slopes of Mount Halla, groundwater
discharge from fractures in the bedrock forms
numerous springs. Historically, villages were
established in areas where such springs were
abundant. As a result, communities learned to share
surface water and groundwater in peace through
the centuries. However, with increasing demand,
conﬂicts have begun to arise. While the constitution
of Korea and local laws in Jeju provide basic judicial
and administrative guidance in terms of developing
groundwater, springs and streams, the lack of
speciﬁcity as to fair use and allocation remains a
problem that needs to be addressed with urgency.

through integrated water resource management
is essential. There will also be need for additional
legislation, supported by practical mechanisms for the
allocation of limited water resources among competing
sectors. Jeju Island is one of the areas in Korea with
the highest rainfall, and hydro-meteorological data
shows a trend towards increasing intensity. The master
plan for ﬂood control and continuing improvements
in infrastructure provide a strong basis for disaster
mitigation in the future. Overall, the necessary ﬁnancial
and human resources are in place to address the
water-related challenges facing Jeju Island.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References

Conclusions
Thanks to investment, the of Jeju Province has made
signiﬁcant progress in terms of socio-economic
standards, with its inhabitants boasting the highest
longevity in the country. Aquifers have long provided
a dependable supply of fresh water for development
needs. However, current levels of use, coupled with
challenges such as pollution, seawater intrusion, and
increasing demand, mean that more effective planning

WWDR4

Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Republic of
Korea Case Study Report, Time for Solutions: An
Assessment of Water Development in Jeju, Korea, a
WWAP study prepared for the fourth edition of the
United Nations World Water Development Report by
the Ministry of Land, Transport and Maritime Affairs,
Republic of Korea, 2011 (forthcoming).

JEJU ISLAND, KOREA

819

CHAPTER 44
Pakistan, with special reference
to the Indus River basin

—
Acknowledgements Kozue Kay Nagata, Arslan Syed

© Shutterstock/Asianet-Pakistan

Location and general characteristics

two-thirds of which usually falls between July and
September. On the Indus Plains, most of the rain falls
during the Monsoons in early July.

Pakistan is bordered by Afghanistan to the north,
the Arabian Sea to the south, China to the northeast, India to the east and the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the south-west (Map 44.1). There are three
major geographical areas: the northern highlands, the
Indus River plain and the Balochistan Plateau. The
northern highlands include parts of the Himalayas.
The Indus Plain, made up of alluvium deposited by the
Indus River and its tributaries, stretches from the Salt
Range to the Arabian Sea. The Balochistan Plateau is
composed of dry hills and deserts that run from northeast to south-west.

Originating in the mountains of the Tibetan Plateau, at
an altitude of 5,000 m above sea level, the Indus River
is Pakistan’s most important source of fresh water.
With a drainage area of approximately 1.1 million km2,
the Indus River basin covers approximately 65% of
the territory of Pakistan (FAO–Aquastat, 2011a), and
extends into the neighbouring countries of India, China
and Afghanistan.

Water resources and potential impact of
climate change

Pakistan has a surface area of 800,000 km2 and
a population of approximately 185 million people
(2010). The country is divided into four administrative
provinces: the Punjab, Sindh, Khyber Pakhtunkhaw
and Balochistan, as well as several areas with special
administrative status.

The Indus River and its tributaries (the Jhelum, the
Chenab, the Ravi, the Sutlej, the Beas and the Kabul)
have an average combined potential of 190 billion m3
of water. The 1960 Indus Basin Treaty gives Pakistan
exclusive use of three western rivers (the Indus, the
Jhelum and the Chenab), whereas three eastern rivers
(the Ravi, the Sutlej and the Beas) are allocated to
India (Map 44.1). The Permanent Indus Commission,
with a representative from each country, serves as the
regular channel of communication on matters relating
to the implementation of the Treaty, particularly the
exchange of data and information. Most of the rivers

In general, the climate is arid, and mean annual
precipitation ranges from less than 100 mm in parts
of the Lower Indus Plain to over 750 mm in the
Upper Indus Plain. The Monsoons and the western
disturbances – extratropical storms that originate in
the Mediterranean – are the major sources of rainfall,

MAP 44.1
Indus River basin
CHINA
Hi

m

a

Indu l a
s ya

s

Kabul
Peshawar

Kabul

- Hamun-iMashkel

Rav

Sut

b

Lahore

s

i

l ej

INDIA
ai

IRAN

sh k

Ma

s

ub

Karachi

H

International boundary

Indu

ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC
OF

PAKISTAN

e

Be
a

Indus

Zh

Hydroelectric
power plant
City

Ch

ob

Ramsar site

National park

Jhelum

l

Goma

Basin

na

Islamabad

AFGHANISTAN

0

100

200

300 km

ARABIAN SEA

WWDR4

PAKISTAN, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE INDUS RIVER BASIN

821

outside the Indus River basin are insubstantial streams,
which ﬂow only during the rainy season and do not
contribute signiﬁcantly to the availability of surface
water.
Beneath the Indus River basin is an aquifer extending
over an area of 160,000 km2. While the safe yield is
estimated to be about 68 billion m3, the volume of
groundwater abstraction by different sectors, including
domestic consumption, is already approaching 62
billion m3 (FAO–Aquastat, 2011b). Over the last two
decades, groundwater has played an important role in
sustaining irrigated agriculture in Pakistan, with more
than 50% of the irrigation water coming from more
than one million privately owned wells. However, the
current rate of use is not sustainable, and groundwater
levels are declining in many areas.
Himalayan glaciers are the major source of the
freshwater that feeds the Indus River and its
tributaries. According to climate change scenarios,
following an initial period of high ﬂows caused by
accelerated glacial melt, it is predicted that the
amount of water ﬂowing into the Indus River system
may decrease by as much as 30% to 40% within the
next two decades. Furthermore, the effects of climate
change and siltation may reduce already-low reservoir
capacity in the basin by 30%. The overall reduction
in water availability may potentially have a serious
impact on irrigation. This, in turn, may affect food
security nationwide. There is already concern about
forecasts that increasing temperatures may reduce
grain yields in Asia by 15% to 20% by 2050 (IFPRI,
2011).
Climate change is also expected to affect the South
Asian monsoon. According to the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), an increase in
rainfall of up to 24% may amplify the frequency and
magnitude of ﬂoods. The 2010 ﬂood (Box 44.1) is an
example that illustrates how devastating the socioeconomic impact of such calamities can be at the
nation-wide level. A more recent example, the 2011
ﬂooding of Sindh province, has affected 5.4 million
people to date. The number of deaths has reached
223 and over 600,000 homes have been damaged
or destroyed. Nearly 300,000 people, the majority of
whom are women and children, are currently living
in camps (OCHA, 2011). These extreme events clearly
demonstrate that planning and mitigation measures

822

CHAPTER 44

are required if the country is to be prepared to cope
with climate change and climatic variations.

Water and agriculture
In Pakistan, 220,000 km2 of land (approximately 27%
of the country) is cultivated. Irrigation is used on 80%
of arable land nationwide, and is practised mainly
in the Indus River basin. The irrigation system in the
Indus River basin is one of the largest in the world,
with a total of 59,000 km of canals. Overall, almost
90% of all agricultural production is supported by
irrigation. Livestock production is also widespread,
particularly in Balochistan province, where it is
responsible for almost 40% of agricultural income.
While agricultural yield grew at an average annual
rate of 4.5% over the last decade, its contribution
to gross domestic product (GDP) has been steadily
decreasing over the years. In 2010, its share was down
to 19.6%, while the service sector has grown to 53.7%
and industry to 26.8%. However, the importance of
agriculture lies in the fact that it employs about 44%
of the nation’s workforce, supports about 75% of the
population and accounts for more than 60% of export
earnings.
Irrigation has had a negative impact on soil fertility in
the basin as a result of waterlogging (oversaturation
of soil by groundwater) and soil salinization, which
between them have already affected over 20,000 km2
of land. These problems result from a combination
of several factors, including seepage from unlined
earthen canal systems, inadequate provision of surface
and sub-surface drainage, poor water management
practices, and the use of poor quality groundwater for
irrigation.
A social problem linked to irrigation is the inequity of
water distribution. The operation of the basin's irrigation
system is based on a continuous water supply and is
not related to actual crop water requirements. The
distribution of water from the canal outlets is done
on a seven-day rotational system (locally known as
warabandi). Farmers are allowed to take an entire
ﬂow of the outlet once in seven days, and for a period
proportional to the size of their land holding. However,
the warabandi system discriminates against ‘tail-enders’,
who end up getting 40% or less water than ‘headenders’. This has serious implications not only in terms
of equity but in terms of crop productivity.

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

As a result of age and neglect, much of the
infrastructure in the basin's irrigation system is in
poor shape, resulting in considerable losses across
the system and low performance in carrying water
to the lower reaches of canals. Many elements of
the vast hydraulic system are now reaching the end
of their design lives and have to be rehabilitated
or replaced at an estimated cost of around US$
60 billion. Unfortunately, there is a huge backlog of
deferred repair and maintenance, a problem which was
aggravated by the ﬂoods of 2010 (Box 44.1).
Agriculture is the primary user of water resources.
In fact, agriculture took 96% of the 183.5 billion m3
of water used in 2008, followed by municipal and
industrial uses (FAO–Aquastat, 2011b). Projections
clearly show that water supply in the Indus River basin
will gradually begin to fall short of demand, with the
requirement for irrigation water expected to rise to
250 billion m3 in 2025, as against availability of 190
billion m3. This imminent challenge calls for more
efficient use of water in agriculture, the adoption of
water-conservation measures, and the augmentation
of water storage capacity in order to prevent problems
feeding the growing population.

Water and health
Access to safe drinking water and sanitation in
Pakistan is an issue that requires considerable
attention and investment. In 2008, about 95% of the
urban population had access to water supplies (WHO/
UNICEF, 2010a), but only some 55% of that number
had household connections. In rural areas, almost half
of the population uses water from sources that are not
properly suitable for human consumption – sources
such as streams, canals, village ponds, and springs. In
fact, an estimated 62% of the urban population and
84% of the rural population do not treat their water
prior to use. In national terms, the rate of access to
sanitation is 45% (WHO/UNICEF, 2010b). Given this
low value, it will be difficult to achieve the national
target of 90% coverage by 2015. The ﬁnancial cost
of the disease burden that is linked to lack of safe
drinking water and proper sanitation is equal to
approximately 2% of Pakistan’s GDP.
Among the reasons for such low rates of access
to water supply and sanitation are low tariffs and
inadequate revenue collection. These problems result
in meagre investment and the degradation of water

WWDR4

and sanitation infrastructure caused by a lack of
periodical maintenance. In fact, water-related public
investment corresponds to only 0.25% of GDP (ADB–
APWF, 2007). Consequently, tariff adjustment that
better reﬂects the true value of water and covers the
cost of service provision is considered vital if current
challenges are to be addressed.
Poverty is a serious problem in Pakistan. Some 60%
of the population lives on less than two dollars a day,
while another 22% lives on less than one dollar a day.
More than 38% of children under ﬁve are malnourished,
with 13% of those severely underweight. Poor health
in children is linked directly to lack of education for
women. As a result of substantial gender inequality, the
literacy rate for women is just 35%, compared to 59% for
men. And broadly speaking, while there has been some
success in the ﬁght against poverty, the devastation
caused by the massive ﬂood in 2010 (Box 44.1) is likely
to have had a detrimental effect on this trend.

Water and energy
The potential of hydropower generated by the Indus
River is estimated at 35,700 MW and over 55,000 MW
for the entire Indus River system. While only 15% of
that overall potential of the Indus River is currently
being tapped, the completion of projects that are
already underway or at the planning stage will mean
that the overall hydropower generation capacity of
Pakistan can be increased to 25,000 MW.
With demand growing at an annual rate of 10%, and
the absence of any hydropower development since
1975, the energy mix in Pakistan has shifted towards
carbon-based sources. This has led to more expensive
electricity, and shortages that affect every sector
of the economy, particularly industry. Coal reserves
remain as a potential source for thermal energy
generation.

Environment and ecosystems
Despite its generally arid climate, there are more
than 225 signiﬁcant wetlands in Pakistan. Of these,
19 are internationally recognized under the Ramsar
Convention. The Indus River and its ﬂoodplains form
the main axis of these wetlands, both man-made and
natural, which cover a total area of approximately
7,800 km2. In addition, the Thar, Thal, Cholistan1, Kharan
and Indus Valley deserts also support a wide range of
animal and plant species. In all, there are 18 threatened

PAKISTAN, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE INDUS RIVER BASIN

823

BOX 44.1
The 2010 Flood in Pakistan
Pakistan experienced torrential rainfall between midJuly and September 2010. This caused the worst ﬂoods
since 1929, which affected the entire country. The socioeconomic impact of the disaster was overwhelming.
According to the National Disaster Management Authority
(NDMA), 1,700 people died and over 20 million were
displaced. Many of those displaced suffered from various maladies, including at least 700,000 cases of acute
diarrhoea, 800,000 cases of acute respiratory infection,
nearly a million cases of skin disease, and almost 183,000
cases of suspected malaria. Flash ﬂoods and landslides
triggered by the rain caused severe damage to infrastructure, urban settlements and agricultural production.
According to the World Bank–Asian Development Bank
joint damage and needs assessment the overall recovery and reconstruction cost associated with the ﬂoods is
expected to be between US$8.74 billion and US$10.85 billion, which includes estimated costs for relief, early recovery and medium to long-term reconstruction.

Source: Adapted from ADB ReliefWeb (2010) and CNN (2010).

species of wetlands dependent mammals, including
the Indus River dolphin. There is now a very real threat
to the twenty bird species, twelve species of reptile,
two endemic species of amphibian, and more than 190
indigenous freshwater ﬁsh species that are supported
by Pakistan’s wetlands.
The Indus River basin wetlands, in addition to their
intrinsic value as a rich source of biodiversity, also
contribute to the ﬁght against poverty through the raw
materials they produce that help to sustain subsistence
living.
While forest cover is only around 6%, businesses
associated with forestry employ almost half a million
people. Fuel-wood production, which provides
one third of the country’s national energy needs, is
unfortunately one of the major causes of shrinking
forests. The continuing loss of forest habitat, and the
associated fauna and ﬂora, have serious implications
for the region’s ecosystems, as well as for the ﬁght
against poverty.
The water quality of the Indus and its main tributaries
deteriorates towards their downstream end as a result
of municipal and industrial contaminants and return

824

CHAPTER 44

water from irrigation, which is polluted with fertilizers.
However, the dissolved oxygen level in all rivers
remains higher than the threshold value of 5 mg/l.

Water resources management
At the federal level, the Ministry of Water and Power
is responsible for water and energy-related issues.
The Water and Power Development Authority was
established in 1959 as a government-owned public
institute for the planning, design and implementation
of irrigation, drainage and power projects.
Up to 1997, the distribution of irrigation water to
farmers, the collection of water fees, and the repair
and maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure
was the responsibility of the Provincial Irrigation
Departments. However, following a governmental
reform, backed ﬁnancially by the World Bank, to
address problems in irrigated agriculture and water
management, the Provincial Irrigation Departments
were transformed into newly established autonomous
Provincial Irrigation and Drainage Authorities. As a
part of this reform, at the main and branch canals
level, commercially oriented Area Water Boards were
established. At the same time, the operation and
management of the system at distributor and minor
levels was handed over to independently elected
farmer organizations. Overall, a total of 340 farmer
organizations have been formed, of which 257 have
taken over the management of irrigation systems.
These organizations are responsible for collecting
water charges, settling water-related disputes, and
supplying irrigation water equitably and efficiently to
users. While collection of revenues increased initially, it
gradually fell back (in some cases by as much as 50%),
because of the lack of technical assistance provided
to farmer organizations by government agencies, and
insufficient funds being allocated for their efficient
functioning. Unfortunately, this situation raises
questions about the long-term sustainability of farmer
organizations in Pakistan.

Conclusions
The Indus River system is the lifeblood of Pakistan.
It is the major source of freshwater that allows the
country to thrive in an otherwise arid environment.
Irrigated agriculture is the only way to secure the
food production that is necessary to feed a growing
population. However, the country is now facing
critical problems, such as deteriorating infrastructure
that causes signiﬁcant losses during irrigation water
transfer, low agricultural productivity, and a water

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

management system that is unable to adequately
address the challenges on the ground. Water-use
projections show clearly that under a business-asusual scenario, water demand will exceed supply by
2025. Climatic variations and climate change, coupled
with low water storage capacity, may further aggravate
this situation. Consequently, it is crucial to develop
new strategies and policies that take into account the
potential effects of projected climate change, with a
view to promoting sustainable water use in all sectors.
This will help to ensure food security, help in the ﬁght
against widespread poverty, and help to protect the
environment.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

Cholistan Desert was covered as a case study in United Nations
World Water Development Report 3 (WWAP, 2009), http://
webworld.unesco.org/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr3/case_studies/
pdf/Case_Studies_AsiaPaciﬁc.pdf#page=13

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Pakistan Water
Development Report, prepared in 2011 by UNESCO
Islamabad Office (unpublished).

WWDR4

ADB–APWF (Asian Development Bank–Asia-Paciﬁc Water
Forum). 2007. Asian Water Development Outlook 2007.
Manila, ADB. www.adb.org/documents/books/awdo/2007/
cr08.pdf (Accessed 16 June, 2011.)
ADB ReliefWeb. 2010. Pakistan Floods 2010: Preliminary
Damage and Needs Assessment. Manila, ADB. http://
reliefweb.int/node/374745 (Accessed 13 June, 2011.)
CNN. 2010 Pakistan ﬂood damage estimated at $9.7
billion. CNN World, 14 October, 2010. http://articles.cnn.
com/2010-10-14/world/pakistan.ﬂood.cost_1_southernsindh-province-malaria-cases-world-bank?_s=PM:WORLD
(Accessed 13 June, 2011.)
FAO–Aquastat. 2011a. Country Proﬁle: Pakistan. Rome, FAO.
http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/
pakistan/index.stm (Accessed 16 June, 2011.)
––––. 2011b. Country Fact Sheet: Pakistan. Rome, FAO. http://
www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/countries_regions/index.
stm (Accessed 23 July, 2011.)
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2011.
Threats to security related to food, agriculture, and natural
resources: what to do? Washington DC, IFPRI. http://
www.ifpri.org/publication/threats-security-related-foodagriculture-and-natural-resources-what-do (Accessed
23 July, 2011.)
OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs). 2011. Pakistan Floods: Rapid
Response Plan. September 2011. Geneva, OCHA. http://
pakresponse.info/LinkClick.aspx?ﬁleticket=1Itqe86Ja9M%3
D&tabid=41&mid=597 (Accessed 12 November, 2011.)
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization and United
Nations Children’s Fund.) 2010a. Estimates for the Use of
Improved Drinking Water. Joint Monitoring Programme
for Water Supply and Sanitation. Geneva, Switzerland and
New York, WHO and UNICEF. http://www.wssinfo.org/
ﬁleadmin/user_upload/resources/PAK_wat.pdf (Accessed
23 July, 2011.)
––––. 2010b.Data and Estimates Table. Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. Geneva,
Switzerland and New York, WHO and UNICEF. http://www.
wssinfo.org/data-estimates/table/ (Accessed 23 July,
2011.)

PAKISTAN, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE INDUS RIVER BASIN

825

CHAPTER 45
Czech Republic

—
Acknowledgements Jaroslav Plainer, Michal Vrabec, Josef Hladný

© Shutterstock/LianeM

Location and general characteristics

TABLE 45.1

The Czech Republic is an inland country located in
central Europe. Its neighbours are Poland to the northeast, Germany to the west, Austria to the south, and
Slovakia to the south-east (Map 45.1). The total area
of the Czech Republic is around 79,000 km2. In 2008,
its total population was approximately 10.5 million. Its
highest point is Sněžka, at an altitude of 1,604 m above
sea level, is situated in the mountains in the north of
the country. The lowest point is in the Labe Valley,
where the Labe River leaves the Czech Republic, at
an altitude of 115 m above sea level. The average air
temperature of the country is 7.5°C.

Basic characteristics of major river basins in the
Czech Republic

Extent of the
basin (km2)

Elbe
basin

Morava*
basin

Oder
basin

51,410

24,109

4,715

309

59.6

48.1

Average annual
discharge (m3/s)

*Morava basin at Strážnice, upstream of the Dyje river

Water resources, their use and management

are located in the lowlands. Groundwater accounts for
approximately 6% of total available water, therefore
its importance in terms of overall water supply is
relatively low. Because of its high quality, however,
groundwater is frequently used as drinking water.

Because of its relatively high altitude and climatic
conditions, the Czech Republic receives an average of
674 mm of precipitation annually. There are more than
3,600 rivers that have basins of 5 km2 or larger. These
include the sources of a number of major European
rivers, such as the Elbe (Labe in Czech), the Oder
(Odra in Czech) and the Morava, which is a tributary
of the Danube. The Elbe has the largest basin in the
Czech Republic, followed by the Morava and the Oder
(Table 45.1). These rivers discharge into the North Sea,
the Black Sea, and the Baltic Sea, respectively.

The highest demand for surface water comes from
the energy sector, mainly for use in thermal and
nuclear power plants. The levels of demand for water
for industrial use, drinking water and sanitation
(including settlements and animal farms) are broadly
comparable. Agricultural demand is low because
crop production mainly depends on rainfall. With
the exception of energy production, there has been
a declining trend in water use in all sectors since
1990 (Figure 45.1). Rising water prices and the

Groundwater resources tend to be unconﬁned, or
slightly artesian in character, and usually not very
deep below the surface. The largest usable aquifers

MAP 45.1
Czech Republic

Ústí
nad Labem

Liberec

POLAND

Elb

e

Ohre

Ramsar site

a
R a d buz

National park

Vl
tav
a

a

lav

Úh

be

Pardubice

Sáz

Jihlava

Otava

Bla

GERMANY

ce
ni

Jih
la

Budweis

0

20

40

60 km

Lipno

WWDR4

er

Od

Olomouc

Th

ay

a

City
International boundary

Ostrava

ava

Zlín

Brno

va

Dam

Pilsen

e

El

va

Mz

eroun
ka

Hradec Králové

or a

B

Basin
Hydroelectric
power plant

be

Prague

Karlovy
Vary

La

M

SLOVAKIA
AUSTRIA

CZECH REPUBLIC

827

FIGURE 45.1
Surface water abstraction in the Czech Republic between 1980 and 2009

1400
Energy

Water use (in million m3)

1200

Industry

1000

Municipal
(Water supply
and sanitation)

800
600

Agriculture

400

Other uses

200

828

10

08

20

06

20

04

20

02

20

00

20

98

20

19

96

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

19

86

84

19

19

82
19

19

80

0

increased use of advanced technology have both
contributed to this decline. For example, in 2004,
water abstraction was almost 35% less than in 1991.
In parallel, the unit price of drinking water and water
for sanitation rose from approximately US$0.25
in 1991 to US$3.0 in 2009. As a net outcome,
wastewater generation dropped by 26% between
1991 and 2004.

Climate change and hydrologic extremes

Water resources management in the Czech Republic
involves local, regional and national authorities. At
national level, responsibility is spread between the
ministries of agriculture, the environment, the interior,
health and transport. The management of important
watercourses such as the Vltava, the Elbe, the Ohře,
the Morava and the Oder is entrusted to the River
Basin Boards established by the government. Their
main task is to operate and maintain the major water
structures, such as dams, reservoirs, weirs and locks.
In that context, key legislation includes the Water
Act (No. 254/2001 Coll.) and the Water Supply and
Sewerage Systems for Public Needs Act (No. 274/2001
Coll.). In 2010, Act No. 150 came into force, amending
the Water Law. These acts, together with the European
Union Water Framework Directive, established the
framework for community action in the ﬁeld of water
policy.

Floods are frequent, but are not a regular
phenomenon. In the period from 1990 to 2010, their
frequency increased somewhat, and the ﬂoods in
1997 and 2002 were among the most serious in the
country’s history. There is a comprehensive mechanism
in place for ﬂood prevention, emergency response, and
protection, which involves local, regional, and national
authorities. The Central Flood Protection Committee,
which operates at the highest level, is appointed by
the government. In line with the EU Flood Directive
(2007/60/EU), the Czech Republic is in compliance
with the requirements of ﬂood risk assessment. This
is a process in which the country has drawn on its
experience and previous knowledge in the ﬁeld of
natural disaster related risk management.

CHAPTER 45

While there are climate change scenarios for central
Europe, none of these has been able to produce
reliable models that can be used to predict changes in
precipitation and hydrological conditions. In fact, there
have been no statistically signiﬁcant trends available
for monthly or annual precipitation in the Czech
Republic since 1961 (EEA, 2011).

Drought also occurs infrequently in the Czech Republic.
Short periods of drought occur mostly in the second

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

half of the vegetation season. The worst drought in
the twentieth century was in 1947, when the recorded
rainfall deﬁcit in Bohemia during the vegetation period
reached almost 45% of the long-term average. Within
the last 135 years, there have been ﬁve vegetation
seasons with similar rainfall deﬁcits.

Water and the environment
Water used in industry and for the production of
electricity is returned almost entirely to the rivers.
However, discharged water is ‘thermally polluted’
(that is, it is warmer than the ambient temperature
of normal water bodies). Such elevated water
temperature may cause variations in dissolved
oxygen levels, which adversely affects ecosystems.
The inﬂuence of other types of industry – particularly
chemical, pulp-paper, and steel factories – on water
quality was signiﬁcant in the past because of the
absence of wastewater treatment systems. However,
in the 1970s, water quality began to improve gradually,
as a result of restrictions on industrial wastewater
discharge and the introduction of advanced treatment
technologies. In 1971, the proportion of pollution
caused by industry was approximately 57% or
79,400 tonnes1. By 1990, this proportion had dropped
to almost 30% or approximately 49,000 tonnes.
From the 1950s, growth in agriculture and the
increased use of fertilizers, insecticides and herbicides
caused soil and water pollution. Following the political
changes that took place in 1989, agricultural policies
that had been part of the former socialist regime’s
‘planned economy’ were abandoned. Agricultural
modernization, as well as the privatization and
restitution of property, led to reduced water demand
from the agriculture sector. Overall, agricultural
production has dropped by about 30%. Further
development of agriculture has been affected by the
Czech Republic’s membership of the European Union
(EU). As a combined result of these changes, the use
of artiﬁcial fertilizers has been dropping.

Conclusions
Apart from local shortages, the availability of water
resources is sufficient in the Czech Republic. In the
1960s and 1970s, water quality deteriorated rapidly
as a result of booming water demand and discharges
of wastewater from industry, agriculture and human
settlements. However, political reforms initiated in
the 1990s began to reduce that demand, and the
associated pollution. This positive trend gained further
momentum following EU accession. The national
water management policy reﬂects the top priorities of
the country: sustainable management of freshwater
resources and the protection of ecosystems. Czech
Republic is now working towards meeting the targets
of the EU Water Framework Directive.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1

This measurement indicates the corresponding BOD5 value.
BOD5 is an index used to assess aquatic organic pollution and
commonly used to monitor organic load for environmental and
process control in industry.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Czech Republic
Case Study Report, Water and Water Resources in
the Czech Republic, prepared in 2010 by the Czech
National Committee for the International Hydrological
Programme of UNESCO (forthcoming).
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2011. Czech Republic:
Climate Change Mitigation. http://www.eea.europa.eu/soer/
countries/cz/soertopic_view?topic=climate%20change
(Accessed, 25 November 2011.)

Alongside the social and political changes of 1989,
the principles of environmental protection have been
introduced and implemented rigorously. The Nature and
Landscape Act (No. 114) came into force in 1992, and the
Programme for Revitalization of the River Systems was
introduced the same year. The Czech Republic joined the
EU in 2004, and since then has been bound by the EU
Water Framework Directive. This has also contributed to
an overall improvement in environmental conditions.

WWDR4

CZECH REPUBLIC

829

CHAPTER 46
Marseille Provence Métropole
Urban Community, France

—
Acknowledgements Marseille Provence Métropole
– Water and Sanitation Agency

© Shutterstock/Giancarlo Liguori

Location and general characteristics
The Marseille Provence Métropole (MPM) Urban
Community was created in 2000 and is home to
approximately one million inhabitants. The MPM is
located in the Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur region
of France on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea.
It covers a surface area of 607 km2, comprising
the city of Marseille and eighteen municipalities,
concentrating 23% of the region’s population on just
over 2% of its territory (Map 46.1). Marseille alone,
France’s second-largest city after Paris, extends over
an area of 240 km2.
The MPM lies in the temperate zone and has a
Mediterranean climate. Average annual rainfall is
around 550 mm, which is concentrated into a period
of approximately 80 days, mostly in the spring and
autumn months as violent, localized precipitation. The
area is subject to summer droughts.

Water resources, their management and
sanitation
The regional proverb Eici, l’aigo es d’or (here, water is
gold) clearly illustrates the shortage of the resource.
In fact, the lack of water, and the health consequences
that underlie this, have been the principal cause of
severe epidemics in the past, such as the outbreaks
of bubonic plague in 1347 and 1720, and the cholera
epidemics in 1834 and 1884 – all of which resulted in
signiﬁcant numbers of deaths.

To alleviate water scarcity, a diversion canal, locally
known as Canal de Marseille, was begun in 1838 to
transfer the ﬂow of the Durance River to the city of
Marseille. Today, the main artery of the canal is
97 km long and its minor arteries extend over 195
km. The canal system comprises two dams, a number
of underground canals and twenty aqueducts. The
capacity of the canal has almost tripled since the
middle of the nineteenth century, from 5.75 m3/s to 15
m3/s – although the ﬂow varies depending on seasonal
conditions and on an allocation agreement between
the City of Marseille and the national utility company,
Electricité de France.
On average, the canal provides 193 million m3 of water
per year to 1.2 million inhabitants in 36 municipalities.
Today, the canal accounts for two-thirds of the water
brought to Marseille, with the rest coming from
the Verdon River through the Canal de Provence.
Underground water resources are also used in the
MPM to increase water availability in Marseille and
to provide drinking water to the towns of Aubagne
and Gemenos. As a result, protection zones are being
established to minimize the risk of pollution of surface
water and groundwater resources, including the
network of the Canal de Marseille.
Annual water consumption in the MPM is about 100
million m3, 95% of which is processed in wastewater
treatment plants before being released back into the

MAP 46.1

e nc

ro v
ld

l de

eP

Berre
Lagoon

Ca n a

FRANCE

e

Marseille Provence Métropole Urban Community

Ma

rs

Protected area

Can

a

Marseille

MPM
National park

e i ll e

MEDITERRANEAN
SEA

City
The Calanques

10 km

WWDR4

MARSEILLE PROVENCE MÉTROPOLE URBAN COMMUNITY, FRANCE

831

environment. Since 1942, Marseille’s water supply has
been managed by the Société des Eaux de Marseille.
This has included the operation of the Canal de
Marseille, as well as the production and distribution of
drinking water. The Societe des Eaux de Marseille, a
private company, also manages water supply in 15 of
the MPM’s municipalities. Marseille’s ﬁrst large-scale
sewer system, the combined length of which is 346
km, was completed in 1896. The sewer network has
been extended, improved and modernized over the
past hundred years.

Marseille, has introduced a strategy that combines
regulatory arrangements and crisis management.
Other developments too have helped to mitigate
climate change effects – an extensive hydrographic
network with sensors transmitting data in real time,
river channel improvements and the construction
of ﬂood control reservoirs. Currently, the retention
capacity of the reservoirs in Marseille is 130,000 m3
and the MPM Urban Community is studying the
feasibility of constructing 27 more to provide an
additional storage of 200,000 m3.

The ﬁrst physico-chemical treatment plant was
put into service in 1987. In 2008, the MPM Urban
Community completed the construction of one of
the world’s largest underground biological treatment
facilities – an investment of some US$270 million.
Since 1981, the management of the City of Marseille’s
sanitation system (sewage and storm-water) has been
delegated to a private company. In seventeen of the
other MPM municipalities, sanitation services are also
almost exclusively provided by private companies on
an operation and maintenance basis.

In the ﬁeld of risk management, raising public
awareness and involving local residents are high
priorities. For example, in the district of Saint Loup, an
SMS-based information system was set up following
the mudslides in 2009. This is to inform residents of
hazardous situations as quickly as possible and to make
them an integral part of civil security operations.

To ensure that the water supply is secure, potential
risks are constantly being evaluated – to prevent,
for example, accidental pollution and failure in the
puriﬁcation plants or distribution network. Such
studies have provided the basis of preparation of a
ﬁve-year water plan. The plan is submitted to the MPM
Urban Community's elected representatives, who
select the projects that are to be carried out. The ﬁrst
MPM plan was approved in 2006, and represented an
investment of US$165 million. The goal of this plan
was to identify the weaknesses of the region’s drinking
water supply system and help to rectify them. Some
85% of the analysis section of this plan was achieved,
and 65% of the project implementation was completed
by the end of 2010. The MPM Urban Community is now
preparing a second ﬁve-year plan, this time with the
objective of ensuring water security for all the member
municipalities. The budget for the new plan has not yet
been established.

Climate change and risk management
Although water resources are limited, occasional
heavy rainfall in the autumn and winter may cause
severe ﬂoods. The Durance River in particular has
caused frequent and violent ﬂoods. Similarly, intense
precipitation causes ﬂoods in Marseille. To address
these challenges, the MPM, on behalf of the City of

832

CHAPTER 46

While analysis of hydrometeorological data gathered
by the MPM Urban Community does not show any
speciﬁc trend that points to climate change, the likely
consequences of climate change – such as rises in sea
levels and the accelerated melting of the snow and ice
that feed the rivers bringing water to the MPM – could
be serious. Swollen rivers could ﬂood because the
storage capacity of reservoirs might not be sufficient
to regulate higher ﬂow rates, and rising sea levels
could cause seawater intrusion into coastal aquifers
and sewer system weirs. Recent studies point out the
need to identify ﬂood prone areas and adapt water
works to be able to mitigate the effects of a potential
change in rainfall regime. On the other hand, the
ﬂooding of coastal settlements is less likely because of
Marseille’s topography.

Environmental protection and use of
modern technology
Environmental protection and the optimization of
water use is a permanent priority for the MPM Urban
Community. Consequently, the following measures has
been taken:
đƫ Unused water in the Canal de Marseille is now
returned to the environment;
đƫ Inspections to detect infrastructure leaks are carried
out periodically;
đƫ Out-dated lead connections have been changed;
đƫ The sewer network is maintained regularly; and
đƫ Street-cleaning vehicles are specially designed to
minimize water use.

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

FIGURE 46.1
Evolution of water consumption in the MPM from 1995 to 2009

Water consumption (in million m3)

105

100

95

90

Annual consumption

20
09

20
07

20
05

Average annual consumption

As a result, average annual water use in the MPM
has remained relatively stable over the years
(Figure 46.1). The MPM Urban Community also deals
with wastewater management through operating
2,525 km of sewerage networks and 10 wastewater
treatment plants. Moreover, it monitors the impact that
discharges have on the marine environment.
Drinking water production and wastewater treatment
plants in the MPM are upgraded regularly in line with
regulatory requirements and technological advances
(Box 46.1). For example, the drinking water production
plant at Sainte Marthe, which was built in 1934, still
complies with current standards. In addition, the sewage
treatment plant at Ensuès-la-Redonne has been using
advanced bio-reactor technology since 2009. However,
in spite of the sophisticated technology utilized, treated
wastewater is not re-used in the MPM because of
potential environmental and sanitary risks.
All major modernization projects as well as maintenance
operations are subject to public consultation. These
are submitted for approval to the Regional Committee
for the Environment and to the regional and national
commissions that oversee sites with a recognized
natural, ecological or cultural value. This can lead to
changes in the proposed projects. For example, a
project to modernize the sludge facility of the Marseille
wastewater treatment plant, which is located in in the

WWDR4

20
03

20
01

99
19

97
19

19

95

85

BOX 46.1
The use of renewable energy in the MPM
As a part of its environmentally conscious approach,
various sources of renewable energy are used to reduce
emissions in the MPM. For example, the Sainte Marthe
drinking water plant is equipped with a turbine that
generates enough electricity for the facility to be selfsufficienti. Another turbine was installed on the Batarelle
main, downstream of the Vallon Dol reservoirii. The
Marseille wastewater treatment plant uses thermophile
anaerobic digestion to produce methane that is used in
the plant for thermal processes, or, when economically
feasible, to produce electricityiii.
The MPM Urban Community is also studying the
possibility of capturing the energy that is contained in
wastewater through the installation of heat exchangers.
Implementation of these innovative methods is being
prioritized in the construction of new infrastructure or
in modernizing the current sewer network. The sites are
selected according to their potential in terms of connected
population equivalent (PE)iv.
i

ii

iii

iv

Mean annual electricity production at Sainte Marthe:
3 million kWh or 266 TOE
Mean annual electricity production at Batarelle:
820,000 kWh or 70 TOE
Production of biogas in the sludge treatment plant:
10 million Nm3 in 2010, or 6300 TOE.
PE is an estimation of the organic biodegradable load that will
be entering a treatment plant. Thus, it is an estimate of the
usage of sewage facilities and not a measure of population.

MARSEILLE PROVENCE MÉTROPOLE URBAN COMMUNITY, FRANCE

833

classiﬁed site of the Calanques, had to be modiﬁed to
adapt to the biological characteristics of the local ﬂora
and fauna.
To ensure environmental ﬂow, the MPM Urban
Community agreed to allocate water from the Canal
de Marseille to compensate for low water levels in
rivers such as the Arc and the Touloubre, following
discussions with local stakeholders and representatives
of relevant governmental organizations.

quantity of water to meet the growing demand. The
challenge is to minimize the environmental footprint
of this urban conglomerate, which has approximately
one million inhabitants. Use of modern technology,
the introduction of innovative approaches, and the
handling of operation and maintenance by the private
sector makes the MPM Urban Community conﬁdent of
its ability to overcome the difficulties it faces.

ııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

Conclusions
The Marseille Provence Métropole (MPM) is home to
a large urban community in a region where water
is rather limited. Local efforts to secure freshwater
resources and proper sanitation infrastructure began
more than a century ago. The ambitious projects that
have been carried out since have allowed the people
in the region to enjoy high living standards, free of the
diseases that prevailed in the past. The canals (Canal
de Marseille and Canal de Provence), in conjunction
with groundwater resources, provide a sufficient

834

CHAPTER 46

References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Marseille
Provence Métropole Urban Community (MPM) Case
Study Report, Managing Water and its Risks, from
Mountain to Sea, prepared in 2011 by the Water and
Sanitation Agency of the Marseille Provence Métropole
Urban Community (forthcoming).

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

CHAPTER 47
Tiber River basin, Italy

—
Acknowledgements Giorgio Cesari, Remo Pelillo, Giorgio Pineschi, Giuseppe Bortone,
Katia Raffaelli, Maurizio Baudone, Francesca Caparrini, Enzo Di Carlo, Sergio Paderi,
Raniero De Filippis, Luca Fegatelli, Mauro Lasagna, Angelo Viterbo, Nicola Berni, Mario
Smargiasso, Emidio Primavera, Sabrina Di Giuseppe, Tiziana Di Lorenzo

© Shutterstock/Dmitry Agafontsev

Location and general characteristics
The Tiber River begins the in the northern part of the
Apennine Mountains in Italy and travels about 400 km
before draining into the Tyrrhenian Sea (Map 47.1). The
river runs through the Italian capital, Rome. The Tiber
River basin covers an area of about 17,500 km2, which
crosses six administrative regions. Almost 90% of the
basin lies in the regions of Umbria and Lazio, and the
remainder falls within the regions of Emilia–Romagna,
Tuscany, Marche and Abruzzo. The basin lies fully in the
Central Apennines District , which includes all the regions
of the basin and Italy’s newest region, Molise (Table 47.1).
The Tiber River basin has approximately 4.7 million
inhabitants (2009), some 60% of whom live in Rome.
Overall, 83% of the population is composed of urban
dwellers. The topography of the basin varies from
lowlands to highlands and is mainly characterized by
a temperate climate with hot, dry summers and cool,
wet winters. The highest precipitation in both the Tiber
River basin and the Central Apennines District is usually
recorded in the autumn and spring, with a peak in early
winter and a dry season during the summer.

Water resources availability and their use
The annual average discharge of the Tiber River into
the Tyrrhenian Sea is 225 m3/s or approximately
7 billion m3 (calculated on a long-term average)
(Cesari, 2010). Depending on the hydrologic

conditions, the maximum discharge can exceed
1500 m3/s or can be as low as 60 m3/s. Groundwater
availability in the basin is about 3.5 billion m3.
With the exception of the Emilia–Romagna region,
the basin and its immediate surroundings are mainly
characterized by small farms (Table 47.2). Irrigation is
practised through sprinklers, drip systems and canals
over a combined area of 2,100 km2, which corresponds
to approximately 8% of agricultural land in the ﬁve
regions. The most commonly cultivated products are
fruit and vegetables (such as cereals and potato) and
tobacco.
The territory is not very industrialized. However,
there are important steelworks in Terni and beverage,
tobacco, agro-processing and paper factories in
the basin. Since the 1990s, industrial activity has
been reducing gradually, and the services sector has
become the main contributor to the region’s gross
domestic product (GDP) (Table 47.3).
In the largely rural Emilia–Romagna region, agriculture
is the sector with the highest water demand, followed
by municipal use and industry. In fact, irrigation
accounts for 66% of overall water consumption. In other
regions, agricultural water demand is relatively low.
However, generally speaking, all regions are
implementing various projects to improve water

MAP 47.1
Tiber River basin and Central Apennines District

ITALY

ber
Ti
Lake
Trasimeno

Perugia

Tiber

Te

Hydroelectric
power plant

National park

a
Lake
Bracciano

an
Vom

a

Lake
Campotosto

Lake
Vico

b er

Ramsar site

Lake
Bolsena

nto

Ti

Central Appennines District

ADRIATIC
SEA

Tro

Ner

Basin

a
nn

Rome
me
e

City
TYRRHENIAN
SEA

836

CHAPTER 47

0

40

80 120 160 200 km

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

TABLE 47.1
Extent of regions and distribution of the Tiber River basin
Region

Proportion of national
territory (%)

Proportion of Central
Apennines District (%)

Proportion of Tiber River
basin (%)

Emilia–Romagna

7.45

0.08

0.1

Tuscany

7.63

3.46

6.7

Umbria

2.81

22.37

46.8

Marche

3.11

12.17

1.2

Abruzzo

3.57

25.31

3.7

Lazio

5.72

36.26

41.5

Molise

1.47

0.36

-

TABLE 47.2
Basic regional statistics about agricultural land use (2007)
Region

Average land holding size
(km2)

Irrigated area
(km2)

Cultivated area
(km2)

Irrigated/cultivated area
(%)

Emilia–Romagna

1.28

2,966

10,525

28.20

Tuscany

0.10

472

8,064

5.90

Umbria

0.09

244

3,394

7.20

Marche

0.10

245

4,964

4.90

Lazio

0.07

861

6,740

12.80

Abruzzo

0.07

345

4,340

8.00

TABLE 47.3
Contribution of various sectors to GDP at the national, Central Apennines District and Tiber River basin levels
Sector/Region

Italy

Central Apennines
District

Tiber River
basin

Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing

2.5%

2.0%

1.7%

Industry

27.2%

22.0%

19.8%

Services

70.3%

76.0%

78.5%

demand management and to reduce seasonal water
deﬁcits. Umbria and Tuscany have facilitated access
to information by developing databases on water
use that are linked to online portals. Similarly, Emilia–
Romagna introduced an ‘Irrinet’ service to reduce
water consumption in agriculture, and has achieved
successful results (Box 47.1). This region has also had
its successes in the municipal sector, with a 7% drop in

WWDR4

water use between 2002 and 2006. Umbria is aiming
to increase public awareness of the need to reduce
water consumption and has made improvements to its
infrastructure to minimize water loss from the network.
In 2005, Rome’s municipal water requirement was
approximately 450 million m3, and in the rest of the
Tiber River basin it was about 80 million m3. The same

TIBER RIVER BASIN, ITALY

837

BOX 47.1
Developing knowledge and capacity: Irrinet and Irrinet plus
The ‘Irrinet’ project, which aims to reduce irrigational water use, is an initiative of Emilia–Romagna region and part
of the 2007–2013 Rural Development Programme. The Irrinet service is freely available on the internet and provides
irrigational advice using data from the Regional Agency for Environmental Protection (Agenzia Regionale per la Protezione
Dell’Ambiente – ARPA), the region’s geologic, seismic and soil service, and the experimental activities of the consortium of
the Canale Emiliano–Romagnolo.
Based on their geographical location, it is possible to indicate to farmers when to irrigate and how much in order to achieve
the highest productivity. It has been estimated that the Irrinet service has helped to save about 50 million m3 of water
between 2006 and 2007. Since 2009, Irrinet has evolved into Irrinet Plus, which provides farmers with further information
specifying the economic beneﬁts associated with a particular irrigation routine that uses an intuitive advisory system.
This project provides institutions with a practical instrument for managing the water demand for irrigation and helping
farmers to use the right amount of water to minimize the risk of overuse. Also, institutions can monitor the irrigational water
consumption, thus facilitating water rationing especially in drought periods.

year, water use for drinking and sanitation in the wider
Central Apennines District was around 1.2 billion m3,
90% of which was withdrawn from springs and
aquifers. In general, a signiﬁcant increase in water use
is not expected and there are plans to reduce water
consumption by as much as 8% by 2015.
In the Central Apennines District, there are
approximately 40 dams, over 30 of which are
hydroelectric power plants (HEPP) with an installed
capacity of 1,400 MW. HEPPs in the TRB are mainly
concentrated on the Tiber and Nera Rivers. About
8% of national electricity production comes from
hydropower in the region, and almost all the
power that is produced is consumed locally. While
hydropower generation is a non-consumptive
water use, it requires about 40 billion m3 per year,
and therefore adds to the competition from other
sectors. Although a reduction in the production of
hydroelectricity could increase water availability for
other water users, it would have a negative impact on
the national target of producing 20% of energy from
renewable resources (Cesari et al., 2010).

Climatic variability, climate change and risk
management
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) predicts that the Mediterranean region in
general will suffer from a reduction in water resources
availability. In addition, the most severe climate
change scenarios for central Italy – where a 6°C to
8°C increase in temperature is forecast by 2080

838

CHAPTER 47

– foresee a decreasing trend in rainfall throughout the
year, most notably between October and April where
precipitation could drop by as much as 50%.
These predictions are partially conﬁrmed by
measurements. Data collected between 1952 and
2007 show a consistent trend of gradually decreasing
annual precipitation (mainly in winter, with falls of up
to 30%) with rising surface temperatures. Throughout
the TRB, the amount of precipitation has decreased
by 2 billion m3 in the same period. While there have
been exceptionally dry years (2007) and exceptionally
wet years (2008), the Tiber River basin, in general,
has experienced prolonged dry periods. In fact, major
drought events that affected the entire basin occurred
in 1955, 1971, 1987, 1990, 1993, 2003 and 2007. The
droughts at the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century did
not get much attention from the point of view of
water scarcity. Instead, what were highlighted were
the weaknesses in supply systems – including poor
ﬂexibility in the operation of reservoirs – and the lack
of integrated management.
Floods are usual along the Tiber River. There were
frequent ﬂoods in the ﬁrst decade of the millennium,
fortunately none of them was a major event and losses
were economic in nature.
Because climate change is expected to exacerbate
droughts and ﬂoods, there are policies and structural
measures in place in Italy and throughout the Tiber
River basin to deal with disaster mitigation and disaster

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

preparedness. For example, at national level, the Local
Action Programme uses meteorological and agrometeorological indicators to highlight risks related to
drought and desertiﬁcation that could have an impact
on agriculture, the environment and society in general.
In the Emilia–Romagna region, 460 additional small
reservoirs were built after the Programme identiﬁed
that there was insufficient capacity to meet agricultural
water demand in dry periods during the summer. The
national civil protection service runs simulations to
forecast water requirements under different climate
scenarios and issues drought alerts. Regions are also
cooperating to alleviate seasonal water shortages. For
instance, in Tuscany and Umbria, extensive studies on
water sharing led to an agreement between the regions
for the joint use of the Montedoglio reservoir, which is
located in the upper Tiber River basin.
Flood management is ensured through national
directives that include early warning systems, and
there are regional offices to implement the necessary
measures. Legislative Decree 49, which came into
force in 2010, transposed the EU Floods Directive
(2007/60) into national law. In fact, the Tiber River
Basin Authority had anticipated the contents of the
EU directive and had already developed a planning
tool (in line with Law 183/89 on soil protection) for
the identiﬁcation of ﬂood-prone areas and the level
of risk exposure. However, two main requirements
of the Floods Directive remain to be implemented in
the Central Apennines District: public participation
in the planning process and the economic analysis
and development of civil protection plans. Regarding
public involvement, the Tiber River Basin Authority
participated in the EU project ‘integrative ﬂood
risk governance approach for improvement of risk
awareness and increased public participation (IMRA)’
to develop a method of risk communication and
participation in local communities that are located in
ﬂood-risk areas.

Policy framework and decision-making
At national level, the 1933 Italian Royal Decree
recognized water resources as a public good. In 1989,
Law 183 established major basin authorities and
identiﬁed the river basin as the basic unit for water
resources management, water pollution control and
soil protection activities. In 1994, Law 36 introduced
a reform under which municipal utilities were
aggregated into Optimal Territorial Areas which are
responsible for the management and supply of water

WWDR4

services such as wastewater treatment, sanitation and
the provision of drinking water.
Legislative Decree 152 was introduced in 1999 to
protect water resources by preventing and reducing
pollution, and improving water quality. This Decree
delegated certain responsibilities to the regions.
Accordingly, each region had the right to make its
own laws, and shared the responsibility for local
implementation with the provinces (sub-units of the
regions). In 2006, Legislative Decree 152 incorporated
the contents of the EU Water Framework Directive
and replaced the 1999 Legislative Decree 152. The
new decree set out for the creation of a Central
Apennines District Authority, with several ministries
(Environment, Infrastructure and Transport, Economic
Development, Cultural Heritage, Agriculture, Civil
Function and Civil Protection) and regions (Emilia–
Romagna, Tuscany, Umbria, Marche, Lazio, Abruzzo
and Molise) as members. Although the Central
Apennines District Authority remains to be established,
some of its functions (such as the coordination
and implementation of the district River Basin
Management Plans) have been temporarily assigned
to the river basin authorities including the Tiber River
Basin Authority. As an ongoing process, with the full
implementation of the EU Water Framework Directive
and Floods Directive, CADA will take over as the TRBA
will merge into this Authority.
The regional governments have adopted strategies to
reverse the current trend of environmental degradation
and to integrate sustainable development principles into
their work programmes. These strategies, which form a
part of the Central Apennines District Management Plan
(Piano di Gestione del Distretto dell’Appennino Centrale)
are deﬁned by the Regional Plan for Water Protection
(Piano Regionale di Tutela delle Acque) and identify
both quality-related and quantity-related measures
that make up a holistic approach. The regions have
also developed other strategies to address matters not
included in the water protection plan, including natural
disaster risk management, agricultural development,
environmental protection, and energy production from
renewable resources.
A comprehensive approach involving the close
interaction of district and regional authorities is
followed to prevent pollution and to protect water
resources. It is the responsibility of the district
authority to balance water availability with water

TIBER RIVER BASIN, ITALY

839

demand. To do this, it deﬁnes appropriate goals and
priorities. The regions then deﬁne the actions that
are necessary to achieve those targets, including
recovering the cost of water supply and sanitation
services. The district authority audits these actions
to ensure compliance with the goals and priorities.
Once the actions are approved, the regions adopt and
implement the Regional Plan for Water Protection.
In terms of water resources management, regional
governments plan for and manage the services that
are provided. For irrigation purposes, each district’s
rural development plan is taken as basis for helping
to improve irrigation networks, wastewater treatment
plants and aqueducts. For electricity generation,
regional governments prepare plans to develop
renewable energy sources, and identify the areas that
are most suitable for the construction of hydroelectric
power plants.

Water and the environment
The heavy and uncontrolled exploitation of surface
water and groundwater resources has had a negative
impact on water quality in the basin. Fertilizers used
in agriculture along with municipal and industrial
pollution have all added to environmental degradation.
In 2010, 61% of rivers and 69% of lakes in the TIber
basin were assessed to be of sufficient quality or
higher. But during the summer, when there is little rain
and demand for water peaks, the ﬂow of the some
streams is sustained mainly by wastewater returns. The
Regional Plan for Water Protection aims to address
environmental and water-quality related problems
by holding open discussions with the participation of
all stakeholders in an effort to identify appropriate
actions. Furthermore, the Central Apennines District
management plan emphasises EU Directive 42/2001
on strategic environmental assessment regarding the
main drivers of water consumption and pollution,
such as agriculture, industry, hydropower and drinking
water.
The central and regional governments are proactive
when it comes to ﬁnding solutions to environmental
challenges. This is because their overarching objective
is to maintain the quality of water resources (which
is an integral part of the Central Apennines District
Management Plan and the Regional Plan for Water
Protection). For example, the Abruzzo and Umbria
Regions are implementing their action plans to combat
the high level of nitrate pollution, which is a common

840

CHAPTER 47

problem in Italy. These plans focus on the correct
use of fertilizers and promote best practices – such
as suggesting the appropriate amount of fertilizer to
use for various crops, recommending the best periods
during which to use it, and advising on the best ways
of storing and transporting it. The action plans do
this through direct communication with farmers and
landowners. In addressing the issue of nitrate pollution,
the Central Apennines regions put signiﬁcant emphasis
on public participation. Communication tools such as
websites, information sheets and meetings are used to
facilitate better interaction between local authorities
and stakeholders. This approach also aims to inform
stakeholders and help them to tackle the problems
associated with nitrate pollution.
An ongoing project in the Marche Region in
cooperation with the major Italian energy distribution
company, Enel, aims to determine the degree to
which increasing the amount of water discharge from
dams affects the quality of surface water resources
and the recharge rate of aquifers, especially in dry
periods. The ﬁndings of this project will contribute
to a better understanding of how to adjust minimum
environmental ﬂow requirements – an area where
experimental research is lacking.

Conclusions
The water resources of the Central Apennines District
and the Tiber River basin are important for the socioeconomic development of central Italy and the
country’s capital, Rome. Agriculture, which is practised
throughout the basin, is the sector with highest water
requirement, accounting for over 60% of annual water
demand. The sector contributes little to regional GDP,
however, and is one of the sources of the ongoing
problem of nitrate pollution. Consequently, regional
authorities have been implementing projects to
curb agriculture’s impact on the environment and to
reduce the amount of water it uses. Declining water
availability, caused by climatic variability and climate
change, has also necessitated a revisit of current
water policies on allocation and supply. Implementing
the EU Water Framework Directive, which was
on hold until recently, can help to address the
aforementioned challenges of seasonal water scarcity
and environmental pollution, while improving public
participation in decision making.

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Tiber River Basin
Case Study Report, prepared in 2011 by the Tiber River
Basin Authority and Regional Services (forthcoming).
Cesari, G. 2010. Il bacino del Tevere, il suo ambiente idrico e
l’impatto antropico. Primo rapporto annuale del Consorzio
Tiberina. Rome, Consorzio Tiberina, 29 October 2010.
http://www.abtevere.it/sites/default/ﬁles/datisito/
pubblicazioni/articolo_giorgio_cesari.pdf
Cesari, G. and Pelillo, R. 2010. Central Apennines District:
River Basin Management Plan of District (PGDAC) –
Problems and Expectations. Paper presented at the
European Water Association 6th Brussels Conference,
Implementing the River Basin Management Plans, 5th
November 2010. Brussels/Rome, EWA/Tiber River Basin
Authority.

WWDR4

TIBER RIVER BASIN, ITALY

841

CHAPTER 48
Tagus River basin, Portugal

—
Acknowledgements Manuel Lacerda, Simone Pio, Santa Clara Gomes, the Office for
International Relations of the Ministry of Agriculture, Sea, Environment and Spatial
Planning, Portugal, DHV, S.A., Hidroprojecto – Engenharia e Gestão, S.A., Laboratório
Nacional de Engenharia Civil (LNEC), International Centre for Coastal Ecohydrology
(ICCE), Instituto Nacional de Recursos Biológicos, I.P./IPIMAR; Biodesign, Lda.,
ARH do Tejo team

©Rui Cunha

Location and general characteristics
The River Tagus has its source in Spain and ﬂows into
the Atlantic Ocean near Lisbon in Portugal. The Tagus
River basin is home to 9.5 million people and covers
an area of 80,550 km2 – almost one-third of which is
in Portugal. At 1,100 km long, the Tagus is the longest
river in the Iberian Peninsula and it is an important
source of water for both Spain and Portugal. The
capitals, Madrid and Lisbon, rely on the Tagus River
basin for their water supply, which further increases its
critical value.

months often causes ﬂoods. However, the ﬂow regime
of the Tagus and its tributaries is quite irregular as a
result of rainfall variation from year to year as well as on
a seasonal basis.
In the study area, the surface water availability (6.3
billion m3) in average is higher than the groundwater
potential (3 billion m3) (ECOSOC, 2011). However,
groundwater use predominates in the majority of the
sub-basins.
While agriculture and agro-forestry employ only 2.7%
of the labour force, approximately 45% of the river
basin is given over to farming and forestry. The water
requirement of this sector (944 million m3) accounts
for 65% of the total water demand in the basin. The
remainder is largely used by municipalities (27%) and
to a much lesser extent, by industry (6%).

This case study focuses on the lower section of the
basin, which is situated in Portugal (Map 48.1). In
2008, approximately 3.5 million people were living in
this area. The basin is subdivided into 23 sub-basins,
three of which (Tejo Superior, Erges and Sever) are
transboundary.

Water resources, their use and potential
effects of climate change
Portugal has a mild Mediterranean climate with distinct
wet seasons in autumn and winter. Annual precipitation
in the basin varies from 2,700 mm in the mountainous
north-east to 520 mm in its westernmost regions.
Generally, in summer most of the smaller rivers dry up,
whereas intense precipitation in the autumn and winter

Overall, the local water stress caused by the seasonal
and other temporal variations is more of a concern
than water availability. In order to cope with this
problem, over 30 dams have been built with a total
storage capacity of 2.3 billion m3.
Climate change scenarios indicated a potential
decrease in the amount of precipitation in the order of

MAP 48.1
Tagus River basin

PORTUGAL
L

PORTUGAL
Me im

s

l
ge

Castelo P o n
Branco

su

Se

ba

ve

o

Ramsar site

r

Hydroelectric
power plant

Santarem

Dam
M

Protected areas

aio

gu
Ta

s

Portalegre
Ra

r
S or r

City

ia





Av i z

a i a S or
D i vor

L av re

Lisbon

C an h

0

WWDR4

za

Na

Basin

re

Er

Oc

tec
ara a

A T L A N T I C
O C E A N

International boundary

oa

e re
Zez M

25

50

a

75

100 km

TAGUS RIVER BASIN, PORTUGAL

843

100 mm per year, particularly in the centre of Portugal
and to the south. The regional model, however, predicts
a 20% to 50% increase in precipitation in winter. This
pattern of change may substantially increase the risk of
ﬂoods. The prediction is that by 2100, the annual mean
runoff from the Tagus River basin will be 10% to 30%
lower. Such a reduction implies longer periods with
low ﬂow, and that is likely to have a negative impact
on agriculture and tourism. It is also expected that a
reduction in water availability will affect ecosystems,
energy production and water quality which is extremely
important in terms of human health, ecosystem services
and other water uses.
To analyse the long-term trends, Portugal’s national
water authority (Instituto da Água – INAG) carried
out a climate assessment on the period from 1931 to
2000. This study revealed that Portugal’s mean annual
air temperature had been increasing since the 1970s.
Precipitation data for the same period showed a weak
decreasing trend that became more pronounced
after 1976. Analysis of data also showed an increase
in the frequency of both heavy precipitation events
and severe and extreme droughts – particularly in the
southern regions between 1990 and 2000.
The national water authority assessment also pointed
out the imminent threat of rising sea levels. About
75% of Portugal’s population lives along the coastal
zone, and 85% of gross domestic product (GDP) is
generated there (Santos et al., 2002). In accordance
with Portugal’s 2004 National Climate Change
Programme, and its adaptation strategies, a number
of complementary actions have been taken including
enacting the new Water Law (2005), a revision of
the Strategic Plan for Water Supply and Sanitation
for 2007–2013 (PEAASAR II, MAOTDR 2006), a
revision in 2007 of the original National Climate
Change Programme, and the Scenarios, Impacts and
Adaptation Measures (SIAM 1 and SIAM 2), research
project (Santos et al. 2002; Santos and Miranda, 2006;
da Cunha, 2007).

Transboundary cooperation
Spain and Portugal share several rivers. The Albufeira
Convention applies to the Minho, Lima, Douro, Tagus
and Guadiana rivers and covers issues such as the
exchange of information, pollution control and
prevention, the evaluation of the transboundary impacts
of water uses, the assignment of rights and conﬂict
resolution. The Albufeira Convention is administered by

844

CHAPTER 48

the Commission for the Application and Development
of the Convention. This is an intergovernmental
technical commission coordinated by the foreign
ministries of both riparian countries, with technical
support from their environment ministries. Under the
Convention, which came into force in 2000 and was
revised in 2008, Spain guarantees to release 2.7 billion
m3 of water to Portugal measured at the downstream
section of the Cedillo dam. This corresponds to
approximately 37% of the annual average river ﬂow
(modiﬁed hydrologic regime). The current text of
the Convention allows for future revisions of the
established hydrologic regimes in order to ensure the
achievement of the environmental objectives set at
basin level and to integrate the climate change issue
and adaptation measures.

Environmental status and legal framework
The River Tagus ﬂows into the Tagus estuary, one of
the largest estuaries in Western Europe. Because of its
rich biodiversity and variety of habitats, the estuary is
protected under the EC Directive on the Conservation
of Wild Birds, which also makes it part of the Natura
2000 network. It is also classiﬁed as nature reserve
under Portuguese national legislation.
Water quality in the basin continues to be an issue
that demands attention. A series of consultations
with stakeholders was conducted as a part of the
preparation of a river basin management plan.
These consultations identiﬁed nutrient enrichment,
pollution (organic, microbial, heavy metals, dangerous
substances) and eutrophication as the most signiﬁcant
issues inﬂuencing water quality degradation in the
basin. The preliminary water status assessment shows
that 54% of the surface water bodies and 66.7% of the
groundwater bodies are classiﬁed as good or excellent
(ARH do Tejo, 2011).
Nutrient enrichment, particularly in the form of nitrogen
and phosphorus, is mainly the result of fertilizer use
in agriculture and wastewater discharge from other
sectors (including municipal use). To reduce nitrate
concentrations in water bodies, the Code of Good
Agricultural Practice was drawn up and steps have
been taken to raise farmers’ awareness by means of
nationwide training initiatives. The code sets out general
guidelines, mainly with a view to helping farmers to
rationalize the use of fertilizers. It also proposes a
range of growing techniques and methods that protect
surface water and groundwater from pollution (EEA,

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

Water resources management
and institutions

2010). A national strategy for agricultural and agroindustrial wastewater treatment (Estratégia Nacional
para os Eﬂuentes Agro-Pecuários e Agro-Industriais)
was approved in 2007 to deﬁne environmentally
sustainable solutions and to ensure the reduction, or the
elimination of the pollution being caused by discharges
from agro-industrial activities.

The ﬁrst water resources planning exercise took
place during the EU Water Framework Directive codecision procedure (1997–2000). It resulted in the
preparation of Portugal’s national water plan as well
as ﬁfteen separate river basin plans and two regional
water plans. Work is still ongoing on the formulation
of the revised national water plan and the river basin
management plans.

In relation to reducing urban pollution, the second
phase (2007-2013) of the Strategic Plan for Water
Supply and Wastewater Treatment (Plano Estratégico
de Abastecimento de Água e de Saneamento de
Águas Residuais – PEAASAR II) was adopted to make
further progress towards attaining the objectives of
the EU directives (MAOTDR, 2006). PEAASAR II aims
to optimize the management and environmental
performance of water supply and sanitation utilities
to reduce costs and to maximize efficiency. In 2009,
the sewage treatment plant connection rate was 79%
in the basin, against a national target of 90% (ARH do
Tejo, 2011).

The Water Law was adopted in 2005 as part of the
EU Water Framework Directive implementation
process (Box 48.1). The law has a broader scope than
the EU Directive as it includes all the elements of the
integrated water resources management approach,
including both quantitative and qualitative aspects,
as well as mitigating the effects of extreme events.
To complete the legal framework on water resources
management, a number of additional regulations were
also introduced, notably Decree 226–A (2007) on the

BOX 48.1
The Water Law and the river basin district administrations
The Water Law, adopted in 2005, established a new institutional model in Portugal. It is based on ﬁve river basin district administrations and Portugal’s national water authority, the Instituto da Água (INAG), which is responsible for water resources planning and coordination in all parts of the country. The district administrations are in charge of water resources management at
the basin level – in particular, they look after planning, licensing, infrastructure management, monitoring, and information and
communication activities.

Advisory Bodies:
- River basin district councils
- National Water Council

In this conﬁguration, the river basin district councils and the National Water Council are the advisory bodies. The district councils
provide advice to the district administrations and are composed of representatives from central government, municipalities, the
private sector and civil society. The National Water Council makes its recommendations at the governmental level, particularly to
the Ministry of Agriculture, Sea, Environment and Spatial Planning. All ﬁve river basin district administrations function according to the principles of stakeholder participation (user associations, for example), transparency, coherence, responsiveness and
accountability.

WWDR4

Ministry of Agriculture, Sea,
Environment and Spatial
Planning

River Basin District
Administrations:
North
Centre
Tagus
Alentejo
Algarve

National Water Authority
(INAG)

TAGUS RIVER BASIN, PORTUGAL

845

establishment of a licensing system for water resources
uses, Decree 348 (2007) on the establishment of
water users associations and Decree 97 (2008) on the
establishment of an economic and ﬁnancial regime
for water resources. Decree 97 aims to implement
the ‘polluter-pays’ and ‘user-pays’ principles, and
integrates the social and economic values of water as
well as the environmental aspects of water resources
management.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Tagus River
Basin Case Study Report, prepared in 2011 by the
Administração da Região Hidrográﬁca do Tejo,
Ministério do Ambiente e do Ordenamento do
Território (forthcoming).

Conclusions
Annual, seasonal and geographic variability in the
levels of rainfall the Tagus River basin receives causes
water stress at a local level. However, the current
challenge facing the basin is to improve the quality of
water resources. The interests of the agricultural (such
as large-scale irrigation) and agro-industry sectors
often conﬂict with the environmental standards set
by the EU Water Framework Directive, leaving water
managers and decision-makers with a number of
complex problems. While resource availability has
been improved by constructing many large dams, this
has also caused signiﬁcant changes in the ﬂow regime,
which have had consequences for the ecosystems.
Climate change and climatic variability are concerns
in a transboundary setting. Consequently, it is
important to assess the water allocation agreement
between Portugal and Spain based on climate change
studies and to meet environmental objectives set by
EU Water Framework Directive. Portugal has been
making signiﬁcant efforts to address current and
imminent challenges by developing national strategies
and implementing programmes that are holistic and
broader in scope than the Directive. It is critical to keep
up this momentum as the Tagus River basin lies at the
heart of both Portugal and Spain.

ARH (Administração da Região Hidrográﬁca) do Tejo. 2011.
Tagus River Basin Management Plan. Draft version for
public review. (In Portuguese). www.arhtejo.pt
da Cunha, L. V., 2007. Adaptation strategies related to water
management and water services – an example of the
situation in southern Europe, a case study of Portugal.
Presentation at the conference, ‘Time to Adapt: Climate
Change and the European Water Dimension – Vulnerability,
Impacts, Adaptation’. Lisbon, MAOTDR, INAG and
Nova University. http://www.climate-water-adaptationberlin2007.org/documents/veiga.pdf.
ECOSOC (United Nations Economic and Social Council). 2011.
Assessment of transboundary waters discharging into
the North Sea and eastern Atlantic. Note prepared by the
Secretariat for the ECE Working Group on Monitoring and
Assessment. ttp://www.unece.org/ﬁleadmin/DAM/env/
documents/2011/wat/WG2/ECE_MP_WAT_WG2_2011_15_
North_Sea_Eastern_Atlantic.pdf
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2010. Freshwater
(Portugal): Why Should We Care about this Issue? Country
Proﬁle series. Copenhagen, EEA. http://www.eea.europa.
eu/soer/countries/pt/soertopic_view?topic=freshwater.
MAOTDR (Ministério do Ambiente do Ordenamento do
Território e do Desenvolvimento Regional), Portugal. 2006.
PEAASAR II (Plano Estratégico de Abastecimento de
Água e de Saneamento de Águas Residuais 2007–2013).
Lisbon, MAOTDR. http://www.maotdr.gov.pt/Admin/Files/
Documents/PEAASAR.pdf
Santos, F. D. Forbes, K. and Moita, R. (eds) 2002.
Climate Change in Portugal. Scenarios, Impacts and
Adaptation Measures – SIAM 1. Lisbon, Gradiva. Executive
summary and conclusions. http://www.siam.fc.ul.pt/
SIAMExecutiveSummary.pdf
Santos, F. D and Miranda, P. (eds). 2006. Alterações
Climáticas em Portugal: Cenários, Impactos e Medidas
de Adaptação – SIAM 2. (Climate Change in Portugal.
Scenarios, Impacts and Adaptation Measures – SIAM 1.[In
Portuguese]), Lisbon, Gradiva.

846

CHAPTER 48

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

CHAPTER 49
St Johns River basin, Florida,
United States of America

—
Acknowledgements Radha Pyati, Heather McCarthy, Gretchen Bielmyer, Stuart Chalk,
Daniel McCarthy, Gerry Pinto, Lucinda Sonnenberg, Patrick Welsh

© Shutterstock/Steve Bower

Location and general characteristics
The St Johns River basin lies in central and northern
Florida – the most south-easterly state in the United
States of America. The river, which is composed of
upper, middle and lower sub-basins, rises in Indian
River County in Central Florida and ﬂows into the
Atlantic Ocean at Mayport, Jacksonville (Map 49.1).
The St Johns is one of very few rivers in the USA
that runs from south to north. The major tributaries
that feed into it are the Ocklawaha River, Dunns
Creek, Black Creek, the Wekiva River and the
Econlockhatchee River. Over its 500 km long journey,
the river ﬂows very slowly as the total drop (the
difference in altitude between the source and point of
ﬂow into the ocean) is merely 10 metres. Jacksonville,
the largest city in the basin, has a population of
about 800,000 (2009). Moreover, some sections of
the Orlando metropolitan area also lie in the basin.
With a drainage area covering 32,000 km2 or about
25% of Florida, the St Johns River basin is home to

approximately 4.7 million inhabitants (St Johns River
Water Management District, 2011a).

Water resources and their use
St Johns River lies within a humid subtropical zone
and rainfall typically occurs in late summer and early
autumn. The average annual precipitation in the basin
is approximately 132 cm per year and the average
annual discharge at the mouth of the river is around
7.5 billion m3. The Floridan aquifer is an important
groundwater source that extends over an area of
259,000 km2, which includes all of Florida and parts
of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and South Carolina.
Nearly all the drinking water for central and northern
Florida, including the St Johns River basin, comes
from this aquifer (Marella and Berndt, 2005). The
population of the basin is growing rapidly – between
1950 and 2000, the number of inhabitants in Florida
increased six fold. The amount of water withdrawal
from this aquifer has also steadily increased, and

MAP 49.1
St Johns River basin
Jacksonville

Mayport

Doctor’s
Lake
0

RIDA

10

20

30

40 km

S t.
J o hn s

Wetland

aha
law

County border

DeLand

ck

City

Bunnell

O

National forest

nt
ce
es e
Cr Lak

Basin

Palatka
Newman’s
Lake
Lochloosa
Lake
Orange
Lake
Lake
George
Lake
Weir
Lake
Griﬃn

Lake
Monroe Lake
Harney
Lake
t
Jesup
S

oh

MERRITT
ISLAND

ns

Orlando

Lake
Apopka

.J

Lake
Harris

Lake
Eustis

Blue Cyprus
Lake Vero

Beach

848

CHAPTER 49

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

reached approximately 5.5 billion m3 per year in 2000.
Nearly 78% of this water was withdrawn in Florida.
While a study by the US Geological Survey is currently
underway to determine how sustainable current
rates of water withdrawal are, the St Johns River
Water Management District estimates that the level
of abstraction of groundwater is about to reach the
limit of sustainable use (District, 2005). The matter of
quantity is further complicated by the fact that water
quality is threatened by saltwater intrusion and the
introduction of contaminants to the aquifer.
The various categories of water uses are listed
in Table 49.1. According to projections, by 2030,
agricultural consumption will decrease by 12%, whereas
municipal consumption (that is, the demand for the
public water supply) may increase by as much as 10%
(St Johns River Water Management District, 2005.)
In terms of importance, agriculture is second only to
tourism in Florida’s economy. Important agricultural
activities include growing oranges and other citrus
fruit as well as cattle ranching for both beef and dairy
products. Florida possesses 68.1% of the market share
of orange production in the USA. These activities are
all typical of the St Johns River basin.

Climate change and climatic variability
Precipitation patterns in Florida are dependent on
larger-scale climatic anomalies such as El Niño and
the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation. Climate change
could amplify the effects of these anomalies and
make rainfall patterns even more unpredictable.
However, in the southern parts of the state, the
effects are expected to be a decrease in rainfall
during both the dry and the wet seasons, a loss in
dry season refugia1 and saltwater intrusion. Sea level
rise, a phenomenon associated with the melting
of polar ice caps as a result of global warming,
poses a signiﬁcant threat to the St Johns River
basin because of its low-lying nature. According
to estimates, sea levels in Florida may rise by as
much as 35 centimetres by 2080. The general
consequences of this include the inundation of lowlying areas and salt-water intrusion into aquifers and
estuaries. Preliminary results of modelling studies
being conducted near the mouth of the St Johns
River indicated that areas of open water and estuary
channels may already be elevated and the marshes
near the river mouth are likely to be inundated
more frequently. However, only a small area of the
marsh would actually change from being ‘regularly
submerged’ to ‘fully submerged’.

TABLE 49.1
Annual water use by category in the St Johns River basin, 2010

Category
Public supply

Freshwater
(million m3)

Saline water
(million m3)

Water reuse
(million m3)

Total water use
(million m3)

%

742.29

0.00

0.00

742.29

40.26

93.62

0.00

0.00

93.62

5.08

Commercial/industrial/
institutional self-supply

134.52

3.84

31.32

169.68

9.20

Agricultural irrigation
self-supply

570.95

0.00

10.57

581.52

31.54

Recreational self-supply

88.03

0.00

157.48

245.51

13.32

Thermoelectric power
generation self-supply

11.18

0.00

0.00

11.18

0.61

1,640.59

3.84

199.37

1,843.80

100.00

Domestic self-supply and
small public supply systems

Total

Note: Source of domestic self-supply is assumed to be groundwater and domestic self supply is an estimate. Estimated amounts are based on
best available data at the time of publication.
Source: St Johns River Water Management District (2011a).

WWDR4

ST JOHNS RIVER BASIN, FLORIDA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

849

Droughts, ﬂoods and hurricanes are the natural
disasters that cause socio-economic losses in the State
of Florida. The 2004 and 2005 hurricane seasons were
especially notable for the frequency of major storms
and the extent of hurricane damage. The 2004 season
included four major storms that caused the highest
cumulative single-year damage costs in Florida’s
history (Malmstad et al., 2009)2.
Droughts and ﬂoods also have a signiﬁcant impact on the
St Johns River basin. Tropical storm Fay deposited over
40 cm of rain in a ﬁve-day period in Brevard County in
2008. The water level rose by approximately two metres
in Seminole County in four days, setting a record. Overall,
the storm led to severe ﬂooding in the middle section
of the basin and caused damage of an estimated half
a billion dollars over three neighbouring states, Florida,
Georgia and Alabama (Stewart and Beven, 2009). In
spite of uncertainty in predicting the impact of climate
change on meteorological extremes, there is a possibility
that these events will become both more frequent and
more severe.

Environment and ecosystems
The St Johns is a blackwater river. Dissolved organic
matter from decaying plants in swamps dissipates
across the basin reducing the depth of light
penetration and giving the river its dark colour. Other
issues that affect water quality and environmental
conditions in the basin are slow ﬂow, salinity
ﬂuctuation, marshland destruction and human-induced
pollution (St Johns River Water Management District,
2011b).
The river’s extremely low gradient slows the ﬂow, holds
back drainage, decelerates the ﬂushing of pollutants
and intensiﬁes ﬂooding and pooling of water along
its length. This creates numerous lakes and extensive
wetlands throughout the St Johns River basin. The
retention time of the water (and its dissolved and
suspended components) in the river is around three
to four months. The high retention times of pollutants
have severe impacts on water quality.
A number of salty springs feed into the basin and
cause localized areas of elevated salinity (>5 ppt) in
otherwise freshwater sections of the river. Reverse
ﬂows triggered by weather conditions and massive
ocean tides cause the river to ﬂow in an upstream
direction. And this too results in abrupt changes in
salinity. Reverse ﬂows have been detected as far as

850

CHAPTER 49

257 km upstream. Such variations in salinity have
profound hydrological and ecological effects.
Wetlands are vital to the Northeast Florida ecosystem.
However, in the Upper St Johns River basin, the marshes
have been drained to grow citrus fruit and for animal
husbandry. Trends in wetland coverage cannot be
accurately established because of insufficient and
inconsistent information. On the other hand, since
1988, the St Johns River Water Management District
and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers have restored
and enhanced more than 600 km2 of marshes in Indian
River and Brevard counties (St Johns River Water
Management District, 2011b). However, because of
habitat loss, increased boating traffic and drought,
some species such as the Florida manatee, the wood
stork, the shortnose sturgeon, the piping plover, the
Florida scrub jay and the eastern indigo snake continue
to be vulnerable and face extinction.
Every year, more than 14,000 tonnes of nitrogen
and phosphorus enter the St Johns River – mainly as
a result of the disposal of partially treated sewage
(St Johns River Water Management District, 2011c).
Other signiﬁcant pollution sources include farms in
the agricultural areas of Flagler, Putnam and St Johns
counties. Agricultural runoff from farming areas carries
animal waste, fertilizers and pesticides into the river.
Storm water from urban areas also takes pollutants
such as lawn fertilizers, sediments, pesticides and
trash into the river. Consequently, nutrient levels in
the river’s main stem and faecal coliform levels in
the tributaries exceed limits set by water quality
standards. In addition, because of the river’s slow
ﬂow, the lower St. Johns River in particular is facing
pollution problems. These include the growth of algal
blooms which block sunlight from reaching underwater
vegetation, produce toxins, deplete dissolved oxygen
and endanger ﬁsh and other wildlife. Efforts are
ongoing to reduce nutrient loading by setting a total
maximum daily load (TMDL), by drawing up a Basin
Management Action Plan, through collaboration
between government and industry and public
education.

Water resources management
Federal laws on water resources include the Clean
Water Act (CWA) and the Safe Drinking Water Act
(SDWA). The CWA, which was passed in 1972 and
amended in 1977 and 1978, shifted the focus of
pollution control from being solely oriented towards

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

water-quality standards to looking at ways of limiting
effluent from point sources. Following the CWA, the
SDWA was passed in 1974 and amended in 1986. With
it came the establishment of monitoring and waterquality standards for all public water supply systems.
In the State of Florida, the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection (FDEP) and other entities
implement these efforts.
In 1972, the Florida Legislature passed the Florida
Water Resources Act, which established ﬁve water
management districts in the state, supervised by the
FDEP. Each district was tasked with managing water
resources in its basin, granting permits for water
use, developing and implementing ﬂood control and
drought planning projects, performing technical and
scientiﬁc evaluations of water resources in the basin
and acquiring land to protect water resources and
habitats. The St Johns River Water Management
District is one of these ﬁve districts.
Unfortunately, in the years since it was passed, the
FWRA has not been able to assure water availability
or quality. This is because many exceptions have
been made to the laws – mostly in order to enable
population growth and land development in Florida –
which have signiﬁcantly weakened the impact of the
Act. The 1972 CWA had more direct impact on water
quality issues but some of its provisions, particularly
on TMDLs were not actively enforced by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) until citizen
lawsuits in the late 1990s forced the agency to start
collecting information from states on water resources
that did not meet quality standards.
Florida’s enforcement of TMDLs effectively began in
1999 with the passage of the Watershed Restoration
Act. Following that law, all the water bodies in the
state were organized into basins, which were further
collected into groups. The basins were assessed in a
ﬁve-year cycle to address their TMDLs. Basically, the
TMDL programme establishes total amounts for a
number of pollutants (both point sources and nonpoint sources). These total amounts are the maximum
levels that can be absorbed by a speciﬁc water body
without breaching the water quality standards set to
protect human health and aquatic life. Once a TMDL
is drafted and approved (which includes a time period
for public comments and discussion), it is implemented
through a Basin Management Action Plan, which
prescribes strategies such as wastewater treatment

WWDR4

improvements, redirecting wastewater discharge
toward reuse, prescribing best-management practices
in agricultural, urban, and rural settings, and facilitating
environmental education. Nutrient TMDLs have been
successfully established for the lower, middle and
upper basins. In addition, Basin Management Action
Plan have been developed for a large number of water
bodies and pollutants, including several within all
stretches of the river and its tributaries. However, the
lower St Johns River basin is the only section of the
river with a nutrient Basin Management Action Plan
which it adopted in 2008.

Conclusions
Despite high levels of rainfall, water supply has
become a contentious issue in Florida. The growing
population and ever greater demands for water
are putting increasing pressure on water resources,
notably on the Floridan aquifer system that provides
drinking water for ﬁve states. The river’s slow ﬂow and
continuous disposal of partially treated wastewater
mean that both phosphorus and nitrogen levels
generally exceed EPA recommended standards in both
the main stem of the St Johns River and its tributaries.
Dissolved oxygen concentrations also fall below the
site-speciﬁc minimum standard in several tributaries.
Consequently, water quality in both surface and
groundwater is becoming a major concern. Although
institutions are in place both federally and at state
level, a lack of enforcement of the legislation up to
the 1990s has caused basin-wide degradation. While
restoration and prevention activities by state and local
governments in the St Johns River basin are ongoing,
there is a clear need to compound these efforts by
involving other governmental agencies, organizations
and the public.

ST JOHNS RIVER BASIN, FLORIDA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

851

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
Notes
1
2

Refugia are the water-holding areas that offer refuge to a
variety of species during a dry season.
Hurricanes Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne caused a
combined damage of US$49 billion in Florida.

St Johns River Water Management District. 2005. Water
Supply. SJR–WMD website. http://www.sjrwmd.com/
watersupply/waterusedatamanagement.html

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı

––––. 2011a. St. Johns River Water Management District 2009
Annual Water Use Survey. Palatka, Fla., SJR–WMD. http://
www.sjrwmd.com/technicalreports/pdfs/FS/SJ2011-FS1.
pdf

References

––––. 2011b. n.d. Water Bodies, Watersheds and Storm Water:
The St Johns River. SJR–WMD website. http://www.sjrwmd.
com/stjohnsriver/index.html (Accessed 17 October, 2011)

Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Case Study
Report of St Johns River basin, Florida, USA prepared
in 2011 by Pyati et al. (forthcoming).
Malmstad, J., Scheiffin, K. and Elsner, J. 2009. Florida
hurricanes and damage costs. Southeastern Geographer,
Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 108–31. http://www.stormrisk.org/admin/
downloads/MalmstadtEtAl2009.pdf

852

Marella, R. L. and Berndt, M. P. 2005. Water Withdrawals
and Trends from the Floridan Aquifer System in the
Southeastern United States, 1950-2000. Reston, Va., US.
Geological Survey Scientiﬁc circular 1278. p.http://pubs.
usgs.gov/circ/2005/1278/pdf/cir1278.pdf

CHAPTER 49

––––. 2011c. Water Bodies, Watersheds and Storm Water:
Lower St Johns River Basin. SJR–WMD website. http://
www.sjrwmd.com/lowerstjohnsriver/index.html (Accessed
17 October, 2011.)
Stewart, S. R. and Beven, J. L. 2009. Tropical Cyclone Report:
Tropical Storm Fay, 15–26 August, 2008. Miami, Fla.,
National Hurricane Center. http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/pdf/
TCR-AL062008_Fay.pdf

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

CHAPTER 50
Costa Rica

—
Acknowledgements José Miguel Zeledón, Juan Carlos Fallas, Carlos Romero,
Carlos Vargas, Sadí Laporte, María Elena Rodríguez, Fabio Herrera, Andrei Bourrouet,
Federico Gómez-Delgado

© Shutterstock/Erkki & Hanna

Location and general characteristics
Costa Rica is located in the narrowest part of Central
America, bordered by Nicaragua to the north and
Panama to the south. To the east, it forms a coastline
with the Caribbean Sea and to the west, with the
Paciﬁc Ocean (Map 50.1). The surface area of the
country is around 50,000 km2.
Costa Rica’s population in 2010 was slightly over
4.6 million – about 59% of whom live in urban
areas. The capital, San José, is the largest city in the
country, with a population of 1.6 million. There are
seven provinces – Alajuela, Cartago, Guanacaste,
Heredia, Limón, Puntarenas and San José (FAO–
Aquastat, n.d.). The provinces are divided into six
regions for planning purposes – Chorotega, Huetar
Atlantic, Huetar North, Central Paciﬁc, Central and
Brunca.
There are many volcanoes in the country, some of which
are still active. The Poás (2,708 m above sea level),
located in the Central Highlands, is one of Costa Rica’s
largest and most active volcanoes (Arenal.net, n.d.).
The country lies in a humid tropical zone. While the
amount of rainfall varies from one basin to another,

Costa Rica has annual average rainfall of 3,300 mm
(UNESCO IHP, 2007). In general, the north of the
country on the Paciﬁc side is drier than the Caribbean
region, which is humid almost all year round. The rainy
season extends from May to November on the Paciﬁc
side, and from May to February on the Caribbean
side. Forests cover approximately 25,000 km2, or
approximately half the country’s land surface.

Water resources availability and their use
There are 34 river basins in Costa Rica, ranging in size
from 200 km2 to 5,000 km2 (FAO–Aquastat, n.d.).
Unfortunately, reliable information is available for only
15 of those basins. The country has total renewable
water resources of slightly more than 110 billion m3
(MINAET, 2008a). Of this, surface water accounts for
73 billion m3.
Research initiatives begun in the 1960s helped to
identify 58 aquifers across the country, 34 of which
are coastal. As a result of seasonal shortages in the
availability of surface water and growing pollution,
the exploitation of groundwater has become more
common. According to estimates, annual water
demand is approximately 23.5 billion m3 (2010), almost
88% of which is met by aquifers. Consequently, the

MAP 50.1
Costa Rica

NICARAGUA
o

nill
t eier

EA

Lake
Arenal

IB

In

Miravalles

RR

Liberia

CA

Lake
Caño Negro
Rincón de la Vieja
Frio

Arenal

N

Heredia

San José
Cartago

Ramsar site
Hydroelectric
power plant
National park
Volcano

E stre l l

i st

Telira
ad

Cot

Cocos Island

20

Am




PACIFIC
OCEAN

0

CHAPTER 50

Puerto Limón

La

City

854

Turrialba
Irazú

a

Puntarenas

A

Basin

SE

Poás

Alajuela

40

60

oB

rus





80 100 km

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

sustainable exploitation of groundwater resources is of
great importance.
The Central region has the biggest demand for water
in the country because more than half the population
lives here and there is a high concentration of
industrial and economic activity (Mora Valverde, n.d.).
Nationwide, generating hydroelectricity accounts for
80% of total water demand, followed by agriculture
at 16%. The remaining 4% is used for drinking water,
and by industry and tourism. Given that the water
used for hydropower generation returns to the ﬂow
without loss, agriculture remains the largest user
(3.2 billion m3) in terms of actual consumption. In
2008, agricultural activities were practised over
approximately 4,190 km2 of land (8% of national
territory), 920 km2 of which were irrigated. Some 70%
of the irrigated land is developed by the private sector,
and the most important agricultural products grown
are coffee, rice, African palm, sugar cane, banana and
pineapple (SEPSA, 2009).
The sectors that contribute most to economic
growth are industry at 32.5% and agriculture at 14%
(MINAET/IMN, 2009). Unfortunately, 80% of water
contamination originates in these two sectors. Urban
settlements are also a big source of pollution because
only around 3% of wastewater is treated prior to being
disposed of into nature (FAO–Aquastat, n.d.).
According to various scenarios, water demand may
substantially increase by 2030 to reach approximately
109 billion m3, the upper limit of freshwater availability
in the country. However, the energy sector will
continue, by a large margin, to be the major (nonconsumer) water user, processing 100 billion m3 in
hydroelectricity generation. Consequently, the main
challenge will not be water scarcity but to plan for
water use in an integrated fashion to be able to satisfy
the demand of all sectors.

Natural disasters, national strategies
and climate change
Central America and the Caribbean region are
highly vulnerable to extremes of climate. Of
248 hydrometeorological disasters between 1930
and 2008, some 85% were ﬂoods, tropical storms,
landslides or mudslides, while 9% were droughts.
Because of the steep slopes of the mountainous
terrain, rivers run fast in the central part of Costa

WWDR4

Rica, and are known to cause violent ﬂoods. Urban
development, deforestation, and channel modiﬁcation,
especially in the Caribbean slope and the South
Paciﬁc, have worsened these conditions, causing
ﬂoods to affect ever larger human settlements,
agricultural areas, infrastructure, and nature reserves.
Consequently, between 1994 and 2003, approximately
120,000 people and 17,000 housing units were
reported to have been affected by ﬂoods, landslides,
and windstorms. As recently as 2010, heavy rain and
mudslides affected over 2,000 km of national roads,
and caused US$242 million worth of damage. The
same year, over 3,000 houses were damaged, at an
estimated cost of US$50 million. The loss to agriculture
was in the vicinity of US$40 million. To a lesser extent,
the country is also prone to drought. In fact, recurring
droughts in 1997 and 1998 and again in 2001 caused a
combined economic loss of US$18 million.
Risk management in Costa Rica has gone through a
process of institutionalization. The 1969 Emergencies
Act led to the establishment of the National
Commission for Risk Prevention and Emergency
Response (ComisiónNacional de Prevención de
Riesgos y Atención de Emergencias) and the National
Emergency Funds. Later amendments to the law
required the integration of risk management into the
planning activities of all national institutions as well as
into all national development policies.
Costa Rica is understandably concerned with the
likely effects of climate change. Current climatic
models indicate the possibility that, by 2100,
temperatures may have increased as much as 3.8°C,
precipitation may have decreased by up to 60%,
and the sea level may have risen by as much as
one metre (World Bank, 2009). Under a businessas-usual scenario (that is, no reduction in carbon
emissions), by 2100, the cumulative cost of climate
change in Central American countries is estimated
to reach approximately US$52 billion (2002 US$
reference). In Costa Rica alone, additional investment
of as much as US$3.4 billion may be required for
the adaptation of sectors relying on water and
biodiversity for the provision of their services. Given
that heavy ﬁnancial burden, and the potentially severe
implications of climatic extremes, a National Strategy
on Climate Change has been established and is being
overseen by the Ministry of Environment, Energy and
Telecommunication (MINAET). This strategy aims to
improve overall efficiency in all sectors, with the goal

COSTA RICA

855

of reducing greenhouse gases. The strategy document
also estimates that the largest amount of investment
(71%) needs to be made in the energy sector, followed
by agriculture (21%), to compensate for the effects
of climate change (Box 50.1). These two sectors have
traditionally been ﬁnanced through external funds.
The most important source of internal funding for
climate change adaptation is the National Fund for
Forest Financing (Fondo Nacional de Financiamiento
Forestal), established by the Forestry Law and linked
to payment for ecosystem services. In line with the
‘Peace with Nature’ initiative, promoted by President
Oscar Arias Sánchez, Costa Rica has pledged to
become a carbon neutral country by 2021.

Water resources management: National
strategy and water policy
Costa Rica’s national strategy has the overarching aims
of boosting economic development and increasing
human welfare, in harmony with the environment
(MINAET, 2008b). Integrated water resources
management (IWRM) is central to this strategy. As a
result, the State has established a number of guiding
principles for water policy that identify water as a public
good, and access to drinking water as a human right
under the constitution. Other important issues identiﬁed
by the strategy document include the equitable use of
water resources, the improvement of water infrastructure
and the application of technology to improve the
efficiency of water use and curb water pollution. It also
highlights the importance of the economic valuation of
water, the promotion of integrated, decentralized, and
participatory basin management programmes, and the
protection of water resources for human well-being and
the protection of ecosystems.
The National Water Policy seeks to harmonize the
priorities of economic growth, poverty reduction
and nature conservation through IWRM, the aim
being to ensure that both water quantity and quality
meet the demands of sustainable national growth
(MINAET, 2009). In terms of national water security,
the policy has six strategic priorities: increasing the
competitiveness of domestic industry, promoting
holistic water management, ensuring the sustainable
use of water resources, creating a water culture,
mitigating the effects of climate change, and involving
public participation in decision-making processes.
There are a number of institutions involved in
implementing and overseeing the National Water

856

CHAPTER 50

Policy. MINAET is the lead agency responsible for
implementing the 1942 Water Law. The Water Board
(Dirección de Agua) and the National Register of
Concessions are other national bodies that support
MINAET’s efforts through promoting the rational use
of water resources and centralizing inquiries for water
abstraction. The National Service of Groundwater,
Irrigation and Drainage (Servicio Nacional de Aguas
Subterráneas, Riego y Avenamiento) is a public agency
that promotes sustainable agricultural development
through efficient management and the use of surface
water and groundwater. The Costa Rican Water and
Sewer Institute (Instituto Costarricense de Acueductos
y Alcantarillados) provides drinking water and
sanitation services in both urban and rural settlements.
The Institute also aims to conserve river basins and
to reduce water pollution. The Costa Rican Institute
of Electricity (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad)
is the main operator providing electricity and
telecommunications services.
In terms of a legal framework, the Water Law, which
has been relied on to regulate all aspects of water use
is outdated. The reality is that in a time of increasing
demand for water and growing competition among
different sectors for the resource, it no longer provides
sufficient means to manage and protect the country's
water resources. In recognition of this, MINAET is
drafting a water bill to modernize the current water
management policy.

Poverty, access to water supply and
sanitation services
According to the 2010 National Household Survey (INEC,
2010) approximately 21% of Costa Rica's population lives
in poverty, while 6% face extreme poverty every day.
The incidence of poverty in rural areas is signiﬁcantly
higher at 26.3% than in urban areas at 18.3%. There is a
marked difference also in terms of gender equality, with
the number of men in work signiﬁcantly higher than the
number of women (71.4% and 39.4%, respectively). This
illustrates the greater difficulty that women face in the
labour market and in gaining access to employment.
In general, 99% of the population has access to safe
drinking water (2009), almost all of which is piped
to their premises. In rural areas, the rate of access is
92%. Access to improved sanitation is equally high
at 95%. However, only 40% of the urban population
and 4% of rural dwellers are served by the sanitation
infrastructure (WHO/UNICEF, 2010).

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

Protection of Environment and Biodiversity
Costa Rica, in spite of its small size, accounts for
approximately 6% of the world’s biodiversity. That is
because of its geographical location and its varying
landscape, which ranges from islands and beaches to
rainforests (Embassy of Costa Rica, n.d.). Since the
middle of the last century, Costa Rica has developed
an extensive network of protected areas, totalling
approximately 26% of its land surface. Cocos Island
and La Amistad, for example, are two renowned
national parks which have received international
recognition as UNESCO World Heritage Sites.
Costa Rica, as a signatory to 45 international
environmental treaties, has also enacted a number of
regulatory instruments such as the Organic Law, drawn
up by the Ministry of Environment and Energy (1993),
the Environment Law (1995), and the Forestry Law
(1996). The Biodiversity Act (1998) deals speciﬁcally
with the protection of biodiversity and endangered
species. The National System of Conservation Areas,
which operates within the MINAET, is responsible
for promoting the conservation of biodiversity and
the sustainable use of forests, mangroves, wetlands,
and forest plantations (Embassy of Costa Rica, n.d.).
In addition, the National Biodiversity Institute was
established in 1989 as a private, not-for-proﬁt,
organization to carry out monitoring and research.
Its key aims are the establishment of a biodiversity
inventory, the promotion of conservation activities, and

the provision of data which inform decision-making
in relation to the protection and sustainable use of
biodiversity.
Costa Rica has pioneered the use of ‘payment for
environmental services’, by establishing a countrywide
mechanism –locally known as Pago de Servicios
Ambientales – to charge users for the environmental
services they receive. In spite of initial difficulties
caused by the reluctance of service users to pay for
conservation, the programme is now well established
within Costa Rica and widely perceived as successful
(Pagiola, 2006).
In line with the Peace with Nature initiative, which aims
to make Costa Rica carbon neutral by 2021, 93.6% of
electricity is generated using renewable sources of
energy, notably hydropower. Similarly, the 2007–2021
strategic plan developed by the Costa Rican Institute
of Electricity (Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad)
foresees further development of hydropower through
the construction of dams with the minimum possible
environmental impact, and the use of alternative
sources of power such as wave, wind and geothermal
energy. This plan will require an investment of
US$1.4 billion (2005 US$ reference).
However, the other side of the coin is that population
growth, the expansion of urban settlements, industrial
development and the intensiﬁcation of agricultural

BOX 50.1
Potential implications of climate change on agriculture
In 2008, approximately 20% of cultivated land in Costa Rica was irrigated. A vulnerability study has been conducted in the
three most important river basins, the Reventazón, the Grande de Terraba and the Grande de Tárcoles, using climate scenarios in which temperatures increase by 1°C to 2°C, with changes in precipitation of ±15% on the Paciﬁc side and ±10% on the
Atlantic side. Results predict that marked variations in water ﬂow will occur in these areas, which will affect agriculture especially during the transition between the dry season and the rainy season.
There is also expected to be an increase in ﬂoods, which will have a direct impact on irrigation systems and lead to more soil
erosion. At the same time, there will be an increase in the frequency of droughts in some parts of the country, leading to less
water for irrigation.
According to an analysis of the vulnerability of water resources to climate change, the country’s most vulnerable regions
are those where most land is used for agriculture, or areas where there is conﬂicting land use. In 2009, Costa Rica’s Second
National Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change examined several adaptation
measures concerning water resources. These included the following: water storage facilities, the protection of aquifers, the
monitoring of water resources, water rationing and projects aimed at increasing water efficiency in irrigation.
Source: Modiﬁed from the World Bank (2009).

WWDR4

COSTA RICA

857

activities, including livestock production, have all led to
an increase in the amount of contaminants. These range
from industrial, agricultural, and solid waste, to agrochemicals and sewage, and they are being discharged
into Costa Rica’s water bodies. Nationwide, only 3.6% of
sewage is treated. Consequently, many streams, rivers,
and aquifers are polluted to varying degrees.

and curbing pollution, are some of the issues that now
require further attention at national level.

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References

An example of this complex and growing problem is
the Tárcoles River basin, which is home to 51% of the
population and 85% of the country’s industries. Severe
pollution in the major rivers of this basin and in some
tributaries of the Virilla River (such as the María Aguilar,
the Torres and the Tiribí rivers) has considerably limited
water availability in the most economically developed
region of the country. While this is an impediment to
sustainable development, it also raises serious health
and environmental concerns (GWP, 2011).

Conclusions
Costa Rica, with average annual water availability of
24,000 m3 per capita, is well endowed in terms of
water resources. While rainfall is abundant, seasonal
shortages in surface water have prompted the
widespread exploitation of aquifers. However, greater
use of water in all sectors, combined with increasing
population density, has led to the contamination of
rivers and some aquifers, such as those in the Central
Valley, where more than half the population lives.
On the positive side, Costa Rica is the ﬁrst country
in the world which has pledged to become carbon
neutral by 2021. This aspiration goes hand in hand with
the efforts to protect the country’s rich biodiversity
and environment. Almost 94% of electricity production
already comes from renewable resources, and the
government aims to promote further diversiﬁcation
into renewable forms of energy such as wave, wind
and solar power, in addition to hydroelectricity.
Costa Rica is also a pioneer in Latin America in terms
of the implementation of Payment for Ecosystem
Services, which, in turn, generates national funds for
climate change adaptation. The major challenges are to
update the obsolete Water Law, improve legislation and
mechanisms that deal with extreme events, and reduce
poverty. Enhancing hydrometeorological information
by extending research and monitoring activities to
all the river basins, ensuring the sustainable use of
groundwater resources, extending sanitation coverage,

858

CHAPTER 50

Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the Costa Rica Case
Study Report, Informe de Recursos Hídricos de Costa
Rica (Recopilación), prepared in 2011 by the Costa
Rica IHP National Committee, the National Institute of
Statistics, and the Costa Rican Institute of Electricity
(forthcoming).
Arenal.net. n.d. Volcanoes of Costa Rica. http://www.arenal.
net/costa-rica-volcanoes.htm (Accessed 13 August 2011.)
Embassy of Costa Rica, United States. n.d. Environment.
Washington DC, Embassy of Costa Rica. http://www.
costarica-embassy.org/?q=node/12
FAO–Aquastat. 2011. Sistema de Información sobre el Uso
del Agua en la Agricultura y el Medio Rural de la FAO. FAO
Country Proﬁle. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/
countries_regions/costa_rica/indexesp.stm (Accessed
13 August 2011.)
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2011. Situación de los
recursos hídricos en Centroamérica: hacia una gestión
integrada. Tegucigalpa, Honduras, GWP.
INEC (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos). 2010.
Encuesta Nacional de Hogares : Cifras básicas sobre fuerza
de trabajo, pobreza e ingresos de los hogares, julio 2010.
San José, Costa Rica, INEC.
MINAET (Ministerio de Ambiente, Energía y
Telecomunicaciones Costa Rica). 2008a. Elaboración de
Balances Hídricos por cuencas hidrográﬁcas y propuesta de
modernización de las redes de medición en Costa Rica. San
José, Costa Rica, MINAET.
––––. 2008b. Plan Nacional de Gestión Integrada de
los Recursos Hídricos. San José, Costa Rica, MINAET.
http://www.gwpcentroamerica.org/uploaded/content/
event/1814341097.pdf (Accessed 26 November 2011.)
––––. 2009. Política Hídrica Nacional. San José, Costa
Rica, MINAET. http://www.drh.go.cr/textos/balance/
politicahidrica_30nov09.pdf
MINAET/IMN (Instituto Meteorológico Nacional). 2009.
Segunda Comunicación Nacional, a la convención marco
de las naciones unidas sobre cambio climático. San José,
Costa Rica, MINAETand IMN. http://unfccc.int/resource/
docs/natc/cornc2.pdf (Accessed 14 August 2011.)

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

Mora Valverde, M. n.d. Estructura socio-productiva y su
relación con el Ordenamiento urbano. San José, Costa Rica,
URBANO and Universidad de Costa Rica Observatorio
del Desarrollo. http://www.odd.ucr.ac.cr/phocadownload/
estructura-socioproductiva-y-su-relacion-con-el-ordeurbano.pdf (Accessed 14 August 2011.)
Pagiola, S. 2006. Payments for Environmental Services in
Costa Rica. Washington DC, World Bank. http://www.oired.
vt.edu/sanremcrsp/documents/research-themes/pes/
PESCostaRica.pdf.
SEPSA (Secretaría Ejecutiva de Planiﬁcación Sectorial
Agropecuaria). 2009. Boletín Estadístico Agropecuario 19.
San José, Costa Rica, SEPSA.

WWDR4

UNESCO IHP (United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc
and Cultural Organization, International Hydrological
Programme). 2007. Balance hídrico superﬁcial de Costa
Rica. Período: 1970–2002. Documentos Técnicos del PHILAC, No. 10. Montevideo, Uruguay, UNESCO IHP.
WHO/UNICEF (World Health Organization/United Nations
Children’s Fund). 2010. Costa Rica country proﬁle.
Estimates for the Use of Improved Sanitation Facilities.
Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and
Sanitation (JMP). http://www.wssinfo.org/ﬁleadmin/user_
upload/resources/CRI_san.pdf (Accessed 3 October 2011.)
World Bank. 2009. Costa Rica Country Note on Climate
Change Aspects in Agriculture, 2009. Washington DC,
World Bank. http://tiny.cc/gqr2f (Accessed 14 August
2011.)

COSTA RICA

859

CHAPTER 51
Lerma–Chapala basin, Mexico

—
Acknowledgements Gerencia de Ingeniería y Normas Técnicas
(Subdirección General Técnica), Comisión Nacional del Agua
- Mario López Pérez, Colin Herron, Mestre Rodríguez

© CONAGUA, Lerma-Santiago-Paciﬁc River Basin Organization

Location and general characteristics
The Lerma River is the longest inland watercourse
in the United Mexican States (Mexico from here on).
It rises at about 3,800 m above sea level in western
central Mexico. After covering a distance of 750 km,
the Lerma ﬂows into Lake Chapala (1,510 m above
sea level), which is the largest natural lake in Mexico.
The entire Lerma–Chapala basin is located in a high
altitude area with mountain chains and extensive
valleys. It covers a total area of 54,451 km2 and
includes portions of ﬁve States: Mexico, Queretaro,
Michoacán, Guanajuato and Jalisco.

represents almost 25% of the basin’s contribution
to the national economy. The automobile industry
is particularly advanced, with 50% of the country’s
automobile production located here. Economic activity
is concentrated in speciﬁc cities such as Leon, Silao,
Toluca, Queretaro, Morelia, Irapuato, Salamanca and
Celaya. As a result, more than 50% of the basin’s total
value-added production takes place in just seven of its
127 municipalities.

Water resources availability and their use

Overall, the climate in the basin is warm. However, it
ranges from semi-hot and humid in the central and
southern areas, to dry and temperate in the northern
areas. The winters are relatively cold, and the summers
are semi-humid. Depending on the location, rainfall
varies from around 270 mm to more than 1,000 mm
per year, with 825 mm being the average. Most rainfall
occurs in the high plateaus and peaks between April
and early October, with the second half of the season
(from mid-June until mid-October) usually bringing
the heaviest rainfall.

Compared to other river basins in Mexico, the Lerma–
Chapala basin is not rich in terms of water resources.
The Lerma River has average annual water potential
of 4.9 billion m3. During the dry season, which extends
from early November until mid-May, it becomes a
shallow river with a modest ﬂow. Lake Chapala itself is
a shallow tropical lake, with mean depths of 7.2 m, and
never deeper than 18 m along its 1150 km2 inﬂuence
area. The lake is the most important water source for
the Guadalajara Metropolitan Area, providing almost
75% of its water supply. Its water level drops rapidly in
response to over-use of water, and recharges rapidly in
the rainy season.

The Lerma–Chapala basin is home to approximately 10
million people. In 2005, population density in the basin
was roughly four times the national average. In terms
of productivity, the basin generated 11.5% of Mexico’s
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2009. Industry

There are 40 aquifers in the basin, with a combined
annual renewable capacity of 4.1 billion m3.
Groundwater is a crucial resource in the basin and is
used heavily. In 2004, for example, 79.3% of all water
rights in the Lerma–Chapala basin were granted in

MAP 51.1
Lerma–Chapala basin
MEXICO

GUANA
GUAN
GUANAJUAT
GUANAJUATO
G
UAN
ANAJ
A
NAJU
AJ
A
JUATO
J
UATO

Tu

JALISC
JALI
JALIS
J
AL
ALIS
LISCO
LIS
L
IS
IS
SCO
CO

rbi

o

Leon

Dam
National park
City
State Boundary

WWDR4

rma

L erma

Lake
Yuriria
m

ro

r

Hydroelectric
power plant

Salamanca

QUE
QU
Q
UE
UE
ERTAR
ER
RTARO
RTAR
TARO
O
Querétaro

Tig

Le

Ramsar site

Ocotlan a
m
L er
Lake
D
Chapala
ue

do

Le

Basin

ora

L aja

Col

Le

Lake
Cuitzeo

Lake
Patzcuaro

40

a

Le

r ma

Toluca

MICHOACÁ
MIC
M
MICHOACÁN
IICH
CH
C
HOACÁ
ÁN
N
20

rm

ME
MEX
ME
EX
XIIICO
XICO
X
CO
O

Patzcuaro
0

re

a

60

80 km

LERMA–CHAPALA BASIN, MEXICO

861

relation to groundwater resources. Because of this
substantial use of aquifers, overdrafting has been a
concern since the early 1970s. Today, about 70% of
aquifers in the basin, most notably in Guanajuato,
are being pushed beyond their sustainable limits. In
fact, since the 1980s, water demand has commonly
exceeded availability almost every year. Overall, total
annual abstraction exceeds recharge by approximately
1.3 billion m3 (2011). When this is combined with waterquality degradation and immigration, it is clear that the
current water availability per person, which stood at
932 m3 in 2010, is likely to worsen.
The basin boasts the highest rate of agricultural land
use in Mexico, thanks to a combination of fertile
soil and favourable climatic conditions. In 2000,
approximately 30,000 km2 of land (56% of the basin)
was allocated to agriculture. Rainfed agriculture is
most common, practised over 41% of the basin, while
the rest of the cultivated land (15%) is irrigated. Maize
and sorghum are the main crops and are planted on
65% of the agricultural land. Water demand from
this sector accounts for roughly 80% of all water
abstraction, whereas the sector’s contribution to GDP
is around 5%. By comparison, water demand from
industry accounts for less than 4% of overall water use,
while the sector generates around 23% of the basin’s
GDP (2009).
To improve water efficiency in all sectors, water
tariffs have been increased to reﬂect more accurately
the real cost of service provision and maintenance.
Between 1989 and 1994, the price of irrigation
water increased ten-fold. In addition subsidies were
offered favouring farm investments that led to more
efficient water use. Unfortunately, public interest is
waning because the pay-out is seen as insufficient,
and in some areas, tariffs are still well below real
costs. Furthermore, because the water revenue goes
straight to the Mexican Federal Treasury, and regions
do not beneﬁt directly, people’s willingness to pay
remains limited. Consequently, there is an immediate
need to deﬁne appropriate mechanisms for the
redistribution of water revenue.

Climate change and water-related disasters
Since the early 1920s, there has been a gradual
increase in the difference between mean summer
temperatures and mean winter temperatures – or, in
other words, warmer summers and colder winters.

862

CHAPTER 51

Such trends can be seen clearly between 1985 and
2010, when average temperatures rose by almost
2°C in spring and summer, and dropped by a similar
average in winter.
Rainfall patterns also indicate a movement towards
extremes: less precipitation during the dry season,
with more violent storms; and greater surface run-off
in the wet season. Overall, in the 40-year period up to
2010, annual rainfall and surface run-off has decreased
by some 3.6%. Since the 1900s, analysis of long-term
rainfall data indicates a series of alternating wet and
dry periods, each lasting several years. Droughts occur
in the basin almost every decade and may last up to
ﬁve years or more. The most recent drought, which
lasted for 10 years from 1993 until 2003, is a notable
example. In 2002, the water level in Lake Chapala
dropped to 14% of its capacity, the second-lowest
level recorded since data collection began in 1934.
The worst droughts usually occur in the northern subbasins where the climate is drier.
Greater climatic variations have affected the opposite
end of the spectrum too, leading to more frequent
ﬂoods. Heavy rainfall (deﬁned as 20% or more above
the monthly or yearly average), of an intensity that
leads to ﬂooding disasters, typically returns every
three to six years. The probability of ﬂoods is higher in
the southern part of the basin; however, such events
also affect the central and western portions of the
basin, with considerable damage to urban settlements,
industry and farmland.
Over 500 dams and reservoirs in the basin provide
structural safeguards against water-related natural
disasters. However, increasing vulnerability, speciﬁcally
to ﬂoods, calls for the adoption of a basin-wide
integrated strategic plan that combines both legislative
and engineering measures.

Water and settlements: Health issues
and poverty
The Lerma–Chapala basin is highly urbanized and an
estimated 77% of the population is concentrated in
its cities. In addition, the water resources of the basin
are used not only by the 10 million inhabitants of the
basin area itself, but also by an additional 5.5 million
people living outside the basin in the metropolitan
areas of Mexico City and Guadalajara. Total annual
water demand is around 1.1 billion m3. Of this, 73% is

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

supplied from groundwater resources. The water tariff
in the basin ranges from US$0.04 to US$0.12, the
average being US$0.09. Tariff systems are designed
to beneﬁt the poor and marginalized groups, and,
as a result, charges for low water consumption are
relatively insigniﬁcant. Overall, collected fees cover
only around 50% of operating costs.
Water-related diseases have been on the decline
since the early 1930s. At the same time, the 1991
Clean Water Act required local water utilities to meet
national water quality standards. Consequently,
morbidity and mortality caused by water-related
diseases are nowadays practically negligible. However,
problems do persist in remote rural areas, which often
also suffer from low incomes, low level of education,
poor infrastructure, and water scarcity. Approximately
1.5 million basin inhabitants live below the national
poverty line (2008), and the global ﬁnancial crisis is
expected to add to this problem. However, extreme
poverty and famine are non-existent in the basin.

Environment, ecosystems and water quality
Mexico is very rich in terms of plant species, animals,
and micro-organisms. The region in which the Lerma–
Chapala basin is located fosters a wide diversity of
ﬂora and fauna thanks to the varying landscape, with
its mountains, lakes, the extensive marshes of the
Toluca Valley, and the Lerma River itself. Overall, there
are over 7,000 species of ﬂora and fauna in the Lerma–
Chapala basin, including more than 800 species of
mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and ﬁsh. The
basin is particularly distinctive in its freshwater ﬁsh
endemism, as 30 of the 42 species of ﬁsh found here
are unique. In addition, according to the National
Ecology Institute of Mexico, 988 plant species found
here have value either from an economic or from an
ecological point of view.
There are 12 protected areas, including the Monarch
Butterﬂy Sanctuary in Michoacán, the Nevado de
Toluca area in the State of Mexico, and the Sierra
Gorda in Queretaro, listed as Common Heritage of
Mankind. Unfortunately, changes in land use patterns
stemming from urbanization, as well as agricultural
and industrial development, have put increasing
pressure on this environment and its ecosystems. For
example, untreated effluent has caused serious local
and regional pollution in the basin. By 1989, most
of the rivers in the basin were polluted, and 90%
of the reservoir of Chapala Lake was unsuitable for

WWDR4

drinking or for breeding ﬁsh. Groundwater quality
also changed dramatically, with several aquifers
affected by contamination from urban settlements
and industrial zones. Given this critical situation, the
federal government and the ﬁve state governments in
the river basin signed an agreement in 1989 with four
main objectives: formulation of a new water allocation
policy, treatment of raw municipal and industrial
effluents to improve water quality, increased efficiency
in the way water is used, and the protection and
conservation of the water resources of the basin. In line
with this agreement, the ﬁrst phase of the Regional
Water Treatment Plan was put into effect, with the aim
of constructing 48 new treatment plants for municipal
wastewater. In 1993, the second phase of the Plan was
agreed by the Lerma–Chapala River Basin Council,
with the aim of enlarging those treatment plants and
allowing them to treat 10,835 l/s of effluent. Taking
those two stages together, the aim was that about
80% of all municipal wastewater would be treated.
The ﬁrst phase was started during the 1990s and
continued during the ﬁrst decade of the millennium.
However, most of the programme has not been
implemented yet. The second phase is facing ﬁnancial
difficulties. In general, the basin has the largest water
treatment capacity in the region and since the 1990s,
new treatment facilities and technical improvements
have been introduced. While there is progress, and
water quality has improved in the basin overall, the
four objectives of the 1989 agreement have yet to be
accomplished. This slow progress has been attributed
to poor enforcement of laws, lack of political support,
inadequate ﬁnancing, the lack of a water culture based
on the ‘polluter pays’ principle, and a lack of awareness
in society about the importance of water.
Another environmental problem that affects 36%
of the basin is soil degradation, including loss
of fertility and erosion. The former is the more
critical as it has an impact on 26% of the basin
area – with serious consequences for agricultural
production. Unfortunately, there are no large-scale
soil conservation projects or capacity building
programmes for farmers to address these problems.

Water resources management
and legislation
In Mexico, water is the property of the nation and
its management is the responsibility of the federal
government. Article 27 of the Constitution sets out the

LERMA–CHAPALA BASIN, MEXICO

863

main guidelines for water resources management and
land resources management. A federal water law, derived
from this article, was enacted during the 1960s. This was
followed by the National Water Plan in 1975. In 1989,
the National Water Commission (Comisión Nacional del
Agua - CONAGUA) was established as the federal water
authority responsible for overall planning, management
and the development of national water resources. Its
broad responsibilities included the allocation of water
among its users, the collection of water tariffs, and the
planning, construction, and operation of hydraulic works.

the establishment of a water rights system and the
creation of a public registry enabling users to buy
and sell water rights (Arreguín-Cortés et al., 2007).
The National Water Law also provided the legal
foundation for the creation of river basin councils
(RBCs) as coordinating agencies. As of 2010, 26
RBCs were established. Being at the forefront of the
national water resources development agenda, the
ﬁrst basin council in Lerma–Chapala was created as
early as 1993, bringing water users from different
sectors together. Today, its composition is much larger,
with representatives of federal, state and municipal
government, water user associations and social
organizations (Box 51.1).

In 1992, the National Water Law was enacted to
improve water management. One notable aspect was

BOX 51.1
The Lerma–Chapala River Basin Council
River basin councils in Mexico derive their legitimacy from the National Water Law. They have the sustainable and integrated
management and protection of water resources as their ultimate target. The Lerma–Chapala River Basin Council, one of 26
river basin councils in Mexico, coordinates action among government institutions and stakeholders. To accomplish this goal,
it brings together government officials, water users and representatives of NGOs. By deﬁnition, the council is a consultative
body that can propose programmes for implementation and speciﬁc actions to address challenges, and survey their performance. It is also entitled to intervene to conciliate problems between users and to recommend speciﬁc actions to CONAGUA,
though it is not entitled to make decisions.
The Lerma–Chapala River Basin Council is neither a regulatory body nor a service provider. It is a forum within which stakeholders can meet one another, and meet government officials, to examine complaints, search for solutions, raise issues, and
promote projects of varying scope. In summary, the council is a mechanism for identifying problems and dealing with competition and conﬂicts.

*
Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources (Secretaría de Medio
Ambiente y Recursos Naturales
– SEMARNAT)

Lerma-Chapala River Basin Council Composition. 2008

Steering comittee
đƫƫ.!/% !*0
đƫƫ!$*%(ƫ!.!0.5

Federal Government
Representatives*
SEMARNAT, SHCP, SEDESOL,
SENER, SE, SALUD, SAGARPA

Representatives of State and
Municipal Governments
Not more than 35%
Guanajuato, Jalisco, Mexico,
Michoacan and Queretaro

Functional
Body

Water Users and Civil Society
Representatives
At least 50% Agriculture, other
Agricultural Farming activities, Power Generation, Industry,
Livestock, Urban Public Services

Ministry of Finance and Public Credit
(Secretaria de Hacienda y Crédito
Público - SHCP)
Ministry of Social Development
(Secretaria de Desarrollo Social
- SEDESOL)
Ministry of Energy (Secretaría de
Energía - SENER)
Ministry of Economy (Secretaria de
Economía - SE)
Ministry of Health (Secretaria de
Salud - SALUD)

Basin Committees,
Watershed
Committees and
COTAS*

Operation
management

Basin Council
Operation and
Monitoring Committee

General Water Users
and Civil Society
Assembly

Subsidiary
work bodies
Specialized groups

Functional
Bodies

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Rural Development, Fisheries and
Food (Secretaria de Agricultura,
Ganadería, Desarrollo Rural, Pesca y
Alimentación - SAGARPA)
Technical Groundwater Committee
(Comité Técnico de Aguas
Subterráneas – COTAS)

Subregional and state users' committees per water use

864

CHAPTER 51

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

In 1994, CONAGUA became a part of the Environment,
Natural Resources, and Fishing Secretariat, which
had the aim of intensifying national efforts towards
sustainable development. In 2000, this became
the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
(Tortajada, 2005). In 2004, the National Water Law
was revised so that water rights, and their transmission
from one user to another, could be identiﬁed and
tracked more easily. The same revision introduced
integrated water resources management (IWRM)
with a conﬂict resolution dimension. The reform also
allowed for the creation of river basin organizations
(which are regional administrative branches of
CONAGUA) and bolstered the role of river basin
councils as autonomous consultative bodies. However,
in spite of continuing efforts, a centralized (top-down)
management approach still prevails. This calls for
further emphasis on the promotion of IWRM.

use – allowing holistic and effective management of
the basin’s limited resources. Consequently, tough
measures that regulate water resources demand and
improve the efficiency of water use and reuse are
essential, and are gradually and successfully being
implemented.

Conclusions

Arreguín-Cortés, F. and López-Pérez, M. 2007. An Overview
of Mexico’s Water Regime and the Role of Groundwater:
Proceedings of a Workshop on Sustainable Management
of Groundwater in Mexico. Science and Technology for
Sustainability Program. Mexico City, CONAGUA (National
Water Commission, Mexico).

The Lerma–Chapala basin has experienced strong
demographic and economic growth, with a high
increase in water demand. Unfortunately, that
demand has now reached the point at which it has
surpassed the current limit of renewable water
resources availability. While increasing water efficiency
in all sectors is desirable, reducing agricultural
water consumption from its current level of 80% of
all water abstracted is a necessity for sustainable
development in the basin. Worsening pollution load
has led to degradation of the environment and of
water resources. Efforts to augment the capacity
of wastewater treatment plants have helped to
improve water quality and environmental conditions.
However, the Regional Water Treatment Plan, which
was initially introduced in the early 1990s, has yet
to be implemented fully. Poor enforcement of laws,
mainly stemming from lack of political support and
inadequate ﬁnancing, is an important dimension of
continuing pollution. The revised National Water Law
is an important milestone because it clearly introduces
the integrated water resources management (IWRM)
approach. On the other hand, central management of
water resources continues to operate in parallel. For
that reason, the ongoing process of strengthening
the roles of river basin organizations and river
basin councils constitutes a strategic priority both
nationally and locally. At the basin level, successful
implementation of IWRM is crucial because it is the
ﬁrst step to minimizing the negative effects of climatic
variability, and stopping unsustainable levels of water

WWDR4

ıııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııııı
References
Except where otherwise noted, information in this
concise summary is adapted from the 2011, Lerma–
Chapala Basin Case Study: A Fruitful Sustainable Water
Management Experience. Mexico City, CONAGUA
(National Water Commission, Mexico) (forthcoming).

Tortajada, C. 2005. River basin management approaches
in Mexico. VertigO - la revue électronique en sciences
de l’environnement, special issue. http://vertigo.revues.
org/1927. (Accessed 10 November 2011.)

LERMA–CHAPALA BASIN, MEXICO

865

BOXES, TABLES, FIGURES AND MAPS

BOXES
37.1 Agriculture and food security
38.1 Payment for ecosystem services
39.1 A new era in conservational thinking
41.1 Drought’s heavy toll on Australia
42.1 Sediment management strategies in the Yellow River basin
43.1 Management tools against extreme events
44.1 The 2010 Flood in Pakistan
46.1 The use of renewable energy in the MPM
47.1 Developing knowledge and capacity: Irrinet and Irrinet plus
48.1 The Water Law and the river basin district administrations
50.1 Potential implications of climate change on agriculture
51.1 The Lerma–Chapala River Basin Council

782
790
796
807
812
818
824
833
838
845
857
864

TABLES
38.1 Water use by sector in the Mara River basin (2006)
38.2 Rate of access to water resources in the Mara River basin
38.3 Rate of access to sanitation facilities in the Mara River basin
41.1 Average surface water use
42.1 GDP of provinces in the Yellow River basin (2006)
43.1 Groundwater development and use in Jeju Island
43.2 Access to improved water supply in Jeju Province
45.1 Basic characteristics of major river basins in the Czech Republic
47.1 Extent of regions and distribution of the Tiber River basin
47.2 Basic regional statistics about agricultural land use (2007)
47.3 Contribution of various sectors to GDP at the national, Central Apennines District and Tiber River basin levels
49.1 Annual water use by category in the St Johns River basin, 2010

787
789
789
805
811
815
818
827
837
837
837
849

FIGURES
40.1 Fluctuation in water resources availability between 1945 and 2010
41.1 Total system inﬂows, surface water use and dam storage capacity in the Murray-Darling basin
43.1 Trend in annual damage and casualties by water-related disasters
45.1 Surface water abstraction in the Czech Republic between 1980 and 2009
46.1 Evolution of water consumption in the MPM from 1995 to 2009

800
805
817
828
833

MAPS
37.1
38.1
39.1
41.1
42.1
43.1
44.1
45.1
46.1
47.1
48.1
49.1
50.1
51.1

866

Regional distribution of the case studies
Ghana
Mara River basin
Jordan River basin
Murray–Darling basin
Yellow River basin
Jeju Island
Indus River basin
Czech Republic
Marseille Provence Métropole Urban Community
Tiber River basin and Central Apennines District
Tagus River basin
St Johns River basin
Costa Rica
Lerma–Chapala basin

iv
780
787
793
804
810
815
821
827
831
836
843
848
854
861

FACING THE CHALLENGES

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted by UNESCO and brings together the
work of 28 UN-Water members and partners in the triennial World Water Development Report (WWDR).
This ﬂagship report is a comprehensive review that gives an overall picture of the world’s freshwater resources. It
analyses pressures from decisions that drive demand for water and affect its availability. It offers tools and response
options to help leaders in government, the private sector and civil society address current and future challenges. It
suggests ways in which institutions can be reformed and their behaviour modiﬁed, and explores possible sources of
ﬁnancing for the urgently needed investment in water.
The WWDR4 is a milestone within the WWDR series, reporting directly on regions and highlighting hotspots, and it
has been mainstreamed for gender equality. It introduces a thematic approach – ‘Managing Water under Uncertainty
and Risk’ – in the context of a world which is changing faster than ever in often unforeseeable ways, with increasing
uncertainties and risks. It highlights that historical experience will no longer be sufficient to approximate the
relationship between the quantities of available water and shifting future demands. Like the earlier editions, the
WWDR4 also contains country-level case studies describing the progress made in meeting water-related objectives.
The WWDR4 also seeks to show that water has a central role in all aspects of economic development and social
welfare, and that concerted action via a collective approach of the water-using sectors is needed to ensure water’s
many beneﬁts are maximized and shared equitably and that water-related development goals are achieved.
—
UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for all freshwater related issues. It was
formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. It currently counts 29 UN
Members and 25 other international Partners. UN-Water complements and adds value to existing UN initiatives by
facilitating synergies and joint efforts among the implementing agencies. See www.unwater.org

9 789231 042355

