WIPO Economics & Statistics Series

2013
World Intellectual Property Report
Brands – Reputation and Image in the Global Marketplace

WIPO Economics & Statistics Series

2013
World Intellectual Property Report
Brands – Reputation and Image in the Global Marketplace

FOREWORD

FOREWORD

FOREWORD
Brands pervade everyday life. They are an indispensable

Second, the Report takes a closer look at the trademark

guide for consumers and a means for companies to build

system, reviewing the foundations of why governments

a reputation and an image in the marketplace. A prod-

protect trademarks, and how key features of trademark

uct’s brand appeal can be as important for determining

laws and institutions determine competitive outcomes.

competitive success as its quality or price tag. In short, a

One of the central messages emerging from this dis-

recognized brand is among the most valuable intangible

cussion is that the design of the trademark registration

assets a company can own.

process shapes how companies use the trademark
system. Policymakers are well advised to promote an

From its humble beginning as an identifier of origin,

institutional framework that carefully balances the inter-

branding has evolved into a sophisticated business tool

ests of applicants, third parties, and the public at large.

employing professionals as diverse as data analysts, lawyers, linguists, graphic artists, psychologists and celebrity

Finally, the Report explores how branding affects market

actors. Companies in all economic sectors – whether

competition and innovation. It shows that companies

small or large, in more developed or less developed

which invest heavily in branding are also often highly

economies – rely on brands when they commercialize

innovative. Indeed, branding can be an important com-

their goods and services. Trademarks – the legal incar-

plement to product innovation. By generating demand

nation of brands – are by far the most widely used form

and willingness to pay, branding enables firms to profit

of registered intellectual property (IP).

from investing in technology and design. Branding thus
emerges as an important element of a vibrant innova-

Despite this cross-cutting importance, evidence of

tion ecosystem.

how branding and trademark use affect economy-wide
performance is still limited – especially when compared

As always, a report of this nature leaves several ques-

with the large volume of studies carried out on the patent-

tions open. For example, while we hope to have made

innovation nexus. I am therefore pleased that WIPO’s

a contribution towards better measuring investments in

second World Intellectual Property Report explores the

branding, fully capturing all company activities that further

role that brands play in today’s global marketplace. As

a brand’s image and reputation remains a daunting task.

with our first Report, we aim to explain, clarify and offer

In addition, in reviewing institutional approaches towards

fresh insights into the role that the IP system plays in

trademark protection, this Report cannot do full justice

market economies, hoping to facilitate evidence-based

to the rich institutional frameworks that have emerged

policymaking. We do this in three different ways.

in different parts of the world. However, we hope that
this Report lays the foundation for additional research in

First, the Report seeks to set the scene by establishing

this area and we look forward to addressing remaining

how branding behavior and trademark use have evolved in

knowledge gaps in our future work and in our continuous

recent history, and how they differ across countries. It re-

dialogue with Member States.

thinks how branding investments of firms should be measured and capitalized as an intangible asset, and presents
new estimates of the magnitude and growth of such investments. It also explores what lies behind the rapid growth
in the number of trademark filings worldwide. Finally, it
takes a look at markets for brands; while few data are
available to capture their size and growth, it is nonetheless
clear that they constitute an increasingly important instru-

Francis GURRY

ment for companies to broaden the reach of their brands.

Director General
3

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This Report was developed under the general direction of

The Report team benefitted greatly from external reviews

Francis Gurry (Director General). It was prepared and co-

of the draft chapters from Tony Clayton, Stuart Graham,

ordinated by a team led by Carsten Fink (Chief Economist)

Damien Neven, and Nathan Wajsman. Additional com-

and comprising Intan Hamdan-Livramento (Economist)

ments and data were provided by Ty Gray, Christine

and Sacha Wunsch-Vincent (Senior Economist), all from

Greenhalgh, V. Kumar, Antonella Liberatore, Tony Lisanti,

WIPO’s Economics and Statistics Division.

Glenn Mac Stravic, Joscelyn Magdeleine, Andreas
Maurer, Christophe Mazenc, Julio Raffo, David Roache-

Sören Simon Petersen in the Economics Section pro- Turner, Elizabeth Webster and Erik Wilbers.
vided background research and made written contributions to Chapter 1.

Thanks also go to Interbrand, Brand Finance and BrandZ
for kindly making available the brand value data pre-

The IP Statistics Section and the Data Development

sented in Chapter 1 and for offering comments.

Section provided much of the data used in this Report,
especially for Chapter 1.

Samiah Do Carmo Figueiredo and Caterina Valles Galmès
provided valuable administrative support.

Marcus Höpperger from the Law and Legislative Advice
Division, Brands and Designs Sector, offered valuable

Finally, gratitude is due to Brenda O’Hanlon for editing the

advice throughout the conceptualization, development,

Report, to the Communications Division for designing the

and drafting of the Report, and he made written contri-

Report, and to the Printing and Publication Production

butions to Chapter 2.

Section for their printing services. All worked hard to
meet tight deadlines.

Background reports were prepared by Atif Ansar, Carol
Corrado, Emmanuelle Fortune, Carl Benedikt Frey,
Georg von Graevenitz, Janet Hao, Christian Helmers,
Laurence Joly, Benjamin Mitra-Kahn, Sridhar Moorthy,
Amanda Myers and Philipp Schautschick. Additional
background analysis and written contributions were
provided by Marina Filgueiras Jorge, Stéphane Lhuillery,
Travis Lybbert, Kazuyuki Motohashi, Sergio Paulino de
Carvalho, Siriporn Pittayasophon and Marcos Segantini.
Giovanni Napolitano and Nuno Pires de Carvalho from
the Intellectual Property and Competition Policy Division
provided helpful input for Chapter 3.

4

DISCLAIMER

TECHNICAL NOTES

DISCLAIMER

TECHNICAL NOTES

This Report and any opinions reflected therein are the

COUNTRY INCOME GROUPS

sole responsibility of the WIPO Secretariat. They do not

This Report relies on the World Bank income classification

purport to reflect the opinions or views of WIPO Member

of 2011 to refer to particular country groups. The clas-

States. The main authors of this Report also wish to

sification is based on gross national income per capita,

exonerate from responsibility for any errors or omissions

and it establishes the following four groups: low-income

those who have contributed to and have commented

economies (USD 1,025 or less); lower middle-income

on the Report.

economies (USD 1,026 to USD 4,035); upper middleincome economies (USD 4,036 to USD 12,475); and

Readers are welcome to use the information provided in

high-income economies (USD 12,476 or more).

this Report, but are requested to cite WIPO as the source.
More information on this classification is available at http://
data.worldbank.org/about/country-classifications.
IP DATA
The majority of the IP data published in this Report
are taken from the WIPO Statistics Database, which is
primarily based on WIPO’s annual IP statistics survey
and data compiled by WIPO in processing international
applications and registrations filed through the Patent
Cooperation Treaty, Madrid, and the Hague systems.
Data are available for download from WIPO’s Statistics
webpage at: www.wipo.int/ipstats/en. WIPO’s annual
World Intellectual Property Indicators, freely available
on the same webpage, provides additional information
on the WIPO Statistics Database.
Every effort has been made to compile IP statistics based
on the same definitions, and to ensure international comparability. The data are collected from IP offices using
WIPO’s harmonized annual IP statistics questionnaires.
However, readers must keep in mind that national laws
and regulations for filing IP applications or for issuing
IP rights, as well as statistical reporting practices, differ
across jurisdictions.
Please note that, due to the continual updating of
missing data and the revision of historical statistics,
data provided in this Report may differ from previously published figures and the data available on
WIPO’s webpage.

5

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Brands are an important aspect of everyday life.

For policymakers, it is important to understand the ways

Consumers have strong preferences for which smart-

in which branding activities interact with the broader

phones offer the best functionality, which airlines provide

economy. Branding investments affect consumer welfare

the best service, which fashion accessories garner the

and, in the long term, can influence the rate of economic

most attention from friends and colleagues. Brands

growth. In addition, governments have some influence on

help consumers to exercise their preferences in the

the branding activities of companies – including through

marketplace. They come with a reputation for quality,

the protection of trademarks. In order to promote con-

functionality, reliability and other attributes, ultimately

sumer choice and maintain vibrant competition in the

enabling consumers to exercise choice in their decision-

marketplace, governments need to assess the effective-

making. Equally important, they come with a certain

ness of existing policies and adapt them in light of the

image – whether for luxury, trendiness or social respon-

evolving needs of the marketplace and new evidence on

sibility – which consumers care about, and which in turn

the behavior of companies and individuals.

influences which goods and services they purchase.
This Report endeavors to make an analytical contribution
For companies, in turn, brands are valuable strategic as-

in this respect. It does so in three ways. First, it sets the

sets and a source of competitive advantage. Accordingly,

scene by describing key trends and patterns of branding

companies have gained rich experience in determining

activity across the globe. Second, it reviews the role of

how their branding choices affect their sales and profits.

trademarks – the form of intellectual property (IP) that pro-

A large volume of academic studies across a variety of

tects the exclusivity of brands – and presents evidence

disciplines offer many insights into successful branding

informing trademark policy choices. Finally, it explores

practices. Numerous specialized consulting firms stand

how branding activities affect market competition and

ready to offer advice – whether on broad questions of

innovation, thus relating branding to broader company

branding strategy or narrow questions of advertising ef-

strategies and industrial organization.

fectiveness.
By comparison, evidence on the economy-wide implications of branding is still limited. For example, how
much do companies invest in branding relative to other
tangible and intangible assets? In which ways are there
markets for brands? How do branding choices affect the
functioning of market competition? Do branding activities
affect the pace of product innovation?

6

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The changing face of Branding
The face of branding has changed throughout history.

Global branding investments
approach half a trillion dollars…

In order to set the scene, Chapter 1 reviews available

Available data on advertising expenditures reveal that

evidence and assembles new data to explore how the

they make up between 0.6 and 1.5 percent of GDP in

economic contribution of brands has shifted and how

most high-income countries, and are growing towards

branding behavior has evolved.

similar levels in fast-growing middle-income economies.

Globalization and technology have
left their mark on branding

Globally, advertising expenditures stand at a level that
is equivalent to about one-third of global research and
development (R&D) expenditures.

While informal forms of branding already played some
role in long-distance cross-border trade during the

However, advertising expenditures only partially portray

Middle Ages, it was the creation of mass markets dur-

the multifaceted nature of modern branding activities.

ing the Industrial Revolution that made branding a core

Ideally, one would like to capture all company expenses

element of economic activity. Overall, three interrelated

which contribute to the goodwill that brands command

trends stand out:

in the marketplace. Using such an approach, the Report
estimates that global branding investments by compa-

• First, globalization and the rise of the Internet have

nies stood at USD 466 billion in 2011. Across countries,

prompted brands to more easily transcend national

branding investments correlate closely with the level of

borders. At the same time, companies in low- and

economic development. Interestingly, however, rapidly

middle-income economies increasingly seek to devel-

growing middle-income economies such as China and

op their own brands – or to acquire them from abroad.

India today invest more in branding than high-income
countries did when they were at a comparable stage

• Second, today, rather than just advertising a product,

of development.

companies work to create and deliver a “brand experience” for the consumer. Companies increasingly

Relative to GDP, branding investments are stable or falling

have to manage not only product quality, but also their

for high-income economies, whereas they are increasing

reputation as good global citizens, paying attention

for low- and middle-income countries and, especially, for

to how socially and environmentally responsible they

China (see Figure 1).

are perceived to be.
• Third, brand communication takes place through
a larger number of more fragmented, frequently
changing and more interactive channels. In addition,
the increasing availability of detailed customer data
harbors the promise of more targeted and thus more
efficient branding strategies.
• Fourth, branding is no longer the purview of companies alone. Increasingly, individuals, civil society
organizations, as well as governmental and intergovernmental organizations are adopting an active
approach to branding.
7

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 1: Branding investments have
grown relative to economic output in
low- and middle- income economics
Branding investments in high- versus low- and middleincome economies, as a percentage of GDP, 1988- 2011

Available data only allow for a more accurate estimate of
branding investments for the United States (US). This estimate points to an overall magnitude of investments that is
more than twice as large as the estimate generated by the

1.00%

less complete approach. In addition, instead of trending

0.90%

downward, branding investments have increased since

0.80%

the 1990s (see Figure 2), and stood at USD 340 billion

0.70%

in 2010. In the period from 1987 to 2011, investments in

0.60%

branding accounted for close to a quarter of all intangible

0.50%

asset investments in the US. Notably, they exceeded

0.40%

investments in R&D and design.

0.30%
0.20%

High-income economies
Middle- and low-income economies

0.00%

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0.10%

Figure 2: Better estimate of branding
investments in the US shows higher
magnitude and positive trend
Components of new metrics for US business branding investment
(top) and US business branding investments versus advertising media
expenditure (bottom), both as a percentage of GDP, 1987-2011

1.2%

3.5%

1.0%

3.0%

In-house

0.8%

Purchased

2.5%

0.6%

2.0%

0.4%
1.5%
0.2%

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

1.0%
0.0%

US
Japan
Eurozone area

UK
China

See Figure 1.6

…although more complete data for the United
States suggest that this is a lower-bound estimate
Due to data limitations, the Report’s estimate of branding
investments worldwide still does not completely capture
all branding activities. In particular, they exclude strategic
marketing, corporate communications and other bought-

0.5%
0.0%
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%
Advertising media expenditure
Brand investment

in services that contribute to brand perception. More
importantly, they also exclude “own-account” brand-

0.5%

ing expenditures.
0.0%

1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

See Figure 1.7
8

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Table 1: Brands account for a considerable share of companies’ market capitalization
Value of the top 10 brands in absolute terms and as a share of companies´ market capitalization, 2013
Interbrand

BrandZ

Company

Brand value
2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Apple

98.3

58.0%

Google

93.3

Coca-Cola

Brand Finance

Company

Brand value
2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Company

Apple

185.1

41%

20.7%

Google

113.7

79.2

39.3%

IBM

112.5

IBM

78.8

26.9%

McDonald’s

90.3

Microsoft

59.6

22.9%

Coca-Cola

78.4

General Electric

47

19.9%

AT&T

75.5

McDonald’s

42

43.9%

Microsoft

Samsung

39.6

35.2%

Intel

37.3

Toyota
Average

Brand value
2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Apple

87.3

19%

39%

Samsung

58.8

32%

56%

Google

52.1

18%

94%

Microsoft

45.5

18%

46%

Wal-Mart

42.3

18%

43%

IBM

37.7

19%

69.8

27%

General Electric

37.2

16%

Marlboro

69.4

NA

Amazon

36.8

27%

20.0%

Visa

56.1

49%

Coca-Cola

34.2

20%

35.4

17.8%

China Mobile

55.4

25%

Verizon

30.7

23%

61

30.5%

91

46.7%

46

21%

See Table 1.1

Some brands offer considerable
value in the marketplace
Private sector estimates of the market value of different

The demand for trademarks has grown
substantially – in absolute terms and in
proportion to economic activity…

brands point to the considerable commercial weight of

Trademarks are the most widely used form of registered

selected brands. The average value of the top 10 brands

IP throughout the world. In particular, many low- and

in three widely used brand rankings ranges from USD

middle-income countries see companies intensively

46 billion to USD 91 billion. In addition, the total value of

filing for trademarks, even if they make comparatively

the top 100 global brands grew by between 19 and 24

less use of other IP forms.

percent in the period 2008 to 2013, despite the global
economic downturn. The estimated brand values ac-

Over the course of the last four decades, the demand

count for a significant share of companies´ market capi-

for trademarks has intensified to unprecedented levels.

talization (see Table 1).

After a slow start in the early 20st century, trademark
activity accelerated significantly in the mid-1970s at the

Among the top 100 brands, the technology sector –

United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) and

including brands such as Apple, Google, IBM, Intel,

even earlier at the Japanese Patent Office (JPO); other

Microsoft and Samsung – dominates all three rankings.

IP offices followed suit in the 1980s. Middle-income

While most top brands are from high-income economies,

economies, in turn, started to experience a rapid rise in

brands from fast-growing middle-income economies are

trademark filings in the late 1980s and 1990s. In most

gaining some ground. In particular, the share of middle-

economies, the number of trademark filings correlates

income economies in the total value of the top 500 brands

with the business cycle; accordingly, there were sharp

in the Brand Finance ranking increased from 6 percent

declines in the number of filings both following the dotcom

to 9 percent between 2009 and 2013.

boom in the late 1990s and following the onset of the
most recent financial crisis. By 2001, China’s trademark
office had become the top recipient of trademark filings,
a position China was not to gain in patent filings until 2011.

9

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 3: Most countries have seen use of the trademark system intensify
Trademark applications divided by GDP, index (1985 = 100), 1985-2011
260
240
220
Middle-income economies

High-income economies

200
180
160
140
120
100

1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

See Figure 1.12
For both high-income and middle-income economies, • The globalization of economic activity has prompted
the use of trademarks relative to GDP increased con-

trademark holders to take their brands to more and

siderably between 1985 and 2011. While high-income

more places. This includes trademark holders from

economies increased their trademark filing intensity by a

low- and middle-income countries, who account

factor of 1.6, middle-income economies increased it by

for an increasing proportion of non-resident filings

a factor of 2.6 during this period (see Figure 3).

throughout the world.

…driven by a multitude of factors

• The emergence of the Internet has spurred trademark

The Report identifies a multitude of factors that account

filings in a number of ways. It has spearheaded the

for the growth in trademark filings:

creation of new firms, business models and services.
The digital marketplace has increased the importance

• Economic growth has come along with the creation

of brand reputation, as consumers engage in transac-

of new companies and the introduction of new goods

tions at a distance. At the same time, brand owners

and services, thus intensifying demand for trademarks.

face online sales of counterfeit goods and other forms
of misuse of their trademarks, increasing their need

• The shift towards services – that are increasingly
provided competitively – has prompted the rapidly
growing use of trademarks in the service sector.

10

for legal protection.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 4: Trademark licenses and franchises account for a growing
share of registered technology contracts in Brazil
Distribution of registered contracts by type of contract, 2000-2004 and 2008-2012

2008-2012

2000-2004

6%
5%

9%

1%

Patents and indudstrial designs
Franchising
Know-how
Mixed
Technical assistance
Trademarks

See Figure 1.22

The precise empirical importance of these factors is not

The limited and fragmented data points that are avail-

yet well understood. Other factors – such as increased

able suggest that the entertainment and sports sectors

strategic use of the trademark system and regulatory

account for the greatest number of trademark licenses

changes – may well have contributed to the rapid growth

– including, for example, the licensing of cartoon char-

in filings.

acters and sport clubs to manufacturers of toys, food

Markets for brands enable companies
to enlarge the reach of their brands

top licensors operate in the apparel, automotive, and

products, home decor, clothes and footwear. Other
consumer electronics sectors.

Markets for brands play an important but underappreciated economic role. Similar to patents, brands are

Franchising is an even bigger market – with a high level

increasingly licensed, bought and sold at the national and

of activity in almost all countries. Europe accounts for

international levels. Markets for brands allow companies

the largest number of franchising brands, whereas Asia

to diversify their business and to expand into additional

leads the field in the number of franchising establish-

product categories. In addition, they enable companies

ments. Markets for franchises are, however, largely

to access competences outside their own core strategic

domestic – i.e., brand owners and franchisees reside in

assets, and to generate new revenues without substantial

the same country.

investments into building or acquiring additional knowhow or manufacturing capability.

11

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

While generally growing, the number of cross-border
trademark licensing and franchising transactions seems

The economics of trademarks

modest when compared with other IP-based trans-

Against the background of these trends, Chapter 2 takes

actions. Receipts related to software, copyright and

a closer look at the economics of the trademark system.

industrial processes account for the bulk of IP-related

It explores the reasons why governments protect trade-

cross-border trade. This pattern also appears to hold in

marks and it also discusses the various choices facing

middle-income countries. For example, in Brazil – one

policymakers in this area.

of the few countries for which detailed data are available
– royalty payments are mostly associated with know-how

Trademarks reduce search costs

and technical assistance services, even if the share

Economic research has shown that brands play an

of trademark licenses and franchise agreements has

important role in bridging so-called asymmetries of

increased over time (see Figure 4).

information between producers and consumers. In
many modern markets, product offerings differ across
a wide range of quality characteristics. Consumers, in
turn, cannot always discern these characteristics at
the moment of purchase; they spend time and money
researching different offerings before deciding which
product to buy. Brand reputation helps consumers to
reduce these search costs. It enables them to draw on
their past experience and other information about products – such as advertisements and third party consumer
reviews. However, the reputation mechanism only works
if consumers are confident that they will purchase what
they intend to purchase. The trademark system provides
the legal framework underpinning this confidence. It
does so by granting exclusive rights to names, signs and
other identifiers in commerce. In addition, by employing
trademarks, producers and sellers create concise identifiers for specific goods and services, thereby improving
communication about those goods and services.
By lowering search costs, trademarks create incentives
for companies to invest in higher quality goods and
services: producers will be confident that consumers are
able to identify higher quality offerings in the marketplace
and not confuse them with lower quality ones. In short,
where consumers are uncertain about the quality of the
products they are considering buying, trademarks play
an important role in preventing market failure.

12

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Indeed, the market-enabling role of trademarks becomes

In performing these tasks, trademark offices need to

evident when exploring the impact of counterfeiting

promote accessibility to the trademark system – espe-

activity. Where consumers are unable to distinguish

cially for smaller, more resource-constrained applicants.

fake goods from genuine goods, they can no longer rely

In addition, they need to ensure transparency and legal

on the reputation mechanism to guide their purchases.

certainty, while balancing the interests of right holders

Producers, in turn, have a reduced incentive to invest in

and those of third parties. More recently, questions have

product differentiation, thus undermining product quality

arisen concerning the extent to which trademark offices

and diversity. Society is bound to be worse off.

should seek to limit the possible “cluttering” of their
trademark registers; “cluttered” registers risk reducing

Notwithstanding this general conclusion, there are cases

the space of names and other signs available for new

of consumers purchasing counterfeit products fully aware

trademarks. While the precise extent of cluttered registers

that their purchases are not the genuine products. The

and their costs are uncertain, there is some evidence that

welfare effects of this type of “non-deceptive” coun-

they negatively affect at least some market participants.

terfeiting activity are more complex, as consumers of

However, this question merits further study – especially

fake goods may derive image benefits from pretending

in light of the rapid increase in the number of trademarks

that they own the genuine brand. Evidence suggests

filed over the past decades, as described above.

that the precise nature of these image benefits differs
across products, and that they depend on consumer

One important question in relation to the design of the

attitudes and social context, thus making few general-

registration process is to what extent the registration of

izations possible.

a trademark application should be conditional on the

The design of the trademark
registration process matters

applicant actually using the trademark – notably, by selling products bearing the trademark in the marketplace.
Some countries do not require any use of a trademark.

As an economic principle, protecting trademarks gen-

Other offices – such as the European Union’s Office for

erates little controversy. However, designing trademark

Harmonization in the Internal Market (OHIM) – require

laws and institutions entails choices that determine how

such use, but do not require the applicant to demonstrate

effectively the system fulfills its market-enabling role. Over

use during the registration process. Yet again others

time, different approaches to trademark protection have

are stricter, and require that applicants furnish proof of

emerged in different countries. New business models, the

use before registering a trademark. For example, at the

increased sophistication of branding, and the evolving

USPTO, applicants can file an “intent-to-use” application

nature of the marketplace constantly challenge existing

whereby they need to establish use within three years of

practices and prompt new or refined approaches.

the office approving the application; only after they have
done so will the office actually register the application.

One key institutional choice concerns the design of

Interestingly, more than half of the intent-to-use trade-

the trademark registration process. The registration of

marks filed at the USPTO do not result in a registration

a trademark is usually the most important vehicle for

(see Figure 5).

securing exclusive rights to a brand. The typical tasks of
trademark offices consist of examining the applications
they receive for registration, publishing those applications,
considering possible third party oppositions against them,
registering successful applications, and maintaining the
register as the official record of trademark ownership.

13

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 5: Intentions to use often
do not result in actual use

A second important design question is to what extent

Applications and registrations for intent-to-use
trademarks at the USPTO, by filing year, 1995-2010

with earlier trademarks in different ownership – in particu-

offices examine whether new applications pose a conflict
lar, whether their co-existence would likely cause confu-

Intent-to-use applications

sion in the marketplace. One argument against examining
Applications

Registrations

250'000

all incoming trademark applications on such “relative
grounds” is that it requires considerable resources; only
a minority of new applications raise a conflict with a
prior trademark, and those cases may be best resolved

200'000

through opposition proceedings. An argument in favor
of relative grounds examination is that not all trademark

150'000

owners – especially small businesses – have the capacity
to monitor and, if necessary, oppose conflicting new applications; more generally, relative grounds examination

100'000

contributes to greater legal certainty. While less robust
compared to the evidence on the use requirement, stud-

50'000

ies suggest that relative grounds examination matters:
stronger relative grounds examination is associated with

0
1995

2000

2005

2010

See Figure 2.3
Similarly, research which compares common trademark
applications at OHIM and the USPTO suggests that many
applications that see registration at the former office, do
not do so at the latter office because applicants fail to
establish use. In other words, the implementation of the
use requirement has an important bearing on registration outcomes.

14

fewer registrations and fewer opposition proceedings.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

At the international level, several instruments that facilitate
the administrative process of obtaining trademark protection in several countries have emerged – notably the so-

Branding, Innovation,
and Competition

called Madrid registration system. One long-standing and

Having focused on the function of the trademark system,

challenging area of international cooperation concerns

Chapter 3 takes a wider perspective and explores how

the protection of well-known trademarks – including

companies’ branding strategies interact with their innova-

household names such as Coca-Cola, Mercedes, and

tion strategies and how they affect market competition.

Sony that are recognized by a substantial part of the
public. National laws provide special treatment for such

Branding generally complements innovation…

trademarks, affording them protection even when they

Through branding, companies can increase the demand

are not registered in a particular jurisdiction. However,

for their products and enhance the willingness of con-

what precisely qualifies as “well known” is context spe-

sumers to pay for them. In particular, advertising activi-

cific. Offices and courts consider a range of factors in

ties raise awareness of a company’s products among

order to determine whether a particular trademark is well

interested consumers. Strong brand reputation – and at

known in the domestic context. One of those factors

the extreme, outright brand loyalty – makes consumers

may be the extent to which a particular trademark is

willing to accept higher prices, as switching to a compet-

well known abroad, as a trademark’s recognition easily

ing brand would entail additional search costs. Moreover,

transcends national borders. International cooperation

branding enables firms to associate an image with their

can thus be helpful in providing information that can assist

offerings. For many products – especially luxury goods

relevant authorities to evaluate a trademark’s international

– image is an important product feature in and of itself

reach. At a minimum, this can be done by providing

that consumers may care about when deciding which

information on where a trademark is registered and for

offering to purchase. Through image-focused branding,

how long. A more ambitious form of cooperation would

companies can carve out a niche and can generate

be to establish a framework for exchanging information

a higher willingness to pay among consumers whose

on well-known trademarks, possibly resulting in a direc-

preferences align with the product’s image.

tory of such trademarks.
Branding can therefore be an important source of market
power from which companies can benefit when they innovate. In particular, evidence has shown that branding
is one of the most important mechanisms for firms to
secure returns on investments in R&D. Accordingly, firms
that invest more in innovation also invest more in branding. Similarly, innovative firms that most frequently rely
on patents, industrial designs and copyright also most
frequently rely on trademarks (see Figure 6).

15

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Figure 6: Innovative firms rely most frequently on trademarks
Manufacturing firms using different IP instruments, as a percentage of all manufacturing firms

50
45

Percentage of Innovative Firms,
Manufacturing

40

Trademark

Patents

Industrial design

Copyright

35
30
25
20
15
10

Hungary

Estonia

Ireland

Malta

Malta

Czech
Republic

Belgium

Cyprus

Ireland

Bulgaria

Lithuania

Spain

Slovakia

Poland

Croatia

Netherlands

Romania

Portugal

Norway

Luxembourg

Greece

Austria

France

0

Turkey

5

25
Percentage of Non-Innovative
Firms, Manufacturing

20

Trademark

Patents

Industrial design

Copyright

15
10

Luxembourg

Greece

Hungary

Czech
Republic

Estonia

Belgium

Romania

Croatia

Poland

Lithuania

Bulgaria

Norway

Netherlands

Austria

Spain

Slovakia

Portugal

France

0

Turkey

5

See Figure 3.2
This evidence suggests that branding generally comple-

the latter case, companies have a stronger motive to

ments innovation. How precisely branding activities

invest in advertising. Indeed, some studies have argued

support innovation investments depends, however, on

that, for this reason, the highest quality products should

a number of product-specific and industry-specific

attract the most advertising.

characteristics. One such characteristic is whether
consumers can immediately ascertain a product’s in-

…even if at times they can be substitutes

novative features upon purchase, or whether they need

While evidence generally supports a complementary

to experience the product before assessing how useful

relationship between branding and advertising, in certain

those features are. Research has shown that advertis-

situations companies may find it more profitable to dif-

ing mainly plays an informative role in the former case,

ferentiate themselves through image rather than through

whereas it plays a persuasive role in the latter case. To

product innovation. Much depends on market-specific

the extent that advertising leads to repeat purchases in

circumstances, such as the importance of product image

16

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

for consumers and the scope for technological innovation.
For example, companies are more likely to compete on
the basis of brand image rather than product innovation

Conclusion
The evidence presented in this Report is intended to

for mature and inexpensive convenience goods, such

offer insights into the economy-wide role of branding.

as ready-to-eat cereals, soft drinks and chocolate bars.

The Report highlights that branding has become a

Occasionally, strong brands can
raise competition concerns

central strategic asset for companies; it explores how
the trademark system supports consumer choice and
orderly competition in the marketplace; and it explains

As highlighted above, brands can be an important

why branding is a key element of a vibrant innovation

source of market power. In most cases, this does not

ecosystem. Unquestionably, certain trends in branding

raise any concerns about brand owners behaving in an

strategy and trademark use are better understood than

anticompetitive manner. Consumers generally benefit

others. The Report points to a number of areas where

from the reputation of brands, even if it makes them less

more statistical data and new investigations could offer

price sensitive. Similarly, trademark exclusivity generally

fresh insights, and thus lays the foundation for future

promotes orderly competition in the marketplace by pre-

research work.

venting consumer confusion. In particular, trademarks
only prevent one company from selling its product under
another company’s name; it does not prevent companies
from selling otherwise identical products.
However, in certain situations, strong brands can create
high barriers to market entry, as new competitors may
not be able to bear the high advertising costs of inducing
consumers to switch to their products. There are two
particular circumstances where competition authorities
have assessed the competitive consequences of strong
brands and, at times, have intervened:
• Mergers and acquisitions (M&As) can lead to the
concentration of brands in the hands of one or a few
companies, posing the risk of collusive behavior and
the formation of dominant market positions.
• When licensing their trademarks, owners of strong
brands may impose certain restrictions on their licensees – such as resale price maintenance or limits on
carrying the products of competitors – that can unduly
extend the brand owners’ market power.

17

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1
BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
1.1.
Trademarks and advertising through history, and recent trends

23

1.2.
Increased importance of brands to companies operating in the global economy

26

1.2.1

Increased investment in brands

28

1.2.2

The value of the leading brands is considerable and is on the increase

40

1.3
The global surge in trademark filings and its main drivers
1.3.1
		

46

The demand for trademarks has grown substantially in absolute terms,
and in proportion to economic activity

1.3.2. Main drivers of growth in trademark applications

47
53

1.4
The rise of markets for brands

61

1.4.1

What are markets for brands and why do companies use them?

62

1.4.2

Putting numbers on markets for brands: not so easy…

64

1.5
Conclusions and directions for future research

74

References77

18

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 2
THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS
2.1
The rationale for protecting trademarks

81

2.1.1

How trademarks reduce consumers’ search costs

82

2.1.2

How trademarks compare to other intellectual property rights

84

2.2
Trademark counterfeiting

88

2.2.1

Deceptive counterfeiting

89

2.2.2

Non-deceptive counterfeiting

90

2.2.3

Economy-wide effects

92

2.3
Choices in designing trademark laws and institutions
2.3.1 Designing trademark laws
2.3.2 Designing trademark institutions

93
93
95

2.4
Conclusions and directions for future research

106

References108

19

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 3
BRANDING, INNOVATION, AND COMPETITION
3.1
Conceptual considerations

109

3.1.1

How competition affects innovation

109

3.1.2

Why does branding matter?

113

3.2
Branding and promoting innovation
3.2.1

Helping firms appropriate their returns to innovation

117
117

3.2.2 Branding based on product versus image

122

3.2.3 Branding activities that may raise competition concerns

126

3.3
Safeguarding competition
3.3.1

Assessing firms’ market power

3.3.2 The case of vertical arrangements

127
128
132

3.4
Conclusions and directions for future research

135

References137
Acronyms139

20

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

CHAPTER 1
BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY
Introduction

Despite their importance to consumers and businesses,

Brands are an important aspect of everyday life.

nificance and role of branding activities. How much do

relatively little is known about the economy-wide sig-

Consumers tend to have strong preferences for which

companies invest in branding, and what proportion of

smartphones offers the best functionality, which airlines

company value can be accounted for by brand goodwill?

provide the best service, which fashion accessories

What lies behind the increase in the number of trade-

garner the most attention from friends and colleagues.

mark filings worldwide which protect brands? What are

Brands help consumers to exercise their preferences

markets for brands, and is there any way of measuring

in the marketplace. They come with a reputation for

these markets?

quality, functionality, reliability and other attributes, ultimately enabling consumers to exercise choice in their

This chapter sets the scene for the 2013 edition of the

decision-making. Equally important, they come with a

World Intellectual Property Report by offering a perspec-

certain image – whether for luxury, trendiness or social

tive on key trends and cross-country patterns of branding

responsibility – which consumers care about, and which

behavior and trademark use. The chapter first discusses

in turn influences decision-making on which goods and

how brands and trademarks came into existence, how

services consumers purchase.

they have evolved, and what new developments stand
out (Section 1.1). It then sheds light on the importance of

For companies, in turn, brands and trademarks have

brands to companies, both in terms of investment and

become strategic assets and a source of competitive ad-

in terms of their contribution to company value (Section

vantage (see Box 1.1 for the relationship between brands

1.2). Finally, it explores what accounts for the surge in

and trademarks). Successful branding campaigns gener- trademark filings worldwide (Section 1.3) and provides
ate demand and willingness to pay, helping to increase

some insights into the evolving nature of markets for

profit margins, as well as increase companies’ market

brands (Section 1.4).

share and value. Brand leaders thus spend considerable
resources on maintaining their brand values. Similarly,

In relation to terminology, it is important to point out that

companies without powerful brands invest heavily in

this Report employs the term “trademark” when refer-

order to create consumer goodwill towards their brands.

ring to the specific instrument of intellectual property

Moreover, markets for brands have emerged, thus en-

(IP) protection; the term “brand” is employed for more

abling brands to be licensed, franchised or acquired.

general discussions on the use of product and business
identifiers in the marketplace. While there are no unique
definitions of these terms, this approach appears to be in
line with their ordinary meaning, as described in Box 1.1.

21

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Box 1.1: What is a brand? What is a trademark? Is there a
difference?
Everyday discourse often treats the English terms “brand” and
“trademark” as synonyms. Dictionary definitions of these two words
confirm their close relation, but point to some differences.1
The Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS), as part of the agreement establishing the World
Trade Organization (WTO), defines a trademark as a “(a)ny sign,
or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the goods
or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings,
shall be capable of constituting a trademark”.2
The American Marketing Association states that “a brand is a name,
term, sign, symbol or a combination of them, intended to identify
the goods and services of one seller or a group of sellers and to
differentiate them from their competitors”, stressing the similarity of
both terms. In their seminal treatise on the economics of trademarks,
Landes and Posner (1987) also indicate that trademarks and brand
names are “rough synonyms”.

The marketing literature and the business community in turn stress
the distinct significance of brands. In particular, they emphasize
the image and reputational value of brands. To the business community and to marketing scholars, a brand is clearly more than a
trademark alone. Brands are not merely viewed as instruments for
differentiation, but relate to consumer perceptions, determining
brand loyalty, brand awareness and brand associations.5 Urwin et
al (2008), for instance, defined a brand as “a ‘reputational asset’
which has been ‘developed over time so as to embrace a set of
values and attributes’, resulting in a ‘powerfully held set of beliefs
by the consumer’ and a range of other stakeholders”. Brand value
thus comprises the collection of past experiences and perceptions
that the enterprise stands for, including for employees, customers,
investors, suppliers and society as a whole. Brands thus distil the
meaning and value of other intangible assets of the company into
one meaningful identity.6
As a consequence, multiple competencies and business functions
at the company level – as opposed to marketing and advertising
alone – contribute to brand value and brand development (see
also Section 1.2.1). Similarly, not only trademarks but also other IP
forms, such as industrial designs, patents, copyrights and others,
contribute to brand value.

Subsequent economic research clarified the distinction between a
trademark as a legal instrument and a brand as a business tool. Legal
scholars have similarly described trademarks as the legal anchor
for the use of the commercial functions of brands.3 Indeed, often a
brand is protected by several trademarks, and the management of
brands inevitably involves trademark law.4

1

The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines
a “brand” as, among other things:
“3 a (1): a mark made by burning with a hot iron to attest
manufacture or quality or to designate ownership (2): a
printed mark made for similar purposes: trademark
4a: a class of goods identified by name as the
product of a single firm or manufacturer: make
b: a characteristic or distinctive
kind: ‘a lively brand of theater’
c: brand name”
It defines a “trademark” as:
“1: a device (as a word) pointing distinctly to the
origin or ownership of merchandise to which it
is applied and legally reserved to the exclusive
use of the owner as maker or seller
2: a distinguishing characteristic or feature firmly
associated with a person or thing ‘wearing
his trademark bow tie and derby hat’”.
2 TRIPS, Section 2, Art. 15. See also (WIPO, 1993).
3 See Phillips (2003).
4 See, for example, Sullivan (2001) and Lemper (2012).

22

5
6

See Faust and Eilertson (1994), Aaker
(1995), and Moore (2012).
Moore (2012) notes that a brand collects, assembles,
associates and articulates the meaning from
other intangibles of the firm “into a highly faceted
and nuanced entity and complex identity that
distils meaning and creates brand equity”.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.1.

In the Middle Ages, the emergence of international trading

Trademarks and advertising
through history, and recent
trends

mediaries created the need to verify quality and to build

networks, more complex distribution channels and intertrust through the use of signs associated with particular
producers. In guilds in the Middle Ages, craftsmen and
merchants affixed unique, observable traits to goods, in
order to distinguish their work from the makers of low-

Trademarks and the advertising of brands have a long,

quality goods, and also in order to maintain trust in the

related history and have exerted influence on the way

guilds.8 In the absence of a formal trademark system, this

reputation and image are built.7 Trademarks satisfy

allowed guilds to prevent the sale of low-quality products

the need for producers to identify their products to the

and to build a reputation for the guilds. Good reputations

consumer, whereas advertising satisfies the desire of

assuaged consumers’ fears about purchasing products

producers to make their products valued and demanded

with hidden defects, and encouraged consumption of

by consumers.

manufactured merchandise. The cost to counterfeiters
of copying products increased.

The use of distinctive signs existed in the ancient world,
even when goods or services were acquired from local

With industrialization, trademarks started to play an even

producers – and long before the rise of a formal, legally

more important economic role. While industrialization

grounded trademark system. In fact, the use of distinc-

delivered benefits as a result of specialization and econo-

tive, visual marks can be traced back thousands of years;

mies of scale, it also meant that consumers became

they can be found on pottery, porcelain and swords dat-

even more distanced from producers than had been

ing from ancient Greece and the period of the Roman

the case in Medieval times. With the addition of many

Empire, and also on goods produced by Chinese and

more steps between producers and sellers, the greater

Indian craftsmen in ancient times.

transactional distance created increased incentives for
producer identification. Gradually, the modern trademark

In addition to these early examples of the use of visual

system emerged; it contained provisions such as making

marks, one can identify three later timelines in history

it illegal to copy somebody else’s trademark, and it also

when distinctive marks were used extensively. The first

focused on preventing fraud. During the 19th century and

of these was the Middle Ages, which saw the develop-

early 20th century – by which time ‘marks of origin’ had

ment of more intense long-distance cross-border trade.

become a well-established practice – trademark laws

The second was the Industrial Revolution, which saw the

were passed in a number of European countries and

creation of mass markets and the rise of advertising. The

also in the United States of America (US).9

third timeline is today’s globalized economy, spurred by
a brand-driven market and the Internet.

7

For a summary of the history of trademarks see
WIPO (1993), Ono (1999), Bittlingmayer (2008),
Richardson (2008), and Corrado and Hao (2013).

8
9

See WIPO (1993 and 2004), and Richardson (2008).
See WIPO (1993) and Ono (1999).

23

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

The history of advertising and other promotional activi-

Since the beginning of the 21st century, a number of

ties to increase brand awareness is an equally ancient

trends have influenced branding strategies worldwide.

practice, and there is evidence that the Babylonians were

When it comes to the business world, three major, inter-

using advertising as early as 3000 BC. Throughout history,

related developments are worth highlighting.

advertising has been highly influenced by innovations in
communication technologies – from the printing press

First, today’s companies are adopting a more holistic

to radio, to TV and to the Internet. In particular, the rise

marketing approach than was used in the past. Rather

of advertising has been spurred by the rise of the printed

than just advertising a product, companies work to cre-

press and the advent of inexpensive mass-circulation

ate and deliver a “brand experience” for the consumer,

newspapers.

while simultaneously maintaining active relationships
with the companies’ diverse networks and communi-

The advertising industry, as we know it today, did not

ties. Increasingly, companies have to manage not only

emerge until the mid-18th century, when the Industrial

to maintain product quality but also to maintain their

Revolution got under way. Large quantities of goods

reputation and conduct as good global citizens, pay-

produced and stored in warehouses were sold as a

ing attention to their image in fields such as social and

result of creating consumer demand. Some of the most

environmental responsibility. The rise of independent

notable trademarks and brands, such as Bass Pale Ale

labels for environmental standards, energy efficiency,

(UK, 1840), Louis Vuitton (France, 1854), Nokia (Finland,

fair trade, and other quality seals based on conformity

1871), Lucky Strike (US, 1871), Lipton (United Kingdom

assessments and tests – coupled with companies’ as-

(UK), 1871), and Coca-Cola (US, 1886) were developed

piration to co-brand their company or product with such

during this period and have weathered the ups and

attributes – has gained importance.

downs of various economic cycles until this day.10 In
particular, the tobacco industry and the pharmaceutical

Second, globalization and the rise of multinational com-

industry, as well as companies manufacturing consumer

panies have triggered increased internationalization of

products, began the practice of advertising their products

brands. Companies aim to develop brand strategies with

during the period of the Industrial Revolution.

global reach while simultaneously trying to maintain local
context that is attuned to domestic culture. While some

The 20 century saw another growth spurt in advertising,

companies, notably Internet companies, are born global,

helped by the expansion of radio broadcasting from the

the majority of companies invest in building brand im-

th

1920s onwards; by the advent of television broadcasting

age and reputation regionally or worldwide. In particular,

in the 1940s, and, later, the proliferation of the Internet in

companies from middle- and low-income economies

the late 20th century.

work at developing brands that are appreciated both at
home and abroad. Brands emanating from high-income

In today’s interconnected global economy, with rising

economies in turn adapt to consumers in middle- and

world incomes, trademarks and brands are reaching new

low-income economies that have good prospects for

levels of omnipresence. Global advertising expenditures

future economic growth.

are steadily rising, in part driven by the uptake in middleincome economies.11 New channels for communication
and marketing are flourishing.

10 See Corrado and Hao (2013).
11 See Nayaradou (2006).

24

.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Third, communication channels have evolved from a

While some of the most well-known brands are more

small number of standardized, one-way communica- than a century old, and have demonstrated considerable
tion methods to a large number of more fragmented,

staying power (see Section 1.2.2), arguably, the speed of

constantly changing, more interactive channels. Media

the rise and eventual decline of brands has also increased.

diversification, which began in the 1960s, initiated this
trend. Arguably, however, the biggest changes are yet

Coupled with the pressure to manufacture goods in

to come, due to the Internet and social media, which

ever-shorter production cycles, and to offer ever-greater

will result in an increasing number of digital interactions.

product diversity, companies have to manage their

On the one hand, the increasing availability of detailed

brands carefully. They have to decide what products to

customer data harbors the promise of more targeted,

introduce under a particular brand name, how to extend

and thus more efficient, branding strategies. New ad- the brand name to other product categories, if and how
vertising possibilities – such as viral videos, banners,

to co-brand their product with another company, and

advertorials, sponsored websites, branded chat rooms

whether to acquire, sell or license brands (see Section 1.4).

and others – have emerged. The “distance” between
consumer and producer – introduced as consequence of
new production and distribution systems during the 19

In addition, some overarching trends must be empha-

th

sized in order understand branding trends and strategies.

and 20th century – can be bridged once again through

One important issue is the fact that branding is no longer

the creation of new communications technologies. The

the purview of companies alone. Increasingly, individu-

latter enable the producer and the consumer to interact

als and civil society organizations, such as charities; the

with each other – just as they did in the 18 century,

world of sports and entertainment (e.g. celebrities), and

when producers and consumers frequently lived in the

governmental or inter-governmental organizations are

same village.

adopting an active approach to branding.

th

The advent of modern communications technologies not- As part of this phenomenon, cities, regions and nations
withstanding, reputation is much harder to control today

are more actively seeking to develop branding strategies

than it was in the past; it can be earned or lost much more

(see Box 1.2). Emphasis is placed on the country origin

quickly. Even without the Internet, there are numerous

or local origin of products – often influenced by particular

examples and a great deal of evidence showing how fast

local skills or traditions. As part of this development, one

a brand’s value can be destroyed, either due to neglect

can also witness an increasing trend and interest in the

on part of the brand holder or as a result of external cir-

use of collectively-owned brands in branding strategies.

cumstances beyond the control of the company. The new
online and instantaneous communications environment is
just adding another layer of complexity. Managing online
communities and associated “word-of-mouth” on social
media, blogs, comment threads and reviews is indeed
proving to be a challenge for companies and others who
are managing their reputation and image online.12
As result of the three trends outlined above, companies
are now more actively involved in looking after their brand
portfolios and how to leverage their brands.
12 See Brinker (2012).

25

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

For example, geographical indications (GIs) (see Box 2.2
in Chapter 2) can be described in a non-legal sense as
collectively-owned brands. In particular, the producers of
agricultural products, food products, wines and spirits, as
well as the producers of craft products, hope to denote
the origin and the quality of products by the use of a GI

1.2.
Increased importance of brands
to companies operating in the
global economy

to garner particular attention and a greater willingness by

Today, investments in intangible assets often exceed

consumers to pay a premium for such products. While

investments in physical assets at the company level and

traditionally the use of GIs was commonplace in some

at the country level.14 These intangibles have become a

European countries, increasingly, GIs are being used

primary source of value creation and wealth.

in non-European countries, with the establishment of
associations focused on locally produced coffee, alco- The importance of brands – and thus trademarks – as
holic beverages or local handcrafts, just to name a few

intangible assets is universally acknowledged by both

examples.

business practitioners and the marketing literature.15

13

Research provides evidence for the positive impact of
strong brands and customer loyalty on company value,
revenues and profits.16 Good reputation and image
builds customer loyalty and the ability to garner a price
premium. In addition, a company can use the reputational
advantage of a brand not only to extract a premium
price, but also to grow market share – and therefore its
revenue stream – at the expense of its competitors.17
The associated additional earnings can help to finance
long-term investments, including research and development (R&D) (see Chapter 3).18 Furthermore, marketing is
often an integral part of the innovation process and how
new products are introduced to the market. Additionally,
strong brands can play a key role in helping companies
to both attract and retain talented employees.

13 For more details and examples, see WIPO (2013a).

26

14 See Box 1.1 in WIPO (2011a) based on Corrado et
al (2006), and Hulten and Isaksson (2007).
15 See Kallapur (2004), Urwin et al (2008), Morgan
and Rego (2009), Day (2011), Yarbrough
et al (2011), Bharadwaj (2011).
16 See Simon and Sullivan (1993), Cobb-Walgren (1995),
Askenazy et al (2010), and Keller (2011). Economists
have also found a positive correlation between trademark
use and firm value, but the causality is difficult to
establish. Greenhalgh and Schautschick (2013) found
that higher trademark intensity has some positive
associations with productivity growth in services, but
the results are relatively weak for manufacturing firms.
17 See Kashani et al (2000).
18 See Askenazy et al (2010).

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Brands, reputation and image also matter in increasingly

Countries seem more aware today of the leveraging effect

global production networks, and in international trade.

of a strong national brand, and many have been work-

In global value chains, production processes have dis-

ing on developing strong ‘nation brands’.24 Indeed, the

integrated and have been dispersed across countries.19

literature shows that consumers respond to the country

Often, branded companies or large branded retailers

of origin of a brand and the perceptions associated

with a known trademark play the lead role in sourcing

with it.25 A country of origin can therefore be a key factor

from decentralized networks of independent suppliers,

in a decision to purchase a product from a particular

defining product and process specifications and stan-

country, as the country of incorporation forms part of

dards, and capturing the maximum profits along the

a company’s image. In this context, richer and poorer

way. The ability to control high value-added activities

economies alike are keen to improve their reputation

in global value chains often rests in upstream activities

and image (see Box 1.2). Emerging companies strive to

such as concept development, R&D, or the manufac-

establish brands that are valued at home and abroad,

ture of key parts and components; alternatively, it may

competing against strong established brands. In low- and

20

rest in certain downstream activities such as marketing,

middle-income economies, brands coming from high-

branding or customer service. These upstream and

income countries are often preferred to local brands, a

downstream activities are characterized by high barriers

phenomenon that is linked not only to perceived quality

to entry; moreover, they command high returns – usually

but also to social status.26

reaped by ‘lead companies’ in high-income countries.21
The actual physical production of goods is often left to
globally operated turnkey suppliers with low margins and
large production volumes.22
In certain sectors, such as the automotive industry, food

Box 1.2: Nation branding – old story or new trend? What impact
does it have?
Nations have always created their own brands – by default or
deliberately – directly and indirectly, including through diplomacy,
their leaders, their history and their people.27

industry, computer industry, textile industry and others,
building a strong brand has become an important element in the process of moving up the value chain in the
globalized economy. In particular, companies in fastgrowing, middle-income economies aim to make the
leap from contract manufacturing and low-value tangible
production activities to becoming own-brand producers
of innovative products.23

19 See Feenstra (1998), Koopman et al (2008), OECD
and Inno-Tec (2009), Lanz et al (2011), WTO
and IDE-JETRO (2011) and IMF (2012).
20 See Feenstra (1998) and UNESCAP (2007).
21 See Kaplinsky (2000), Cattaneo et al (2010),
Draper et al (2012), and OECD (2013b).
22 See Humphrey and Schmitz (2001), Wortmann (2004),
UNESCAP (2007), and OECD and Inno-Tec (2009).
23 See Humphrey and Schmitz (2001), Chattopadhyay
and Batra (2012), and Kumar and Steenkamp (2013).

Throughout the past decade, however, countries seem to be much
more aware of the leveraging power of a strong national brand. Just
as companies manage their brands, countries too are increasingly
involved in promoting their “brand” – and in a more active and
deliberate fashion.28 Promoting tourism was – and often still is – the
main objective of these national branding strategies. Indeed, many
of these activities started at the subnational level – as exemplified in
the “I love New York” campaign in 1977. Increasingly, however, the
idea is to promote a strong nation brand with a certain quality image
and reputation, in order to positively influence broader economic
issues such as foreign direct investment, trade and the presence of
skilled workers. As part of this strategy, since the late 1990s, many
countries have succeeded in creating a distinctive country of origin
sign (see Figure 1.1).29
24 Nation branding can be defined as “a compendium
of discourses and practices aimed at reconstituting
nationhood through marketing and branding
paradigms” , according to Kenava (2011).
25 See Bilkey and Nes (1982), and Han and Terpstra (1988).
26 See Batra et al (2000).
27 See Loo and Davies, (2006).
28 See Anholt (2007) and Fan (2010).
29 See the protection of country names
and examples (WIPO, 2013b).

27

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.1: Nations are adopting distinctive logos and campaigns

1.2.1
Increased investment in brands
If brands are so central, how much are companies investing in brands and what contribution are brands making
to economic growth? While the question seems straightforward, offering a reply, backed up with solid statistical

Note: The logos featured here are for illustrative purposes only.
Source: National sources on the Internet.

In addition, countries have been undertaking more comprehensive
branding strategies in order to improve perceptions that consumers,
business partners and investors may have about producers who are
based in the particular country in question. Several rankings which
measure the value of a nation’s brand over time have emerged. Such
rankings include the Anholt-GfK Nation Brands Index (NBI) and the
Country Brand Index.30

evidence, is not possible for two reasons.
First, it is difficult to clearly single out all the diverse efforts
that companies make in order to build a strong brand and
an associated trademark. By simply quantifying companies’
advertising budgets, it is not possible to capture the full
range of a company’s investments that are specifically aimed
at maintaining or creating a strong brand. High spending
on advertising and marketing alone, without achieving

More work is needed, however, in order to assess the economic case,
and thus the efficacy of subnational or national branding strategies in
terms of growth, exports, employment and other economic variables.

Branding investment (i.e. the input) is leading to brand
value and equity (i.e. the output). Both issues are discussed in turn in the next two sections of the Report.

customer quality advantage or sufficient scale, often results
in low returns on investment.31 Brands are reputational
assets – a promise to consumers – which largely depend
on investment and the excellence of the company in all
strategic business functions (see Box 1.1).32 As such, brands
are said to “distill the value of other intangible assets into a
one meaningful identity of the firm”.33 All customer-facing
aspects of a company’s performance – including product
quality, production innovation and the underlying technology, product design, product cost, managerial know-how,
human capital in the company, research, service and other
issues – have an impact on brand value, as well as on the
company’s image and reputation.34 The alignment of performance with customer expectations is central to maintaining
brand value.35 One such example is the hotel industry, where
reputation is built over a long period and is based on promotional efforts, and, importantly, is also based on excellence
in management, operations and other business functions.
31
32
33
34

30 The Anholt-GfK Roper Nation Brands Index measures
the image of 50 economies. See www.simonanholt.com.
The FutureBrand Country Brand Index measures the
image of 118 economies. See www.futurebrand.com.

28

See Kashani et al (2000).
Idem.
See Moore (2012).
See Clayton and Turner (1998), Kashani et al (2000),
Smith et al (2004), Kapferer (2008), and Corrado
and Hao (2013). Recently, the literature has also
underlined the profound convergence between a
brand and its design. Indeed, brand leaders are
also often design leaders, see (Prahalad, 2011).
35 See Gregory (2003).

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Second, even if one wanted to measure advertising and

For some time, there has been a growing consensus

communication-related branding investments alone, cur- that all intangible assets of a company need to be more
rently, in cases where standard accounting procedures

appropriately captured. Measurement frameworks for

are applied, communication-related branding invest-

intangible assets have been developed.37 Specifically,

ments are not classified as investments. On income

experts on intangible assets have included branding

statements, in order to comply with standard accounting

investments as subsets of the intangible assets group

reporting requirements, companies treat related expendi- “economic competencies” alongside (1) organizational
tures as purchased intermediate costs. On the aggregate

capital i.e. the value of overall managerial competencies,

level, branding-related efforts are not currently treated

and (2) company-specific human capital i.e. the value of

as productive capital to be factored in as investments in

competencies stemming from investments in company-

national accounts. As a result, the accounting statements

specific training. Next to economic competencies, the

of many modern companies tend to substantially under-

other two pillars of the intangible assets framework are

report branding investments. Hence economic reality is

“computerized information” and “innovative property”,

also not reflected properly on the aggregate level.

including R&D.

Clearly, overcoming the first challenge is not practicable.

Statisticians and economists have started measuring

Measuring the direct and indirect specific contribution of

what national accounts do not measure. Figure 1.2

all business functions, and their interaction with a brand,

shows existing estimates of tangible versus intangible

is a difficult proposition for statisticians and economists.

investments across a number of high-income countries
and China. In some countries, intangible investments

Some headway can be made, however, on the second

are larger than tangible investments – for example, in the

challenge by ensuring that promotional expenditures and

UK, the US, and also within the Eurozone, in Denmark,

other communication-related expenditures related to

Finland, France, Ireland and the Netherlands. The broad

brand building are capitalized as intangible investments.

category of intangible investment that includes brand

This approach would put branding expenditures on a

equity, namely economic competencies, is the largest

par with R&D, software, training and other expenditures

component of intangible investment for Eurozone area

that expand a company’s revenue-generating capacity.36

countries, the UK and the US. For half of all countries for

The idea is that investments in communication activity

which data are available, economic competencies ac-

enhance reputation and image when such investments

count for slightly more or just about equal the investments

are made in tandem with other “complementary invest-

in other intangible assets as a proportion of value added.38

ments” – for example, R&D, design and after-sales service
– which help to deliver on the brand promise. Knowledge
about a product’s existence, about a company’s characteristics, or about service quality, accumulates as a
reputational asset based on consumer trust, which the
company can appropriate. When it is positive, this stock
of assets is thought to generate a positive return in terms
of a company’s sales, or its market value.

36 This section draws on a background report
prepared for the 2013 World Intellectual Property
Report, see Corrado and Hao (2013).

37 See Corrado et al (2006).
38 See OECD (2013b).

29

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.2: Increasingly, in high-income countries, intangible investments exceed
tangible investments; economic competencies make an important contribution
Investment in tangible and intangible assets (left) and types of intangible investments
(right), both as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), 2007
35%

14%
12%

30%
Tangible

Intangible

25%

10%

20%

8%

15%

6%
4%

10%

2%

5%
0%

Computerized information
Innovative property
Economic competencies

0%
China

Japan

Eurozone area

UK

US

China

Japan

Eurozone area

UK

US

Note: The Eurozone area, as defined in this graph, comprises Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Malta, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Spain. Luxembourg, officially part of the Eurozone, is missing from this graph.
Source: Corrado and Hao (2013), drawing on various contributions, including Corrado et al (2013), Miyagawa and Hisa, (2013), and
the INTAN-Invest database. Estimates for China are based on The Conference Board’s unpublished research.

The above methods are refined further in the following
analysis. Companies’ expenditures for bought-in advertising and market research services are used in the
following analysis, the so-called “bought-in component”
to shed light on promotional branding expenditures.39
Importantly, a longer depreciation schedule of four years
is used to calculate branding investments. The rationale
for this calculation is described in Box 1.3.

39 Data on market research expenditures generate
survey data and other outputs to help understand
specific consumer needs improving the ability
to tailor products and services. These data may
not include production costs and may exclude
certain forms of direct marketing (e.g., mail).

30

Box 1.3: How long-lived are branding investments? Proposal
for an updated depreciation schedule within the intangible
assets framework
Branding has been part of the suggested intangible asset frameworks
for some time. Yet, the current intangible asset literature struggles to
appropriately identify the depreciation rates to be used for branding
investments. An investment is an outlay made today in order to achieve
benefits in the future, which, in the case of R&D expenditures, seems
fairly obvious. However, when capturing investment over time, one
needs to factor in a certain “depreciation” of the asset’s value in
order to properly assess the stock of the respective intangible assets
produced. Economists and accountants have a fair understanding of
how to account for depreciation of physical assets. Approaches on
how to discount intangible assets, such as R&D, have also emerged.
In the case of branding investments, however, economists struggle
to capture how long-lived related investments actually are.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Present approaches – and statistics used, such as in Figure 1.2
– currently assume a high rate of depreciation for branding investments (55 percent per year), much faster than R&D (15 percent per
year). The high depreciation rate used in the past reflects the fact
that, in existing approaches, advertising is the dominant component
of measured investments in brands, and thus other elements are
ignored.40 Specifically, it is assumed that branding investments
stimulate demand for approximately three years before buyers
forget, or competitors imitate the brand and offset the investment,
thus resulting in the asset having no residual value.41
Nevertheless, practitioners know that efforts relating to the creation
of a strong brand can have lasting impacts, sometimes over decades
(see Section 1.1). While other assets of the company, such as new
technologies, may go out of date quickly, the lifespan of a brand
can be long.42 In order to reflect these factors, a longer depreciation schedule of about four years is used for branding investments.

Second, expenditures on advertising have risen to significant levels.45 According to private sector sources, the
global advertising market for 2012 and 2013 is worth
between USD 525 and 560 billion, and therefore about
one-third of global R&D expenditures.46 The growth of advertising before and after the economic crisis of 2009 was
fuelled largely by expenditures outside of high-income
economies. While television and print media still constitute the bulk of advertising outlets, the strongest driver
of advertising spending is now the Internet, accounting
for between 15 and 20 percent of the global advertising
market in 2012.47 The Internet proportion is considerably
higher in countries such as the UK and the US.

Source: WIPO based on Corrado and Hao (2013).

Based on the analysis of advertising expenditures and
new estimates of branding investments, a few lessons emerge.
First, similar to the use of trademarks, on average, advertising expenditures are cyclical in nature; they correlate
well with company revenues and general economic
activity (Box 1.4).43 This explains the recent, pronounced
fall in global advertising in the context of the economic
crisis and its current recovery. Advertising budgets can be
quickly amended, unlike costs for staff, production, housing, equipment or R&D. That said, different sectors and
different advertising outlets, such as newspapers versus
television, respond differently to economic conditions.44

40 This refers to the rates used to develop the INTANInvest dataset available at www.INTAN-Invest.net.
41 See Corrado and Hao (2013).
42 See Clayton and Turner (1998), and Moore (2012).
43 See Picard (2001), and Hall (2012). For
trademarks, see WIPO (2010a).
44 See van der Wurff et al (2008).

45 See Nayaradou (2006).
46 On global advertising, see PriceWaterHouse Coopers
(PwC), Global entertainment and media outlook: 20132017; Strategy Analytics, Global Advertising Forecast from
Strategy Analytics (February 2012), ZenithOptimedia
(2013) Advertising Expenditure Forecasts, and Nielsen’s
quarterly Global AdView Pulse report, first quarter 2013.
On global R&D, see Battelle (2012) with an estimate
of USD 1.5 trillion in 2013. See WIPO (2011a) for an
estimate for 2009, evaluated at USD 1.2 trillion.
47 Idem.

31

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Box 1.4: Economic growth, advertising and trademark filings
are correlated, and move with the business cycle
Economic growth, advertising and trademark filings are correlated.
As shown by Figure 1.3, US advertising and trademark filing activity
is shown to move cyclically with the business cycle; indeed, in many
countries these two indicators are a leading indicator of economic
activity. Around the dotcom crisis in 2000, US advertising and trademark filings fell sharply, but recovered in a speedy fashion. Patent
filings, in turn, fell after GDP started to decline; and this drop in patent
filings and their recovery took longer and was shallower. During the
most recent economic crisis in 2009, US advertising expenditures
fell first, and were followed by trademark filings. Interestingly, the
fall in trademark filings was not as vigorous as that for advertising,
and it was less vigorous than that experienced following the 2001
crisis. Similarly, the 2010 recovery in patent filings seems to have
been quicker than the recovery in trademark filings during previous
economic crises.

Third, in the most conservative estimates, the proportion
of expenditures on advertising in terms of a percentage of
GDP has risen to considerable levels, accounting for 0.6
to 1.5 percent of GDP in most high-income economies,
and increasing towards similar levels in fast-growing
middle-income economies.49
In fact, the evidence shows that economic growth as
measured by real GDP per capita goes hand in hand
with increasing branding investments. This is also shown
in Figure 1.4 which plots the proportion of branding investment as a percentage of GDP against the GDP per
capita for various high- and middle-income economies.50
Research produced in the preparation of this Report
have shown that a doubling of real GDP per capita is,

Figure 1.3: Trademark applications and advertising
expenditures move cyclically with economic growth

on average, associated with an increase in advertising

GDP, direct resident patent/trademark applications by filing office
and advertising expenditure growth rates, in percentages, divided
by their respective standard deviations, 1997-2011, USPTO, US

of GDP.51

and market research expenditures of around 0.3 percent

4

2

0

-2
Resident patent applications
Resident trademark applications
Advertising expenditures
GDP

03
20
04
20
05
20
06
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11

20

01
02
20

00

20

99

20

98

19

19

19

97

-4

Note: GDP data are in constant 2005 purchasing
power parity (PPP) dollars.
Source: WIPO based on data in the WIPO Statistics
Database, the World Bank, and the WARC AdSpend
Database used in Corrado et al (2013).48

48 For earlier analysis along these lines, see WIPO
(2010a), and Guellec and Wunsch-Vincent (2009).

32

49 The shares are higher in Nayaradou (2006),
for example, as advertising expenditures are
larger when other data sources are used.
50 Regressions of propensities on the natural
logarithm of real GDP per capita and dummies
for fixed effects confirm the positive relationship
described above. For an earlier analysis with similar
findings, see Chang and Chan-Olmsted (2005).
51 See Nayaradou (2006), and Corrado and Hao (2013).

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.4: Branding investment increases compared with economic development, 1988-2011
Branding investment as a percentage of GDP, compared with GDP per capita, in 2005 USD PPP
1,40%

1,20%

US

Brand Investment (% GDP)

1,00%

UK
Australia
Spain

0,80%

Portugal

Finland
Germany
Canada

France
0,60%

Russian Federation
0,40%

China

0,20%

0,00%

Japan

Republic of Korea

Brazil
Italy

Argentina

India

0

10 000

20 000

30 000

40 000

50 000

60 000

GDP per capita (2005 PPP $)
Argentina

Australia

Brazil

Canada

China

Finland

France

Germany

India

Italy

Japan

Republic of Korea

Portugal

Russian Federation

Spain

UK

US

Note: Comparable data on advertising and market research spending (purchased component excluding
strategic marketing) for 17 countries. PPP refers to purchasing power parities.
Source: WIPO, based on Corrado and Hao (2013).

The underlying relationship is plausible for several rea-

proportion of their revenues on advertising. On the other

sons, chief among them that, as countries grow and

hand, scholars and consultancies have argued that a

develop from agrarian to dynamic innovative economies,

more complex pattern of interactions between economic

markets cease to be local. This is the result of improved

growth and advertising is at play; the direction of effects

infrastructure and, in particular, transportation systems,

and causality might actually be quite different from what

increased economies of scale in production and greater

has been assumed.53 In this view, advertising makes

product differentiation – all within the context of eco-

it possible for companies to sell their products and

nomic development. This effect can be seen in the data

to achieve better performance levels in terms of sales

for the Republic of Korea, for example, in Figure 1.4. As

and value added. Branding strategies work along with

the country’s economic structure shifted to high-tech

technical knowledge obtained via R&D, competencies at

manufacturing and related exports from the late 1980s

transforming research results into useful products or pro-

onwards, branding increased as a share of GDP.

cesses, impacting demand through impacts on tastes or
product quality, or by meeting needs in new or improved

Whether economic development triggers increased ad- ways.54 In particular, advertising via digital media is said
vertising, or whether advertising is a driver of economic

to help companies increase their revenues, market share

growth, is an open question, however. On the one hand,

and profit margins, thus boosting economic growth.55

research reveals that it is economic growth that triggers
more advertising, and not the other way around.52 The
argument here is that companies just spend a fixed
52 See Schmalensee (1972), and van der Wurff et al (2008).

53 See Nayaradou (2006), and McKinsey & Company (2012).
54 See Smith et al (2004), and Corrado and Hao (2013).
55 See McKinsey & Company (2012).

33

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Irrespective of the direction of causality, the data show
that the richest countries seem to reach a threshold for
advertising, and then decrease their advertising efforts
as a proportion of GDP once they attain the highest development levels. In the US, advertising as a proportion
of GDP first increased with GDP per capita, and then
decreased after GDP per capita exceeded a certain level.
The UK, Canada and Australia follow a similar pattern.56

Figure 1.5: In high-income countries
advertising is constant as a percentage
of GDP, while R&D increases
US advertising and business R&D, as percentage of GDP
3.0%
Advertising total

Business funding of R&D

2.5%
2.0%
1.5%

As discussed later, this trend might be due to the fact
that advertising expenditures, i.e. the “bought-in component” only, are an imperfect way of capturing today’s

1.0%
0.5%

that Internet competition has reduced advertising charge

0.0%

rates significantly over the last ten years.
Figure 1.5 shows that the proportion of advertising spending as a proportion of GDP is rather flat for the US (top),

1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010

investments in brands. It might also be linked to the fact

High-income and China advertising and
business R&D, as percentage of GDP

High-income economy R&D carried out by businesses as a percentage of GDP
High-income economy advertising spend as a percentage of GDP
China R&D carried out by businesses as a percentage of GDP
China advertising spend as a percentage of GDP

fluctuating at around 2 percent of GDP from the 1950s to
the present, but with an actual fall in more recent years.57
This flat spending pattern was reflected generally among

1.8%

high-income economies during 1996-2010 (Figure 1.5,

1.6%

bottom). In comparison, R&D expenditures in the US

1.4%

have had a different trajectory since the 1950s, with a

1.2%

rapid increase shown as a percentage of GDP (Figure

1.0%

1.5, bottom), suggesting a disconnect – at least in the

0.8%

US – between R&D and advertising spending.

0.6%
0.4%

0.0%

1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010

0.2%

Note: Countries included in the sample for high-income economies
on the right were Australia, Canada, Finland, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Portugal, Spain, UK and US.
Source: Left: Corrado and Hao (2013) based on advertising estimates
originally developed by Robert J. Coen, and R&D estimates issued by
the US Bureau of Economic Analysis for its R&D Satellite account.
Right: WIPO, based on WARC and the UNESCO
Institute for Statistics database.

56 2005 PPP USD GDP based on The Conference Board’s
Total Economy Database, January 2013 release.
57 See Bittlingmayer (2008).

34

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Looking at the same graph plotted for a group of high-

In Figure 1.4 middle-income economies are located at

income economies (Figure 1.6, top), one also sees

the lower left section of the graph. China’s and India’s

flat development for the advertising component and a

advertising propensity increased steeply with GDP per

more rapid increase of business R&D spending during

capita for a time, but has leveled off or declined in recent

1988-2010. There are important country-specific differ- years. The steep increase for China and India are similar
ences, however, with flat expenditures in Japan and the

to the trajectory for Portugal, with the latter recording

Eurozone area, and falling expenditures in the UK and

a relatively low GDP per capita in the 1980s. At the

in the US, over this shorter time period (see also Figure

same time, in the 1980s Portugal had a higher GDP per

1.6, bottom).

capita than China and India, but a significantly smaller

Also, and despite the high correlation between GDP and

of development, China and India are shown to attract

propensity to invest in its brands. Thus, for a given level
advertising, the advertising rates relative to GDP vary

more advertising from both foreign and local brand own-

greatly among the major high-income countries. The

ers. The key question is whether over the past 30 years

US, for example, has a higher advertising propensity

globalization has resulted in putting such fast-growing

relative to GDP than most European countries; Japan’s

middle-income economies on a different trajectory than

58

advertising-to-GDP intensity, in turn, is particularly low.

when high-income countries were at this stage of de-

While this variation might also be due to measurement

velopment a few decades ago. For a given level of GDP,

differences across countries, the reasons for these

more investment in branding might be required today

varying intensities – e.g., the level of competition, culture,

than in the past. Foreign brands are also redoubling their

industrial composition etc. – are not well understood.

efforts to cater for the rapid expansion of a large number

Remarkably, countries with similar levels of development

of new middle-class consumers in these economies who

also use trademarks, with greatly varying intensity (see

have not yet been drawn into the “branded markets”.

Section 1.3.1).
When compared with high-income economies, middleincome economies, as exemplified here by the extreme
case of China, have experienced both an increase in
R&D ratio and an increase – albeit a slower one – in their
advertising intensity (Figure 1.5, bottom).
The above findings are confirmed when estimating branding investment in advertising and market research with
upward adjusted depreciation rates (see Figure 1.6).
Relative to GDP, branding investments are stable or falling
for high-income economies, whereas they are increasing
for middle- and low-income countries and, in particular,
for China. Based on this approach, it is estimated that
the world invested USD 466 billion, or about 0.7 percent
of world GDP, in brands in 2011. Again, this only takes
into account the bought-in component and it excludes
strategic marketing and, potentially, other expenditures
not captured by standard advertising budgets.
58 See Nayaradou (2006). See also van der Wurff et al (2008).

35

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.6: Branding investments are
growing as a percentage of GDP in
middle- and low-income economies
Branding investments in high- versus middle- and lowincome economies, in percentage of GDP, 1988- 2011

A more accurate estimate of branding investment is
required. For the purposes of this Report, a more comprehensive appraisal of branding investment for one
country – the US – has been computed (see Corrado

1.00%

and Hao (2013)). The authors made progress on three

0.90%

fronts: the use of more accurate depreciation rates, the

0.80%

inclusion of bought-in expenditures on strategic market-

0.70%

ing, and the inclusion of an estimate for own-account,

0.60%

in-house advertising and branding activities.59 For the

0.50%

latter, Corrado and Hao (2013) selected occupations

0.40%

that are thought to be actively involved in creating and

0.30%

0.10%
0.00%

maintaining a brand – including computer-related and
High-income economies
Middle- and low-income economies

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0.20%

media-related occupations – to account for the increased
relevance of the Internet in brand building.60 Indeed, any
measure of branding investment that only considers occupations such as advertising is likely to underestimate
the contribution of branding to the economy.

1.2%
1.0%
0.8%
0.6%
0.4%

0.0%

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

0.2%

US
Japan
Eurozone area

UK
China

Note: The advertising data for the US is different, and is lower
than the data in the earlier estimate in Figure 1.5 (top) because
a different database is used for global estimates.
Source: Corrado and Hao (2013), based on media-structured advertising
data from WARC, and market research revenue data from Esomar.

The above analysis provides the best data that researchers have produced estimating global cross-country
investments in brands. This data notwithstanding, the
current analysis continues to underestimate important
components of branding investments, namely certain
components of bought-in branding expenditures and,
more importantly, all brand-related activities carried out
within companies in internal marketing or advertising
departments, i.e., the salaries and wages of relevant
staff, and thus the so-called “own-account component”
is not accounted for.
36

59 Market research and public opinion polling (NAICS
54191) is used to measure purchased market research
services. Marketing consulting services (NAICS 541613)
are used to measure purchased strategic marketing
services. Strategic marketing services (whether in-house
or purchased) are now counted as investments in
branding, as opposed to investments in organizational
capital used in previous intangible assets framework
and measurement efforts as, for example, in Figure 1.2.
60 See Corrado and Hao (2013), Table 7. A list of 14
specific occupations was used to develop own-account
investments. One group of occupations used to develop
in-house estimates of investments in branding consists
of certain managers and analysts – advertising and
public relations managers, marketing and public
relations managers, and market researchers. Another
group consists of certain computer, writer/editor and
media occupations, in order to better capture in-house
expenditures on online-related advertisements, which
is one of the new trends identified in Section 1.1.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

When considering labor inputs to building these intangible
assets, occupations other than pure advertising also
contribute to the creation of the reputation and image
that comprise a brand.61
As a result, the authors find that branding investments in

Figure 1.7: More accurate branding investment
data for the US show that investment is
more dynamic than is suggested when
advertising data alone is considered
Components of new metrics for US business branding
investment in percentage of GDP, from 1987 to 2011
3.5%

the US are much higher than originally estimated; both
the levels and the trajectory of such investments are
impacted positively (see Figure 1.7). Instead of trending

In-house

Purchased

3.0%
2.5%

downward, as would be suggested if advertising expenditures only were examined, a slight upward trend in total
expenditures on brands can be identified for the period

2.0%
1.5%

2000-2011. Figure 1.7 shows that in-house business
investments in marketing grew faster than nominal GDP
during the 2009 economic downturn and its aftermath,
increasing rapidly from 2007 to 2011, and faster than
nominal GDP growth. During the same period, advertising
media expenditure fell 3.3 percent per year, demonstrating the difficulty of using advertising spending as a good
barometer for investments in brands.

1.0%
0.5%
0.0%
1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011
US business branding investment versus advertising media
expenditure in percentage of GDP, from 1987 to 2011
3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%
Advertising media expenditure
Brand investment
0.5%

0.0%

1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

Note: Business advertising media expenditure is the Coen/
Galbi/WARC media-structured advertising spending series
less estimated spending by non-profits and individuals.
Source: Corrado and Hao (2013).

61 See Urwin et al (2008). The range of occupations
contributing to branding indeed seems varied, and
is an increasingly significant source of employment
in modern economies. See UK IP Office (2011), and
Officina Espanola de Patentes y Marcas (2012).

37

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

As per the improved metric, branding investments in

Figure 1.8

the US stood at USD 340 billion in 2010. Accordingly,

Percentage point contribution to economic growth
in output per hour (OPH), 1995-2007

the economic contribution of branding investment is
about 65 percent higher than the contribution estimated
previously (see Figure 1.8); in fact, in terms of contribu-

0.25

tion to economic growth, it is comparable to roughly 50
percent of the direct contribution of privately-funded

Added branding
Branding
investment as
investment
per new calculations

Private R&D

0.20

R&D. The research also suggests that the contribution
of branding investments to growth in output per hour has
increased in relative importance since 2007. In short, it
demonstrates that branding investments are significantly
underappreciated with respect to their size and the scale
of their contribution to economic growth. While smaller
than the contribution of R&D, they are a major source of

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

US

economic growth, and one that is currently not accounted
for. The new metrics also go to show that high-income

Percentage point contribution to growth in OPH, 1980-2011

economies have probably not decreased their branding

0.10

investments, or held them at a constant level, as implied in
the analysis based on advertising alone. The example of

0.08

Added branding
investment as
per new calculations

the US clearly shows that using advertising expenditures
alone as a barometer of branding efforts is erroneous.
Rather, branding investments have grown vigorously
since 1980; in the case of the US, branding investments
have made a significant contribution to growth in output

Branding
investment

0.06

0.04

per hour. In the period 1987 to 2011, US investments in
brands accounted for about 22 percent of all intangible

0.02

assets investment. Notably, they exceeded investments
in R&D and design.

0.00

1980-1990

1990-2001

2001-2007

2007-2011

Notes: Top, R&D and existing contribution of branding, based on information
reported in Corrado et al (2013). Privately-funded R&D refers to R&D
carried out by for-profit industries only (i.e. academic R&D is excluded).
Bottom, output is private industry excluding education, health, and real
estate. The first three time periods shown are between years with business
cycle peaks, as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Source: Corrado and Hao (2013).

38

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

These branding investment estimates constitute signifi- To conclude, another question looms large. While it is
cant progress, when compared with previous estimates.

important to measure branding investments, it is equally

Nonetheless, more work is required. First, currently, these

important to be able to capture their effectiveness and

new branding investment indicators have only been

to rate the impact of branding investments accordingly.

computed for the US, where the detailed data required

Anecdotal evidence suggests that the underlying return

are available. Second, as advertising and branding

on investment on marketing and advertising expendi-

efforts and their organization within the company and

tures has improved thanks to improved targeting made

outside evolve, the current approach will need fine-tuning

possible by new technologies – in particular by online

e.g., the choice of occupations used to account for in-

advertising and access to more detailed customer data

house branding efforts will likely need to adapt as well.

(see Section 1.1.). Through further research, it might be

Third, new technologies, such as mobile broadband,

interesting to understand how the market for (big) data

social networks, digital video and others, will continue

reflects the changing investments in branding. If the

to shape how branding investments are undertaken and

efficacy of advertising does indeed increase, then a de-

measured; additional challenges will arise with regard to

clining ratio of branding investments to GDP – as seen in

the accurate measurement of related own-account or

many high-income countries in recent years – could also

bought-in components.

reflect improved effectiveness of branding investments.
At the same time commentary about failures in performance can be communicated between consumers
much faster through social media than through traditional
channels. New competitors can gain access to market
faster and cheaper than ever before if they can come up
with something that captures consumers’ imagination.

39

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.2.2

Box 1.5: IKEA – one of the first companies to disclose its
brand value

The value of the leading brands is
considerable and is on the increase

At the beginning of 2012, IKEA became one of the first companies
to disclose its brand value as part of a financial transaction between
a holding company and one of its subsidiaries. Interogo Foundation
sold the brand name to Inter IKEA Systems – a subsidiary which now
owns the IKEA trademarks – for about USD 11 billion dollars, as a
way of “consolidating and simplifying the group’s structure”. The
estimate is said to have been produced as a result of using internal
data combined with outside analysis. It is reasonably close to the
estimates published by two of the indices discussed in this section.62

If companies invest considerable sums in building strong
image and reputation, how valuable are their brands?
Putting an estimate on the value of a brand and the underlying trademark is no easy feat (see Box 1.6 on page 45 for

Source: Press articles and investor relations
material from August 9, 2012.

various approaches used). In practice, little reliable data
exist about the actual value of existing brands. Given the
investments that many companies make in public rela-

Even if companies wanted to explicitly reveal informa-

tions and advertising, as well as maintaining global port- tion on brand values, there is no market mechanism for
folios of trademarks, it appears that companies recognize

evaluating brand values, except in a case where brands

the relevance of brands. Nevertheless, brand values are

or trademarks are acquired or licensed, and where the

not actively reported by companies. Accounting stan-

parties agree to value the goodwill associated with the

dards do not offer a standardized method of calculating

brand (see Section 1.4).63

value, and, in fact, such standards generally restrict the
inclusion of brand value, and associated goodwill, on the

Nevertheless, global indices have emerged – indices

balance sheet. Instead, investments in intangibles are, at

which publish the values of the so-called “top 100” or the

best, listed as operating expenses (see Section 1.2.1). The

“top 500” brands worldwide (see Table 1.1 for data on the

exception to this rule is when companies have acquired

top 10 brands across the three most eminent brand value

a formal valuation of a brand as a result of having bought

rankings). These rankings compiled by BrandZ, Brand

or sold a business entity. In most countries, companies

Finance and Interbrand necessarily focus on a small

are allowed to recognize the value of acquired brands

selection of top brands and do not pretend to assess

i.e., acquired goodwill, as identifiable intangible assets,

the value of brands to all companies, or to the economy

and are permitted to put these on the balance sheet of

as a whole. Moreover, methodologies for assessing

the acquiring company. In one recent but unusual case,

brand values, as defined at the outset of this section,

brand value was provided in a transaction between a

are complex to engineer, and therefore methodological

holding company and its subsidiaries (see Box 1.5).

choices – with respective strengths and weaknesses –
have to be made.

62 In 2012, Interbrand valued IKEA at USD 11.9 billion
and Brand Finance valued it at USD 9.2 billion.
63 Adams and Oleksak (2011) noted that the dollar value
of brands can be difficult to identify, since no financial
transaction is involved in creating the brands.

40

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Table 1.1: Brand values are high and are important as a proportion of market capitalization
Values of the top ten brands in 2013 in absolute terms and as proportion of the company’s market capitalization
Interbrand

BrandZ

Company

Brand value 2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Apple

98.3

58.0%

Google

93.3

Coca-Cola

Brand Finance

Company

Brand value 2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Company

Apple

185.1

41%

20.7%

Google

113.7

79.2

39.3%

IBM

112.5

Brand value 2013
(in billion USD)

Brand value as
a percentage
of market
capitalization

Apple

87.3

19%

39%

Samsung

58.8

32%

56%

Google

52.1

18%

IBM

78.8

26.9%

McDonald’s

90.3

94%

Microsoft

45.5

18%

Microsoft

59.6

22.9%

Coca-Cola

78.4

46%

Wal-Mart

42.3

18%

General Electric

47

19.9%

AT&T

75.5

43%

IBM

37.7

19%

McDonald’s

42

43.9%

Microsoft

69.8

27%

General Electric

37.2

16%

Samsung

39.6

35.2%

Marlboro

69.4

NA

Amazon

36.8

27%

Intel

37.3

20.0%

Visa

56.1

49%

Coca-Cola

34.2

20%

Toyota

35.4

17.8%

China Mobile

55.4

25%

Verizon

30.7

23%

Average

61

30.5%

91

46.7%

46

21%

Note: The values for market capitalization are based on valuations on the New York Stock Exchange,
obtained from Yahoo! Finance, access date September 6, 2013, 2 p.m.
Source: WIPO, based on BrandZ, Brand Finance, Interbrand.

Accordingly, different methodologies and different cri-

Notwithstanding these caveats, a number of insights

teria for inclusion yield different results. In 2013, only 33

emerge when studying brand value indicators over time

brands are common to all three top 100 rankings, and

and across indices. To begin with, according to these

the brand values assigned by existing indices can differ

rankings, the value of brands is significant and, for the

noticeably for the same brand. The total brand value of

most part, is increasing, with average values of between

all common top brands in the BrandZ and Brand Finance

USD 46 billion and USD 91 billion for the top 10 brands

rankings varies between a low of about USD 863 billion

in the three respective rankings in 2013. Furthermore, in

and a high of about USD 1.2 trillion, and hence by about

nominal terms, the total value of the top 100 global brands

39 percent. The brand value assigned by two distinct

grew by 32 percent (BrandZ), 19 percent (Brand Finance)

valuations for Apple, for example, differs by almost USD

and 24 percent (Interbrand) between 2008 and 2013,

64

100 billion (Table 1.1).

despite the economic downturn which began in 2009.
The top 100 brands and their performance might not be
representative of the brand values of all companies. Still,
the top 200 to 500 brands in the Brand Finance ranking
also experienced similar growth in their value.

64 Interbrand’s total brand value lies in the
middle of these two rankings.

41

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Indeed, Table 1.1 also shows that the assigned brand

According to WIPO calculations, the technology sector

values make up for a significant share of the company’s

and Internet sector, including brands such as Google,

market capitalization. This further corroborates earlier

account for the most highly ranked combined brand

analysis claiming the large contribution that brands make

value among the top 100 global brands. More established

to shareholder value.65 Of course, this is also due to the

sectors, such as car companies BMW, Mercedes-Benz

fact that brand value indicators are computed to a great

and Volkswagen; banks such as Wells Fargo, HSBC

extent by incorporating the current and future profits of

and J.P. Morgan; business service companies such

the company (see Box 1.6). It is also an open question

as Cisco, Oracle and SAP, and conglomerates such

whether the proportion of brand value in market capi-

as General Electric, Siemens or Tata are the next most

talization tends to be smaller for brands outside the top

highly ranked sectors in terms of their total value within

100 range.66

the top 100 global brands.

Figure 1.9: The total brand value of the
top 100 global brands is increasing

For reasons explained earlier (see Section 1.2), multi-

Total value of top 100 brands, 2008-2013, in USD trillion

are pursuing strategies to build or acquire brands at

national enterprises outside of high-income economies

3,0

home and abroad. Multiple, possibly complementary,
BrandZ

Brand Finance

Interbrand

strategies have been adopted by companies as local

2,5

and global economies have changed and grown.67 Some
companies’ strategies have evolved over time: companies

2,0

in countries such as Japan and the Republic of Korea,
which at one time pursued a low-cost and low-price

1,5

strategy, have, over time, been able to raise prices and
1,0

quality, thus turning low-cost products into premium

0,5

information technology (IT) industry in particular, have

brands. Other companies, including companies in the
made a name as providers of certain components, or as
0,0

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Source: WIPO, based on data from BrandZ, Brand Finance and Interbrand.

assembly and contract manufacturers (e.g. Asus, Acer,
etc.); alternatively, these companies (e.g. Huawei) may
have focused on business customers before entering the
end-consumer markets with a more established brand.
Other companies have bought brands from companies
in high-income economies (see Section 1.4). Many of
these successful brand strategies have tracked changes
in economic climates and the evolution of opportunities
over time.

65 Study by Interbrand in association with JP Morgan.
In this study, it is suggested that “brands account
for more than one-third of shareholder value”.
66 Data obtained from Corebrand by Carol A. Corrado
and Janet X. Hao at the Conference Board suggest
that the estimate of corporate brand value,
overall, is of the order of 5-7 percent of market
capitalization for the top 500 US companies.

42

67 See Chattopadhyay and Batra (2012), and Kumar
and Steenkamp (2013) for an elaboration of
branding strategies of multinational companies
emanating from middle-income economies.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.10: Brands emanating from high-income economies lead in
global brand rankings, but other brands are catching up
Number of brands per economy, Top 500 Brand Finance, 2013

France, 31 China,
26
UK, 32

Switzerland, 19
Canada, 14
Rep. of Korea, 14
Netherlands, 11

Russian
Federation, 8

Spain, 10

Germany, 33

Other, 47

Japan, 49

Sweden, 8

India, 6

Italy, 8

Australia, 8

Brazil, 9

US, 185

Note: Only economies with more than five brands within the top 500 ranking were included.
Source: WIPO, based on data from Brand Finance.

Partly as a result of methodological issues and differ- The average brand value of companies based in middleent criteria for inclusion, the majority of top brands are

income economies has grown faster than brand value

associated with companies that are primarily located in

of companies in high-income economies. In fact, the

high-income economies (see Figure 1.10). Among the

average value of the top 500 brands in companies based

top 500 ranking in the Brand Finance index, brands

in middle-income economies grew by more than 98

emanating from the US led the field in terms of numbers

percent between 2009 and 2013, while the brand value

– ahead of brands emanating from Japan, Germany, the

of companies in high-income economies has grown by

UK and France. But, outside the list of traditional leaders,

61 percent (Figure 1.10).

companies from other economies are also making an
impact on these indices, with Chinese brands ranked

This trend is not consistent throughout all rankings,

in sixth place and Brazil ranked in twelfth place in 2013.

however. In the case of the Interbrand ranking, brands

Clearly, brands from fast-growing middle-income econo-

small role, accounting for less than one percent of the

mies are gaining ground. In 2008, five (BrandZ) or two

total brand value. Again, this is partly due to the meth-

(Brand Finance) brands from middle-income economies

odological criteria discussed in Box 1.6.

emanating from middle-income economies still play a

featured in these top 100 league tables. Their number
increased to 17 (BrandZ) and 12 (Brand Finance) in 2013. This issue aside, Table 1.2 consolidates all brands emaThe proportion of middle-income economies in terms of

nating from middle-income economies, and treats them

total top 500 brand value accounted for about 9 percent

as being part of one of the three rankings. Most of these

in 2013, up from 6% in 2009.

brands belong to the banking, telecommunications or
technology sectors. A comparatively large number of
Chinese brands (13 out of 23) are included in the rankings, with an emphasis on the banking sector and the
technology sector.

43

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Table 1.2: Brands emanating from companies based in middle-income economies
are mostly in the telecommunications sector and the banking sector
Brand value by ranking
(in USD million)

Rank
BrandZ
2013

Brand
Finance
2013

Name

Country

Industry
group

BrandZ

Brand Finance

Interbrand

20

China Mobile LTD

China, Hong
Kong SAR

Telecoms

55,368

23,296

-

31

Industrial and
Commercial
Bank of China

China

Banks

41,115

19,820

-

39

Tata

India

Conglomerate

-

18,169

-

21

Tencent

China

Technology

27,273

-

-

22

China Construction
Bank
China

Banking

26,859

-

-

33

Baidu

China

Technology

20,443

-

-

37

Agricultural
Bank Of China

China

Banking

19,975

15,967

-

57

China Life

China

Insurance

15,279

-

-

59

ICICI Bank

India

Banking

14,196

-

-

10

16

Interbrand
2013

56

58

64

Bank of China

China

Banking

14,236

14,145

-

67

67

Sinopec

China

Oil and gas

13,127

13,518

-

65

71

PetroChina

China

Oil and gas

13,380

12,994

-

70

63

Sberbank

Russia

Banking

12,655

14,160

-

66

Bradesco

Brazil

Banking

-

13,610

-

77

Itaú

Brazil

Banking

-

12,442

-

73

Moutai

China

Consumer

12,193

-

-

79

MTN Group

South Africa

Telecoms

11,448

-

-

82

Mobile TeleSystems
OJSC
Russian Federation Telecoms

10,633

-

-

84

Ping An

China

Insurance

10,558

-

-

89

Airtel

India

Telecoms

10,054

-

-

93

China Telecom

China

Telecoms

-

9,974

-

94

Banco do Brasil

Brazil

Banking

-

9,883

-

Corona

Mexico

Alcohol

-

-

4,276

93

Source: WIPO, based on data from BrandZ (2013), Brand Finance (2013) and Interbrand (2013).

Methodological and other issues aside, the existing
assessment of brand value demonstrates the growing
role and economic importance of brands, both at the
company level and at the country level.

44

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Table 1.3: Overview of selected brand rankings
Name/
origin

Availability

Brands
under consideration

Main components of
brand value calculation
Financial
dimension

Consumer
dimension
Quantitative consumer research
- Consumer surveys
- Consumer interviews

BrandZ
(UK)

2006-2013

Universe: World
Industries: All
Companies: Financial data must be publicly available.

Profit-based
Financial value based on
past and future profits

Brand Finance
(UK)

2007-2013

Universe: World
Industries: All
Companies: Financial data must be publicly available. Private
companies can submit data if they wish to be included

Revenue-based
Qualitative & financial research
Financial value based on a royalty - In-house expert panels
rate applied to future revenues
- Third party sources

Interbrand
(US/UK)

2001-2013

Universe: Companies must generate more than 30% of
their revenues outside their home market. Companies
must be present at least in three major continents.
Industries:
Certain industries such as telecommunications, pharmaceutical and
aviation do not tend to meet Interbrand’s criteria for inclusion
Companies:
Financial data must be publicly available.

Profit-based
Financial value based on
past and future profits

Box 1.6: Methodology used to establish brand value
In theory, three main approaches to how to measure brand value
stand out.68 One approach is the “product market level” approach.
It aims to identify the price premium generated by a brand i.e., an
implicit valuation of the revenue stream that accrues to the company
from its brand name(s). This is the additional price a customer is
willing to pay for an equivalent branded product versus a non-branded
product. While this approach sounds pertinent to economists, it is
difficult to implement in practice.69 Since this approach relies on
comparing identical products – one of which is branded, while the
other is not – it is difficult to implement in practice. Another reason
it is difficult is because some brands relate to a company with
multiple products whereas others relate to entire product ranges.
The second approach is the “financial market” approach, which
calculates brand value on the basis of the hypothetical price of a
brand if it were sold or acquired in an arms-length transaction. It
is often based on the brand holder’s revenues, but it also uses the
cash flow valuation of licensing fees and royalties.70 While seemingly hard data are used, it is challenging to appropriately assign
revenue flows to the power of the brand alone. Given the dearth of
data in this field (see Section 1.4), it is equally challenging to identify
pertinent royalty or licensing rates for the brands being studied. In
addition, this approach only captures the value created by the brand
68 Based on Aliwadi et al (2002) and their interpretation of
Keller and Lehman (2002). In addition, an international
standard for monetary brand evaluation (ISO 10668) exists.
69 Even putting aside the practical implementation issues,
it ignores the volume effect of having a stronger brand,
and it is not as relevant where the volume effect is
greater than the price effect, such as in ‘fast fashion’
retail. In addition, some brands deliberately choose to
position themselves as low priced e.g. Ryanair. This
airline succeeds by differentiating itself as low priced,
thus generating no premium relative to competitors’
short-haul airlines, and creating significant passenger
volumes as a result. The authors would like to thank
Michael Rocha (Interbrand) for this comment.
70 See Aliwadi et al. (2002).

Qualitative analysis
- In-house expert panels
- Primary research
- Desk research

for the (often hypothetical) licensor through the royalty stream. The
full value of the brand is likely to be higher, with some of the value
created by the brand accruing to the licensee, a factor which this
approach does not account for. Finally, these financial data may
only indirectly estimate the power of the brand with customers.
Third, the “customer mindset” focuses on customer attitudes towards
a brand, and relies on qualitative and quantitative research based
on customer surveys, interviews and polls. This method is the most
costly to perform, and is often restricted to small sample sizes for
these brand rankings, unless customized research is carried out with
fully representative samples by particular brand owners. Furthermore,
no agreed scale or unit of measurement exists to properly assess
the value of a brand as captured by customer perceptions.71 In addition, for a long list of the top 100 or 500 brands, it is challenging
to produce global estimates which accurately aggregate brand
values – as perceived by people of different nationalities – into a
single quantitative and/or financial value indicator.72
In practice, existing rankings use a mix of the above approaches to
triangulate brand values. Table 1.3 summarizes the main approaches
used in the compilation of the various indexes.
To begin with, different indices adopt different approaches as to
which brands should be considered for inclusion in their indices.
The Interbrand ranking, for example, requires that a company must
generate more than 30 percent of its revenues outside the home
market, and on three continents.
All three indices have a strong financial dimension, mirroring the
“financial market” approach. By focusing on company data and
forecasts, all rankings rely on standardized approaches to estimate
the current and future performance of a company on which the brand
71 See Aaker (1995), and Grannell (2008).
72 To provide an example, certain brands are widely known
and are popular in a large middle-income economy such
as China, but the same brands are unknown elsewhere.
In such cases, how does a final combined value take into
account the fact that Chinese consumers have high brand
awareness and value perception, whereas consumers
in other countries assign no value to these brands?

45

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

value is based. In the first step in the process, the brand’s relevance
for company earnings is calculated. In the second step, a so-called
“income approach” is used; this calculates the discounted future
cash flow from the potential future earnings of a brand.73 These
calculations are based on annual reports data, as well as on future
profit forecasts. While the fundamental evaluation steps between
the rankings are relatively similar, some differences exist.74
These approaches suffer from the fact that it is hard to associate
earnings exclusively with the value of a brand. Revenues are driven
by factors other than the brand alone. It is also challenging to correctly assess pertinent, hypothetical royalty rates for the licensing
of brands. These data are hard to come by, and they do not exist
for most brands that are not licensed.
As described above, the customer dimension relies on qualitative and
quantitative approaches. BrandZ is the only ranking which surveys
consumers directly by conducting interviews as well as carrying out
market research surveys. Brand Finance and Interbrand substitute
direct consumer contact with using their own in-house experts
drawn from offices worldwide.75 The behavioral aspect is the most
important, but it is also the most difficult aspect to measure. As a
result, there can be a tendency in some brand value methodologies
to assign a proportionately higher weight to the financial dimension
than to the customer dimension. Valuations carried out for particular
companies by these brand valuation agencies may be much more
granular than the top 100 rankings, and can more easily overcome
the challenges described above.

1.3
The global surge in trademark
filings and its main drivers
The increase in expenditures on branding, and the increased economic role of such expenditures, goes
hand in hand with a pronounced but less noticeable
surge in trademark filings both at the national and the
international level.
Nevertheless, the increased demand for trademarks
remains relatively unexplored, as noted in the 2011 World
Intellectual Property Report.76 While the patent-innovation
nexus has garnered most of the attention from IP economists, the surge in trademark filings, and an analysis of
its main drivers, has not.

All indices describe their approach in publicly available documents,
and they compare their approach to their competitors’ rankings.
Nevertheless, a lot of details, for example, how the overall values
are computed, or how the customer dimension is assessed in
practice, are not publicly available. It is therefore challenging to
independently verify the underlying data or the methodologies, and
then replicate existing findings.

73 See Keller and Lehmann (2006).
74 Brand Finance uses notional royalty rates that a company
could earn if it were to license its brand to an independent
third party. Interbrand uses a hybrid of the “customer
mindset” and the “financial market” approach. BrandZ
uses a hybrid of the “financial market” and “customer
mindset” approach; it takes the financial value of the
brand (not the company), similar to the method used
by financial analysts to value companies, and it then
assesses the proportion of that value that is attributable
to brand and brand alone, based on an extensive
quantitative global consumer research program.
75 Interbrand uses a combined approach by aggregating
data from expert panels, desktop research and
information gathered from primary research.
Brand Finance uses an amalgam of in-house
experts’ opinions combined with external data.

46

76 See Jensen and Webster (2011), and WIPO (2011a).

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.3.1

A second significant acceleration took place from the late
1990s until today. In most high-income economies, and
in a number of middle-income economies, applications

The demand for trademarks has grown
substantially in absolute terms, and
in proportion to economic activity

reached their first peak in 1999 or 2000, suggesting amplified demand for new registrations during the dotcom
boom, followed by a contraction in registrations that

The demand for trademarks has intensified, reaching

corresponded with the timeline of the dotcom collapse.

unprecedented levels since the 1970s.77

Applications peaked again in 2007, before the onset
of the global financial crisis, with demand falling again
th

Trademarks have been in existence since the mid-19

throughout the downturn, but with new filings recovering

century (see Section 1.1). Yet, in most high-income

to near pre-crisis levels by 2011.80 Most middle-income

economies, the rapid growth in trademark applications

economies saw substantial increases in trademark fil-

only began to take off after 1975.78 Following a slow start

ings at the turn of the 21st century. By 2001, the Chinese

in the early 20st century, trademark activity accelerated

trademark office had become the top recipient of trade-

significantly in the mid-1970s at the United States Patent

mark filings, a position China was not to regain in terms

and Trademark Office (USPTO). At the Japanese Patent

of patent filings until 2011, when it became the world’s

Office (JPO) such activity accelerated at an even earlier

top patent application recipient.

date. Trademark activity in other IP offices followed
much later – in the 1980s (see Figure 1.11, top). Thus,

In absolute terms, trademark demand quadrupled from

the surge in trademark filings in high-income economies

just under 1 million applications per year in 1985 to 4.2

began about ten years earlier than the historic increase

million trademark applications by 2011 (Figure 1.11, bot-

79

in worldwide patenting, which began in the mid-1980s.

tom). During this period, trademark applications multiplied

Middle-income economies, in turn, began experiencing a

approximately fivefold in the case of the Republic of Korea

rapid rise of trademark filings in the late 1980s and 1990s.

and the US, approximately threefold in Australia, and approximately twofold in Canada, France and Germany.81
In the case of middle-income economies, the rise was
more striking, with an increase by a factor of close to 30
in the case of China, 20 in the case of Turkey, 12 in the
case of India, more than six in the case of Mexico, and
three in the case of Brazil.

77 This section draws on the following background reports
prepared for the 2013 World Intellectual Property Report:
Fortune (2013), Helmers (2013), Mitra-Kahn (2013),
Myers (2013), and Schautschick and Graevenitz (2013).
78 See Duguid et al (2010), and Greenhalgh
and Schautschick (2013).
79 See Graevenitz et al (2012).

80 See Fortune (2013), Helmers (2013), Mitra-Kahn (2013),
Myers (2013) and Schautschick and Graevenitz (2013).
81 The only major high-income economy with apparently
falling filing rates is Japan. As explained earlier, the
switch to a multi-class system introduces a downward
bias, which is not meaningful for time series comparison.
Moreover, the filing increase in individual European
countries was accompanied by an increase in filings
at the European Union’s OHIM, reaching 105,000
applications in 2011, up from zero in 1995.

47

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.11 Trademark growth has taken off since the mid-1970s in highincome economies, and since the 1980s in middle-income economies
Trademark applications at selected offices, 1974-2011 (China, right hand axis)
1,400,000

400,000
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000

1,200,000

Brazil

India

Republic of Korea

US

OHIM

France

Australia

Russian Federation

1,000,000

Mexico

Germany

China (right axis)

Turkey

800,000
600,000

150,000
400,000

100,000

200,000

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2001

2002

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1991

1992

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1981

1982

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

0

1974

50,000

0

Note: The chart includes economies with a single-class trademark filing system (China, Mexico indicated with dotted lines) and a multi-class trademark
filing system (the remaining economies). The levels of trademark filings are not directly comparable across these economies with different systems
(see Box 1.7). Australia and Japan are not included, given the structural break in the series due to the introduction of a multi-class system in 1996.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, October 2013.
Trend in trademark applications worldwide (applications and application class count), in millions, 1985-2011
7
6
5

Applications

Application class count

Million

4
3
2

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, July 2013.

In turn, trademark application class counts increased
from 4.4 million in 2004 to 6.2 million in 2011 (see Box
1.7 for an explanation, and Figure 1.11, bottom).

48

2011

2010

2009

2008

2007

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1985

0

1986

1

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Box 1.7: Pitfalls when comparing trademark data over time
and/or across countries
Care must be taken when comparing trademark data across countries
and over time. Countries’ institutional frameworks for registering
trademarks differ in important ways and often undergo substantial
reform, which can affect how many applications trademark offices
receive and eventually register.
Most importantly, when comparing trademark data across countries,
it is vital to account for different trademark filing systems.82 Some
offices have a single-class filing system, which requires applicants
to file a separate application in respect of each of the goods and
services classes in which they seek protection. Other offices follow
a multi-class filing system, which enables applicants to file one
application that lists all the classes in which they seek protection.
For example, the offices of Argentina, Brazil, China, Colombia and
Mexico follow a single-class filing system, whereas the offices of
Japan, the Republic of Korea and the US, as well as many European
offices, today operate multi-class filing systems.

In addition to differences in filing systems, there are a number of
other institutional differences that affect applicant behavior and the
propensity of offices to register incoming applications. As will be
further explained in Section 2.3, key institutional elements in this
context include the following:
• Whether applicants must use the trademarks for which they seek
protection and, if so, to what extent they must demonstrate such
use prior to the registration of the trademark.
• To what extent trademark offices examine applications on relative
grounds for refusal – i.e., whether new applications pose a conflict
with earlier trademarks in different ownership.
• How opposition systems operate and at what point during the
registration process third parties can initiate oppositions.
• Whether a country is a member of the Madrid system83 (see
Section 1.3.2) and other international treaties or organizations,
such as the EU, for which the Office for Harmonization in the
Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs) (OHIM) facilitates the
registration of a trademark in several jurisdictions.84

All other factors being equal, a single-class filing system invariably
results in higher application counts than does a multi-class filing
system, as trademarks covering more than one class lead to more
than one application under the former system. A direct comparison
of trademark filing levels between countries that operate different
systems would, therefore, be misleading. However, it is possible
to compare trademark filing volumes on the basis of application
class counts. For this reason, WIPO’s Statistics Database reports
comprehensive class count statistics. However, these reports contain
information dating back to no earlier than 2004, which complicates
longer-term historical comparisons. Furthermore, several countries
have switched from a single-class to a multi-class system – notably
Australia and Japan in 1996 – introducing a structural break in
application and registration data, which complicates comparability over time.

82 See also WIPO (2012).

83 The abbreviated form of the Madrid system for the
International Registration of Marks administered by
WIPO. The Madrid system makes it possible for an
applicant to register a trademark in a large number of
countries by filing a single application with WIPO via the
applicant’s national or regional IP office that is party to
the system. The Madrid system simplifies the process
of multinational trademark registration by reducing
the requirement to file separate applications in each
office. It also simplifies the subsequent management
of the mark, since it is possible to record changes or to
renew the registration using a single procedural step.
84 For example, many companies in European countries
have switched from filing trademarks in their
national office to filing in the OHIM. If one were to
merely quantify the number of filings in the national
IP office over time, and after the creation of the
OHIM, the figures would therefore be misleading.

49

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.12: Since 1985, trademark use intensified in most high- and middle-income economies
Trademark applications by GDP, direct applications excluding applications via the Madrid system,
index (1985 = 100), growth in percentage terms since 1985 (1985 = 100), 1985-2011
400

350

300

Middle-income economies
Brazil
China
India

High-income economies
US
Mexico
Canada

Republic of Korea
Germany
France

250

200

150

100

50

0

1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011

Note: GDP data are in constant 2005 purchasing power parity (PPP) dollars. For France, Germany, Spain, Switzerland and the UK, the
trademark applications by the OHIM were added. The graph is based on data for middle-income economies: Algeria, Brazil, Chile, China,
Colombia, Costa Rica, India, Mexico, Panama, Philippines, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkey, and high-income economies:
Canada, France, Germany, Israel, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, Spain, Switzerland, the UK and the US. As China and Mexico use
single-class systems, their trademark filing intensity should not be directly compared to the other countries in the graph.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, March 2013 and the World Bank, October 2013.

For both high-income and middle-income economies, the

In the case of middle-income economies, over the

use of trademarks relative to GDP increased considerably

same time span, Turkey experienced a sixfold increase

between 1985 and 2011 (Fig. 1.12). While high-income

in its trademark filing intensity, while in Mexico and

economies for which data are available increased their

Costa Rica it increased by a factor of about 3.5. The

trademark filing intensity by a factor of 1.6, middle-income

Russian Federation doubled its trademark filing intensity

economies increased their trademark filing intensity by a

in a shorter time span, namely between 1992 and 2011.

85

factor of 2.6 during this period. Over the same time span,

However, a few high-income economies such as Spain,

the US, Germany and Switzerland saw their trademark

Israel and New Zealand, and middle-income economies

intensities, relative to GDP, more than double. France and

such as Sri Lanka, saw their trademark filing intensity fall

Canada saw an increase of about 20 percent.

between 1985 and 2011. The difference between nations
with similar levels of economic development in terms of
trademark filing intensity is little understood, however.
Here, institutional and cultural factors could be at play.

85 When resident trademark applications are converted to
equivalent class counts and are measured relative to GDP,
one also finds increasing levels of filing intensities; the
majority of the selected economies for which resident
application class count data exist had higher ratios
in 2011 than in 2006, with the Russian Federation
exhibiting the largest increase by a factor of 20.

50

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Remarkably, many middle-income economies use trade-

But, the general point holds. Furthermore, separate com-

marks more intensively, relative to GDP, than do most

putations show that the intensity of patent applications

high-income economies. When resident trademark

over trademark filings is indeed positively correlated to the

applications are converted to equivalent class counts,

level of economic development (see Figure 1.13, bottom).

countries such as Turkey, Viet Nam, China, Madagascar,

An increase of GDP per capita thus reduces the ratio of

Uruguay and the Russian Federation emerge with trade- trademarks/patents, with some statistical significance.87
mark filing intensities that are higher than the world
average.86 A parallel to the earlier analysis of advertising
intensities also emerges (see Section 1.2.1); less developed economies experience more trademark filings
from residents and non-residents at an earlier period
of development.
The mix of different IP forms also varies between richer
and poorer economies. Economies with lower GDP per
capita often file more trademarks relative to patents than
do richer countries. This can be seen in Figure 1.13 (top),
which plots the intensity of trademarks relative to GDP
(class counts) and patents relative to GDP for a number of
economies. This pattern does not hold for all countries for
which data are available. Some high-income economies,
such as New Zealand for instance, use trademarks more
intensively, relative to patents, than do their peers. The
case of Australia is striking, when compared with other
high-income economies which have a high intensity of
trademark filings but a low intensity of patents relative
to GDP.

86 See WIPO (2012), Figure B.7.1. Among high-income
economies, this concerns Switzerland, the Republic of
Korea, Australia, Germany and Finland, for example.

87 When data for trademark class counts become available
for a greater number of middle- and low-income
economies, this result should, in fact, be reinforced.
Indeed, the current computations exclude many of
middle- and low-income economies that are using
trademarks relatively more frequently than patents.

51

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.13: Poorer countries use trademarks more intensively relative to patents
2011 resident trademark applications/GDP over 2011 resident patent application class count/GDP
180
Bulgaria

Resident trademark applications per GDP (class counts)

160
Turkey
140

Costa Rica

120

New
Zealand

Czech
Republic

Viet Nam

Switzerland

Chile

Romania

100
Estonia
Australia

Uruguay
80

China, Hong Kong SAR

Jordan

Spain

60

Germany
Russian
Federation

Poland

Finland

Mexico
UK

40

India
Malaysia

20
Algeria
0

Sweden

0

Singapore

5

US

Austria
France

Israel
10

15
Resident patent applications per GDP

20

25

30

11

12

Note: The Republic of Korea and China are excluded from the graph, as their level of filing intensity of both IP types
is many multiples that of the rate of filing intensity of one of the other countries listed here.
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2013 and World Bank for GDP.
Log of trademarks over patents against per capita GDP, 2011
7

6

ln (TMs/patents)

5

4

3

2

1

0

6

7

8

9

10

ln (GDP per capita)
Note: To compute the trademark/patent ratio, patent filings by origin, residents only (i.e. including, for example, filings by
German residents at the German office and at the European Patent Office (EPO)) are divided by trademark class counts, by
origin, by residents only (including, for example, filings by German residents at the German office and at the OHIM).
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2013 and World Bank for GDP.

52

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.3.2.

3) The shift to an innovating service economy: Today,
businesses and other entities providing services are

Main drivers of growth in
trademark applications

eligible for trademark registration in most countries.
The services sector now accounts for about 60-70 per-

The important surge in trademark applications, and its

cent of economic activity in high-income economies. As

drivers, has been subjected to little systematic analysis

the proportion of services is growing in poorer economies

thus far.88 The economic literature has largely focused on

as well, the structural change from economies based

understanding the surge in patent applications. According

on manufacturing to economies based on services

to available data and analysis, the following main drivers

production is also judged to be an important driver of

for the growth in trademark applications can be identified.

trademark filings.91

The empirical importance of the factors listed here, and
their interaction, are not yet well understood, however.

The privatization and deregulation of important services

1) Increased growth and investment in branding

services, has led new private companies to create their

industries e.g., telecoms, financial services and energy
in high- and middle-income economies: Economic

own innovative services, and to brand and advertise

growth and increased global branding expenditures

them. This rise in a competitive and innovative service

are highly correlated with trademark activity. The higher

industry is translating into higher levels and faster growth

investments by companies to maintain existing brands,

of services trademarks.92 Moreover, the services sector

or to develop new brands, coupled with the rise of new

is not alone in filing for services trademarks. As part of

players in new countries using trademarks, all have a

a shift to a service economy, manufacturing industries

positive impact on filing activity.

complement their product offerings with new services,
such as after-sales, financial and consulting services, and

2) Increased product innovation: According to the liter- they also file related services trademarks.93
ature, rising trademark activity also reflects the increased
rate of product innovation and quality improvements in the
economy. New or qualitatively improved products often
trigger a new trademark filing, which helps to differentiate new goods and services in the marketplace.89 In the
legal literature it has also been argued that trademarks
reinforce the protection of patented goods; trademarks
are said to prolong the life of a patented product beyond
the patent itself.90 Increased global technological and
non-technological innovation expenditures and activity
may, therefore, act as indirect drivers of trademark activity.

88 See Jensen and Webster (2011), and WIPO (2011b).
89 See Mendonça et al (2004), Hipp and Grupp (2005), Millot
(2009), Jensen and Webster (2011), and Greenhalgh
and Schautschick (2013). For a similar analysis for a
middle-income economy, see Brahem et al 2013.
90 See Rujas (1999).

91 See Blind and Green (2003), Mendonça et al (2004),
Mangàni (2006), and Greenhalgh and Rogers (2012).
92 See Greenhalgh et al (2003). The Global Innovation
Index uses the number of trademarks filed as
proxy for non-technological innovation. See
Cornell University et al (2013). Other experts
have made a similar point. See Millot (2012).
93 See Schmoch (2003), Hipp and Grupp (2005),
Schmoch and Gauch (2009), Myers (2013), and
Blind and Green (2003). This is not always easy to
show with the available data, as no straightforward
comparison between Nice classes and particular
sectorial industry classifications exists.

53

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.14: Services trademarks have been growing faster than goods trademarks
Growth rate of total trademark applications by goods and services, in percent, for selected economies, 2004-2011
192.6%

200%

150%

126.1%
91.9%

100%

7.1%

4.0%

38.9%

36.7%

33.1%

50%

94.0%

15.4%

13.2%

51.7%

38.8%
7.5%

19.3%
1.3%

0%

Chile

China

Germany

Russian
Federation

Singapore

South Africa

Services

Goods

Goods

Services

Goods

Services

Goods

Services

Goods

Republic of
Korea

Services

-0.8%

-1.5%
Services

Services

Goods

Services

Goods

Services

Goods

Services

Goods

Australia

Goods

-0.4%

-6.7%
-50%

UK

US

Note: The time series are different for Chile (2007-2011) and South Africa (2008-2011).
Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2013.

The number of services trademarks in total trademark ap-

However, on the global level, and in most economies,

plications is still lower than the share of goods trademarks.

between 2004 and 2011 the number of filings of trade-

Together, the 11 service-related classes accounted for

marks in services classes grew considerably faster than

only one-third of all classes specified in applications filed

in goods classes (see Figure 1.14).94 In high-income

worldwide in 2011. However, these percentages differed

economies, only a few countries, such as France, have

considerably across offices and across countries with

seen the growth of goods classes achieve roughly the

different levels of economic development. Around 45

same levels as services classes.95 Among middle-income

percent of trademark filing activity in Australia, Mexico,

economies, the Russian Federation and South Africa

Turkey, the UK, the US, France and Germany was fo-

saw higher growth in goods classes. Yet, these are the

cused on service classes; in the case of Spain, services

exceptions, with most other economies experiencing

trademarks accounted for the majority of all trademark

higher growth of services trademarks relative to goods

filing activity. Conversely, China, with around 77 percent

trademarks. The services which drive trademark filings

of trademark filing activity, had the highest percentage of

are diverse, but the following categories stand out as the

applications in the goods-related classes. India and Viet

main drivers of growth: advertising, business manage-

Nam, for example, also displayed higher percentages of

ment, business administration, office functions; treat-

activity in goods classes.

ment of materials; medical services; veterinary services;
hygiene and beauty care; legal services; security services;
personal and social services.

94 In the US, for example, between 1985 and 2010,
the demand for services trademarks grew on
average three times as fast as that for product
trade trademarks. See Myers (2013).
95 See Fortune (2013).

54

CHAPTER 1

4) Greater global demand for trademarks: Trademark
filings on a local and international level are also positively
influenced by increased globalization and economic

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Table 1.4: Middle-income economies’ IP offices
receive the majority of trademark filings
Patent, trademark (based on class counts) and proportion of
GDP by economies’ income group (in percent), 2005-2011

development. Existing companies or other trademark

Patents (%)

holders export their brands to more countries, and they

2005

2011

2005

2011

2005

2011

High-income

79.8

65.3

54.9

45.1

64.8

57.6

Upper middle-income

16.9

register local variations of existing brands, thus driving

Trademarks (%) GDP (%)

30.4

35.1

43.9

24.2

29.7

trademark filings. Brands created by companies that

Upper middle-income – excluding China 6.7

5.9

21.3

21.1

14.8

15.5

are “born global”, and have an immediate Internet pres-

Lower middle-income

2.7

3.1

8.9

9.9

9.9

11.8

Low-income

0.4

0.0

1.0

1.0

1.2

1.3

BRICS

15.1

30.1

20.9

32.4

20.2

26.5

BRICS – excluding China

4.9

5.6

7.0

9.6

10.8

12.3

World

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

ence, are available to consumers worldwide. For these
firms, the importance of expeditiously registering their
trademarks, and using them in overseas markets to
retain rights, is increased (see Section 1.4). New brands
emerge from middle-income economies, which also
start exporting their brands. Finally, the use of electronic
commerce (e-commerce) by firms and customers has
increased, thanks to digital networks.
Interestingly, two sets of findings emerge when analyzing the data:
First, the data show that a wider range of companies,
individuals and countries are now active in trademark
filing than at any previous time in history. Trademark
filings in middle- and low-income economies (at home
and abroad) have increased significantly since 2005 in
terms of volume, but also in terms of their share in global
trademark filing activity. Trademark filings in middleincome economies now account for most trademark
applications, i.e. 54 percent (see Table 1.4). About 30
percent of the top 20 IP offices are now located in middleincome economies. In regional terms, Asia surpassed

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2013.

Trademarks, first filed at the national level, are also increasingly being filed abroad. In order to obtain trademark
protection in multiple offices, an applicant can either
file directly in each individual office or file an application for an international registration through the Madrid
system.96 When compared with patents, and thanks to
the Madrid system, it is easier to obtain a trademark in a
large number of jurisdictions. Moreover, the disclosure
of trademarks does not destroy novelty – thus internationalization can happen over a longer period and at
a different pace. Trademarks filed abroad more than
doubled from 437,000 in 1995 to close to 872,000 in 2011
(see Figure 1.15). International registrations via the Madrid
system also more than doubled from close to 19,000 in
1995 to close to 42,000 in 2012. Box 1.8 discusses the
patterns of international trademark filing and the new
tools needed in order to better understand international
branding strategies.

Europe as the largest recipient of trademark applications
in 2009. In 2011, it received 44 percent of all applications
filed worldwide. Latin America and the Caribbean region
also increased their shares in global trademark filings.

96 See fn. 83 for a description of the Madrid system.

55

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.15: More trademarks filed abroad

Second, the data do not support the view that trademark

Growth of trademark applications abroad and Madrid
registrations, percentage growth, 1995=1, 1985-2012

filings at the national level are necessarily characterized
trademarks retain a local character that is persistent over

2.50

2.00

by a larger share of non-resident filings. Brands and
time, partly due to language-related factors.

Madrid registrations
Trademarks led abroad
1995 = 1

To begin with, trademark filings are usually more local – i.e.

1.50

filed by residents – than patent filings, which are more

1.00

international in nature. In most of the top 20 IP offices

0.50

majority of trademark filings are filed by residents. In

by number of trademark applications (class count), the
China, the US, France, the Russian Federation, Germany,
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012

0.00

Source: WIPO Statistics Database, September 2013.

Box 1.8: New tools needed in order to analyze international
trademark strategies at the sector level
The determinants of companies’ trademark filing behavior abroad,
and the potentially pronounced differences in these strategies across
sectors, remain largely unexplored. Differences exist across economic income groups. Trademark owners in high-income economies
register a majority of their foreign trademarks in other high-income
countries. Trademark owners in middle-income economies in turn
register their trademarks about as frequently in high-income economies as they do in middle-income economies. Trademark owners
in low-income economies register the majority of their trademarks
in middle-income economies.
The intensity of trademark use abroad relative to exports is highest
for high-income economies, meaning that for every dollar exported,
companies in high-income economies file more trademarks abroad
than other income groups. However, since 1994, middle- and lowincome economies have ramped up their reliance on trademark use
abroad relative to their exports.
Despite this evidence, analyzing the determinants and effects of
trademark filings abroad is difficult because, until now, trademark
data could not be jointly analyzed with sector-level economic data
such as trade, foreign direct investment and other data. This might
soon change. Lybbert et al (2013) are developing an approach to
link trademark and economic data via standard product and industry
classification systems. If perfected, this mapping would enable
analysts to model the determinants and impacts of international
and domestic trademark activity at the sector level.
Source: Lybbert et al (2013).

56

India, Japan, Turkey, the Republic of Korea, Mexico, Italy,
the UK, the Benelux countries and Spain, the proportion
of non-resident trademark applicants was always below
30 percent in 2011, and sometimes as low as around
ten percent.97 The exceptions are Canada, Australia,
Switzerland and China, Hong Kong SAR.
In the case of less developed middle- and low-income
economies, the proportion of resident filings is clearly less
numerous than in the 20 largest IP offices in the world,
in terms of trademark filings. In countries such as Viet
Nam, Thailand, South Africa, Colombia, Venezuela and
Bangladesh, the proportion of non-resident applicants
is around 40 to 50 percent of total filings. Even so, this
proportion of non-resident applications for trademark
filings is usually lower than the proportion of non-resident
applications for patents.

97 See WIPO (2012), Figure B.2.1.3. In the case of European
countries, care must be taken when analyzing the
figures, as applicants can obtain domestic trademark
protection by filing a regional application with the
OHIM. This increases the difficulty of capturing the
resident/non-resident breakdown. In particular, with
OHIM filings, it is hard to assess to what extent the
applicant has a domestic or an EU-wide objective.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Furthermore, over time, the proportion of resident trade-

Box 1.9: Non-resident versus resident trademark filings in the US

mark filings versus non-resident trademark filings does

Of the five million trademark applications filed with the USPTO between 1985 and 2011, only 15.3 percent can be attributed to non-US
residents.100 Foreign demand did appear to be more resilient following
the dotcom boom. Throughout 2010, non-resident trademark filing
applications recovered faster and exhibited stronger growth than
resident filings. Overall, however, both resident and non-resident
applications grew at roughly the same pace between 1985 and
2011 (see Figure 1.16).

not appear to be impacted as much as in the case of
patents. In fact, at the global level, the proportion of nonresident trademark filings hovered around 30 percent
in the period 2004 to 2011. While this global figure is
largely influenced by the high level of resident trademark
applications in China, the finding also holds true at the
national level. For instance, the proportion of resident
trademark filings is relatively stable in large IP offices (see
Box 1.9 for the US).
Overall, the finding that domestic actors dominate trademark filings at local IP offices is plausible. The answer lies
in the nature of the companies that file for trademarks,

Figure 1.16: Non-resident trademark filings are not becoming
more important over time in the US as a proportion of total filings
Trademark filing applications by residents
and non-residents, 1985-2011
300,000
250,000

Resident
Non-resident

200,000

and the reasons that they do so. When compared with
patents, trademarks are more accessible to actors in any

150,000

economy. They are cheaper and easier to obtain and they

100,000

services (see Chapter 2).98 A lot of small- and mediumsized enterprises (SMEs) apply for trademarks to protect
goods and services. The vast majority of these SMEs only

50,000
0

1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

have a wider applicability to businesses, products and

operate domestically; consequently, SMEs represent a
large proportion of resident applications for trademark
filings. In fact, many trademark filings in middle- and
low-income economies tend to be by individuals rather
than by companies.99 Finally, patenting tends to be more
concentrated in a smaller number of global companies.
Additionally, patents are often filed abroad by company
headquarters, rather than by their subsidiaries abroad.

There is some variation in the distribution of non-resident applications
over this time period. As a proportion of total non-resident applications,
Canadian filings peaked in the mid-1990s, potentially in response
to increased access to the US economy following implementation
of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994. While filings
have since slowed, Canadian residents remain the largest source of
non-resident applications for US trademark registration. Non-resident
filings from Germany, the UK, Japan, France, and Italy also show
signs of relative decline, although they are increasing in annual
volumes overall. In contrast, China (including China, Hong Kong SAR),
Mexico, and the Republic of Korea accounted for growing shares of
non-resident applications. In 2011, Chinese residents were the fourth
largest source of foreign applications for US trademark registrations.
Source: Myers (2013). For more detail, see Graham et al (2013).

98 See OECD (2013c), Section 5.8.
99 See Abud et al (2013) for the case of Chile.

100 Applicant residency was established based on the
first-named applicant’s address. For applications
with no owner address data recorded, the firstnamed applicant’s nationality was used to proxy
residency. Applications with neither address nor
nationality data coverage were omitted. Basing
residency on nationality yielded comparable results.

57

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

When it comes to IP offices in middle- and low-income

Third, the Internet increases the need for legal protec-

economies with smaller volumes of trademark filings,

tion where rights owners face online sales of counterfeit

non-residents file the majority of trademarks. In this case,

goods or other forms of misuse of their trademark.101

experience shows that it is indeed the proportion of

The consequences of this increased risk include not only

residents – and not non-residents – that is more likely to

loss of profit, but also impairment through trademark

grow over time, as local companies develop experience

dilution (see Section 2.3.1 of Chapter 2 for a discussion

with the trademark system, and also as the proportion of

on this concept).

services in overall economic output grows. In general, a
certain level of economic development is associated with

In tandem with these three developments, a dynamic

a greater degree of dominance of resident trademarks

interaction is taking place between trademarks and

in the home market. A stronger presence of these same

domain names. Companies with existing brand names

brands in foreign markets is only attained at far higher

are filing for domain names both in country code top-

levels of economic development, however.

level domains (ccTLDs) and in the international generic
top-level domains (gTLDs) under these brand names

5) The rise of the Internet: The Internet has affected the

(and in combination with other terms) in order to build

role of trademarks in at least three major and related ways.

their online presence, or, defensively, to prevent third
parties from carrying out such registrations. In turn, new

First, the Internet has led to a considerable and most likely

companies with novel products are more likely to acquire

lasting boost to trademark applications. On the one hand,

both trademarks and domain names.

existing businesses launch new Internet-based or related
products and services, triggering new trademark filings.

Broadly in parallel with trademark filings, the number

On the other hand, the Internet is spurring the creation of

of domain name registrations has increased almost

new companies and the development of novel products,

continuously, with ccTLD registrations growing from

which, in turn, is also spurring the use of the trademark

less than 2 million in 2000 to close to 35 million in 2012,

system. Both these trends have led to a robust increase

and gTLDs, most importantly “.com”, moving from 105

in services-related trademarks in particular. It is worth

million in 2004 to 233 million in 2012.102 This trend was

noting that during the Internet boom years around 2000,

also accompanied by an increasing number of domain

the filing of trademarks in IT-related service trademark

name disputes, where trademark-related domain names

classes also increased sharply.

were occupied by entities that were different from the
trademark owner. The number of cases administered

Second, the Internet has increased the international and,

under the WIPO-initiated Uniform Domain Name Dispute

indeed, global reach of brands. More companies file not

Resolution Policy (UDRP), for example, has also grown. In

only in their home country but also abroad, leading to

2003, the number of WIPO domain name disputes stood

a larger spread of trademark filings. Arguably, the role

at 1,100; in 2012 that number had more than doubled

of brands – and the trust they create – are particularly

to 2,884 cases.

important in the online context, as consumers engage
in transactions remotely, often without being able to
physically inspect the product before concluding the
transaction. Comparable in some ways to the evolution
of trademarks during certain historical advancements in
international trade (Section 1.1), trademarks are seemingly becoming more important in the context of today’s
national and cross-border online transactions.
58

101 See WIPO (2010b).
102 See OECD (2013a), compiled from country and generic
network information centers and from ZookNIC.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

In a recent development, the Internet Corporation for

Finally, there is the issue of the interaction between

Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) has begun

trademarks and how products are searched for and

introducing new, generic, top-level domains.103 Following

found via Internet search engines. A known trademark

a round of applications, 1,930 applications are currently

may lead Internet users more quickly to a company’s

being processed, with the first of these domains expected

webpage and corresponding offerings online. Similarly,

to come online in 2014. The introduction of such domains

competitors or counterfeiters might be tempted to use

comes with additional opportunities and risks around the

someone else’s trademark to direct traffic to their sites.

use of trademarks online, thus further increasing the level

The Internet has provided countless new ways for busi-

of interaction between the Internet and trademarks. For

nesses to refer to trademarks in a manner that affects

example, brand owners who can afford the fees might

the trademark holder’s business.104 Practices such as the

assess whether to apply for their own domain. Regardless

use of trademarks within listings for non-genuine goods

of whether or not they apply, they must address any need

on auction sites, the use of trademarks as keywords in

for a presence in new domains operated by third parties,

search engines, the use of trademarks to name accounts

and devise strategies for the prevention and resolution of

in social networks, or the use of trademarks on virtual

infringement of their trademarks in such new domains.

objects that are traded in virtual worlds, constitute clear
challenges to the traditional application of trademark law.
As a result of competitors or counterfeiters purchasing
trademarks as keywords from Internet search engines,
advertisers’ websites may show up in searches for
trademarks that these advertisers do not own. Many
trademark owners fear that website traffic is redirected
in such a manner. Whether this is true or not is largely
an empirical question.105 As the importance of brands is
likely to increase rather than decrease in the context of
Internet searches and purchases of apparently genuine
branded goods from websites, trademark enforcement
practices will have adapt to this new environment.

103 For more information see www.wipo.int/
amc/en/domains/newgtld/.

104 See WIPO (2010b).
105 For the first empirical work on the matter see
Bechtold and Tucker (2013). The authors find that,
while some groups of users may visit the websites of
trademark owners less often after seeing third-party
advertisements on search engine result pages, other
groups of users actually visit them more often.

59

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

6) Strategic use of trademarks: A more strategic use of
trademark filings may have contributed to overall growth
of trademark filings. In particular, in legal regimes where
there is an absence of stringent use requirements, companies or other organizations may file a great number of
trademarks – without any plans to use them immediately.
They may do this so that they can “fence” around their
existing trademarks by way of preparing for future similar
product releases, or so as to ensure that other companies
do not get too close to their namespace. The inflation of
trademark filings could end up “cluttering” the trademark
register (see Subsection 2.3.2).106 Currently, while there
seems to be little indication that the existence of too many
trademarks is inhibiting the registration of new marks, the
proliferation of trademarks may be responsible for driving
up the costs of searches and clearance for companies
that are considering entering a new market.
7) Institutional and regulatory changes: Finally, in the
case of institutional drivers (for example the facilitation of
filing trademarks abroad due to international agreements),

Box 1.10: The extension of registrable trademarks beyond
words alone
Like the situation which applies to patent protection, the range of
signs that can be registered, and thus protected as trademarks, has
also grown. In 1994, Article 15.1 of the TRIPS Agreement confirmed
a trend whereby a broader range of registrable trademarks had been
well under way in countries since the 1980s. Initially, only words
or combinations of words, typically represented in connection with
graphical elements, such as drawings or logos, were considered
registrable. Later, three-dimensional or shape marks (e.g. the
Coca-Cola bottle), slogans, acoustical signs and sounds, identification threads of textiles, abstract colors (e.g. the colors green and
yellow for agricultural machines from John Deere) were accepted
as registrable trademarks.107 Such developments notwithstanding,
word trademarks, or a combination of word(s) and image, continue
to be the most important trademark type by far. Data from four highincome economies shows that pure word trademarks accounted for
anywhere between 55 percent (Germany) and 73 percent (France)
of all trademarks in 2010 (see Figure 1.17).
Figure 1.17: Word trademarks account for the majority of
registrations; some trend growth towards registration of other
types of trademarks
Trademark applications by type, in percent, 1996 and 2010
90%
80%

the ease of trademark applications via new online ap-

70%

plication systems, coupled with other factors outlined in

60%

Box 1.7, play an important role in explaining trademark

50%

filing patterns. Interestingly, however, the extension of

40%
30%

registrable trademarks to new forms of trademarks – and

20%

beyond service, word and shape trademarks – does not

10%

currently seem to be a major driver of trademark filings
for countries for which data are available (see Box 1.10).
To conclude, one might also expect that the enforcement

Applications 2010
Applications 1996

0%

Word Other Word Other Word Other Word Other Word Other
marks marks marks marks marks marks marks marks marks marks
Australia

Chile

of trademark rights is related to the growth of trademark
filings, with the assumption that improved legal certainty
over time via improved enforcements leads to more
trademark filings.

106 On trademark cluttering, see Graevenitz et al
(2012). This work, commissioned by the UK
Intellectual Property Office (UK-IPO), provides
a first empirical assessment of the matter.

60

France

Germany

US

Source: WIPO based on data in Fortune (2013), Helmers (2013), MitraKahn (2013), Myers (2013), and Schautschick and Graevenitz (2013).

107 See WIPO (2006).

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

The filing of other types of trademarks (such as three-dimensional,
sound or color) is still negligible in countries for which data are
available. In Germany, for example, word, and word and image
accounted for almost 97 percent of all trademarks filed in 2011. In
Australia, the use of sound, scent, shape, color, or a combination of
shape and color on trademarks, has decreased as share of overall
trademark activity, accounting for a mere 0.3 percent of filings in 2012,
down from one percent in 1996. Of these filings, the most popular
is the shape trademark, which accounted for 137 filings in 2012,
or 0.2 percent of the total. In the US, the proportion of image-only
trademarks is slowly decreasing over time, while word and image
trademark filings are on the increase. Filings to register sound, smell,
and other non-visual trademarks are rare in the US. France is an
exception, in that color trademarks play a non-negligible role; color
trademarks accounted for 96 percent of non-word trademarks and
hence about 26 percent of all trademarks in 2011 (Figure 1.18). It must
be noted, however, that all color marks are not single-color marks;
there are also trademarks that claim color as a distinctive feature,
which might be captured by the French statistics as color marks.
Figure 1.18: In France, apart from word trademarks, color
trademarks are the most commonly used trademark type
Proportion of French trademark applications, other than
applications for word trademarks, by type, in percent, 1993-2011

1.4
The rise of markets for brands
Markets for brands seem to play an important but underappreciated economic role in today’s global economy.
Similar to patents, trademarks and brands are increasingly licensed, bought and sold at the national and international level. In addition, franchise business models
are both growing and internationalizing.
Against this background, the absence of definitions, data
and analysis on markets for brands is an important gap
in the current body of knowledge. Whereas markets for
technology have received a great deal of attention, the
licensing and acquisitions of brands is relatively uncharted
territory.108
This section seeks to synthesize the disparate data on

100%

markets for brands and to provide new evidence.109

90%

The objective is (i) to define and provide a taxonomy for

80%

different brand markets, and (ii) to provide evidence on

70%

their magnitude.

60%
50%
40%
30%
Color

Figurative

Sound

3-D

Hologram

20%
10%

19

93
19
9
19 4
9
19 5
9
19 6
9
19 7
9
19 8
9
20 9
0
20 0
0
20 1
0
20 2
03
20
0
20 4
0
20 5
0
20 6
0
20 7
0
20 8
0
20 9
10

0%

Source: Fortune (2013).

108 See Arora et al (2001), and Giuri et al
(2007) on markets for technology.
109 This section draws on a background report
prepared for the 2013 World Intellectual
Report, see Frey and Ansar (2013).

61

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.4.1

Companies often pursue a brand licensing strategy.
Companies (“licensors”) may license the use of their

What are markets for brands and
why do companies use them?

brands (along with associated trademarks) to third party
producers or sellers (“licensees”) in return for a stream
of royalties or other value. Companies often pursue

What are markets for brands? Despite their economic

such a licensing strategy, allowing them to diversify their

significance, no agreed definition of these markets exists.

business and expand into additional product categories.

In this Report the term “markets for brands” covers three

By doing so, they are able to enter new markets, access

different transactions, grouped under the the following:

competences outside the boundary of the company,

“Temporary transfer of the right to use an IP” with (i) the

and generate new revenues without making substantial

licensing of brands and (ii) the franchising of business

investments in building or acquiring additional know-

models; and “Sale or purchase of IP ownership rights”

how and manufacturing capacities.110 The practice is

essentially consisting of (iii) the acquisition of a brand

often used internationally as companies outsource their

and the transfer or associated rights, including as part

manufacturing, sales or services to foreign countries. An

of company merger and acquisition (M&A) (Figure 1.19).

additional incentive might be the fact that companies
need to commercially use the brand in order to retain

Trademarks correspond to the legal rights associated

rights to the trademark in a foreign country, and hence

with brand assets that may be transferred or purchased;

to maintain brand ownership.111 Again, licensing can

hence they are often an integral part of these three trans-

often accomplish this at a lower cost than would apply

actions.

in a case where a direct entry approach is adopted. In

Figure 1.19: Markets for brands defined

the licensing of a trademark increases the brand value of

Temporary transfer of
the right to use an IP

the licensor as well.112 One such example would be the

many cases of promotional trademark merchandising,
Sale or purchase of IP
ownership rights

Brand transfer and
licensing to third party

Brand purchases and sales, also
as part of mergers & acquisitions

Trademark licensing

Trademark acquisition

licensing of a brand of luxury car to a toy manufacturer
producing miniature cars.

Franchising

Note: The sale or purchase of IP rights (see, right) covers a case
where there is a change of economic ownership of the IP right;
the seller no longer has any rights associated with the IP.
Source: WIPO. Definitions aligned with (UN et al 2011).

110 See Calboli (2007), and Colucci et al (2008)
111 See WIPO (2004), and Jayachandran et al
(2013). See the discussion of the use requirement
in Subsection 2.3.2 of Chapter 2.
112 See Ladas (1973), and Calboli (2007).

62

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Many companies also pursue a franchise strategy. A

Third, the acquisition of brands and the transfer of as-

company (“the franchisor”) may choose to license its

sociated rights constitute a more permanent transfer of

whole business model to a third party (“the franchisee”)

IP rights from one business to another. This regularly

in a particular geographical area in return for a stream of

takes place as part of company M&As. One relevant

royalty payments or other value.113 Examples of this type

example is the Lenovo purchase of the personal computer

of business model include fast food, hotel and car repair

division of IBM, including the “Think” trademark, which

chains. As part of a franchise-based business model,

took place in 2004. While there may well be secondary

the franchisee secures the right to use the brand and

markets for brands – i.e. where companies acquire a

the relevant know-how. Franchising is similar to licens-

brand, but not the related business – such transactions

ing in that it facilitates market entry for the franchisor

are likely to be uncommon, since brands are typically

while simultaneously enabling them to avoid the costs

difficult to separate from a business, and the value of

associated with building a brand and building a new

the business is likely to decrease substantially without

business model; as such, franchising ensures short

the brand. Moreover, trademark assignments are likely

lead time to market. Licensing and franchising are also

to be a submarket of the above.

commonly employed as early-stage international moves
for companies seeking to “go global”, since they offer an

In short, markets for brands provide a way of mitigating

opportunity to operate in new countries, and in doing so,

some of the costs and risks associated with building

to incur relatively low costs and low risk. Because fran-

a brand, allowing the companies involved to alleviate

chising allows entrepreneurs worldwide to expand with

costs when entering new markets by using established

relatively little capital investments, it provides a suitable

brands.115 On the flipside, companies with established

growth model for businesses in low-income countries.

brand names increasingly depend on their ability to

114

leverage brand equity by launching new products using
established brand names, sometimes externally through
brand licensing. This creates market opportunities, with
some companies seeking to acquire established brands
for new product developments, whereas others examine
opportunities to leverage their own brands.116
However, a number of factors may restrain the development of these markets. The granting of the temporary
use of a brand – as in licensing and franchising – entails
the risk of the licensee or the franchisee weakening the
brand by reducing the product or service quality, for
example. Customers will expect a certain quality level;
if disappointed, this will have a negative impact on the
brand value itself. A brand owner will have to closely
113 As stated in EFF (2011), franchising is: “[…] a system of
marketing goods and/or services and/or technology based
upon a written contract between two legally, financially
and fiscally separate and independent undertakings, the
Franchisor and each of its individual Franchisees, whereby
the Franchisor grants each of its individual Franchisees
the right, and imposes the obligation, to conduct a
business in accordance with the Franchisor’s concept.”
114 See Frey and Ansar (2013).

monitor the use of his or her brands.

115 See Tauber (1988).
116 See Clifton (2003).

63

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.4.2

Some private entities have made efforts to map the
economic importance of brand licensing by gauging the
sales of licensed products. One of these – The Top 150

Putting numbers on markets
for brands: not so easy…

Global Licensors ranking – has estimated that retail sales

Temporary and partial transfer of the right to use an IP

USD 230 billion in 2012.119 Using this measurement,

of branded, licensed products worldwide were almost
Disney Consumer Products is the largest licensor, with

Putting numbers on trademark licensing: Examples

revenues of USD 39 billion in 2012 – more than double

of trademark licensing in most sectors, as well as ex- the revenues achieved in 1992 (see Table 1.5). Disney
amples for individual product and service lines, abound.117

licenses its film, television and movie characters for use

Trademark licensing also appears to be a significant

on third-party products and thereby earns royalties.120

source of revenue for many trademark owners.

Unmistakably, the entertainment sector, together with
the sports sector, is one of the most important sectors

Nonetheless, reporting systematic data on trademark

in trademark licensing. As a result, the more detailed

licensing is notoriously difficult.

trademark licensing studies and publicly available data
concern the licensing of cartoon characters or sport

First, company-level data on brand licensing is hard to

clubs to toys, food, home décor, clothing and footwear,

grasp. For the most part, trademark licensing transac-

and consumer products. The other top licensors in the

tions between companies are not made public. On the

ranking of the top global brand licensors mostly operate

contrary, companies have an incentive to avoid admitting

around the apparel, automotive, textile and consumer

to existing or potential customers that their brand is being

electronics sectors.

used by third parties. While annual reports may make
numerous references to the importance of brands and
related licensing, only in very rare cases do they provide
detailed figures on trademark licensing payments and
revenues. In addition, disparate information on trademark
deals, and underlying royalty rates, can be gleaned from
court records, some filings with the US Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) or similar sources; nevertheless, no systematic source is available.118

117 See Jayachandran et al (2013).
118 See Smith and Parr (2005).

64

119 The ranking does not pretend to offer details on
licensing revenues of these companies. Rather, the
top global licensors report the retail sales of branded
products from their licensees. These sales revenues
are the basis on which confidential royalty rates are
applied, yielding licensing revenue to top licensors.
120 Some of the major properties licensed by the
company include Mickey Mouse, Cars, Disney
Princess, Winnie the Pooh, Toy Story, DisneyFairies,
and the Marvel properties including Spider-Man
and Avengers. See Disney Annual Report 2012.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Others industry surveys by associations or consultan- Table 1.5: Global sales of licensed merchandise
cies help by collecting data on licensing across different as reported by the top 15 brand licensors, 2012
Global sales of licensed
merchandise (in USD billion)

IP forms and via surveys of licensors. They publish ag-

Rank Company

gregate numbers; data are not made available on the

1

Disney Consumer
Products

US

Entertainment

39.3

level of the company, in order to keep individual license

2

Iconix Brand Group

US

Apparel

13

deals and revenues confidential. For instance, when

3

PVH Corp.

US

Apparel

13

examining the US licensing market, the latest survey

4

Meredith

US

Media
and Marketing

11.2

carried out by the International Licensing Industry and

5

Mattel

US

Toys and games

7

6

Sanrio

Japan

Art

7

7

Warner Bros. Consumer
US
Products

Entertainment

6

8

Nickelodeon Consumer
US
Products

Entertainment

5.5

Merchandisers’ Association (LIMA) shows that trademark
owners generated USD 5.5 billion in royalties in 2012, a
gain of 2.5 percent over 2011, for an estimated retail value
of USD 112 billion.121 In terms of revenues, the majority
of these revenues are generated in the following sectors (in decreasing order of importance): (i) “Celebrity
and Character” (entertainment, TV, movie and celebrity)

9

Major League Baseball

US

Sports

5.2 (E)

10

Hasbro

US

Toys, games and
entertainment

4.8

11

The Collegiate Licensing
US
Company

Sports

4.6

12

IBML (International
Brand Management
& Licensing)

UK

Apparel

4

13

Westinghouse

US

Electrical
Engineering
Household
Appliances

3.99

followed by (ii) “Corporate brands”, (iii) “Fashion” which
includes designer branded goods, (iv) “Sports”, including leagues and individuals, (v) “Art”, and (vi) royalties for
“University College” trademarks.122 Other surveys and

Country Type of business

14

Rainbow

Italy

Entertainment

3.8 (PRIVATE)

15

General Motors

US

Automotive

3.5 (E)

reports carried out by consultancies offer insights into

Note: E = estimated, PRIVATE = privately owned.

specific sectors in specific countries.123

Source: Top 150 Global Licensors as in Lisanti (2013).

Second, in most countries, there is no legal requirement
for trademark licenses to be recorded with the national
IP office. Even where countries require registration (as is
the case in Brazil), see Box 1.12, an insignificant amount
of these data are available in a usable format, and there
is no one source in existence anywhere in the world
that stores all the various national statistics in a single
repository. The information collected usually relates to
registration requirements, which vary, and which are
specific to each country. Often, only a minority of deals
are registered. The data cannot be clearly associated
with any particular company. Moreover, usually only
information on the licensing deal, but not its outcomes
(i.e. paid royalty streams, etc.) is available.

121 See LIMA (2013).
122 Idem.
123 See PwC (2012), for example, on licensing
in the Italian fashion industry.

65

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

To overcome these limitations, a number of private enti-

Statistical offices are beginning to track the franchise

ties have begun to collect data on trademark licensing

industry. In 2007, the US Census Bureau launched an

deals. This information includes the name of licensor and

Economic Census Franchise Statistics initiative focused

licensee, the royalty rate (e.g. five percent of sales, and

on assessing the contribution of franchising to the US

a possible upfront payment) and the description of the

economy and on examining the number of businesses

deal. These data reveal the number of deals across time.

engaged in franchising, their annual sales, as well as their

Deal coverage is often low, however. Moreover, the data

employment data and payroll.126 The 2012 Economic

also do not include comprehensive figures on the value

Census forms also have franchising questions in relation

of trademark licensing deals, as the deal information is

to franchise industries. The US franchising sector has

concluded ex ante to revenue generation. In addition,

experienced steady growth both in terms of franchising

these sources are biased towards deals in high-income

establishment formation and related economic output.

countries and, in particular, towards deals in the US.

The estimates referred to in the US Census report suggest
that the number of franchising establishments in the US

The analysis of available deals shows that average royalty

will reach 757,055 by the end of 2013. Franchising output

rates on both net and gross sales vary from less than

is expected to reach USD 802 billion by the end of 2013.127

5 percent to more than 25 percent across sectors. The
highest average rates are found within the “Celebrity

Apart from some mostly US-specific rankings of top

and Character” category, while the lowest average roy- franchises, most other reports are based on data gathalty rates relate to “Corporate/Product” and “Fashion”

ered from diverse national franchising associations or

trademarks.

compilations of data produced by these associations.128

124

The lack of a reporting framework at the international level
In short, trademark royalty deals and outcomes are

complicates matters; different national reports adopt

only public for a minority of the total trademark licens-

different reporting structures, and the data are hard to

ing deals.125 Available information on licensing deals is

compile and compare.

highly incomplete.
Putting numbers on franchising: Thanks to incipient
work by statistical offices, reports by national franchise
industry associations and publications of consultancies,
the data situation with respect to franchising is somewhat better.

124 See Smith and Parr (2005).
125 Idem.

66

126 See US Economic Census, 2007 Economic
Census Franchise Report, released on
September 14, 2010. See also PwC (2011).
127 See IFA (2013).
128 The 2013 Franchise 500 Rankings, for
instance, offers a tool that can be used to
compare franchise operations in the US.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

To get around this problem, Antonowicz (2011) gathered

Trade in IP – cross-border trademark licensing and

data from franchising associations of individual coun-

franchises: Paradoxically, while these data are not avail-

tries.129 He showed that franchising agreements are

able at the national level, monetary data on any IP-related

widely used around the world. According to his data, the

licensing are provided at the international level. As part

international franchising market comprises 71 countries,

of their balance of payments (BoP) statistics compilation

40,200 franchise brands and more than 3 million franchis-

systems, countries report these IP-related receipts and

ing establishments. In terms of the regional distribution

payments with other countries under the title “Royalties

of the market, the highest number of franchising brands

and license fees” (see Section 1.3.1 in the 2011 World

operates in Europe, while Asia leads the field in the num-

Intellectual Property Report).

ber of franchising establishments. In terms of franchising
intensity relative to GDP, firms in Australia are the most

One advantage of these data is that they are published by

active. Firms in North America, Africa, Europe, Asia and

all countries in a timely and yearly (or quarterly) manner.

South and Central America follow in decreasing order of
franchise intensity relative to GDP.

Thus far, however, most data on cross-border receipts
and payments of royalties and license fees do not distin-

The above findings are similar to the findings of the

guish between different forms of IP. For most countries,

European Franchise Federation (EFF) (2011). Over the

only aggregate data for all IP-based transactions were

period 2007 to 2009, Europe as a region was the largest

available. No breakdown of these data were available,

franchising market, with 11,731 franchise brands. While

which would have allowed economists to assess interna-

the US was the largest single market for franchise brands

tional payments and receipts for specific IP types, such

in 2007, the data suggest that it was overtaken by China

as trademarks or franchising.131

and the Republic of Korea in 2009. Nevertheless, the US
was still the leading market in 2009, when the number of

On this front, some noteworthy developments have

franchise establishments – as opposed to the number of

taken place (as described in Box 1.11). The Manual on

franchise brands – is considered.130

Statistics of International Trade in Services (MSITS) 2002

Finally, reports from the EFF show that markets for fran-

ing franchise and trademark payments. In addition, the

chise brands are largely domestic. In China, for example,

current 2010 edition of the manual clarifies this recom-

90 percent of the franchise brands were still domestic in

mended identification. More detailed data on international

asks countries to submit data while separately identify-

2009. In Brazil, this figure was 89 percent in 2009, and

IP transactions have slowly started to become available.

in India, it was 99 percent in 2007.

While these statistics will not be reported by the IMF, in
line with the 2010 MSITS recommendations, the data
are accessible from the countries themselves or from
international organizations such as the WTO.

129 See Antonowicz (2011). Although the author provides
a list of the countries included in the study, no
country-specific information is provided. According
to Frey and Ansar (2013), this makes it difficult
to verify and replicate Antonowicz’s findings.
130 Frey and Ansar (2013) note, however, that the EFF
figures diverge substantially from the US Census
estimates as well as from Antonowicz (2011).

131 The OECD’s Technology Balance of Payments
provides more detailed disaggregated information,
distinguishing between four categories of technology
services. See Athreye and Yang (2011). Yet, extracting
trademark and licensing receipts separately from this
database does not currently appear to be possible.

67

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Box 1.11: Important developments in relation to international
IP payments
More disaggregated data on international trade in IP rights are
starting to become available. Following publication of the fifth
edition of the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) BoP Manual,
which introduced separate reporting for IP payments, the United
Nations interagency Task Force on Statistics of International Trade
in Services recommended an extended breakdown of charges
for the use of IP through the Manual on Statistics of International
Trade in Services. In the sixth edition of the BoP Manual, an item on
the “Charges for the use of IP not included elsewhere (n.i.e.)” was
introduced with clearer definitions. The 2010 edition of the trade
in services manual recommends the breakdown between various
IP-based licensing transactions.
The item “Charges for the use of intellectual property n.i.e.” is now
defined as follows:
• Charges for the use of proprietary rights, such as patents,
trademarks, copyrights, industrial processes and designs, trade
secrets and franchises, where rights arise from research and
development, as well as from marketing
• Charges for licenses to reproduce and/or distribute intellectual
property embodied in produced originals or prototypes, such
as copyrights on books and manuscripts, computer software,
cinematographic works and sound recordings, and related rights,
such as for the recording of live performances and for television,
cable or satellite broadcast
Following these recommendations, royalties and license fees, or
the new charges for the use of IP n.i.e should include license fees
paid for the use of produced originals or outcomes of research and
development and trademarks and franchises. MSITS 2010 suggests
reporting franchise and trademark licensing fees separately.
The methodology makes a difference between temporary right to
use, outright sales, and full transfers of IP rights (compare to Figure
1.19). Similarly, the provision of temporary right to use or reproduce
IP products is shown as a service.
Another recently introduced change is where to classify the sales
of specific IP assets. In previous recommendations, a sale of the
IP asset was supposed to be under the capital account, i.e. as
non-produced non-financial assets. In the new recommendations,
the sale of other IP-based products should be included under the
appropriate service that produces them, i.e. software originals should
be shown separately under computer services; audiovisual (films,
music) originals should be shown under audiovisual services. The
only exception here is trademarks; their sale is not currently considered on a par with the sale of other IP rights, which are treated as
produced assets. The sale of trademarks, therefore, is still treated
under the capital account as a non-produced non-financial asset.
Source: IMF (2009), and UN et al (2011).

68

The following relies on IP-flow BoP-statistics for five countries which already offer disaggregated information on
trademark licensing and on franchising, namely Australia,
Brazil, Canada, Sweden, and the US. A number of findings emerge from this preliminary analysis:
First, international markets for trademark licensing and
franchising have been growing, both in absolute terms and
relative to trade in services in some of the selected countries.
The total number of international trademark licensing
and franchising transactions (defined as receipts plus
payments) has grown in absolute terms over the period
2006 to 2011 for the five countries under consideration,
except for Sweden (see Figure 1.20, top). The US and,
to a lesser extent Sweden, have a positive balance in
trademark licensing and franchising, whereas Australia,
Brazil and Canada have a negative balance. The receipts
and payments for the US are multiple times larger than
that of its partners, and one can see how countries such
as Canada rely on trademark and franchise-related payments from the neighboring US.

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.20: The total value of international
trademark and licensing transactions
has mostly increased over the period
2006 to 2011, sometimes rapidly

Trademark licensing and franchising also grew, relative
to trade in services in the case of the US, rising from
2.2 percent to 2.7 percent of total services trade, and in
Australia from 0.7 percent to 1.1 percent of total services

Total affiliated and unaffiliated transactions (receipts and
payments) for trademarks and franchising, 2006-2011
1,400

Australia
Canada

Brazil
US (right axis)

Sweden

1,200

trade. For the other countries, the development was flat,
30,000

25,000

1,000
20,000
800
15,000

or, in the case of Canada, negative (Figure 1.20, bottom).
Second, when examining Australia, Canada and the
US, one finds that the receipts for trademark licensing
and franchising are relatively small when compared with
other IP-based transactions (Figure 1.21). One also finds
that payments can, however, account for a significant

600
10,000

proportion of IP trade flows, as in the case of Australia

5,000

copyright and industrial processes constitute the bulk

400

and Canada. Transactions related to IP for software,

200

of the IP-related unaffiliated international payments, both
0

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

0

Source: WIPO, based on data from the Australia Bureau of Statistics
(ABS), National Industrial Property Institute Brazil (INPI), Statistics Canada
(CANSIM), Statistics Sweden (SCB), Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

in Canada and in the US. In the US, trademarks and
franchising account for 10 percent of the receipts for IP
rights, while payments accounted for 6.6 percent of all
imports for IP rights in 2010. In Canada, trademarks and

Total affiliated and unaffiliated transactions for trademarks
and franchising as a proportion of total trade in commercial
services (excluding government services n.i.e.), 2006-2011

franchising accounted for only 1.3 percent of the unaffiliated receipts for IP rights, but a considerable 25.6 per-

3.0%
Australia
Sweden

Brazil
US

cent of all IP-related payments. Also, in Canada and the

Canada

US, the proportion of markets for unaffiliated trademark

2.5%

licensing and franchising are growing relatively slowly as
a proportion of total IP trade between unaffiliated entities.

2.0%

In Australia, the situation is similar to Canada, but with
1.5%

amplified magnitudes and growth as regards IP-related
payments. Specifically, the trademark and franchise

1.0%

proportion of total IP receipts was at 10 percent in 2011,
but payments accounted for a much higher proportion,

0.5%

0.0%

at 45 percent of all IP payments. In addition, they have
been growing since 1998. Turning to Brazil, while the
2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Source: WIPO, based on data from ABS, INPI Brazil, CANSIM,
SCB, BEA and WTO data for trade in commercial services.

2011

proportion of trademarks and franchises has been growing over time, royalty payments are also mainly due to
payments related to know-how and technical assistance
services (see Box 1.12).132

132 Lutz et al (2013).

69

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Figure 1.21: Markets for trademark licensing and franchising are
relatively small compared with the trade in other IP forms
AUSTRALIA
Exports (affiliated and unaffiliated)

Imports (affiliated and unaffiliated)

CANADA
Exports (unaffiliated)

11

10

20

09

20

08

20

07

20

06

20

05

20

04

20

03

20

20

02

01

20

00

20

99

20

19

98

Franchise and trademarks
Hardware and design
Music and other
Software

19

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

20

02

20

20

20

20

19

19

11

-3,000

10

0

09

500

-2,500

08

-2,000

07

1,000

06

-1,500

05

1,500

04

-1,000

03

2,000

01

-500

00

2,500

99

0

98

3,000

Imports (unaffiliated)

2,000

0

1,800
-500

1,600
1,400

-1,000

1,200

Software and other royalties
Copyrights and related rights
Franchise fees
Trademarks
Patents and industrial design

1,000
-1,500

800
600

-2,000

400

-2,500
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

0

US
Exports (unaffiliated)

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010

200

Imports (unaffiliated)

50,000

0

45,000
-2,000

40,000
35,000

-4,000

30,000
-6,000

25,000

Industrial processes
General use computer software
Trademarks
Franchise fees
Film and television tape distribution
Other intangibles
Books, records, and tapes
Broadcasting and recording of live events

20,000
-8,000

15,000
10,000

-10,000

5,000

Source: WIPO, based on data from ABS and the Office of the Chief Economist, IP Australia, CANSIM, and BEA.

70

11

20

10

09

20

20

08

07

20

06

20

20

05

04

20

20

03

02

20

01

20

00

20

99

20

19

19

11

20

10

09

20

20

08

07

20

06

20

20

05

04

20

03

20

02

20

01

20

00

20

99

20

19

98
19

98

-12,000

0

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Box 1.12: Is the licensing of foreign brands and franchises
increasing? Evidence from Brazil
Following national regulations, the Brazilian IP office (INPI) registers
contracts related to the transfer of technologies. By law, companies
are obliged to register technology or franchise contracts, in order
to enable the Central Bank to process and facilitate outward payments of royalties and license fees. In Brazil, such registration also
allows income tax deduction of these expenses. The contracts under
consideration involve the licensing of industrial property rights,
such as trademarks, patents, utility models, industrial designs
and integrated circuits. They also include contracts on knowledge
transfer not involving IP rights, such as know-how agreements and
technical assistance services and franchise contracts.

Approximately 1,000 technology contracts between a foreign licensor
and a national licensee are registered per year. The vast majority of
these contracts relate to technical assistance services (76 percent),
which are followed by know-how agreements (10 percent), trademark
licenses (7 percent) and franchise contracts (3 percent). Given that
only the number of deals is recorded, but not the value of the deals,
these proportions do not necessarily reflect the actual amounts
involved in the remittances.
However, the contracts involving trademarks licenses and franchising are the only ones that grew fairly consistently, both in absolute
and proportional terms during the 2000-2012 period. Altogether,
they now account for around 15 percent of contracts registered in
2012 (see Figure 1.22).

Figure 1.22: In Brazil, the relative importance of trademark licensing and franchising is small, but it is growing relative to other
technology contracts
Distribution of registered contracts by kind and period, 2000-2004 and 2008-2012, as a percentage of the total

2008-2012

2000-2004

6%
5%

1%

9%

Patents and indudstrial designs
Franchising
Know-how
Mixed
Technical assistance
Trademarks

Source: INPI Brazil, and Lutz et al (2013).

Third, in countries where these figures are available,

a central position, and they then charge the other parts of

the vast majority of registered international receipts for

the business a license fee. Global companies are known

trademark licensing and franchising relate to transactions

to allocate profits between tax jurisdictions – sometimes

between affiliates. In the US, unaffiliated transactions

in order to optimize business processes, sometimes in

accounted for 22 percent of total (affiliated and unaf-

order to pay fewer taxes – and this may impact on how

filiated) trademark licensing and franchising receipts in

licensing revenues and flows are reported, thus affecting

2011. In Canada, unaffiliated transactions accounted for

the interpretability of the data.133

only 9.5 percent of total trademark licensing. Although
no separate information is available, the situation is likely
to be similar in the vast majority of countries. In affiliated
transactions, however, companies transfer trademarks
within companies to manage the brand or franchise from

133 For more details, see Box 1.7 in WIPO
(2011a) and Madeuf (1984).

71

CHAPTER 1

Fourth, and unsurprisingly, examination of the data from
the US shows that most international trademark and
franchise transactions are between high-income countries. US franchising and trademark licensing receipts are

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Fig 1.23: Asia, Latin America and
Africa are becoming more important
markets for US trademarks
US trademark receipts, by region, affiliated
and unaffiliated, 1996 and 2011

mainly confined to OECD member states. Unsurprisingly,
Canada and Mexico, given their close proximity to the US,
provide important export markets. Additional noteworthy

1.8%

1996

US markets for trademark licensing, are Japan, the UK,

7.8%

1.0%

8.7%

Australia, and central European countries. One largely
finds the same patterns when examining franchising receipts. An exception is China, which constitutes a more
important franchise export destination than Australia
and France.
Middle-income economies are becoming more important markets. While small, growth rates in US receipts
from these countries increased substantially during the

57.4%

23.4%

Europe
Asia and Paci c
Latin America
Canada
Africa
Middle East

investigated period. In particular, US franchising receipts
from the Middle East increased by 15 percent annually
over the investigated period. Double-digit growth figures

2.0%

2011

were also recorded for South America.

5.9%

0.8%

10.6%

While middle- and low-income economies still provide
relatively small markets, some regions, such as Asia,

50.3%

Latin America and Africa, have increased their proportion of trademark licensing from the US at the expense
of Europe and Canada (see Figure 1.23).
While some middle- or low-income economies have
increasingly become important export destinations for

30.4%
Europe
Asia and Paci c
Latin America
Canada
Africa
Middle East

trademark licensing, and in particular for franchising, there

Note: Regions as defined by the US Bureau of Economic Analysis.

is either limited or no evidence suggesting that these

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), US Department of Commerce.

economies export licensed brands to richer countries. US
payments to middle- and low income countries for both
franchising and trademark licensing remained negligible
over the investigated period.

72

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Sale or purchase of IP rights: brand-related M&As
Both the press and the business literature provide numerous examples of brand-related M&As. In particular, the

The chosen methodology yields about 1,000 to 1,700 brand-related
deals per year, or only about 1.5 percent of the global deal volume.
Interestingly, however, the value of the average brand-driven M&A
transaction is approximately 10 to 12 times higher than the value
of the average global M&A deal.

acquisitions of Dunlop, Jaguar, Land Rover, Volvo, Tetley
and others by companies in middle-income economies
have received much attention in recent years
Putting a figure on the acquisition of brands is complicated for conceptual reasons. First, brands or trademarks
are rarely acquired on their own; rather, they are usually
part of an M&A deal (see Figure 1.19). Evidently, M&As
are seldom motivated by the acquisition of a brand
alone. They are usually related to many other strategic
considerations of the parties involved – sometimes
the brand comes along with other assets, with these
other assets being the intended target of the takeover.
Consequently, purely brand-related M&A transactions
are difficult to single out from M&As that are motivated

Most brand-driven M&A transactions tend to be domestic deals as
opposed to international deals. Cross-border brand-related M&As
– as defined here – typically constitute about 25 to 30 percent of
annual transactions. However, the moderate proportion of crossborder transactions is not particular to the market for brand-driven
M&A transactions, but is general to the M&A market as a whole.
When international deals take place, both the main acquirer and the
targeted commercial entity tend to be in high-income economies,
although there was a substantial decline in OECD country to OECD
country transactions following the financial crisis of 2008 (Figure
1.24). Firms in non-OECD countries are becoming more important
acquisition targets. Moreover, although it is possible to cite a number
of prominent examples, Frey and Ansar (2013) conclude that there
is little systematic evidence of non-OECD countries catching up in
absolute terms, or of being important acquirers of branded companies
in high-income countries. Interestingly, in this data sample, however,
transactions in non-OECD-non-OECD countries have increased.

by other considerations.
Nonetheless, it is possible to use available M&A databases to extract some preliminary findings of interest
(see Box 1.13).

Figure 1.24: Markets for brand-driven M&A transactions are
largely domestic
Brand-driven M&A transactions by origin and by
transaction value, as a percentage of total, 2004-2013
100%
90%

Box 1.13: Triangulating cross-border purchases of brands
Frey and Ansar (2013) identified brand-driven acquisitions by
searching a database of M&As.134 This was done by using a number
of brand-related keywords in the deal descriptions. The authors
are the first to admit to, and to describe, the limitations of such
an approach. In the first place, it is likely to lead to a systematic
under measurement of deals in which the brand plays some role;
the deal descriptors might not mention the significance of brands
and trademarks in the given transaction explicitly.

80%
70%

non-OECD-OECD (value)
OECD-non-OECD (value)
non-OECD-non-OECD (value)
OECD-OECD (value)

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

134 The database used is Bureau van Dijk (BvD)’s Zephyr.
It covers deals in 40 languages – deals that Englishonly databases tend to miss. In addition, BvD states
that it builds on data from a large number of analysts
in various countries who monitor media, press
releases by transaction parties, interim and annual
financial reports, and filings in the local language.
This partly helps to overcome the common bias
against deals in non-English-speaking countries.

Source: WIPO, based on data in Frey and Ansar
(2013), based on the Zephyr database.

73

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

1.5

The chapter also reviewed current approaches to brand

Conclusions and Directions for
Future Research

well as the main trends in brand evaluations. The value

For centuries, companies have relied on succinct logos

the importance of brands emanating from middle-income

and promotional efforts, in order to help build their reputa-

economies generates a great deal of speculation. While

tion and image. Trademarks as a registered IP right came

these brands are slowly beginning to show up in global

into existence in the 19th century, when the first trade-

brand rankings, this is only the tip of iceberg. Judging

valuations, the relative merits of such approaches, as
of top brands is significant both in absolute terms and as
share of firms’ market capitalization. Both the value and

mark laws were passed. As a result of globalization and

by the number of trademark filings in low- and middle-

the rise of the Internet, companies’ reliance on brands,

income economies, the world of brands will dramatically

advertising and trademarks is intensifying. While at the

change in the years to come, with new brands appearing

global level the use of patents is more concentrated, a

at the local and international level.

dramatic increase in trademark filings has occurred in
many middle- and low-income economies. Brands and

Additionally, the demand for trademarks has intensified,

trademarks are not the purview of companies alone: na-

reaching unprecedented levels since the 1970s. This first

tions, institutions and individuals also care about brands

assessment of the global increase in trademark filings

and trademarks – and, in particular, about the value of

aims to contribute to creating a better understanding

such brands and trademarks.

of the rapid growth in the number of trademark filings
worldwide. It shows that the surge of trademark filings

This chapter sets the scene for the 2013 World Intellectual

in high-income economies began about ten years earlier

Property Report by establishing how branding behav- than the historic increase in worldwide patenting, which
ior and trademark use have evolved in recent history,

began in the mid-1980s. Middle-income economies, in

how they differ across countries and how they relate

turn, began experiencing a rapid rise in trademark fil-

to economic growth. In order to take into consideration

ings in the late 1980s and 1990s. For both high-income

the economy-wide significance of branding activities, a

and middle-income economies, the use of trademarks

rethink on the issue of how companies’ branding invest-

relative to GDP increased considerably between 1985

ments should be conceptualized and measured is being

and 2011. Interestingly, the intensity of trademark filings

proposed. The more accurate estimates of branding

varies greatly between countries, even at the same level

investment – only available for the US at this point – show

of development. In addition, middle-income economies

that both the magnitude and the growth of branding

use trademarks more intensively than richer countries.

investments are considerable in absolute terms, and are

Interestingly, the use of more novel trademark forms, such

much larger than previously believed.

as sound or smell trademarks, is at best just beginning
to emerge in rich and poor countries alike.

74

CHAPTER 1

The following main drivers for the growth in trademark
applications have been identified: (i) increased growth and

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Areas for future research

investment in branding, (ii) increased use of trademarks to

Brands and trademarks merit closer attention from

foster product innovation, (iii) the boost to trademarks via

economists and statisticians. This chapter has identified

the service sector, (iv) the internationalization of the global

a number of important gaps. It is hoped that it has laid

demand for trademarks, (v), the Internet and trademark

the groundwork for reflection and debate and further

interactions with domain names and online search, (vi)

economic work on the matter by introducing definitions,

more strategic use of trademarks, and (vii) institutional and

concepts, metrics and a series of findings. Drawing on

regulatory changes, including new electronic application

the chapter’s findings, the following areas will need to

procedures and improved international filing possibilities

be prioritized:

through the Madrid system.
• First, the economic role and contribution of branding
Finally, the chapter has shown that markets for brands

at the country-level and at the company-level deserves

play an important but underappreciated economic role

a more in-depth treatment in scholarly work on intan-

in today’s global economy. A taxonomy for studying

gible assets. Thus far, the branding component has

different brand markets, and available evidence on their

not received sufficient attention, both in terms of how

magnitude, is provided. Markets for brands provide a way

to measure it and on how to settle on a fitting depre-

of mitigating some of the costs and risks associated with

ciation rate that would better capture the durability of

building a brand. On the flipside, companies with estab-

the reputational capital generated. To facilitate this

lished brand names increasingly depend on their ability to

discussion, a better understanding of (i) changing

leverage brand equity by launching new products using

branding models, (ii) the impacts of new technologies

established brand names. The scarce data on licens-

on branding efficacy, and (iii) the interaction between

ing presented in this chapter show that the markets for

brands and other intangible assets would be helpful.

brands are large and growing, in particular in the area of

On the data side, improved global datasets of brand-

entertainment, corporate brands that relate to consumer

ing expenditures i.e., including the bought-in as well

products, fashion, sports, arts and education. While

as the own-account components – as defined in this

franchising is likely to be an even bigger market – with a

chapter – are required.

high level of activity in almost all countries – systematic
international data is also hard to grasp. Interestingly, and

• Second, more empirical research into the surge in

contrary to what one might expect, the chapter shows

trademark filings and its drivers is imperative. The

that the market for franchising is still largely domestic.

chapter highlights important cross-country varia-

To conclude, while the press and the business literature

tions in the absolute and relative use of trademarks

provide numerous examples of brand-related purchases

which need more study. The chapter also identifies

out of middle-income economies, the evidence seems to

the main drivers of recent trademark filing growth but,

show that this is still a small, albeit growing phenomenon.

as it also shows, there is little understanding of the
empirical significance of each of these drivers and their
interactions. Two related subthemes are of particular
interest: the role of trademarks in the services sector
and the Internet.

75

CHAPTER 1

• Third, there is a need for research on the value of
trademarks to their owners and to the economy as
a whole. On the one hand, the question is how firms
capitalize on trademarks when introducing new products to market, when trying to preserve market share
and, for instance, if trademarks are used as collateral
to secure debt – similar to way in which other IP assets
are used for this purpose. Here, the interactions between trademarks and other IP rights, notably designs
and patents, and other intangible assets for value
creation at the company level remain ill understood.
On the other hand, the question is how trademark
owners derive value from markets for brands – as
defined in this chapter – and hence via licensing or
franchise agreements. Little is known about the magnitude of markets for brands, the associated business
models and the resulting economic impacts. Finally,
one main finding of the chapter is the relatively high
and emerging importance of trademarks in low- and
middle-income countries, both in absolute terms and
relative to GDP or other economic variables. Better
understanding the related economic and development
impacts, also relative to other forms of IP, will be an
area for further research.

76

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

CHAPTER 1

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

REFERENCES
Aaker, D.A. (1995). Building Strong Brands. New York: Free Press.

Clifton, R. (2003). Brands and Branding. London: The Economist Books.

Abud, M.J., Fink, C., Hall, B., & Helmers, C. (2013). “The
Use of Intellectual Property in Chile”. WIPO Economic
Research Working Papers, No. 11. Geneva: WIPO.

Cobb-Walgren, C. J., Ruble, C. A., Donthu, N. .
(1995). “Brand equity, brand preference, and purchase
intent”. Journal of Advertising, 24(Fall), 25-40.

Adams, M., & Oleksak, M. (2011). Intangible Capital: Putting Knowledge
to Work in the 21st Century Organization. Praeger Publishing.

Colucci, M., Montaguti, E., & Lago, U. (2008). “Managing brand
extension via licensing: An investigation into the high-end fashion
industry”. International journal of research in marketing, 25(2), 129-137.

Aliwadi, K.L., Lehmann, D.R., Klein, S.A. (2002). A Product-MarketBased-Measure of Brand Equity. Marketing Science Institute.
Anholt, S. (2007). Competitive Identity: The New Brand Management
for Nations, Cities and Regions. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Antonowicz, A. (2011). “The dissemination of franchising all over
the world: an attempt to assess the scale of the phenomenon”.
Problems of Management in the 21st Century. Volume 2, 2011.
Arora, A., Fosfuri, A., & Gambardella, A. (2001). Markets for Technology:
Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Askenazy, P., Breda, T., & Irac, D. (2010). “Advertising and R&D: Theory and
evidence from France”. Working paper. Paris: Paris School of Economics,
at http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/56/49/88/PDF/wp201045.pdf.
Athreye, S., & Yang, Y. (2011). Disembodied knowledge flows in the
world economy. Background Report to the WIPO 2011 World Intellectual
Property Report. Published as WIPO Economic Research Working
Papers, No. 3, Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
Batra, R., Ramaswamy, V., Alden, D. L., Steenkamp,
J.B., & Ramachander, S. (2000). “Effects of Brand Local
and Nonlocal Origin on Consumer Attitudes in Developing
Countries”. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 9(2), 83-95.
Battelle (2012). “2013 Global R&D Funding Forecasts”. Battelle,
R&D Magazine.
Bechtold, S., & Tucker, C. (2013). “Trademarks, Triggers,
and Online Search”. SSRN Working Paper.
Bharadwaj, S., Tuli, K.R., Bonfrer, A. (2011 ). “The Impact of Brand
Quality on Shareholder Wealth”. Journal of Marketing, 75(5), 88-104.
Bilkey, W.J., & Nes, E. (1982). “Country-of-Origin Effects on Product
Evaluations”. Journal of International Business Studies, 13(1), 89-99.
Bittlingmayer, G. (2008). “Advertising.” In D.R. Henderson
(Ed.), Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.).
Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty.
Blind, K., Edler, J., Schmoch, U., Andersen, B., Howells, J.,
Miles, I., Roberts, J., & Green, L., Evangelista, R., Hipp, C.,
Herstatt, C. (2003). Patents in the service industries (final report
prepared for the European Commission). Karlsruhe: ISI.
Brahem, M., El Harbi, S., & Grolleau, G. (2013). “What drives trademarks
registration among Tunisian clothing firms? An econometric investigation”.
International Journal of Intellectual Property Management (IJIPM), 6(1/2 2013).
Brinker, S. (2012). “5 meta-trends underlying almost all of
modern marketing”. http://chiefmartec.com/2012/10/5-metatrends-underlying-almost-all-of-modern-marketing.
Calboli, I. (2007). “The Sunset of ‘Quality Control’ in
Modern Trademark Licensing”. American University Law
Review, Vol. 57(no.2 (December 2007)), 341-407.
Cattaneo, O., Gereffi, G., & Staritz, C. (2010). Global
Value Chains in a Postcrisis World – A Development
Perspective. Washington D.C.: The World Bank.
Chang, B.-H., & Chan-Olmsted, S.M. (2005). “Relative constancy
of advertising spending. A crossnational examination of advertising
expenditures and their determinants”. Gazette, 67(4), 339–357.
Chattopadhyay, A., & Batra, R. (2012). The New Emerging
Market Multinationals – Four Strategies for Disrupting
Markets and Building Brands. New York: McGraw Hill.
Clayton, T., & Turner, G. (1998). Brands, Innovation and Growth:
Evidence on the contribution from branded consumer businesses to
economic growth. London: PIMS Profit Impact of Market Strategy.

Cornell University, INSEAD, & WIPO. (2013). The Global
Innovation Index 2013 – The Local Dynamics of Innovation.
Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
Corrado, C.A., & Hao, J. (2013). “Brands as Productive Assets:
Concepts, Measurement, and Global Trends”. Background research for
the 2013 World Intellectual Property Report. New York: The Conference
Board, forthcoming as WIPO Economic Research Working Paper.
Corrado, C.A., Haskel, J., Jona-Lasinio, C., & Iommi, M.
(2013). “Innovation and Intangible Investment in Europe”. Oxford
Review of Economic Policy, 29(2 (Summer)), 2-26.
Corrado, C.A., Hulten, C.R., & Sichel, D.E. (2006). “Intangible
Capital and Economic Growth”. NBER Working Paper 11948.
Day, G.S. (2011). “Closing the Marketing Capabilities
Gap”. Journal of Marketing, 75(4), 183-195.
Draper, P., Dadush, U., Hufbauer, G., Bacchus, J., & Lawrence, R.
(2012). The Shifting Geography of Global Value Chains: Implications
for Developing Countries and Trade Policy: World Economic Forum.
Duguid, P., Da Silva Lopes, T., & Mercer, J. (2010). “Reading registrations:
an overview of 100 years of trade mark registrations in France, the United
Kingdom and the United States”. In P. Duguid & T. Da Silva Lopes (Eds.),
Trade marks, Brands and Competitiveness. New York: Routledge.
EFF. (2011). Franchising: A Vector for Growth in
Europe: European Franchise Federation.
Fan, Y. (2010). “Branding the Nation: Towards a Better Understanding”.
Place Branding and Public Diplomacy, 2010(6), 97–103.
Faust , W.H., & Eilertson, A. (1994). “You’ve got a logo, you
need a brand”. ABA Banking Journal, 86(86-88).
Feenstra, R.C. (1998). “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production
in the Global Economy”. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(4), 31-50.
Fortune, E. (2013). “What is behind the surge in trademark
filings in France?”. Unpublished background research for the
2013 World Intellectual Property Report. Direction des Études,
Paris: Institut National de la Propriété Intellectuelle.
Frey, C.B., & Ansar, A. (2013). “Markets for Brands: Theory and
Evidence”. Unpublished background research for the 2013 World
Intellectual Property Report. Oxford: Oxford University.
Giuri, P., Mariani, M., Brusoni, S., Crespi, G., Francoz, D.,
Gambardella, A., Garcia-Fontes, W., Geuna, A., Gonzales, R.,
Harhoff, D., Hoisl, K., Le Bas, C., Luzzi, A., Magazzini, L., Nesta, L.,
Nomaler, Ö., Palomeras, N., Patel, P., Romanelli, M., & Verspagen,
B. (2007). “Inventors and invention processes in Europe: Results
from the PatVal-EU survey”. Research Policy, 36(8), 1107-1127.
Graevenitz, G.V., Greenhalgh, C., Helmers, C., &
Schautschick, P. (2012). Trademark Cluttering (Report for the
UK IP Office). London: UK Intellectual Property Office.
Graham, S., Hancock, G., Marco, A., & Myers, A.F. (2013).
The USPTO Trademark Case Files Dataset: Descriptions,
Lessons, and Insights. SSRN Working Paper.
Grannell, C. (2008). “Untangling Brand Equity, Value, Assets and Health”.
Brand Papers, from www.brandchannel.com/papers_review.asp?sp_id=1460.
Greenhalgh, C., Longland, M., & Bosworth, D. (2003). “Trends
and distribution of intellectual property: UK and European
patents and UK trade and service marks 1986-2000”. Report
to the UK Patent Office on a Research Project into The Extent
and Value of Intellectual Property in United Kingdom Firms.

77

CHAPTER 1

Greenhalgh, C., & Rogers, M. (2012). “Trade Marks and Performance in
Services and Manufacturing Firms: Evidence of Schumpeterian Competition
through Innovation”. Australian Economic Review, 45(1), 50-76.
Greenhalgh, C., & Schautschick, P. (2013). “Empirical studies of trade
marks – the existing economic literature”. Oxford University Department
of Economics Discussion Paper Series (Ref: 659) June 2013.
Gregory, J.R. (2003). The Best of Branding: Best Practices
in Corporate Branding. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Guellec, D., & Wunsch-Vincent, S. (2009). Policy Responses to
the Economic Crisis: Investing in Innovation for Long-Term Growth
(OECD Digital Economy Papers). Paris: OECD Publishing.
Hall, R.E. (2012). “The Cyclical Response of Advertising Refutes
Counter-Cyclical Profit Margins in Favor of Product-Market Frictions”.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, 18370.
Han, C.M., & Terpstra, V. (1988). “Country-of-Origin
Effects for Uni-National and Bi-National Products”. Journal
of International Business Studies, 19(2), 235-255.
Helmers, C. (2013). “What is behind the surge in trademark filings
in Chile?” Unpublished background research for the 2013 World
Intellectual Property Report. Santa Clara: Santa Clara University.
Hipp, C., & Grupp, H. (2005). “Innovation in the service sector:
The demand for service-specific innovation measurement
concepts and typologies”. Research Policy, 34(4), 517-535.
Hulten, C. R., & Isaksson, A. (2007). “Why Development Levels
Differ: The Sources of Differential Economic Growth in a Panel of
High and Low Income Countries”. NBER Working Paper 13469.
Humphrey, J., & Schmitz, H. (2001). Governance in Global
Value Chains (IDS Bulletin ): Institute of Development Studies.
www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/humphreyschmitz32.3.pdf.
IFA. (2013). Franchise Business Economic Outlook: 2013. International
Franchising Association Education Foundation.available at:
www.franchise.org/Industry Secondary.aspx?id=42842.
IMF. (2009). Balance of Payments and International Investment Position
Manual Sixth Edition (BPM6). Washington D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
IMF (2012). Changing Patterns of Global Trade (Strategy, Policy, and Review
Department Paper). www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dp/2012/dp1201.pdf
Jayachandran, S., Kaufman, P., Kumar, V., & Hewett, K. (2013). “Brand
Licensing: What Drives Royalty Rates?”. Journal of Marketing, 77(5), 108-122.
Jensen, P. H., & Webster, E. M. (2011). “Patterns of Trademarking
Activity in Australia”. Melbourne Institute Working Paper No. 2/04.
Kallapur, S. (2004). “The value relevance and reliability of brand assets
recognized by U.K. firms”. The Accounting Review, 79(1), 151-172.
Kapferer, J.N. (2008). The New Strategic Brand Management: Creating
and Sustaining Brand Equity Long Term (4th ed.): Kogan Page.
Kaplinsky, R. (2000). “Globalisation and Unequalisation:
What Can Be Learned from Value Chain Analysis?”. The
Journal of Development Studies, 37(2), 117-146.
Kashani, K., Miller, J., & Clayton, T. (2000). A Virtuous Cycle:
Innovation, Consumer Value and Communication –Research Evidence
from Today’s Brand-Builders. Lausanne: IMD International.
Keller, K. L. (Ed.). (2011). Brand Equity, in: The Palgrave
Encyclopedia of Strategic Management: Palgrave Macmilla.
Keller, K.L., & Lehmann, D. (2006). “Brands and Branding:
Research Findings and Future Priorities”. Marketing
Science, 25 (November-December), 740-759.
Kenava, N. (2011). “Nation Branding: Toward an Agenda for Critical
Research”. International Journal of Communication 5(2011), 117–141.
Koopman, R., Wang, Z., & Wei, S.-J. (2008). “How Much of Chinese
Exports is Really Made In China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added
When Processing Trade is Pervasive”. NBER Working Paper 14109.

78

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

Kumar, N., & Steenkamp, J.B. (2013). Brand Breakout: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ladas, S.P. (1973). “Trademark Licensing and the Antitrust
Law”. TRADEMARK REPORTER – Official Journal of the
International Trademark Association, 63 (245), 257–259.
Landes, W.M. & Posner, R.A. (1987). “Trademark Law: An Economic
Perspective.” Journal of Law and Economics, 30(2), 265-309.
Lanz, R., Miroudot, S., & Nordås, H. (2011). Trade in Tasks
(OECD Trade Policy Working Papers). Paris: OECD Publishing.
Lemper, T.A. (2012). “Five trademark law strategies for
managing brands”. Business Horizons, 55 (2), 113-117.
LIMA. (2013). 2013 Licensing Industry Survey. New York City: International
Licensing Industry and Merchandisers’ Association. www.licensing.org.
Lisanti, T. (2013). Top 150 Licensors. Global License!, 16 (2 (May).
Loo, T., & Davies, G. (2006). “Branding China: The Ultimate Challenge in
Reputation Management?” Corporate Reputation Review, 9(3), 198-210.
Lutz, M. C. V. , Orind, V., Carvalho, S. M. P., Filgueiras Jorge, M., &
Pinheiro, V. (2013). “Is the licensing in of foreign brands and franchises
increasing? Evidence from Brazil”, Unpublished background research
for the 2013 World Intellectual Property Report. Coordenação Geral de
Contratos de Tecnologia (CGTEC) da Diretoria de Contratos, Indicações
Geográficas e Registros (DICIG) e Assessoria para Assuntos Econômicos
(AECON), Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (INPI). Rio de Janeiro.
Lybbert, T.J., Zolas, N., & Bhattacharyya, P. (2013). “An ‘Algorithmic
Links with Probabilities’ Concordance for Trademarks Creates
New Possibilities For Analyzing Trademark & Economic Data”,
forthcoming as WIPO Economic Research Working Paper.
Madeuf, B. (1984). “International technology transfers and
international technology payments: Definitions, measurement
and firms’ behaviour”. Research Policy, 13(3), 125-140.
Mangàni, A. (2006). “An Economic Analysis of Rise of Service Marks”.
Journal of Intellectual Property Rights (JIPR), 11(4), 249-259.
McKinsey & Company. (2012). Advertising as an
economic-growth engine. www.mckinsey.com/locations/
Belux/~/media/Belux/FinalAdvertising.ashx.
Mendonça, S., Pereira, T.S., & Godinho, M.M. (2004).
“Trademarks as an indicator of innovation and industrial
change”. Research Policy, 33(9), 1385-1404.
Millot, V. (2009). Trademarks as an Indicator of Product
and Marketing Innovations. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Co-Operation and Development.
Millot, V. (2012). Patent and trademark-based indicators of service
innovation. Paper presented at the KNOWINNO – Making the
most of knowledge Innovation in services: the role of R&D and
R&D policy (INNOSERV) – Second expert meeting. Paris.
Mitra-Kahn, B. (2013). “What is behind the surge in trade mark filings?”
Unpublished background research for the 2013 World Intellectual
Property Report. Office of the Chief Economist, IP Australia. Canberra.
Miyagawa, T., & Hisa, S. (2013). “Estimates of intangible
investment by industry and productivity growth in
Japan”. Japanese Economic Review, 64(1), 42-72.
Moore, L. (2012). “The Law and the Ultimate Intellectual Asset”.
Intellectual Asset Management, November/December 2012, 78-84.
Morgan, N.A., & Rego L.L. (2009). “Brand Portfolio Strategy
and Firm Performance”. Journal of Marketing, 73(1), 59-74.
Myers, A.F. (2013). “What is behind the surge in trademark
filings? An analysis of United States data”. Background research
for the 2013 World Intellectual Property Report. United States
Patent and Trademark Office Economic Working Paper No. 20131. www.uspto.gov/ip/officechiefecon/publications.jsp.
Nayaradou, M. (2006). Advertising and Economic Growth.
PhD, University of Paris 9 - Dauphine, Paris.

CHAPTER 1

OECD. (2013a). Communications Outlook. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2013b). New Sources of Growth: Knowledge-Based Capital - Key
Analyses and Policy Conclusions Synthesis Report. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD. (2013c). Science, Technology and Industry
Scoreboard. Paris: OECD Publishing.
OECD & Inno-Tec. (2009). Summary - Workshop on Trademarks
and Trademark Data. Summary presented at the Workshop on
Trademarks and Trademark Data, Paris: OECD Publishing.
Officina Espanola de Patentes y Marcas. (2012). Impacto de las Marcas
en la Economia y Sociedad Espanolas: Officina Espanola de Patentes
y Marcas and Departemento de Marketing, Universidad de Alicante.

BRANDING IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY

UNESCAP. (2007). “Primer on global value chains and international
production networks”. (UNESCAP) (Ed.), Linking Greater Mekong
Subregion Enterprises to International Markets: The Role of Global
Value Chains, International Production Networks and Enterprise
Clusters (Vol. ST/ESCAP/2439, pp. 3-15). Bangkok: United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
UK Intellectual Property Office. (2011). Branding in a Modern
Economy – Conference Report. Paper presented at the Branding in
a Modern Economy – Conference Report, London: UK IP Office.
Urwin, P., Karuk, V., Hedges, P., & Auton, F. (2008). Valuing Brands
in the UK Economy – report for the British Brands Group. London:
Westminster Business School, University of Westminster.

Ono, S. (1999). “The History and Development of Trademark Law”.
Overview of Japanese Trademark Law (2nd ed.). Tokyo: Yuhikaku.

van der Wurff, R., Bakker, P., & Picard, R.G. (2008). “Economic
Growth and Advertising Expenditures in Different Media in Different
Countries”. Journal of Media Economics, 21(1), 28-52.

Phillips, J. (2003). Trade Mark Law: A Practical
Anatomy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

WIPO. (1993). Introduction to Trademark Law & Practice – The Basic
Concepts (2nd ed.). Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.

Picard, R.G. (2001). “Effects of Recessions on Advertising
Expenditures: An Exploratory Study of Economic Downturns in Nine
Developed Nations”. Journal of Media Economics, 14(1), 1-14.

WIPO. (2004). “Fields of Intellectual Property Protection”.
In WIPO (Ed.), WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook:
Policy, Law and Use (pp. 17-156). Geneva: WIPO.

Prahalad, D. (December 8, 2011). “Why Trust Matters
More Than Ever for Brands”. http://blogs.hbr.org/
cs/2011/12/why_trust_matters_more_than_ev.html.

WIPO. (2006). Making a Mark – An Introduction to Trademarks for
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Intellectual Property for Business
Series (Intellectual Property for Business Series). Geneva: WIPO.

PwC. (2011). Franchise Business Economic Outlook: 2011
(Prepared for The International Franchise Association
Educational Foundation). PriceWaterHouse Coopers.

WIPO. (2010a). “Special Theme: The Impact of the Crisis and
Recovery on Innovation”. In WIPO (Ed.), World Intellectual
Property Indicators 2010 (pp. 14-30). Geneva: WIPO.

PwC. (2012). Italian Licensing Industry Survey 2012 – Report
for the International Licensing Industry and Merchandisers’
Association. PriceWaterHouseCoopers.

WIPO. (2010b). Trademarks and the Internet (Standing Committee on
the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical Indications
24th Session, Geneva, November 1 to 4, 2010). Geneva: WIPO.

Richardson, G. (2008). Brand Names Before the Industrial
Revolution, NBER Working Paper 13930.

WIPO. (2011a). “The Changing Face of Innovation and
Intellectual Property”. The Changing Face of Innovation
(Vol. 2011, chapter 1, pp. 23-75). Geneva: WIPO.

Rujas, J. (1999). Trade marks: complementary to
patents. World Patent Information, 21(1), 35-39.
Schautschick, P., & Graevenitz, G. (2013). “What is behind the
surge in trademark filings in Germany?”. Unpublished background
research for the 2013 World Intellectual Property Report. East
Anglia: Centre for Competition Policy, University of East Anglia.
Schmalensee, R. (1972). The Economics of Advertising.
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

WIPO. (2011b). “The Surge in Worldwide Patent Applications”, Study
prepared by the International Bureau for the Patent Cooperation
Treaty (PCT) Working Group (Vol. PCT/WG/4/4). Geneva: WIPO.
WIPO. (2012). “Trademarks”. In WIPO (Ed.), World Intellectual Property
Indicators 2012 (Vol. Section B, pp. 97-130). Geneva: WIPO.
WIPO. (2013a). Geographical Indications – An Introduction. Geneva: WIPO.

Schmoch, U. (2003). “Service marks as novel innovation
indicator”. Research Evaluation, 12(2), 149-156.

WIPO. (2013b). Study on the Protection of Country Names (Standing
Committee on the Law of Trademarks, Industrial Designs and Geographical
Indications, 29th Session, May 27 to 31, 2013). Geneva: WIPO.

Schmoch, U., & Gauch, S. (2009). “Service marks
as indicators for innovation in knowledge-based
services”. Research Evaluation, 18 (4), 323-335.

Wortmann, M. (2004). Retail and Globalization the
Governance of Global Value Chains by German Retailers
(Project). Berlin: WZB Berlin Social Research Center.

Simon, C. J. & Sullivan, M.W. (1993). "The measurement and determinants
of brand equity: A financial approach". Marketing Science, 12(Winter), 28-52.

WTO, & IDE-JETRO. (2011). Trade patterns and global value
chains in East Asia: From trade in goods to trade in tasks. Geneva
and Tokyo: WTO and Institute of Developing Economies.

Smith, G.V., & Parr, R. (2005). Intellectual Property: Valuation, Exploitation,
and Infringement Damages (Fourth ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons.
Smith, P., Amos, J., & Clayton, T. (2004). Brands, Innovation
and Growth – A report for the European Brands Association.
London: PIMS Profit Impact of Market Strategy.

Yarbrough, L., Morgan, N., & Vorhies, D. (2011). “The impact of product
market strategy-organizational culture fit on business performance”.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 39(4), 555-573.

Sullivan, M. (2001). “How Many Trademarks Does It Take to Protect a
Brand? The Optimal Number of Trademarks, Branding Strategy and
Brand Performance”. Washington D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
Tauber, E.M. (1988). “Brand Leverage: Strategy for Growth in a Cost-Control
World”. Journal of Advertising Research, 28 (August-September), 26-30.
UN, IMF, OECD, Eurostat, UNCTAD, UNWTO, & WTO. (2011).
Manual on Statistics of International Trade in Services 2010
(MSITS 2010). Geneva, Luxembourg, Madrid, New York, Paris and
Washington D.C.: United Nations, IMF, OECD, Statistical Office
of the European Union, United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, World Tourism Organization and WTO.

79

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

CHAPTER 2
THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS
Branding is a central element of modern market economies and an important feature of everyday life. Firms invest
large sums of money in advertising their goods and services and building a reputation in the marketplace. In turn,
these activities influence consumer choice and determine

2.1
The rationale for
protecting trademarks

commercial success. Ultimately, branding shapes how

In order to appreciate the role of trademarks, it is helpful

firms compete, with important implications for economic

to start by asking why consumers value brands in the

welfare. Understanding firms’ branding strategies and

marketplace.1 One can broadly distinguish between two

how they affect market outcomes is therefore important.

different sources of value. First, brands have reputational

Early theories of how market economies function paid

for a variety of reasons – how functional or effective the

value. Consumers may prefer one product over another
little attention to branding activities. Starting with the

product is; how reliable it is; how long it lasts; how easy

writings of Adam Smith in the 1700s, economic scholars

it is to use; how it tastes, sounds or smells; what side

implicitly took it for granted that consumers have full

effects it may have. Often, these characteristics cannot

knowledge of all products offered on the market and that

be easily observed at the time of purchase. Consumers

their purchase decisions form part of the invisible hand

may only be able to evaluate them as they experience

that guides firms’ production decisions. However, in the

the product.

early 1970s, economists began to appreciate that information does not flow freely among market participants.

In order for consumers to select the products that best

This development paved the way for rigorous analysis of

suit their needs and preferences, they must rely either

how branding activities and the behavior of imperfectly

on their past consumption experience or on information

informed consumers affect market outcomes.

about the product provided by the producer or a third
party. In short, they need to rely on a product’s reputation.

Drawing on the insights of the economic literature, this

But this only works when consumers can reliably identify

chapter explores the role of the trademark system in sup-

the goods of different producers in the marketplace – the

porting the branding activities of firms and promoting or-

precise function performed by brands. Indeed, if many

derly competition in the marketplace. It begins by outlining

producers could independently market their products

the main rationale for protecting trademarks (Section 2.1)

using the same brand, consumer intelligence would have

and then asks how society fares when counterfeit goods

little value, and producers could not build a reputation.

violating trademark rights enter the market (Section 2.2).
Against this background, the chapter explores important
choices in designing trademark laws and institutions
(Section 2.3). The concluding remarks summarize the
main messages emerging from the chapter’s discussion,
and point to areas where more research could usefully
guide policymakers’ decision-making (Section 2.4).

1

As in Chapter 1, this chapter employs the term “trademark”
when referring to the specific instument of intellectual
property protection; the term “brand” is used when
more generally referring to the use of product and
company identifiers in the marketplace (see Box 1.1).

81

CHAPTER 2

However, brands do not only offer reputational value. A
consumer facing the choice between two goods of the
same known quality, but bearing different brand names,
may still choose one brand over another – and may even
be willing to pay a higher price for the preferred brand.

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.1.1
How trademarks reduce
consumers’ search costs

This is because brands have image value. For example,

Neoclassical economics largely assumes that buyers

a consumer may derive pleasure from wearing the same

have full knowledge of the quality of all product offerings

sunglasses as a Hollywood actor. More often, image

and that there are many sellers of the same product.

value stems from displaying the ownership of a particular

Unrestricted competition among self-interested sellers

brand to other members of society. This is especially

then leads to an allocation of resources that maximizes

relevant for many luxury products, where brands enable

societal welfare. In today’s world, some markets come

consumers to communicate their affluence. However, it

close to fitting these assumptions. For example, primary

also applies to other images; for example, consumers

commodities such as gold or copper are homogenous

choose brands to convey how traditional, modern, al-

goods traded around the world at pre-determined qual-

ternative, sporty, or trendy they are.

ity levels. Similarly, many financial markets are close to

In rationalizing the trademark system, economic analysis

the same in terms of Japanese yen, regardless of whether

has mainly focused on the reputational value of brands.

the dollar is purchased in New York or in Tokyo.

perfectly competitive – a United States (US) dollar costs

Accordingly, this section takes a closer look at what lies
behind such reputational value, which the economic

However, many modern markets – particularly consumer

literature analyzes in terms of consumers’ search costs.

markets – do not fit these simplified assumptions. As

However, the image value of brands has important eco-

described above, product offerings differ along a wide

nomic implications to which this chapter – and Chapter

range of quality characteristics. Consumers, in turn, can-

3 – will return.

not always observe these characteristics at the moment
of purchase. In economic jargon, they are asymmetrically
informed about products – asymmetrically, in the sense
that they know less about the products than the sellers.
Nobel prize-winning economist George Akerlof was
the first to explore the consequences of asymmetric
information on market behavior and the allocation of
resources.2 His main conclusion – illustrated in Box 2.1
with the example of the market for used cars – is that
buyer uncertainty about product quality may not lead to
markets for high-quality products, even if there is demand
for such products; as a result, consumers and society
as a whole are worse off.

2

82

See Akerlof (1970).

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

A different way to think about information asymmetry

Box 2.1: A market for lemons?
In what turned out to be one of the most-cited journal articles in
economics, George Akerlof famously considered the market for used
cars. He argued that, typically, buyers will have less information
about the quality of used cars than sellers – the latter of whom
could be either the cars’ owners or specialized dealers. This is
because buyers cannot ascertain key quality characteristics of a
used car – how long the engine will last, how often the windscreen
wiper needs repair, or whether the engine will ignite on a cold
winter’s day – by simple inspection. In other words, buyers are
uncertain about whether they are about to buy a good quality car
or a lemon (which is American slang for a car that is found to be
unsatisfactory or defective).

is to recognize that consumers spend time and money
researching different offerings before deciding which
good or service to buy. Brand reputation helps consumers to reduce these so-called search costs. As already
pointed out, it enables them to draw on their past experience and other information about specific goods
and services – such as advertisements and third party
consumer reviews. However, the reputation mechanism
only works if consumers are confident that they will
purchase what they intend to purchase. The trademark

Faced with this uncertainty, buyers will not be willing to pay the
full price of a high-quality car. If they are risk-neutral and quality is
uniformly distributed, they will at most be willing to pay the price of
an average quality car. Sellers, in turn, who have perfect knowledge
about quality, would not be willing to sell a high-quality car for the
price of an average quality car. As a result, there is no market for
high-quality cars. Instead, a race to the bottom ensues, whereby
only sales of the lowest quality cars occur.

system provides the legal framework underpinning this
confidence. It does so by granting exclusive rights to
names, signs and other identifiers in commerce subject
to certain procedural rules and limitations.
Besides guaranteeing exclusivity, the trademark system
reduces consumers’ search costs in another way. It

Of course – as many readers would attest – markets for high-quality
used cars do, in fact, exist. Akerlof’s original article recognized that
certain mechanisms – such as warranties and social norms – exist in
order to lessen the effects of quality uncertainty. In a nod to the role
of trademarks, he specifically mentioned the role of brand names:
“[b]rand names not only indicate quality but also give the consumer a
means of retaliation if the quality does not meet expectations. For the
consumer will then curtail future purchases. Often too, new products
are associated with old brand names. This ensures the prospective
consumer of the quality of the product.”
Source: Akerlof (1970)

pushes producers and sellers towards creating concise
identifiers for specific goods or services. For example,
instead of asking for the location of a “coffee store belonging to a firm headquartered in the US city of Seattle”,
consumers can simply search for “Starbucks” and will
be perfectly understood. Trademarks thus improve
communication about goods and services.3 They help
consumers to distinguish between different product offerings and, in this way, they promote orderly competition
between sellers.

3

See Landes and Posner (1987).

83

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

While the discussion has thus far focused on brands for
goods and services, the same principles also apply to
firm brands. Knowing who produced a particular good,
or who is providing a particular service, offers consumers
relevant information and can thus reduce their search

2.1.2
How trademarks compare to other
intellectual property rights

costs. Company brands can be especially important

Trademarks are a form of intellectual property (IP). Like

for new and previously untested products: consumers

patents, copyright, industrial designs and other forms

cannot base their purchase decisions on how satisfied

of IP, they afford exclusive rights to an intangible asset.

they were with a product in the past, but rather by how

However, trademarks differ in important ways from other

satisfied they were with the producer of that product

forms of IP; in order to fully appreciate the role of trade-

following previous purchases.

marks, it is useful to explore these differences.

From the perspective of producers, lower search costs

From an economic perspective, the most significant dif-

create incentives to invest in higher quality goods and

ference pertains to the type of market failure the various

services. Producers will be confident that consumers are

IP rights seek to resolve. As already explained, in the

able to identify higher quality offerings in the marketplace

case of trademarks, the relevant market failure is the

and not confuse them with lower quality ones. More

presence of asymmetric information between buyers

generally, trademarks are at the heart of product differen-

and sellers. In the case of patents and copyright, it is

tiation strategies, whether vertical or horizontal in nature

the public good nature of inventive and creative output.

– concepts that Chapter 3 will explore in greater detail.

4

Economists refer to public goods as goods that many
people can use simultaneously, and which one cannot
effectively exclude people from using. Clearly, a solution
to a technical problem or a literary work falls within this
definition. Without patents and copyright, firms’ incentive to invest in inventive and creative activities would be
reduced, as competitors could free-ride on the fruits of
those activities.5

4

84

Historically, the introduction of trademarks supported the
geographical separation of production and sale. Before
the Industrial Revolution, manufacturers had to sell goods
to consumers in distant markets anonymously, leading
to Akerlof-type information failures. To overcome these
information failures, manufacturers added conspicuous
characteristics to products which served as substitutes
for today’s brands (Richardson, 2008). Trademarks
enabled firms to reach consumers through intermediaries
(Griffiths, 2011). They thus encouraged specialization in
the organization of economic activities, allowing firms to
reap economies of scale and focus on what they do best.

5

See WIPO (2011) for a more detailed
discussion of the market failure that gives
rise to patent and copyright protection.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Are trademarks private goods or public goods?

Box 2.2: What are GIs and how do they differ from trademarks?

Interestingly, they have elements of both. A brand only

A GI is a sign used on products that have a specific geographical
origin and possess qualities or a reputation associated with that
origin. Most commonly, a GI consists of the name of the product’s
place of origin, for example, “Jamaica Blue Mountain” or “Idaho
potatoes”. However, non-geographical names – such as “Vinho
Verde”, “Cava” or “Argan Oil” – or symbols commonly associated
with a place can also constitute a GI.

has reputational value if it is used in relation to a single
good, service, or firm.6 Use of a brand is thus “rival” in
nature – in contrast to an invention which many firms can
reuse without undermining its value. Viewed from this
perspective, trademarks are private goods. At the same
time, the fact that trademarks uniquely identify particular
goods and services makes them useful communication
tools. This attribute of trademarks has a public good
character, as many people can simultaneously refer to
a trademark when describing or comparing products.
It has given rise to certain exceptions to the exclusive
rights conferred by trademarks, notably the right of the
public to use a trademark when referring to particular
goods and services.7

Whether a sign functions as a GI is a matter of national law and
consumer perception. As a general prerequisite, it must identify a
product as originating in a given place. In addition, the qualities or
reputation of the product should be essentially attributable to the
place of origin.8
GIs and trademarks are distinctive signs used to distinguish goods
or services in the marketplace. Both convey information about the
origin of a good or service, and enable consumers to associate a
particular quality with a good or service. In the case of trademarks,
this information relates to the identity of the producer; in the case
of GIs, it relates to a particular place.

There is one form of IP that is closely related to trademarks, namely geographical indications (GIs). Like trademarks, GIs seek to reduce consumers’ search costs
and provide incentives for product differentiation. One
key difference is that the right to use a GI belongs to a
group of producers located within a certain geographical
boundary, rather than a single entity. There are additional

GIs do not belong to individual producers. Irrespective of the legal
form of GI protection, the embodied collective goodwill benefits all
producers who are entitled to use it. Those producers are often
members of a collective body administering and controlling a GI’s use.
Indeed, sui generis GI protection instruments – such as appellations of
origin or registered GIs – often require that the beneficiaries organize
themselves into a collective such as a producers association, which
administers the use, control, certification and marketing of the GI.

legal and institutional differences between trademarks
and GIs (see Box 2.2). However, many of the arguments
and findings in relation to trademarks that are presented
in this chapter also apply in the same way, or in a similar
way, to GIs.

A trademark can be assigned or licensed to anyone, anywhere in
the world. In contrast, the sign to denote a GI is directly linked to a
particular place. All producers who are based in the area of origin
– and produce the good according to specified standards – may
use the GI. However, because of its link with the place of origin, a
GI cannot be assigned or licensed to someone producing outside
that place, or to someone who does not belong to the group of
authorized producers.
Some countries protect GIs under trademark law – more specifically
through collective marks or certification marks. This is the case, for
example, in Australia, Canada, China and the US. What precisely
defines a collective mark or certification mark differs from country
to country. However, a common feature of these types of trademarks
is that more than one entity may use them, as long as all users
comply with the regulations of use or the standards established by
the holder. Those regulations or standards may precisely require
that the trademark be used only in connection with goods that have
a particular geographical origin.

6
7

See Landes and Posner (1987).
See Barnes (2006).

8

See Article 22.1 of the Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).

85

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Like brands protected by trademarks, brands displaying GIs can have
considerable image value – especially brands with a long history of
reputation for quality. This explains why selected GI products can
command substantial price premia akin to luxury goods. For example,
accounting for product quality and the reputation of individual producers, Landon and Smith (1998) found that the display of certain
regional designations for Bordeaux wines plays a significant role in
determining prices, with the “Pomerol” designation commanding a
price premium of United States dollar (USD) 15 per bottle.

Like other forms of IP, trademarks can confer market
power on their owners; however, the sources of market
power differ. Patents and industrial designs prevent
competitors from copying physical product features or
technologies that consumers value.10 Trademarks at first
appear less exclusionary, as they do not restrict this form
of copying, as long as competitors sell their products
under a different brand. Yet, the brand may be all that

Policymakers around the world have taken an interest in GIs as a
way to enhance the value of local production – especially in the
agricultural sector. Indeed, there are several examples of GI products that have developed an international reputation, including GI
products from developing countries, such as “Café de Colombia” and
“Darjeeling tea”. At the same time, the number of GI products that can
command a substantial price premium remains relatively small, and
even those highly successful GI products do not feature in lists of
top global brands (see Subsection 1.2.2). Newly established GIs not
only face the challenge of gaining an international reputation – which
may take decades – but also face the challenge of competing with
incumbent GIs benefitting from considerable consumer goodwill.

matters: when trademarks protect brands with significant image value, the brand in and of itself becomes a
product characteristic that consumers care about but
competitors cannot copy. In addition, regardless of any
image value, certain brands can command considerable
consumer goodwill due to buyers being unwilling to incur
the search cost of switching to a competing product. For
example, studies have shown that brands of previously
patent protected medicines can command a premium
price over newly available generic versions of the same
medicines.11 In a world of imperfect information, it may

Another important difference between trademarks and
other forms of IP concerns their protection term. Most
other IP rights are time bound – for example, limited to
20 years in the case of patents – after which the subject

be entirely rational for consumers to pay a higher price
for the brand they are used to, as they save the time
of researching whether other products would equally
satisfy them.12

matter they protect moves into the public domain.9 This
reflects the trade-off between providing sufficient incentives for inventive and creative activities, and limiting the
costs imposed on society from inhibiting competitive
market forces. Trademarks, by contrast, can last for a
potentially unlimited time as long as their owners renew them and use them. This supports the permanent
contribution that trademarks make towards reducing
consumers’ search costs. Indeed, a statutory term limit
would create confusion in the marketplace and, invariably,
raise search costs.

9

86

Trade secrets are an exception; their
protection term is not statutorily limited.

10 Of course, patented products still compete
with substitute products, limiting the market
power that patent holders can exercise.
11 See, for example, Hurwitz and Caves (1988).
Admittedly, the price premium for the established
brands may also reflect strong relationships of
pharmaceutical firms with market intermediaries,
notably doctors. See also Subsection 3.2.1.
12 Another way in which trademarks can command market
power is specific to design marks. Sometimes, product
designs acquire distinctiveness with consumers, in
which case they become eligible for trademark
protection. The shape of the Coca-Cola bottle is a
famous case in point. A design can be an important
product characteristic, leading consumers to choose
one product over another; a trademarked design
cannot, in turn, be copied by competitors. However,
market power is limited by competitors “designing
around” a trademarked design and by exceptions in
trademark laws that deny protection to designs that are
functional in nature. See Economides (1988) for a fuller
discussion of the entry barriers created by trademarks.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

The fact that brands can be a source of market power
means that they can support firms’ innovation strategies.

Figure 2.1: SMEs mostly use
trademarks, especially in services

In particular, evidence has shown that branding is one

Number of IP-active SMEs in the UK, 2001–2005a

of the most important mechanisms for firms to secure

7'000

returns to investments in research and development
(R&D) – a link that will be the focus of the discussion in

6'000

Chapter 3.
5'000

As a final point, and as a practical matter, trademarks are
more widely used than other forms of IP.13 In contrast to
patents, trademark use is not limited to firms that oper-

4'000

3'000

ate at the technology frontier, or to sectors that witness
rapid technological progress. Firms in almost every

2'000

sector of the economy employ trademarks to protect
the exclusivity of their brands. This includes the service
sector, which accounts for the majority share of gross
domestic product (GDP) in most economies and which
sees only modest use of other forms of IP. Small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), in particular, rely to a
far greater extent on trademarks than they do on patents
– as illustrated in Figure 2.1 for the United Kingdom (UK).
In addition, many low- and middle-income economies

1'000

0

Agriculture & mining
UK trademark

Manufacturing

Community Trade Mark

Services
UK patent

EPO patent

Notes: Figures are based on the Oxford Firm Level Intellectual
Property database that links IP activity to all UK firms. The definition
of SMEs excludes micro entities; see the source for further details.
The figure excludes 191 SMEs that could not be allocated to a
particular industry. EPO stands for European Patent Office.
Source: Rogers et al (2007).

show intensive trademark use, even when they only see
limited use of other forms of IP.14 A study on IP use in Chile,
for example, found that 92 percent of all IP applicants
only filed for trademark protection.15

13 Trade secrets may be an exception here.
However, they are an unregistered form of IP
that does not leave a statistical trace.
14 See Subsection 1.3.1.
15 See Abud et al (2013a).

87

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.2

What happens when trademark rights are ignored and

Trademark counterfeiting

ers and society at large will be affected depends greatly

Just as the protection of trademarks promotes orderly

goods, or whether they knowingly do so. The economic

fake goods enter the market? How consumers, producon whether consumers unknowingly purchase fake

competition in the marketplace, so are there incentives to

literature refers to these two alternatives as deceptive

infringe trademarks and profit from disorderly competition.

and non-deceptive counterfeiting, respectively.20 This

Trademark counterfeiting is not a new phenomenon. The

section first explores the socioeconomic effects of these

oldest counterfeit products on display at the Museum

two distinct forms of counterfeiting and then discusses

of Counterfeiting – stoppers used to seal amphorae

more generally the economy-wide consequences of

filled with wine – date from around 200 BC.16 A study

trademark violations.

on manufacturing activity in the Middle Ages reports
widespread product counterfeiting; in one example,
chemical analysis of sword blades believed to be made of
Damascus steel showed that one in four were convincing
counterfeits.17 In the mid-1980s, a business magazine
described counterfeiting as “perhaps the world’s fastest
growing and most profitable business”.18
Even though it remains elusive to precisely measure
global counterfeiting activity, anecdotal evidence suggests that its scale and scope has expanded. For example, newspaper articles and surveys indicate that
counterfeiting has moved beyond luxury goods to target
various types of consumer goods – affecting products
as diverse as automotive replacement parts, electrical appliances and toys.19 Falling shipping costs have
spurred international trade in counterfeit goods, and the
Internet has created new distribution channels for such
goods that are more difficult to monitor than bricks-andmortar stores.

16 See “The Museum of Counterfeiting, Paris – A Walk on
the Wild Side,” WIPO Magazine, February 2009, page 20.
17 See Richardson (2008).
18 See “The Counterfeit Trade: Illegal Copies Threaten Most
Industries,” Business Week, December 1985, pages 64-72.
19 See OECD (2008).

88

20 See Fink (2009).

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.2.1

In most circumstances, the selling of counterfeit products
that endanger the public will not only violate trademark

Deceptive counterfeiting
If consumers are unable to tell apart fake from genuine

laws, but also health and consumer protection laws. In
addition, certain falsely-labeled or substandard products violating health and consumer protection laws do

goods, the supply of fake goods undermines the abil-

not involve trademark counterfeiting. The incidence of

ity of trademarks to identify goods in the marketplace.

fraudulent products – broadly defined – is typically higher

Unknowing buyers of fake goods will derive a value

in less developed economies with weaker regulatory and

from the product that is lower than what they expected

enforcement systems.23

and, possibly, below what they were willing to pay for.
To the extent that consumers know about the presence
of fake goods on the market but cannot easily identify
them, sufficiently high search costs will lead them to shun
higher quality products for fear of buying a low-quality
fake. Producers, in turn, will have a reduced incentive
to invest in product differentiation, undermining product
quality and diversity. Society is bound to be worse off.21
The harm inflicted by fake goods may go beyond consumers being disappointed. Counterfeit products may pose
health and safety risks – for example, when drugs do not
contain the relevant active ingredient, or when defective
vehicle replacement parts result in traffic accidents.22 The
risk of physical harm may not be limited to the persons
consuming the fake good, but may extend to others – for
example, due to the spread of infectious diseases. In the
parlance of economists, the consumption of fake goods
may entail negative externalities.

21 Producers of fake goods benefit from the purchase
of fake goods, but those benefits will likely be lower
than the losses to consumers and genuine producers.
Grossman and Shapiro (1988a) confirm that this in a
formal model, although they also identify special cases
in which social welfare effects are more ambiguous.
22 For a specific example of mislabeled malaria
medicines not containing the relevant active
ingredient, see Dondrop et al (2004).

23 See WHO et al (2013) for evidence on
substandard, spurious, falsely-labeled,
falsified and counterfeit medicines.

89

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.2.2

Box 2.3: Why do consumers buy counterfeit luxury brands?

Non-deceptive counterfeiting
Cases of non-deceptive counterfeiting involve different – and arguably more complex – considerations.
At the outset, such cases raise the question of why a
consumer prefers a product bearing a falsified label to a
generic product of the same quality. Since no information asymmetry prevails, the only plausible explanation
is that consumers derive image value from buying the
falsified brand. This may, at first, seem irrational. However,
there may be rational explanations. In particular, while
consumers know that they are buying a fake product,
they may be able to pretend that they own the genuine
brand when displaying the product to others. This explanation seems relevant to luxury products, where brands
are especially important as a means of communicating
affluence and status.
A considerable body of survey evidence has confirmed
that image value is indeed what underlies the decision
of consumers to knowingly buy counterfeit products.
At the same time, they trade off image value with other
considerations – notably the price of fake goods, and
their moral attitude towards counterfeiting.24 In addition,
the precise image benefit that counterfeit products

Drawing on the psychology of human attitudes, Wilcox et al (2009)
distinguish between two social functions that luxury brands fulfill
– a “social-adjustive” function and a “value-expressive” function.
Under the former, brands help consumers to gain approval in social
situations. Under the latter, brands help consumers to communicate
their central beliefs and values to their peers.
Research in psychology has suggested that consumers valuing the
“social-adjustive” function of brands primarily respond to messages
promoting a product’s image, whereas consumers employing brands
for “value-expressive” purposes primarily respond to messages
promoting a product’s quality.25 Accordingly, to the extent that
counterfeit products allow consumers to borrow a product’s image but not its quality, one would expect consumers who seek
brands for “social-adjustive” purposes to be more likely to turn to
counterfeit products.
Using a survey of consumer attitudes towards luxury brands, Wilcox
et al confirm that this is indeed the case. In particular, they identify
how strongly survey participants value the two social functions of
brands and then explore whether those preferences explain their
intent to purchase counterfeit products. The empirical results show
that preference for a brand’s “social-adjustive” function has a statistically significant effect on counterfeit purchase intent, whereas
preference for a brand’s “value-expressive” function does not.
Interestingly, however, Wilcox et al also find that moral attitudes
towards counterfeit products only affect counterfeit purchase
intent when preferences are of the “value-expressive” rather than
the “social-adjustive” type. They explain this result by such moral
attitudes forming part of the central beliefs and values that guide the
purchase decisions of “value-expressive” but not “social-adjustive”
type consumers.

provide differs markedly across products and social
context (see Box 2.3).

24 See, for example, Bian and Moutinho (2009), Bloch et
al (1993), Penz and Stöttinger (2005), Vida (2007).

90

25 See Snyder and DeBono (1985).

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

It is this latter complexity that makes it difficult to evaluate

The effects of non-deceptive counterfeiting on innova-

the socioeconomic impact of non-deceptive counterfeit-

tion are similarly complex. To the extent that counterfeits

ing. In particular, the buying of a fake not only affects the

undermine the image value of brands, one would expect

buyer, but also how other consumers perceive the genu-

the immediate effect to be negative: fewer sales and

ine brand underlying the fake. One prominent theoretical

reduced market power make it more difficult for brand

study on this topic assumes that image value results

owners to finance investments in innovation. At the same

from a product’s perceived exclusivity; in particular, it

time, as further explained in Section 3.1, greater com-

models image value as declining in terms of the number

petition may under certain circumstances lead firms to

of consumers buying the product – whether genuine or

innovate more in order to retain their competitive edge.

fake. In this particular setting, the social welfare con- This holds true even when competition is illicit in nature.
26

sequences of counterfeiting prove to be ambiguous. In

Indeed, one prominent investigation on counterfeiting in

particular, while the presence of fake goods undermines

the Chinese footwear industry found that some genuine

the brand’s image value, and thus harms brand owners

producers reacted to increased competition from fake

and consumers of the genuine product, consumers of

products by improving the quality of their product line

fake goods benefit by deriving image value without paying

– especially visible quality elements such as surface ma-

the full price of the genuine product.27

terials.29 However, this finding is specific to the industry
and the nature of counterfeit activity studied; there have

The notion of perceived product exclusivity generating

been too few empirical studies on this link to draw any

image value arguably holds for many luxury products –

general conclusions.

as evidenced by numerous advertisements for luxury
brands expressly alluding to their exclusivity. However,
there are other ways in which the presence of counterfeit
products can affect the demand for the genuine product.
For example, trend conformity – consumers seeking to
imitate their peers – may lead to a positive relationship
between image value and the number of both genuine
and fake purchases.28

26 See Grossman and Shapiro (1988b).
27 The overall effect on social welfare depends on
the values of the relevant market parameters.
See Grossman and Shapiro (1988b).
28 For empirical evidence of such peer effects, see, for
example, Burnkrant and Cousineau (1975), and Bearden
et al (1989). Conner (1995) and Nia and Zaichkowsky
(2000) show that, under certain assumptions, the
presence of counterfeit products can benefit the
producers of genuine goods. See also the “socialadjustive” role of brands, as described in Box 3.

29 See Qian (2008). This study exploits a natural experiment
created by the reallocation of enforcement resources
away from the footwear industry and towards sectors
where illicit products posed greater risks for public
health. In addition to innovating more, genuine
producers reacted to the entry of fake products
by vertically integrating downstream retailers and
stepping up enforcement efforts. These strategies
proved effective in reducing counterfeit sales.

91

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.2.3

Some studies have sought to estimate the effects of
counterfeiting activity on sales, employment, and tax

Economy-wide effects

revenue.31 These studies have focused entirely on the
short-term effects of counterfeiting.32 Possibly because

In policy discussions on trademark counterfeiting, pos-

they lack information on a hypothetical scenario that is not

sible adverse tax revenue and employment effects have

characterized by counterfeiting, they do not consider the

assumed some importance. In this regard, it is important

longer term economic effects of persistent counterfeiting

to distinguish between short-term effects of changes in

activity. In addition, they suffer from data limitations and,

levels of counterfeiting and the longer term effects of a

where no data exist, they need to make crude assump-

given level of these activities.

tions – especially on important behavioral parameters.33

Understanding the former is conceptually straightforward.

Indeed, the lack of consistent macroeconomic data on

Short-term employment effects depend on the output

counterfeiting activities across countries and over time

movements of licit and illicit producers, and the intensi-

poses one of the biggest barriers towards providing more

ties with which they use labor in the production and

reliable empirical insights into this topic. Being illegal,

distribution of goods. Short-term tax revenue effects

the production and sale of fake goods escapes official

are bound to be negative, as sales of fake goods typically

statistical recording. While some efforts are under way

30

occur in informal markets and thus do not generate sales,

to find indirect ways of capturing the scale and effect of

corporate income, or import tax revenue. In addition, to

counterfeiting, it will invariably take time for better data to

the extent that counterfeiting reduces the sales of genu-

become available.34 In the meantime, policymakers will

ine producers, tax collections from those firms also fall.

need to continue setting priorities for fighting trademark
counterfeiting with little empirical guidance on offer.

The longer term consequences of counterfeiting activity
are more difficult to grasp. Workers losing employment
likely find other jobs and governments facing a revenue
shortfall likely adjust their tax structure to finance public
spending. The key question is how workers and the
efficiency of the tax system would fare in a hypothetical
scenario that is not characterized by counterfeiting.

30 Much will depend on whether employment changes
take place in the formal or informal sector; the
setting of wages, the reach of social safety nets,
and the length of possible unemployment spells
are bound to differ in these two sectors.

92

31 See Fink et al (2010) and the US Government
Accountability Office (2010) for reviews of these studies.
32 In some cases, the resulting estimates include the
effects of copyright piracy as well. In addition, some
studies look at short-term effects of given levels – rather
than changes in levels – of counterfeiting, without
considering the longer term ‘general-equilibrium’
consequences outlined in the text. See Fink et al (2010).
33 One such parameter is the degree to which fake and
genuine products are substitutes for one another. Some
studies simply assume that consumers of fake goods
would switch one-for-one to genuine goods, if the
former were not available. See Fink et al (2010).
34 The European Observatory on Counterfeiting and Piracy
has initiated work towards methodologies that would
quantify the scope, scale and impact of IPR infringements
on the European economy. However, this work is still at
a relatively initial stage. See Hoorens et al (2012) for a
first proposal for a new approach towards quantification.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

2.3

2.3.1

Choices in designing trademark
laws and institutions

Designing trademark laws
To fulfill their economic rationale (see Section 2.1), trade-

As an economic principle, protecting trademarks stirs little

mark laws establish exclusive rights over signs, with the

controversy. As outlined in Section 2.1, they help lower

ultimate objective of preventing consumer confusion.

consumers’ search costs and promote orderly competi-

At the same time, they seek to avoid unduly restricting

tion in the marketplace; society as a whole stands to ben- “orderly” competition in the marketplace – which is generefit. However, designing trademark laws and institutions

ally defined as competition whereby one firm does not

entails choices that determine how effectively the system

inappropriately take advantage of another firm’s brand.

fulfills this role. Among others, these choices concern
what subject matter qualifies for trademark protection,

In many cases, there are no conflicts between the exclu-

how trademark rights are acquired and lost, and what

sive rights associated with a trademark and the activities

acts constitute violation of those rights.

of competitors. Indeed, firms often seek to establish their
own identities and deliberately differentiate their brands

Over time, different approaches to trademark protection

from those of their competitors. However, situations of

have emerged in different countries. New business mod-

conflict sometimes arise – especially when firms seek

els and the evolving nature of the marketplace constantly

trademarks that closely resemble those protecting suc-

challenge existing practices and prompt new or refined

cessful brands.

approaches. In particular, the arrival of the Internet some
20 years ago posed new questions about how firms

One important question is what subject matter should

employ trademarks, when consumers may be confused,

qualify for trademark protection. The increased so-

and what constitutes orderly competition.

phistication of modern marketing strategies has vastly
expanded the types of signs for which applicants seek

This section reviews some of the key design choices,

protection. In particular, firms no longer limit claims for

exploring what approaches different jurisdictions have

trademark protection to names and two-dimensional

followed and what trade-offs these approaches entail. It

logos, but try to extend protection to three-dimensional

is divided into two parts. The first part looks at the law,

shapes, colors, holograms, slogans, sounds, smells,

and the second part looks at the institutions charged

tastes, and feels (see Subsection 1.3.1). National laws

with implementing the law – mainly trademark offices.

define whether specific signs are eligible for protection.35

The discussion does not comprehensively cover all legal
and institutional design choices; rather, it focuses on
selected choices for which approaches differ markedly
across countries.

35 Note that Article 15 of the TRIPS Agreement requires
that “[a]ny sign, or any combination of signs, capable of
distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking
from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of
constituting a trademark. Such signs, in particular words
including personal names, letters, numerals, figurative
elements and combinations of colours as well as any
combination of such signs, shall be eligible for registration
as trademarks. Where signs are not inherently capable of
distinguishing the relevant goods or services, Members
may make registrability depend on distinctiveness
acquired through use. Members may require, as a
condition of registration, that signs be visually perceptible.”

93

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Even if a particular sign qualifies, in principle, for protec-

A second important question is whether there can be

tion, it must meet additional requirements: it must not

situations of trademark infringement, even when it is

deceive; it must not be contrary to morality and public

not clear that consumers are confused. One classic

order; in the case of shapes, it must not perform a

example is the use of the name Cadillac in a brand of

technical function that competitors may want to use;

dog food. On the one hand, it seems unlikely that this

and it must be distinctive.36 The latter requirement is a

dual use of the Cadillac name for two unrelated prod-

key eligibility criterion. For trademarks to best support

ucts confuses consumer as to its source or origin. One

efficient communication as outlined in Subsection 2.1.1,

may even argue that the “premium product” notion

consumers need to clearly associate them with specific

associated with the Cadillac name conveys informa-

goods and services. If descriptive terms such as “orange

tion to consumers. On the other hand, the introduction

juice” or “mobile telephone” could receive trademark

of the Cadillac dog food brand may negatively affect

protection in relation to the goods they denote, the

the image value of the original automobile brand; in

ordinary meaning of those terms would be distorted;

legal terms, the former brand may “dilute” the latter.

in addition, firms possessing those trademarks would
have an undue advantage vis-à-vis their competitors. In

Questions of trademark dilution have gained new promi-

practice, it is not always easy to evaluate how distinctive

nence with the rise of e-commerce and the emergence of

different subject matter is in different contexts, and this

new market intermediaries. For example, search engine

evaluation may change over time.

operators sometimes auction off trademarked keywords
for the display of advertisements to the highest bidder,

A similar tension arises when a brand name is so suc-

even if this bidder is not the trademark owner.38 Does the

cessful that its primary meaning evolves to describe a

display of advertisements unrelated to the trademarked

general class of a good or service rather than the specific

keyword dilute the trademark in question? And if so, does

good or service offered by the trademark holder. Well-

such dilution constitute trademark infringement, even if

known examples of such cases are the terms “gramo-

there is no consumer confusion?

phone”, “escalator”, and “zipper”. From an economic
perspective, maintaining exclusive trademark rights in
such cases would cement a dominant market position
and lock in economic rents. Trademark law thus allows
for the possibility that “genericized” trademarks lose
their protection and become part of the public domain.
However, this does not happen frequently. Indeed, trademark holders typically try to preempt losing their exclusive
rights by discouraging the generic use of their trademarks.
For example, the US firm Google publishes on its website
suggested generic terms for the trademarks it owns,
partly to help stem the use of “google” as a verb.37

36 See WIPO document SCT/16/2 for
further discussion on this subject.
37 See: www.google.com/permissions/
trademark/our-trademarks.html

94

38 See Rosso (2010).

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Courts have reached different conclusions on these
questions, in part reflecting differences in how trademark
laws protect right holders against dilution.39 Assessing the
consequences of dilution from an economic perspective
is similarly complex. As pointed out in Subsection 2.1.2,

2.3.2
Designing trademark institutions
Trademark institutions encompass those entities tasked

trademarks can have a useful communication function,

with implementing trademark law. In principle, this in-

justifying their third-party use. In addition, diluting the

cludes the administrative office managing the trademark

image value of a brand may reduce the economic rents

registration process, as well as the various entities

that strong brands can generate. This tends to benefit

responsible for enforcing the law – including judicial

society. However, depending on competitive conditions,

authorities, the police, and customs authorities. This

reduced profits may undermine investments in innovation,

subsection focuses on the registration process, although

possibly rendering society worse off in the longer term

it also touches on questions of law enforcement.

(see Section 3.1). Few generalizations are possible and
much depends on case-specific circumstances.

The registration of a trademark is usually the most important vehicle for securing exclusive rights to a brand.40 The
typical job of a trademark office consists of examining the
applications they receive for registration, publishing those
applications, considering possible third-party oppositions
against them, registering successful applications, and
maintaining the register as the official record of trademark
ownership. In performing these tasks, trademark offices
typically seek to further the following objectives:
• Promote accessibility to the trademark system. Fees
for registering and defending a trademark as well
as associated procedural requirements should not
unduly burden applicants – especially smaller, more
resource-constrained entities.
• Ensure transparency and legal certainty. All market
participants should have a clear picture of the trademarks that are legally registered, the goods and
services they cover, the trademarks for which the
office has received applications, and the trademarks
that have expired.

39 In the US, arguments of trademark dilution have
historically gained little traction in both trademark case
law and jurisprudence (Beebe 2004). Recent legislative
reforms, however, have widened the possibilities for
right holders to claim dilution of their trademarks (Slowik,
2009). In the EU, the Community Trademark Regulation
(No 207/2009) expressly protects trademarks with a
reputation against blurring, tarnishment, and free-riding
(Fhima, 2011). Gilliéron (2008) offers a perspective on
how the development of new online business models
may influence the scope of trademark protection.

40 However, in most countries, even unregistered trademarks
can benefit from legal protection. For example, under the
US common law system, an entity can create and enforce
a trademark without registering it. Registration provides
additional benefits, however. See Graham et al (2013).

95

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

• Balance the interests of right holders and those of

Box 2.4: Trademark cluttering in the pharmaceutical industry

third parties. Administrative procedures should lead to

Evaluating to what extent trademark registers may be cluttered
is difficult, as one does not have information on whether owners
of trademarks actually use them. To overcome this difficulty, von
Graevenitz (2012) makes use of a natural experiment provided by
the enlargement of the European Union (EU) in 2004.

the refusal of applications that pertain to non-eligible
subject matter, that are not sufficiently distinctive, or
for which prior rights exist. They should also allow
third parties to challenge applications for new trademarks, while preventing them from unduly delaying
the administrative process.
• Avoid “cluttering” of the trademark register. There
should be incentives to minimize the registration and
renewal of trademarks that applicants do not use.
Cluttered registers impose a cost on society in that
they reduce the space of names and other eligible
subject matter available for new trademarks. While the
precise extent of cluttered registers and their costs are

In particular, von Graevenitz’s study focuses on the pharmaceutical industry where firms do not only seek trademark protection
for new drug names, but they must also obtain the approval of
medical regulators for using those names in commerce. Indeed, in
order to avoid confusion of drug names and the possible adverse
health outcomes that could ensue, the scrutiny applied by medical
regulators is typically tougher than that applied by trademark offices.
As a result, pharmaceutical firms often submit multiple names for
their new products to medical regulators, so that they do not have to
start from scratch if one or more regulator around the world rejects
a name. In order to establish exclusive rights over the submitted
names, they apply for trademarks for each of them.

uncertain, there is some evidence that they negatively
affect at least some market participants (see Box 2.4).41

Against this background, von Graevenitz’s study questions whether
the enlargement of the EU prompted pharmaceutical companies to
apply for more trademarks, as they faced a tougher name review at
the European Medicines Agency (EMA). In particular, EU enlargement meant that 10 additional countries could object to a name in
the EMA’s Invented Name Review Group.
The study focuses on trademark applications at the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (OHIM), the EU office responsible for
the Community Trade Mark (CTM). It employs a so-called differencein-difference estimator that not only compares filing behavior before
and after EU enlargement, but also evaluates how filing behavior
in the pharmaceutical industry compares to other industries.42 It
concludes that name review at the EMA prompted pharmaceutical
companies to register between 10 and 37 percent more trademarks.
The costs of these additional trademark registrations are not trivial.
Estimates suggest that the cost of developing a single new drug
name can amount to USD 25,000 or more.
Admittedly, the study’s findings only pertain to the pharmaceutical
industry. Given the additional layer of name review that takes place
in this industry, cluttering may well be less important elsewhere.
However, this question deserves further study – especially in light
of the rapid increase in the number of trademarks filed over the
past decades (see Subsection 1.3.1).
Source: von Graevenitz (2012)

41 An explorative study on the extent of trademark cluttering
at the UKIPO and OHIM reported on “survey-based
evidence that applicants perceive cluttering to be a
problem in specific fields and countries”. However, it also
concluded that there is no “strong evidence that cluttering
has already become a systemic problem for the trade mark
system that is comparable to the effect of patent thickets
for patent systems.” See von Graevenitz et al (2012).

96

42 The study also employs a so-called nearest neighbor
matching estimator that confirms the main findings.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Trademark offices face a number of choices in designing

Figure 2.2: Fees matter

the registration process that ultimately determine how

Average number of classes specified in trademark applications, 2010

effectively the system promotes the above objectives.43

2.6

The remainder of this subsection discusses several of
these choices, pointing to different approaches and
associated trade-offs.

2.2

The first choice concerns the level and structure of administrative fees. Trademark offices charge applicants
fees for the services they offer, typically starting with an

1.8

initial application fee and extending to fees for additional
services – such as publishing and registering the trademark, recording a change of ownership, and renewing

1.4

the registration at regular intervals. The details vary from
country to country.
1

Fees influence applicants’ decisions, not only on whether
to apply for a trademark, but also on the number of
classes in which they seek protection. For instance, in
some offices, the initial application fee already covers
goods or services belonging to more than one class,
whereas in other offices the initial fee only covers goods
or services belonging to a single class, and the fee for
each additional class costs extra. As a result, offices in
the former category see, on average, 0.63 more classes
specified in each application than offices in the latter
category (Figure 2.2).44

Offices with fee discount

Offices without fee discount

Note: This comparison is based on a sample of 51 offices for which
underlying data were available and which operate multi-class filing
systems. “Offices with fee discount” include 34 offices where the total
fee for an application covering two classes exceeds the total fee for
an application covering a single class by less than 50 percent; in most
of these offices, the initial application fee already covers two or three
classes. “Offices without fee discount” include 17 offices where the
total fee for an application covering two classes exceeds the total fee
for an application covering a single class by 50 percent or more.
Source: World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Statistics
Database and websites of national and regional IP offices.

These findings suggest that fees shape applicant behavior. How applicant behavior in turn shapes competitive
outcomes in the marketplace is not always clear, however.
For example, low fees can promote the trademark system’s accessibility, benefitting small entities that might

43 It should be noted that, strictly speaking, at least some
of the institutional choices discussed here are governed
by law rather than by trademark offices decisions.
However, for expositional simplicity, the discussion treats
them as trademark offices choices, in view of the fact
that offices are responsible for implementing them.
44 Of course, statistical correlation does not imply
causation. In particular, many offices in the former
category do not examine trademark applications on
relative grounds and do not require that an application
be based on ‘intent to use’ – which possibly explains
why applicants specify additional classes. However,
in a multivariate regression analysis based on the 51
offices included in Figure 2.2 that controlled for these
office characteristics, the availability of a fee discount
emerged as the only statistically significant variable that
explains the average number of classes per application;
the point estimate suggests that fee discounts are
associated with 0.54 more classes per application.

otherwise be exposed to ‘disorderly’ competition. At the
same time, low fees might invite more speculative applications across a wider set of classes – thus possibly
contributing to the cluttering of trademark registers, as
described above.

97

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Similar trade-offs exist for other design choices. Consider
the implementation of the so-called use requirement.

Figure 2.3: Intentions to use often
do not result in actual use

Most countries’ legal frameworks make trademark pro-

Applications and registrations for trademarks at
the USPTO, by filing year, 1995–2010

tection conditional on the right holder using the trademark

Intent-to-use applications

in commerce.45 This condition precisely seeks to prevent
the cluttering of trademark registers and bad-faith applicant behavior. In implementing this requirement, a key

Applications

Registrations

250'000

question is whether the trademark applicant or owner
should furnish proof of use and, if so, when. On this

200'000

question, countries have followed different approaches.
Many European countries and OHIM, for example, do
not require demonstration of use when trademarks are

150'000

applied for, registered, or renewed. Questions of use only
arise when third parties challenge trademarks through

100'000

pre- or post-grant opposition procedures. At the United
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), by contrast,
applicants generally need to demonstrate use before the

50'000

office registers or renews a trademark.
From an economic viewpoint, not – or not immediately
– requiring use is justified in cases where the market in-

0
1995

2005

2010

Use applications

troduction of new goods or services takes considerable
time, and where firms need some assurance that their

2000

Applications

Registrations

120'000

future brands will receive protection. For this reason, a
considerable number of offices have opted for an intentto-use system, whereby they accept applications for

90'000

which the applicant signals future use, but registration
can only occur once the applicant is actually using the
trademark.46 At the USPTO, for example, applicants who

60'000

file on an intent-to-use basis have to establish use within
three years of the office approving the application. Only
after they have done so will the office actually register

30'000

the application.47
45 A WIPO questionnaire on trademark law and practice
reveals that in 2010 only 11 out of a total of 79 countries
(or regional trademark offices) did not provide for a
use requirement. See WIPO/STrade/INF/1 Rev.1.
46 Responses to the WIPO questionnaire referred to
in footnote 45 reveal that 23 out of a total of 79
countries (or regional trademark offices) require
that an application be based on intent-to-use.
47 See Graham et al (2013). There are certain
exceptions to this use requirement, notably for
applications filed under the Paris Convention as
well as via the Madrid system (see Box 2.5).

98

0
1995

2000

2005

2010

Note: Intent-to-use applications include applications filed on the basis of intentto-use, a foreign application or a registration under the Paris Convention, or an
extension of protection under the Madrid Protocol.
Source: Myers (2013).

CHAPTER 2

Interestingly, more than half of the intent-to-use trademarks filed at the USPTO do not result in a registration – a
substantially higher share than for “regular” trademark
applications (Figure 2.3). This suggests that many applicants realize within three years that they will not use
the trademarks they intended to use. One explanation
is that firms withdraw their plans for the introduction of
new products; alternatively, they may initially apply for
more than one trademark for the same product in order
to collect more information on which branding strategy
works best. The latter practice is especially relevant for
the pharmaceutical industry, where firms face the risk
that their proposed trade names will not meet regulatory
approval (see Box 2.4).
The relatively low registration share of intent-to-use applications at the USPTO raises the question of whether
offices that do not require proof of use as a condition for
registration see a larger number of unused trademarks in
their register. Preliminary evidence derived from comparing applications for the same trademarks at the USPTO
and at OHIM suggests that this indeed is the case (see
Box 2.5). Again, while indicating that the implementation
of the use requirement matters, it remains unclear how
the registration of unused trademarks affects competitive

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Box 2.5: What happens to applications for the same trademarks
at the USPTO and at OHIM?
One way to assess the effect of institutional design choices on
trademark filing behavior and outcomes is to compare what happens
to applications for the same trademarks that are filed in different
offices. Von Graevenitz (2013) performed such an exercise focusing
on trademarks filed in August 2007 at the USPTO and at OHIM. In
those two months, the USPTO received 25,516 applications and
OHIM received 8,140. Comparing the trademark names as well
as the identity of the applicants, von Graevenitz identified 2,159
applications received by both offices.48
Some of the 2,159 common applications arrived at the two offices via
the Madrid system, whereas others arrived via the regular national
procedures. This matters for the USPTO insofar as the registration of
Madrid system-based applications is not conditional on applicants
establishing use; by contrast, the great majority of non-Madrid
system-based applications at the USPTO are intent-to-use applications, for which applicants need to establish use prior to registration.
How do registration outcomes for these 2,159 common applications
differ across these two offices? Table 2.1 compares registration
outcomes, first focusing on only those common applications for
which applicants at the USPTO opted for intent-to-use filings.
Marked differences emerge. First, OHIM registered 87 percent of all
applications in this subsample, whereas the USPTO only registered
59 percent. Second, there were 445 applications – representing
33 percent of the subsample – for which registration occurred at
OHIM but not at the USPTO. Looking more closely at why those 445
applications failed to register at the USPTO, it turns out that the applicant did not establish use in 292 of the 445 cases. In other words,
the USPTO’s use requirement is an important factor explaining why
the two offices saw different registration outcomes.

behavior and market outcomes.
Table 2.1: Registration decisions, intent-to-use subsample
Registered at the USPTO?
Registered
at OHIM?

No

Yes

Total

No

108

70

178

Yes

445

741

1,186

Total

553

811

1,364

48 In identifying common applications, von Graevenitz
(2013) also considered applications filed in the
three months before and after August 2007.
Correctly identifying common applications requires
extensive manual checks. This explains why this
investigation focused only on applications filed in a
particular month, rather than the whole population
of applications at the USPTO and at OHIM.

99

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Table 2.2 makes the same comparisons, focusing only on those
common applications that entered the USPTO via the Madrid
system.49 Interestingly, the registration rate at the USPTO – at 81
percent – was considerably higher for this subsample. This again
underlines the relevance of the use requirement. OHIM’s registration
rate – at 95 percent – was also higher for this subsample, and it
remains the case that far more registrations fail to register at the
USPTO than at OHIM. This suggests that other factors besides the
use requirement “filter out” applications at the USPTO. One such
factor may be stricter examination of applications: the USPTO – in
contrast to OHIM – examines applications on relative grounds
against earlier trademarks. Unfortunately, available data do not
offer useful insights into the precise reasons why applications at
the USPTO fail to register.50
Table 2.2: Registration decisions, Madrid system subsample

new trademarks? Virtually all offices examine applications
on so-called absolute grounds – evaluating whether the
applied for sign is eligible subject matter, sufficiently distinctive and in line with other provisions of the law (see
Subsection 2.3.1). The majority of offices also perform
so-called relative grounds examination – identifying any
conflict with earlier trademarks in different ownership.
However, a number of large offices – notably, OHIM and
selected national offices in European countries – do not
examine applications on relative grounds.
Relative grounds examination of all incoming trademark
applications can consume considerable resources. One

Registered at the USPTO?
Registered
at OHIM?

How extensively should offices examine applications for

No

Yes

Total

No

17

20

37

Yes

119

566

685

Total

136

586

722

may argue that such a resource investment may not be
necessary if only a minority of new applications is likely
to raise a conflict with a prior trademark. In addition,
the views of office examiners on whether new applica-

While offering an empirical window into the effects of institutional
design choices on registration outcomes, two caveats apply. First,
there may be genuine differences in how applicants use the trademarks they applied for in the two jurisdictions, which could affect
registration outcomes. Second, the sample at hand is relatively
small; future investigations using larger samples may refine von
Graeventiz’s results and provide additional insights into how registration outcomes differ by sector and by applicant type.
Source: von Graevenitz (2013)

tions indeed raise a conflict may differ from the views of
trademark owners.51 Some offices have therefore opted
to only deploy examination resources when third parties
oppose new trademarks. While this approach can save
resources, one counter-argument is that not all trademark
owners – especially small businesses – have the capacity to monitor and, if necessary, oppose conflicting new
applications; ex officio relative grounds examination thus
offers some assurance to those entities, and contributes
more generally to legal certainty.

49 In addition to intent-to-use and Madrid system
applications, the USPTO accepts so-called Section 44
applications filed on the basis of a foreign application
or registration. However, there are only 73 common
applications for which the USPTO equivalent is based
on Section 44 – a subsample that is too small for
meaningful comparison of registration outcomes. This
also explains why the two subsamples in Tables 2.1
and 2.2 only total 2,086 applications, slightly below
the full sample of 2,159 common applications.
50 In the majority of cases, the data records simply indicate
that the applicant failed to respond to an office inquiry.

100

51 Some offices that examine applications on relative
grounds allow applicants to submit consent or coexistence agreements, allowing them to overcome a
refusal based on a prior conflicting trademark. Generally,
both parties sign these agreements, stating that they
do not believe the trademarks will cause consumer
confusion and that they should be allowed to co-exist.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Unfortunately, only limited empirical guidance is avail-

Whether or not to examine on relative grounds raises a

able on how relative grounds examination affects filing

closely related institutional choice: the design of opposi-

behavior and registration outcomes.52 The comparison

tion systems. The vast majority of trademark offices have

of common trademark applications at OHIM and at the

such systems in place, thereby enabling third parties to

USPTO outlined in Box 5 suggests that relative grounds

formally object to the registration of a new trademark

examination may be a factor in explaining why more ap-

through an adversarial, administrative proceeding.54

plications fail to register at the USPTO, but the evidence

Opposition systems serve to balance the interests of

is not fully conclusive. A study on the effect of the United

applicants, owners of existing trademarks, and the public

Kingdom Intellectual Property Office (UKIPO) weakening

at large; in addition, as stated above, they can guide the

relative grounds examination in 2007 concluded that this

allocation of administrative resources. The exact design

policy change increased opposition rates; unfortunately

of opposition procedures differs in important ways across

the study could not evaluate how the policy change af-

offices. Key design elements include the following:

fected registration outcomes.53
• Timing of oppositions. Should oppositions take place
before or after the registration of a trademark and, if
before, should they occur prior to or post the examination stage? Allowing oppositions before registration
avoids the uncertainty of untested registrations on
the register. In addition, if oppositions precede examinations, they can provide relevant information that
examiners might otherwise miss. The main advantage
of delaying oppositions until after registration is that
they shorten the registration process, benefitting the
majority of applications that do not lead to any conflict.
• Grounds for opposition. Should third parties be able to
oppose trademarks on all grounds or only on selected
grounds? The most common scenario is for owners
52 Responses to the WIPO questionnaire referred to in
footnote 45 reveal that 38 of the 51 offices in the
sample underlying Figure 2.2 engage in relative grounds
examination. Those 38 offices see, on average, 0.48
fewer classes specified in each trademark application
than the remaining 13 offices. In a multivariate
regression analysis that controlled for whether an office
requires that an application be based on intent to use
and the availability of a fee discount (as per Figure
2.2), relative grounds examination had a negative
effect on the number of classes per application;
however, this effect was not statistically significant.
53 See von Graevenitz et al (2012). In 2007, the UKIPO
adopted a system whereby the office no longer
automatically refuses to register a new trademark
application if it conflicts with an earlier trademark.
However, the office still examines applications on
relative grounds. In cases where it finds a conflict,
it notifies the applicant; if the applicant chooses
to continue with the application, it also notifies
the owners of earlier conflicting trademarks.

of earlier trademarks to oppose a new trademark on
the basis that it would give rise to confusion. However,
in addition to such relative grounds, some offices
also allow oppositions based on formal and absolute
grounds. Narrowing the opposition grounds reduces
the burden that oppositions pose to applicants, but it
also narrows opportunities for third parties to provide
information that may assist in preventing the erroneous registration of trademarks.

54 Responses to the WIPO questionnaire referred
to in footnote 45 reveal that 60 out of 73
offices allow for ex parte opposition.

101

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

• Opposition periods. Time windows for lodging opposi-

indications of individual Nice classes as covering all the

tions range from as little as 30 days to up to 6 months

goods or services falling within those classes.58 At the

after publication of a trademark. On the one hand, third

other extreme, some offices have adopted the “means-

parties need sufficient time to consider and prepare

what-it-says” approach, whereby applicants need to list

an opposition; on the other hand, long opposition

in detail the particular goods and services for which they

periods delay the registration of trademarks, causing

will use the trademark; protection then only applies to

uncertainty for applicants. Some offices have put in

those goods and services and not to the full classes into

place “cooling-off” periods – additional time windows

which they fall. The former approach offers wider protec-

for parties to consult on a case; these mechanisms

tion, especially benefitting firms that frequently launch

appear to be useful in encouraging the settlement of

new products and services under the same trademark.

cases that would otherwise lead to administrative or

The latter approach leads to a more clearly delineated

judicial decision-making.55

and transparent trademark register, promoting legal
certainty among all market participants.59 It also leaves

There are no clear best practices in relation to these

room for new trademarks within the same class that

elements. Much depends on other institutional charac-

would otherwise conflict with the broad specification of

teristics – notably, whether an office conducts relative

existing trademarks.

grounds examination and what resources an office has
at its disposal to carry out such an examination.56 In any
case, balancing the interests of applicants as well as
the interests of third parties and the public should be a
principal goal of any opposition system.
A seemingly legalistic, yet important institutional choice
is how to specify the goods and services for which an
applicant seeks trademark protection. It determines the
scope of trademark protection and the transparency of
the trademark register. Most offices have adopted the
so-called Nice Classification consisting of 34 goods
classes and 14 services classes, as well as alphabetical lists of goods and services indications falling within
each class.57 However, there are important differences
in how they use this classification. In particular, at one
extreme, selected European offices have adopted a
“class-heading-covers-all” approach, whereby they deem
55 See WIPO document SCT/19/3 for
further discussion on this topic.
56 WIPO documents SCT/19/3 and WIPO/STrade/
INF/4 offer additional background.
57 The official name of the Nice Classification is the
International Classification of Goods and Services
under the Nice Agreement. In order to keep the
Nice Classification up to date, it is regularly revised
by a Committee of Experts, and a new edition of
the classification is published every five years.
See: www.wipo.int/classifications/nice/en

102

58 In the EU, a 2012 ruling by Court of Justice of the EU in
the so-called “IP translator” case has prompted changes
to the “class-heading-covers-all” approach. One the one
hand, the Court ruled that goods and services indications
in trademark applications must be sufficiently clear
and precise to delimit their scope on that basis alone.
But it also allowed the possibility of listing Nice class
headings, provided applicants specify whether they
intended to cover all of the goods or services included
in the alphabetical list of the particular class concerned
or only some of those goods or services. Accordingly,
OHIM and many national offices have clarified how they
interpret goods and services specifications in light of
the Court’s decision. See “Common Communication
on the Implementation of `IP Translator´”, European
Trademark and Design Network, May 2, 2013.
59 There are no studies that systematically explore
how alternative specification rules affect filing
behavior. Abud et al (2013) report a sharp drop in the
average number of classes specified in trademark
applications – from 2.2 to 1.2 – after Chile adopted
a “means-what-it-says” type rule in 2006.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

A final important area of institutional design concerns

In addition to the Madrid system, two international agree-

international cooperation. Generally, a trademark only

ments – the Trademark Law Treaty and the Singapore

receives protection within the borders of the country that

Treaty on the Law of Trademarks – simplify and harmonize

grants the right.60 In principle, firms that sell their goods

administrative procedures for the registration of trade-

or services in more than one country need to apply for

marks. Among other elements, these treaties govern

trademarks in multiple national offices. This can be a

what type of information applicants need to supply when

costly exercise. In addition to paying office fees, firms

applying for a trademark; how goods and service classes

face substantial administrative and legal costs when

should be specified, and what means of communica-

drafting and submitting application documents in differ-

tion with the trademark office are acceptable. They also

ent languages and conforming to different national rules.

mandate multi-class filing systems, so that applicants do

One key area for international cooperation therefore is to

not have to apply for more than one trademark if they

make registration systems compatible, so as to facilitate

seek protection in two or more classes. Like the Madrid

the processing of the same trademark application in

system, these treaties reduce the administrative cost of

multiple jurisdictions.

applying for the same trademark in several jurisdictions,
but leave the decision on whether a trademark qualifies

A number of international instruments have emerged to

for protection under prevailing laws to participating offices.

further this goal. First and foremost, the Madrid system
– one of the oldest international cooperation frame-

A somewhat different need for international coopera-

works dating back to a treaty first signed in the late

tion arises for well-known trademarks. National laws

19 century – offers trademark owners the possibility

provide special treatment for such trademarks, affording

to have their trademarks protected in several countries

them protection even when they are not registered in a

through a single application for international registration.

particular jurisdiction.61 The existence of a well-known

It reduces the administrative burden on applicants and

trademark can therefore be a reason for offices to refuse

th

offices, while preserving the ability of offices to refuse

a trademark application. Determining whether there is a

applications that do not qualify for protection on absolute

conflict with a well-known trademark in a particular goods

or relative grounds.

or services class can be challenging, however. What
precisely qualifies as “well known” is context specific.
Above all, among which group of consumers should a
trademark be well known? Different jurisdictions have
adopted different criteria in order to answer this question; they have also adopted varying terminology – such
as “famous trademarks” or “trademarks with a reputation” – with varying legal implications.62 Uncertainty about
whether a trademark is well known in a country can give
rise to so-called squatting behavior (see Box 2.6).

60 The exceptions are supranational trademark systems –
notably the CTM administered by OHIM – where protection
applies to all jurisdictions that are party to the system.

61 Article 6bis of the Paris Convention and
Article 16 of the TRIPS Agreement mandate
special protection for well-known marks.
62 US law has adopted the concept of famous trademarks
(Beebe, 2004). The EU’s First Trademark Directive
and the Community Trademark Regulation have
introduced the concept of a trademark “with a
reputation”; it remains unclear, however, to what extent
there is a difference between the concepts of “well
known” and “with a reputation” (Marsland, 2008).

103

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Box 2.6: Trademark squatting – evidence from Chile
Trademark squatting describes a phenomenon whereby a firm or
an individual deliberately registers a trademark that protects a
good, service, or name belonging to another firm. The trademarks
in question are often well-known and embody substantial goodwill
built by the brand owner. However, the original owner has not
registered them in a particular jurisdiction – for example, because
the market in question is too small or initially seemed unattractive.
Squatters, in turn, do not necessarily intend to use these trademarks;
rather, they extract rents from the original brand owners or other
companies that rely on the brand – such as importers of foreign
brands. For example, the squatter may threaten to sue the original
owner for trademark infringement once the latter seeks to enter
the local market. Instead of engaging in costly litigation, the brand
owner may be willing to make a modest payment to the squatter
for abandoning or re-assigning the trademark.
There is anecdotal evidence of squatting behavior throughout the
world. For example, when planning to enter the Russian market
in 2005, Starbucks saw its trademark registered by an individual,
Sergei Zuykov, who offered to re-assign the mark for USD 600,000.
Instead, Starbucks succeeded in invalidating Mr. Zuykov’s trademark
in court – at the cost of delayed market entry. By contrast, other
companies appear to have given in to Mr. Zuykov’s demands.63
Going beyond anecdotal evidence, how systemic is squatting behavior?
One recent study sought to quantify the share of squatters among
all trademark applicants in Chile. Several characteristics make Chile
an interesting case for studying the incidence of squatting: the legal
framework does not require owners to use their trademarks; at an
initial application fee of around USD 85, applying for a trademark
is relatively cheap; and Chile is not a member of the Madrid system,
requiring foreign applicants to directly file for protection in Chile.

63 See “He Doesn’t Make Coffee, but He Controls ‘Starbucks’
in Russia”, The New York Times, October 12, 2005.

104

The study employed ten variables to identify potential squatters
in the trademark register, including the share of an applicant’s
trademarks that were rejected, opposed, or revoked, simultaneous
filings of unrelated trademarks, class diversity, and others. Using
these variables, the researchers calculated a “squatter score”
that ranks trademark applicants according to how likely they are
squatters. After performing extensive manual checks, the authors
conservatively identified a total of 431 potential squatters – 87
companies and 344 individuals – in the Chilean trademark registry.64
These potential squatters filed together almost 5,800 trademark applications between 1991 and 2010. The sector seeing the greatest
number of squatting attempts is clothing and accessories; examples
of trademark filings for which the Chilean IP office has frequently
denied registration concern brands such as Abercrombie & Fitch,
Adidas, Barbour, Calvin Klein, Chanel, and Ray-Ban.
The study also explores the effect of squatting on affected
trademark owners. Using data on oppositions, the study finds
that trademark owners that have been exposed to squatting
file a disproportionately large number of trademarks shortly
after having been targeted by squatters. This suggests that the
squatting phenomenon induces more trademark filings by brand
owners, which means squatting can have wider effects beyond
the relatively small number of squatted trademarks themselves.
Source: Forthcoming study by the National Institute of Intellectual
Property of Chile and WIPO on “Trademark Squatters: Evidence
from Chile”.

64 The estimates are conservative because the study
ignores applicants with less than three filings and
there may well be applicants that use the trademark
system both “legitimately” and as squatters.

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Offices and courts look at a range of factors to determine

A stronger form of cooperation would be to establish a

whether a particular trademark is well-known in the do-

framework for exchanging information on well-known

mestic context.65 One of those factors may be the extent

trademarks, possibly resulting in a directory of such

to which a particular trademark is well-known abroad. A

trademarks. While discussions on the establishment of

trademark’s recognition can easily transcend national

such a framework have taken place, they have not yet led

borders, through travelling consumers, television, the

to any concrete proposals.67 Several difficult questions

Internet and other media. International cooperation can

arise. For instance, what should be the relevant criteria

thus be helpful in providing information that can assist

for a trademark in order to qualify for inclusion in any

relevant authorities to evaluate a trademark’s international

directory, when national rules for what should qualify

reach. One example of such cooperation is WIPO’s

as well-known differ? What should be its legal effects, if

Global Brands Database, which allows users to search

any? How can one avoid a presumption that a trademark

for trademarks across multiple jurisdictions (Box 2.7). In

is not well-known, if it is not included in the directory?

particular, this public database allows users to establish

How could one maintain a directory to reflect changes

in how many countries a trademark is registered and

in market condition across all relevant jurisdictions?

for what length of time – variables that may be relevant

Answering these questions is as challenging today as it

for evaluating whether a trademark should qualify as

was 10 or 20 years ago. One possible new element in

well-known.

this discussion, however, is the increased availability of
electronic data enabling assessments of the popular-

Box 2.7: WIPO’s Global Brand Database

ity and geographical reach of trademarks. Such new

Reflecting the territoriality of IP laws, trademark registration systems
operate to a large extent at the national level and, in selected cases,
at the regional level. As a consequence, researching in which jurisdiction a particular sign is already registered requires, in principle,
consulting all relevant national and regional trademark registers.
Until recently, no single international source was publicly available
that would allow for simultaneous trademark searches.

quantitative approaches may well spur renewed interest
in international cooperation.

WIPO’s Global Brand Database – a free service established in 2011
– seeks to fill this gap.66 It includes the national trademark collections
of 10 countries as well as the data collections generated by the
Madrid system for the international registration of trademarks and
the Lisbon system for the international registration of appellations of
origin. The service offers state-of-the-art search features – including
searches of images and figurative elements as well as automatic
suggestions of potential matching terms. As of mid-2013, the Global
Brand Database contained close to 12 million records, with the
number of national collections included set to grow.

65 See WIPO (2000).
66 The Global Brand Database is available
online at www.wipo.int/branddb.

67 In the 1990s, WIPO’s Committee of Experts on
Well-Known Marks considered the establishment of
a voluntary network for the exchange of information
among countries on well-known marks. However, the
Committee concluded at the time that the setting up
of such a network was “not realistic” and “no longer
pursued” this idea. See WIPO document WKM/CE/II/2.

105

CHAPTER 2

2.4
Conclusions and directions for
future research

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Unfortunately, there is much less evidence on how differences in filing behavior and registration outcomes affect
competition and firms’ performance in the marketplace.
One specific concern is the possible “cluttering” of
trademark registers, making it more difficult and costly

Brands are an indispensable guide for consumers and

for firms to find new trademarks that are available for pro-

a means for companies to build a reputation and im-

tection. Policymakers would be well advised to carefully

age in the marketplace. By protecting their exclusivity,

assess whether there are signs of “cluttered” registers

trademarks enable market economies to function more

in different goods and services classes – especially in

efficiently. Their importance goes far beyond sophisti-

countries that have seen rapid growth in trademark

cated markets for differentiated goods in high-income

registrations over the past decades. More generally,

countries. They are, by far, the most frequently used form

differences in filing behavior and registration outcomes

of registered IP in low- and middle-income countries.

raise the question of how different types of firms fare

Firms of every size and from virtually every sector of the

under alternative approaches. For example, do smaller

economy rely on trademarks when seeking to gain an

firms face a disadvantage in offices that place some of

edge on their competitors.

the burden of identifying conflicts with earlier trademarks
on existing owners?

Notwithstanding the clear economic rationale for protecting trademarks, policymakers face a set of choices that

Finally, the protection of well-known trademarks raises

have a bearing on how effectively the trademark system

special questions for international cooperation. With the

supports market economies. In addition, changing busi-

globalization of information, a trademark’s recognition

ness models and the rise of e-commerce have challenged

easily transcends national borders. However, whether

established practices, requiring new thinking and new

a trademark is well-known in a particular place remains

approaches. The fight against trademark counterfeiting,

context specific. International cooperation can help

for example, requires continuous adjustment, as produc-

national authorities assess the international reach of a

ers and sellers of fake goods find new ways of distributing

trademark. At a minimum, this can be done by providing

them and evading existing channels of law enforcement.

information on where a trademark is registered and for

Another central area of policymaking concerns the design

be to establish a framework for exchanging information

of the trademark registration process. Different countries

on well-known trademarks, possibly resulting in a direc-

have opted for different approaches, thus affecting fil-

tory of such trademarks.

how long. A more ambitious form of cooperation would

ing behavior in important ways. In particular, evidence
suggests that offices register fewer applications when
they require applicants to establish use prior to registration. Similarly, whether or not an office conducts relative
grounds examination affects how frequently applications
face oppositions. Other important design choices include
the level and structure of administrative fees, the rules
governing oppositions, and how applicants specify the
goods and services for which they seek protection.

106

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

Areas for future research

• As already mentioned, research has provided too few
insights into how differences in trademark filing behav-

While not as voluminous as the literature on patents,

ior and registration outcomes affect firm performance

economic research on trademarks has already provided

and competition in the marketplace. The increased

important insights – both on how they resolve market fail-

availability of unit-record trademark datasets should

ures and how policy choices affect economic outcomes.

enable new investigations aimed at providing such

Nonetheless, there are many areas where future research

insights.70 In fact, similar datasets for patents became

could offer better guidance to policymakers. Such areas

available more than 10 years ago and have prompted

include the following:

a large number of new empirical research studies

• Generating reliable evidence on the scale and effects

of the patent system. Comparable efforts in the field

that have produced new insights into the workings
of trademark counterfeiting represents one of the

of trademarks would be welcome.

biggest research challenges. The availability of data
on what are inherently illicit activities will continue to
constrain investigations in this field. However, there
appears to be scope to generate better data on the
basis of information that is collected in the course of
law enforcement activities. In addition, as shown by
several pioneering studies, original survey work can
generate useful evidence on the behavior of consumers and firms that may in turn inform policymaking.68
• More insights into how trademark institutions affect
filing behavior and registration outcomes are required
– partly in order to validate and refine the conclusions
of existing studies and partly in order to look at institutional choices that have not been considered thus far.69

68 See Fink et al (2010) for observations
on possible ways forward.
69 The WIPO questionnaire referred to in footnote 45
provides a list of relevant institutional choices and,
indeed, enables cross-country studies on their effects.

70 For example, the USPTO recently released a Trademark
Case Files Dataset covering 6.7 million trademark
applications filed with, or registrations issued by, the
USPTO between March 1823 and January 2012.

107

CHAPTER 2

THE ECONOMICS OF TRADEMARKS

REFERENCES
Abud, M.J., Fink, C., Hall, B. & Helmers, C. (2013a). “The Use of Intellectual
Property in Chile.” WIPO Economic Research Working Paper No. 11.

Landon, S. & Smith, C. (1998). “Quality Expectations, Reputation,
and Price.” Southern Economic Journal, 64(3), 628-647.

Akerlof, G. (1970). “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488-500.

Landes, W.M. & Posner, R.A. (1987). “Trademark Law: An Economic
Perspective.” Journal of Law and Economics, 30(2), 265-309.

Ashmead, R. (2012). “IP TRANSLATOR and Trade
Mark Registration Goods/Services Scope.” Journal of
Intellectual Property Law & Practice, 7(12), 844-846.

Marsland, V. (2008). “Famous and well-known trademarks in EU
law”. World Trademark Review, January/February, 66-67.

Bloch, P.H., Bush, R.F. & Campbell, L. (1993). “Consumer ‘Accomplices’ in
Product Counterfeiting.” The Journal of Consumer Marketing, 10(4), 27-36.
Burnkrant, R.E. & Cousineau, A. (1975). “Informational
and Normative Social Influence in Buyer Behavior.”
Journal of Consumer Research, 2(3), 206-214.
Dondorp, A.M., Newton, P. N., Mayxay, M., Van Damme, W., Smithuis,
F.M., Yeung, S., Petit, A., Lynam, A.J., Johnson, A., Hien, T.T., McGready,
R., Farrar, J.J., Looareesuwan, S., Day, N.P.J., Green, M.D. & White, N.J.
(2004). “Fake Antimalarials in Southeast Asia are a Major Impediment to
Malaria Control: Multinational Cross-Sectional Survey on the Prevalence of
Fake Antimalarials.” Tropical Medicine and International Health, 9, 1241–1246.
Barnes, D.W. (2006). “A New Economics of Trademarks.” Northwestern
Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property, 5(1), 22-67.
Bearden, W.O., Netemeyer, R.G. & Teel, J.E. Jr. (1989).
“Measurement of Consumer Susceptibility to Interpersonal
Influence.” Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 473-481.
Beebe, B. (2004). “The Semiotic Analysis of Trademark
Law.” UCLA Law Review, 51, 621-704.
Bian, X. & Moutinho, L. (2009). “An Investigation of
Determinants of Counterfeit Purchase Consideration.”
Journal of Business Research, 62(3), 368-379.
Conner, K.R. (1995). “Strategic Advantage from Being Imitated: When Can
Encouraging ‘Clones’ Pay?” Management Science, 41(2), 209-225.
Economides, N.S. (1988). “The Economics of
Trademarks.” Trademark Reporter, 78, 523-539.
Fhima, I.S. (2011). Trade Mark Dilution in Europe and
the United States. (Oxford University Press).
Fink, C. (2009). “Enforcing Intellectual Property Rights: an
Economic Perspective.” Issue Paper No.22, (International Centre
for Trade and Sustainable Development, Geneva, Switzerland).
Fink, C., Maskus, K. & Qian, Y. (2010). “The Economic
Effects of Counterfeiting and Piracy: A Literature Review.”
Advisory Committee on Enforcement, (WIPO/ACE/6/7).
Gilliéron, P. (2008). “Online Advertising Business Models and Distinctive
Signs – Should One Rethink the Concept of Confusion?” International
Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law, 39(6), 688-706.
Graham, S.J.H., Hancock, G., Marco, A.C. & Myers, A.F.
(2013). “The USPTO Trademark Case Files Dataset: Descriptions,
Lessons, and Insights.” SSRN working paper, available at http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2188621.
Griffiths, A. (2011). “An Economic Perspective on
Trademark Law.” (Cheltenham: Edward Elgar).
Grossman, G.M. & Shapiro, C. (1988a). “Counterfeit-Product
Trade.” American Economic Review, 78(10), 59-75.
Grossman, G.M. & Shapiro, C. (1988b). “Foreign Counterfeiting of
Status Goods.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1), 79-100.
Hoorens, S., Hunt, P., Malchiodi, A., Liccardo, R., Pacula, S.K.,
Rabinovich, L. & Irving, B. (2012). “Measuring IPR infringements
in the internal market: Development of a new approach to estimating
the impact of infringements on sales.” Report prepared for the
European Commission, Internal Market and Services DirectorateGeneral, available at http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/
iprenforcement/docs/ipr_infringment-report_en.pdf.
Hurwitz, M. A., & Caves, R. E. (1988). “Persuasion or Information?
Promotion and the Shares of Brand Name and Generic
Pharmaceuticals.” Journal of Law and Economics, 31(2), 299-320.

108

Nia, A. & Zaichkowsky, J.L. (2000). “Do Counterfeits
Devalue the Ownership of Luxury Brands?” Journal of
Product & Brand Management, 9(7), 485-97.
Myers, A. F. (2013). “What is behind the surge in trademark filings? An
analysis of United States data.” Background research for the World IP Report
2013. United States Patent and Trademark Office Economic Working Paper
No. 2013-1, available at www.uspto.gov/ip/officechiefecon/publications.jsp.
OECD (2008). “The Economic Impact of
Counterfeiting and Piracy.” (Paris, OECD).
Penz, E. & Stöttinger, B. (2005). “Forget the ‘Real’ Thing – Take the
Copy! An Explanatory Model for the Volitional Purchase of Counterfeit
Products.” Advances in Consumer Research, 32, 568-575.
Qian, Y. (2008). “Impacts of Entry by Counterfeiters.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1577-1609.
Richardson, G. (2008). “Brand Names Before the Industrial
Revolution.” NBER Working Paper No. 13930.
Rogers, M., Helmers, C. & Greenhalgh, C. (2007). “An Analysis
of the Characteristics of Small and Medium Enterprises that
Use Intellectual Property.” Working paper commissioned by
UKIPO. www.ipo.gov.uk/ipresearch-characteristics-200710.pdf
Rosso, M. & Jansen, B. (2010). “Brand Names as Keywords
in Sponsored Search Advertising.” Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, 27(1), 81-98.
Slowik, M.J. (2009). “Ahead of the Curve? The Effect of
the Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006 on the Federal
Circuit.” The Federal Circuit Bar Journal, 18(2), 349-364.
Snyder, M. & DeBono, K.G. (1985). “Appeals to Image and Claims
About Quality: Understanding the Psychology of Advertising.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49(3), 586-597.
US Government Accountability Office (2010). “Observations on
Efforts to Quantify the Economic Effects of Counterfeit and Pirated
Goods.” GAO-10-423, available at www.gao.gov/new.items/d10423.pdf.
Vida, I. (2007). “Determinants of Consumer
Willingness to Purchase Non-Deceptive
Counterfeit Products.” Managing Global Transitions, 5(3), 253-270.
von Graevenitz, G., Greenhalgh, C., Helmers, C. &
Schautschick, P. (2012). “Trade Mark Cluttering: An Exploratory
Report.” Working paper commissioned by UKIPO. Available
at www.ipo.gov.uk/ipresearch-tmcluttering.pdf.
von Graevenitz, G. (2012). “Trade Mark Cluttering – Evidence
from EU Enlargement.” Manuscript, available at http://papers.ssrn.
com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2145588&download=yes.
von Graevenitz, G. (2013). “Concurrent filing of trade marks at the USPTO
and at OHIM.” Unpublished background research commissioned for the
World IP Report 2013. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
WHO, WIPO, and WTO (2013). “Promoting Access to Medical
Technologies and Innovation”. (Geneva, WHO, WIPO, and WTO).
Wilcox, K., Kim, H.M. & Sankar S. (2009). “Why Do Consumers Buy
Counterfeit Luxury Brands?” Journal of Marketing Research, 46(2), 247-259.
WIPO (2000). Joint Recommendation Concerning Provisions
on the Protection of Well-Known Marks. (Geneva, WIPO).
WIPO (2011). World Intellectual Property Report: The
Changing Face of Innovation. (Geneva, WIPO).

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

CHAPTER 3
BRANDING, INNOVATION
AND COMPETITION
Introduction
Branding has come a long way from its humble beginnings
as an identification mark to its current position as a tool

3.1
Conceptual considerations

for communicating with consumers. Firms use branding

Innovation and market competition are two important

as a way to control and manage consumers’ perceptions

elements in determining the growth rate of an economy.

about their products and image. In many cases, brand- The combination of vibrant innovative activities and
ing creates sustainable competitive advantage for firms.

competitive market pressures can lay the foundation for
strong economic growth in any country.1 However, the

How much a firm should invest in branding is critically

effects of these two elements are so interrelated, and

dependent on the business model that the firm pursues.

so intertwined, that each of them has significant impact

For example, many recent buyers of a smartphone would

on the other.

attest, as firms that invest heavily in branding often also
invest heavily in innovation. This raises the question of how
firms’ branding strategies interact with their innovation
strategies. Does one support the other? Do firms face
a choice between either branding or innovating? This
chapter offers a perspective on such questions by exploring how branding affects innovation and competition in
the marketplace. In particular, it draws on the economic
literature to highlight the linkages between branding and
innovation, and to show how such linkages have repercussions on market competition. It also examines forms of
branding behavior that may be considered anticompetitive.
The chapter first describes the relationship between innovation and competition, and explores how branding

3.1.1
How competition affects innovation
Market competition can affect innovation in several ways.
On the one hand, too much competition discourages
innovation. When competitive pressures are too strong,
firms are not in a position to innovate. Given that innovation is costly and risky, any additional expenditure would
have to be justified by the potential profit margin. Where
intensely competitive market conditions prevail, the
profit margin may not be sufficiently large, or significant
enough, for firms to recover their investments in innovative activities.2

affects this relationship (Section 3.1). It then examines in
greater detail how branding and innovation relate to one
another, and considers scenarios where competition
concerns may arise (Section 3.2). Based on the insights

1

gained, the chapter reviews ways in which competition
authorities could safeguard competition against anticompetitive behavior (Section 3.3). The concluding
remarks summarize the main messages emerging from
the chapter discussion, and point to areas where more
research could usefully guide policymakers (Section 3.4).

2

See Paul Romer (1986, 1990). Romer argues
that a country can have sustainable economic
growth if it invests in innovative activities.
In economic theory, perfect competition implies
that firms in the market make little or no profit. In
other words, the firms’ total revenue from the
sales of their goods or services pays for the costs
of producing them. This would leave little to no
leftover profit to invest in innovative activities.

109

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Using a different line of reasoning, too little competition

However, when firms operate in markets where the

also hampers innovation. Firms that operate in markets

economic rents are small – as happens when market

where few rivals challenge them, or where they do not

competition is intense – the reward from innovating may

face any competitor, are less likely to innovate because

be too small to justify the investment, and therefore the

there is no motivation for them to do so.

level of innovation in the market will also fall. At the other
extreme, when rents are large and there are no competi-

In short, for competition to best incentivize innovation, it

tive pressures, firms can continue to enjoy their economic

has to be neither too strong nor too weak. Plotting the

rents without any need to innovate.

relationship between competition and innovation on a
graph reveals an inverted U-shaped figure, whereby in-

Competitive pressures also affect the types of innovation

novation increases as competition intensifies; however,

that firms bring to the market. The effect varies according

after a certain threshold of competition intensity, innova-

to whether the innovation is a product or process innova-

tion decreases as more rivals enter the market.3

tion, leaving aside industry-specific factors.5

What matters from an economic viewpoint is the pres-

Process innovation is generally viewed as reducing firms’

ence and size of economic rents. When firms operate

production costs. In a competitive setting, each firm

in markets where they enjoy some economic rents – and

would be motivated to invest in innovative activities that

their rents are threatened by the potential entry of new

would reduce its production costs, so as to earn higher

rivals – these firms are more likely to innovate. They

profit margins than its rivals; this impetus to innovate be-

4

innovate so as to ensure that they continue to enjoy

comes stronger the higher the profit margin is expected to

their rents, as well as ensure that they continue to stay

be.6 Moreover, if a firm’s process innovation significantly

competitive in the market. New entrants, on the other

reduces costs, it would be able to replace the existing

hand, are encouraged to innovate and enter the market

leader in the market and gain market share. Therefore,

so as to capture these rents for themselves. In this case,

in this case, market competition generally encourages

competition encourages firms to innovate, thus leading

innovation, which in turn may provide a basis for inter-

to generally higher innovation levels.

vention from competition authorities if there is high risk
of the market becoming too concentrated.7

3

4

110

It is only recently that economists have been able to
theoretically justify the inverted U-shaped relationship
between market competition and innovation. Prior to the
seminal contribution by Aghion et al (2005), most scholars
observed this relationship without being able to provide
a credible explanation for it. See also Subsection 2.2.3
of WIPO (2011) for further discussion on the relationship
between innovation and competition, but from a patent
rights perspective. Other economists have also added
to the contribution of Aghion et al (2005) by looking at
the innovation-competition relationship as influenced
by advertising (Askenazy et al, 2010) and by considering
when the market structure is endogenously determined
(Goettler and Gordon, 2013), to name but a few.
Economic rent is a term that many economists use to
refer to the return on a factor input. Profit – a type of
economic rent – is the financial return from investing
in the production of a particular good or service after
subtracting the cost of producing that good or service.

5

6

7

Industry-specific factors include how seamlessly one
product could be substituted for a similar one; barriers
to entry; presence of innovation spillovers, and ability
to exclude others from imitating the innovation. See
Richard Gilbert (2006), who conducted an extensive
review of theoretical and empirical evidence on
how market competition, market structure and
innovation (proxied by R&D) affect one another.
This is a model proposed by Arrow (1962), and
it assumes that the innovative firm is able to
appropriate all returns on its innovation.
Concentration refers to when there are too few
producers in the market – less than what is dictated
in the effective competition framework. In traditional
competition cases, market concentration is usually
measured by the Herfindahl–Hirschman Index.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Product innovation – characterized by the introduction of
new and improved products – can thrive in both competitive and less competitive settings.8 The reason for this is
that product innovation will almost always increase firms’
profits from the sale of both the new and the old products,
especially when the products are differentiated. In the
case of process innovation, however, the new process
method often makes the older method obsolete, and so
the profit that the innovator gains is only from the use
of the new or the old process method, and not both.
Therefore for product innovation, regardless of whether
the market is competitive or not, firms tend to have the
incentive to innovate. This result, in turn, makes it relatively difficult for competition authorities to assess if there
could be competition issues at play in cases where they
are assessing markets in terms of differentiated product
innovation. Subsection 3.3 delves into this issue further.

How innovation affects competition
Innovation, in particular product innovation, can affect
market competition.9 There are two general types of
product innovation, and these have differing effects on
competition. The two types are: horizontal product differentiation and vertical product differentiation (see Box 3.1).10

8

This assuming that the firm innovating can appropriate
all returns to its innovation. See Gilbert (2006) for a good
review of Arrow’s (1962) economic model which explains
why it is not clear whether a competitive environment
provides a good incentive for product innovation, even
though this is generally the case for process innovation.
See also Greenstein and Ramey (1998) for the case of
vertical product differentiation and Chen and Schwarz
(2013) for the case of horizontal product differentiation.
9 See Goettler and Gordon (2013). Similar to the
findings of Aghion et al (2005), Goettler and Gordon
found an inverted U-shaped relationship between
innovation and product market competition, as
measured by product substitutability.
10 Product innovation refers to a new or
improved good or service.

Box 3.1: Distinguishing between horizontal and vertical product
differentiation
Firms can improve products by differentiating them either horizontally or vertically. When firms cater to consumers’ differing tastes
and aesthetic preferences, it is regarded as horizontal product differentiation. This particular type of product differentiation is called
horizontal because the product has not changed drastically; rather,
it has been only slightly modified so as to meet the preferences/
tastes of particular consumer segments. For example, a potato
chip manufacturer may produce different product flavors such as
barbeque, paprika or sour cream. Vertical product differentiation,
on the other hand, improves the product’s quality. One example of
vertical product differentiation is Microsoft’s quality upgrade from
Windows Vista to Windows 7. The following examples also illustrate
the difference between these two types of product differentiation.
Consider a market with two market segments, A and B. The consumers in these segments have different tastes, so the firm has
to decide which of these segments it should design a product for.
Suppose it decides to design for A – perhaps because A is the larger
market segment, and let’s assume that consumers in A are willing
to pay USD 25 for this product whereas consumers in segment B
are willing to pay only USD 15. Now the firm has to make a pricing
choice: price at USD 25 and cater to A only, or price at USD 15 and
cater to both A and B. The choice depends on the trade-off between
higher margins or more sales. Choosing margins over sales means
that the firm will cater for A’s market segment whereas consumers in segment B will be shut out of the market. On the other hand,
favoring sales over margins means that while all consumers would
be catered for, the firm would have to forego its potential revenue
from segment A: consumers in segment A would have paid USD
15 for a product that is worth USD 25 to them.
Now, suppose the firm innovates with a new product that explicitly
caters to segment B’s tastes – an example of horizontal product
differentiation. Segment B would be willing to pay more for this
product than for the previous one, say USD 20. By contrast, segment
A’s willingness to pay for this product would be lower than that for
the previous product priced at USD 15. Here, the logical approach
is for the firm to set the price for the old product at USD 25 and the
new product at USD 20.
Suppose in a different scenario, the firm innovates to change the
quality of the product – an example of a vertical product differentiation. Specifically, the firm invests in order to provide a lower quality
of the same product, so as to cater for segment B’s preference
(because B does not care much for the high quality of the original
product.) Suppose B is willing to pay USD 10 for the new product
(as opposed to USD 15 for the high-quality product), and suppose
A is willing to pay USD 25 for the high-quality product, and USD 18
for the low-quality product. Note that A’s willingness to pay for the
new product still exceeds B’s willingness to pay for it – even if the
new product is meant for the latter.

111

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

In both cases of product differentiation, investing to introduce
products that cater to the demands of consumer B is good for the
firm and can also benefit consumers. The firm now caters for both
consumers A and B, earning more sales revenue; simultaneously,
both A’s and B’s demands are met.
Source: Moorthy (2013)

The other type of product innovation is vertical product
differentiation. This type of innovation can either increase
or maintain the number of products and competitors in
the market. Modeled by Sutton (1991), and later Shaked
and Sutton (1982, 1983), vertical product differentiation
introduces into the marketplace a new product with

Horizontal product differentiation, generally referred to
as the Hotelling (1929) model, is one where products are
spread along a straight line and consumers generally
align themselves with their closest preference. A new
firm could enter the product market and place itself along
the line, either close to or far from the existing products,
and then capture both new and existing consumers
from rival producers.11 In such a scenario, the product
innovation would result in more competition in the market in terms of the variety of products available and the
number of producers in the market. Existing producers
could also introduce new, differentiated products in order to increase their customer base.12 While this would
result in the availability of more products, the number of
competitors would remain the same as before. However,
such a situation might discourage new producers from
entering the market (see subsection 3.2.3).

superior quality to the existing one. When similar products of different qualities are sold at the same price, the
newer and better quality one is always preferred to the
older and lower quality one, and then displaces it in the
marketplace. This cannibalization of the older product
by the newer one enables the innovative firm to capture
all consumers in the market, and both the number of
products and competitors in the market remains the
same as prior to the product’s introduction.13
However, in certain circumstances, both the new and
the existing firms can co-exist in the market. When there
is a difference in consumers’ willingness to pay for quality – such that some consumers would pay a premium
price for the superior quality product while others would
prefer the lower priced product regardless of quality – the
existing firm with the lower quality product could set a
lower price for its product in response to the introduction
of the new, higher quality one. This would therefore lead
to an increase in the number of products and competitors in the market.14

11 How similar or different these products are
from one another can vary from almost exact
likeness to very different. See Hotelling (1929),
D’Asprement et al (1979), and Böckem (1994).
12 See Chen and Schwarz (2013).

112

13 Scherer (1979).
14 Innovation dynamics alone will not define the market,
since, ultimately, the prevailing number of products and
competitors in the market would depend on market forces
and industry-specific factors such as barriers to entry.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

How market competition and innovation affect one
another has been the reason why some prominent
economists, such as Kenneth Arrow, have argued for
government intervention to encourage innovation.15 This
intervention could be in the form of an exclusive right,

3.1.2
Why does branding matter?
Branding can be broadly defined as all activities that

such as patent protection, which would provide some

raise awareness of a firm’s offerings and shape how

reward to firms so as to encourage them to innovate. It is

consumers perceive those offerings. This includes, first

also why competition authorities around the world have

and foremost, advertising and other activities that directly

been concerned about certain innovative activities that

promote the firm and its goods or services. More gener-

may give rise to anticompetitive behavior.

16

ally, it includes all observable activities for which consumers may have a preference – for example, what kind of
innovation the firm pursues, how it treats its customers,
and to which environmental or labor standards it adheres.
Firms invest in branding so as to increase demand for
their products and enhance the willingness of consumers to pay for these products. In general terms, branding
investments are worthwhile as long as an additional dollar
spent on branding generates a net profit of at least one
dollar.17 However, branding can affect consumer behavior, and consequently the performance of firms through
different channels, and so therefore it is useful to briefly
review these channels.
How does branding do this? First, as outlined in
Chapter 2, branding reduces consumers’ search costs.
It also informs potential consumers about firms’ goods
and services, highlighting the unique traits they may
have and thus making it easier for consumers to choose
between competing items. This informational role of
branding not only raises awareness of firms’ offerings,
but also reduces the uncertainty that consumers face
when making new purchases.

15 See Arrow (1962).
16 See Chapter 3 of WIPO (2011) for thorough discussion
on how collaborative research and development
(R&D) activities facilitate innovation, but can also give
rise to concerns about anticompetitive behavior.

17 In economic theory, branding investments represent
a form of endogenous sunk costs (Sutton, 1991).

113

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

A related point is that branding links products to the firms

A second important way in which branding affects con-

producing them. This association helps to promote the

sumer behavior and firms’ performance is that it enables

firms’ newer products – even new products in markets

firms to associate an image with a particular product. As

that are new to these firms.18 The good experience that

discussed in Chapter 2, for many products – especially

consumers may have had with previous purchases is

luxury products – image is an important product feature

likely to motivate them to continue purchasing products

in and of itself. Through image-focused branding, firms

from these same firms.

can carve out a niche and can generate a higher willing-

As firms capitalize on their past successes, they develop

with the product’s image.

ness to pay among consumers whose preferences align
a reputation that continues to reduce consumers’ search
costs. This reputation benefits the firms in several ways.

In many situations, firms differentiate their products

For one, consumers would be more willing to pay more

based on a large number of characteristics along both

for these firms’ products, as switching to competing

horizontal and vertical dimensions. In fact, the most

products would entail extra search costs. One study,

successful branding strategies are often those that

which examined how much it would cost for consumers

manage to combine reputation and image in such a way

19

to switch from one branded breakfast cereal product to

that they reinforce each other and appeal to a variety of

another, estimated that the cost of switching to a different

consumer tastes.

breakfast cereal brand is high; in fact it is higher than
the cost of purchasing any branded cereal.20 In addition,
consumers can develop goodwill towards a brand over
time, which in its strongest form be expressed as fierce
brand loyalty.

How do branding investments
affect firms’ performance?
To begin with, strong brand value – whether induced by

Even with purchases on online price

reputation or by image – can have an important impact

comparison sites – where consumers can easily choose

on firms’ growth potential. In the first place, it can increase

21

between similar products at different prices – brands

firms’ financial value above the traditional accounting

continue to play an important role in consumers’ final

book value, which in turn can help them raise money

purchase choice.

in the financial market.23 The money raised can then

22

be used to generate more innovation. In addition, firms
with strong brand value are more likely than their rivals
– and tend to be faster than them – at introducing new
products.24 This is useful because studies have shown
that a firm that breaks into a new market segment first
is more likely to retain a significant share of the market.25
Therefore, strong brand value not only helps raise money
18 Cabral (2000).
19 In addition, Klemper (1987) argues that changing
brand imposes a switching cost to the consumer
and results in a loss in the consumer’s utility.
20 Shum (2004) investigates how advertising may influence
consumers to switch brand loyalty by looking at the
purchases of breakfast cereal purchases in several
districts in Chicago, Illinois in the United States of
America (US). In this case, brand loyalty is defined by
consumers’ past purchases of particular cereal brands.
21 Homburg et al (2010).
22 See Smith and Brynjolfsson (2001), and
Baye and Morgan (2009).

114

in the capital markets, but it can also help secure a firm’s
future revenue stream.

23 Subsection 1.3 contains a discussion on how brand plays a
role in firms’ stock value. See also Krasnikov et al (2009).
24 Thomas (1995).
25 Schmalensee (1982) shows that the order in which
consumers are introduced to branded products
influences their loyalty to the product, thus making
the case for firms to be the first ones to enter the
market. See also Guadagni and Little (1983).

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

It is unclear, however, whether branding channels such

As outlined earlier, brand investments generate market

as advertising increases firms’ profit margins.

When

power for firms. This market power is at the heart of

empirical studies examine the impact of advertising on

brand equity and can be defined as the result of a firm’s

firm-level profits, the results are mixed.

26

The reason

branding activities to promote itself – in comparison with

for this can be attributed to industry-specific factors.28

other firms that do not engage in such activities.31 One

27

However, when industry-specific factors are taken into

of the outcomes of this equity is the ability of branded

consideration, this branding channel is found to increase

products to command higher prices than their generic

the profit levels of firms in certain industries.

counterparts, thus increasing their mark-up over produc-

29

For ex-

ample, Porter (1976) shows that the advertising-to-sales

tion costs.32 This ability to command higher prices can be

ratio increased profits for firms operating in convenience

due to the firms’ product differentiation efforts, such as

goods industries (i.e. non-durable goods that are easily

investments to produce higher product quality, or to use

purchased by consumers, and which tend to be low

more efficient production methods.33 It also allows firms

priced and widely available), but not in shopping goods

to distance themselves from their rivals and to compete

industries, which consists of durable goods that tend to

on factors other than on just price.34

involve consumers in more selection and comparison effort than is required for purchasing non-durable goods.30

26 See Shah and Akbar (2008).
27 Bloch (1974); Ayanian (1975).
28 Aggregating these different firms may neutralize any effect
that advertising may have on firms in specific industries
with firms where advertising has no impact. A related
factor which contributes to the mixed result finding from
studies on advertising profit is the method some studies
use to account for firms’ advertising expenditure – in
particular the rate at which advertising spending should
depreciate over time. The depreciation rate determines
how long the effect of spending on advertising would last,
which also varies according to industry sectors. Therefore,
studies that do not take into account the differences
across industries, and their corresponding depreciation
rates, are likely to be missing the nuanced picture of the
advertising-profit relationship. See Shah and Akbar (2008).
29 Weiss (1969) and Comanor and Wilson (1974).
30 Porter (1974) attributes the distinction between
convenience goods and shopping goods to consumers’
buying habits. Convenience goods are, “[g]oods with
relatively small unit price, purchased repeatedly and
for which the consumer desires an easily accessible
outlet. Probable gains from making price and quality
comparisons small relative to consumer’s appraisal of
search costs.” Shopping goods, on the other hand, are,
“[g]oods where the consumer compares prices, quality
and style; compares several stores; the purchase can be
delayed; the purchase is relatively infrequent. Probable
gains from making price and quality comparisons are
large relative to the consumer’s appraisal of search costs.”

31 Aaker (1991); Dubin (1998); and Keller (2003).
Researchers have proposed many ways to measure
brand equity, which includes the customers’ perspective,
product and financial market outcomes (Ailawadi,
Lehmann and Neslin, 2003). Chapter 1 of this report
also suggests another way to measure brand equity.
32 Using scanner data from a large Midwestern chain
in the United States, Barsky et al (2003) studied 19
different categories of products to compute how much
higher branded goods are priced above their production
costs. Many of the categories studied have estimated
that mark-ups in general range from 1.40 to 2.10 times
their marginal costs of production and delivery. These
findings are consistent with previous studies that looked
at mark-ups in the breakfast cereal industry and the
saltine cracker food category (Nevo, 2001; Slade, 1998).
33 Wiggins and Raboy (1996) examine the factors that
affect banana prices in North America and show that the
quality of the banana, rather than the brand name, tends
to explain a significant portion of the price difference
between branded bananas and their generic counterparts.
34 See Joachimsthaler and Aaker (1997), Baye and
Morgan (2009) and Desai and Waller (2010) on
how consumers’ choice of products or services
is no longer primarily determined by price.

115

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Strong brand names can also help firms venture into new

However, there is the risk that the new products may

markets, where they may have had no previous com-

undermine the original brand. When firms fail to deliver on

mercial experience; alternatively, it may enable firms to

their promises, consumers are likely to punish the brand

license out their name in return for royalty payments (see

by withholding future purchases or by bad-mouthing

Section 1.4).35 In essence, these firms use their brands

the brand.38 This helps to explain why some firms prefer

to draw consumers’ attention to the quality of the firms’

to create separate brands when commercializing new

new products in the new markets. In many cases, this

products in different market segments, or when intro-

strategy has been proven to be quite successful, espe-

ducing products in markets that are very different from

cially when firms have a strong brand reputation.36 Ralph

their original product-based brand identity.39 Consider,

Lauren, an American fashion company, has successfully

for example, Toyota’s investments in building hybrid car

pursued the strategy of licensing out its name in order

technology.40 The company has chosen to commercial-

to diversify its business from clothing to perfumes and

ize this innovation by creating a new sub-brand, Prius.

home furnishings. By licensing out its brand name, the

Toyota’s successful marketing and advertising efforts,

Ralph Lauren company was able to expand its revenues

coupled with its innovative technology, have led to the

from the design and manufacture of clothing lines to

creation of a Prius brand that is based entirely on hybrid

include royalty payments from the licensing activity. For

cars and, by extension, on environmental responsibility. In

the company that licensed in the Ralph Lauren brand

the meantime, Toyota’s efforts to ensure that consumers

name, the licensing provides a way to mitigate some

continue to link the Prius brand with the Toyota brand

of the costs and risks in building a brand by using an

have enhanced the company’s image as an innovator.

established name to enter new markets.

37

This is not to say that branding is always a more profitable
business strategy than selling generic products. Even if
branded products generate a higher net profit on each
sale, firms still need to recover their fixed investments in
branding. Indeed, because consumers differ in their willingness to pay for reputation and image, there may well be
room in the market for both generic and branded products,
with both underlying business models being profitable.
Due to the often high upfront costs of establishing a
brand, the presence of strong brands in a particular
market may pose a barrier to entry into that market by
new firms. Competition among existing brands may still
be fierce and, as explained earlier, may be sufficiently
strong to promote innovation. However, in selected cases,
brands may become so powerful that they may result in
the firms having dominant market positions – a topic to
35 See Randall et al (1998); Lei et al (2008) and Heath et
al (2011) for empirical evidence on the use of brand
reputation on brand stretching. A good example of
brand stretching is the Virgin brand. This brand has
been used on airlines, music stores, a banking brand, a
train operating company and many other applications.
36 Cabral (2000).
37 See Aaker (2011) and Kapferer (2008).

116

which Section 3.3 will return.
38 Klein and Leffer (1981); and Choi (1998). In 1986,
Audi had an incident with the sudden acceleration
problem in its Audi 5000 car, which reduced demand
both for this model and for the Audi Quattro.
39 Pepall and Richards (2002).
40 Moorthy (2013).

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

3.2

3.2.1

Branding and
promoting innovation

Helping firms appropriate their
returns to innovation

How does branding promote innovation, in particular

Branding is one of the ways that helps firms recover the

product innovation?

investments they have made in innovating. Surveys conducted in the United States, Switzerland, the Netherlands,

First, branding channels, such as sales and promotion

and Japan on how firms appropriate their returns on

activities, help firms to recoup their returns on investment

investment in innovation show how important branding

in innovative activities. This ability to recover investments

activities are. The factor known as “sales or services ef-

made, in order to produce innovation, provides a further

forts” appears as one of the top five important ways that

incentive for firms to continue investing in innovative

firms use in order to appropriate their returns on invest-

activities.

ment in innovation; however, it is not the only method
that firms use to achieve this objective (see Table 3.1).

Second, effective branding channels not only promote
firms’ market offerings by increasing consumers’ demand

Firms use branding activities as a way of promoting

for their products, as well as increasing their willingness to

their product innovation (see Figure 3.1). In fact, firms

pay for them, but they also help to build consumer trust

that invest more in research and development (R&D)

in the firms’ products, and by extension trust in the firms

activities are also more likely to invest in branding activi-

themselves.41 This trust built over time, also known as

ties.42 This finding is not surprising given that branding

consumer goodwill, provides another incentive for firms

channels, such as advertising, have been shown to be

to continue producing innovative products.

useful in promoting the sale of firms’ goods or services.43
However, the duration of this effect and its significance
varies across the types of goods and industrial sectors.44
For example, Zhao et al (2003) studied the effect of
advertising on sales of durable and non-durable goods
in China, and they found that advertising is more useful
for the former than for the latter. 45

41 Bresnahan et al (1997).

42 Von Graevenitz (2009) shows that there is
complementarity between firms that invest in R&D
activities and the advertising expenditure of those firms.
43 Shah and Akbar (2008) provide a good review of the link
between advertising and its impact on sales. Furthermore,
it is worth emphasizing that while advertising does have
an impact on sales, firms’ sales also have an effect on
this branding channel. For many firms, the size of their
advertising budget is dependent on the firms’ sales
performances, whether past or projected. See Lee et
al (1996) on this simultaneous causal relationship.
44 See Yip (1982); and Acs and Audretsch (1990).
45 Durable goods studied included air conditioners,
color television sets, refrigerators and washing
machines, while non-durable products
included shampoos and skincare creams.

117

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Table 3.1: Top five methods that firms use to protect their innovations
Year

Country

Survey sample

Product innovation

Process innovation
3

4

5

Yale

1982

US

Firms in the
manufacturing sector
(publicly traded),
performing R&D

Sales or
service
efforts

Lead time

Fast
learning
curve

Patents

Secrecy

Lead time Fast
learning
curve

Sales or
service
efforts

Secrecy

Patents

Harabi

1988

Switzerland Firms, mainly in the
manufacturing sector,
engaging in R&D

Sales or
service
efforts

Lead time

Fast
learning
curve

Secrecy

Patents

Lead time Sales or
service
efforts

Fast
learning
curve

Secrecy

Patents

Dutch CIS

1992

Netherlands Firms in the
manufacturing sector
with (≥10 employees)
that developed or
introduced new or
improved products,
services or processes
during the previous
three years

Lead time Retain
Secrecy
skilled labor

Patents

Complexity
of design

Lead time Retain
Secrecy
skilled labor

Com-plexity Certifiof design
cation

Carnegie
Mellon

1994

US

Firms in the
manufacturing
sector with (≥ 20
employees and ≥ USD
5 million in sales)
carrying out R&D

Lead time Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Sales or
service
efforts

Patents

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Lead time

Sales or
service
efforts

Patents

Japan
Carnegie
Mellon

1994

Japan

Firms in the
manufacturing
sector carrying out
R&D (≥ 1 billion Yen
capitalization)

Lead time Patents

Complementary
assets

Sales or
service
efforts

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Secrecy

Lead time

Patents

Sales or
services
assets

RIETI2007
Georgia Tech

Japan

Inventors who
applied for triadic
patents with patents
with priority during
the time period
2000 to 2003

Lead time Complementary
assets

Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Patents

Survey does not distinguish between
product and process innovation

Berkeley

US

Small manufacturing
firms focusing
on biotechnology,
medical devices
and software

Lead time Secrecy

Complementary
assets

Patents

Reverse
engineering
difficulty

Survey does not distinguish between
product and process innovation

2008

Source: WIPO, 2011

118

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Figure 3.1: Firms spend money on marketing their product innovation
Firms that engage in marketing their product innovation as a percentage of all innovative firms
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

Russian Federation

Brazil

Norway

Malta

Spain

Bulgaria

Italy

Egypt

Latvia

Hungary

Portugal

Colombia

Romania

Netherlands

France

Malaysia

Poland

Sweden

Lithuania

Estonia

Belgium

Finland

Germany

Cyprus

South Africa

Austria

Croatia

Slovakia

Czech Republic

Israel

Luxembourg

China

Ghana

Indonesia

0
%

Source: WIPO, based on country innovation surveys. Data for OECD countries were obtained from Eurostat, 2010. Other countries from the UNESCO Institute
for Statistics, 2012.
Note: The Oslo Manual (1992, 1995, 2005) defines market preparations for product introduction as activities that are aimed at introducing new or significantly
improved goods or services to the market – across countries. Only responses from the manufacturing sector are considered here, in order to allow for crosscountry comparison. However, there are other factors, which are specific to each country innovation survey, that prevent further comparison between countries.

The results of Berkeley study (2008), which surveyed in- The fact that trademark protection does not have a term limnovative firms in the highly innovative sectors, show that

itation allows firms to prevent others from free-riding on in-

on average trademark protection is considered a “slightly”

vestments made in order to build consumer goodwill, which

to “ moderately” important means to help recoup the in-

then extends the firms’ exclusivity over their brand names.

novative firms’ investments in innovative activities. While
this IP instrument is often used in conjunction with other
IP instruments such as patents and industrial designs,
firms tend to use trademark protection more frequently
than they do with other IP instruments. Figure 3.2 shows
how important trademarke are in comparison to patents,
industrial designs and copyright – for both innovative
and non-innovative firms in both manufacturing and
services sectors in several Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries.46

46 See Subsection 2.1.2 for a discussion of key
differences among these forms of IP.

119

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Figure 3.2: Firms are more likely to use trademarks than any other IP instrument
Firms using IP instruments as a percentage of all firms in OECD countries

50
45

Percentage of Innovative Firms,
Manufacturing

40

Trademark

Patents

Industrial design

Copyright

35
30
25
20
15
10

Hungary

Estonia

Ireland

Malta

Malta

Czech
Republic

Belgium

Cyprus

Ireland

Bulgaria

Lithuania

Spain

Slovakia

Poland

Croatia

Netherlands

Romania

Portugal

Norway

Luxembourg

Greece

Austria

France

0

Turkey

5

25
Percentage of Non-Innovative
Firms, Manufacturing

20

Trademark

Patents

Industrial design

Copyright

15
10

120

Luxembourg

Greece

Hungary

Czech
Republic

Estonia

Belgium

Romania

Croatia

Poland

Lithuania

Bulgaria

Norway

Netherlands

Austria

Spain

Slovakia

Portugal

France

0

Turkey

5

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Firms using IP instruments as a percentage of all non-innovative firms in OECD countries

30
Pecentage of innovative rms,
services

25

Trademark

Patents

Industrial design

Copyright

20
15
10

Bulgaria

Malta

Czech
Republic

Malta

Portugal

Hungary

Czech
Republic

Belgium

Cyprus

Romania

Croatia

Poland

Slovakia

Spain

Austria

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Norway

0

Greece

5

10
9
Trademark

Pecentage of non-innovative
rms, services

8

Patents

7
6
5
4
3
2

Hungary

Bulgaria

Belgium

Romania

Croatia

Lithuania

Spain

Poland

Austria

Slovakia

Luxembourg

Norway

Greece

0

Portugal

1

Source: Eurostat, 2005.
Note: Interpret these cross-country results with caution. Idiosyncratic differences between countries’ innovation
surveys affect survey results, and thus impose limitations on cross-country comparability.

One such example can be seen in the pharmaceutical

But pharmaceutical firms have been able to temporarily

sector. Original drug manufacturers usually use the full

avoid this erosion of market share through investing in

term of patent protection, in order to protect their prod-

consumer goodwill.47 Jennewein provides the anecdotal

uct from competition. Upon patent expiry, the original

example of Bayer and its success with Aspirin. In 1897,

manufacturer would have to contend with generic drug

one of Bayer’s researchers discovered a method that

entry into the market, which would eventually erode the

produced a pure and durable form of acetylsalicylic

original manufacturer’s market share.

acid more efficiently than was available at that time.48 To
protect its discovery, Bayer applied for a patent on the
47 Other methods used include the introduction
of slight product differentiations, such as
changes in the delivery method of the drug.
48 See Jennewein (2005).

121

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

process innovation and it also registered a trademark on
the name Aspirin. In addition, the company invested in
building its brand name by imprinting the Aspirin tablet
with Bayer’s name and logo. The rationale for adopting
this approach was that whenever people consumed

3.2.2
Branding based on product versus image
In general, branding activities promote innovation and

Aspirin, they would associate it with its original manu-

innovation-related activities. However, there are instances

facturer, Bayer. Jennewein credits this branding strategy

where firms may use branding strategies to repackage

along with Bayer’s efforts to build consumer goodwill,

an existing product instead of investing in innovation – for

with the company’s ability to maintain its market share

example, when a firm creates a different image for an

even when the patent for Aspirin expired and was fol-

existing product and markets it as a new product.

lowed by competition from generic manufacturers. More

Accordingly, branding can have two effects on product

empirically, Hurwitz and Caves (1988) considered how

innovation: when firms invest in branding activities to sell

sales promotion activities, before and after patent expiry,

an innovation-based product, branding complements

helped protect the original drug manufacturer’s market

innovation.50 But when firms rely on these activities to

share from the manufacturers of generic competitors.

sell an image-based product, branding may substitute

They found that branding, through the use of trademark

for innovation.

protection and advertising activities undertaken after
patent term expiration, helps firms to extend some of this

Two factors help determine whether firms invest in in-

market power.49 They attributed this success to consumer

troducing innovation-based products as opposed to

goodwill generated during and after patent protection.

image-based products. The first factor relates to the

However, Hurwitz and Caves noted that over time this

cost-effectiveness of investing in either type of product.

market power is likely to diminish, as more generic drug

The second relates to broader considerations, such

producers enter the market and competition forces the

as whether the investment can be used across mul-

price of the drug to fall.

tiple products or technologies to maximize the firms’
brand name.51

49 See Conley and Sczoboscan (2001) and
Conley et al (2008) for other examples.

122

50 Branding may also play a role in process
innovation. For example, the American retail chain
Wal-Mart has successfully branded itself as a
low-price retailer by investing in supply chain
innovation, a type of process innovation, which
gives it cost advantage over its competitors.
51 Sutton (1991) provides the theoretical model for this
analysis. The model allows for two substitutable
ways of increasing the quality of a product: either
product innovation-based (objective) or advertisingbased (perception). While consumers do not have a
preference, firms do, and the decision is based on
which means is more cost-effective. In any application,
the investment that is more productive may be
chosen. When weighing the productivity of R&D
versus advertising, Sutton’s analysis suggests that the
possibility of leveraging the two investments across
multiple products/technologies ought to be considered.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

The cost of investing in innovation-based products, as
opposed to image-based products, is related to industryspecific factors as well as factors that are specific to the

When branding activities
complement product innovation

firm in question. Firms that operate in industries where the

How effective branding channels will be in terms of pro-

market is new, and there are avenues for product-based

moting innovation depends on the quality of information

differentiation, may find it cost-effective to introduce

communicated to consumers.

product-based innovation. Conversely, firms that operate in markets where product differences are few and

Product innovations that have search attributes are

far between, and where further investments in product

relatively easier to promote than those with experience

innovation may be counter-productive, may find that

attributes. (See Box 3.2 on the distinction between the

image-based products have a clear advantage.52 Many

two traits). In particular, branding channels such as

convenience goods categories – low-priced consumer

advertising are particularly effective in making claims

packaged goods, such as ready-to-eat cereals, canned

for goods with search attributes. This is because goods

soup, and chocolate bars – may fall into this category.

with search attributes can be verified by consumers

Firm-specific factors that determine whether firms in-

before they purchase them.54 Here, advertising plays a

troduce innovation-based products or image-based

clear, informative role by pointing out relevant product

products include the firms’ market performance, tech-

differences to consumers.

nological prowess and reputation considerations. Firms
that have strong R&D capabilities are likely to introduce

In the case of goods with experience attributes, however,

product innovation. But if these firms find themselves

advertising has to be both informative and persuasive. By

so technologically advanced that their rivals are unable

definition, claims in advertising for experience goods can-

to keep up with them, they may exploit their strategic

not be verified before product purchase, and so consum-

and reputational advantage – independent of activities

ers tend to discount these claims. Consequently, firms

that would lead to the creation of new products – and

that produce experience goods may be more inclined

instead introduce image-based products to maintain

to spend more on advertising than firms that produce

their market lead.

search goods, since the quality of information conveyed

53

may not be as relied upon as that used for promoting
search goods.55 In general, investments in advertising
increase according to the difficulty of demonstrating innovation superiority: in other words, investment is low for
differentiated search goods; it is higher for differentiated
52 Moorthy (2012) discusses this subject in further detail.
53 Ofek and Sarvary (2003) examined in a dynamic
competitive setting how firms decide whether or not
to introduce new products based on their innovative
or reputational advantage. The researchers make two
reasonable assumptions: (i) a firm’s position as the market
leader can easily be toppled; and (ii) past successes
have an impact on firms’ investment decisions. They
show that firms with strong research and development
competence would invest more in R&D in order to retain
their market leadership position. The more these firms
invest in R&D, the less likely their followers would be
able to compete with them. The smaller number of
effective competitors in the market would motivate
these firms to exploit their strategic advantages rather
than continue to produce more innovative products.

experience goods, and it is highest for non-differentiated
convenience goods.

54 Nelson (1974); Ford et al (1990); Anand and Shachar (2011).
55 Klein and Leffler (1981). Nelson (1974) argued that
search goods do not require as much branding activity
as experience goods, mainly because consumers
can easily verify the differences in search goods
prior to the purchase, unlike experience goods.

123

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Box 3.2: Search versus experience attributes

First, it depends on a firm’s incentive to differentiate

The distinction between search attributes and experience attributes
corresponds to the difference between search goods and experience
goods, respectively.

advertising tend to spend more on advertising than firms

Strictly speaking, search goods can be identified through their
physical traits. They can therefore be examined and assessed by
the consumer prior to purchase. Examples of physical traits include
the design, size and color of a product. More generally, any product
information that can be trusted – even if the information is not personally verifiable – falls under the search goods category. One such
example is the nutrition information printed on a breakfast cereal box.
Experience goods, however, can only be assessed after the purchase
has been made; in other words, the consumer needs to experience the good in order to differentiate it from others. Examples of
experience-related product traits include those that refer to its quality,
durability and reliability, or taste – such as in food or beverages.
Source: (Nelson, 1970, 1974).

itself from others. Firms that are more likely to profit from
that do not fall into that category. For example, a firm that
wishes to distance itself from its rivals – because it has
a higher quality product than its rivals – tends to invest
more in advertising. In addition, because its consumers
are likely to make repeat purchases, this firm should be
able to recover some of the extra spending required in
order to promote its products.
But this incentive may not be sufficient to determine the
effectiveness of advertising as an indicator of product
quality.57 If consumers in general consider that advertising
does indeed provide a good indicator of product quality,
then firms producing lower quality product would have

However, this does not mean that firms that spend more

the perverse motivation to advertise as much as their

on advertising necessarily produce better quality prod-

high-quality product rivals.58 In such a situation, advertis-

ucts, especially in the case of experience goods. So, how

ing becomes a noisy indicator of product quality. However,

can consumers determine if the products advertised are

if the cost of advertising is high – and consumers do not

good? In other words, can consumers rely on advertising

completely rely on advertising as an indicator of quality

expenditure as an indicator of product superiority?56 It is

– then firms which need to advertise would do so. As

difficult to definitively answer this question. Many factors

a result, once again this branding channel becomes a

can have an impact on the effectiveness of advertising

good indicator of product quality.59

as an indicator.

56 Firms often use a combination of both advertising
and pricing to provide indicators to their consumers
regarding the quality of their product (Fluet and
Garella, 2002). However, pricing and its relationship
to the product’s quality is not discussed here. For
further discussion on price, advertising and quality,
see Archibald, Haulman and Moody (1983) and
Klein and Leffler (1981), to name but a few.

124

57 Comanor and Wilson (1979).
58 Schmalensee (1978).
59 Levin et al (2009). Although Askenazy et al (2010)
argued that the cost of advertising should be low, to
allow for more R&D-based product innovation.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

A second factor that determines how good the product

Brands that build their name based on image tend

quality is depends on how easily consumers can verify

to fall into the realm of persuasive advertising. This

a firm’s advertising claims before they make a purchase;

type of advertising can appeal to consumers in a spe-

this is especially true in the case of products with experi-

cific age group; one such example is Pepsi advertising,

ence attributes.60 Here, the ability of consumers to verify

which appeals to young people – the “Pepsi generation”.

advertising claims plays an important role in promoting

Persuasive advertising may also associate itself with a

sales of the product.61 This verification may manifest itself

cause that has a broader appeal, e.g., “Dove is for girls’

in the form of repeat purchase, or third party review or

self-esteem.” 64 The strategy of firms that use persuasive

certification. Archibald et al (1983), for example, studied

advertising involves targeting specific consumer groups

62

the relationship between quality, price and advertising

by appealing to their personal, subjective and, often,

in the case of running shoes. They found that evalua-

emotional preferences.

tions published by the Runner’s World magazine had a
positive impact on the effectiveness of advertising as an

The power of image-based brand identities is illustrated

indicator of product quality, when factors such as price

in Allison and Uhl’s (1964) beer experiments. In these

differences were taken into account.

experiments, consumers rated several brands of beer

When branding activities may
substitute for product innovation

after tasting them – once in a blind taste test with the
brand names hidden, and a second time with the brand
names visible. The authors found that consumers’ rat-

Firms sometimes use image as a way to distinguish

ings changed from the first to the second evaluation,

themselves from their rivals; in some cases this is a

even though the order in which the beers were tasted

complement to their product innovation. But, strictly

was exactly the same. This shows that image-created

speaking, image-based identity is one that is created

branding plays a big role in influencing consumers’ views

solely through advertising, and is independent of the final

of products. Marketing folklore is replete with stories of

product. In general, advertising creates brand identity by

brands being positioned differently at different times,

associating the brand with a particular imagery. However,

even though the product itself never changed.65

it can also do this by simply increasing awareness of the
brand: more familiar brands are perceived by consumers
to be higher in quality.63
60 Klein and Leffler (1981).
61 See Caves and Greene (1996); and Hakenes and
Peitz (2009). Caves and Green (1996) calculated
the correlation between brands’ quality ratings
and prices, and advertising expenditures, for about
200 products evaluated by the American Consumer
Reports. They found that, in general, advertising
serves as a good quality indicator only in cases
where the quality of the product can be verified.
62 Firms that have built trustworthy brand names based on
their product quality are more likely to be able to promote
their product innovation with experience attributes. But
this trust in brand name gives rise to a moral hazard
problem whereby firms may deviate from providing
high-quality products. However, it has been shown
that consumers can punish the firms for such deviation
by, for example, withholding future purchases from the
firm. See Klein and Leffer (1981); and Choi (1998).
63 Stokes (1985); Hoyer and Brown (1990).

64 Moorthy (2013).
65 The Marlboro brand was introduced as a women’s
cigarette in 1924, with the slogan “Mild as
May”. In 1954, it was repositioned as men’s
cigarette, with advertisements featuring a tattooed
man. See: www.rochester.edu/College/ANT/
faculty/foster/ANT226/Spring01/history.html

125

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

3.2.3

Second, effective branding activities may lead to market
segmentation, which in turn affects the level of effective
competition in the market.69 Branding activities do this by

Branding activities that may
raise competition concerns

persuading consumers to consider similar products as
completely different from one another to the extent that

Investments in branding activities may raise competition

these products are considered imperfect substitutes for

concerns. This is because branding activities make it dif-

one another and compete in different market segments

ficult for competitors to convince consumers to switch

(see Subsection 3.3.1 for further discussion on product

from branded goods, due to established goodwill. In

substitutability and how it relates to competition). Such

addition, firms with strong brand reputation can deter

market segmentation may then affect the level of competi-

the entry of competitors into new markets.66

tion that firms face, and can result in a scenario where

How do branding activities raise competitive concerns?

This in turn creates potential for anticompetitive behavior.

a firm may find itself as the only producer in the market.
First, effective branding channels can create market entry
barriers; for example they may lead to higher advertising

And, finally, branding activities may lead to a concentra-

costs for all manufacturers in the market. If consumers

tion of market power in the hands of a few firms. Both

were easily swayed by advertising, this would lead firms

the higher barrier to market entry and the lack of con-

67

to spend more money on sales promotion activities. The

testability between branded and non-branded products

increase in marketing and advertising expenditure could

due to branding activities can lead to a decrease in the

lower firms’ profit margins, which in turn could force

number of firms in the market. This market concentration

smaller firms to exit the market. New firms, on the other

creates the potential for collusive and anticompetitive

hand, could be deterred by high advertising costs and

behavior between the remaining firms in the market. More

therefore would not enter the market at all.68

importantly, it can have an adverse effect on innovation,
although this depends on industry-specific factors.70

66 Choi and Scarpa (1986) considered how firms use a
brand proliferation strategy to deter the entry of new
competitors. Brand proliferation usually applies in the
horizontal product differentiation market, and refers
to situations where firms use their brand name and
the reputation they have acquired in order to enter new
markets. Schmalensee (1978) documented one such
case in the breakfast cereal ready-to-eat market.
67 Comanor and Wilson (1967).
68 See Sutton (1991).

126

69 There is no legal definition of effective competition.
However, competition authorities refer to this term
in order to describe a competition framework that
captures the essential concept of perfect competition,
as described by economic theory. See OECD (2012).
70 Dixit and Stiglitz (1977).

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

3.3

One area where competition authorities have expressed

Safeguarding competition

market power through financial transactions, such as

The previous discussion has highlighted how branding

arrangements. In the case of M&As, competition au-

concern is in situations where firms consolidate their
mergers and acquisitions (M&As), and through vertical

activities may give rise to competition concerns. These

thorities may worry that the combined branded assets

concerns revolve around the influence of strong brand

of the merged entity will result in an increased likelihood

names and high market entry barriers – due to branding

of coordinated and collusive behavior between compet-

activities – on competition and price.

ing firms; alternatively, they may worry that the merged
entity is likely to have obtained significant market power,

Competition authorities generally condone the existence

such that it can behave independently of its competitors,

of strong brand name and reputation. These are invest-

like a monopolist.73 In the case of vertical arrangements,

ments that firms have cultivated over time in order to

the authorities may be concerned that certain distribu-

build consumers’ trust and goodwill as part of the normal

tion clauses – inserted at the request of the stronger

functioning of competitive markets. There is a priori no

negotiating party – are anticompetitive and may result

reason why these firms cannot profit from consumers’

in a reduction in overall consumer welfare.74 Specifically

goodwill, which may manifest itself in the form of strong

in the case of branding, the authorities would take into

consumer loyalty and less sensitivity to price changes.

consideration whether the stronger negotiating party at-

71

tributes its market power to having strong brand assets.
In addition, competition authorities see trademark protection as complementary to and supportive of innovation
and competition, as it prevents rivals from confusing
consumers or from free-riding on the goodwill developed by firms. Rivals are not permitted to use the same
trademark as the rights holders, in order to promote their
products, but they are free to sell the same products
under different names and identities.72

71 See Desai and Waller (2010).
72 For instance, a trademark owner may have registered
a trademark relating to running shoes, which entitles
the trademark owner to prevent competitors from
selling running shoes with a similar trademark
that may confuse customers. Competitors may
still sell running shoes, but those shoes must have
a different name. Rivals can also choose to sell
their products as non-branded running shoes.

73 In the European Union (EU) anticompetitive acts are
referred to as abuse of dominance, while in the United
States they are referred to as monopolization. A firm
is considered to have dominance when it can behave
in a manner that is independent of its consumers,
customers and competitors, although this definition
vary between different jurisdictions. In some cases,
the exercise of this significant market power may be
reflected in the firm’s ability, and motivation, to raise
or maintain prices above competitive levels. For more
details, see the EC’s Technology Transfer Guidelines
(2004), the United States FTC and Department of
Justice (2010) to name but a few. See also United
Brands Company and United Brands Continental BV v
Commission of the European Communities (1978).
74 The distribution clauses may include choices
of distribution channels, selection of specific
retailers, product/service sale conditions, etc.

127

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

3.3.1

One example of how competition authorities use firms’
brands to identify the relevant product market for assess-

Assessing firms’ market power

ment is the 2010 European Commission (EC) analysis

Brands play an important role in the competition

of the deodorant product category in the Unilever/Sara

authorities’ assessments of M&As. Brands are one

Lee merger case.77 Of all the product categories where

of the factors that determine the extent of firms’

Unilever and Sara Lee had overlapping economic activi-

market power. Firms with strong branded products

ties, the deodorant category had the highest degree of

tend to have the ability to raise the prices of their

product differentiation, and market competition was

goods or services without seeing a reduction in

mainly between brand name deodorants.78 Both Unilever

the demand of their products by consumers. This

and Sara Lee contended that there was only one deodor-

75

market power derives from the fact that the branded

ant market, while the EC argued for a narrower definition

goods belong to a class of goods that are imperfect

of male and non-male deodorant market segmentations.

substitutes for one another. What this imperfect

When the narrower definition of relevant product mar-

substitutability implies is that consumers would be

ket was used, the EC found that the proposed merger

less inclined to switch from the branded product

would result in potential anticompetitive effects in the

to a competing one, even if there were an increase

non-male deodorant markets in several European Union

in the price of the branded product (see Box 3.3).

(EU) territories.79

Competition authorities take into consideration firms’
brand assets, in order to identify the relevant product
market and assess the competitive effects of the proposed M&A.76 A narrow definition of the relevant market
implies that branded firms have strong market power;
conversely, a broad definition implies the opposite.

75 Economists refer to this type of market power as
the firm facing low price elasticity of demand.
76 Identification of the relevant market is the first step in
assessing a firm’s market power. The relevant market
is one where the products or services of a specific
group are considered substitutes by consumers. This
assessment is often undertaken with respect to a
specific set of products or services in which the firm
has allegedly conducted an unlawful practice.

128

77 Unilever/Sara Lee Body Care (2010). Unilever exists
as two separate entities, Unilever N.V. and Unilever
Plc., but operates as a single economic unit.
78 According to the submission of Unilever and Sara Lee,
there were seven product categories where they had
other overlapping economic activities: deodorant, skin
cleansing, skin care, fabric care, aftershave treatments,
oral care, hair care, and household cleaning.
79 Unilever owns the trademark to the deodorant brand
names Axe (Lynx in the United Kingdom), Rexona (Sure in
United Kingdom), Dove, Vaseline and Impulse, while Sara
Lee markets its products under the brand name Sanex.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

The EC’s reasoning for separating the deodorant product
market into two segments highlights how this competition authority may consider brands when identifying and
delineating the relevant market. First, the EC considered
consumers’ perception of the deodorant market. Based
on a survey it conducted, consumers overwhelmingly
perceived male deodorants as distinctly different from
the non-male deodorants. Second, the EC considered
firms’ sales and promotion efforts as well as the supplyside constraints that would prevent them from switching
between producing either male or non-male deodorants.
The EC found that the substantial time and financial investments needed to produce and market the product
for one gender segment restricted a firm’s ability to either
enter the market, or easily switch between catering for
one market segment to catering for another. The EC
also took into consideration how retailers marketed the
products and noted the different placements assigned
to deodorants, based on the gender of consumers.
Finally, the EC undertook the hypothetical monopolist
test where it assessed the substitutability between the

Box 3.3: How competition authorities determine relevant market
for differentiated goods
Competition authorities are often engaged in complex product
and geographic market definitions, in order to assess the actual
or potential competitive harm caused by a specific firm’s, or firms’,
behavior. They employ several empirical methods in order to define
the relevant market for antitrust enforcement purposes.
Measures of whether products are direct substitutes of one another
tend to be based on the metric of cross-price elasticity of demand
between two products. This measure determines how responsive
the demand of one product is to a change in the price of a second,
similar product. If there is some effect, and the effect is such that
an increase in the price of the first product results in an increase
in the demand of the second product, then these two products
are considered substitutable and can belong in the same relevant
market. If there is no effect, then the products are not considered
substitutes and do not belong to the same market.
Differentiated products tend to be imperfect substitutes for one
another. This implies that the products, while not direct substitutes,
are similar enough that they compete with each other in the same
product category. Take the example of Coca-Cola and Pepsi. A
consumer may still prefer to purchase a can of Coca-Cola, even if
the price of the Coca-Cola product is higher than the price of the
equivalent Pepsi product. However, if the Coca-Cola beverage is
not available, the same consumer may be inclined to purchase a
can of Pepsi.

two types of deodorants using the small but significant
non-transitory increase in price (SSNIP) test (see Box
3.3). Using scanner data submitted by Unilever, the EC
found that a hypothetical monopolist producing deodorants for the non-male market segment would not face
competition from its competitors in the male market
segment.80 All of the assessments made clearly pointed
to the gender-based market distinction in the deodorant
product category.

In order to measure whether two products belong in the same
relevant market, more sophisticated measures have been employed.
One of the most widely used tests is the so-called small but significant non-transitory increase in price (SSNIP) test. The SSNIP test
assesses the relevant market from the perspective of a hypothetical
monopolist. It considers a relevant market as one that includes the
narrowest grouping of all relevant products and regions where the
monopolist would be able to impose this small but significant increase
in price. The SSNIP test is arguably an international standard for
market definition, with countries such as the United States, Canada,
New Zealand, Australia and EU member states applying it when
assessing merger cases.
However, in markets with differentiated products where brands
play an important role, market shares – based on relevant markets
defined throug the SSNIP test – may not capture the actual market
power of firms and may therefore lead to an incorrect assessment
of the competitive dynamics within a specific market.

80 The data were collected by AC Nielsen
Company, a retail service tracking provider.

129

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

The drawback identified in using the SSNIP test has given more
prominence to using a different test, referred to as the upward
pricing pressure (UPP) index. This index, proposed by competition
economists Joseph Farrell and Carl Shapiro (Farrell and Shapiro,
2008, 2010), who served in the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and
the Department of Justice (DOJ) in the United States, respectively,
measures the incentives that merging firms may have to increase
the post-merger prices on their products, although it is not able to
predict the magnitude of such increase. The index considers how
close the substitutable products of merging firms are in comparison
to other products, a measurement that is known as the diversion
ratio. Simply put, this diversion ratio measures the fraction of sales
lost by a merging product (A) with the other merging product (B), as
a result of an increase in the price of the former merging product (A).

Competition authorities may also consider the firm’s

Both the SSNIP and UPP tests attempt to answer the same question: does the proposed merger result in an increased incentive
to raise prices on the combined products without suffering the
consequences of a reduced demand for those products, as would
normally be expected in a competitive environment?81

States FTC sought a preliminary injunction to block the

However, the way in which these tests answer the question is different. The SSNIP test considers the hypothetical case of a monopolist
and a basket of products in comparison to an alternative basket
of products, while the UPP index test carries out the exercise with
respect to the proposed merging firms and their combined basket
of products. In addition, the UPP index also takes into consideration
the competition faced by the firms in the marketplace, something
which the SSNIP test does not.

trademarks, or set of trademarks, when reviewing the
effects of a proposed merger on a market. If the firm
has a strong brand name or a set of brand names applicable to several products, all of which are protected by
trademarks, the competition authorities may suggest that
the firm divest itself of a few of these trademarks before
approving the proposed merger. One such example is
the merger between Dreyer and Nestlé in the premium
brand ice cream market – specifically, the market for
superpremium ice cream. In March 2003, the United
merger of Nestlé and Dreyer. The FTC was concerned
that the merger would result in Nestlé controlling about
60 percent of the superpremium ice cream market.
Since Nestlé markets its superpremium ice cream under
the trademark Häagen-Dazs, while Dreyer’s included
Dreamery, Godiva and Starbucks, the FTC assessed that
there would be strong evidence of a high level of concentration if the merger were to proceed as envisioned.82
As a remedy, Nestlé and Dreyer agreed to divest three of
Dreyer’s brands as well as Nestlé’s distribution assets.83

Note: For further discussion on this issue, see OECD (2012).

81 In a competitive environment, an increase in the
price of a product is likely to induce consumers
to switch to a substitutable product.

130

82 Dreyer marketed its superpremium ice creams under
the trademark Godiva, under license with Godiva
Chocolatier, Inc., and Starbucks, under a joint
venture with Starbucks Corporation respectively.
83 See Federal Trade Commission Press Release, June 25,
2003, “Nestlé-Dreyer Settle FTC Charges,” available
online at www.ftc.gov/opa/2003/06/nestle.shtm.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

A related example of where the competition authority

In both merger cases, each of the merging parties had

used trademark divestment as a remedy to counter

strong brand names. By merging, the competition au-

potentially anticompetitive effects was in the acquisition

thorities determined that the consolidation of these brand

of Moulinex by Société d’Emboutissage de Bourgogne’s

names would make it difficult for newcomers to enter the

(SEB) two brands of kitchen appliances.84 SEB is the

market, and could potentially harm consumer welfare.

owner of two global brands, namely Tefal and Rowenta,
while Moulinex has control over two equally well-known

A related example of competitive concerns due to effec-

brands, namely Moulinex and Krups. In order to allow

tive branding channels is the Babyliss SA v Commission

the merger to proceed, the EC temporarily suspended

case.87 Babyliss, as a new entrant to the kitchen appli-

the SEB’s use of its newly acquired trademark, Moulinex,

ances market, challenged the EC’s decision to allow

for eight years; within this eight-year period, SEB would

the acquisition of Moulinex by SEB, as described above,

have to license the trademark out to a third party for five

arguing that the EC did not consider all possible anticom-

years, and refrain from using it for three years.85

petitive impacts of the merger on new market entrants.
In its submission, Babyliss argued that the cost and time

Strong brand names built through branding activities

necessary to build its brand awareness – in order to be

can result in low contestability of the market for branded

on par with the newly merged entity – would place it in a

products, and can create strong market power for the

severely disadvantaged position. It also argued that the

holders of the branded goods or services; in turn, this

merger would concentrate a significant share of the most

can result in anticompetitive concerns. The case of the

powerful small kitchen appliance brands into one already

General Mills-Pillsbury (2001) merger in the pancake mix

dominant company. While Babyliss was not successful in

market raised such concerns. Both firms were success-

preventing the merger, it did trigger an assessment from

ful in creating separate brands for functionally equivalent

the Court of First Instance on the potential anticompetitive

baking products. Due to their branding efforts, the FTC

effects of the merger.

considered that the firms were able to behave relatively
independently of their rivals: any increase in the price of

For the moment, neither the courts nor competition

these branded goods was unlikely to induce a switch by

authorities have conclusively clarified the role played by

their consumers to other similar baking products, includ-

brands in determining a firm’s market power. Nonetheless,

ing unbranded flour. The General Mills-Pillsbury merger

there seems to be at least a growing awareness of the

was allowed to proceed only after Pillsbury agreed to

necessity to deepen the understanding of branding and

divest itself of its baking products line. In a similar line

competition, as more and more private investment is de-

of reasoning, the 1995 merger between Kimberly-Clark

voted to the strengthening of brand image and reputation

Corp. and Scott Paper Co. was rejected because it was

in order to enhance competitiveness.

86

deemed likely to result in harm for consumers of tissue
paper and baby wipes.

84 See: http://europa.eu/rapid/pressrelease_IP-03-1531_en.htm
85 See Babyliss Sa v. Commission of the
European Communities (2003).
86 General Mills Inc./Diageo PLC/Pillsbury Co. (2001).

87 Babyliss Sa v. Commission of the
European Communities (2003).

131

CHAPTER 3

3.3.2
The case of vertical arrangements
Related to the discussion of brand names and market

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

How do branding activities relate
to vertical arrangements?
Vertical arrangements relate to branding activities through
trademark licensing. Firms that own valuable trade-

power is the issue of vertical arrangements. Vertical ar-

marked names can license out those trademarks for

rangements are arrangements between market players

specific commercial purposes. For example, the licensing

that operate at different levels of the supply chain – for

could be related to an authorization on the use of the

example an agreement between a manufacturer and a

trademarked name to a distributor, or it could even be in

distributor. In vertical arrangements, competition authori-

the form of franchise agreements. In practice, franchise

ties are generally concerned that a firm may use its strong

agreements are the most relevant agreements regard-

brand name and reputation to limit competition with its

ing the licensing of trademarks.88 Companies such as

rivals – for example by imposing certain restrictions on

McDonald’s, Subway and 7-Eleven have successfully

the distribution of its products. Vertical arrangements can

franchised their brand names and business models, thus

relate to intra-brand or inter-brand competition (see Box

allowing independent entities to do business under their

3.4); in either case, they restrict the competitive behavior

brand names at individual locations.89

of one of the parties to the agreement.
Box 3.4: Two types of competition associated with vertical
arrangements
Vertical arrangements can relate to two types of competition. The
first type is intra-brand competition, which takes place between retailers of the same branded goods or services in the same geographic
market. This kind of competition is usually limited by specific clauses
in distribution contracts; such clauses provide either for a certain
territorial exclusivity or for recommended/imposed prices, as in the
case of resale price maintenance. Here, competition authorities often
try to determine whether any limitations on the economic freedom
of retailers, placed by the vertical arrangement, are motivated by
high-level consumer service imperatives.

When do branding activities
in vertical arrangements give
rise to competition issues?
The types of vertical arrangements that may worry competition authorities are those where one of the parties
to the vertical arrangement leverages its strong brand
name to create an even stronger market position and,
in doing so, reduces overall consumer welfare. In order
to allay anticompetitive concerns, the authorities would
ensure that vertical arrangement contracts are based
on efficiency gains reasons.

The second type is inter-brand competition, where competition takes
place between different branded products belonging to the same
goods or services market. Here, the question at hand is the ability
of firms with strong brands to prevent others from competing in
the same market by imposing certain clauses that may foreclose
their rivals. For example, a manufacturing firm may decide to enter
into a vertical arrangement with a distribution firm in the interest
of continually improving the quality of its goods or services, and
also in order to gain competitive edge over the firm’s rivals. In its
arrangement, the manufacturing firm imposes a restrictive clause
on the distribution firm, which stipulates that the distribution firm
cannot service products that rival the manufacturing firm’s products.
And because this firm has strong market power, due to its ownership of branded products, the distribution firm may readily accept
this restrictive clause and avoid servicing other rival products. This
type of restrictive arrangement is one that competition authorities
would most likely consider anticompetitive. Therefore, the objective
of the competition authority in the inter-brand competition case
is to ensure that any arrangement undertaken promotes market
competition between brands rather than hinders it.
132

88 Franchising agreements may take the following
three general forms: (i) ownership by one person (the
franchisor) of the rights to a trademark, brand name or
other similar sign; (ii) the grant of a license to selected
independent retailers, not agents, (the franchisees) to
use the trademark, brand name or other sign in exchange
for some agreed upon payment in order to provide retail
products or services; (iii) a license (franchise) agreement
establishing an ongoing contractual relationship between
franchisor and franchisee of significant duration, and
specifying some set of obligations on the franchisee, the
franchisor, or both. See Section 1.4 and OECD (1994).
89 These franchising agreements are generally part
of strict licensing and contract agreements that
govern how the businesses will be conducted, and
how the brand will be used and displayed.

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Resale price maintenance (RPM) is one of the most

On the other hand, RPM limits price competition. For

contentious vertical arrangements relating to branding

example, fixed and minimum price arrangements of RPM

activities. It restricts the distributors from selling the

eliminate or reduce intra-brand competition and may

manufacturer’s product below a specific suggested price.

result in prices above the competitive level.91 This is the

On the one hand, RPM is beneficial to the manufacturer

reason why the EC competition authorities fined Yamaha

in two ways. First, it enables the manufacturer to maintain

in 2003.92 Another example is where RPM takes the form

its brand name reputation by setting a certain price level

of a company policy that limits sales only to resellers who

benchmark. This price level may signal to consumers

adhere to the manufacturer’s suggested retail prices.93

that the product is of certain high quality (see Subsection
3.2.2). Second, RPM provides incentives to the distributor

In the past, regulators in both the United States and EU

to engage in sales and promotional activities that it might

have considered RPM as a hardcore restriction which

not otherwise have engaged in were the arrangement not

should be prohibited without any further analysis. For

in place; such activities might include offering pre-sale

example, in 1911, the United States Supreme Court in

demonstrations free of charge. This may help build the

Dr. Miles held that a supplier cannot lawfully restrict its

manufacturing firm’s brand name, especially in situations

reseller’s pricing freedom.

where the product being sold is new to the market, or
where the provision of demonstrations to consumers

Current trends, however, indicate a move away from this

may be required before they use the product for the first

strict approach and allow for a rule of reason review of

time. In addition, RPM enables distributors to make some

RPM. This new position can be seen in the subsequent

profits, and it may motivate them to actively promote the

rulings of the Colgate, State Oil v. Khan and Leegin cases

product, even by way of offering after-sales services,

in the United States and in the slight changes set out in

which in turn are beneficial for the manufacturer.

the EC’s Guidelines on Vertical Restraints in Europe.94

90

Under the rule of reason regime, the pro- and anticompetitive effects of potential violations of antitrust law will
be analyzed. If the pro-competitive effects outweigh the
anticompetitive effects, the behavior in question will not
be regarded as a violation of antitrust law.

90 RPM works best when the distributor can impose
territorial limitations on the sale of the products. In other
words, when the RPM is accompanied by limitations
stating that other distributors cannot service the same
market as one another. See Areeda and Kaplow (2004).

91
92
93
94

See Verras (2009).
See Yamaha (2003).
Verras (2009).
United States v. Colgate & Co. (1919); State Oil
Co. v. Khan (1997); and Leegin Creative Leather
Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc. (2007). However, in
Europe, RPM is still considered a blacklisted clause.

133

CHAPTER 3

Indeed, it seems appropriate to apply a rule of reason
approach regarding RPM, particularly in cases involving
trademarks; this is because the traditional elements of
the competition analysis do not necessarily apply in the
case of strong brands. More importantly, price competition is less relevant in the case of strong trademarks and
the resulting brand loyalty than in traditional competition
analysis. Finally, as described above, RPM may also have
pro-competitive effects which cast doubt on applying

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Box 3.5: Trademark exhaustion and parallel imports
Trademark laws – like laws for other IP instruments – typically set
rules on how far trademark holders can control the distribution
of their goods after their first sale on the market. It is possible
to broadly distinguish between two approaches. Under a rule of
“national exhaustion”, trademark holders cannot control the resale
of goods first sold in the domestic market, but they can prevent the
parallel importation of these goods if they were first sold abroad.
By contrast, under a rule of “international exhaustion”, trademark
holders cannot control the resale of their goods, regardless of where
they were first sold; in other words, parallel importation of goods
first sold abroad is legal.

strict prohibition on this type of vertical arrangements.
Finally, how vertical restraint arrangements affect competition is also a key consideration for policymakers who
must decide on whether to permit the parallel importation
of trademarked goods distributed in foreign markets.
Trademark laws regulate this question through the socalled exhaustion doctrine (see Box 3.5). Where policies
allow for parallel importation, competition rules can in turn
play an important role in scrutinizing private contractual
arrangements that seek to unduly limit competition from
foreign-sold goods.

What precisely are parallel imports? Parallel trade refers to trade in
genuine goods outside official channels of distribution. For instance,
an independent firm may purchase goods from a trademark holder’s
official wholesaler in country A and then sell them on to a retailer
in country B. Alternatively, a trademark holder’s official distributor
can directly engage in parallel trade by entering a foreign market in
competition with other official distributors. In either case, parallel
trade leads to greater intra-brand competition (see Box 3.5).
A policy of restricting parallel importation amounts to a marketsegmenting vertical restraint linked to national territories. Assessing
the pros and cons of such a policy involves similar considerations to
those required for assessing vertical restraints in trademark licensing
or franchising arrangements, as outlined in the subsection 3.3.2. In
particular, do benefits such as better sales services for consumers
outweigh the costs of reduced intra-brand competition? And how do
consumers fare under internationally differentiated pricing structures?
Different jurisdictions have opted for different exhaustion rules. The
EU has adopted a hybrid regime that denies parallel importation from
outside the EU territories, but allows parallel trade within the EU’s
single market.95 United States law generally permits parallel importation of trademarked goods, subject to certain requirements – such
as the imported goods in question not differing from domestically
sold goods, so as to deliberately confuse consumers.96
Some countries, such as Japan, have adopted an approach whereby
exhaustion is at the discretion of the trademark owner. In particular,
parallel imports are permissible, unless trademark holders indicate
otherwise in licensing and purchasing agreements. In principle, this
approach enables the case-by-case evaluation of the competitive
effects of vertical restraints by competition authorities, as is generally advocated by economists and lawyers.

95 Calboli (2002).
96 Another requirement is that the domestic and foreign
trademark are owned by the same economic entity.
See Lever Brothers Company v United States (1993).

134

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

3.4

Finally, investments in branding may give rise to competition concerns. High costs of advertising, for example,

Conclusions and directions for
future research
Building brand names is an important investment component of the process of creating sustainable competitive advantage for firms in the world today. It helps firms

can discourage or prevent the entry of new competitors
into the market. Another cause for concern is where
firms use their strong trademarked brand name to limit
competition in downstream markets.

Areas for future research

differentiate themselves from others, it promotes firms’

In better understanding how branding affects innovation

goods and services, and it can even help firms venture

and competition, several avenues for future research

into new markets. When effective, branding activities

stand out:

can help firms increase their market share, encourage
consumers to demand more of these branded products,

• Relatively few research studies have analyzed how

and persuade them to pay more for them in comparison

branding activities may substitute for product in-

to their generic counterparts.97

novation, especially in the case of vertical product
differentiation, where firms introduce higher quality

More importantly, branding helps firms to appropriate

products to rival their competitors. Given that these

their investments in innovation. Branding channels, such

types of innovative products tend to have experience

as sales promotion activities, marketing and advertising,

attributes, it is possible that firms may engage in ad-

can extend firms’ market power.

ditional branding activities aimed at persuading consumers about the quality of their products, rather than

It is therefore not surprising that firms that invest more in

investing in innovative activities to achieve the same

innovation also invest more in branding. Of course, how

objective. In Hoyer and Brown’s (1990) laboratory

effective these sales promotion activities are depends on

experiment using peanut butter, the researchers found

the types of product innovation being promoted. Once

that brands can compensate for deficiencies in objec-

consumers are familiar with and are satisfied with firms’

tive quality by advertising more than the higher quality

brands, they may develop goodwill towards them, which

product. But, the question is, what circumstances in

tends to be expressed in the form of brand loyalty.

the real world would lead to this outcome? Do the
same circumstances apply across all industries? In

Notwithstanding a generally complementary relationship,

other words, at what point do branding channels,

branding activities can, under certain circumstances,

such as advertising, become more effective at selling

substitute for product innovation. Firms may prefer to

firms’ goods or services than the introduction of new

invest in introducing products that are based solely on

innovative products?

image, and are independent of any technological improvements. This can happen when firms benefit from
strong consumer goodwill and are able to leverage this
goodwill to promote their image-based products.

97 Bresnahan et al (1997).

135

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

• The Internet has changed how consumers make new

• Lastly, assessing a firm’s market power based on its

purchases. It has reduced the time input and cost

ownership of brand names is not easy. The current

required to conduct research on potential purchases,

methods used to identify the relevant market, and as-

and it has simplified how consumers make purchases.

sess whether the firm in question has market power,

How have these factors affected the way firms intro-

need more rigorous study and analysis. Most of the

duce new products? Are they obliged to introduce

current tools rely on traditional economic analysis,

more new products at a more frequent rate? In other

which can produce contradictory findings. It would

words, has the Internet changed firms’ product life

be both timely and useful to conduct additional re-

cycle? Has it also changed how firms appropriate

search studies to identify how best to incorporate

their returns on investment in innovation? In the past,

determinants of consumers’ choices, such as brand

firms reported that lead-time advantage was one of

reputation and brand loyalty, in these assessments.

the most effective ways to appropriate their returns
on investment in innovation.98 Are branding activities
online a better way for firms to improving their chances
of securing a return on investment to innovation?
• The Internet enables the collection of large amounts
of data that can be used to answer specific brandingrelated research questions. Google, for example, is
able to track how many times a firm’s brand name or
its branded product is searched over time. Combining
this information with the amount of money a firm
spends on building its brand or marketing its products
may provide better insights into exactly how effective a
firm’s branding activities are. Further research studies
need to be conducted using “big data” in combination with newly available trademark data (see the
proposal set out in Chapter 2.4 in relation to research
using trademark data). As well as creating a better
understanding of how firms use branding activities,
these research studies would also shed new light
on the effectiveness of branding activities in terms of
promoting firms’ sales and growth.

98 See Cohen et al (2000).

136

CHAPTER 3

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

REFERENCES
Aaker, D.A. (1991). Managing Brand Equity. New York: The Free Press.
Aaker, D.A. (2011). Brand Relevance: Making
Competitors Irrelevant. New York: Jossey-Bass.
Acs, Z.J., & Audretsch, D.B. (1990). Innovation and
Small Firms. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aghion, P., Bloom, N., Blundell, R., Griffith, R., & Howitt, P.
(2005). Competition and Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 701-728.
Ailawadi, K.L., Lehmann, D.R., & Neslin, S.A. (2003). Revenue Premium
as an Outcome Measure of Brand Equity. Journal of Marketing, 67, 1-17.
Allison, R.I., & Uhl, K.P. (1964). Influence of Beer Brand Indentification
on Taste Perception. Journal of Marketing Research, 1(3), 36-39.
Anand, B.N., & Shachar, R. (2011). Advertising, the Matchmaker.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 42(2), 205-245.
Archibald, R.B., Haulman, C.A., & Moody, C.E., Jr.
(1983). Quality, Price, Advertising, and Published Quality
Ratings. Journal of Consumer Research, 9(4), 347-356.
Areeda, P. E., & Kaplow, L. (2004). Antitrust Analysis: Problems,
Text, Cases (6th ed.). New York: Aspen Publishers.
Arrow, K. (1962). Economic Welfare and the Allocation of
Resources for Invention. In R.R. Nelson (Ed.), The Rate and
Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors
(pp. 609-626). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Askenazy, P., Breda, T., & Irac, D. (2010). Advertising
and R&D: Theory and Evidence from France. Paris School
of Economics Working Paper, No. 2010-45.
Ayanian, R. (1975). Advertising and Rate of Return.
Journal of Law and Economics, 18, 479-506.
Babyliss Sa v. Commission of the European Communities Case T-114/02 II-01279 (Court of First Instance 2003).
Barsky, R., Bergen, M., Dutta, S., & Levy, D. (2003). What Can
the Price Gap between Branded and Private-Label Products Tell Us
about Markups? In R.C. Feenstra & M.D. Shapiro (Eds.), Scanner Data
and Price Indexes (pp. 165-228): University of Chicago Press.
Baye, M.R., & Morgan, J. (2009). Brand and Price Advertising
in Online Markets. Management Science, 55(7), 1139-1151.
Bloch, H. (1974). Advertising and Profitability: A Reappraisal.
Journal of Political Economy, 82, 112-128.
Böckem, S. (1994). A Generalized Model of Horizontal Product
Differentiation. Journal of Industrial Economics, 42(3), 287-298.
Bresnahan, T.F., Stern, S., & Trajtenberg, M. (1997). Market Segmentation
and the Sources of Rents from Innovation: Personal Computers in the
Late 1980s. The RAND Journal of Economics, 28(ArticleType: researcharticle/Issue Title: No. 0, Special Issue in Honor of Richard E. Quandt/Full
publication date: 1997/Copyright © 1997 RAND Corporation), S17-S44.

Comanor, W.S., & Wilson, T.A. (1967). Advertising Market Structure and
Performance. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 49(4), 423-440.
Comanor, W.S., & Wilson, T.A. (1974). Advertising and Market
Power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Comanor, W.S., & Wilson, T.A. (1979). The Effect of Advertising on
Competition: A Survey. Journal of Economic Literature, 17(2), 453-476.
Conley, J.G., Berry, J.D., DeWitt, L., & Dziersk, M. (2008).
Inventing Brands: Opportunities at the Nexus of Semiotics and
Intellectual Property. Design Management Review, 19(2), 58-67.
Conley, J.G., & Szobocsan, J. (2001). Snow White Shows
the Way. Managing Intellectual Property, 6(1), 1-5.
D’Asprement, C., Gabszewicz, J.J., & Thisse, J.F. (1979). On
Hotelling’s “Stability in Competition”. Econometrica, 47(5), 1145 - 1150.
Desai, D.R., & Waller, S. (2010). Brands, Competition and the
Law. Brigham Young University Law Review, 2010(5), 1425-1499.
Dixit, A.K., & Stiglitz, J.E. (1977). Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
Product Diversity. The American Economic Review, 67(3), 297-308.
Dubin, J.A. (1998). The Demand for Branded and Unbranded
Products: An Econometric Method for Valuing Intangible Assets
Studies in Consumer Demand: Econometric Methods Applied to
Market Data (pp. 77-127). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
EC. (2004). Technology Transfer Guidelines. Brussels: European Commission.
Farrell, J., & Shapiro, C. (2008). Antitrust Evaluation of Horizontal
Mergers: An Economic Alternative to Market Definition. Working Paper.
Farrell, J., & Shapiro, C. (2010). Upward Pricing Pressure and
Critical Loss Analysis: Reponses. The CPI Antitrust Journal.
Fluet, C., & Garella, P.G. (2002). Advertising and Prices as
Signals of Quality in a Regime of Price Rivalry. International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 20(7), 907-930.
Ford, G.T., Smith, D.B., & Swasy, J.L. (1990). Consumer Skepticism
of Advertising Claims: Testing Hypotheses from Economics of
Information. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(4), 433-441.
General Mills, Inc./ Diageo plc/ Pillsbury Co. - FTC File
No. 001-0213 (U.S. Federal Trade Commission 2001).
Gilbert, R.J. (2006). Looking for Mr. Schumpeter: Where are We in the
Competition-Innovation Debate? In A.B. Jaffe, J. Lerner & S. Stern (Eds.),
Innovation Policy and the Economy (Vol. 6). Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Goettler, R.L., & Gordon, B.R. (2013). Competition and Product
Competition in Dynamic Oligopoly. University of Rochester Working Paper.
Greenstein, S., & Ramey, G. (1998). Market Structure,
Innovation and Vertical Product Innovation. International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 16, 285-311.
Guadagni, P.M., & Little, J.D.C. (1983). A Logit Model of Brand Choice
Calibrated on Scanner Data. Marketing Science, 2(3), 203-238.

Cabral, L.M.B. (2000). Stretching Firm and Brand Reputation.
The RAND Journal of Economics, 31(4), 658-673.

Hakenes, H., & Peitz, M. (2009). Umbrella Branding and External
Certification. European Economic Review, 53(2), 186-196.

Calboli, I. (2002). Trademark Exhaustion in the European
Union: Community-Wide or International? The Saga Continues.
Marguette Intellectual Property Law Review, 6, 47-90.

Heath, T., DelVecchio, D., & McCarthy, M.S. (2011). The
Asymmetric Effects of Extending Brands to Lower and
Higher Quality. Journal of Marketing, 75(3), 3-20.

Caves, R.E., & Greene, D.P. (1996). Brands’ Quality Levels, Prices, and
Advertising Outlays: Empirical Evidence on Signals and Information
Costs. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 14(1), 29-52.

Homburg, C., Klarmann, M., & Schmitt, J. (2010). Brand Awareness
in Business Markets: When is it Related to Firm Performance?
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 27, 201-212.

Chen, Y., & Schwartz, M. (2013). Product Innovation
Incentives: Monopoly vs. Competition. Journal of
Economics & Management Strategy, 22(3), 513-528.

Hotelling, H. (1929). Stability in Competition. Economic Journal, 39, 41-57.

Choi, J.P. (1998). Brand Extension and Informational
Leverage. Review of Economic Studies, 65, 655-669.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. (2000). Protecting
Their Intellectual Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why
U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 7552.

Hoyer, W.D., & Brown, S.P. (1990). Effects of Brand
Awareness on Choice for a Common, Repeat-Purchase
Product. Journal of Consumer Research, 17(2), 141-148.
Hurwitz, M.A., & Caves, R.E. (1988). Persuasion or Information?
Promotion and the Shares of Brand Name and Generic
Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Law and Economics, 31(2), 299-320.

137

CHAPTER 3

Jennewein, K. (2005). Intellectual Property Management:
The Role of Technology-Brands in the Appropriation of
Technological Innovation. Heidelberg: Physica-Verlag.

BRANDING, INNOVATION AND COMPETITION

Romer, P. (1990). Endogenous Technical Change.
Journal of Political Economy, 94(5), 1--21.

Joachimsthaler, E., & Aaker, D.A. (1997). Building Brands
Without Mass Media. Harvard Business Review, 75(1), 39-48.

Scherer, F.M. (1979). The Welfare Economics of Product
Variety: An Application to the Ready-to- Eat Cereals Industry.
The Journal of Industrial Economics, 28(2), 113-134.

Kapferer, J.N. (2008). The New Strategic Brand Management: Creating
and Sustaining Brand Equity Long Term. London: Kogan Page.

Schmalensee, R. (1978). A Model of Advertising and Product
Quality. Journal of Political Economy, 86(3), 485-503.

Keller, K.L. (2003). Strategic Brand Management: Building,
Measuring, and Managing Customer-Based Brand Equity
(Second ed.). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

Schmalensee, R. (1982). Product Differentiation Advantages of
Pioneering Brands. The American Economic Review, 72(3), 349-365.

Klein, B., & Leffler, K.B. (1981). The Role of Market Forces in Assuring
Contractual Performance. Journal of Political Economy, 89(4), 615-641.

Shah, S.Z.A., & Akbar, S. (2008). Value Relevance of
Advertising Expenditure: A Review of the Literature. International
Journal of Management Review, 10(4), 301-325.

Klemperer, P. (1987). Entry Deterrence in Markets with Consumer
Switching Costs. The Economic Journal, 97, 99-117.

Shaked, A., & Sutton, J. (1982). Relaxing Price Competition Through
Product Differentiation. The Review of Economic Studies, 49(1), 3-13.

Krasnikov, A., Mishra, S., & Orozco, D. (2009). Evaluating the
Financial Impact of Branding Using Trademarks: A Framework
and Empirical Evidence. Journal of Marketing, 73, 154-166.

Shaked, A., & Sutton, J. (1983). Natural Oligopolies.
Econometrica, 51(5), 1469-1483.

Lee, J., Shin, B.S., & Chung, I. (1996). Causality between
Advertising and Sales: New Evidence from Cointegration.
Applied Economics Letters, 3(5), 299-301.
Leegin Creative Leather Products, Inc. v. PSKS, Inc.,
551 U.S. 877 (United States Supreme Court 2007).
Lei, J., Ruyter, K.D., & Wetzels, M. (2008). Consumer Responses to
Vertical Service Line Extensions. Journal of Retailing, 84(3), 268-280.
Lever Brothers Company v United States, 981 F.2d
1330 (United States Court of Appeals 1993).
Levin, D., Peck, J., & Ye, L. (2009). Quality Disclosure and
Competition. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 57(1), 167-196.
Moorthy, S. (2012). Brand Extension Strategy: An Integrative Framework. In
D. Soberman & D. Soman (Eds.), Flux: What Marketing Managers Need to
Know to Navigate the New Environment. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Moorthy, S. (2013). Branding, Innovation and Competition.
Unpublished Background Research Commissioned for the World IP
Report 2013. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.

Slade, M.E. (1998). Optimal Pricing with Costly Adjustment: Evidence from
Retail-Grocery Prices. The Review of Economic Studies, 65(1), 87-107.
Smith, M.D., & Brynjolfsson, E. (2001). Consumer DecisionMaking at an Internet Shopbot: Brand Still Matters. The
Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(4), 541-558.
State Oil Co. v. Khan et al., 522 U.S. 3 (United States Supreme Court 1997).
Stokes, R.C. (1985). The Effects of Price, Package Design, and
Brand Familiarity on Perceived Quality. In J. Jacoby & J. Olson
(Eds.), Perceived Quality. Lezington: Lexington Books.
Sullivan, M. (1990). Measuring Image Spillovers in UmbrellaBranded Products. Journal of Business, 63, 309-329.
Sutton, J. (1991). Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition,
Advertising and the Evolution of Concentration. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Thomas, L.A. (1995). Brand Capital and Incumbent Firms’ Positions in
Evolving Markets. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(3), 522-534.
U. S. Department of Justice, & Federal Trade
Commission. (2010). Horizontal Merger Guidelines.

Nelson, P. (1970). Information and Consumer Behavior.
Journal of Political Economy, 78, 311-329.

Unilever/Sara Lee Body Care - Case No
COMP/M.5658 (European Commission 2010).

Nelson, P. (1974). Advertising as Information. The
Journal of Political Economy, 82(4), 729-754.

United Brands Company and United Brands
Continentaal BV v Commission of the European
Communities 207 (European Court of Justice 1978).

Nevo, A. (2001). Measuring Market Power in the Ready-toEat Cereal Industry. Econometrica, 69(2), 307-342.
OECD. (1994). Competition Policy and Vertical Restraints:
Franchising Agreements. Paris: Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Development.
OECD. (2012). Market Definition. Paris: Organisation of
Economic Co-operation and Development.
Ofek, E., & Sarvary, M. (2003). R&D, Marketing, and the Success of
Next-Generation Products. Marketing Science, 22(3), 355-370.
Pepall, L.M., & Richards, D.J. (2002). The Simple Economics of
Brand Stretching. The Journal of Business, 75(3), 535-552.
Porter, M.E. (1974). Consumer Behavior, Retailer Power and
Market Performance in Consumer Goods Industries. The
Review of Economics and Statistics, 56(4), 419-436.
Porter, M.E. (1976). Interbrand Choice, Media Mix and Market
Performance. The American Economic Review, 66(2), 398-406.
Randall, T., Ulrich, K., & Reibstein, D. (1998). Brand Equity and
Vertical Product Line Extent. Marketing Science, 17(4), 356-379.
Romer, P. (1986). Increasing Returns and Long-Run
Growth. Journal of Political Economy, 94(5), 1002-1037.

138

United States v. Colgate & Co. - No. 828, 250 U.S.
300 (United States Supreme Court 1919).
Verras, N. (2009). Resale Price Maintenance in E.U. Competition
Law: Thoughts in Relation to the Vertical Restriants Review
Procedure. The Columbia Journal of European Law, 16, 37-41.
Weiss, L.W. (1969). Advertising, Profits, and Corporate Taxes.
The Review of Economics and Statistics, 51(4), 421-430.
Wiggins, S.N., & Raboy, D.G. (1996). Price Premia to Name Brands: An
Empirical Analysis. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 44(4), 377-388.
WIPO. (2011). World Intellectual Property Report 2011: The Changing
Face of Innovation. Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization.
Yamaha - Case COMP/37.975 PO (European Commission 2003).
Yip, G. (1982). Barriers to Entry: A Corporate Strategy
Perspective. Lexington, MA: D.C. Health.
Zhou, N., Zhou, D., & Ouyang, M. (2003). Long-Term Effects
of Television Advertising on Sales of Consumer Durables and
Nondurables: The Case of China. Journal of Advertising, 32(2), 45-54.

ACRONYMS

ACRONYMS
ABS

Australia Bureau of Statistics

SEB

Société d’Emboutissage de Bourgogne

BEA

Bureau of Economic Analysis

SEC

Securities and Exchange Commission

BoP

Balance of Payments

SIPO

State Intellectual Property Office of the

BvD

Bureau van Dijk

CANSIM

Canadian Socioeconomic Information

SME

Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise

Management System

SSNIP

Small but Significant Non-Transitory

ccTLDs

Country Code Top-Level Domains

CTM

Community Trade Mark

DOJ

Department of Justice

EBOPS

Extended Balance of

People’s Republic of China

Increase in Price
TRIPS

Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights

UDRP

Payments Services

Uniform Domain Name Dispute
Resolution Policy

EC

European Commission

UK

United Kingdom

EMA

European Medicines Agency

UKIPO

United Kingdom Intellectual

EPO

European Patent Office

EFF

European Franchise Federation

EU
FTC

Property Office
UPP

Upward Pricing Pressure

European Union

US

United States

Federal Trade Commission

USD

United States Dollar

GDP

Gross Domestic Product

USPTO

United States Patent and

GI

Geographical Indication

gTLDs

Generic Top-Level Domains

WIPO

World Intellectual Property Organization

ICANN

Internet Corporation for Assigned

WTO

World Trade Organization

Trademark Office

Names and Numbers
INPI

Instituto Nacional da
Propriedade Industrial

IP

Intellectual Property

JPO

Japanese Patent Office

LIMA

International Licensing Industry and
Merchandisers’ Association

M&A

Mergers and Acquisition

MSITS

Manual on Statistics of International
Trade in Services

NAICS

North American Industry
Classification System

NBI

Nation Brands Index

OECD

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development

OHIM

Office for Harmonization in the
Internal Market

OPH

Output per Hour

PPP

Purchasing Power Parity

R&D

Research and Development

RPM

Resale Price Maintenance

SCB

Statistics Sweden
139

For more information contact
WIPO at www.wipo.int
World Intellectual Property Organization
34, chemin des Colombettes
P.O. Box 18
CH-1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Telephone:
+4122 338 91 11
Fax:
+4122 733 54 28

WIPO Publication No. 944E/2013 			

ISBN 978-92-805-2411-6

