Wor l d Eco no m i c a nd F i na nci a l S ur v e y s

World Economic Outlook
October 2016

Subdued Demand
Symptoms and Remedies

I

N

T

E

R

N

A

T

I

O

N

A

L

M

O

N

E

T

A

R

Y

F

U

N

D

©2016 International Monetary Fund
Cover and Design: Luisa Menjivar and Jorge Salazar
Composition: AGS, An RR Donnelley Company
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Joint Bank-Fund Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. |
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80
ISBN 978-1-51359-954-0 (paper)
978-1-47553-996-7 (PDF)
978-1-47553-981-3 (ePub)
978-1-47553-998-1 (Mobi)

The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a
year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and has benefited
from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their discussion of the
report on September 23, 2016. The views expressed in this publication are those of the
IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s Executive Directors
or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2016. World Economic Outlook:
Subdued Demand: Symptoms and Remedies. Washington, October.

Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, U.S.A.
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@imf.org
www.imfbookstore.org
www.elibrary.imf.org

CONTENTS

Assumptions and Conventions

x

Further Information and Data

xi

Preface

xii

Foreword

xiii

Executive Summary

xv

Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies

1

Recent Developments and Prospects
The Forecast
Risks
Policy Priorities
Scenario Box 1. Tariff Scenarios
Box 1.1. World Growth Projections over the Medium Term
Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on
Food Security and Markets in the World Economy
References
Chapter 2. Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

1
18
26
29
37
40
48
60
63

The Implications of Trade for Productivity and Welfare: A Primer
The Slowdown in Trade Growth: Key Patterns
Understanding the Slowdown in Trade Growth
Summary and Policy Implications
Box 2.1. Is the Trade Slowdown Contributing to the Global Productivity Slowdown? New Evidence
Box 2.2. The Role of Trade Policies in Reinvigorating Trade
Box 2.3. Potential Gains from Jump-Starting Trade Liberalization
Annex 2.1. Data
Annex 2.2. Constructing Disaggregated Import Volume and Price Indices
Annex 2.3. Analysis Using an Empirical Model of Import Demand
Annex 2.4. Analysis Using a General Equilibrium Model
Annex 2.5. Analysis at the Product Level
Annex 2.6. Analysis Using Gravity Model of Trade
References
Chapter 3. Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

66
67
69
85
88
91
94
95
95
98
106
107
110
115
121

A Primer on the Costs of Disinflation, Persistently Low Inflation, and Deflation
Inflation Dynamics: Patterns and Recent Drivers
How Well Anchored Are Inflation Expectations?
Summary and Policy Implications
Box 3.1. Industrial Slack and Producer Price Inflation
Box 3.2. The Japanese Experience with Deflation
Box 3.3. How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

124
126
134
142
145
147
150

iii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Box 3.4. The Impact of Commodity Prices on Producer Price Inflation
Box 3.5. A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy
Annex 3.1. Sample and Data
Annex 3.2. Model Simulations
Annex 3.3. Principal Component Analysis
Annex 3.4. Drivers of the Recent Decline in Inflation
Annex 3.5. The Effect of Inflation Shocks on Inflation Expectations
References
Chapter 4. Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration
Introduction
The Challenges and Opportunities of Migration
Box 4.1. China’s Ties with Low-Income and Developing Countries
Box 4.2. Conflicts Driving Migration: Middle East and North Africa
Box 4.3. Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa
References
Statistical Appendix
Assumptions
What’s New
Data and Conventions
Country Notes
Classification of Countries
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP,
Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2015
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Table C. European Union
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of
Export Earnings
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and
Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Low-Income Developing Countries
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
List of Tables
Output (Tables A1–A4)
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)
Financial Policies (Table A8)
Foreign Trade (Table A9)
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)
Flow of Funds (Table A14)
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)

154
156
158
158
160
161
164
168
171
171
183
195
196
197
199
203
203
204
204
205
205
206
207
208
208
209
210
212
213
223
228
235
240
241
243
250
254
257

World Economic Outlook, Selected Topics

259

IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, September 2016

267

iv

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CONTENTS﻿

Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
Annex Table 1.1.1. Europe: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance,
and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asia and Pacific: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan Africa: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
Table 1.SF.1. Used-to-Available Land Suitable for Agriculture by Region, 2013
Table 1.SF.2. Food Exports
Table 1.SF.3. Agricultural Yield
Table 1.SF.4. Urban Population by Region
Table 1.SF.5. Net Export of Food
Table 1.SF.6. Share of Food and Beverages in Total Consumption, 2010
Table 1.SF.1.1. Impact of Land Governance and Food Security on Land Deals
Table 2.1. Historical Association among Real Import Growth at the Product Level, Trade Policies, and
Participation in Global Value Chains
Table 2.1.1. Baseline Estimation Results
Table 2.2.1. Trade Policy Challenges Vary across Countries
Annex Table 2.1.1. Data Sources
Annex Table 2.1.2. Sample of Economies Included in the Analytical Exercises
Annex Table 2.3.1. Import Content of Aggregate Demand Components
Annex Table 2.3.2. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Goods and Services
Annex Table 2.3.3. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Goods
Annex Table 2.3.4. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Services
Annex Table 2.3.5. Residuals: Real Goods Import Growth
Annex Table 2.3.6. Residuals: Real Services Import Growth
Annex Table 2.3.7. Residuals: Real Goods Import Growth Controlling for Global Uncertainty, Global
Financial Conditions, and Financial Stress
Annex Table 2.3.8. Decomposing the Decline in Real Goods Import Growth: Full Sample
Annex Table 2.3.9. Residuals: Real Goods Import Growth, Corrected for Potential Effect of
Trade Policies on Aggregate Demand
Annex Table 2.3.10. Decomposing the Decline in Real Goods Import Growth
Controlling for Trade Policies
Annex Table 2.5.1. Alternative Specifications for Real Imports in Product-Level Regressions
Annex Table 2.5.2. Alternative Specifications for Nominal Imports in Product-Level Regressions
Annex Table 2.6.1. Link between Global Value Chain Integration and Yearly Nominal Import
Growth Using Gravity Model Estimated in Levels
Annex Table 2.6.2. Link between Global Value Chain Integration and Yearly Nominal Import
Growth Using Gravity Model Estimated in Growth Rates
Table 3.3.1. Cross-Country Determinants of Pass-Through of Free-on-Board Food Prices to
Food Consumer Price Inflation
Annex Table 3.1.1. Sample of Advanced and Emerging Market Economies
Annex Table 3.1.2. Data Sources

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

2
42
43
44
45
46
47
52
53
53
54
55
56
59
84
90
92
96
97
99
100
101
102
103
103
104
104
105
105
109
111
113
114
153
158
158

v

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A1. Summary of World Output
Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table A5. Summary of Inflation
Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt
Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario

228
229
230
232
235
236
238
240
241
243
246
247
250
254
257

Online Tables
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing and General
Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of Trade in Goods and
Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of Export Earnings: Total
Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria: External
Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term Baseline Scenario: Selected
Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators
Figure 1.2. Global Inflation
Figure 1.3. Commodity and Oil Markets
Figure 1.4. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes, March 2016–September 2016

vi

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

4
6
6
7

CONTENTS﻿

Figure 1.5. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Figure 1.6. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial Market Conditions
Figure 1.7. Advanced Economies: Credit, House Prices, and Balance Sheets
Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates
Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and Credit
Figure 1.10. Domestic Demand, Output Gap, Unemployment, and Labor Force Participation
in Advanced Economies
Figure 1.11. Demographics
Figure 1.12. Advanced Economies: Growth, Investment, and Employment in Recent
WEO Vintages
Figure 1.13. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains and Losses and Real
Exchange Rates
Figure 1.14. Real per Capita Growth Rates and Convergence (1995–2020)
Figure 1.15. Fiscal Indicators
Figure 1.16. External Sector
Figure 1.17. Creditors versus Debtors
Figure 1.18. Current Account Gaps and Real Exchange Rates
Figure 1.19. Risks to the Global Outlook
Figure 1.20. Recession and Deflation Risks
Scenario Figure 1. Unilateral and Bilateral Imposition of Tariffs on Imported Goods
Scenario Figure 2. A Worldwide Increase in Protectionism
Figure 1.1.1 World Growth Projections over the Medium Term
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
Figure 1.SF.2. Producer Support Estimate
Figure 1.SF.3. World Food Production and Consumption by Country, 2015
Figure 1.SF.4. Population and World Food Consumption
Figure 1.SF.5. Maize Yield
Figure 1.SF.6. Food Prices and Violent Events
Figure 1.SF.7. Global Food Security Index, 2016
Figure 1.SF.1.1. Evolution of Deals over Time by Target Region
Figure 2.1. World Real Trade and GDP Growth in Historical Perspective
Figure 2.2. World Trade in Volumes, Values, and across Countries
Figure 2.3. Trade Dynamics across Broad Country Groups
Figure 2.4. Trade Dynamics across Types of Trade and Products
Figure 2.5. Empirical Model: Actual and Predicted Evolution of Real Import Growth
Figure 2.6. Empirical Model: Difference between Actual and Predicted Growth of Real
Goods Imports
Figure 2.7. Empirical Model: Decomposing the Slowdown in Real Goods Import Growth
Figure 2.8. Structural Model: Actual and Model-Implied Evolution of Nominal
Import-to-GDP Ratio
Figure 2.9. Trade Costs in Historical Perspective: A Top-Down Approach
Figure 2.10. Trade Policies in Historical Perspective
Figure 2.11. Logistics and Transportation Costs of Trade in Historical Perspective
Figure 2.12. Global Value Chains in Historical Perspective
Figure 2.13. Contribution of Trade Policies and Global Value Chains to the Slowdown in Real
Goods Import Growth
Figure 2.14. Gravity Model: Global Value Chain Participation and Bilateral Sectoral Trade Growth
Figure 2.1.1. The Evolution of Trade across Industries in Major Economies
Figure 2.2.1. Potential Gains from Tackling Traditional Trade Barriers
Figure 2.2.2. Trade Policy Frontier Areas

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

8
9
9
10
10
12
13
14
17
17
19
25
26
26
29
30
37
38
40
48
51
52
52
54
56
57
58
64
68
70
70
72
73
73
77
79
80
82
82
85
86
89
93
93

vii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Figure 2.3.1. Gains from Eliminating Tariffs and Implementing the World Trade Organization
Trade Facilitation Agreement
Annex Figure 2.1.1. Nominal Import Growth across Categories of Services
Annex Figure 2.2.1. Real Import Growth
Annex Figure 2.5.1. Trade Finance Availability
Annex Figure 2.5.2. Contribution of Trade Policies and Global Value Chains to the Slowdown in
Real and Nominal Goods Import Growth
Figure 3.1. Oil Prices and Consumer Price Inflation
Figure 3.2. Share of Countries with Low Inflation
Figure 3.3. Medium-Term Inflation Expectations and Oil Prices
Figure 3.4. Effect of Disinflationary Shocks in Advanced Economies under Constrained Monetary
Policy and Unanchored Inflation Expectations
Figure 3.5. Consumer Price Inflation
Figure 3.6. Share of Consumer Price Inflation Variation Explained by First Common Factor
Figure 3.7. Core Consumer Price Inflation
Figure 3.8. Wage Inflation in Advanced Economies
Figure 3.9. Sectoral Producer Prices in Advanced Economies
Figure 3.10. Sectoral Consumer Prices in Advanced Economies
Figure 3.11. Estimated Phillips Curve Parameters
Figure 3.12. Contribution to Inflation Deviations from Targets: Advanced Economies
Figure 3.13. Contribution to Inflation Deviations from Targets: Emerging Market Economies
Figure 3.14. Correlation of Manufacturing Slack in China, Japan, and the United States with
Import Price Contribution to Inflation in Other Economies
Figure 3.15. Survey- and Market-Based Inflation Expectations
Figure 3.16. Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises
Figure 3.17. Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises and Monetary
Policy Frameworks
Figure 3.18. Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises before and after Adoption
of Inflation Targeting
Figure 3.19. Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises over Time
Figure 3.20. Change in Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises
Figure 3.21. Average Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations to Inflation Surprises in Countries at the
Effective Lower Bound
Figure 3.22. Sensitivity of Longer-Term Inflation Expectations to Changes in Oil Prices
Figure 3.1.1. Producer Price and Consumer Price Inflation in China, Japan, and the United States
Figure 3.1.2. Industrial Slack in China, Japan, and the United States
Figure 3.1.3. Decomposition for Total Producer Price Inflation for China, Japan, and the
United States
Figure 3.2.1. Inflation Dynamics
Figure 3.2.2. Cyclical and Structural Indicators in Japan
Figure 3.2.3. Policy Indicators in Japan
Figure 3.3.1. Food Weights in Consumption and per Capita GDP
Figure 3.3.2. World Food Prices and Consumer Food Prices
Figure 3.3.3. Food Prices Relative to Nonfood Prices
Figure 3.3.4. Food Pass-Through Coefficients for Various Country Groups
Figure 3.3.5. Distribution of Food Pass-Through Coefficients
Figure 3.4.1. Commodity Prices and Producer Prices
Figure 3.4.2. Contribution to Cumulative Producer Price Inflation
Figure 3.5.1. Forecast as Envisaged at 2009:Q2: Loss-Minimization versus Linear Reaction Function

viii

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

95
97
98
108
110
122
122
123
125
127
127
128
129
129
130
132
132
133
134
136
137
138
138
139
140
140
141
144
145
145
147
148
149
150
151
151
152
152
154
155
156

CONTENTS﻿

Annex Figure 3.2.1. Effect of Disinflationary Shocks on Core Inflation in Advanced Economies under
Constrained Monetary Policy
Annex Figure 3.2.2. Effect of Disinflationary Shocks on Core Inflation in Advanced Economies under
Constrained Monetary Policy and Unanchored Inflation Expectations
Annex Figure 3.3.1. Share of Consumer Price Inflation Variation Explained by Different Factors
Annex Figure 3.3.2. First Common Factor and Commodity Prices
Annex Figure 3.4.1. Contribution to Inflation Deviations from Targets Using Various Measures
of Inflation Expectations
Annex Figure 3.4.2. Contribution to Inflation Deviations from Targets Using Various Measures of
Cyclical Unemployment
Annex Figure 3.4.3. Correlation of Manufacturing Slack in China, Japan, and the United States
with Import Price Contribution to Inflation in Other Economies
Annex Figure 3.4.4. Correlation of China Manufacturing Slack with Import Price Contribution to
Inflation in Other Economies: Results from Panel Regressions
Annex Figure 3.5.1. Change in Inflation Expectations and Inflation Shocks
Annex Figure 3.5.2. Sensitivity of Inflation Expectations when Controlling for Slack:
Advanced Economies
Figure 4.1. China: GDP and Trade Growth
Figure 4.2. Number of International Migrants and Refugees
Figure 4.3. China: Global Clout and Rebalancing
Figure 4.4. Spillovers from China over Time
Figure 4.5. Impact on Exports of a 1 Percent Shock to China’s Demand after One Year
Figure 4.6. Decline in Average Export Growth Rate Attributed to China Demand,
2014:Q1–2015:Q3
Figure 4.7. China: Processing Trade
Figure 4.8. A Large Footprint in Commodity Markets
Figure 4.9. Cumulative One-Year Price Impact from a 1 Percent Shock to China’s
Industrial Production
Figure 4.10. China: Slowdown Scenario
Figure 4.11. Spillovers from China
Figure 4.12. Transmission of Spillovers through Financial Channels
Figure 4.13. China: Cyclical Slowdown Scenario
Figure 4.14. International Migrants and Refugees
Figure 4.15. Migration by Age and Skill
Figure 4.16. Determinants of Migration
Figure 4.17. Females: Low Education versus High Skilled, 2000
Figure 4.18. Labor Market Performance
Figure 4.19. Germany: Present Value of Expected Future Net Fiscal Contribution by Age Group
Figure 4.20. Estimated Impact of Migration in More Developed Economies, 2100
Figure 4.21. Migration: Positive Longer-Term Growth Effects
Figure 4.22. Contributions of Outward Migration to Population Growth
Figure 4.23. Migration of Population with Tertiary Education
Figure 4.24. Remittances and Diasporas
Figure 4.1.1. China’s Ties with Low-Income and Developing Countries
Figure 4.3.1. Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa
Figure 4.3.2. Age and Education of Migrants and Origin Country Population
Figure 4.3.3. Top Receivers of Remittances in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2013–15

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

159
160
161
161
163
163
164
165
165
166
172
172
173
175
176
176
177
178
179
180
180
181
182
184
185
186
187
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
195
197
198
198

ix

Editor’s note
October 4, 2016
Statistical Tables A2 and A6 have been replaced to correct incorrect values for Macao SAR, Iceland, and San
Marino in the first column of each table.

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS

A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during July
22 to August 19, 2016, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism
II (ERM II), which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established
policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for
selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $42.96 a barrel
in 2016 and $50.64 a barrel in 2017 and will remain unchanged in real terms over the medium term; that the
six-month London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on U.S. dollar deposits will average 1.0 percent in 2016 and
1.3 percent in 2017; that the three-month euro deposit rate will average –0.3 percent in 2016 and –0.4 percent in
2017; and that the six-month Japanese yen deposit rate will yield on average 0.0 percent in 2016 and –0.1 percent
in 2017. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and the uncertainties surrounding them
add to the margin of error that would in any event be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections
are based on statistical information available through September 16, 2016.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
. . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
–
	between years or months (for example, 2015–16 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered, including the beginning and ending years or months; and
/
between years or months (for example, 2015/16) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
“Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
“Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of 1
percentage point).
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and
government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2015 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the national
accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for each country.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
• If no source is listed on tables and figures, data are drawn from the WEO database.
• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of
the weighted group data.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on the maps do not imply, on the
part of the International Monetary Fund, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

x

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

x

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: TENSIONS FROM THE TWO-SPEED RECOVERY

FURTHER INFORMATION AND DATA

This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series
most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the World Economic Outlook are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The historical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers
in the context of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and
structural breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques.
IMF staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable.
As a result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but it cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the World Economic Outlook and the WEO database should be sent by mail, fax,
or online forum (telephone inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20431, U.S.A.
Fax: (202) 623-6343
Online Forum: www.imf.org/weoforum

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

xi

PREFACE

The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international financial
markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information the IMF
staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out in particular by
the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department, European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—together with the
Strategy, Policy, and Review Department, the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, and the Fiscal Affairs
Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of Maurice
Obstfeld, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
Deputy Director, Research Department; Oya Celasun, Division Chief, Research Department; and Helge Berger,
Division Chief, Research Department and Head of the IMF’s Spillover Task Force.
The primary contributors to this report were Rabah Arezki, Aqib Aslam, Claudia Berg, Samya Beidas-Strom,
Patrick Blagrave, Christian Bogmans, Emine Boz, Luis Catão, Eugenio Cerutti, Sangyup Choi, Davide Furceri,
Bertrand Gruss, Zsóka Kóczán, Ksenia Koloskova, Toh Kuan, Weicheng Lian, Akito Matsumoto, Malhar Nabar,
Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, Sweta Saxena, Petia Topalova, and Esteban Vesperoni.
Other contributors include Jaebin Ahn, Emre Alper, Michal Andrle, Elif Arbatli, Gavin Asdorian, Felicia Belostecinic, Diego Cerdeiro, Kevin Clinton, Vanessa Diaz Montelongo, Romain Duval, Rupa Duttagupta, Angela
Espiritu, Rachel Yuting Fan, Emily Forrest, Mitko Grigorov, Refet Gürkaynak, Mahnaz Hemmati, Christian Henn,
Benjamin Hilgenstock, Niko Hobdari, Ava Yeabin Hong, Keiko Honjo, Benjamin Hunt, Gabi Ionescu, Zoltan
Matyas Jakab, Hao Jiang, Alimata Kini-Kaboré, Sinem Kılıç Çelik, Douglas Laxton, Andrei Levchenko, Olivia Ma,
Trevor Charles Meadows, Juan Angel Garcia Morales, Brent Neiman, Emory Oakes, Evgenia Pugacheva, Rachel
Szymanski, Daniel Te Kaat, Sheng Tibung, Nicholas Tong, Ali Uppal, Hou Wang, Niklas Westelius, Jilun Xing,
Yuan Zeng, Fan Zhang, and Qiaoqiao Zhang.
Joseph Procopio from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with support
from Michael Harrup and Christine Ebrahimzadeh and editorial assistance from Linda Kean, Lucy Scott Morales,
Lorraine Coffey, Gregg Forte, EEI Communications, and AGS (an RR Donnelley Company).
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 23, 2016. However, both projections and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive Directors or
to their national authorities.

xii

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

FOREWORD

W

hen I arrived at the International Monetary Fund about a year ago, our worries
focused on China’s growth prospects
amid domestic rebalancing, the struggles
of primary commodity exporters, and the timing
and impact of the Federal Reserve’s first interest rate
increase since 2006. Today, stable growth performance
has reduced near-term concerns about China, commodity prices have partially recovered, and the Federal
Reserve’s initial interest rate hike is behind us. Global
asset markets seem placid after these developments,
with advanced economy equity prices at high levels,
market-based volatility measures low, and renewed
capital inflows to emerging market economies. And our
baseline forecast sees improving world growth in the
years ahead. That projected improvement is driven by
emerging market and developing economies: as conditions in economies under stress gradually normalize,
China’s growth rate—while declining—remains high,
and the recovery is gaining traction elsewhere.
A closer look, however, gives cause for disquiet.
China’s growth stability owes much to macroeconomic
stimulus measures that slow needed adjustments in
both its real economy and financial sector. Commodity exporters still struggle with past investment
overhangs in extractive sectors, along with the challenges of fiscal adjustment and longer-term economic
diversification. And the Federal Reserve, despite an
ever-strengthening U.S. job market, has so far judged
a second interest rate rise to be too risky, several times
citing worrisome economic developments abroad.
Asset prices and emerging market capital inflows
are supported by ultra-low interest rates in advanced
economies that now seem poised to persist considerably
longer than they did last October. But while lower-forlonger interest rates have their upsides, they also reflect
difficult economic realities. Our expectations for future
global growth and productivity have fallen in light of
recent disappointing outcomes. Deflation pressures
persist. And policy uncertainty in the global economy,
as reflected in news-based measures, is elevated. The
current outlook remains subdued.
Political tensions have now made advanced economies a major locus of policy uncertainty. Most dramatically, the unexpected vote for Brexit on June 23 leaves
unclear the future shape of the United Kingdom’s

trade and financial relations with the remaining 27
European Union (EU) members, introducing political
and economic uncertainties that threaten to dampen
investment and hiring throughout Europe. Alongside
economic anxiety and other factors, the Brexit vote
reflects a resentment of cross-border migration that has
fueled nationalist sentiment in Europe and called into
question the way forward for EU integration. These
trends are exacerbated by the difficulties of absorbing a
large volume of refugees who have fled tragic events in
the Middle East. In general, centrifugal political forces
across the continent are making it harder to advance or
even maintain economic reforms. Similar tensions afflict
the U.S. political scene, where anti-immigrant and antitrade rhetoric have been prominent from the start of the
current presidential election round. Across the world,
protectionist trade measures have been on the rise.

Inside the World Economic Outlook
Not coincidentally, the chapters in this new World
Economic Outlook focus on several of these concerns.
After Chapter 1’s summary of the global outlook,
Chapter 2 analyzes the forces behind the recent growth
slowdown in the volume of international trade. A major
driver is slower growth in aggregate demand, particularly in investment, which is especially apt to generate
international trade flows in the form of capital goods
and intermediate inputs. But key roles are also played
by the slowing momentum of trade liberalization measures, the return of some protectionist measures, and
the (possibly related) retraction of global value chains.
Some of the trade slowdown may reflect a natural maturation of the tendencies that propelled trade growth in
the past, but it also seems likely that more worrisome
pressures are at work, and that these may in turn reduce
business dynamism and productivity growth.
The topic of Chapter 3 is the persistently low inflation in many economies and its relationship to falling
commodity prices, remaining output gaps, global excess
capacity, and possibly de-anchored inflation expectations.
The chapter finds that medium-term measures of inflation expectations generally remain reasonably close to central bank targets so far, but also shows that for countries
with policy interest rates at their effective lower bounds,
expectations of medium-term inflation have become more
sensitive to weaker-than-expected inflation outcomes. The
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

xiii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

danger is that expectations will diverge downward from
targets, raising real interest rates and thereby reducing
monetary policy effectiveness while dragging these economies into low inflation or deflation traps.
Finally, Chapter 4 focuses on two salient cross-border
economic spillovers that have driven recent global
economic and political developments: repercussions
from China’s slowing growth and migration. Spillovers
from China’s economy have increased markedly since
the mid-1990s, operating primarily through trade linkages and through the impact of China growth shocks
on global commodity prices. China’s growing global
role makes it all the more important for it to address its
internal imbalances so as to approach smoothly a more
sustainable consumption- and service-oriented growth
framework. Regarding migration, Chapter 4 finds that
both sending and receiving countries are impacted. Most
striking, perhaps, is the result that low-skilled and highskilled migrants alike contribute to positive long-term
productivity effects in receiving advanced economies.
Moreover, these effects raise per capita income broadly
across the income distribution. Demands to reduce
immigration would foreclose these income gains, while
accentuating the negative effects of workforce aging.

Policy Implications
A common thread connecting the chapters of this
World Economic Outlook is the still weak and precarious
nature of the global recovery, and the threats it faces.
Especially in a low-demand environment where key
policy interest rates are near effective lower bounds,
tepid growth risks becoming self-perpetuating as investment falls, productivity growth declines, labor markets become less dynamic, and human capital erodes.
Moreover, declining growth rates, along with increased
income inequality and concerns about the impact of
migration, contribute to political tensions that block
constructive economic reforms and threaten a rollback
of trade integration. These tensions will only worsen as
governments struggle more and more to make good on
social entitlements in the face of shrinking tax bases.
Some argue that current economic growth rates are
acceptable, being consistent with past historical averages, and that they appear even more favorable when
viewed in per capita terms. This argument ignores the
still sizable slack in many advanced economies and
the large number of emerging market and developing
economies in recession or with stagnant per capita
incomes. True, exogenous factors such as demographics likely weigh even on per capita growth, as
does China’s necessary rebalancing. But significant
opportunities for boosting jobs and incomes around
xiv

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

the world are being lost today through short-sighted
policy approaches.
What can be done to close remaining output gaps,
fight deflation, and lift potential output?
A comprehensive, three-pronged policy approach
that supports overstretched monetary policies with
fiscal policy (where fiscal space allows) and structural
reforms is essential. Even where fiscal space is limited,
there is scope to change the composition of spending
and revenues in a way that supports near-term growth
and future productive capacity. One cause of economic
uncertainty, however, is the fear that each of these three
tools faces economic or political constraints, which
could prevent policymakers from responding aggressively
to a new global slowdown. Policy space can be created,
however, if policy is based on consistent frameworks that
communicate to markets how instruments will be used
to attain objectives over time, exploiting their synergies
while safeguarding medium-term inflation goals and
fiscal sustainability. This is intranational policy coordination. International coordination can create even more
policy space, thanks to positive, mutually reinforcing
spillovers between different countries’ demand support
measures. Both intranational and international coordination make the whole greater than the sum of its parts.
The policy framework should include measures that
mitigate the adverse income-distribution effects of economic changes, whether due to technology, globalization
forces, or other developments. Educational investments
that equip people with adaptable skills, as well as better
social insurance mechanisms and appropriate income tax
regimes, can enhance risk sharing and resilience for all, not
just those with access to sophisticated financial markets.
It is vitally important to defend the prospects for
increasing trade integration. A global environment
hostile to trade will make it impossible for commodity exporters and low-income countries in general
to develop new export models and gradually narrow
income gaps with richer countries. It will also broadly
deter global productivity growth, the spread of knowledge and technology, and investment. In short, turning
back the clock on trade can only deepen and prolong
the world economy’s current doldrums.
The need for international cooperation extends to a
much broader set of international public-good problems—refugees, climate, infectious disease, security,
corporate taxation, and financial stability, for example.
An increasingly interdependent world will achieve more
growth and stability if governments engage cooperatively
around the many areas where their interests intersect.
Maurice Obstfeld
Economic Counsellor

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Global growth is projected to slow to 3.1 percent
in 2016 before recovering to 3.4 percent in 2017.
The forecast, revised down by 0.1 percentage point
for 2016 and 2017 relative to April, reflects a more
subdued outlook for advanced economies following
the June U.K. vote in favor of leaving the European
Union (Brexit) and weaker-than-expected growth in
the United States. These developments have put further
downward pressure on global interest rates, as monetary policy is now expected to remain accommodative
for longer. Although the market reaction to the Brexit
shock was reassuringly orderly, the ultimate impact
remains very unclear, as the fate of institutional and
trade arrangements between the United Kingdom and
the European Union is uncertain. Financial market
sentiment toward emerging market economies has
improved with expectations of lower interest rates in
advanced economies, reduced concern about China’s
near-term prospects following policy support to growth,
and some firming of commodity prices. But prospects
differ sharply across countries and regions, with emerging Asia in general and India in particular showing
robust growth and sub-Saharan Africa experiencing a
sharp slowdown. In advanced economies, a subdued
outlook subject to sizable uncertainty and downside
risks may fuel further political discontent, with antiintegration policy platforms gaining more traction.
Several emerging market and developing economies still
face daunting policy challenges in adjusting to weaker
commodity prices. These worrisome prospects make the
need for a broad-based policy response to raise growth
and manage vulnerabilities more urgent than ever.
The current outlook is shaped by a complex confluence of ongoing realignments, long-term trends,
and new shocks. These factors imply a generally
subdued baseline for growth, but also substantial
uncertainty about future economic prospects. The
main unforeseen development in recent months
was the U.K. vote in favor of leaving the European
Union. Brexit is very much an unfolding event—the
long-term shape of relations between the United
Kingdom and the European Union, and the extent

to which their mutual trade and financial flows
will be curtailed, will likely become clear only after
several years. Adding to the uncertainty is the impact
of the referendum results on political sentiment in
other EU members, as well as on global pressure to
adopt populist, inward-looking policies.
Important ongoing realignments—particularly
salient for emerging market and developing economies—include rebalancing in China and the macroeconomic and structural adjustment of commodity
exporters to a long-term decline in their terms of
trade. Slow-moving changes that are playing an
important role in the outlook for advanced economies (as well as for some emerging market economies) include demographic and labor-market trends,
but also an ill-understood protracted slowdown in
productivity, which is hampering income growth and
contributing to political discontent.
In the World Economic Outlook (WEO) baseline scenario, global growth is projected to decline to 3.1 percent in 2016, and to rebound next year to 3.4 percent.
The 2016 forecast reflects weaker-than-expected
U.S. activity in the first half of the year as well as
materialization of an important downside risk with the
Brexit vote. Although financial market reaction to the
result of the U.K. referendum has been contained, the
increase in economic, political, and institutional uncertainty and the likely reduction in trade and financial
flows between the United Kingdom and the rest of the
European Union over the medium term is expected to
have negative macroeconomic consequences, especially
in the United Kingdom. As a result, the 2016 growth
forecast for advanced economies has been marked
down to 1.6 percent.
Growth in emerging market and developing
economies is expected to strengthen slightly in 2016
to 4.2 percent after five consecutive years of decline,
accounting for over three-quarters of projected world
growth this year. However, the outlook for these
economies is uneven and generally weaker than in the
past. While external financing conditions have eased
with expectations of lower interest rates in advanced
economies, other factors are weighing on activity.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

xv

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

These include a slowdown in China, whose spillovers
are magnified by its lower reliance on import- and
resource-intensive investment; commodity exporters’
continued adjustment to lower revenues; spillovers
from persistently weak demand in advanced economies;
and domestic strife, political discord, and geopolitical
tensions in several countries. While growth in emerging
Asia and especially India continues to be resilient, the
largest economies in sub-Saharan Africa (Nigeria, South
Africa, Angola) are experiencing sharp slowdowns or
recessions as lower commodity prices interact with difficult domestic political and economic conditions. Brazil
and Russia continue to face challenging macroeconomic
conditions, but their outlook has strengthened somewhat relative to last April.
The recovery is projected to pick up in 2017 as the
outlook improves for emerging market and developing economies and the U.S. economy regains some
momentum, with a fading drag from inventories
and a recovery in investment. Although longer-term
prospects for advanced economies remain muted,
given demographic headwinds and weak productivity
growth, the forecast envisages a further strengthening
of growth in emerging market and developing economies over the medium term. But as noted in previous
WEOs, this forecast depends on a number of important assumptions:
• A gradual normalization of conditions in economies currently under stress, with a general pickup
in growth in commodity exporters, albeit to levels
more modest than in the past
• A gradual slowdown and rebalancing of China’s
economy with medium-term growth rates that—at
close to 6 percent—remain higher than the average
for emerging market and developing economies
• Resilient growth in other emerging market and
developing economies
Both economic and noneconomic factors threaten
to keep these assumptions from being realized and
imperil the baseline outlook more generally. In particular, some risks flagged in recent WEOs have become
more prominent in recent months. The first is political
discord and inward-looking policies. The Brexit vote and
the ongoing U.S. presidential election campaign have
highlighted a fraying consensus about the benefits of
cross-border economic integration. Concerns about
the impact of foreign competition on jobs and wages
in a context of weak growth have enhanced the appeal
of protectionist policy approaches, with potential

xvi

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

ramifications for global trade flows and integration
more broadly. Concerns about unequal (and widening)
income distribution are rising, fueled by weak income
growth as productivity dynamics remain disappointing.
Uncertainty about the evolution of these trends may
lead firms to defer investment and hiring decisions,
thus slowing near-term activity, while an inwardlooking policy shift could also stoke further crossborder political discord.
A second risk is stagnation in advanced economies.
As global growth remains sluggish, the prospect of
an extended shortfall in private demand leading to
permanently lower growth and low inflation becomes
ever more tangible, particularly in some advanced
economies where balance sheets remain impaired. At
the same time, a protracted period of weak inflation in
advanced economies risks unmooring inflation expectations, causing expected real interest rates to rise and
spending to decline, eventually feeding back to even
weaker overall growth and inflation.
Other risks flagged in previous WEOs remain
important potential influences on the outlook. China’s
ongoing adjustment and associated spillovers continue
to be pertinent, even as near-term sentiment regarding China has appeared to recover from the acute
anxiety at the start of the year. The economy’s transition away from reliance on investment, industry, and
exports in favor of greater dependence on consumption
and services could become bumpier than expected at
times, with important implications for commodity and
machinery exporters as well as for countries indirectly
exposed to China through financial contagion channels. That risk is heightened by the current short-term
growth-promoting measures on which China is relying,
as a still-rising credit-to-GDP ratio and lack of decisive
progress in addressing corporate debt and governance
concerns in state-owned enterprises raise the risk of
a disruptive adjustment. More generally, although
financial conditions in emerging markets have continued
to improve in recent months, underlying vulnerabilities
remain among some large emerging market economies. High corporate debt, declining profitability,
weak bank balance sheets—together with the need
to rebuild policy buffers, particularly in commodity
exporters—leave these economies still exposed to sudden shifts in investor confidence. A range of additional
noneconomic factors continues to influence the outlook
in various regions—the protracted effects of a drought
in eastern and southern Africa; civil war and domestic

Executive Summary

conflict in parts of the Middle East and Africa and
the tragic plight of refugees in neighboring countries
and in Europe; multiple acts of terror worldwide; and
the spread of the Zika virus in Latin America and the
Caribbean, the southern United States, and southeast
Asia. If these factors intensify, they could collectively
take a large toll on market sentiment, hurting demand
and activity.
Upside developments include the orderly repricing
in financial markets after the initial shock of the Brexit
vote; sustained improvements in the U.S. labor market;
and a modest recent uptick in commodity prices,
which should ease some of the pressure on commodity
exporters. These developments point to the possibility of a better-than-envisaged pickup in momentum,
which could be even stronger if countries adopt
comprehensive frameworks to lift actual and potential
output.
While the baseline forecast for the global economy
points to a pickup in growth over the rest of the
forecast horizon from its subdued pace this year, the
potential for setbacks to this outlook is high, as underscored by repeated growth markdowns in recent years.
Against this backdrop, policy priorities differ across
individual economies depending on the specific objectives of improving growth momentum, combating
deflation pressures, or building resilience. But a common theme is that urgent action relying on all policy
levers is needed to head off further growth disappointments and combat damaging perceptions that policies
are ineffective in boosting growth or that the rewards
accrue only to those at the higher end of the income
distribution.
In advanced economies, output gaps are still negative, wage pressures are generally muted, and the risk
of persistent low inflation (or deflation, in some cases)
has risen. Monetary policy therefore must remain
accommodative, relying on unconventional strategies as needed. But accommodative monetary policy
alone cannot lift demand sufficiently, and fiscal support—calibrated to the amount of space available and
oriented toward policies that protect the vulnerable
and lift medium-term growth prospects—therefore
remains essential for generating momentum and
avoiding a lasting downshift in medium-term inflation
expectations. In countries facing rising public debt and
social entitlement outlays, credible commitments to
medium-term consolidation can generate additional
space for near-term support. And fiscal policy should

concentrate outlays on uses that most strongly support demand and longer-term potential growth. More
broadly, accommodative macroeconomic policies must
be accompanied by structural reforms that can counteract waning potential growth—including efforts to
boost labor force participation, improve the matching
process in labor markets, and promote investment in
research and development and innovation. As discussed
in Chapter 3 of the April 2016 WEO, comprehensive
policies that combine demand support with reforms
targeting a country’s structural needs, anchored in
coherent and well-communicated policy frameworks,
can fire up both short-term activity and medium-term
potential output.
Across emerging market and developing economies, the
broad common policy objectives are continued convergence to higher incomes by reducing distortions in
product, labor, and capital markets and giving people
a better chance in life by investing wisely in education
and health care. These goals can only be realized in an
environment safe from financial vulnerability and the
risk of reversals. Economies with large and rising nonfinancial debt, unhedged foreign liabilities, or heavy
reliance on short-term borrowing to fund longer-term
investments must adopt stronger risk management
practices and contain currency and balance sheet
mismatches.
For countries hardest hit by the slump in commodity prices, adjustment to reestablish macroeconomic
stability is urgent. This implies fully allowing the
exchange rate to absorb pressures for countries not
relying on an exchange rate peg, tightening monetary
policy where needed to tackle sharp increases in inflation, and ensuring that needed fiscal consolidation is as
growth friendly as possible.
Low-income developing economies must rebuild fiscal
buffers while continuing to spend on critical capital
needs and social outlays, strengthen debt management,
and implement structural reforms—including in education—that pave the way for economic diversification
and higher productivity.
While essential at the country level, these policies
for all country groups would be even more effective if
adopted broadly throughout the world, with due attention to country-specific priorities.
With growth weak and policy space limited in many
countries, continued multilateral effort is required in
several areas to minimize risks to financial stability and
sustain global improvements in living standards. This

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

xvii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

effort must proceed simultaneously on a number of
fronts. Policymakers must address the backlash against
global trade by refocusing the discussion on the longterm benefits of economic integration and ensuring
that well-targeted social initiatives help those who are
adversely affected and facilitate, through retraining,
their absorption into expanding sectors. Effective bank-

xviii

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

ing resolution frameworks, both national and international, are vital, and emerging risks from nonbank
intermediaries must be addressed. A stronger global
safety net is more important than ever to protect economies with robust fundamentals that may nevertheless
be vulnerable to cross-border contagion and spillovers,
including strains that are not economic.

CHAPTER

1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Recent Developments and Prospects
The forces shaping the global outlook—both those
operating over the short term and those operating over
the long term—point to subdued growth for 2016
and a gradual recovery thereafter, as well as to downside risks. These forces include new shocks, such as
Brexit—the June 23, 2016, U.K. referendum result
in favor of leaving the European Union; ongoing
realignments, such as rebalancing in China and the
adjustment of commodity exporters to a protracted
decline in the terms of trade; and slow-moving trends,
such as demographics and the evolution of productivity growth; as well as noneconomic factors, such
as geopolitical and political uncertainty. The subdued
recovery also plays a role in explaining the weakness in
global trade (discussed in Chapter 2) and persistently
low inflation (discussed in Chapter 3).
Relative to the global outlook envisaged in the
April 2016 World Economic Outlook (WEO), the
main changes relate to the downward revision to
U.S. growth (mostly reflecting weaker-than-expected
growth in the second quarter of 2016), further confirmation that the economies of Brazil and Russia are
closer to exiting from recession, and the outcome of
the U.K. referendum. Brexit is an unfolding event—
the long-term arrangements in relations between the
United Kingdom and the European Union will be
uncertain for a protracted period of time. And the
vote is not only a symptom of fraying consensus on
the benefits of cross-border economic integration
amid weak growth, but could catalyze pressures for
inward-looking policies elsewhere as well.
On the positive side, beyond a sharp depreciation of
the pound, broader market reaction to the Brexit vote
has generally been contained, with equity valuations
and risk appetite recovering after an initial drop,
as discussed elsewhere in this chapter. Bank stocks,
however, remain under pressure, especially in countries
with more fragile banking systems. Based on preliminary readings, business and consumer sentiment were
generally resilient in July, immediately following the
referendum, except in the United Kingdom. Sentiment has improved regarding emerging market and

developing economies, reflecting reduced concerns
about China’s near-term prospects following policy
support for growth, mildly favorable macroeconomic
news from other emerging market economies in the
past few months, some recovery in commodity prices,
and expectations of lower interest rates in advanced
economies. But with very limited post-Brexit macroeconomic data so far, uncertainty about the impact of
Brexit on macroeconomic outcomes remains, especially
in Europe.
Growth is projected to pick up from 2017 onward,
almost entirely on account of developments in
emerging market and developing economies. This
reflects primarily two factors: the gradual normalization of macroeconomic conditions in several countries
experiencing deep recessions and the increasing weight
of fast-growing countries in this group in the world
economy (Box 1.1).

The World Economy in Recent Months
Global Activity Remains Sluggish
Based on preliminary data, global growth is
estimated at 2.9 percent in the first half of 2016,
slightly weaker than in the second half of 2015
and lower than projected in the April 2016 WEO.
Global industrial production remained subdued, but
has shown signs of a pickup in recent months, and
trade volumes retreated in the quarter through June
after several months of sustained recovery from the
trough of early 2015 (Figure 1.1). The recent weak
momentum is mostly a product of softer activity in
advanced economies.
•• The U.S. economy has lost momentum over the
past few quarters, and the expectation of a pickup
in the second quarter of 2016 has not been realized,
with growth estimated at 1.1 percent at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. Consumption growth (at
about 3.0 percent on average in the first half of the
year) has remained strong, supported by a firm labor
market and expanding payrolls, but continued weakness in nonresidential investment together with a
sizable drawdown of inventories has weighed on the
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (U.S. dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)

Difference from July
2016 WEO Update1
2016
2017
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.6
–0.3
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.5
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.1
–0.2
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
0.0

Difference from April
2016 WEO1
2016
2017
–0.1
–0.1
–0.3
–0.2
–0.8
–0.3
0.2
–0.1
0.2
–0.2
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
0.5
–0.1
0.0
0.7
–0.1
–1.1
–0.3
0.0
–0.1
–0.1

2015
3.2
2.1
2.6
2.0
1.5
1.3
0.8
3.2
0.5
2.2
1.1
2.0

Projections
2016
2017
3.1
3.4
1.6
1.8
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.3
0.8
0.9
3.1
2.2
0.5
0.6
1.8
1.1
1.2
1.9
2.0
2.3

4.0
–2.8
–3.7
–0.5
6.6
6.9
7.6
4.8
3.6
0.0
–3.8
2.5
2.3
3.5
3.4
2.7
1.3

4.2
–0.3
–0.8
0.9
6.5
6.6
7.6
4.8
3.3
–0.6
–3.3
2.1
3.4
1.2
1.4
–1.7
0.1

4.6
1.4
1.1
2.3
6.3
6.2
7.6
5.1
3.1
1.6
0.5
2.3
3.4
2.0
2.9
0.6
0.8

0.1
0.3
0.4
–0.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.2
–0.2
0.0
–0.4
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.0

0.0
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.3
0.1
0.0
–0.4
–0.5
–0.2

0.1
0.8
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.1
0.5
–0.3
0.3
0.0
–1.6
–4.0
–0.5

0.0
0.1
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.5
–0.3
–0.1
0.1
–1.1
–2.9
–0.4

2.3
4.6
2.1
2.6

1.9
3.7
3.2
2.4

1.7
4.9
3.2
2.8

0.0
–0.1
–0.1
–0.1

0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.0

0.1
–1.0
0.3
–0.1

–0.2
–0.6
–0.1
–0.1

2.6

2.3

3.8

–0.4

–0.1

–0.8

0.0

4.2
–0.6

2.4
2.3

3.9
4.1

–0.4
–0.4

–0.3
0.0

–1.0
–0.7

–0.2
0.4

3.6
1.3

1.8
2.9

3.5
3.6

–0.5
–0.2

–0.1
–0.2

–0.7
–0.9

0.0
–0.3

–47.2

–15.4

17.9

0.1

1.5

16.2

0.0

–17.5

–2.7

0.9

1.1

1.5

6.7

1.6

Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6

0.3
4.7

0.8
4.5

1.7
4.4

0.1
–0.1

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0

0.2
0.2

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On U.S. Dollar Deposits (six month)
On Euro Deposits (three month)
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)

0.5
0.0
0.1

1.0
–0.3
0.0

1.3
–0.4
–0.1

0.1
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.0
0.1

0.1
0.0
0.1

–0.2
0.0
0.2

Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during July 22–August 19, 2016. Economies are listed on the
basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted.
1Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2016 World Economic Outlook Update, and April 2016 World Economic Outlook forecasts.
2Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12
as a base year.
4Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

2

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Table 1.1 (continued)
Q4-over-Q47

Year-over-Year
2014
3.4
1.9
2.4
1.1
1.6
0.6
–0.3
1.4
0.0
3.1
2.5
2.8

2015
3.2
2.1
2.6
2.0
1.5
1.3
0.8
3.2
0.5
2.2
1.1
2.0

Projections
2016
2017
3.1
3.4
1.6
1.8
1.6
2.2
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.3
1.3
0.8
0.9
3.1
2.2
0.5
0.6
1.8
1.1
1.2
1.9
2.0
2.3

2014
3.2
1.9
2.5
1.2
1.6
0.6
–0.4
2.1
–0.9
3.5
2.4
2.7

2015
3.1
1.8
1.9
2.0
1.3
1.3
1.1
3.5
0.8
1.8
0.3
2.0

Projections
2016
2017
3.1
3.5
1.7
1.8
2.0
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
0.7
1.2
2.6
2.1
0.8
0.8
1.4
0.8
1.5
1.9
2.1
2.4

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commonwealth of Independent States
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
ASEAN-54
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

4.6
1.1
0.7
2.0
6.8
7.3
7.2
4.6
2.8
1.0
0.1
2.2
2.7
3.6
5.1
6.3
1.6

4.0
–2.8
–3.7
–0.5
6.6
6.9
7.6
4.8
3.6
0.0
–3.8
2.5
2.3
3.5
3.4
2.7
1.3

4.2
–0.3
–0.8
0.9
6.5
6.6
7.6
4.8
3.3
–0.6
–3.3
2.1
3.4
1.2
1.4
–1.7
0.1

4.6
1.4
1.1
2.3
6.3
6.2
7.6
5.1
3.1
1.6
0.5
2.3
3.4
2.0
2.9
0.6
0.8

4.4
–0.9
–0.2
...
6.6
7.0
7.1
4.9
2.9
0.3
–0.7
2.6
...
2.4
...
...
1.4

4.2
–3.3
–3.8
...
6.8
6.9
8.1
4.8
4.1
–1.2
–5.9
2.4
...
1.8
...
...
0.2

4.3
–0.3
–0.3
...
6.3
6.4
7.4
4.4
2.9
–0.4
–1.2
1.8
...
1.0
...
...
0.1

5.0
2.1
2.4
...
6.3
6.1
7.4
5.8
2.9
2.3
1.1
2.4
...
2.5
...
...
1.3

Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates

1.6
6.0
2.6
2.7

2.3
4.6
2.1
2.6

1.9
3.7
3.2
2.4

1.7
4.9
3.2
2.8

1.8
...
...
2.5

2.3
...
...
2.3

1.9
...
...
2.5

1.6
...
...
2.8

3.9

2.6

2.3

3.8

...

...

...

...

3.8
4.5

4.2
–0.6

2.4
2.3

3.9
4.1

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

3.8
3.5

3.6
1.3

1.8
2.9

3.5
3.6

...
...

...
...

...
...

...
...

–7.5

–47.2

–15.4

17.9

–28.7

–43.4

14.6

6.8

–4.0

–17.5

–2.7

0.9

–7.4

–19.1

6.8

–1.2

1.4
4.7

0.3
4.7

0.8
4.5

1.7
4.4

1.0
4.2

0.4
4.6

1.0
4.2

1.8
3.9

World Output
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Commodity Prices (U.S. dollars)
Oil5
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity export
weights)
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies6

London Interbank Offered Rate (percent)
On U.S. Dollar Deposits (six month)
0.3
0.5
1.0
1.3
...
...
...
...
On Euro Deposits (three month)
0.2
0.0
–0.3
–0.4
...
...
...
...
On Japanese Yen Deposits (six month)
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
...
...
...
...
5Simple average of prices of U.K. Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in U.S. dollars a barrel was $50.79 in
2015; the assumed price based on futures markets is $42.96 in 2016 and $50.64 in 2017.
6Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7For World Output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
For Emerging Market and Developing Economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 80 percent of annual emerging market
and developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

3

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.1. Global Activity Indicators
Global growth weakened slightly in the ﬁrst half of 2016, mostly due to softer
activity in advanced economies, while emerging market and developing economies
picked up modestly. Global trade contracted in the second quarter of 2016, while
industrial production remained subdued for the most part, but has risen in recent
months.
25 1. World Trade, Industrial Production, and Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving average; annualized percent change,
20
unless noted otherwise)
Manufacturing PMI (deviations from 50)
15
Industrial production
10
World trade volumes
5
0
–5
–10

2010

11

12

13

14 2. Manufacturing PMI
(Three-month moving
12
average; deviations
10
from 50) Advanced
8
economies1
Emerging market
6
economies2
4

14

15

Aug.
16

3. Industrial Production
(Three-month moving
average; annualized
percent change)
Advanced economies1
Emerging market economies2

24
20
16
12
8
4
0
–4

2
0
–2
–4

28

2010 11

12

13

14

15 Aug.
16

2010 11

12

13

14

–8
15 Jul.
16

GDP Growth
(Annualized semiannual percent change)
April 2016 WEO
4 4. Advanced Economies

October 2016 WEO
5. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

3

9
8
7
6

2

5
1
0
2010:
H1

4
12:
H1

14:
H1

16:
H1

17: 2010:
H1
H2

12:
H1

14:
H1

16:
H1

3
17:
H2

Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; Haver Analytics;
Markit Economics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: IP = industrial production; PMI = purchasing managers’ index.
1Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, euro area, Hong Kong SAR (IP only),
Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway (IP only), Singapore, Sweden (IP only),
Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China, United Kingdom, United States.
2Argentina (IP only), Brazil, Bulgaria (IP only), Chile (IP only), China, Colombia (IP
only), Hungary, India, Indonesia, Latvia (IP only), Lithuania (IP only), Malaysia (IP
only), Mexico, Pakistan (IP only), Peru (IP only), Philippines (IP only), Poland,
Romania (IP only), Russia, South Africa, Thailand (IP only), Turkey, Ukraine (IP only),
Venezuela (IP only).

4

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

headline growth number. The weakness in business
fixed investment appears to reflect the continued
(albeit moderating) decline in capital spending
in the energy sector, the impact of recent dollar
strength on investment in export-oriented industries, and possibly also the financial market volatility
and recession fears of late 2015 and early 2016.
Nonfarm labor productivity declined 0.6 percent at
a seasonally adjusted annualized rate in the second
quarter, the third consecutive negative reading.
•• Growth in the euro area declined to 1.2 percent at
a seasonally adjusted annualized rate in the second
quarter, after mild weather and consequent strong
construction activity helped boost growth in the first
quarter to 2.1 percent. Domestic demand, notably
investment, decelerated in some of the larger euro
area economies after successive quarters of stronger-than-expected growth. High-frequency data and
corporate survey indicators for July point to a muted
impact of the Brexit vote on confidence and activity
thus far.
•• In the United Kingdom, a strong start to the second
quarter lifted GDP growth to 2.4 percent at a
seasonally adjusted annualized rate (from 1.8 percent in the first quarter of 2016). A breakdown of
high-frequency data within the quarter suggests that
momentum had begun to weaken over May and
June leading up to the referendum. Survey indicators for July and August point to a sharp post-referendum retrenchment in manufacturing activity
followed by a rebound, while retail sales have held
up so far.
•• In Japan, growth decelerated in the second quarter
to 0.7 percent at a seasonally adjusted annualized
rate, from 2.1 percent in the first quarter. In part
this reflects payback after an unusually strong first
quarter, during which the outturn—particularly for
consumer spending—was driven in part by leapyear effects. In addition, weaker external demand
and corporate investment weighed on activity in
the second quarter.
•• Elsewhere, among advanced economies whose
prospects are closely linked to systemic economies,
momentum in Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region and Taiwan Province of China improved
in the second quarter as adverse financial and
economic spillovers from China abated after the turbulence at the start of the year. Growth in Canada,
by contrast, has been negatively affected by weaker-than-expected outcomes in the United States,

CHAPTER 1

compounding the setbacks stemming from one-off
events such as the wildfires in Alberta.
Despite subdued activity in advanced economies and
associated spillovers, emerging market and developing economies as a group recorded a slight pickup in
momentum over the first half of 2016, broadly in line
with the April 2016 WEO projection. Emerging Asia
continued to register strong growth, and the situation
improved slightly for stressed economies such as Brazil
and Russia. Many economies in the Middle East and
sub-Saharan Africa, however, continued to face challenging conditions.
•• In emerging Asia, growth in China in the first half
of the year stabilized close to the middle of the
authorities’ target range of 6½ –7 percent for 2016
on policy support and strong credit growth. Robust
consumption and a further rotation in activity from
industry to services indicate that rebalancing is progressing along the dimensions of internal demand
and supply-side structure. India’s economy continued to recover strongly, benefiting from a large
improvement in the terms of trade, effective policy
actions, and stronger external buffers, which have
helped boost sentiment.
•• In Latin America, Brazil’s economy remains in recession, but activity appears to be close to bottoming
out as the effects of past shocks—the decline in
commodity prices, the administered-price adjustments of 2015, and political uncertainty—wear off.
•• Russia’s economy shows signs of stabilization as it
is adjusting to the dual shock from oil prices and
sanctions, and financial conditions eased after bank
capital buffers were replenished with public funds.
Macroeconomic performance elsewhere in emerging
Europe was broadly stable, although the situation in
Turkey became more uncertain in the aftermath of
the attempted coup in July.
•• Activity weakened in sub-Saharan Africa, led by
Nigeria, where production was disrupted by shortages of foreign exchange, militant activity in the
Niger Delta, and electricity blackouts. Momentum
in South Africa was flat, despite the improvements
in the external environment—notably stabilization
in China. Elsewhere, resilience in Côte d’Ivoire,
Kenya, Senegal, and Tanzania partially offset generally softer activity across the region.
•• The Middle East continues to confront difficult challenges with subdued oil prices, the fallout from geopolitical tensions, and civil conflict in some countries.

Global Prospects and Policies

Inflation Remains Low
In 2015, consumer price inflation in advanced economies was, at 0.3 percent, the lowest it had been since
the global financial crisis. It edged up to about 0.5 percent in the first half of 2016 as the drag from oil prices
diminished (Figure 1.2). Core consumer price inflation
is higher than headline inflation but differs across
major advanced economies. It averaged slightly above
2 percent in the first half of the year in the United
States, which may reflect temporary factors or seasonality, while it was lower at about ¾ percent in the euro
area and Japan. Inflation has held steady in emerging
market and developing economies as exchange rates
remained broadly stable—or appreciated—in many
countries and the effects of past exchange rate depreciations began to fade.
A Partial Recovery in Commodity Prices
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index has
increased by 22 percent since February 2016—that is,
between the reference periods for the April 2016 and
the current WEO report (Figure 1.3). The strongest
price increases were for fuels, in particular for oil and
coal:
•• After hitting a 10-year low in January 2016, oil
prices rallied by 50 percent, to $45 in August,
mostly due to involuntary production outages that
brought balance to the oil market.
•• Natural gas prices are declining—the average price
for Europe, Japan, and the United States is down
by 6 percent since February 2016. The previous
decline in oil prices, abundant natural gas production in Russia, and weak demand in Asia (particularly in Japan) have contributed to that decline. In
the United States, natural gas prices have instead
edged higher on account of stronger demand from
the power sector, reflecting warmer-than-expected
weather.
•• Coal prices have rebounded, with the average of
Australian and South African prices 32 percent
higher than levels in February 2016.
Nonfuel commodity prices have also increased, with
metals and agricultural commodity prices rising by
12 percent and 9 percent, respectively.
•• Metal prices had been gradually declining because of
a slowdown in and a shift away from commodity-intensive investment in China, but the recent stimulus
has provided some support to prices.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.2. Global Inﬂation

Figure 1.3. Commodity and Oil Markets

Headline inﬂation inched up in advanced economies as the drag from lower
commodity prices faded. In emerging market and developing economies, headline
inﬂation has held steady as currencies remained broadly stable, or appreciated in
some cases.

Oil prices have rebounded from the 10-year low recorded in January 2016, due in
large part to involuntary production shutdowns. Metal prices increased modestly in
the ﬁrst half of 2016 with slightly stronger demand from emerging market and
developing economies, while food prices ticked up for most items, in large part due
to adverse weather shocks.

(Year-over-year percent change, unless noted otherwise)

18 1. Global Aggregates: Headline Inﬂation
16
Emerging market and developing
14
economies1
12
Advanced economies
World1
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
3. Commodity Prices
(Index, 2005 = 100)

8 2. Headline Inﬂation (Dashed
lines are 6- to 10-year
inﬂation expectations)
6

200 1. Real Commodity Price Indices
(Deﬂated using U.S. consumer price index; index, 2014 = 100)
160
120
80
APSP
Metal

40
0

17
300

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

Food

12

8 2. Global Activity and Oil Demand
(Year-over-year percent change)
6

13

14

15

16

World real GDP
Global industrial
production (right scale)

4

250
200
150

0

–2
–4

–6

Global oil demand (IEA)
2005 06

07

08

Food
Metal
Energy

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

2005 07

5 4. Nominal Unit Labor Cost and Compensation
(Quarterly percent change, annual rate)
4
3

09

11

13

15

34
32
30

Unit labor cost
Compensation

2005

2

100

1

80

0

60

–1

40

–2

20
Japan
Other Adv.
Euro area Other Adv. Eur.
Average, 2013–15

USA

Euro area Other Adv. Eur.
Japan
Other Adv.
2016:Q1

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Price
System; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: Other Adv. = other advanced economies; Other Adv. Eur. = other advanced
Europe; USA = United States.
1Excludes Venezuela.
2In Japan, the increase in inﬂation in 2014 reﬂects, to a large extent, the increase in
the consumption tax.

6

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

07

08

09

4. Oil Trade Balance, Fuel
Exporters (Percent of GDP;
average and 10th/90th
percentiles)

10

11

12

13

14

15 16:
Q2

5. Oil Trade Balance, Fuel
10
Importers (Percent of GDP;
average and 10th/90th
5
percentiles)
0
–5

0
–20

Fuel exporters

USA

06

2015
Fuel importers 2016
Advanced 2015
Asia 2016
Advanced 2015
Europe 2016
Emerging 2015
Asia 2016
Emerging 2015
Europe 2016
2015
LAC 2016

15

CIS energy 2015
exporters 2016

13

36

MENA oil 2015
exporters 2016

11

50
17

2016

09

100

–12
17:
Q4

40 3. OECD Oil Inventories
(Days of consumption)
38

SSA oil 2015
exporters 2016

–4
2005 07

12
6

2015

–2

18

2

2
United States
Euro area
Japan2

24

0

4

0

17

–10

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; International Energy Agency (IEA);
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD); and IMF staff
estimates.
Note: APSP = average petroleum spot price; CIS = Commonwealth of
Independent States; LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East
and North Africa; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.

CHAPTER 1

•• Among agricultural commodities, food prices rose
by 7 percent, with increases in most items, except
for a few such as corn and wheat. International
prices have not fully reflected the adverse weather
shock until recently, but El Niño and a potential
La Niña have started to take a toll on international food markets. In addition, Brazil—a big
food producer—has been experiencing a prolonged
drought. Wheat prices have come down with the
expectation of higher stocks following favorable
production in the United States, the European
Union, and Russia.

Figure 1.4. Real Effective Exchange Rate Changes,
March 2016–September 2016
(Percent)

Since March 2016 advanced economy currencies have remained mostly stable, or
appreciated modestly, with the exception of the British pound (which depreciated
sharply after the June 23 U.K. referendum vote to leave the European Union) and
the Japanese yen (which has appreciated close to 10 percent). Currencies of
commodity exporters have generally appreciated with the recovery in commodity
prices.
12 1. Advanced Economies 1
9
6
3

Exchange Rates and Capital Flows
Relative to the spring, the dollar and the euro
remain broadly unchanged in real effective terms
(Figure 1.4, first panel). The largest movements across
the currencies of advanced economies as of the end
of mid-September 2016 were the depreciation of the
pound following Brexit (about 9 percent since the
spring and over 10 percent since the June 23 referendum) and the appreciation of the Japanese yen (around
10 percent). Across emerging market currencies, the
Chinese renminbi continued to depreciate gradually,
by over 4 percent (Figure 1.4, panel 2). The currencies
of commodity exporters—including the Brazilian real,
the Russian ruble, and the South African rand—have
generally appreciated, reflecting some recovery in
commodity prices and a more general strengthening of
financial market sentiment vis-à-vis emerging market
economies, related in part to expectations of even
lower interest rates in advanced economies.1
Capital flows to emerging market economies have
recovered after the sharp downturn in the second half
of 2015 and a weak start to 2016, on the back of
the same factors supporting exchange rate valuations
(Figure 1.5). In particular, purchases of shares in funds
specializing in emerging market portfolio instruments
have picked up (Figure 1.5, panel 1). Data from the
few countries that have released full balance of payments data for the second quarter confirm an increase
in capital inflows, especially in portfolio instruments.
China has continued to experience capital outflows
and some loss in foreign exchange reserves, but at
1Exceptions include the Mexican peso, which has weakened
in recent weeks on U.S. electoral uncertainty, and especially the
Nigerian naira, which depreciated sharply after the central bank
initiated greater flexibility in the exchange rate in June.

Global Prospects and Policies

Jun. 22, 2016, relative to Mar. 2016
Aug. 2016 relative to Jun. 22, 2016
Latest relative to Mar. 2016

0
–3
–6
–9
–12

20
15
10

GBR SWE SGP AUS EA CHE USA CAN TWN KOR NOR NZL JPN
2. Emerging Market Economies1
Jun. 22, 2016, relative to Mar. 2016
Aug. 2016 relative to Jun. 22, 2016
Latest relative to Mar. 2016

5
0
–5
–10

MEX CHN PHL MYS THA POL IDN PER TUR CHL HUN IND COL ZAF RUS BRA

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: EA = euro area. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1Latest data available are for September 16, 2016.

a much more modest pace than in the second half
of 2015 and early 2016.
Monetary Policy and Financial Conditions
Asset prices and risk sentiment have generally
recovered after the declines in the aftermath of the
U.K. referendum (Figure 1.6). Equity prices reached
record highs in the United States in August and
picked up in other advanced economies as well. A
notable exception are bank stocks, reflecting expectations of weakened future bank profitability, as interest
rates are now expected to stay very low even longer,
as well as balance sheet concerns in some countries
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

7

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.5. Emerging Market Economies: Capital Flows
Following a large decline in the second half of 2015 and early 2016, capital ﬂows to
emerging markets have recovered since February amid a growing sense in ﬁnancial
markets that advanced economy central banks will maintain accommodative
monetary policy for even longer, the ﬁrming of commodity prices, and signs of
stabilization in key emerging markets.
40 1. Net Flows in Emerging Market Funds
(Billions of U.S. dollars)
30
May 22,
20
2013
10
0
–10
1st ECB
Bond
Greek Irish
–20
LTROs
Equity
crisis crisis
–30
EM-VXY
–40
2010
11
12
13
14
15
15 2. Capital Inﬂows
(Percent of GDP)
12
9

Emerging Europe
Latin America
Saudi Arabia

Aug.
16

Emerging Asia excluding China
China
Total

6
3
0
–3
–6

2007

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15 16:
Q1

15 3. Capital Outﬂows Excluding Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
12
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
9
Latin America
China
Saudi Arabia
Total
6
3
0
–3
–6

2007

08

09

10

11

15 4. Change in Reserves
(Percent of GDP)
Emerging Europe
12
Latin America
9
Saudi Arabia
6

12

13

14

15 16:
Q1

Emerging Asia excluding China
China
Total

3
0
–3
–6

2007

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15 16:
Q1

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; EPFR Global; Haver Analytics; IMF, International
Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Capital inﬂows are net purchases of domestic assets by nonresidents. Capital
outﬂows are net purchases of foreign assets by domestic residents. Emerging Asia
excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand;
emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia, and Turkey; Latin America
comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. ECB = European Central Bank;
EM-VXY = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Volatility Index; LTROs = longer-term
reﬁnancing operations.

8

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

with more vulnerable banking systems, such as Italy
and Portugal.
In response to persistently weak inflation and lackluster data on economic activity, markets expect central
banks in major advanced economies to remain dovish
for longer than previously thought (Figure 1.6, panels
1 and 2). In particular, markets now expect only one
further rate increase in the United States during 2016.
The shift in expectations was particularly notable in
the United Kingdom, where the Bank of England cut
the policy rate, boosted quantitative easing, and undertook a number of other initiatives to support sentiment following the referendum. Term premiums have
also compressed further, with long-term interest rates
in advanced economies declining again (Figure 1.6,
panel 3). As of late August, yields on 10-year U.S. and
German government bonds had declined by 25 to 30
basis points since March, while the yields on U.K.
10-year gilts had declined by 90 basis points. Yields
have increased modestly in September.
A large stock of advanced economy sovereign
bonds is now trading at negative yields, as discussed
in the October 2016 Global Financial Stability Report
(GFSR). Meanwhile, credit to nonfinancial firms and
households continues to expand (albeit at a decelerating pace) in the United States, and in the euro area as
a whole (Figure 1.7).
Sentiment toward emerging market economies has
generally improved, with a compression in spreads,
declining long-term real interest rates, and a recovery
in equity valuations (Figures 1.8 and 1.9). A number of
emerging markets have eased monetary policy rates since
the spring, including several economies in Asia where
inflation has been muted (notably Indonesia and Malaysia) as well as Russia and Turkey. Exceptions to this
trend are Mexico, where the policy rate was raised by 50
basis points after the exchange rate came under pressure
immediately following the Brexit vote, and Colombia
and South Africa, where policy rates were raised in order
to keep inflation expectations around target.

Forces Weighing on the Outlook
Economic growth in recent years has fallen short of
expectations in both advanced and emerging market
economies. As the world economy moves further away
from the global financial crisis, the factors affecting
global economic performance are becoming more
complex. They reflect a combination of global forces—
demographic trends, a persistent decline in produc-

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.6. Advanced Economies: Monetary and Financial
Market Conditions

Figure 1.7. Advanced Economies: Credit, House Prices, and
Balance Sheets

Markets expect advanced economy central banks to maintain low rates for even
longer as economic activity has stayed sluggish and inﬂation pressures remain
muted. Financial market sentiment has generally recovered after the initial short-lived
negative reaction to the June 23 U.K. referendum vote to leave the European Union.

Credit to nonﬁnancial ﬁrms and households continues to grow in the United States
and the euro area as a whole. Household net worth has generally continued to
improve as a share of disposable income in Japan and the euro area, while
stabilizing in the United States.

(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

4.0 1. U.S. Policy Rate
Expectations1
3.5
Sep. 16, 2013
3.0
Sep. 16, 2014
Sep. 16, 2015
2.5
Sep. 16, 2016
2.0

2. Policy Rate Expectations 2 3.0
(Percent; dashed lines
2.5
are from the April 2016
WEO)
2.0
United States
1.5
Euro area
United Kingdom
1.0

1.5

0.5

1.0

0.0

0.5
0.0

2013 14 15 16 17 18 Aug.
19
3. Key Interest Rates 3
U.S. average 30-year
ﬁxed-rate mortgage

7
6
5
4
3

U.S.

2

Germany

1 Japan
0
–1
2007

09

11

13

15 Sep.
16

200 5. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100; national
currency)
160
MSCI Emerging Market
DJ Euro Stoxx
120

2015

16

17

18

–0.5
Sep.
19

4. Central Bank Total Assets 4 100
(Percent of 2008 GDP)
90
80
Federal Reserve
70
ECB
60
Bank of Japan
50
40
30
20
10
0
2007 09
11
13
15 Sep.
16
6. Price-to-Earnings

Ratios5

U.S.
Japan
Germany
Italy

40
35

40

25

0
2007

15
10
S&P 500
TOPIX
09

5
11

13

15 Sep. 2007
16

09

11

13

15

2. Household Net Worth
950
(Percent of household
gross disposable income) 850
750

United States
Euro area

10

650

5

550

0
–5
–10
2006

United States
Japan2

Italy
Spain
08

10

12

14

160 3. Household Debt
(Percent of household
gross disposable income)
140

Euro area

350
16: 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16:
Q2
Q2
4. Real House Price Indices
(Index, 2000 = 100)
AEs experiencing upward
pressure4

120
Euro area
100
80

United States
Euro area3
Japan

450

United States

200
180
160
140
120
100
80

Japan

60
60
2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16: 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12 1416:
Q2
Q1

30
20

80

30 1. Nonﬁnancial Firm and
Household Credit Growth1
25
(Year-over-year percent
change)
20

0
15 Sep.
16

Sources: Bank of England; Bank of Spain; Bloomberg L.P.; European Central Bank
(ECB); Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;
and IMF staff calculations.
1Flow-of-funds data are used for the euro area, Spain, and the United States. Italian
bank loans to Italian residents are corrected for securitizations.
2Interpolated from annual net worth as a percentage of disposable income.
3Includes subsector employers (including self-employed workers).
4Upward-pressure countries are those with a residential real estate vulnerability
index above the median for advanced economies (AEs): Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, France, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Korea, Luxembourg, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.

Sources: Bank of Spain; Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; Thomson Reuters
Datastream; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: DJ = Dow Jones; ECB = European Central Bank; MSCI = Morgan Stanley
Capital International; S&P = Standard & Poor’s; TOPIX = Tokyo Stock Price Index;
WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures.
2
Expectations are based on the federal funds rate futures for the United States,
the sterling overnight interbank average rate for the United Kingdom, and the euro
interbank offered forward rate for the euro area. Current data are for September 16,
2016; April 2016 WEO data are for March 24, 2016.
3
Interest rates are 10-year government bond yields, unless noted otherwise. Data
are through September 16, 2016.
4
Data are through September 16, 2016. ECB calculations are based on the
Eurosystem’s weekly ﬁnancial statement.
5
Data are through September 16, 2016.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

9

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.8. Emerging Market Economies: Interest Rates
Financial conditions in emerging market economies have eased since February
with expectations of a more persistent dovish monetary policy stance in
advanced economies, an uptick in commodity prices, and signs of stabilization
in emerging market economies currently in recession. Sovereign yields have
declined and spreads have narrowed.
Emerging Europe
Emerging Asia excluding China
14
12

China
Latin America

1. Policy Rate
(Percent)

Figure 1.9. Emerging Market Economies: Equity Markets and
Credit
Equity prices have generally ﬁrmed up in recent months, reﬂecting improvements
in the operating environment for corporates in emerging market economies with
the pickup in commodity prices and lower borrowing costs. Vulnerabilities,
however, continue to accumulate in some cases as the credit -to-GDP ratio remains
on an upward path.
200 1. Equity Markets
(Index, 2007 = 100)
180
Emerging Asia
160
excluding China
140

10
8

120

6

100

4

80
2010

11

12

13

14

15

2. Real Policy Rates1
( Percent)

10
8

Aug.
16

February 2016
August 2016
February 2016 average
August 2016 average

6
4
2

60

Emerging Europe

40

2010

40

2.

BRA CHL CHN COL IDN IND KOR MEX MYS PER PHL POL RUS THA TUR ZAF
3. Ten-Year Government Bond Yields2
(Percent)

14

12

BRA
IND

30

16

11

China
13

14

15

Aug.
16

Real Credit Growth1
(Year-over-year percent change)

0
–2

Latin America

12
10

3.

CHN
MEX

COL
MYS
TUR

IDN
RUS

40
30

20

20

10

10

0

0

–10

8
6

2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 Jul.
16

–10
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 Jun.
16

Credit-to-GDP Ratio1
(Percent)

4
2

2010

600
500

11

12

4. EMBI Sovereign Spreads
(Basis points)

13

14

15

2

Sep.
16

85 4.

BRA
IDN
RUS

75

160 5.

COL
IND
TUR

150

65

140

400

55

130

300

45

120

200

35

110

100

25

100

0

2010

11

12

13

14

15

Sep.
16

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Emerging Asia excluding China comprises India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand; emerging Europe comprises Poland, Romania, Russia,
and Turkey; Latin America comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru.
EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index. Data labels in the ﬁgure use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Deﬂated by two-year-ahead World Economic Outlook inﬂation projections.
2
Data are through September 16, 2016.

10

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

15
2006

08

10

12

14

16:
Q2

90
2006 08

MEX (right scale)
CHN
MYS

30
25
20
15
10
5

10

12

0
14 16:
Q2

Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, International Financial Statistics
(IFS) database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.
1Credit is other depository corporations’ claims on the private sector (from IFS),
except in the case of Brazil, for which private sector credit is from the Monetary
Policy and Financial System Credit Operations published by Banco Central do Brasil.

CHAPTER 1

tivity growth, the adjustment to lower commodity
prices—and shocks driven by domestic and regional
factors. These are discussed in turn for advanced and
emerging market and developing economies.

Advanced Economies
Advanced economies were at the epicenter of the
global financial crisis. Eight years after the collapse
of Lehman Brothers, significant progress has been
made in repairing the macroeconomic damage from
the crisis. But the progress is uneven, and the crisis
scars still quite visible, especially in some countries.
The first panel of Figure 1.10 documents deviations of
main macroeconomic aggregates from their precrisis
trends (based on the 1996–2005 period) and precrisis
levels. For selected euro area countries more severely
affected by the crisis, GDP and especially domestic
demand and investment remain in 2016 well below
their precrisis levels, and even more distant from their
precrisis trends. As noted in the October 2016 GFSR,
many banks in the euro area continue to struggle with
a high volume of impaired assets, which has potentially
held back lending and suppressed investment. In other
advanced economies demand, GDP, and investment
are generally above precrisis levels, but still well below
precrisis trends.
Relative to the depth of the crisis, progress is more
visible in output gaps (Figure 1.10, panel 2). Output
gaps remain negative virtually across the board, a clear
symptom of weak global demand, but economic slack
has declined substantially since its postcrisis peak.2 The
extent of progress—and of cross-country heterogeneity—is also evident in the behavior of unemployment,
which has declined sizably since its peak but remains
higher than its precrisis level in most countries. For the
aggregate of advanced economies, the unemployment
rate is less than 1 percentage point above its 2007
level. In some countries (such as the United States) the
decline in unemployment to precrisis levels somewhat
overstates the recovery in employment, given the
decline in labor force participation. This has not, however, been the case in other advanced economies, where
in many cases participation rates are above precrisis
levels (Figure 1.10, panel 4).
2Downward revisions to potential growth and reassessment of
precrisis potential output imply estimated negative output gaps that
are much smaller in absolute terms than a comparison of pre- and
postcrisis growth outcomes would suggest.

Global Prospects and Policies

This uneven progress in macroeconomic repair
across advanced economies is overlaid on underlying trends related to population aging and weaker
productivity growth. The combination of these
deeper factors may have contributed to diminished
expectations of future potential output growth and
profitability and to weak current demand and a lower
equilibrium real interest rate. Lower equilibrium
rates, in turn, limit the extent to which low policy
rates can stimulate demand.
Other factors have also played a role in shaping
prospects for advanced economies. One example is
the slowdown and rebalancing in China, discussed
further below and in Chapter 4, which implies more
modest growth in demand for advanced economies’
exports. This slowdown, together with the weakening
in the growth rate of global trade discussed in Chapter
2, had a notable impact on prospects for advanced
Asian economies (Hong Kong SAR, Korea, Singapore,
Taiwan Province of China) that are very open and have
strong trade ties to China. Also at play is the decline in
commodity prices, which, as discussed more extensively in Chapter 1 of the April 2016 WEO, implies
windfall gains for most advanced economies but sizable
losses in disposable income for commodity exporters
such as Australia, Canada, and Norway.
Demographic Trends and Migration
With low fertility rates, population growth in
advanced economies has declined over the past decade
and is projected to decline further over the next five
years and beyond (Figure 1.11, panel 1).3 Slowing
population growth has been accompanied by aging—
the working-age population (between the ages of 15
and 64) is projected to decline over the next five years
(Figure 1.11, panel 2). These trends are common to
“old” advanced economies (considered advanced since
at least the mid-1990s) but also to “new” advanced
economies,4 which are actually experiencing a faster
and sharper demographic transition. In addition, the
share of workers ages 55 to 64 has increased sizably
in advanced economies over the past two decades
(Figure 1.11, panel 3). Population aging is set to
increase pressure on pension and health care systems
3The

decline has been more moderate than demographic
projections suggested a decade ago, given the strong increase in
immigration.
4These include the Baltic countries (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania),
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hong Kong S.A.R., Israel, Korea,
Macao S.A.R., Puerto Rico, San Marino, Singapore, the Slovak
Republic, and Slovenia.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

11

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.10. Domestic Demand, Output Gap, Unemployment, and Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies
In advanced economies, uneven progress has been made in repairing the macroeconomic damage from the global ﬁnancial crisis. Domestic demand and
investment are still below precrisis levels in some euro area countries. Economic slack and unemployment rates have fallen from their postcrisis peaks, but
remain high in a few cases.
1. Deviation from Precrisis Trend and Level1
(Colored bars show percentage difference from precrisis trend; black squares
show percentage differences from 2007 levels)

40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50

Investment
Greece, Italy,
Portugal, Spain

Domestic Demand

GDP

Japan

Asian AEs

Other AEs

2. Output Gap2
(Percent of Potential Output)

2
0
–2
–4
–6

2016
Maximum output gap (2008–16)

–8
–10
–12

30
25

BAL

GRC

JPN

ESP

PRT

IRL

TWN

USA

ITA

DEU

CAN

SCN

GBR

FRA

NLD

KOR

BEL

AUS

CHE

3. Unemployment Rate2
(Percent of the Labor Force)
Peak unemployment rate (2008–16)
2007
2016

20
15
10
5
0
85
80

GRC

ESP

BAL

PRT

IRL

ITA

FRA

4. Labor Force Participation Rate2
(Percent of the Population Aged 16-64)

USA

BEL

CAN

GBR

DEU

SCN

NLD

AUS

TWN

JPN

KOR

CHE

CAN

SCN

CHE

2015
2007

75
70
65
60
55
50

ITA

KOR

GRC

BEL

FRA

BAL

IRL

ESP

JPN

PRT

USA

DEU

AUS

GBR

NLD

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development labor statistics; and IMF staff estimates.
Investment, domestic demand, and GDP are in real terms. For all countries except Japan, precrisis trends are linear regression trends ﬁtted for each variable
using data for 1996–2005. For Japan, trends are ﬁtted for 2001–05 given the sharp drop in investment in 1997–98. Asian AEs = Australia, Hong Kong SAR,
Korea, Macao SAR, New Zealand, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China; Other AEs = Austria, Belgium, Canada, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, San Marino, Slovak Republic, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
2
BAL = Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania; SCN = Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden. Other labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1

12

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

and worsen debt dynamics, especially as the workforce
starts to shrink.
Migration from emerging market and developing
economies over the past few decades has alleviated the
impact of aging on the labor force in advanced economies, as discussed in more detail in Chapter 4. The
share of migrants in the advanced-economy population
almost doubled from 6 to 11 percent between 1990
and 2015. As the majority of migrants tend to be of
working age, migration contributed about half of the
increase in the working-age population between 1990
and 2010.
Receiving migrants, however, also creates challenges
for advanced economies, especially in a context of
weak economic growth. Concerns about the impact
on wages and possible displacement of native workers
and short-term fiscal costs can potentially add to social
tensions. These concerns can in turn spur a political
backlash, as demonstrated by the current U.S. presidential election campaign and the campaign preceding
the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom. However,
once integrated into the labor force, migrants tend
to benefit recipient economies. Previous studies find
positive long-term effects of immigration on per capita
income and labor productivity and little impact on
the employment rates and wages of native workers. A
number of studies do, however, find negative effects on
lower-wage groups. Immigrants can help alleviate the
fiscal challenges of aging societies by reducing dependency ratios (and accordingly, the burden of health
care and social security spending), even if they weigh
on fiscal balances in the short run.
More recently, the civil war in Syria and unrest
throughout the Middle East have led to a resurgence
of refugees in advanced economies, particularly in
Europe, boosting the refugees’ share in global migration flows to about 50 percent in 2014–15. Efficient and swift integration of refugees into the local
workforce will be crucial for unlocking the potential
net benefits of these inflows in recipient economies.
Gainful employment opportunities for refugees would
also help reduce potential social tensions and meet
the humanitarian challenge of absorbing traumatized
populations.
Weak Productivity Growth and Low Interest Rates
A second important trend—with much more
uncertainty surrounding its causes and likely persistence—is weak productivity growth. For instance,
the October 2015 WEO documented that labor

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.11. Demographics
The growth rates of total population and of the working-age population have
declined, notably in advanced economies. The share of older workers has been
on a steady upward trend in advanced economies for close to two decades. A
similar pattern has formed in emerging market and developing economies in
the past 10 years, although the share of older workers remains below that in
advanced economies.
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

1. Population Growth1
(Percent)
1995–2004
2005–15
2016–21

0.5
0.0
–0.5

3.0
2.5

"Old" AEs

"New" AEs

EMs excluding
China

China

LIDCs

2. Working-Age Population Growth1
(Percent)

2.0

1995–2004
2005–15
2016–21

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5

"Old" AEs

"New" AEs

EMs excluding
China

25 3. Share of Workers Aged
55–64 in Advanced
Economies2
20
(Percent)
15

China

LIDCs

4. Share of Workers Aged
55–64 in Emerging
Market Economies3
(Percent)

20
15
10

10
Median
Interquartile range

5
0
1995

25

2000

05

10

Median
Interquartile range
15

1995

2000

05

10

5
0
15

Sources: United Nations Population and Development database; and IMF staff
estimates.
Note: Calculations were performed using a weighted average based on population
shares; LIDCs = low-income developing countries.
1
Working-age population is deﬁned here as the number of people aged between 15
and 64. "Old" AEs = countries considered advanced economies in 1996, comprising
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States. "New"
AEs = Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hong Kong SAR, Israel, Korea, Latvia,
Lithuania, Macao SAR, Malta, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia.
2
Advanced Economies (AEs) = Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
United Kingdom, United States.
3
Emerging Market Economies (EMs) = Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Turkey.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

13

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.12. Advanced Economies: Growth, Investment, and
Employment in Recent WEO Vintages
In advanced economies, GDP and investment have in recent years grown
more slowly than projected, whereas employment has grown faster, pointing
to weaker-than-expected labor productivity growth. Persistent weakness in
productivity growth has contributed to lower estimates of potential growth.
Long-term interest rates are also expected to be lower than previously
projected, reﬂecting a possible decline in the real interest rate and weaker
inﬂation forecasts.
5 1. Employment, Fixed Investment, GDP
(Percent; average growth rate for 2014–16)1

GDP
Investment
Employment

4
3
2
1
0

Oct. 2014

Oct. 2015

Oct. 2016

2. Potential Growth
(Percent; average growth rates)1

2.5

2010–15
2016–21

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

5

Oct. 2014

Oct. 2015

Oct. 2016

3. WEO Long-Term Nominal Interest Rate Forecasts2
(Percent)

4
3
2
1

Oct. 2014
Apr. 2016

0
2005

07

Apr. 2015
Oct. 2016
09

11

Oct. 2015

13

15

17

19

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1
Simple averages of annual growth rates calculated for each respective World
Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast vintage.
2
Weighted average of long-term nominal interest rates for advanced economies
using a three-year moving average of GDP in U.S. dollars as weights.

21

productivity growth for the 2008–14 period had been
below precrisis trends for all but one of a sample of
some 30 advanced economies. The causes for the productivity slowdown remain uncertain. It may partly
reflect crisis legacies and prolonged weak investment,
as well as the exhaustion of productivity gains from
the information and communications technology
revolution, as discussed in detail by Fernald (2015)
and Gordon (2015) for the United States. Productivity measurement issues are severe for some parts
of the economy, but recent research suggests that
they are unlikely to account for a sizable part of the
slowdown (Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf 2016;
Syverson 2016).
Disappointing productivity growth was a main
factor behind what proved to be overoptimism in
growth forecasts for advanced economies in the
period after the crisis.5 These forecasts generally
projected productivity growth to return to rates close
to those prevailing before the crisis. Even though
projections for output and productivity growth
have been gradually revised downward since 2011,
growth in advanced economies has continued to
disappoint even relative to the diminished forecasts.
For instance, during 2014–16 it has been weaker
than projected in the October 2014 WEO (about
0.4 percentage point a year) and subsequent WEOs
(Figure 1.12, panel 1, blue bars), despite the sizable
favorable terms-of-trade shock associated with the
decline in commodity prices. The weakness in growth
relative to past forecasts, which is common across
advanced economies and regions, was accompanied
by fixed investment falling short of expectations,
especially in the United States, commodity exporters,
and advanced Asian economies (panel 1, maroon
bars). In contrast, employment growth (panel 1, yellow bars) has generally been stronger than expected
(almost ½ percentage point), and unemployment
in many countries is lower than predicted in earlier
forecasts. These findings point again to weaker labor
productivity growth—and the lion’s share of the
downward revisions to labor productivity growth
estimates reflects lower-than-expected growth in total
factor productivity.
The protracted weakness in total factor productivity growth has led to further downward revisions to
potential growth over the medium term (Figure 1.12,
5Overoptimism in postcrisis growth forecasts was discussed in Box
1.2 of the October 2014 WEO.

14

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

panel 2), which compound the decline due to the
demographic factors highlighted earlier in the chapter. Both demographics and expectations of lower
future growth in productivity (and hence disposable
income) are putting downward pressure on investment rates today, as lower investment is required to
maintain a stable capital-output ratio. But feedback
mechanisms may be at play as well—expectations
of weak future demand growth that hinder investment can take a toll on future potential output both
directly (through lower installed productive capacity)
and indirectly (through weaker total factor productivity growth, to the extent that new technologies are
embodied in capital).
Another salient feature of the change in the
outlook for advanced economies is the very sharp
decline in the levels and expected path of policy rates
(Figure 1.6, panels 1 and 2) and especially long-term
interest rates (Figure 1.12, panel 3). As discussed
further in the October 2016 GFSR, the decline in
long-term interest rates reflects both expectations of
lower future short-term rates and a further compression in the term premium (Hördahl, Sobrun, and
Turner 2016). Inflation forecasts have also come
down, as discussed further in Chapter 3; however,
the lion’s share of the decline in interest rates reflects
a decline in real rates. Estimates of the natural rate
of interest—defined as the interest rate at which the
economy would operate at full employment without
inflationary pressures—have declined substantially
(see, for instance, Laubach and Williams 2015; and
Pescatori and Turunen 2015).
On a conceptual note, a persistent decline in productivity growth reduces the rate of return on capital
and results in a lower real interest rate. As discussed in
Chapter 3 of the April 2014 WEO, lower long-term
interest rates are driven in part by demographic factors
(since demand for investment falls as growth in the
workforce declines) and an increase in desired saving
following the global financial crisis. An increase in
demand for safe assets is an additional factor putting
downward pressure on long-term government bond
yields. This increase is driven by higher risk aversion in
the wake of the global financial crisis, in part related to
financial regulatory changes, central bank purchases of
long-term government bonds, and increased demand
for safe fixed-income assets stemming from demographic factors. While there is uncertainty regarding
the evolution of some of these factors, those related
to demographics and arguably to financial regulation

Global Prospects and Policies

are likely to be very persistent, which implies that the
natural rate of interest may well stay compressed over
the medium term.
An implication of the decline in the natural interest
rate is that the extent of monetary accommodation
provided by record-low policy rates may actually be
lower than previously thought. To the extent that
the decline is persistent, this would have significant
bearing on the stabilization role of monetary policy
and on appropriate monetary policy frameworks more
generally.6

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The growth rates of emerging market and developing economies have been even more varied than those
of advanced economies, and prospects remain diverse
across countries and regions. Indeed, while fast growth
in countries such as China and India has sustained
global growth, deep recessions in a handful of emerging market and developing economies have implied a
particularly strong drag on global activity over 2015
and 2016 (see Box 1.1). Factors that have shaped the
growth rates of this country group include the generalized slowdown in advanced economies, discussed
earlier in this section; rebalancing in China; the adjustment to lower commodity prices; an uncertain external
environment, with sizable changes in risk sentiment
over time; and geopolitical tension and strife in several
countries and regions. Longer-term issues include an
important demographic transition, especially in emerging market economies, as well as prospects for export
diversification and convergence.
The Rebalancing in China and Its Cross-Border
Implications
China’s transition to a more consumption- and
service-based economy continues to influence other
emerging market economies, notably commodity
producers and countries exposed to China’s manufacturing sector. As previously noted (see, for example,
the IMF’s 2016 Asia and Pacific Regional Economic
Outlook), spillovers to global trade and growth from
China’s rebalancing and gradual slowdown have been
significant—not surprising given that as of 2015
China’s GDP at market exchange rates exceeded
the aggregate GDP of the next 12 largest emerging market and developing economies combined.
6See

Williams 2016 for a recent discussion.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

But developments in China increasingly affect a
wider range of emerging market economies through
financial sentiment and cross-border contagion (as
explored in detail in the Spillover Chapter in this
report). As seen in the emerging market sell-off episodes of August 2015 and January 2016, the spikes
in risk aversion vis-à-vis emerging markets coincided
with policy-induced shifts in China’s exchange rate
that raised questions for investors about China’s
policy objectives and the underlying strength of its
economy. As a corollary, greater clarity on policy
objectives and more transparent communication by
key policymakers in China in recent months have
helped stabilize near-term sentiment regarding China
and, by extension, toward emerging markets exposed
to China. Nevertheless, the medium-term outlook for
China remains clouded by the high stock of corporate debt—a large fraction of which is considered
at risk (see the analysis in the April 2016 GFSR).
And vulnerabilities continue to accumulate with the
economy’s rising dependence on credit, which complicates the difficult task of rebalancing the economy
across multiple fronts (shifting from investment to
consumption; switching from industry to services;
reining in credit—see the IMF 2016 China Article IV
Staff Report and Selected Issues Papers). In light of
these factors, external financial conditions and the
outlook for emerging market and developing economies will continue to be shaped to a significant extent
by market perceptions of China’s prospects for successfully restructuring and rebalancing its economy.
Adjustment to Lower Commodity Prices
The adjustment to lower commodity prices in
commodity exporters continues. The macroeconomic implications of the terms-of-trade shock were
discussed in detail in Chapter 2 of the October 2015
WEO. The April 2016 WEO showed the extent
of cross-border income redistribution arising from
terms-of-trade fluctuations and its strong correlation
with macroeconomic outcomes. Figure 1.13 provides an update to the size of the windfall income
gains and losses in the largest emerging market
and developing economies as a result of changes in
commodity prices, in light of the revised baseline for
such prices.7 The figure clearly illustrates the extent
7The windfall is an estimate of the change in disposable income
arising from commodity price changes. The windfall gain in year
t for a country exporting x U.S. dollars of commodity A and
importing m U.S. dollars of commodity B in year t – 1 is defined as ​​

16

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

of the income losses in 2015, concentrated in oil
exporters. The forecasts for windfall gains and losses
in 2016–17 are much smaller than those for 2015
and have declined since the spring with the modest
strengthening in commodity prices. At the same time,
these are gains and losses relative to the previous year,
so they imply a further decline in income in countries
already severely affected by the previous year’s shock.
The “acute” phase of the shock might be over for
several commodity exporters (especially those where
exchange rates adjusted), but further adjustments lie
ahead, particularly in the fiscal sphere, which implies
a subdued outlook for domestic demand, and notably
for investment, given the high capital intensity of
extractive industries.
The link between commodity prices and exchange
rate movements since the spring of this year is illustrated in the third panel of Figure 1.13. The panel
shows that real effective exchange rate movements
between March 2016 and July 2016 are positively
correlated with changes in the forecast of income gains
and losses over 2016 and 2017 resulting from changes
in the terms of trade (the difference between the yellow
dots and red diamonds in panels 1 and 2). But commodity price changes have been much less dramatic
than those during 2014–15. As a result, the exchange
rate responses have generally been more muted than
those seen over the previous year.
Demographics and Convergence
As Figure 1.11 shows, many emerging market
economies are also experiencing a demographic transition, with a decline in population growth rates that
is even sharper for the working-age population than
for the population overall. The transition is particularly rapid for China, where the population growth
rate over the next five years is expected to decline to
¼ percent (from ½ percent in the past decade). Even
more dramatic is the decline in the growth rate of
China’s working-age population, which is projected to
turn negative over the next five years.8 In low-income
countries, population growth rates remain much
higher—over double the rate for emerging economies

A
B
​  ​​​ , in which ​∆ ​pt​  A​  ​​ and ​∆ ​pt​  B​  ​​are the percentage
(∆ ​pt​  ​  ​ ​x​ t-1​​  - ∆ ​pt​  ​  ​ ​m​ t-1​​)​ / ​Yt-1
changes in the prices of A and B between year t – 1 and year t, and
Y is GDP in year t – 1 in U.S. dollars. See also Gruss 2014.
8By contrast, demographic trends in India are relatively more
favorable, and the working-age ratio is projected to increase in the
decades ahead (Aiyar and Mody 2011).

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.13. Emerging Markets: Terms-of-Trade Windfall
Gains and Losses and Real Exchange Rates

Figure 1.14. Real per Capita Growth Rates and Convergence
(1995–2020)

With the recent stabilization and strengthening in commodity prices, terms-oftrade windfall gains and losses in 2016–17 are expected to be smaller than
those registered in 2015. Exchange rate adjustments over recent months have
been positively correlated with changes in expected terms-of-trade windfall
gains and losses for 2016–17.

Emerging market economies and low-income countries narrowed the income
gap relative to advanced economies at a much faster pace over 2005–15 than
during the preceding decade, but the average pace of convergence is expected
to be lower over the next ﬁve years.

1. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Losses1
(Percent of GDP)

10

1. Real per Capita Income Growth
(Percent)

10
8

0

1995–2005
2005–15
2015–20

6
–10
4
–20

2015
2016–17 (Aug. 2016 commodity prices)
2016–17 (Apr. 2016 commodity prices)

–30
–40

8

IRQ

0

"Old" AEs

SAU KAZ
VEN
IRN
ECU MYS
PER
BRA
IDN
QAT
ARE
DZA
AGO RUS COL
SYR
MEX ARG
100

2. Terms-of-Trade Windfall Gains1
(Percent of GDP)

6

"New" AEs

EMs excluding
China

China

LIDCs

2. Real per Capita Income as a Share of "Old" Advanced Economies
(Percent)

80

2015
2016–17 (Aug. 2016 commodity prices)
2016–17 (Apr. 2016 commodity prices)

4

1995
2005
2015
2020

60
40

2

20

0
–2

2

0
PRY

BLR

Change in REER between March and
August 2016 (percent)

ZAF
20

3. Terms-of-Trade Windfall and Real Exchange Rate
BRA
IND
y = 2.90 x + 1.11
TUR
ZAF
R² = 0.14
RUS
MAR
URY
PAK
CHL
COL
MYS
KAZ

15
10
5
0
–5

ROM TUR
TUN
PAN
PHL
HUN BWA
IND
EGY
URY
POL
HRV GTM CHN
CRI
BGR

THA
ROM

–10
–1.5

HUN PER
POL CRI PHL

TUN

"New" AEs

EMs excluding
China

China

LIDCs

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: LIDCs = low-income developing countries.
1
"Old"AEs = only countries considered advanced economies in 1996,
comprising Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, and
United States. "New" AEs = Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hong Kong SAR,
Israel, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Macao SAR, Malta, Singapore, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia, Taiwan Province of China.

IDN

MEX

–1.0 –0.5 0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Percentage change in expected ToT windfall gains/losses for
2016–17 between March and August 2016 (percentage points)

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: REER = real effective exchange rate; ToT = terms of trade. Data labels in
the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1
Gains (losses) for 2016–17 are simple averages of annual incremental gains
(losses) for 2016 and 2017. For details of the calculations see footnote 7 in the
chapter text.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

17

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

excluding China.9 This variation across countries,
regions, and levels of development must be taken
into account when translating GDP growth rates into
assessments of the evolution of income per capita
or per worker and convergence of incomes toward
advanced economy levels.
Figure 1.14 looks at growth in income per capita
across these same country groups. Real income per
capita in the group overall increased by 50 percent
between 2005 and 2015, with gains spread unevenly: it
surged by almost 140 percent in China and increased
by about 45 percent in low-income developing
economies and by about 30 percent in other emerging market economies. Over this time period, real
per capita income in the “older” advanced economies—economies classified as advanced since at least
the mid-1990s—increased by only about 5 percent.
As a result of their growth advantage, the developing
parts of the world narrowed the income gap relative to
advanced economies over the 10 years through 2015:
real per capita income went from about 13 percent
to 30 percent of those of “older” advanced economy
levels in China, from 21 percent to 26 percent in other
emerging market economies, and from 6 percent to
8 percent in low-income developing economies. For
all three groups, these gains were three to five times
larger than those in the prior decade, between 1995
and 2005.
Looking ahead, the per capita growth differential
for most emerging market and developing economies
relative to the advanced economies is projected to
stay well below that of the past decade, and the pace
of convergence will become more uneven. Over the
next five years, low-income developing economies—
many of which are experiencing a stark slowdown in
output growth yet have very high population growth
rates—are expected to close the gap between their and
advanced economy income levels by barely more than
half a percentage point, other emerging market economies by only 2 percentage points, and China by a still
strong 7 percentage points. The new advanced economies, which have maintained remarkably high growth
over the past decade despite starting from a relatively
high level of per capita income (about 70 percent of
that of old advanced economy incomes in 2005) are
9Sub-Saharan Africa, in particular, will see a continued pronounced increase in the share of the working-age population in the
next few decades (see Chapter 2 of the IMF’s sub-Saharan Africa
2015 Regional Economic Outlook).

18

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

projected to further reduce their gap with advanced
economy levels by about 4 percentage points, following
a gain of 17 percentage points in the previous decade.

The Forecast
Policy Assumptions
Fiscal policy is projected to provide mild support
to economic activity in advanced economies as a
whole in 2016, slightly more than projected in the
April 2016 WEO (Figure 1.15). The fiscal policy
stance (measured by the fiscal impulse)10 is forecast to
be expansionary in Canada (over 1 percentage point)
and Germany (0.8 percentage point) and to a lesser
extent in Italy and the United States (½ percentage
point). It is forecast to be broadly neutral in Japan and
contractionary in the United Kingdom (0.8 percentage
point). In emerging market and developing economies,
structural government balances are in the aggregate
projected to remain broadly unchanged for 2016—but
with marked differences across countries and regions.
Monetary policy in advanced economies is expected
to tighten more slowly than envisioned in the
April 2016 WEO. The policy rate in the United States
is projected to rise gradually but steadily, reaching a
long-term equilibrium rate of 2¾ percent by 2020—
much lower than before the crisis. Very low policy
interest rates are expected to remain in place for longer
in the United Kingdom, the euro area, and Japan,
with short-term rates projected to remain below zero
in the euro area and Japan through 2020. The monetary policy assumptions underlying the forecasts for
emerging market economies vary, given the different
circumstances these economies are facing.

Other Assumptions
The baseline global growth forecasts for 2016
and 2017 reflect broadly accommodative financial
conditions, a partial recovery in commodity prices, and
an easing in geopolitical tensions in 2017 and beyond.
Arrangements between the European Union and the
United Kingdom are assumed to settle so as to avoid
a large increase in economic barriers, and the political
fallout from Brexit is assumed to be limited. The process of monetary policy normalization in the United
10The fiscal impulse is defined as minus the change in the ratio of
the structural fiscal balance to potential output.

CHAPTER 1

States is expected to proceed smoothly, without protracted increases in financial market volatility or sharp
movements in long-term interest rates. Financial conditions in emerging markets are forecast to be slightly
more accommodative than assumed in the April 2016
WEO, in light of the partial decline in interest rate
spreads and the recovery in equity prices in recent
months (Figure 1.8). Oil prices are expected to increase
gradually over the forecast horizon, from an average
of $43 a barrel in 2016 to $51 a barrel in 2017. As
in the April 2016 WEO forecast, geopolitical tensions
in some countries in the Middle East are assumed to
remain elevated for the remainder of the year, before
easing in 2017, allowing for a gradual economic recovery in the most severely affected economies.

Figure 1.15. Fiscal Indicators

(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)
Fiscal policy is projected to be mildly expansionary in 2016 in advanced
economies in the aggregate, and broadly neutral for emerging market and
developing economies as a whole, but with differences across countries.
4

1. Change in the Structural Fiscal Balance

3

2012
2015

2

2013
2016

2014
April 2016 WEO

1
0
–1
–2

Global Outlook for 2016 and 2017
Global growth is projected to remain modest at
3.1 percent in 2016, slightly weaker than projected
in the April 2016 WEO (Table 1.1). This forecast
incorporates somewhat weaker-than-expected activity
through the second quarter of 2016 in advanced economies, as well as the implications of the U.K. referendum outcome in favor of leaving the European Union.
The recovery is expected to gather some pace in 2017
and beyond, driven primarily by emerging market and
developing economies, as conditions in stressed economies gradually normalize.
Growth in emerging market and developing economies is expected to strengthen in 2016 to 4.2 percent
after five consecutive years of decline, accounting for
over three-quarters of projected world growth in 2016.
However, despite an improvement in external financing conditions, their outlook is uneven and generally
weaker than in the past. A combination of factors
can account for this weakness: a slowdown in China,
whose spillovers are magnified by its lower reliance on
import- and resource-intensive investment; continued
adjustment to structurally lower commodity revenues
in a number of commodity exporters; spillovers from
persistently weak demand from advanced economies;
and domestic strife, political discord, and geopolitical
tensions in a number of countries.
In major advanced economies, the recovery is
forecast to slow this year, with growth projected at
1.6 percent in 2016, ½ percentage point lower than
in 2015. Their subdued outlook is shaped by a number
of common forces, including legacies of the global
financial crisis (high debt—as discussed in the Octo-

Global Prospects and Policies

2

Advanced
economies
excluding
euro area

Emerging
market and
developing
economies

France and
Germany

Ireland, Italy,
Portugal, Spain

2. Fiscal Balance

0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
2001
160
140
120
100
80
60

World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies
04

07

10

13

16

19

21

3. Gross Public Debt
World
Advanced economies1
Emerging and developing Asia
Major advanced economies1,2
Latin America and the Caribbean
Other emerging market and
developing economies

40
20
1950

60

70

80

90

2000

10

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1
Data through 2000 exclude the United States.
2
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

19

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

ber 2016 Fiscal Monitor; financial sector vulnerabilities,
as described in the October 2016 GFSR; and low
investment) and low productivity growth, as discussed
previously in this chapter. Economic, political, and
institutional uncertainty following the Brexit vote
is also expected to have some negative macroeconomic consequences, especially in advanced European
economies.
The projected increase in global growth in 2017
to 3.4 percent hinges crucially on rising growth in
emerging market and developing economies, where
the waning of downward pressures on activity in
countries in recession in 2016 such as Brazil, Nigeria,
and Russia is expected to more than make up for the
steady slowdown in growth in China. In advanced
economies, growth is projected to pick up modestly
to 1.8 percent (0.2 percentage point less than in the
April 2016 WEO), reflecting primarily a strengthening
of the recovery in the United States and Canada and a
rebound in Japan due to the recent fiscal stimulus. In
contrast, growth is projected to be lower in the euro
area and the United Kingdom, due to the macroeconomic repercussions of heightened uncertainty in the
aftermath of the U.K. referendum.
As discussed elsewhere in the chapter, the sluggish global growth outlook implies a waning pace of
improvement in global living standards. This trend
can be illustrated by the distribution of world population by per capita growth rates. With the growth
rates of emerging market and developing economies
projected to remain well below those over the past
decade, the share of the world population living in
areas with greater than 2 percent annual real per capita
growth is set to decline by almost 10 percentage points
between 2005–10 and 2016–21.

Global Outlook for the Medium Term
Beyond 2017, global growth is projected to gradually increase to 3.8 percent by the end of the forecast
horizon. This recovery in global activity—which is
expected to be driven entirely by emerging market and
developing economies—is premised on the normalization of growth rates in countries and regions under
stress or growing well below potential in 2016–17
(such as Nigeria, Russia, South Africa, Latin America,
parts of the Middle East), China maintaining its transition toward consumption- and services-based growth,
and continued resilience in other countries. It also
reflects the increasing weight in the world economy of
20

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

large emerging market economies, such as China and
India, that are growing well above the world average.
As shown in Box 1.1, these two factors account for
the bulk of the projected pickup in world growth. The
pace of economic activity in advanced economies is
projected to remain subdued in line with their diminished potential, as populations age, but growth in
GDP per worker is projected to reach levels broadly in
line with its average over the past 20 years. Within the
group of emerging market and developing economies,
growth is projected to pick up over the medium term
in low-income developing countries but to remain
below the pace of the past decade, both in absolute
and in per capita terms.

Economic Outlook for Individual Countries and Regions
Advanced Economies
•• In the United Kingdom slower growth is expected
since the referendum as uncertainty in the aftermath of the Brexit vote weighs on firms’ investment
and hiring decisions and consumers’ purchases of
durable goods and housing. Growth is forecast at
1.8 percent in 2016 and 1.1 percent in 2017, based
on the assumptions of smooth post-Brexit negotiations and a limited increase in economic barriers.
Medium-term growth forecasts have also been
revised down to 1.9 percent (0.2 percentage point
lower than the April 2016 WEO forecast) as greater
impediments to trade, migration, and capital flows
are expected to erode growth potential.
•• Softer-than-expected activity in the second half
of 2015 and the first half of 2016 points to some
loss in momentum in the United States, despite a
mildly supportive fiscal stance and a slower projected pace of monetary policy normalization. Job
creation has been healthy, the housing market is
improving, and consumer spending remains robust.
However, a prolonged inventory correction cycle
and weak business investment has prompted a
downward revision of the 2016 forecast to 1.6 percent. The weakness in capital spending reflects in
part still-negative energy investment, dollar appreciation, financial turbulence earlier in the year, and
heightened policy uncertainty related to the electoral
cycle. In 2017, growth is expected to pick up to
2.2 percent, as the drag from lower energy prices
and past appreciation of the U.S. dollar fades. Medium-term potential growth, projected at 1.8 percent,
is held down by an aging population and a continu-

CHAPTER 1

ation of the recent trend of low total factor productivity growth.
•• The euro area recovery is expected to proceed at a
slightly lower pace in 2016–17 relative to 2015.11
Low oil prices, a modest fiscal expansion in 2016,
and easy monetary policy will support growth,
while weaker investor confidence on account of
uncertainty following the Brexit vote will weigh on
activity. Growth for the area as a whole is projected to
decline slightly to 1.7 percent in 2016 and 1.5 percent
in 2017. In Germany growth is forecast to pick up this
year to 1.7 percent, before softening to 1.4 percent
in 2017. In France, growth is expected to stabilize at
1.3 percent in 2016 and 2017. In Spain, growth is
expected to remain broadly stable in 2016 and moderate from 3.1 percent to 2.2 percent in 2017. In Italy
growth is projected to notch up slightly from 0.8 percent in 2016 to 0.9 percent in 2017. Medium-term
potential growth in the euro area is projected at
1.4 percent, held back by unfavorable demographics;
crisis legacies of high unemployment, debt, and, in
some countries, impaired bank balance sheets; and
deep-rooted structural impediments that are holding
back total factor productivity growth.
•• Japan’s growth is projected to remain weak, in line
with potential, at 0.5 percent in 2016, before rising
to 0.6 percent in 2017.12 Postponement of the consumption tax hike, the recently announced growthenhancing measures, including the supplementary
budget, and additional monetary easing will support
private consumption in the near term, offsetting
some of the drag from the increase in uncertainty,
the recent appreciation of the yen, and weak global
growth. Japan’s medium-term prospects remain
weak, primarily reflecting a shrinking population.
11Ireland’s GDP growth for 2014–15 was revised upward by
more than 20 percentage points over two years, largely reflecting
operations of multinational companies that had a limited impact on
the underlying Irish economy. Specifically, corporate restructuring
through the relocation to Ireland of companies’ entire balance sheets,
the shifting of assets to Irish subsidiaries, and the takeover of foreign
companies by entities domiciled in Ireland have led to a sizable level
shift in the stock of capital assets in Ireland (as well as a substantial
negative revision of Ireland’s net international investment position
due to higher liabilities to nonresidents). The relocation of companies was also associated with an increase in Ireland’s net exports and
GDP. As a consequence, growth for the euro area in 2015 was also
revised upward by more than 0.3 percentage point.
12The forecast does not reflect the adjustment to the Bank of
Japan’s monetary policy framework announced on September 21,
2016, which includes a zero interest rate target on 10-year government bonds (JGBs) and a commitment to temporarily overshoot the
2 percent inflation target.

Global Prospects and Policies

•• The prospects of other advanced economies are
mixed. The recovery in Sweden will remain strong,
with growth projected at 3.6 percent in 2016 and 2.6
in 2017, supported by expansionary monetary policy,
higher residential investment, and fiscal spending due
to the refugee inflows. Economic activity is expected
to pick up modestly in Switzerland, with growth
forecast at 1 percent in 2016 and 1.3 percent in 2017
as the effect of the Swiss franc appreciation wanes.
The decline in commodity revenues and reduced
resource-related investment are taking a toll on the
Norwegian economy, with 2016 growth forecast at
only 0.8 percent. Activity is expected to accelerate in 2017 supported by expansionary fiscal and
monetary policy, a more competitive currency, and
a gradual upturn in oil prices. Growth is projected
to rebound starting in 2016 in other advanced
commodity exporters, supported by exchange rate
depreciation and accommodative policies. In Canada,
growth is projected at 1.2 percent in 2016, held back
by the severe impact of wildfires in Alberta on oil
output in the second quarter, before rising to 1.9 percent in 2017, while in Australia, growth is expected
to hover around 2.8 percent in both years. Among
other advanced economies in Asia, growth in 2016
is expected to soften in Singapore (1.7 percent) and
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (1.4 percent)
and pick up modestly in Korea (to 2.7 percent) and
Taiwan Province of China (to 1 percent). Growth in
all four of these very open economies is expected to
pick up more robustly from 2017 onward as strengthening global trade improves their export prospects.
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
•• In China, the economy is expected to grow by
6.6 percent in 2016 on the back of policy support,
slowing to 6.2 percent in 2017 absent further stimulus. The medium-term forecast assumes that the
economy will continue to rebalance from investment
to consumption and from industry to services, on
the back of reforms to strengthen the social safety
net and deregulation of the service sector. However,
nonfinancial debt is expected to continue rising
at an unsustainable pace, which—together with a
growing misallocation of resources—casts a shadow
over the medium-term outlook.
•• Elsewhere in emerging and developing Asia, growth is
projected to remain strong. India’s GDP will continue
to expand at the fastest pace among major economies,
with growth forecast at 7.6 percent in 2016–17.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Large terms-of-trade gains, positive policy actions,
structural reforms—including the introduction of
an important tax reform and formalization of the
inflation-targeting framework—and improved confidence are expected to support consumer demand
and investment. In the near term, however, private
investment will likely be constrained by weakened
corporate and public bank balance sheets. Among the
ASEAN-5 economies (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam), Malaysia and Vietnam are
expected to slow this year (to 4.3 and 6.1 percent,
respectively) partly due to weaker external demand,
while growth in Indonesia, the Philippines, and
Thailand is forecast to pick up relative to 2015 (to
4.9, 6.4, and 3.2 percent, respectively). Growth in all
members of the ASEAN-5 is expected to strengthen
further in 2017 and thereafter.
•• Economic activity in Latin America and the Caribbean continues to slow, with a contraction of
0.6 percent projected for 2016 (0.1 percentage point
more severe than the April forecast). A recovery is
expected to take hold in 2017, with growth reaching 1.6 percent (0.1 percentage point stronger than
forecast in April). However, as highlighted in the
April 2016 WEO, the region’s aggregate growth
masks substantial heterogeneity: although several
countries are mired in recession, most economies in
the region will continue to expand in 2016.
oo Confidence appears to have bottomed out in
Brazil, and growth is forecast at –3.3 percent
for 2016 and 0.5 percent in 2017, on the assumption of declining political and policy uncertainty
and the waning effects of past economic shocks.
This forecast is about ½ percentage point stronger
for both years when compared with April. Argentina has begun an important and much needed
transition to a more consistent and sustainable
economic policy framework, which has proven
costlier than envisaged in 2016, with growth projected at –1.8 percent (compared with –1 percent
forecast in April). Growth is expected to strengthen
to 2.7 percent in 2017 on the back of moderating
inflation and more supportive monetary and fiscal
policy stances. The economic crisis in Venezuela
is projected to deepen in 2016 and 2017 (growth
forecast of –10 percent and –4.5 percent, respectively), as the decline in oil prices since mid-2014
has exacerbated domestic macroeconomic imbalances and balance of payments pressures. Ecuador
continues to face a challenging outlook given the
22

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

reduced value of its oil exports and its dollarized
economy. With the partial recovery in global oil
prices and a more favorable external financing outlook, its projected contraction in activity for 2016
and 2017 is less severe than projected in April, at
–2.3 percent and –2.7 percent, respectively.
oo Most of the remaining commodity exporters in
the region will experience some deceleration in
activity in 2016. In Colombia, growth is expected
to ease to 2.2 percent in 2016 (from 3.1 percent
in 2015), reflecting tighter macroeconomic policies. Similarly, the protracted decline in the price
of copper and policy uncertainties are weighing
on Chile’s outlook, with growth declining to
1.7 percent in 2016 from 2.3 percent in 2015. In
both countries, growth is forecast to strengthen
in 2017 and gradually rise to potential thereafter.
Unlike most of its peers, Peru is expected to grow
faster this year and next, with growth rising to
3.7 percent and 4.1 percent in 2016 and 2017,
respectively, on the back of expanding activity in
the mining sector and higher public investment.
oo Growth in Mexico is projected to decline to 2.1
percent in 2016 due to weak export performance
in the first half of the year. It is expected to accelerate modestly to 2.3 percent in 2017 as external
demand recovers and to 2.9 percent over the
medium term as the structural reforms take hold.
•• The economic outlook for the Commonwealth of
Independent States remains lackluster. The modest
improvement in the region’s growth outlook since
April mostly reflects the firming in oil prices. Higher
oil export revenues are providing some relief to the
region’s oil exporters and to the Russian economy
in particular, where the decline in GDP this year
(0.8 percent) is now projected to be milder than
envisaged in the April 2016 WEO. The somewhat
improved outlook for Russia is expected to support activity elsewhere in the region, especially in
oil importers, given linkages through trade and
remittances. Nonetheless, Russia’s growth outlook for 2017 and beyond remains subdued given
long-standing structural bottlenecks and the impact
of sanctions on productivity and investment. Among
oil importers, Ukraine’s economy is estimated to
have returned to positive growth in 2016 after
very sharp contractions in 2014 and 2015 and is
expected to accelerate as the external economic environment improves and domestic economic reforms
bear fruit. The pace of contraction in activity in

CHAPTER 1

Belarus is expected to ease in 2017, with a recovery
taking hold in 2018. Among oil exporters, the economies of Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan are projected
to contract in 2016 amid a drop in export revenues,
with the Azeri economy shrinking by 2.4 percent
and that of Kazakhstan by about 0.8 percent.
Growth in these countries is projected to rise gradually, supported by increased hydrocarbon production
in Kazakhstan and nonhydrocarbon activities in
Azerbaijan, as well as some recovery in oil prices and
more competitive currencies.
•• Growth in emerging and developing Europe is projected to remain robust at slightly above 3 percent
in 2016 and beyond, with exports expanding at a
strong clip despite sluggish growth in the euro area,
the main trading partner for most economies in the
region. Hungary is estimated to be growing faster
than potential and is projected to return to more
sustainable rates of growth over the medium term.
In Turkey, growth in 2016 and 2017 will be held
back by the heightened uncertainty in the aftermath of recent terrorist attacks and the failed coup
attempt, though macroeconomic policy easing will
support economic activity.
•• The picture for sub-Saharan Africa is increasingly
one of multispeed growth. While growth projections were revised down substantially in the
region, they mostly reflect challenging macroeconomic conditions in its largest economies, which
are adjusting to lower commodity revenues. In
Nigeria, economic activity is now projected to
contract 1.7 percent in 2016, reflecting temporary
disruptions to oil production, foreign currency
shortages resulting from lower oil receipts, lower
power generation, and weak investor confidence.
In South Africa, where policy uncertainty is
making the adjustment to weaker terms of trade
more difficult, GDP is projected to remain flat
in 2016, with only a modest recovery next year as
the commodity and drought shocks dissipate and
power supply improves. Angola is similarly adjusting to a sharp drop in oil export receipts. It is not
expected to grow this year and will experience only
feeble growth next year. By contrast, several of
the region’s nonresource exporters, including Côte
d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Senegal, are expected
to continue to expand at a very robust pace of
more than 5 percent this year, benefiting from low
oil prices and enjoying healthy private consumption and investment growth rates.

Global Prospects and Policies

•• In the Middle East, the recent modest recovery
in oil prices is projected to have little impact on
growth in oil-exporting countries. Most continue to
tighten fiscal policy in response to structurally lower
oil revenues, and financial sector liquidity continues
to decline. Many countries in the region also remain
affected by strife and conflict. The largest economy,
Saudi Arabia, is projected to grow at a modest
1.2 percent this year in the face of fiscal consolidation, before picking up to 2 percent growth next
year. Growth rates in most other countries of the
Gulf Cooperation Council are similarly projected to
be held back by ongoing fiscal adjustment. In Iraq,
higher-than-expected oil production has pushed up
the projected growth rate for 2016. Growth in 2017
and beyond is expected to be held back by continued security challenges and lower investment in
the oil sector limiting gains in oil production. The
Islamic Republic of Iran’s outlook has been boosted
by higher oil production this year following the
unwinding of sanctions. However, growth dividends
are likely to materialize only gradually with reintegration into global financial markets and domestic
reforms proceeding slowly. Recent reforms and lower
oil prices have helped improve macroeconomic
stability in the oil-importing countries of the region.
Yet growth remains fragile due to security concerns,
social tensions, and lingering structural impediments. Continued reform, progress, less fiscal drag,
and gradual improvements in external demand are
expected to support the recovery.

Inflation Outlook
Inflation rates in advanced economies are projected to pick up to about 0.8 percent in 2016, from
0.3 percent in 2015, mostly reflecting a reduced drag
from energy prices. Inflation is expected to rise over
the next few years as fuel prices increase modestly
and output gaps gradually shrink, reaching central
bank targets around 2020. By contrast, excluding
Argentina (where high inflation is a byproduct of
an ongoing and necessary liberalization process) and
Venezuela (where inflation this year is expected to
surge to close to 500 percent), inflation in emerging
market and developing economies is expected to
soften, to 4.5 percent this year from 4.7 percent last
year, reflecting the waning effect of earlier currency
depreciations. However, there is considerable diversity
in the inflation rates within both groups.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

23

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

•• In the United States, consumer price inflation is
picking up relatively strongly, from 0.1 percent
last year to 1.2 percent this year, and is projected
to reach 2.3 percent next year. This reflects a rapid
easing of previous disinflationary forces—the dollar
appreciation in 2015 and the drop in fuel prices—
as well as well-anchored medium-term inflation
expectations.
•• Inflation is also picking up in the euro area, but
more slowly and from a lower level, to 0.3 percent
in 2016 from about zero in 2015. The increase is
projected to remain gradual going forward, with
inflation remaining below the European Central
Bank’s target through 2021, reflecting the gradual
closing of output gaps and firming of inflation
expectations. Inflation is expected to increase only
slowly in Japan as well, staying well below the Bank
of Japan’s target throughout the forecast horizon, as
inflation expectations slowly rise.
•• The depreciation of the pound is projected to
push inflation in the United Kingdom up to about
0.7 percent this year, with a further sharp increase
expected for next year, to about 2.5 percent, before
gradually reaching the Bank of England’s target of
2 percent in the next few years.
•• Inflation rates remain subdued in most other
advanced economies. In Korea, Sweden, and Taiwan
Province of China, inflation is expected to pick up
this year and gradually reach central bank targets in
the following years. Singapore and Switzerland are
projected to experience another year of deflation
this year, although milder than last year, and shift
to positive inflation rates gradually over the forecast
horizon.
•• Inflation in China is expected to pick up to
2.1 percent this year and to 3 percent over the
medium term as slack in the industrial sector and
downward pressure on goods prices diminish. In
most other large emerging market economies,
such as Brazil, Russia, and Turkey, inflation rates
are above central bank targets and are expected to
decline gradually as the effects of past exchange
rate depreciations dissipate. By contrast, Mexico’s
inflation rate is projected to remain close to the
central bank’s target, while Hungary’s and Poland’s
rates are projected to recover slowly from very
weak levels in 2015.
•• Inflation is back at double-digit levels in a few large
economies in sub-Saharan Africa, reflecting the passthrough of large depreciations.
24

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

External Sector Outlook
The growth rate in world trade volumes in 2016
(about 2.3 percent, which is slightly weaker than
its 2015 level) is projected to remain very weak, both
in absolute terms and in relation to world GDP
growth. As discussed extensively in Chapter 2, the
composition of global demand—and in particular the
weakness in investment—plays an important role in
explaining subdued global trade. Global trade growth
is forecast to pick up to about 4.3 percent over the
medium term, reflecting the projected recovery in
economic activity and investment in emerging market
and developing economies and, to a lesser extent, in
advanced economies.
The evolution of global current account imbalances
during 2016 continues to be affected by the very
large decline in oil prices during the previous two
years, as well as by sizable differences in the growth
rate of domestic demand in different regions of
the world. The size of global current account deficits and surpluses in relation to world GDP, which
had expanded modestly in 2015 for the first time
since 2010 (as discussed in the 2016 External Sector
Report—IMF 2016), is projected to fall slightly this
year (Figure 1.16, panel 1), reflecting some decline in
surpluses in China and advanced European economies, together with some further decline in deficits
in Latin American countries. Global current account
imbalances are projected to shrink further in the
medium term, to levels last seen in the mid-1990s,
on the back of a further compression of surpluses in
China and Germany, as well as some moderation of
deficits (for instance in Latin America and the United
Kingdom).
In contrast to shrinking current account imbalances, the size of cross-border creditor and debtor
positions in relation to world GDP has continued to
rise (Figure 1.16, panel 2). Forecasting the evolution
of these positions is particularly difficult, given their
sensitivity to difficult-to-predict exchange rate and
asset price movements, in addition to future patterns
of net borrowing and lending. Assuming for simplicity
no valuation effect, projections for current account
balances and GDP growth would imply a broad
medium-term stabilization of creditor and debtor
positions in relation to world GDP at levels modestly
higher than those prevailing in 2016. Across creditor
countries, the position of advanced European economies—especially Germany—would improve further,
while the position of oil exporters would deteriorate to

CHAPTER 1

some extent. The persistence of large debtor positions
despite the substantial adjustment in current account
balances in recent years is related to slow growth in
domestic demand and GDP in a number of debtor
countries. It underscores the importance of rebalancing
global demand to boost growth in those countries,
which would facilitate external adjustment and reduce
external risks.
With this perspective in mind, Figure 1.17 looks at
three factors affecting the extent of global rebalancing
over the 2014–16 period: GDP growth, the contribution of net external demand to GDP growth, and
windfall gains and losses from terms-of-trade shocks.
Creditor countries have grown faster than debtor
countries and are projected to do so again in 2016.
This differential reflects entirely the strong growth
rate of China—excluding China, creditor countries
are now growing more slowly than debtor countries,
reflecting weak growth in oil exporters and Japan
(Figure 1.17, panel 1). The positive growth differential in 2015 between creditor and debtor countries
also reflected the former’s reliance on net external
demand, in contrast with rebalancing needs. This
was due mainly to growth dynamics in oil exporters,
which had to compress domestic demand in response
to the decline in the terms of trade. For 2016, the
forecast envisages a broadly neutral contribution of
net external demand to growth in creditor and debtor
countries, albeit with significant cross-regional differences. The second panel of Figure 1.17 shows that
windfall gains and losses from terms-of-trade shocks
(primarily related to commodity prices) have been
a major driver of shifts in current account balances
across regions. As also discussed in the 2016 External
Sector Report, terms-of-trade changes have affected
various creditor and debtor country groups differently (strengthening the current account balance of
creditor and debtor countries and regions that import
commodities and weakening the balance of commodity exporters).
There is of course no normative presumption that
current account deficits and surpluses should be compressed. However, as discussed in the 2016 External
Sector Report, current account imbalances in a number
of the world’s largest economies appear too large relative to a country-specific norm consistent with underlying fundamentals and desirable policies. Current
account balances are expected to move in a direction
consistent with a narrowing of these excess imbalances.
The first panel of Figure 1.18 depicts on the horizontal

Global Prospects and Policies

Figure 1.16. External Sector
After increasing slightly in 2015, global imbalances are expected to fall this
year and continue to shrink into the medium term, reﬂecting differences in the
growth rate of domestic demand across countries.
4
3
2

1. Global Current Account Imbalances
(Percent of world GDP)

1
0
–1
–2
–3

USA
CHN+EMA

–4

–5
1998 2000 02
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
–25
–30

OIL
JPN
04

06

DEU+EURSUR
ROW

OCADC
Discrepancy

08

14

10

12

16

18

21

2. Global Net Financial Assets Imbalances
(Percent of world GDP)

USA
CHN+EMA
98

00

OIL
JPN
02

DEU+EURSUR
ROW
04

06

OCADC
Discrepancy
08

10

12

14 15

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: CHN+EMA = China and emerging Asia (Hong Kong SAR, Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China,Thailand); DEU+EURSUR
= Germany and other advanced European surplus economies (Austria, Denmark,
Luxembourg, Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland); OCADC = other European
countries with precrisis current account deﬁcits (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal,
Spain, United Kingdom, World Economic Outlook (WEO) group of emerging and
developing Europe); OIL = Norway and WEO group of emerging market and
developing economy fuel exporters; ROW = rest of the world. Data labels in the
ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

axis the gap between the 2015 current account balance
and its norm and on the vertical axis the projected
movement in current account balances over the next
five years. It shows a strong negative correlation (–0.7),
with current account balances expected to go in the
direction of reducing gaps vis-à-vis the 2015 current
account norm, especially over a longer-horizon.13
During the past few months exchange rate movements
have been more muted than in 2015. As the second
13The correlation of 2015 current account gaps with the change
in current account balances between 2015 and 2016 is also negative
but weaker (–0.15). Of course current account and exchange rate
norms may also shift in the future as economic fundamentals and
policies change.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

25

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.18. Current Account Gaps and Real Exchange Rates

Excluding China, creditor countries are projected to grow at a slower pace than
debtor countries over 2015–16, mainly reﬂecting subdued domestic demand in
oil exporters in response to the adverse terms of trade shock. Windfall gains
and losses from shifts in terms of trade account for a large portion of the
projected changes in current account balances across countries and regions.

Projected changes in current account balances are consistent with a narrowing
of excess external imbalances identiﬁed in the 2016 External Sector Report.

1. Growth
(Percent)1

10
8

Change in current account, 2015–21

Figure 1.17. Creditors versus Debtors

4
2
0

–4

–2
Creditors

–4
–6
Advanced
Europe

Japan

China

Change in current account balances2

4

1. ESR Current Account Gap in 2015 versus Change in
Current Account, 2015–21 (Percent of GDP)

BEL CAN HKG
2 GBR BRA
AUS
ZAF
ESP RUS
0
FRA
TUR
USA
ITA
–2
IND

Domestic contribution
External contribution

6

6

–6
–4

Debtors
Oil
exporters

Advanced
Asia

Euro
area
United
States

Latin
America

Other AEs

CEE

Emerging Africa and
Asia Middle East

2. Windfall Gains/Losses and Correlation with Current Account
Balances
Euro area
(Percent of GDP)
CEE debtors
4
Japan
debtors
Latin American debtors
2
Adv. European creditors
0
African and Middle
–2
Adv.
Eastern debtors
Asia
–4
6

–6

Oil exporters

–8

–10
–20

Other adv.
economy debtors

Emerging
China
Asian United
debtors States

–15
–10
–5
0
Windfall gains/losses from terms-of-trade shocks

5

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Adv. = advanced; AEs = advanced economies; CEE = central and
eastern Europe.
1
Average, 2015–16.
2
Indicates change from 2014 to 2016.

panel of Figure 1.18 illustrates, these exchange rate
changes are not systematically correlated with the
exchange rate gaps for 2015 identified in the 2016
External Sector Report.

CHE

POL

MEX
IDN

Correlation = –0.7
JPN
MYS
NLD

SWE
CHN

KOR
SGP

THA
–3

–2

DEU

–1
0
1
2
3
ESR current account gap, 2015

4

5

Sources: Global Insight; IMF, 2016 External Sector Report (ESR); IMF, International
Financial Statistics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. EA = euro area; REER = real effective exchange rate; ToT =
terms of trade.
1
Data for the euro area are an average for France, Germany, Italy, and Spain.
2
REER gaps and classiﬁcations are based on the IMF's 2016 External Sector Report.

market economies, seem to have become less prominent, but they still remain. On balance, downside risks
continue to dominate.

Risks Stemming from the Policy and Institutional
Domain

Some risks flagged in recent WEO reports have
become more pronounced in recent months, including those associated with political discord and
inward-looking policies, or secular stagnation in
advanced economies. Other risks, such as rising financial turbulence and capital pullbacks from emerging

The U.K. vote to leave the European Union and
the ongoing U.S. presidential election campaign have
brought to the fore issues related to labor mobility and
migration, global trade integration, and cross-border
regulation. Institutional arrangements long in place
are now potentially up for renegotiation—arrange-

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

7

30 2. Changes and Gaps in Real Effective Exchange Rates2
(Percent)
25
20
REER percent change, 2015 (average)–Sep. 2016
15
REER gap for 2015 (midpoint)
10
5
0
–5
–10
Correlation = 0.034
–15
–20
SGP MYS SWE EA THA HKG CHN IND AUS TUR BRA
JPN KOR MEX POL IDN RUS CAN ZAF GBR CHE USA

Risks

26

6

CHAPTER 1

ments that have shaped how businesses organize their
production and hiring, sourcing of raw materials and
financing, and distribution channels across borders.
Additional questions loom regarding possible follow-up
referenda in other EU economies. More generally, concerns about the impact of foreign competition on jobs
and wages in a context of weak economic growth have
enhanced the appeal of protectionist policy platforms,
with potential ramifications for global trade flows.
Ambiguity about how these trends will evolve may lead
firms to defer long-term projects, limit job creation,
and slow near-term activity.
Institutional uncertainty interacting with hardening political divisions within countries can make
solutions to structural challenges even more elusive.
As these challenges—ranging from product and labor
market deregulation to balance sheet repair, entitlement reform, and the integration of migrants into
the labor force— become seemingly more intractable,
perceptions of policy ineffectiveness could become
more firmly rooted and the coordinating role of policy
could diminish. As such, if any of the risks outlined
below were to materialize, the toll on sentiment could
be amplified by concerns that policy action will fail to
offset the shock decisively.
Increasing pressure for inward-looking policies are a
particular threat to the global outlook—a theme also
discussed in Chapter 2. Scenario Box 1 discusses the
potential economic consequences of an increase in
protectionism. It first highlights the implications of a
unilateral increase in tariffs by one country on another
country—as well as the consequences of retaliation by
the second country. The model simulations illustrate
how GDP, consumption, and investment of both
countries are negatively affected by the unilateral tariff
increase. A second scenario illustrates the implications
for the global economy of a generalized increase in
protectionism, taking the form of higher tariff and
nontariff barriers. The result is not just a collapse in
trade flows, but also a sharp decline in global output.
The negative repercussions for the global economy
could be even larger because the disruption in international economic linkages drive a more generalized
decline in cross-border cooperation.

Debilitating Cycles: Weak Demand–Weak Inflation; Low
Productivity–Low Investment
One common thread running through several recent
WEO reports is the prospect of secular stagnation—an

Global Prospects and Policies

extended shortfall in private demand leading to permanently lower output and low inflation.14 As the world
economy continues to struggle to generate widespread,
durable momentum, this prospect becomes ever more
tangible, particularly in some advanced economies.
At the same time, a protracted period of weak inflation risks dislodging inflation expectations, causing
expected real interest rates to rise and expenditure on
capital goods and consumer durables to decline, eventually feeding back to weaker overall growth and inflation. And in economies with a large debt overhang, an
extended period of low nominal growth would add to
debt service difficulties, complicate the task of deleveraging, and further weigh on growth (as discussed in
the October 2016 Fiscal Monitor).
A second debilitating cycle relates to possible
feedback effects between low productivity growth and
low investment. As noted earlier in the chapter, total
factor productivity and labor productivity growth have
declined markedly in many economies. At the same
time, investment has slowed globally and is below
long-term average growth rates in several advanced
and emerging market and developing economies. To
the extent that low productivity growth translates into
expectations of weak profitability, investment could be
negatively affected. The resulting deceleration in capital
deepening would harm the adoption of capital-embodied technological change, further weigh on total factor
and labor productivity, reinforce expectations of diminishing profitability, and spiral back to weak investment.

China’s Ongoing Adjustment and Associated Spillovers
China’s economy continues to support global
growth, but its adjustment to a more sustainable
pace of expansion has at times turned bumpier than
14As

discussed in Box 1.1 of the October 2015 WEO, a number
of mechanisms could generate lower output paths after recessions.
For instance, a prolonged period of high unemployment could
lead some workers to drop out or become unemployable. Reduced
research and development could hurt the level—or even the growth
rate—of productivity. Financial crises could trigger institutional
changes such as tougher capital requirements, weighing on
investment. A number of studies have provided empirical evidence
supporting these hypotheses. For instance, Blanchard, Cerutti, and
Summers (2015) find that, even for recessions triggered by intentional disinflation, the proportion of recessions followed by lower
output relative to the prerecession trend was substantial. Likewise,
Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2015) find that the financial
crisis of 2008 and the ensuing recession put the productive capacity
of the U.S. economy on a lower trajectory than prior to 2007, with a
significant portion of the damage to the supply side of the economy
resulting from the weakness in aggregate demand.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

27

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

expected. Recent months have seen a fading of the
capital outflow pressure and domestic equity market
turbulence that contributed to large sell-offs in global
financial markets in August 2015 and January 2016.
Nevertheless, China’s transition to a services and
consumption-based economy less dependent on commodity and machinery imports will continue to have
an impact on prices, trade volumes, and profits across
a swath of global industries, with associated effects on
asset prices, international portfolio allocations, and
investor sentiment.
China confronts a difficult trade-off in its transition—restructuring the economy, reducing its reliance
on credit, and accepting slower near-term growth
in return for higher and more sustainable long-term
growth. The baseline assumes limited progress in
tackling the corporate debt problem and reining in
credit, and a preference for maintaining relatively high
near-term growth, which raises the risk of an eventual
disruptive adjustment (see the China IMF 2016 Article IV Staff Report). Against this backdrop, relatively
mild triggers such as negative surprises in China’s
high-frequency indicators or a modest adjustment in
domestic asset prices and the exchange rate could catalyze an outsized reaction in global sentiment.

in external conditions to press ahead with structural
reforms, tackle debt overhangs, and credibly advance
fiscal adjustment, where needed.

Adverse Turn in Financial Conditions for Emerging
Markets

Conflict, Health, and Climate Factors

Despite the unexpected outcome of the Brexit vote,
financial conditions in emerging markets have continued to improve in recent months, with some firming
of commodity prices and growing conviction among
investors that monetary policy in advanced economies
will remain highly accommodative into 2017 and
beyond. As noted in the October 2016 GFSR, external
developments appear to have played an important role
in the recent pickup in capital flows to emerging market
economies. Underlying vulnerabilities among some large
emerging market economies (including high corporate
debt, declining profitability, and weak bank balance
sheets in some cases)—together with the need to rebuild
policy buffers, particularly in commodity exporters—
leave emerging market and developing economies still
exposed to sudden shifts in investor confidence. Such
shifts could materialize, for example, if incoming inflation data for the United States point to an earlier hike in
the policy interest rate than anticipated. Investor sentiment could also shift if emerging market and developing
economies fail to take advantage of the relative stability
28

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Breakdown of Correspondent Banking Relationships
In the aftermath of the crisis, large global banks
have been forced to reassess their business models
as they rebuild capital buffers, strengthen their risk
management practices, and face compressed net
interest margins. As a consequence, correspondent
banking relationships—large global banks’ provision
of payment and deposit-taking services on behalf of
other banks, often located in smaller countries—have
declined with global banks’ withdrawal from transactions with smaller, vulnerable economies in Africa, the
Caribbean, central Asia, and the Pacific Islands. An
intensification of this trend would imperil the access of
some of these economies to cross-border remittances,
undermine their ability to finance activity, and weaken
their response to natural disasters. Although the direct
impact on global GDP might be relatively small, the
social and economic ramifications could extend beyond
the borders of the affected economies—for example, if
they add to outward migration.

A range of additional factors continues to influence the outlook in various regions—for example,
the drought in east and southern Africa; civil war
and domestic conflict in parts of the Middle East and
Africa; the unfolding migrant situation in Jordan,
Lebanon, Turkey, and Europe; multiple acts of terror
worldwide; and the spread of the Zika virus in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the southern United
States, and southeast Asia. Each of these factors inflicts
both immeasurable humanitarian and direct economic
costs. Recurrent incidents of terrorism, protracted civil
conflict that spreads to contiguous regions, and a worsening public health crisis from Zika could collectively
take a large toll on market sentiment, with negative
repercussions for demand and activity.

Upside Risks
Despite the abundance of downside risks flagged
in previous WEOs, the world economy had begun to
record slightly stronger-than-expected growth in the
first quarter of 2016. Several signs point to prospects

CHAPTER 1

of a more robust pickup in momentum than currently
envisaged, including the resilience and orderly repricing in financial markets after the initial shock of the
Brexit vote; sustained improvements in the U.S. labor
market; the modest uptick in commodity prices,
which should ease some of the pressure on commodity
exporters without severely hurting net importers; and
fading headwinds from rapid currency depreciations
and capital flows out of stressed emerging markets.
Additional momentum could follow if countries intensify efforts to lift actual and potential output through
targeted and well-sequenced structural reforms,
demand support, and balance sheet repair.

Figure 1.19. Risks to the Global Outlook
The balance of risks points to growth weaker than envisaged in the central
scenario for 2016 and 2017.
6

A fan chart analysis—based on financial and
commodity market data as well as inflation and term
spread forecasts—suggests reduced dispersion of
outcomes around the central scenario. As visible in Figure 1.19, the width of the 90 percent confidence interval has narrowed slightly for both the 2016 and 2017
growth forecasts relative to those in the October 2015
WEO, but remain wider than the estimates of the
October 2014 WEO. Risks remain tilted to the downside for 2016 and 2017.
The probability of a recession over a four-quarter horizon (2016:Q3–2017:Q2) in most regions
has declined relative to the probability computed in
March 2016 (for 2016:Q1–2016:Q4; Figure 1.20). In
Japan, the recently announced fiscal stimulus measures
have lowered the probability of recession relative to the
April 2016 estimates. The slightly improved outlook
for commodity prices and financial conditions relative
to April have helped lower the probability of a recession in Latin America, although the risk remains high.
Deflation risks—as measured by the four-quarter-ahead
probability of deflation—have also declined relative
to April 2016 for the United States and the euro area,
primarily owing to the strengthening in commodity
prices and the associated firming in projected headline
consumer price inflation. By contrast, the probability
of deflation has increased in Japan owing to weak
momentum in consumer prices and the recent appreciation of the yen.

Policy Priorities
While the outlook for the global economy discussed above points to a projected pickup in growth

1. Prospects for World GDP Growth1
(Percent change)

5
4

WEO baseline

3

90 percent conﬁdence interval
70 percent conﬁdence interval
50 percent conﬁdence interval
90 percent conﬁdence interval from October 2015 WEO
90 percent conﬁdence interval from October 2014 WEO

2
1
0
2013
1.5

Fan Chart

Global Prospects and Policies

1.0

14

15

16

17
2

2. Balance of Risks Associated with Selected Risk Factors
(Coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlying
variables)

0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0

Balance of risks for

–1.5

Term spread

2016 (October 2015 WEO)
2016 (October 2016 WEO)

S&P 500

Inﬂation risk

Oil market risks

Dispersion of Forecasts and Implied Volatility3
80

3.

70
60

GDP (right scale)
VIX (left scale)

50

1.2

125

1.0

100

0.8

75

0.6

50

0.4

25

4.

0.5

Term spread
(right scale)
Oil (left scale)

40

0.3

30
20
10
0
2006 08

0.4

10

12

14

0.2
Jul.
16

0
2006 08

0.2

10

12

14

0.1
Jul.
16

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE); Consensus
Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
1
The fan chart shows the uncertainty around the World Economic Outlook (WEO)
central forecast with 50, 70, and 90 percent conﬁdence intervals. As shown, the
70 percent conﬁdence interval includes the 50 percent interval, and the 90 percent
conﬁdence interval includes the 50 and 70 percent intervals. See Appendix 1.2 of
the April 2009 WEO for details. The 90 percent intervals for the current-year and
one-year-ahead forecasts from the October 2015 WEO and October 2014 WEO are
shown.
2
The bars depict the coefﬁcient of skewness expressed in units of the underlyingvariables. The values for inﬂation risks and oil price risks enter with the opposite
sign since they represent downside risks to growth.
3
GDP measures the purchasing-power-parity-weighted average dispersion of GDP
growth forecasts for the G7 economies (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
United Kingdom, United States), Brazil, China, India, and Mexico. VIX is the Chicago
Board Options Exchange Volatility Index. Term spread measures the average
dispersion of term spreads implicit in interest rate forecasts for Germany, Japan,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. Oil is the CBOE crude oil volatility
index. Forecasts are from Consensus Economics surveys. Dashed lines represent
the average values from 2000 to the present.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

29

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.20. Recession and Deﬂation Risks
(Percent)

The probability of recession over a four-quarter horizon spanning 2016:Q3 through
2017:Q2 has generally declined in most regions relative to the probabilities
computed in the April 2016 WEO for the period 2016:Q1 through 2016:Q4. The risk
of deﬂation remains high in the euro area and Japan.
70

1. Probability of Recession, 2016:Q3–2017:Q2

60

April 2016 WEO: 2016:Q1–2016:Q4

50
40
30
20
10
0

25

United
States

Euro area

Japan

Emerging
Asia

Latin
America 5

Rest of the
world

2. Probability of Deﬂation, 2017:Q31
April 2016 WEO: 2017:Q1

20

combating deflation pressure, or building resilience. A
common theme, though, is that urgent policy action is
needed on multiple fronts to head off repeated growth
disappointments and combat damaging perceptions
that policies are ineffective in boosting growth and that
the rewards accrue only to those at the higher end of
the income distribution.
Where room to loosen fiscal or monetary policy
appears more limited, coordinated, comprehensive
responses that exploit complementarities between
structural and demand management policies may
help strengthen the efficacy of the overall policy
package. And coherent frameworks that embed
near-term responses in the context of clearly articulated medium-term targets can boost confidence and
create more room for policy maneuvering to combat
near-term shocks. While essential at the country
level, these policies would be even more effective if
adopted broadly, with due attention to country-specific priorities.

15

Policies—Advanced Economies

10

Advanced economies as a group continue to experience a modest recovery characterized by generally
weak productivity growth, low investment, and low
inflation. These features are products of the interplay
between subdued demand, diminished growth expectations, and declining potential output growth. Policy
action must therefore continue to support demand
while implementing measures that will lift potential
growth.
With output gaps still negative, wage pressures
muted, and inflation expectations for the next few
years below central bank targets, monetary policy must
steer an accommodative course. As the post-Brexit
referendum experience has demonstrated thus far, central banks’ readiness to act with unconventional tools
has lowered the risk of a systemic liquidity crunch,
facilitated orderly market repricing, and helped boost
investor sentiment. Further monetary policy loosening
through asset purchases and, in some cases, negative
deposit rates, will ensure that long-term rates remain
contained, help lift inflation expectations, and lower
the real costs of borrowing for households and firms.
As discussed in Box 3.5 and in Chapter 3 more generally, transparent inflation-forecast frameworks allow for
economic stimulus—even when policy rates are close
to their effective lower bounds—through temporary
overshooting of the target.

5
0

United
States

Euro area

Japan

Emerging
Asia

Latin
America 5

Rest of the
world

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Emerging Asia comprises China, Hong Kong SAR, India, Indonesia, Korea,
Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan Province of China, and Thailand; Latin
America 5 comprises Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru; Rest of the world
comprises Argentina, Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Israel, New Zealand, Norway, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
the United Kingdom, and Venezuela. April 2016 WEO data refer to simulations run
in March 2016.
1
Deﬂation is deﬁned as a fall in the price level on a year-over-year basis in the
quarter indicated in the ﬁgure.

over the rest of the forecast horizon, as seen in Box
1.1, a significant portion of this improvement arises
from weights shifting toward large emerging market
economies projected to grow at rates above the global
average and from the normalization of conditions in
some countries experiencing growth downturns or
outright recessions. The potential for setbacks to this
outlook is high. Against this backdrop, policy priorities
differ across individual economies depending on the
specific objectives for improving growth momentum,
30

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

As the past several years’ experience with unconventional strategies has however also shown, accommodative monetary policy alone cannot lift demand and
may, in some cases, generate undesirable side effects
(as discussed in the October 2016 GFSR). This is
especially true in an environment in which the natural
rate of interest is persistently low, since this implies less
monetary policy accommodation even at record-low
interest rates. Fiscal support therefore remains essential
for lifting momentum where there is slack and avoiding
a lasting downshift in medium-term inflation expectations. It should be calibrated to the amount of space
available and, where adjustment is warranted, oriented
toward policies that protect the vulnerable and are conducive to lifting medium-term growth prospects. Such
growth-friendly tax and expenditure policies include
reforming labor taxes and social benefits to incentivize
labor force participation; reforming corporate income
taxes and providing well-targeted tax incentives to boost
research and development investment (as discussed in
the April 2016 Fiscal Monitor); increasing productive
capacity through infrastructure investment where there
are clear shortfalls; and facilitating improvements in
human capital by investing in education and health
care. In countries facing rising public debt burdens
and social entitlement outlays, credible commitments
to medium-term consolidation strategies can generate
additional space for near-term support.
Support for near-term demand must be accompanied, in some cases, by efforts to repair bank balance
sheets (addressing legacy nonperforming loans and
strengthening operational efficiency, as discussed in
the October 2016 GFSR), as well as structural reform
policies to address waning potential growth, thus bolstering longer-term income prospects. Better income
prospects, in turn, would lift private demand in the
short term and help contain increases in debt-to-GDP
ratios in the medium term. Although employment has
grown more strongly than expected in recent years,
unfavorable demographic trends in advanced economies point to limits to the extent potential growth
can recover on the back of an expanding labor force.
Specific priorities vary across countries, ranging from
measures to boost labor force participation rates, to
reforms that eliminate product and labor market distortions, to steps that address corporate debt overhangs
and facilitate restructuring, to policies that lift research
and development investment and encourage innovation. Some structural reforms can also raise near-term
activity, thereby amplifying the effects of demand sup-

Global Prospects and Policies

port policies in countries with slack. Other structural
reforms require supportive macroeconomic policies to
lessen possible dampening effects they may have on
near-term growth and inflation (see Chapter 3 of the
April 2016 WEO).
Country-Specific Priorities
•• In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England’s
August announcement of a suite of accommodative
measures—including a 25 basis point cut in the
policy rate, a new “term funding scheme” to transmit the lower policy rate to retail borrowing costs,
and resumption of quantitative easing—signals its
commitment to limit post-Brexit downside risks
and maintain confidence. These measures, together
with the reduction in banks’ countercyclical capital
buffers announced immediately after the referendum, are appropriately geared toward ensuring that
lending conditions remain supportive as the U.K.
economy begins to adjust to the new institutional
arrangements. On the fiscal front, automatic stabilizers should be allowed to operate freely. As greater
clarity emerges on the macroeconomic impact of
the Brexit vote, the need for further near-term
discretionary fiscal policy easing and the appropriateness of the medium-term deficit target should be
assessed, possibly in the context of the upcoming
November fiscal review.
•• In the euro area, with inflation expectations still
below target, several economies operating with slack,
and uncertainty clouding prospects for sustained
momentum in activity, the European Central
Bank should maintain its current appropriately
accommodative stance. Additional easing through
expanded asset purchases may be needed if inflation
fails to pick up. Fiscal policy should also be used to
support the recovery in the near term by funding
investment and other priorities in countries where
space permits and by accelerating deployment
of centrally funded investment. Countries with
high debt burdens should undertake gradual fiscal
consolidation. Centrally funded investment programs should be expanded, with access subject to
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact and
implementation of recommended structural reforms.
Demand support should be reinforced with product,
labor market, and public administration reforms to
encourage firms’ entry and exit, raise labor participation rates, and address labor market duality. Action
in these areas, which could be encouraged through
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

31

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

outcome-based reform benchmarks, along with steps
to boost infrastructure investment and complete the
single market in services, energy, digital commerce,
transportation, and capital, would lift potential
growth and productivity. Faster bank and corporate
balance sheet repair, a common deposit insurance
scheme, and a fiscal backstop for the banking union
remain critical in order to weaken bank-sovereign
links, contain risks to financial stability, improve
policy transmission, and facilitate consolidation and
restructuring of the banking sector. Refugee integration into the workforce through swift processing
of asylum applications and enhanced training and
placement services is essential in countries that face
this pressing concern.
•• In the United States, despite the steady decline
in the unemployment rate to less than 5 percent
and the pace of job creation over the past year,
exceeding the average of the precrisis boom years,
wage growth and consumer price inflation have
remained subdued. The Federal Reserve’s pause
after the December 2015 increase in the federal
funds rate is thus an appropriate response to these
developments as well as to risks stemming from
the global environment. Further increases should
be gradual and tied to clear signs that wages and
prices are firming durably. On the fiscal side,
the moderately expansionary near-term stance is
appropriate. Over the long term, however, public
finances are on an unsustainable path given the
anticipated increases in health and pension outlays
as the population ages and potential output slows.
Instituting a credible deficit and debt-reduction
strategy would create room to lift productive
capacity by increasing infrastructure investment;
boosting labor force participation (through expansion in child care assistance and the earned income
tax credit, combined with an increase in the minimum wage for low-income workers) and enhancing
human capital (through higher spending on early
childhood education and skills-enhancing vocational training). Complementing this consolidation plan, a comprehensive reform of the tax code
geared toward simplification and fewer exemptions
would incentivize job creation, widen the revenue
base, and enhance fiscal sustainability.
•• In Japan, with growth below potential and inflation
weakening this year following the yen appreciation,
the Bank of Japan’s monetary easing through asset
purchases and negative deposit rates has been critical
32

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

to preventing the economy from tipping back into
deflation. The fiscal stimulus announced in August
will lessen the drag from the expiration of previous
measures and reduce the risk of a slide in nearterm activity. In order to secure a durable increase
in inflation and growth, however, a comprehensive
policy approach is required that enhances demand
support with actions to lift medium-term growth
expectations and boost wages. Elements of such a
package would include reforms to diminish labor
market duality and increase labor force participation
by women and older workers, while admitting more
foreign workers; measures to boost private investment, including lowering entry barriers in retail
trade and services, improvements in the provision
of capital for new ventures, and stronger corporate
governance to discourage companies from accumulating excess cash reserves; and income policies that
motivate profitable companies to raise wages in line
with the Bank of Japan’s inflation target and productivity growth. Together with this comprehensive
package, a credible long-term fiscal consolidation
plan based on a preannounced schedule of a gradual
increase in the consumption tax, social security
reform, and efforts to broaden the tax base would
place public finances on a more sustainable footing,
create additional space for fiscal policy to respond
to near-term setbacks, and boost confidence in the
overall policy approach.

Policies—Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging market and developing economies have
experienced a period of relative calm in recent months.
External financial conditions are benign compared with
the start of 2016, and there are signs that macroeconomic distress in some key countries may be easing. As
discussed earlier in the chapter, China’s adjustment to a
slower growth path and the subdued outlook for commodity prices remain potent forces shaping prospects
for many of these economies. Most tangibly, these two
large reconfigurations have burdened the operating
environment for emerging market and developing
economy businesses, many of which are saddled with
high debt after the credit boom of 2002–12.
Despite the diverse range of country circumstances
and levels of development within this group, the
broad common policy objectives confronting emerging market and developing economies are to maintain
convergence to higher income ranges and to strengthen

CHAPTER 1

resilience. The former requires structural reforms
that facilitate technology diffusion and job creation,
appropriately harnessing the existing skills in the
economy while minimizing inefficiencies from resource
misallocation. And to continue making progress up the
value-added ladder, a key imperative is to enhance the
quality of human capital through adequate investment
in education and health care.
Strengthening resilience requires action on several
fronts. In stressed emerging market economies where
activity appears to be bottoming out, it is imperative to
continue facilitating the recovery by avoiding premature and excessive tightening of fiscal and monetary
policy. More broadly, as the considerable aftershocks of
the global financial crisis have demonstrated, periods of relative calm in external financial conditions
for emerging market and developing economies can
quickly take an adverse turn. Recent instances of rapid
asset price and exchange rate movements appear to
have had largely localized and short-lived effects in
exposed economies. Nevertheless, the prospect of large
repercussions in economies with unhedged foreign
liabilities, and where short-term borrowing is channeled into longer-term, less liquid investments, requires
that these economies strengthen their defenses against
potential financial turbulence by containing currency
and balance sheet mismatches. Exchange rate flexibility
and permitting market forces to guide movements in
the currency can help absorb shocks and provide some
insulation from protracted external pressure, but at
times foreign exchange intervention may be needed
to maintain orderly market conditions and prevent
disruptive overshooting. Commodity exporters with
large fiscal imbalances face the additional challenge of
adjusting their public finances to an environment with
lower revenue and potentially less favorable financing
conditions compared with those in the past decade.
Against this backdrop, they need to ensure that fiscal
consolidation is as growth friendly as possible.
Country-Specific Priorities
•• China continues to make progress with the complex tasks of rebalancing its economy toward
consumption and services and permitting market
forces a greater role. But the economy’s dependence on credit is increasing at a dangerous pace,
intermediated through an increasingly opaque and
complex financial sector. The high and rising credit
dependence reflects a combination of factors—the
pursuit of unsustainably high growth targets, efforts

Global Prospects and Policies

to prop up unviable state-owned enterprises to
preserve employment and defer loss recognition, and
opportunistic lending by financial intermediaries
in the belief that all debt is implicitly guaranteed
by the government. By maintaining high near-term
growth momentum in this manner, the economy
faces a growing misallocation of resources and risks
an eventual disruptive adjustment. This would
undermine the impressive reform progress made so
far with financial sector liberalization, the opening
of the capital account, and a strengthened framework for local government finances. The priorities
are therefore to address the corporate debt problem
by separating viable from unviable state-owned
enterprises, hardening budget constraints and
improving governance in the former while shutting
down the latter and absorbing the related welfare
costs through targeted funds; apportioning losses
among creditors and recapitalizing banks as needed;
allowing credit expansion to slow and accepting the
associated slower GDP growth; strengthening the
financial system by closely monitoring credit quality
and funding stability, including in the nonbank
sector; continuing to make progress toward an
effectively floating exchange rate regime; and further
improving data quality and transparency in communications. Avoiding a further buildup of excess
capacity among unviable state-owned enterprises
in China would also help ease deflation pressures
in advanced economies grappling with the risk of
persistently low inflation.
•• India’s economy has benefited from the large terms
of trade gain triggered by lower commodity prices,
and inflation has declined more than expected.
Nevertheless, underlying inflationary pressures
arising from bottlenecks in the food storage and
distribution sector point to the need for further
structural reforms to ensure that consumer price
inflation remains within the target band over the
medium term. Important policy actions toward the
implementation of the goods and services tax have
been taken, which will be positive for investment
and growth. This tax reform and the elimination
of poorly targeted subsidies are needed to widen
the revenue base and expand the fiscal envelope to
support investment in infrastructure, education,
and health care. More broadly, while several positive
measures have been undertaken over the past two
years, additional measures to enhance efficiency in
the mining sector and increase electricity generation
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

33

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

are required to boost productive capacity. Additional
labor market reforms to reduce rigidities are essential
for maximizing the employment potential of the
demographic dividend and making growth more
inclusive. Continued efforts by the Reserve Bank
of India to strengthen bank balance sheets through
full recognition of losses and increasing bank capital
buffers remain critical for improving the quality of
domestic financial intermediation.
•• In Brazil, the economy continues to contract, albeit
at a more moderate pace, inflation is above the
central bank’s tolerance band, and policy credibility has been severely dented by events leading up
to the regime transition. There is an overarching
need to boost confidence and lift investment by
strengthening policy frameworks. Adopting the
proposed spending rule and laying out a coherent
medium-term fiscal consolidation framework would
send a strong signal of policy commitment. Further
imperatives for lifting investment include simplifying the tax code, reducing barriers to trade, and
addressing infrastructure shortfalls to reduce the cost
of doing business.
•• South Africa’s economy is still grappling with the
decline in commodity prices, over a quarter of
the workforce is unemployed, and the outlook is
clouded by policy uncertainty and political risks. A
comprehensive structural reform package that fosters
greater product market competition, more inclusive
labor market policies and industrial relations, and
improved education and training, as well as reducing infrastructure gaps is critical to boost growth,
create more jobs, and reduce inequality. Measures
to improve state-owned enterprises’ efficiency and
governance, including through greater private participation, are a particularly important element of
the needed reform package to lift growth prospects
and reduce contingent fiscal risks. While some of
these reforms may take time to yield positive growth
effects, immediate benefits can stem from improved
confidence and signaling of policy consistency.
•• In Russia, the combined effects of lower oil prices,
sanctions, and diminished access of firms to international capital markets have forced the economy
into recession since the end of 2014. Although the
economy is projected to return to growth in 2016,
excessive fiscal tightening should be avoided from
a cyclical perspective. Anchoring fiscal policy to a
medium-term consolidation program and reinstituting the three-year framework based on an updated
34

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

outlook for oil prices would enhance transparency,
increase confidence, and help the economy adjust to
a revised environment for commodity prices. With
inflationary pressures remaining contained, monetary easing should continue to support the adjustment. Improvements to financial supervision and
regulation, comprehensive asset quality reviews with
a view toward publicly funded bank recapitalizations
as needed, and a stronger resolution framework
would boost the resilience of the financial system,
improve the efficiency of credit allocation, and raise
medium-term growth prospects.

Policies—Low-Income Developing Economies
Among low-income economies, those dependent on
commodity exports continue to face a different outlook
than the others. With commodity prices much below
their 2014 peaks, subdued global growth, and a further
tightening in their financial conditions, economic
growth has significantly weakened for commodity-​
dependent low-income developing countries, particularly
fuel exporters. Indeed, many of the risks highlighted in
Box 1.2 of the April 2016 WEO are now materializing
for this group of economies. In contrast, growth expectations for relatively diversified low-income developing
countries are still solid, broadly in line with the projections in the April 2016 WEO. Some of these economies
have, however, also been hit by nonmacroeconomic
shocks, including conflicts and difficult security situations (Afghanistan, South Sudan, Yemen, the Sahel
region) and droughts and natural disasters (Ethiopia,
Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Myanmar), exacerbating
already weak macroeconomic conditions.
Policies in commodity-dependent countries have
been slow to adjust to the difficult economic conditions. After widening sharply in 2015, current account
deficits are expected to narrow slightly in 2016, helped
in part by exchange rate depreciation. But exchange
rate depreciations have also raised inflation for some
(for example, Mozambique, Nigeria, and Zambia) or
increased external debt liabilities. Fiscal deficits are
likely to remain elevated through 2016 as weaker revenues offset cutbacks in spending.
Among diversified economies, fiscal and external
current account positions have not improved despite
continued strong economic growth, reflecting limited
progress in adopting countercyclical policies—particularly with current spending outpacing revenue in
some cases.

CHAPTER 1

Against this backdrop, while the overarching priority
for low-income developing countries remains to deliver
on their United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals, actions to deal with near-term macroeconomic
challenges will also help meet these long-term objectives. In particular, efforts to create fiscal space by
enhancing domestic resource mobilization and improving the efficiency of government spending; steps to
reorient fiscal spending to protect the vulnerable and
address infrastructure gaps to foster inclusive growth;
and measures to improve financial sector resilience
through stronger prudential regulation, along with
steps to deepen financial inclusion, will help achieve
macroeconomic stabilization as well as overall economic resilience, sustained growth, and development.
Specific near-term policy priorities for low-income
developing countries differ based on their degree of
dependence on commodity exports:
•• The ongoing adjustment in macroeconomic policies
must continue and in some cases accelerate in
commodity-dependent low-income developing countries.
Specifically, fiscal policy adjustment needs to be
better balanced with efforts to raise the contribution of the noncommodity sector in fiscal revenue
collection. In the sub-Saharan African economies hit
hard by the slump in commodity prices, especially
oil exporters, the adjustment has started but remains
far from sufficient and continues to rely on unsustainable features, such as the drawdown of reserves,
central bank financing, and accumulation of arrears.
Instead, a sustainable adjustment is needed, based
on a comprehensive and internally consistent set of
policies. With most countries facing limited fiscal
space, spending needs to be rationalized—to the
extent possible by preserving priority capital expenditures and social sector spending and containing
current expenditures. The side effects of exchange
rate flexibility and depreciation will need to be
better managed through a tighter monetary policy
stance in some countries and stronger monetary policy frameworks that anchor inflation expectations.
Enhanced financial sector regulation and supervision will be required to manage foreign currency
exposures in balance sheets. Medium-term priorities
to improve economic resilience by rebuilding fiscal
buffers when commodity prices recover, and structural reforms to achieve economic diversification
and higher productivity, remain relevant.
•• For relatively diversified low-income developing countries, while growth remains strong, it is imperative to

Global Prospects and Policies

focus on adopting countercyclical macroeconomic
policies, in particular to rebuild fiscal buffers. Strong
debt management will also help those exposed to
global financial markets better cope with volatility in
capital inflows.

Multilateral Policies
With growth weak and policy space limited in many
countries, multilateral actions acquire even greater
relevance to sustain global improvements in living
standards. Continued multilateral effort is required on
several levels, including financial regulatory reform,
trade, and the global financial safety net.
•• Financial Regulatory Reform—Steady progress has
been made on building bank capital and liquidity
buffers, but more work is needed on implementing effective resolution frameworks and addressing
emerging risks from nonbank intermediaries. Closer
cross-border regulatory cooperation is also required
to limit the withdrawal of correspondent banking
relationships that provide vulnerable low-income
countries a gateway into the international payments
system.
•• Trade—With the seeming backlash against global
trade in advanced economies, there is a pressing
need for policymakers to refocus the discussion
toward the benefits of integration and to ensure that
those who bear the brunt of the adjustment costs
in an open trading system are adequately supported
through well-targeted social initiatives. As Chapter
2 finds, the diminishing pace of new trade reforms
in recent years, together with a rise in protectionist
measures, appears to have contributed in part to the
global slowdown in trade. Going forward the process of trade liberalization should be revived in order
to support trade growth and lift productivity. There
is substantial scope to further reduce trade costs
through cutting tariffs where they remain elevated,
ratifying and fully implementing commitments
made under the Trade Facilitation Agreement, and
establishing a way forward in the post-Doha trade
agenda. The next generation of trade reforms would
need to focus on areas most relevant to the contemporary global economy, such as reducing barriers to
e-commerce and trade in services, improving regulatory cooperation, and leveraging complementarities
between investment and trade. Reforms should be
coupled with measures to mitigate the costs to those
who are adversely affected. In particular, as noted
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

35

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

in Chapter 2, specific trade adjustment assistance
programs and effective support for retraining, skill
building, and occupational and geographic mobility
could play an important role in certain cases.
•• Strengthening the global financial safety net—The
combination of still-moderate global growth and
pronounced downside risks underscores the importance of strengthening the global financial safety

36

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

net to help economies with robust fundamentals
that may nevertheless be vulnerable to cross-border
contagion and spillovers. Risks stemming from
noneconomic factors with cross-border ramifications, such as the ongoing refugee crisis, further
demonstrate the case for instituting globally
funded vehicles to help the exposed economies
absorb the strains.

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Scenario Box 1. Tariff Scenarios
The Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal Model
(GIMF) is used here to illustrate the macroeconomic
implications of trade protectionism. Two scenarios
are used to illustrate how one country may have an
incentive to impose tariffs, particularly if it believes
there will be no retaliation. However, once a tariff
has been imposed on a country’s exports, it is in that
country’s best interest to retaliate, and when it does,
both countries end up worse off. Further, a scenario is
used to illustrate the negative implications for global
output, trade, and inflation should an increase in
global protectionism become a reality.
Consider first the scenarios presented in Scenario
Figure 1. The blue line traces out some key macro outcomes when country A (left column in figure) imposes
a tariff of 10 percent on imports from country B (right
column in figure) and country B does not retaliate.
Countries A and B are of similar size and have a similar degree of openness. It is assumed that the revenue
generated by the tariff is returned to households in
country A via transfers.1 The higher cost of imports
from country B leads households and firms in country
A to demand fewer of them. With country A’s import
demand lower, it does not need to export as much to
maintain external balance and its currency appreciates,
lowering foreign demand for its exports. Household
consumption in country A rises as the currency
appreciation makes imports from all other countries
cheaper, and the higher cost of country B imports
is returned to households in the form of transfers.
However, because country A exports less, firms reduce
investment (not shown) and overall output in country
A declines.
When there is no retaliation, lower export demand
from country A means that to maintain external
balance, country B’s currency needs to depreciate to
increase demand for its exports in other countries.
However, it does not fully offset the impact of the
decline in export demand from country A, and exports
fall below their pre-tariff level in country B. Imports
in country B also decline notably owing to both its
currency depreciation, which leads to higher import
prices, and the decline in consumption and investment

Scenario Figure 1. Unilateral and Bilateral
Imposition of Tariffs on Imported Goods
(Percent difference from baseline)
Unilateral Tariffs

Bilateral Tariffs
Country B

Country A

2. Real GDP

0.1 1. Real GDP

0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2

–0.2

–0.3
0

2

4

6

8 10

0

2

4

6

4. Real
Consumption

0.3 3. Real
Consumption
0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0

2

4

6

–0.3
8 10

8 10

0

2

4

6

0.2
0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
–0.4
8 10

6. Real Imports

1 5. Real Imports

0.5
0.0

0

–0.5
–1.0

–1
–2
0

–1.5
2

4

6

8

10

0.5 7. Real Exports
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0
–2.5
0 2 4 6 8 10

0

2

4

6

–2.0
8 10

8. Real Exports

1
0
–1

0

2

4

6

8

–2
10

10. Real Effective 1.5
Exchange Rate
1.0

0.5 9. Real Effective
Exchange Rate
0.0
–0.5

0.5

–1.0

0.0

–1.5
0

2

4

6

8 10

0

2

4

6

–0.5
8 10

1If

the tariff revenue is used for infrastructure investment
rather than transferred back to households, GDP in country A
will be higher. However, higher tariffs are not the most efficient
way to fund infrastructure investment as output rises more if
government consumption expenditure is reduced instead or if
consumption taxes are increased.

Source: IMF staff estimates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

37

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Scenario Box 1. Tariff Scenarios (continued)
demand (not shown) owing to the hit to country B’s
income from lower foreign demand for its exports.
The result is an improvement in country B’s net export
position, which helps moderate the decline in GDP
from lower domestic demand.
Facing trade barriers on its exports, it is in its
households’ best interest for country B to retaliate and
impose a tariff of 10 percent on imports from country
A. As illustrated by the red line in Scenario Figure 1,
when country B retaliates with its own tariff in the
second year, consumption in country B rises relative
to the case of no retaliation. First, the higher cost of
imports from country A reduces import demand in
country B. This means that country B does not need
to export as much to maintain external balance and
the currency depreciation is unwound. Imports from
countries other than A are now cheaper and some
of the demand is substituted away from country A.
In addition, households receive back tariff revenues
in the form of transfers from the government and,
consequently, they can afford to support a higher level
of consumption. Investment in country B declines
further as the currency appreciation makes its exports
more expensive, reducing foreign demand. Lower
investment and a relatively weaker net export position
more than offset the impact of higher consumption
and GDP in country B falls below the level when
there is no retaliation.
In country A, the retaliation lowers demand for its
exports, which means it no longer needs the currency appreciation to maintain external balance. The
resulting higher price of imports, plus the decline
in household income resulting from the reduction
in foreign demand, means that households can no
longer afford the previous level of consumption and it
falls back below the original baseline level. Although
country A’s net export position improves relative to the
no retaliation case, this is more than offset by lower
consumption and investment and GDP declines. In
the end, both country A and country B are left worse
off by the increase in protectionism.
A similar exercise is examined at the global level in
Scenario Figure 2 where it is assumed that a growing
level of protectionism in all countries raises tariff and
nontariff barriers gradually over the first three years
such that import prices everywhere rise by 10 percent.
It is assumed that half of the increase in import prices
is from tariffs, the revenue from which is returned
to households via transfers, and half is from an

38

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Scenario Figure 2. A Worldwide Increase in
Protectionism
(Percent difference from baseline, unless noted
otherwise)
Short-term effects
0.5

1. Global GDP

Long-term outcome
2. Global Real
Consumption

0.0

0.5
0.0
–0.5

–0.5

–1.0
–1.0

–1.5

–1.5
–2.0
0 1 2 3 4 5
4 3. Global Real
Exports
0

–2.0
0 1 2 3 4 5
4. Global Real
Investment

–2.5
1
0

–4

–1

–8

–2

–12

–3

–16

–4

–20
0 1 2 3 4 5
4 5. Global Real
Imports
0

0 1 2 3 4 5
6. Global
Inﬂation1

0.15
0.10
0.05

–4

0.00

–8

–0.05
–0.10

–12

–0.15

–16
–20
0 1 2 3 4 5

–5

–0.20
0 1 2 3 4 5

Source: IMF staff estimates.
1Global inﬂation shown in percentage point difference.

–0.25

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Scenario Box 1. Tariff Scenarios (continued)
increase in nontariff barriers. The higher cost of traded
goods lowers global output by almost 1¾ percent
after five years and by almost 2 percent in the long
run. Global consumption falls by a similar amount,
with global investment falling by even more. Global
trade however takes the biggest hit, with imports and
exports down by 15 percent after five years and 16

percent in the long run. Although rising import prices
help raise global inflation marginally during the period
of rising protectionism, once trade restrictions are no
longer increasing in year 4, the decline in demand
starts to dominate and inflation falls below baseline,
resulting in a lower level of prices in the long run
globally.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

39

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 1.1. World Growth Projections over the Medium Term
This box discusses the factors explaining the evolution of medium-term growth projections for the
global economy and how the projections compare with
historical averages. For that purpose, it is useful to
recall how the world growth rate ​​g​ tW
​  ​​for a generic year
t is calculated. Specifically, g​ ​​ tW
​  ​  = ​∑​  i​​ ​ω​  it​​ ​g​ it​​​ where ​​ω​  it​​​ is
country i’s weight in global output for year t (calculated at purchasing power parity) and ​​g​ it​​​ is country i’s
growth rate in year t. It follows that the change in the
world growth rate between year t and year T (in this
case, 2016 and 2021) can be written as follows:

​​​g​ TW​  ​ - ​gt​  W
​  ​  = ​∑​  i​​ ​ω​  it​​​(​​ ​g​ iT​​  - ​g​ it​​​)​​  + ​∑​  i​​​​(​​ ​ω​  iT​​​  - ​ω​  it​​​)​​ ​g​ iT​​​​
That is, the change in the world growth rate can be
decomposed into two terms:
•• The weighted sum of changes in individual growth
rate forecasts between 2016 and 2021 (using 2016
weights)
•• The impact of changes in country weights between
2016 and 2021, measured by the difference
between the 2021 world growth rate evaluated at
2021 weights and 2016 weights
The results of this decomposition are displayed in
the first panel of Figure 1.1.1. The change in country
weights (reflecting the increase in weights for emerging market and developing economies growing faster
than the world average—primarily China and India)
explains about one-third of the ¾ percentage point
increase in global growth whereas the weighted sum
of changes in growth forecasts explains the remaining
two-thirds. A large part of the latter (0.36 percentage
points) is explained by a normalization of conditions
in a handful of emerging market and developing economies experiencing a recession in 2016 (Argentina,
Brazil, Nigeria, Russia, South Africa, and Venezuela).
The aggregate GDP growth rate of these economies is
projected to be –2.3 percent in 2016, and about 2 percent in 2021.1 Higher growth in advanced economies
explains only 0.10 percentage point, with the remainder explained by faster growth elsewhere in emerging
market and developing economies.
The second panel of Figure 1.1.1 puts the medium-term growth forecast in perspective by comparing
it to average growth rates over the past 20 years.
1The negative impact on world growth from recessions in
emerging market economies in 2015 (2016) was more than three
(two) times its median value over the past 20 years.

40

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 1.1.1. World Growth Projections over
the Medium Term
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

1.5 1. Increase in World Growth, 2016–21
(Percentage points)
Change in country weights
AEs
1.0
Selected EMDEs1
Other EMDEs
0.5

0.0
8 2. World GDP Growth
World
AEs
EMDEs

6
4
2
0

1995–2007

1995–2015

2016

2021

8 3. World Growth in GDP per Capita
6
4

World
AEs
EMDEs

2
0

1995–2007 1995–2015

2016

2021

3 4. Growth in GDP per Worker in Advanced
Economies
2

1

0

1995–2004

2005–15

2016

2021

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging
market and developing economies.
1Selected EMDEs = Argentina, Brazil, Nigeria, Russia, South
Africa, Venezuela.

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Box 1.1 (continued)
While the growth forecast for 2016 is considerably
lower than historical averages, world growth in 2021
is projected to be broadly in line with its average over
the past two decades.2 The figure also illustrates the
role played by shifts in weights between advanced
economies and emerging market and developing
economies: while the projected growth rate for 2021
for both country groups is below their 1995–2015
average, the increased weight on (faster-growing)
emerging market and developing economies implies
that world growth is roughly unchanged. The shift in
weights also affects the aggregate growth rate for the
emerging market and developing economies group:
that growth rate for 2021 would be 0.6 percentage points lower if it were calculated with precrisis
(2007) weights.
However, as highlighted in this chapter, the world
is undergoing an important demographic transition.
Hence, the third panel of Figure 1.1.1 provides the
same comparison for growth in GDP per capita.
It shows that by 2021 world growth is projected
to exceed its average of the past two decades, again
reflecting shifts in weights: per capita growth is projected to be in line with its 20-year average for emerging market and developing economies (also reflecting
2The 2021 growth forecast is marginally higher than estimated
potential growth for that year given that output gaps are on
average still slightly negative in 2020.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

shifts in weights within the group, as mentioned
above), and below historical averages for advanced
economies.
The aging process implies not only a decline in
population growth rates, but an even sharper decline
in the growth rate of the workforce. To account for
this factor, the fourth panel of Figure 1.1.1 compares
growth in GDP per worker for advanced economies
(the only ones for which historical data and projections for employment are available). The figure shows
that growth is projected to pick up relative to its
average over the past decade, but to remain below its
precrisis average.
In sum, this box highlights three main points. First,
the projected increase in global GDP growth over
the next five years reflects to an important extent the
normalization of conditions in a few large emerging
market and developing economies currently in a recession, as well as the increased global weight of emerging
market and developing economies as a whole. Second,
taking into account the impact of the demographic
transition on population growth rates, the projections
for medium-term growth for the global economy are
actually broadly in line with precrisis averages. Third,
shifts in relative weights across emerging market
and developing economies play an important role in
explaining growth resilience for the country group as a
whole, as the relative importance of countries growing
faster than average is increasing.

41

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Table 1.1.1. Europe: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2.4
2.0
1.8

Europe

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017
0.6
0.9
1.8

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2.3
2.3
2.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017
...
...
...

Advanced Europe
Euro Area4,5
Germany
France
Italy
Spain

2.2
2.0
1.5
1.3
0.8
3.2

1.7
1.7
1.7
1.3
0.8
3.1

1.5
1.5
1.4
1.3
0.9
2.2

0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.5

0.4
0.3
0.4
0.3
–0.1
–0.3

1.3
1.1
1.5
1.0
0.5
1.0

2.7
3.2
8.4
–0.2
2.2
1.4

2.7
3.4
8.6
–0.5
2.2
1.9

2.8
3.1
8.1
–0.4
1.9
1.7

9.5
10.9
4.6
10.4
11.9
22.1

8.7
10.0
4.3
9.8
11.5
19.4

8.5
9.7
4.5
9.6
11.2
18.0

Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal

2.0
1.4
0.9
–0.2
1.5

1.7
1.4
1.4
0.1
1.0

1.6
1.4
1.2
2.8
1.1

0.2
0.6
0.8
–1.1
0.5

0.1
2.1
0.9
–0.1
0.7

0.9
1.6
1.5
0.6
1.1

8.6
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.4

9.1
0.1
2.6
0.0
0.0

8.2
0.4
2.7
0.0
–0.7

6.9
8.5
5.7
25.0
12.4

6.7
8.4
6.2
23.3
11.2

6.5
8.3
6.4
21.5
10.7

Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia

26.3
0.2
3.6
1.6
2.3

4.9
0.9
3.4
2.6
2.3

3.2
1.1
3.3
3.0
1.8

0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5

0.3
0.4
–0.2
0.5
–0.3

1.2
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.0

10.2
0.1
–1.3
–1.7
5.2

9.5
0.1
–1.0
–1.6
7.7

9.1
0.2
–0.6
–2.8
7.2

9.5
9.3
11.5
9.1
9.0

8.3
9.1
9.9
7.8
8.2

7.7
8.9
8.8
7.6
7.9

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus5
Malta

4.8
2.7
1.1
1.5
6.2

3.5
2.5
1.5
2.8
4.1

3.1
3.4
2.5
2.2
3.4

0.1
0.2
0.1
–1.5
1.2

0.2
0.2
0.5
–1.0
1.2

1.0
1.7
1.4
0.5
1.5

5.5
–1.2
2.1
–3.6
9.9

4.4
–2.0
0.6
–0.9
6.2

4.3
–1.2
0.0
–3.7
5.8

6.9
9.9
6.1
14.9
5.4

6.4
9.4
5.6
13.0
4.8

6.3
9.2
5.5
11.6
4.9

United Kingdom5
Switzerland
Sweden
Norway
Czech Republic

2.2
0.8
4.2
1.6
4.5

1.8
1.0
3.6
0.8
2.5

1.1
1.3
2.6
1.2
2.7

0.1
–1.1
0.7
2.2
0.3

0.7
–0.4
1.1
3.2
0.6

2.5
0.0
1.4
2.3
1.9

–5.4
11.4
5.2
9.0
0.9

–5.9
9.2
5.0
7.0
1.5

–4.3
9.0
5.3
7.6
1.0

5.4
3.2
7.4
4.4
5.0

5.0
3.5
6.9
4.7
4.1

5.2
3.4
6.7
4.5
4.1

Denmark
Iceland
San Marino

1.0
4.0
0.5

1.0
4.9
1.0

1.4
3.8
1.2

0.5
1.6
0.1

0.4
1.7
0.6

1.1
3.1
0.7

7.0
4.2
...

6.7
2.9
...

6.6
1.9
...

6.2
4.0
8.4

6.0
3.4
7.9

5.8
3.5
7.3

Emerging and Developing Europe6
Turkey
Poland
Romania

3.6
4.0
3.6
3.8

3.3
3.3
3.1
5.0

3.1
3.0
3.4
3.8

2.9
7.7
–0.9
–0.6

3.1
8.4
–0.6
–1.5

4.2
8.2
1.1
1.7

–1.9
–4.5
–0.2
–1.1

–2.0
–4.4
–0.1
–2.0

–3.0
–5.6
–1.0
–2.8

...
10.3
7.5
6.8

...
10.2
6.3
6.4

...
10.2
6.2
6.2

Hungary
2.9
2.0
2.5
–0.1
0.4
1.9
4.4
4.9
4.6
6.8
6.0
5.8
Bulgaria5
3.0
3.0
2.8
–1.1
–1.6
0.6
1.4
0.8
0.0
9.2
8.2
7.1
Serbia
0.7
2.5
2.8
1.4
1.3
3.2
–4.8
–4.2
–3.9
18.5
18.6
18.7
Croatia
1.6
1.9
2.1
–0.5
–1.0
0.8
5.2
3.0
2.2
16.9
16.4
15.9
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
5Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
6Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, FYR Macedonia, and Montenegro.

42

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.2. Asia and Pacific: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Asia
Advanced Asia
Japan
Korea
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
New Zealand
Macao SAR4
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India5
ASEAN-5
Indonesia
Thailand
Malaysia
Philippines
Vietnam
Other Emerging and Developing
Asia6

2015
5.4
1.2
0.5
2.6
2.4
0.6
2.0

Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
5.4
5.3
1.3
1.6
0.5
0.6
2.7
3.0
2.9
2.7
1.0
1.7
1.7
2.2

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2.3
2.5
2.9
0.8
0.5
1.2
0.8
–0.2
0.5
0.7
1.0
1.9
1.5
1.3
2.1
–0.3
1.1
1.1
–0.5
–0.3
1.1

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017
2.8
2.6
1.9
4.1
4.4
3.8
3.3
3.7
3.3
7.7
7.2
5.9
–4.7
–3.5
–3.9
14.6
15.0
14.4
19.8
19.3
19.3

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017
...
...
...
3.7
3.6
3.5
3.4
3.2
3.2
3.6
3.6
3.3
6.1
5.7
5.7
3.8
3.9
4.0
1.9
2.0
2.0

2.4
3.0
–20.3

1.4
2.8
–4.7

1.9
2.7
0.2

3.0
0.3
4.6

2.5
0.7
2.6

2.6
1.6
2.8

3.1
–3.2
28.0

2.8
–3.0
28.4

2.9
–3.5
29.2

3.3
5.4
1.9

3.2
5.3
1.9

3.1
5.5
2.0

6.6
6.9
7.6

6.5
6.6
7.6

6.3
6.2
7.6

2.7
1.4
4.9

3.1
2.1
5.5

3.3
2.3
5.2

2.1
3.0
–1.1

1.6
2.4
–1.4

0.8
1.6
–2.0

...
4.1
...

...
4.1
...

...
4.1
...

4.8
4.8
2.8
5.0
5.9
6.7

4.8
4.9
3.2
4.3
6.4
6.1

5.1
5.3
3.3
4.6
6.7
6.2

3.3
6.4
–0.9
2.1
1.4
0.6

2.5
3.7
0.3
2.1
2.0
2.0

3.4
4.2
1.6
3.0
3.4
3.6

1.5
–2.1
7.8
3.0
2.9
0.5

1.2
–2.3
9.6
1.2
1.8
0.4

0.7
–2.3
7.7
1.5
1.4
0.1

...
6.2
0.9
3.2
6.3
2.4

...
5.6
0.8
3.2
5.9
2.4

...
5.7
0.7
3.2
5.7
2.4

6.0

6.0

6.3

6.0

6.3

6.7

–1.5

–2.4

–3.5

...

...

...

Memorandum
6.7
6.5
6.3
2.6
3.0
3.2
2.2
1.7
1.0
...
...
...
Emerging Asia7
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Macao SAR is classified as an advanced economy. It is a Special Administrative Region of China, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent
basis.
5See country-specific notes for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
7Emerging Asia comprises the ASEAN-5 (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam) economies, China, and India.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

43

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2016
2017
1.6
2.2
1.6
2.2
1.2
1.9
2.1
2.3
–1.8
–1.4

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017
0.4
1.4
2.4
0.1
1.2
2.3
1.1
1.6
2.1
2.7
2.8
3.3
–0.8
–0.2
1.1

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017
–2.6
–2.6
–2.7
–2.6
–2.5
–2.7
–3.2
–3.7
–3.1
–2.9
–2.7
–2.8
...
...
...

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017
...
...
...
5.3
4.9
4.8
6.9
7.0
7.1
4.4
4.1
3.9
12.0
11.9
11.9

North America
United States
Canada
Mexico
Puerto Rico4

2015
2.5
2.6
1.1
2.5
0.0

South America5
Brazil
Argentina6
Colombia
Venezuela

–1.3
–3.8
2.5
3.1
–6.2

–2.0
–3.3
–1.8
2.2
–10.0

1.1
0.5
2.7
2.7
–4.5

...
9.0
...
5.0
121.7

...
9.0
...
7.6
475.8

...
5.4
23.2
4.1
1,660.1

–3.7
–3.3
–2.5
–6.4
–7.8

–2.0
–0.8
–2.3
–5.2
–3.4

–2.0
–1.3
–3.2
–4.2
–0.9

...
8.5
...
8.9
7.4

...
11.2
9.2
9.7
18.1

...
11.5
8.5
9.6
21.4

Chile
Peru
Ecuador
Bolivia
Uruguay
Paraguay

2.3
3.3
0.3
4.8
1.0
3.1

1.7
3.7
–2.3
3.7
0.1
3.5

2.0
4.1
–2.7
3.9
1.2
3.6

4.3
3.5
4.0
4.1
8.7
3.1

4.0
3.6
2.4
3.9
10.2
4.1

3.0
2.5
1.1
5.1
8.7
4.1

–2.0
–4.4
–2.2
–5.8
–3.5
–1.7

–1.9
–3.8
–1.5
–6.6
–2.9
0.6

–2.4
–3.1
–0.9
–4.9
–3.1
–0.5

6.2
6.0
4.8
4.0
7.5
6.1

7.0
6.0
6.1
4.0
7.9
5.9

7.6
6.0
6.9
4.0
8.5
5.5

Central America7

4.2

3.9

4.1

1.4

2.5

3.0

–4.0

–3.7

–3.7

...

...

...

Caribbean8
3.9
3.4
3.6
2.2
3.5
4.5
–4.3
–4.5
–4.6
...
...
...
Memorandum
0.0
–0.6
1.6
5.5
5.8
4.2
–3.6
–2.3
–2.3
...
...
...
Latin America and the Caribbean9
2.3
2.2
2.6
–0.9
0.3
2.2
–12.1
–12.6
–13.8
...
...
...
East Caribbean Currency Union10
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is classified as an advanced economy. It is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and
independent basis.
5Includes Guyana and Suriname. Data for Argentina and Venezuela’s consumer prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section
of the Statistical Appendix.
6See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7Central America comprises Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Panama.
8The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Grenada, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent
and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.
9Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies of the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. Data for Argentina and Venezuela’s consumer
prices are excluded. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
10Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are not IMF members.

44

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.4. Commonwealth of Independent States: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2015
2016
2017
–2.8
–0.3
1.4

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017
15.5
8.4
6.3

Net Energy Exporters
Russia
Kazakhstan
Uzbekistan
Azerbaijan
Turkmenistan

–2.4
–3.7
1.2
8.0
1.1
6.5

–0.4
–0.8
–0.8
6.0
–2.4
5.4

1.3
1.1
0.6
6.0
1.4
5.4

13.7
15.5
6.5
8.5
4.0
6.4

7.9
7.2
13.1
8.4
10.2
5.5

5.8
5.0
9.3
9.6
8.5
5.0

3.6
5.2
–2.4
0.1
–0.4
–10.3

1.9
3.0
–2.2
0.1
0.7
–18.5

2.5
3.5
0.0
0.2
3.1
–18.0

...
5.6
5.0
...
6.0
...

...
5.8
5.0
...
6.0
...

...
5.9
5.0
...
6.0
...

Net Energy Importers
Ukraine
Belarus
Georgia
Armenia
Tajikistan

–5.7
–9.9
–3.9
2.8
3.0
6.0

0.7
1.5
–3.0
3.4
3.2
6.0

2.1
2.5
–0.5
5.2
3.4
4.5

29.4
48.7
13.5
4.0
3.7
5.8

11.9
15.1
12.7
2.6
–0.5
6.3

9.9
11.0
12.0
3.6
2.5
7.3

–3.0
–0.3
–3.8
–11.7
–2.7
–6.0

–4.0
–1.5
–4.9
–12.1
–2.5
–5.0

–4.2
–2.1
–4.8
–12.0
–3.0
–5.0

...
9.1
1.5
12.0
17.7
...

...
9.0
1.5
...
17.9
...

...
8.7
1.5
...
18.0
...

Commonwealth of Independent States4

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017
3.0
1.3
1.9

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017
...
...
...

Kyrgyz Republic
3.5
2.2
2.3
6.5
1.1
7.4
–10.4
–15.0
–14.9
7.5
7.4
7.3
Moldova
–0.5
2.0
3.0
9.6
6.8
4.4
–4.7
–2.8
–3.4
4.9
4.7
4.5
Memorandum
3.2
1.3
2.6
6.2
9.8
8.3
–3.0
–4.1
–2.8
...
...
...
Caucasus and Central Asia5
6.1
5.0
5.2
7.3
6.3
7.7
–3.0
–3.0
–3.1
...
...
...
Low-Income CIS Countries6
Net Energy Exporters Excluding Russia
3.1
1.0
2.4
6.4
10.8
8.7
–2.4
–3.5
–2.0
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), are included in this group for reasons of geography and
similarity in economic structure.
5Caucasus and Central Asia comprises Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
6Low-Income CIS Countries comprise Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

45

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Table 1.1.5. Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account
Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)
Real GDP
Projections
2015
2016
2017

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017

2.3

3.4

3.4

5.8

5.1

6.0

–4.0

–4.6

–2.6

...

...

...

1.6
3.5
0.4
4.0
3.9
–2.4

3.3
1.2
4.5
2.3
3.6
10.3

2.9
2.0
4.1
2.5
2.9
0.5

5.4
2.2
11.9
4.1
4.8
1.4

4.7
4.0
7.4
3.6
5.9
2.0

4.2
2.0
7.2
3.1
4.8
2.0

–3.8
–8.3
2.1
3.3
–16.5
–7.2

–4.4
–6.6
4.2
1.1
–15.1
–10.8

–1.8
–2.6
3.3
3.2
–13.7
–3.6

...
5.6
10.8
...
11.2
...

...
...
11.3
...
9.9
...

...
...
11.2
...
10.4
...

Qatar
Kuwait

3.7
1.1

2.6
2.5

3.4
2.6

1.8
3.2

3.0
3.4

3.1
3.8

8.2
5.2

–1.8
3.6

0.0
8.4

...
2.1

...
2.1

...
2.1

Oil Importers5
Egypt
Pakistan
Morocco
Sudan
Tunisia
Lebanon
Jordan

3.8
4.2
4.0
4.5
4.9
0.8
1.0
2.4

3.6
3.8
4.7
1.8
3.1
1.5
1.0
2.8

4.2
4.0
5.0
4.8
3.5
2.8
2.0
3.3

6.7
11.0
4.5
1.5
16.9
4.9
–3.7
–0.9

5.9
10.2
2.9
1.3
13.5
3.7
–0.7
–0.5

9.9
18.2
5.2
1.3
16.1
3.9
2.0
2.3

–4.5
–3.7
–1.0
–1.9
–7.8
–8.8
–21.0
–9.0

–4.8
–5.8
–0.9
–1.2
–5.9
–8.0
–20.4
–9.0

–4.7
–5.2
–1.5
–1.4
–4.9
–6.9
–20.6
–8.9

...
12.9
5.9
9.7
21.6
15.0
...
13.1

...
12.7
6.0
10.2
20.6
14.0
...
...

...
12.3
6.0
10.1
19.6
13.0
...
...

Oil Exporters4
Saudi Arabia
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Algeria
Iraq

Memorandum
Middle East and North Africa
2.1
3.2
3.2
6.0
5.4
6.1
–4.4
–5.0
–2.8
...
...
2.5
2.8
3.0
–0.6
–0.6
0.8
4.6
3.1
2.9
5.2
5.2
Israel6
2.8
2.3
4.3
4.7
5.0
4.5
–14.4
–13.8
–12.7
...
...
Maghreb7
Mashreq8
3.9
3.6
3.8
9.1
8.7
16.0
–6.3
–7.9
–7.7
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Bahrain, Libya, Oman, and Yemen.
5Includes Afghanistan, Djibouti, and Mauritania. Excludes Syria because of the uncertain political situation.
6Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is included for reasons of geography. Note that Israel is not included in the regional aggregates.
7The Maghreb comprises Algeria, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia.
8The Mashreq comprises Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon. Syria is excluded because of the uncertain political situation.

46

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

...
5.2
...
...

CHAPTER 1

Global Prospects and Policies

Annex Table 1.1.6. Sub-Saharan Africa: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Sub-Saharan Africa

Real GDP
Projections
2015
2016
2017
3.4
1.4
2.9

Consumer Prices1
Projections
2015
2016
2017
7.0
11.3
10.8

Current Account Balance2
Projections
2015
2016
2017
–5.9
–4.5
–3.9

Unemployment3
Projections
2015
2016
2017
...
...
...

Oil Exporters4
Nigeria
Angola
Gabon
Chad
Republic of Congo

2.4
2.7
3.0
4.0
1.8
2.3

–1.7
–1.7
0.0
3.2
–1.1
1.7

0.8
0.6
1.5
4.5
1.7
5.0

9.1
9.0
10.3
0.1
3.7
2.0

19.1
15.4
33.7
2.5
0.0
4.0

19.3
17.1
38.3
2.5
5.2
3.7

–4.8
–3.1
–8.5
–2.3
–12.4
–21.0

–2.1
–0.7
–5.4
–5.3
–8.7
–8.2

–1.8
–0.4
–5.4
–4.7
–7.8
–2.1

...
9.0
...
...
...
...

...
12.1
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

Middle-Income Countries5
South Africa
Ghana
Côte d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Zambia
Senegal

2.6
1.3
3.9
8.5
5.8
3.0
6.5

1.9
0.1
3.3
8.0
4.8
3.0
6.6

2.9
0.8
7.4
8.0
4.2
4.0
6.8

5.4
4.6
17.2
1.2
2.7
10.1
0.1

7.0
6.4
17.0
1.0
2.2
19.1
1.0

5.7
6.0
10.0
1.5
2.2
9.1
1.8

–4.3
–4.3
–7.5
–1.8
–4.2
–3.5
–7.6

–3.9
–3.3
–6.3
–1.8
–4.2
–4.5
–8.4

–3.6
–3.2
–6.0
–2.1
–4.0
–2.2
–8.2

...
25.4
...
...
...
...
...

...
26.3
...
...
...
...
...

...
27.0
...
...
...
...
...

5.8
10.2
5.6
7.0
4.8
3.1
6.9

5.4
6.5
6.0
7.2
4.9
4.1
3.9

5.8
7.5
6.1
7.2
5.5
4.5
4.2

5.7
10.1
6.6
5.6
5.5
7.4
1.0

5.8
7.7
6.2
5.2
5.5
6.7
1.7

5.9
8.2
5.5
5.0
5.1
6.9
2.7

–10.1
–12.0
–6.8
–8.8
–9.4
–1.9
–3.7

–8.8
–10.7
–6.4
–8.8
–8.7
–2.3
–0.8

–7.4
–9.3
–6.1
–8.8
–8.9
–3.7
5.2

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Low-Income Countries6
Ethiopia
Kenya
Tanzania
Uganda
Madagascar
Democratic Republic of the Congo

Memorandum
Sub-Saharan Africa Excluding South
Sudan
3.4
1.5
2.9
6.7
10.2
10.4
–5.8
–4.5
–3.9
...
...
...
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of countries with exceptional reporting periods.
1Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Table A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2Percent of GDP.
3Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4Includes Equatorial Guinea and South Sudan.
5Includes Botswana, Cabo Verde, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, Seychelles, and Swaziland.
6Includes Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Comoros, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Malawi, Mali, Mozambique, Niger,
Rwanda, São Tomé and Príncipe, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Zimbabwe.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

47

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Special Feature: Commodity
MarketTitle:
Developments
and Forecasts,
Special Feature
Special Feature
Head with a Focus on
Food Security and Markets in the World Economy
Commodity prices have rebounded since the release of
the April 2016 World Economic Outlook (WEO)
in spite of rising uncertainty following the Brexit
vote—the June 23, 2016, U.K. referendum result in
favor of leaving the European Union. Supply outages
in various countries have led to tighter oil markets. The
announcement of China’s stimulus package increased
metal demand prospects and prices. Unfavorable weather
conditions have put upward pressure on food prices.
This special feature includes an in-depth analysis of
food security and markets in the world economy.
The IMF’s Primary Commodities Price Index has
rebounded 22 percent since February 2016, the reference period for the April 2016 WEO (Figure 1.SF.1,
panel 1). Oil prices have rallied, by 44 percent, due to
involuntary outages. Natural gas prices have declined.
With strong supply from Russia, natural gas prices in
Europe are at their lowest in 12 years. Asian markets
show weaker demand from Japan, which is reactivating
its nuclear power plants. Coal prices have rebounded.
Nonfuel commodity prices have increased, with metals
and agricultural commodities prices increasing by
12 percent and 9 percent, respectively.
Oil markets are in midstream. On the supply side,
the market has been hit by a few outages. Some had a
short-term impact on production, including the labor
dispute in Kuwait and the Fort McMurray wildfires
in Canada, but others, such as the geopolitical unrest
in Iraq, Libya, Nigeria, and Yemen, could have a
long-term impact. These disruptions temporarily
brought balance to the oil market. On the policy
front, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) did not reach its production target
agreement in June. However, some observers expect
OPEC members to set a new target in November
once the Islamic Republic of Iran’s production reaches
its presanction level.
The recent oil price rebound has helped shale
producers, leading to a bottoming of rig count. In
addition, drilled-but-uncompleted wells can be completed at current price levels, which will add to U.S. oil
The authors of this feature are Rabah Arezki (team leader), Claudia Berg, Christian Bogmans, and Akito Matsumoto, with research
assistance from Rachel Yuting Fan and Vanessa Diaz Montelongo.

48

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
320 1. Commodity Price Indices
(2005 = 100)
280

All commodities
Food

Energy
Metals

240
200
160
120
80
40

2005 06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

Aug.
16

90 2. Brent Futures Curves 1
(U.S. dollars a barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
80
70
60
50
October 2016 WEO
40
April 2016 WEO
30
October 2015 WEO
20
April 2015 WEO
10
Apr. 2015
Dec. 16
Aug. 18
Dec. 20
2
200 3. Brent Price Prospects
(U.S. dollars a barrel)
160

Futures
68 percent conﬁdence interval
86 percent conﬁdence interval
95 percent conﬁdence interval

120
80
40
0

2010

11

12

13

14

180 4. Metal Price Indices
(Jan. 2, 2014 = 100)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
Jan. 2014
July 14
Jan. 15

15

16

Aluminum
Iron ore

July 15

17

18

19

20

Copper
Nickel

Jan. 16

July 16

Sources: Bloomberg, L.P.; IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Thomson
Reuters Datastream; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: WTI = West Texas Intermediate.
1World Economic Outlook (WEO) future prices are baseline assumptions for each
WEO and derived from future prices. October WEO prices are based on August 18,
2016, closing.
2Derived from prices of futures options on August 18, 2016.

Special Feature  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

production. Tighter credit conditions could, however,
limit the recovery in investment. Canada’s oil production is strong, but new investment in oil sand fields is
limited. In sum, uncertainties over supply stem from
the persistence of involuntary outages, OPEC policy,
and investment in unconventional oil fields.
After strong global oil demand growth last year—
at 1.6 million barrels a day—on account of lower
oil prices for the most part, the International Energy
Agency expects growth in demand slightly above trend
at 1.3 million barrels a day in 2016 and 1.2 million
barrels a day in 2017. Given robust oil demand, the
continued erosion of high-cost producers, and severe
unplanned outages, markets expect the oil market to
rebalance during the course of next year.
Natural gas prices are declining—with a key natural
gas price index (the price average for Europe, Japan,
and the United States) down by 6 percent since
February 2016. Falling oil prices, abundant natural
gas production from Russia, and weak demand in
Asia have contributed to that decline. In the United
States, natural gas prices have instead edged higher on
account of stronger demand from the power sector,
reflecting hotter-than-expected weather. The coal price
index of average Australian and South African prices
has also increased 32 percent since February 2016 in
line with other energy and metal prices.
Oil futures contracts point to rising prices (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 2). Baseline assumptions for the IMF’s
average petroleum spot prices, which are based on
futures prices, suggest average annual prices of $43.0 a
barrel in 2016—a decline of 15 percent from 2015—
and $50.6 a barrel in 2017 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 3).
There remains substantial uncertainty around the
baseline assumptions for oil prices. Although geopolitical tensions in the Middle East could cause oil market
disruptions, high inventory and a rapid response from
U.S. shale producers should mitigate a sharp rise in
prices in the near future. Oil demand could weaken if
the consequences of Brexit for global aggregate demand
are more severe than anticipated. In the medium term,
the oil market is expected to remain quite tight in light
of supply constraints, considering that the decline in oil
prices has dramatically reduced investment in extraction,
unless shale production can be boosted or global
demand falters. In that environment, geopolitical events
could trigger oil price hikes.
Metal prices have rebounded 12 percent since February 2016 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 4). Prices have been
gradually declining since 2011 because of a slowdown

and a shift away from commodity-intensive investment in China. However, the recent stimulus program
announcement directed toward the construction sector
has provided some support to prices. Metal prices
are projected to decline by 8 percent in 2016 and to
increase by 2 percent in 2017. Futures prices point to
continued low prices.
Prices of agricultural commodities have increased by
9 percent overall since February 2016. Food prices rose
by 7 percent, with increases in most food items, except
a few, such as wheat and corn. International prices
have not fully reflected the adverse weather shock until
recently, but El Niño and a potential La Niña took a
toll on international food markets. In addition, Brazil—a big producer of corn, soybeans, coffee, beef, and
other food products—has been suffering a prolonged
drought. In the past two years, other regions have
made up the difference, but global stocks of corn and
soybeans are now expected to decline. Wheat stocks
are expected to rise due to favorable production in
the United States, the European Union, and Russia,
pushing prices down.
Annual food prices are projected to increase next
year on account of changing weather conditions.
Food prices are projected to increase by 2 percent
in 2016 and to remain broadly unchanged in 2017;
current price levels are already 3 percent above 2015
levels. Over the next two years, prices for major food
products, such as rice, are expected to increase slightly
from current levels. Risks to food prices are associated
with weather variability, particularly concerns over La
Niña, which typically has a stronger negative impact
on harvests than does El Niño.
The following section takes a longer view and
explores the evolution of food markets over the past
decades.

Food Security and Markets in the World
Economy
The debate over the evolution of food supply relative
to population growth dates back at least to the influential theory laid out by Malthus (1798). Since then,
a large body of literature has explored the interplay
between technology, population, and income per capita
and how different growth regimes emerge.1 A central
insight is that the modern era has been characterized
1See, among others, Galor and Weil 2000; Galor 2005 and 2011;
and Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson 2002.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

49

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

by rapid economic growth and divergence across
countries, and that this stands in contrast with most of
human history (the so-called Malthusian era), which
was characterized by stagnant income per capita.
Today, access to food is mainly seen as an issue
facing poor countries. However, developments in food
markets are far reaching and indicative of structural
developments at the global level.2 The rapid growth
in emerging markets, the demographic transition, and
technological developments have and will continue to
shape food markets. Furthermore, food markets are
segmented and subject to multifaceted distortions to
investment and trade. It is thus appropriate to take
an in-depth look at the recent and future evolution
of food markets and discuss what it means for food
security.3
This feature answers the following questions related
to the evolution of food markets and food security:
•• What is special about food markets?
•• What are the drivers of food production and
consumption?
•• How has global food trade evolved?
•• What are the risks?

What Is Special about Food Markets?
Food is an edible or potable substance that helps
sustain life. Food crops include cereals (for example,
wheat, maize, and rice); fruits and vegetables (for
example, oranges, and potatoes); meat and seafood (for
example, pork and shrimp); beverages (for example,
coffee, tea, and cocoa); oilseeds (for example, soybeans
and groundnuts); and sugar.4 These categories differ
in a variety of ways in terms of nutritional value,
perishability, and storability. The agricultural sector is
a source of livelihood for millions, whether through
cash cropping or subsistence farming. Globally, over
750 million individuals work in agriculture—that is,
30 percent of the workforce. In sub-Saharan Africa,
60 percent of the workforce labors in agriculture
(see World Bank 2015a). Historically, the process of
structural transformation that drove labor from the
2See

Arezki and others 2016 and references therein for a discussion on food price fluctuations and their consequences.
3According to the World Food Summit 1996 declaration, “Food
security exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food that meets their
dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.”
4Some of the aggregate figures presented in this special feature also
include nonedible agricultural commodities such as cotton, rubber,
wool, and hides.

50

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

agricultural (low-productivity) sector to the industrial
(high-productivity) sector can explain most of the fast
increase in aggregate productivity (see Duarte and
Restuccia 2010).
Unsurprisingly, most food production is consumed
domestically—about 85 percent of food is produced
in the country where it is consumed, according to the
World Bank (2015a). There are important differences
across types of food depending, among other things,
on whether or not they are cash crops. The transmission of international price variations from the border
is often limited by taxes, subsidies, price controls,
weak market integration, and local distribution costs.
In advanced economies, the average long-term passthrough of a 1 percent food price shock to domestic
food prices is about 0.10 percent and about 0.15 percent in emerging market economies (see Chapter 3,
Box 3.3).5 For these reasons, and because most food
production is consumed domestically, local agricultural
and weather conditions are influential, alongside global
market developments.6
Food has been a long-standing sticking point in
trade negotiations, including over tariff and nontariff
barriers, even though it is a relatively small portion of
global trade—8 percent of merchandise in value terms
according to the World Trade Organization (2015).
Tariff and nontariff barriers often result from concerns
over food sovereignty and the protection of domestic
farmers. The Doha Round trade negotiations stalled
in July 2008 over disagreements on agriculture. More
recently, the special safeguard mechanism proposal to
allow temporary tariff hikes when food imports surge
was opposed by exporters—in both advanced and
developing market economies.
The rationale for a special safeguard has been to
counterbalance official agricultural support in exporting countries. Direct agricultural support in countries
5See

also Furceri and others 2016.
in transportation technology and costs have shaped the
degree of integration of commodity markets, including for food,
which initially had very limited geographical reach. These changes
occurred in two stages (see Radetzki 2011). The first took place in
the latter half of the 19th century and included the introduction of
refrigerated ships permitting long-distance shipment of meat and
fruit. The second stage began in the 1950s, but came to fruition in
the 1970s. This stage involved the introduction of huge specialized bulk carriers, along with their harbor loading and unloading
facilities, which allowed economical shipment of low-value products
across much greater distances. The result was a further dramatic
decline in the cost of shipping—particularly across vast transoceanic
shipping routes—which led in turn to convergence of prices across
regional markets.
6Changes

Special Feature  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development has declined, while emerging markets
have ramped up their support (Figure 1.SF.2). Historically, in developed economies, the distortions tended
to favor farmers, whereas in developing economies
they tended to favor urban consumers at the expense
of small farmers (Anderson 2016). Over the past two
decades, high-income countries have generally reduced
the distortions in their agricultural sectors. Most developing regions, especially in Asia, have switched from
taxing their farmers to providing them with support.
All countries continue to have a strong antitrade bias
in the structure of assistance to their agricultural sector
(Anderson 2016).7 Trade-policy instruments, such as
export and import tariffs, subsidies, and quotas, have
serious distributional consequences for consumers.
Markets that are specially distorted include those for
soybeans, sugar, rice, wheat, beef, pork, and poultry
(Anderson, Rausser, and Swinnen 2013).8

What Are the Drivers of Food Production and
Consumption?
Production and consumption centers for food are
concentrated in a few countries, but the location of
production centers varies considerably with the type
of food under consideration (Figure 1.SF.3). The main
production and consumption centers, however, often
overlap. For example, China is both a large consumer
and producer of rice and pork, as well as a large
importer of soybeans—a key animal feed. The United
States is a large producer and consumer of both corn
and beef, as is the European Union for wheat. Of
course, many raw food products are key intermediate
inputs to the agricultural industry, which in turn produces and exports processed products.
Population growth is a key factor behind food
consumption. Income growth reorients the composition of demand, for instance, toward meat, dairy,

7Available data from the World Bank’s World Integrated Trade
Solution on the evolution of import tariffs on food products
indicate that they fell from 22 percent to 11.5 percent between
1991 and 2014. Tariffs did not increase in any region. However,
tariffs remained especially high in east Asia at 30 percent. In North
America, tariffs were the lowest at about 8–9 percent. These results
are based on effectively applied average import tariff data for food
products (in percent) calculated by aggregating, over all trading
partners, the lowest applicable tariff for each partner.
8Cotton markets are also severely distorted.

Figure 1.SF. 2. Producer Support Estimate
(Percentage of gross farm receipts)
OECD

Emerging market economies

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
–5
1995

2000

05

10

15

Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
Producer and Consumer Support Estimates, Agriculture Statistics (database).
Note: OECD country classiﬁcation is based on current membership. Emerging
market economies comprise Brazil, China, Colombia, Indonesia, Kazakhstan,
Russia, South Africa, Ukraine, and Vietnam. Vietnam is included from 2000
onward.

vegetables, and fresh fruits (Figure 1.SF.4).9 A case
in point is China’s remarkable economic growth over
the past 30 years, which brought sustained increases
in consumer income. Chinese consumers have moved
away from staples (such as grains and rice) toward a
more diversified and higher-quality diet.10 There are
of course important differences in preferences across
countries that lead to a differentiated effect of income
growth on the composition of food demand. India is
a major exception to the trend toward higher meat

9Tilman and Clark (2014 and 2015) show that there is a strong
relationship between income per capita and consumption of (1)
meat protein; (2) refined sugars and animal fats, oils, and alcohol;
and (3) total calories. Global food demand could double by 2050
compared with 2005, with dietary shifts responsible for about 70
percent and global population growth responsible for the remaining
30 percent (Tilman and Clark 2015).
10In China, per capita food consumption of cereals decreased by
7 percent, while consumption of sugar and vegetable oils increased
by 14 percent and 16 percent, respectively. Consumption of protein
increased as well: meat by 37 percent and seafood by 42 percent. The
increases in fruit and milk consumption were especially dramatic,
both increasing by 115 percent.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

51

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 1.SF.3. World Food Production and Consumption by
Country, 2015
(Percent of world production or consumption)

160
140
120

1. Production
EU
BRA
ETH

CHN
ARG
BGD

Figure 1.SF.4. Population and World Food Consumption
(Index 1995 = 100)
240

IND
VNM
Other

RUS
COL

USA
IDN

220
200

100

180

80
60

160

40
20
0

Population
Wheat
Corn
Soybeans
Beef
Rice
Pork

140
Wheat

Corn

160 2. Consumption
EU
140
BRA
120
IDN
100

Rice

CHN
MEX
BGD

Soybeans

Coffee

IND
ARG
VNM

Beef

RUS
JPN
Other

Pork

USA
CAN

120
100
80
1995

2000

05

10

80

Sources: U.S. Department of Agriculture; World Bank, World Development
Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.

60
40
20
0

Wheat

Corn

Rice

Soybeans

Coffee

Beef

Pork

Sources: U.S. Department of Agriculture; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.

consumption, due to religious traditions.11 Besides
population and income growth, the advent of some
types of biofuels—whose share has doubled over the
past decade—can put pressure on food markets and
11See Anand and Cashin (2016) and Tulin and Anand (2016) for
additional details on India’s changing food demand.

has been blamed for food price increases (Chakravorty,
Hubert, and Marchand 2015).
Land and technology availability are key drivers of
food production. Most of the available land suitable
for agriculture is located in developing regions—mostly
sub-Saharan Africa and South America, as shown in
Table 1.SF.1. Growing population, especially in Africa
and Asia, will require an increase in food calorie production by 70 percent by 2050 (IFPRI 2016).12 Putting all unused land into service, assuming everything
12The global population is forecast to reach 9.7 billion by 2050, up
from 7.3 billion as of 2015 (United Nations 2015). More than half of
this increase—that is 1.3 billion—is expected to occur in Africa, the
fastest growing region, and Asia is estimated to contribute 0.9 billion.

Table 1.SF.1. Used-to-Available Land Suitable for Agriculture by Region, 2013
(Thousand hectares)

Sub-Saharan
South
North
North Africa
Africa
America
America
Europe
Oceania
Asia
World
Used land (2013)
46,151
221,805
192,393
205,091
292,457
48,912
568,454 1,575,263
Unused suitable land
46,595
162,198
130,946
7,242
27,189
15,628
13,392
403,190
Total available land
92,746
384,003
323,339
212,333
319,646
64,540
581,846 1,978,453
Ratio used/available
0.50
0.58
0.60
0.97
0.91
0.76
0.98
0.80
Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), FAOSTAT and Global Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Used land is the total of arable land and land under permanent crops, from FAOSTAT. Unused suitable land is calculated from GAEZ. Land is considered
suitable if the land is ranked by GAEZ as highly or very highly suitable in one crop out of five (maize, soybean, wheat, sugarcane, palm oil). Oceania
includes American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Melanesia, Micronesia, Nauru, New Caledonia,
New Zealand, Niue, Norfold Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Pacific Islands Trust Territory, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Pitcairn Islands, Polynesia, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Wallis and Futuna Islands.

52

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

15

Special Feature  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

Table 1.SF.2. Food Exports
(Share of global exports)

Region
1990
2000
2013
OECD
0.7766
0.7406
0.6240
Non-OECD
0.2234
0.2594
0.3760
Brazil
0.0236
0.0292
0.0661
China
0.0370
0.0411
0.0393
India
0.0051
0.0103
0.0263
Argentina
0.0258
0.0281
0.0262
Indonesia
0.0046
0.0108
0.0224
Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO);
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Food refers to food excluding fish aggregate from FAO. OECD =
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. OECD and
Non-OECD country classification is based on current membership.

else remains equal, would help feed 9 billion people—
less than the 9.7 billion who will need to be fed by
midcentury. It is important to note that this back-ofthe-envelope calculation leaves aside other factors, such
as potential technological innovations, reductions in
food waste, and land degradation.
Future food supply increases—necessary to feed the
growing global population—ought to come mostly
from productivity increases. Expanded use of land for
agriculture should be limited to the extent possible in
the interest of the environment and social concerns:
biodiversity loss, ecosystem degradation, increased
carbon emissions, and traditional land-use rights. The
challenge therefore, is to find a way to increase the
productivity of currently cultivated land and slow the
rate of land degradation and deforestation. The potential to increase agricultural productivity is especially
high in sub-Saharan Africa, where yields are 50 percent
below their potential level (Fischer and Shah 2011).

How Has Global Food Trade Evolved?
Over the past decades, the global pattern of food
demand has shifted relatively more than it has for sup-

ply. Demand has shifted from west to east on account
of differences in population growth, as well as changes
in income affecting the composition of demand. The
supply shift from north to south for food has been
more modest than for other commodities, such as
minerals and metals. While some emerging markets
have increased their shares, the lion’s share of global
food trade is still sourced from advanced economies
(Table 1.SF.2). This is true despite potentially high
returns on capital in the agricultural sector in many
developing economies, which would justify capital
flowing into that sector (for example, see Gollin, Lagakos, and Waugh 2014a and 2014b).
There are wide gaps across countries in agricultural
yield—defined as crop production per unit of land
cultivation, which is a measure of land productivity
(Table 1.SF.3). These gaps reflect multifaceted impediments to investment and technology transfers in the
agricultural sectors of developing economies. There
is limited evidence of catching up in productivity
between advanced economies and low-income countries. The example of maize shows a huge divergence
in agricultural yields between North America and
sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 1.SF.5). While a recent
spurt in large-scale cross-border land acquisitions
following food price hikes suggests that capital has
started to flow from north to south, it has also revealed
important fault lines between investors and recipient
countries (see Box 1.SF.1).
There are many impediments to investment in the
agricultural sector. Scant net capital flows to developing
economies, contrary to what neoclassical theory would
suggest, are not unique to the agricultural sector (Alfaro,
Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych 2008). The many
factors that deter investment in agriculture are emblematic of the challenges these countries face in improving
their institutions. There is ample evidence of the role
of technology adoption (or the lack thereof ), and of

Table 1.SF.3. Agricultural Yield
(Ratio relative to highest producer)

Sub-Saharan Latin America and the
North Africa
Africa
Caribbean
North America
Europe
Oceania
Asia
Maize
0.60
0.19
0.43
1.00
0.56
0.77
0.48
Rice
0.88
0.22
0.48
0.81
0.59
1.00
0.44
Soybeans
0.82
0.40
0.88
1.00
0.63
0.68
0.42
Wheat
0.63
0.60
0.65
0.71
1.00
0.48
0.73
Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The above table reports the weighted average yield of crops by region, normalized relative to the highest producer. The average yield is weighted by the
area of harvested land. Oceania includes Australia, Fiji, Guam, Micronesia, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Pacific Islands Trust Territory, Papua New Guinea,
Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

53

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

What Are the Risks?

Figure 1.SF.5. Maize Yield
(Kilogram per hectare)

Amartya Sen (1981) was the first to point out that
hunger was not necessarily caused by a lack of food,
but by a lack of the capability to buy that food. Food
security is a multidimensional concept. The Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
(2015) identified four pillars for food security:
•• Availability—The supply side, determined by production, stocks, and trade in food
•• Access—Economic access (the ability to purchase
with disposable income) and physical access (the
ability to reach food sources via the transportation
infrastructure)
•• Utilization—Through diet diversity, intrahousehold
distribution of food, and food preparation and
consumption
•• Stability—The constancy of the other three dimensions over time

Sub-Saharan Africa
North America
Oceania

North Africa
Latin America and the Caribbean
Europe
Asia
10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0
1965

75

85

95

2005

14

Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Yield refers to a ﬁve-year moving average. Oceania includes Australia, Fiji,
Guam, Micronesia, New Caledonia, Vanuatu, New Zealand, and Papua New
Guinea.

human capital and credit constraints, in agricultural
development (see for instance, Besley and Case 1993,
Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, and Dercon and Christiaensen 2011). Other factors, such as lack of adequate
infrastructure (Donaldson and Hornbeck, forthcoming),
expropriation risk (Jacoby, Li, and Rozelle 2002), and
questions of land tenure (Besley and Burgess 2000), also
limit investment in the sector.

Rapid urbanization and galloping population
growth—especially in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia—
not matched with increases in domestic food supply,
have led to growing dependence on imports (Table 1.
SF.4). An overwhelming majority of countries around
the world are net importers of food (Table 1.SF.5).
Despite the high concentration of countries that have
always been food importers, 27 have switched from
being net exporters to importers since 1990. These are
countries in east Asia, Latin America, and sub-Saharan
Africa and include Honduras, the Philippines, Vietnam, and Zimbabwe. These four countries experienced
major declines in net food exports of more than 7 percentage points of GDP.
These switches have led to further concerns over
food security. Countries can achieve food security
through imports, provided that they are able to finance
the imports. Economically prosperous countries are

Table 1.SF.4. Urban Population by Region
(Percent of total population)

Region
1990
2014
2050
Change 1990–2014
Change 1990–2050
Africa
31.3
40.0
55.9
8.7
24.7
Asia
32.3
47.5
64.2
15.3
31.9
Europe
70.0
73.4
82.0
3.5
12.0
Latin America and the Caribbean
70.5
79.5
86.2
9.0
15.7
Northern America
75.4
81.5
87.4
6.0
12.0
Oceania
70.7
70.8
73.5
0.1
2.8
Sources: United Nations, World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Oceania includes American Samoa, Australia, Cook Islands, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, New
Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Wallis
and Futuna Islands.

54

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Special Feature  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

Table 1.SF.5. Net Food Exporters and Importers
(1990 versus 2013, number of countries)

Region
Always Exporter
Always Importer
Exporter --> Importer
Importer --> Exporter
East Asia and Pacific
6
17
7
2
Europe and Central Asia
9
13
1
1
Latin America and Caribbean
12
14
8
0
Middle East and North Africa
0
17
2
0
North America
2
1
0
0
South Asia
1
6
0
1
Sub-Saharan Africa
4
29
9
3
Total
34
97
27
7
Sources: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; World Bank: World Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.

able to finance their food imports, while impoverished
countries struggle to do so.13 Over the past few years,
the commodity price bust (except food) has exposed
developing economies to food price shocks by reducing
export receipts and fiscal space.14
Climate change affects agriculture—through large
economic losses such as reduced crop yields and
livestock productivity—through changes in average
temperatures and patterns of precipitation and extreme
weather events such as heat waves.15 There are a
host of other effects too, including changes in pests,
diseases, and atmospheric concentrations of carbon
dioxide (Porter and others 2014). Generally, research
has stressed unequal exposure across countries, with
countries closer to the equator being more vulnerable
to climate change than countries at higher latitudes
(Rosenzweig and others 2014).16 For example, Ethiopia recently experienced one of the worst droughts
in decades. Strikingly, the country’s two main rainy
seasons supply over 80 percent of its agricultural yield.
The agricultural sector employs 85 percent of the population. The lack of rainfall and subsequent drought
associated with the El Niño weather phenomenon,
therefore, caused a massive spike in humanitarian
needs, which are expected to continue through much
of 2016 (see Government of Ethiopia 2015).17
13The poorest segments of the population in some rich countries
may, however, be subject to food insecurity.
14In principle, food terms-of-trade shocks can also drive a country
to go from food exporter to importer. In practice, fast population
growth and urbanization, stagnating productivity, and poor infrastructure are key elements explaining many developing economies’
dependence on food imports (Rakotoarisoa, Iafrate, and Paschali
2011).
15See IMF (2016) for a discussion of the effect of natural disasters
and climate change on sub-Saharan African countries.
16There is evidence to suggest that climate change affects different
crops differently.
17Beyond Africa, the impact of the 2015–16 El Niño could be
even more severe in Asia in locations such as the uplands of Cam-

Total
32
24
34
19
3
8
45
165

Such extreme weather events and their threats to
food security are expected to continue to worsen and
increase in frequency (IFPRI 2016; UNEP 2016; World
Bank 2015a).18 So-called climate-smart agriculture can
help mitigate the effects of climate change on agriculture
by offering opportunities for smallholder farmers to produce more nutritious crops, sustainably and efficiently
(IFPRI 2016).19 In addition, the FAO and the United
States Agency for International Development have established early warning systems to anticipate and prevent
famines. The FAO hosts the Global Information and
Early Warning System, which monitors the world food
situation in 190 FAO member countries and warns of
impending crises within countries (Groskopf 2016). The
Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET,
www.fews.net), set up by the United States Agency for
International Development, helps anticipate and plan
for humanitarian crises in 29 countries.
Volatility in food prices and outright food shortages have a crucial impact on the most basic aspect
of welfare in poor countries—namely, survival. As
shown in Table 1.SF.6, the share of food consumption in the overall consumption basket is dramatically
high for many low-income countries. It is even higher
for fragile states such as Guinea and Burundi. For
middle-income countries, the share is somewhat lower
but still significant—reaching up to about 50 percent
bodia, central and southern India, eastern Indonesia, the central and
southern Philippines, central and northeast Thailand, Papua New
Guinea, and other Pacific island countries. In India, severe floods
were reported in several parts of Tamil Nadu during November and
December 2015, inundating most areas of Chennai (United Nations
2015).
18In Latin America and southeast Asia, floods and droughts
during recent El Niño/La Niña episodes, which have already caused
heavy losses in agriculture, are likely to double in frequency (World
Bank 2015b).
19For example, C4 rice has been found to increase yields by 50
percent as a result of doubling water use efficiency and increasing
nitrogen use efficiency by 30 percent (IFPRI 2016).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

55

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Table 1.SF.6. Share of Food and Beverages in Total
Consumption, 2010
Area
Share
High-income countries
21.0
Middle-income countries
43.7
Low-income countries
56.6
Burundi
71.0
Democratic Republic of the Congo
69.5
Guinea
71.1
Sources: World Bank, Global Consumption Database; Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, National Accounts database;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Includes processed food such as alcoholic beverages and catering
services.

of total consumption. Existing econometric evidence
(see Arezki and Brueckner 2014; and Bellemare 2015)
suggests that food price volatility can cause enormous
distributional challenges within and between countries
and lead to conflicts (Figure 1.SF.6).20 Existing indices
of food insecurity (Figure 1.SF.7) show that as a
region, Africa is the most prone to such food insecurity, but that pockets of vulnerability also exist in Asia,
Central America, and South America.
Policy interventions can at times magnify food price
spikes. The price volatility of weather-dependent commodities, such as food, is exacerbated by the tendency
for both developed and developing economies to alter
their trade and domestic policies from year to year in an
effort to stabilize prices and quantities in domestic food
markets (Anderson 2016; FAO 2015). During periods
of elevated food prices, as in 2008, net food exporting
countries frequently implemented export restrictions,
and net food importers lowered import barriers. Both
measures were aimed at increasing domestic food
supplies. Taken together, these two policy responses
exacerbated the food price spike (Anderson, Rausser,
and Swinnen 2013; Anderson 2016). To avoid such outcomes, ensuring higher agricultural sector productivity
and improved supply chains, as well as regional coordination—including through maintaining and managing
20Food production is endogenous to civil conflict; country examples indicate that the presence of civil war may be associated with
an increase of domestic food prices. For example, in Darfur, prices
of the main food staples increased rapidly after widespread violence
started in late 2003 and early 2004 (see, for example, Brinkman and
Hendrix 2010).

56

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 1.SF.6. Food Prices and Violent Events
(Number of events, unless noted otherwise)
1,200

1,000

190

Africa - violent events
Latin America - violent events
Food price index (2005 = 100, right scale)

170

800

150

600

130

400

110

200

90

0
1991

95

2000

05

10

70
13

Sources: IMF, Primary Commodity Price System; Social Conﬂict Analysis Database
(SCAD) 3.1; and IMF staff calculations.

regional grain reserves—have proved effective in hedging
against the consequences of food price volatility in
developing Asia (Jha and Rhee 2012).21
Overall, food markets are segmented, owing to
distortions in trade and domestic impediments to
investment in the sector. Demand for food has and
will continue to grow at a fast pace on account of
population growth. Income growth also affects the
composition of food demand. Fast urbanization trends
in Africa and Asia will make even more countries
dependent on trade. To meet these challenges and
reduce food insecurity, all countries alike must continue to dismantle barriers to trade. Low-income countries should also raise productivity in the agricultural
sector by attracting capital flows, but for that to occur,
multifaceted institutional improvements are needed.
21Other avenues to alleviate food shortages in the long term
include: (1) reducing excessive food consumption, which leads to
obesity and associated negative health outcomes, and (2) reducing
food waste. The FAO estimates that one-third of food produced for
human consumption is lost or wasted globally, which amounts to
about 1.3 billion tons a year.

Special Feature  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

Figure 1.SF.7. Global Food Security Index, 2016
(Overall score 0–100, 100 = best environment)

Score 72.4 to 86.6
Score 57.1 to 72.3
Score 41.6 to 57.0
Score 24.0 to 41.5

Source: Economist Intelligence Unit, Global Food Security Index 2016.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

57

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 1.SF.1. A Global Rush for Land
Against the backdrop of increasing demand for food, there
has been a growing interest by governments, agribusinesses, and investment funds in acquiring long-term
property rights or leases over large areas of farmland,
mostly in developing economies (Arezki, Deininger, and
Selod 2015). Most of the land acquisitions have been in
food-insecure countries that are in dire need of investment in the agricultural sector. These deals could lead to
positive or negative outcomes. This box presents evidence
related to these transnational land acquisitions and discusses policy implications.

Figure 1.SF.1.1. Evolution of Deals over Time
by Target Region

(Number of deals)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Latin America and
Caribbean
South Asia

East Asia and Paciﬁc
Europe and Central Asia
Middle East and North
Africa

175
150

What Is Driving Large-Scale Land Deals?
In this box, the term “land deal” refers to a largescale cross-border acquisition of land, typically at the
expense of smallholder production or greenspace.1
The food crisis of 2007−08 led to a massive increase
in food prices, thereby raising farmland value and the
option value of securing land for food production to
insure against the next food crisis. While the benefits of cultivating vacant land today remain small,
increased uncertainty in the wake of the crisis may
have increased the future profitability for private investors (Collier and Venables 2012).
Figure 1.SF.1.1 shows a sharp increase in the annual
number of land deals in the years leading up to the
2007−08 financial crisis and peaking shortly thereafter.
In 2009, at the height of the rush for land, an average
size of 223 square miles a deal was negotiated almost
every day, an area more than five times the size of
Paris, France. In the years that follow, investors’ and
governments’ appetite for farmland has receded.
The boom-bust pattern in Figure 1.SF.1.1 is consistent with the idea of rapidly changing farmland
(option) value fueled by substantial shifts in food
prices and uncertainty. Evidence suggests that much
of the acquired land has been left idle, raising concern
about the motive behind these large-scale land investThe authors of this box are Christian Bogmans and Vanessa
Diaz Montelongo.
1A deal is defined as an intended, concluded, or failed
attempt to acquire land through purchase, lease, or concession
that meets the following criteria: It (1) entails a transfer of rights
to use, control, or ownership of land through sale, lease, or
concession; (2) occurred after the year 2000; (3) covers an area
of 200 hectares or more; and (4) implies the potential conversion
of land from smallholder production, local community use, or
important ecosystem service provision to commercial use. The
analysis presented in this box focuses on cross-border deals only.

58

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

125
100
75
50
25
0
2000

04

08

12

16

Sources: Land Matrix; and IMF staff calculations.

ments and hinting at potential obstacles to bringing
their agricultural projects to fruition. According to
the Land Matrix database, to date only 49 percent of
the acquired land has been cultivated to some extent,
and this fraction is significantly smaller in sub-Saharan
Africa (37 percent).2

What Do the Data Tell Us about Land Investments?
As of May 2016, the Land Matrix database has
information on 2,152 transnational deals. Slightly
more than two thirds are linked to agricultural projects, with a cumulative size of almost 59 million hectares in 88 countries worldwide. This expanse roughly
corresponds to an area the size of France or Ukraine.
While the amount of land that changed hands is
substantial, it is still fairly modest compared with the
total stock of uncultivated and (nonforest) suitable
land, which amounts to roughly 400 million hect2The Land Matrix Global Observatory. Accessed May 7, 2016.
http://landmatrix.org/en/get-the-detail/.

Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies  COMMODIT Y MARKET DEVELO PMENTS AND FORECASTS

Box 1.SF.1 (continued)
ares—one billion hectares when including forestland.
Sub-Saharan Africa (884 deals) and east Asia (611
deals) have been the most important target regions for
investment, followed by Latin America (368 deals).
To explore the determinants of interest in transnational farmland deals, we use a bilateral Poisson
regression to model the occurrence and count of projects in origin-destination pairs. Let ​​N​ ij​​​ be the expected
number of projects undertaken in host country j by
investors from country i. The regression pools all land
deals between 2000 and 2016.
Following the standard gravity model from the
trade literature, land investment is attributed to origin
and destination country characteristics,​​VarOrig​ i​​​ and ​​
VarDest​ j​​​, respectively, and bilateral variables, ​​VarBilat​ ij​​​.
The baseline specification is:
​​ ij​  ​​  = c + ​α​  i​​  ∙ ​
N
VarOrig​ i​​  + ​​β​  j​​  ∙ VarDestj​  ​​  + ​​γ​  ij​​  ∙ VarBilati​  j​​  + ​ε​ i​  j​​​​​  ,(1.SF.1.1)
in which ​​α​  i​​​, ​​β​  j​​​ and ​​γ​  ij​​​are the parameters of interest,
and ​​ε​  i​​​is an error term. With a large number of zeros
in the data, the ordinary least squares estimator may
be biased and inconsistent. To overcome this issue, a
Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood estimator is used
(Silva and Tenreyro 2006).
The analysis uses a novel measure of uncultivated
nonforest land that takes into account proximity to
market. Data are obtained from the FAO’s Global
Agro-Ecological Zones (FAO 2016). To analyze the relationship between this type of foreign direct investment
and governance, data on law and order from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG 2009), a measure
of investor protection from the World Bank’s Doing
Business dataset, and an index of tenure security (de
Crombrugghe and others 2009) are included. Physical
distance and a dummy variable for former colonial
ties are included as proxies for trade costs. Finally, an
index of food security from the Economist Intelligence
Unit is included.
The results of the regressions based on equation
(1.SF.1.1) are presented in Table 1.SF.1.1. They confirm the importance of trade costs and an abundant
supply of uncultivated arable land. Interestingly, and
in contrast with the existing literature on capital flows,
we find that poor land governance is associated with
more land deals (see Table 1.SF.1.1, column 1). As
weak land governance and food insecurity are highly
correlated (with a correlation coefficient of ​​ρ = 0.77​
)​​​​
, this finding suggests that food-insecure regions are
associated with more land investment. Governments of

Table 1.SF.1.1. Impact of Land Governance and
Food Security on Land Deals
(1)
Bilateral Variables
Distance (log)
Former Colonial Relationship
Origin Country Variables
Net Food Exports (over GDP)

–0.838***
(0.0669)
1.529***
(0.269)

Suitable Nonforest Land
Land Governance
Law and Order
Weak Investor Protection
Net Food Exports (over GDP)

–1.061***
(0.0793)
0.874***
(0.253)

8.199***
(1.180)

Food Security Index
Destination Country Variables
Landlocked

(2)

0.0403***
(0.00447)
0.234
(0.220)
0.525***
(0.0748)
–0.572***
(0.0957)
–0.265***
(0.0827)
–0.00606**
(0.00243)
5.757***
(1.384)

Food Security Index
Number of Observations
19,186
Pseudo R 2
0.217
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.

0.0575
(0.192)
0.810***
(0.0936)
–0.165
(0.108)
–0.152
(0.0958)
–0.00913***
(0.00256)

–0.0539***
(0.00639)
10,044
0.283

food-insecure countries, while eager to host large-scale
land investments, often face the challenge of ensuring
that such outside investments actually help alleviate
domestic hunger. This is especially difficult in light of
weak land governance.

What Are the Implications for Food Security?
Land deals may have either positive or negative
effects. On the one hand, these deals signal that capital
in the agricultural sector is flowing from rich to poor
countries’ investors and hence help transfer new
technology and agronomic knowledge to local farmers.
On the other hand, the clustering of these deals in
food insecure countries can potentially amplify the
detrimental effects of a future food crisis. Host-country governments can remedy these risks by investing
in monitoring capacity to ensure that land is leased
to investors who (1) promote integration of local producers into value chains, (2) coinvest in local public
goods, and (3) compensate displaced land users.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

59

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

References
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych.
2008. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 90 (2): 347–68.
Aiyar, Shekhar, and Ashoka Mody. 2011. “The Democratic Dividend: Evidence from the Indian States.” IMF Working Paper
11/38, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Anand, Rahul, and Paul Cashin. 2016. Taming Indian Inflation.
Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Anderson, Kym. 2009. Distortions to Agricultural Incentives: A
Global Perspective, 1955–2007. London: Palgrave Macmillan
and Washington: World Bank.
———. 2016. “National and Global Price-and-Trade-Distorting Policies.” Working Paper 2016/07, Australian National
University, Canberra.
———, Gordon Rausser, and Johan Swinnen. 2013. “Political
Economy of Public Policies: Insights from Distortions to
Agricultural and Food Markets.” Journal of Economic Literature 51 (2): 423–77.
Anseeuw, Ward, Liz Alden Wily, Lorenzo Cotula, and Michael
Taylor. 2012. Land Rights and the Rush for Land: Findings
of the Global Commercial Pressures on Land Research Project.
Rome: International Land Coalition.
Arezki, Rabah, and Markus Brueckner. 2014. “Effects of
International Food Price Shocks on Political Institutions
in Low-Income Countries: Evidence from an International
Food Net-Export Price Index.” World Development 61 (C):
142–53.
———, Klaus Deininger, and Harris Selod. 2015. “What Drives
the Global ‘Land Rush’?” World Bank Economic Review 29
(2): 207–33.
———, Karim El Aynaoui, Yaw Nyarko, and Francis Teal.
2016. “Food Price Volatility and Its Consequences: Introduction.” Oxford Economic Papers 68 (3): 655–64.
Bellemare, Marc F. 2015. “Rising Food Prices, Food Price
Volatility, and Social Unrest.” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 97 (1): 1–21.
Berden, Koen G., Joseph Francois, Saara Tamminen, Martin
Thelle, and Paul Wymenga. 2009. “Non-Tariff Measures
in EU–US Trade and Investment: An Economic Analysis.”
ECORYS, Rotterdam.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess. 2000. “Land Reform, Poverty Reduction, and Growth: Evidence from India.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 115 (2): 389–430.
Besley, Timothy, and Anne Case. 1993. “Modeling Technology
Adoption in Developing Countries.” American Economic
Review 83 (2): 396–402.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers.
2015. “Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their
Monetary Policy Implications.” IMF Working Paper 15/230,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Brinkman, Henk-Jan, and Cullen S. Hendrix. 2010. “Food
Insecurity and Conflict: Applying the WDR Framework.”

60

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Background paper for the World Bank’s World Development
Report 2011, World Bank, Washington.
Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf.
2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown
or a Measurement Problem?” https://www.brookings.edu/
bpea-articles/does-the-united-states-have-a-productivity-slowdown-or-a-measurement-problem/.
Chakravorty, Ujjayant, Marie-Helene Hubert, and Beyza Ural
Marchand. 2015. “Food for Fuel: The Effect of the U.S. Biofuel Mandate on Poverty in India.” Working Paper, University
of Caen and University of Rennes.
Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2012. “Land Deals in
Africa: Pioneers and Speculators.” Journal of Globalization and
Development 3 (1): Article 3.
Dave, Donaldson, and Richard Hornbeck. Forthcoming. “Railroads and American Economic Growth: A ‘Market Access’
Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
de Crombrugghe, Denis, Kristine Farla, Nicolas Meisel, Chris
de Neubourg, Jacques Ould Aoudia, and Adam Szirmai.
2009. “Institutional Profiles Database III. Presentation of the
Institutional Profiles Database 2009 (IPD 2009).” Documents
de Travail de la DGTPE, No. 2009/14. Treasury Directorate
General of the French Ministry of the Economy, Industry and
Employment, Paris.
Dercon, Stefan, and Luc Christiaensen. 2011. “Consumption
Risk, Technology Adoption and Poverty Traps: Evidence from
Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics 96 (2): 159–73.
Duarte, Margarida, and Diego Restuccia. 2010. “The Role of
the Structural Transformation in Aggregate Productivity.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1): 129–73.
Egger, Peter, Joseph Francois, Miriam Manchin, and Douglas
Nelson. 2015. “Non-Tariff Barriers, Integration, and the
Trans-Atlantic Economy.” Economic Policy 30 (83): 541–73.
Fernald, John. 2015. “Productivity and Potential Output before,
during, and after the Great Recession.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO). 2015. The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets:
Trade and Food Security: Achieving a Better Balance between
National Priorities and the Collective Good. Rome: FAO.
———. 2016. Global Agro-Ecological Zones. Rome: FAO. http://
gaez.fao.org/Main.html#.
Foster, Andrew, and Mark Rosenzweig. 1995. “Learning by
Doing and Learning from Others: Human Capital and Technical Change in Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy 103
(6): 1176–209.
Fischer, Günther, and Mahendra Shah. 2011. “Farmland Investments and Food Security.” Report prepared under World
Bank and International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
contract, Laxenburg.
Furceri, Davide, Prakash Loungani, John Simon, and Susan M.
Wachter. 2016. “Global Food Prices and Domestic Inflation:
Some Cross-Country Evidence.” Oxford Economic Papers 68
(3): 665–87.

CHAPTER 1

Galor, Oded. 2005. “From Stagnation to Growth: Unified
Growth Theory.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by
Phillipe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
———. 2011. Unified Growth Theory. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
———, and David N. Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology,
and Growth: From Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review
90 (4): 806–28.
Gollin, Douglas, David Lagakos, and Michael E. Waugh. 2014a.
“Agricultural Productivity Differences across Countries.”
American Economic Review 104 (5): 165–70.
———. 2014b. “The Agricultural Productivity Gap.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129 (2): 939–93.
Gollin, Douglas, Stephen Parente, and Richard Rogerson. 2002.
“The Role of Agriculture in Development.” American Economic Review 92 (2): 160–64.
Government of Ethiopia, Ethiopia Humanitarian Country Team.
2015. “Ethiopia Humanitarian Requirements Document
2016.” Addis Ababa.
Groskopf, Christopher. 2016. “Science Is Warning Us That a
Food Crisis Is Coming to Southern Africa. Will We Stop It?”
Quartz Africa. March 5. http://qz.com/620499/science-iswarning-us-that-a-food-crisis-is-coming-to-southern-africawill-we-stop-it/.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom—Commodity Prices
and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
HM Treasury. 2016. “HM Treasury Analysis: The Long-Term
Economic Impact of EU Membership and the Alternatives.”
Presented to Parliament by the Chancellor of the Exchequer
by command of Her Majesty, April.
Hördahl, Peter, Jhuvesh Sobrun, and Philip Turner. 2016. “Low
Long-Term Interest Rates as a Global Phenomenon.” BIS
Working Paper 574, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
International Country Risk Guide. 2009. http://epub.prsgroup.
com/products/icrg. Political Risk Services, New York.
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). 2016.
Global Food Policy Report. Washington: IFPRI. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2499/9780896295827.
International Monetary Fund. 2016. “Enhancing Resilience to
Natural Disasters in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Chapter 3 of the
October 2016 Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa,
Washington.
Jacoby, Hanan G., Guo Li, and Scott Rozelle. 2002. “Hazards
of Expropriation: Tenure Insecurity and Investment in Rural
China.” American Economic Review 92 (5): 1420–447.
Jha, Shikha, and Changyong Rhee. 2012. “Distributional Consequences and Policy Responses to Food Price Inflation in
Developing Asia.” In Commodity Price Volatility and Inclusive
Growth in Low-Income Economies, edited by Rabah Arezki,
Catherine Pattillo, Marc Quintyn, and Min Zhu. Washington: International Monetary Fund.

Global Prospects and Policies

Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2015. “Measuring the
Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Working Paper 2015–16.
Malthus, Thomas. R. 1798. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. Johnson.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2016. Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation
2016. OECD Publishing: Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/
agr_pol-2016-en.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, João Paulo Pessoa, Thomas Sampson,
and John Van Reenen. 2014. “The Costs and Benefits of
Leaving the EU.” London School of Economics and Political
Science, Centre for Economic Performance. Unpublished.
Pescatori, Andrea, and Jarkko Turunen. 2015. “Lower for Longer: Neutral Rates in the United States.” IMF Working Paper
15/135, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Porter, J.R., L. Xie, A.J. Challinor, K. Cochrane, S.M. Howden,
M.M. Iqbal, D.B. Lobell, and M.I. Travasso. 2014. “Food
Security and Food Production Systems.” In Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, edited by C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J.
Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy,
S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White. Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Radetzki, Marian. 2011. “Primary Commodities: Historical
Perspectives and Prospects.” In Beyond the Curse Policies
to Harness the Power of Natural Resources, edited by Rabah
Arezki, Thorvaldur Gylfason, and Amadou Sy. Washington:
International Monetary Fund.
Rakotoarisoa, Manitra A., Massimo Iafrate, and Marianna Paschali. 2011. “Why Has Africa Become a Net Food Importer?
Explaining Africa Agricultural and Food Trade Deficits.”
Trade and Markets Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox. 2015.
“Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments
and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy.” IMF
Economic Review 63 (1): 71–109.
Rosenzweig, Cynthia, Joshua Elliott, Delphine Deryng, Alex C.
Ruane, Christoph Müller, Almut Arneth, Kenneth J. Boote,
Christian Folberth, Michael Glotter, Nikolay Khabarov,
Kathleen Neumann, Franziska Piontek, Thomas A. M. Pugh,
Erwin Schmid, Elke Stehfest, Hong Yang, and James W.
Jones. 2014. “Assessing Agricultural Risks of Climate Change
in the 21st Century in a Global Gridded Crop Model Intercomparison.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 2014 111 (9): 3268–273.
Published ahead of print, December 16, 2013.
Sen, Amartya. 1981. “Ingredients of Famine Analysis: Availability and Entitlements.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 96
(3): 433–64.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

61

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Silva, J. M. C. Santos, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2006. “The Log of
Gravity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88 (4): 641–58.
Syverson, Chad. 2016. “Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. Productivity Slowdown,” NBER Working
Paper No. 21974, February, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Tilman, David, and Michael Clark. 2014. “Global Diets Link
Environmental Sustainability and Human Health.” Nature
515: 518–22.
———. 2015. “Food, Agriculture and the Environment: Can
We Feed the World and Save the Earth?” Daedalus 144:
8–23.
Tulin, Volodymyr, and Rahul Anand. 2016. “Understanding
India’s Food Inflation Through the Lens of Demand and Supply.” In Taming Indian Inflation, edited by Rahul Anand and
Paul Cashin. Washington: International Monetary Fund.
United Kingdom Office for National Statistics. 2015. “National
Population Projections: 2014-Based Statistical Bulletin.”
http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/
populationandmigration/populationprojections/bulletins/
nationalpopulationprojections/2015-10-29/pdf.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division. 2015. “World Population Prospects: The

62

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables.” Working
Paper ESA/P/WP.241. United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, New York.
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). 2016. UNEP
Frontiers 2016 Report: Emerging Issues of Environmental Concern. Nairobi: UNEP.
Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star
World.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter
2016–23, August 15.
World Bank. 2015a. Ending Poverty and Hunger by 2030: An
Agenda for the Global Food System. Washington: World Bank
Group.
———. 2015b. Future of Food: Shaping a Climate-Smart Global
Food System. Washington: World Bank Group.
World Food Summit. 1996. Rome Declaration on World Food
Security. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
World Resources Institute. 2014. “Creating a Sustainable
Food Future: Interim Findings.” World Resources Institute,
Washington.
World Trade Organization (WTO). 2015. International Trade
Statistics 2015. Geneva: WTO. https://www.wto.org/english/
res_e/statis_e/its2015_e/its2015_e.pdf.

CHAPTER

2

GLOBAL TRADE: WHAT’S BEHIND THE SLOWDOWN?

Trade growth has slowed since 2012 relative both to its
strong historical performance and to overall economic
growth. This chapter finds that the overall weakness in
economic activity, in particular in investment, has been
the primary restraint on trade growth, accounting for
up to three-fourths of the slowdown. However, other
factors are also weighing on trade. The waning pace of
trade liberalization and the recent uptick in protectionism are holding back trade growth, even though their
quantitative impact thus far has been limited. The
decline in the growth of global value chains has also
played an important part in the observed slowdown.
The findings suggest that addressing the general weakness in economic activity, especially in investment, will
stimulate trade, which in turn could help strengthen
productivity and growth. In addition, given the subdued
global growth outlook, further trade reforms that lower
barriers, coupled with measures to mitigate the cost to
those who shoulder the burden of adjustment, would
boost the international exchange of goods and services
and revive the virtuous cycle of trade and growth.
Global trade growth has decelerated significantly in
recent years. After its sharp collapse and even sharper
rebound in the aftermath of the global financial crisis,
the volume of world trade in goods and services has
grown by just over 3 percent a year since 2012, less
than half the average rate of expansion during the
previous three decades. The slowdown in trade growth
is remarkable, especially when set against the historical
relationship between growth in trade and global economic activity (Figure 2.1). Between 1985 and 2007,
real world trade grew on average twice as fast as global
GDP, whereas over the past four years, it has barely
kept pace. Such prolonged sluggish growth in trade

The main authors of this chapter are Aqib Aslam, Emine Boz (co–
team leader), Eugenio Cerutti, Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro, and Petia
Topalova (co–team leader), with support from Ava Yeabin Hong,
Hao Jiang, Evgenia Pugacheva, Rachel Szymanski, Hong Yang, and
Marina Topalova Cole, and contributions from Jaebin Ahn, Diego
Cerdeiro, Romain Duval, and Christian Henn. Andrei Levchenko
was the external consultant. The chapter benefited from comments
and suggestions by Brent Neiman.

volumes relative to economic activity has few historical
precedents during the past five decades.
The reasons for the weakness in global trade growth
are still not clearly understood, yet a precise diagnosis
is necessary to assess if and where policy action may
help.1 Is the waning of trade simply a symptom of the
generally weak economic environment, or is it a consequence of a rise in trade-constricting policies? Private
investment remains subdued across many advanced
and emerging market and developing economies (see
Chapter 4 of the April 2015 World Economic Outlook
[WEO]), and China has embarked on a necessary and
welcome process of rebalancing away from investment
and toward more consumption-led growth.2 Many
commodity exporters have cut capital spending in
response to persistently weak commodity prices. Since
investment relies more heavily on trade than consumption, Freund (2016) argues that an investment
slump would inevitably lead to a slowdown in trade
growth (see also Boz, Bussière, and Marsilli 2015 and
Morel 2015, for example).
Additional contributors to the trade slowdown are
also possible. The waning pace of trade liberalization over the past few years and the recent uptick in
protectionist measures could be limiting the sustained
policy-driven reductions in trade costs achieved
during 1985–2007, which provided a strong impetus to trade growth (Evenett and Fritz 2016; Hufbauer and Jung 2016). Lower trade costs, as well as
advances in transportation and communication, also
supported the spread of global value chains, in which
the fragmentation of production processes boosted
trade growth as intermediate goods crossed borders
multiple times. The formation of cross-border production chains may have slowed—possibly because
their growth matured or because the cost of trade fell
more modestly, or both—implying a slower expansion
1See Hoekman (2015) and papers therein for an analysis of the
global trade slowdown. Relative to the studies in Hoekman (2015),
the chapter’s approach allows for a more comprehensive horse race
among the various hypotheses for a large number of economies and
using a range of analytical approaches.
2Chapter 4 of this WEO report discusses the global spillovers
from China’s rebalancing, including through trade.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

63

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.1. World Real Trade and GDP Growth in Historical
Perspective
(Percent)
The decline in real trade growth since 2012 has been remarkable, especially
when set against the historical relationship between growth in trade and global
economic activity.
Import growth
Average import growth
15

GDP growth
Average GDP growth

1. World

10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
1960

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

15 2. Advanced Economies
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
1960
25

65

70

75

80

3. Emerging Market and Developing Economies

20
15
10
5

3Constantinescu,

0
–5
–10
–15
1960

in such supply chain-related trade (Constantinescu,
Mattoo, and Ruta 2015).3,4 Other causes of a decline
in goods trade growth could be more evolutionary in
nature, such as an increase in the relative demand for
nontradables in response to growing wealth or aging
populations.
The 1985–2007 period witnessed substantial globalization and rapid economic growth. There is strong
consensus among economists that international trade
contributed to the rise in overall prosperity, notwithstanding the often considerable adjustment costs faced
by some workers. International trade allows economies
to specialize in producing goods and services in which
they have a comparative advantage and to exploit the
resulting economies of scale and scope. But trade can
also boost economic growth by spreading knowledge
and technology and by fostering the development of
new products and, ultimately, productivity.5 In light of
the synchronized slowdown in productivity growth in
many economies, there may be a strong case for reviving the virtuous cycle of trade and growth through a
concerted effort by policymakers to open markets and
reduce trade costs further.6
To contribute to our understanding of the drivers
of the sharp slowdown in trade since the end of 2011
and the design of an appropriate policy response, the
chapter focuses on the following questions:
•• How widespread is the post-2011 decline in the
growth of international trade? Have the dynamics of
trade differed among economies? Has the trade slowdown varied by type of trade and product group?
•• How much of the slump in trade growth reflects
weakness in economic activity and changes in the
composition of growth? In particular, how much of

65

70

75

80

85

90

95

2000

05

10

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Imports include goods and services. The charts are based on an unbalanced
sample of 100 countries in 1960 and 189 in 2015. Annual aggregate import (GDP)
growth is calculated as the weighted average of country-speciﬁc real import
(GDP) growth rates, where nominal import (GDP at market exchange rates) shares
are the weights used.

64

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Mattoo, and Ruta (2015) argue that the growth
of global supply chains, particularly those involving China, had
weakened even before the global financial crisis. See Kee and Tang
(2016) for further evidence on the evolution of China’s value chains
during 2000–07.
4If, indeed, the observed slowdown in trade simply marks the
end of a period of unusually rapid trade growth, due to some of the
factors listed above, then the global economy could be returning to a
steady state in which, as theory predicts, trade grows at the same rate
as output. In such a steady state, trade costs, the structure of individual economies, and production, sourcing, and trade patterns across
countries would be constant. See, for example, Dixit and Norman
(1980) or Ethier (1985).
5See, for example, Krugman (1979), Grossman and Helpman
(1991), Young (1991), Lee (1993), Frankel and Romer (1999), and
Bernard and others (2003), among others.
6See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2016) for a review of the literature
on the effects of trade policy on trade volumes, productivity, labor
markets, and growth.

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

the 2012–15 slowdown in trade growth relative to
the period before the global financial crisis can be
attributed to subdued growth? To what extent is the
trade slowdown relative to GDP growth attributable
to compositional changes in demand?
•• What role have other factors—beyond output—
played in holding back trade growth? Is the slowdown a consequence of policy distortions, such as
a deceleration in trade liberalization or a rise in
protectionism? Or does it reflect a maturation of
global supply chains?

•• Other factors, however, are also weighing on trade
growth. The slowdown in the pace of trade liberalization and the recent uptick in protectionist measures
are holding back international trade in goods, even if
their quantitative impact thus far has been relatively
limited. The apparent decline in the growth of global
value chains has also played an important part in the
observed slowdown. Overall, factors beyond the level
and composition of economic activity have shaved
about 1¾ percentage points off global annual real
import growth since 2012.

The chapter starts by documenting the evolution
of trade growth across various dimensions. It then
employs three complementary analytical approaches
to analyze the factors behind the recent slowdown.
The first part uses a standard empirical model of
import demand to determine whether import growth
at the country level has slowed by more than changes
in aggregate demand components and relative prices
would predict in recent years. The second part complements the empirical analysis by estimating a structural
multicountry, multisector model, which quantifies the
importance of changes in the composition of demand
and other factors, such as trade costs. The third part of
the analysis uses highly disaggregated data to shed light
on the role of trade policies and global value chain
participation.
The chapter’s main findings are as follows:
•• The decline in real trade growth has been broad
based. Few countries were spared the 2012–15
slowdown in trade growth, either in absolute terms
or relative to GDP growth. Likewise, trade growth
fell for both goods and services, although services
trade slowed less. Among goods, trade growth fell
for 85 percent of product lines, with the sharpest
slowdown observed in trade in capital and intermediate goods.
•• The overall weakness in economic activity and,
in particular, the slowdown in investment growth
appear to be key restraints on trade growth
since 2012. Empirical analysis suggests that, for the
world as a whole, up to three-fourths of the decline
in real goods import growth between 2003–07
and 2012–15 can be traced to weaker economic
activity, most notably subdued investment growth.
A general equilibrium model similarly finds that
changes in the composition of demand explain
about 60 percent of the slowdown in the growth
rate of the nominal goods imports-to-GDP ratio.

The key finding of the chapter—that weak trade
growth is largely a symptom of the synchronized
slowdown in economic activity across advanced and
emerging market and developing economies—implies
that policies to address the constraints to growth,
and in particular investment where it is depressed,
should take center stage in the effort to improve
global economic health. Such policies, by lifting
trade indirectly, will generate positive spillovers as
trade linkages transmit and mutually reinforce each
country’s economic expansion. Yet, precisely because
trade can strengthen productivity and boost growth,
policies directly aimed at reducing trade costs and
reinvigorating trade remain important in light of the
subdued global outlook and unfavorable productivity trends. Many emerging market and developing
economies maintain or face trade barriers that inhibit
their entry into global markets and participation
in global production chains; a coordinated effort
to remove such barriers could kick off a new round
of integration and global value chain development
and provide firms with greater incentives to invest
(Freund 2016). More broadly, avoiding protectionist
measures and reviving the process of trade liberalization through trade reforms that lower barriers,
coupled with measures that mitigate the cost to those
who shoulder the burden of adjustment, would boost
growth in the international exchange of goods and
services and ultimately strengthen global activity.
It is important to emphasize from the outset that
providing a precise quantification of the role of economic activity, trade policies, and global value chains
in the evolution of trade flows is inherently a difficult
task. Demand for traded goods is clearly a function of
economic growth, but international trade and trade
policies can also shape economic activity by influencing firms’ investment decisions, their access to intermediate inputs, production processes, and productivity.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

65

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

For example, the fading pace of trade liberalization
since the early 2000s may have contributed to slow
productivity growth, weak investment, and lackluster
output growth in recent years. As in the vast majority
of the trade literature, this chapter’s empirical analysis
focuses only on part of this complex web of relationships, as its primary goal is to establish whether recent
trade dynamics are consistent with the observed level
and composition of output growth, the evolution
of trade policies, and global value chain integration
given historical patterns of association. The structural
analysis takes a more holistic approach as, in general
equilibrium, the level of economic activity, production
structure, and trade patterns are jointly determined by
trade costs, preferences, and productivity. However,
due to its stylized representation of the real world, the
model is unable to capture all the channels through
which trade may affect output.

The Implications of Trade for Productivity and
Welfare: A Primer
While the primary focus of the chapter is to diagnose the drivers of the recent decline in trade growth,
understanding its potential implications for productivity and growth is important in the context of a
subdued global outlook and unfavorable productivity
trends. To this end, this section provides a brief review
of the key channels through which the opening of a
closed economy to trade or further boosting international trade by reducing trade barriers can benefit the
macroeconomy as well as the challenges it may pose.7
Trade liberalization can improve productivity, raise
overall living standards, and promote economic growth
through a number of channels. The best-known benefit
from trade is that it induces factors of production,
such as capital and labor, to be used more efficiently.
When economies open up to international trade, they
can specialize in the goods and services for which they
have comparative advantage, thereby improving their
overall productivity (Ricardo 1817). Trade liberalization could also enhance productivity in each sector by
reallocating resources toward more productive firms
that are better placed to expand their activities in

7It

is important to note that, in most cases, theory predicts
benefits from trade to arise from the removal of distortions that
limit greater trade flows. The Council of Economic Advisers (2015)
provides a comprehensive review of the benefits from trade in the
case of the United States.

66

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

export markets (Melitz 2003) and exploit the resulting
economies of scale (Box 2.1).8
Beyond the productivity gains from reallocation,
trade can also lead to productivity improvements
for individual firms. Exporting offers businesses
the opportunity to learn from foreign markets, for
example, through their relationship with particular
buyers (De Loecker 2013), and the expanded market
access provides greater incentives for investment in
technology (Bustos 2011; Lileeva and Trefler 2010).
Firms that face foreign competition in domestic
markets may be forced to lower price-cost margins
and move down their average cost curve (Helpman
and Krugman 1985), focus on their core competency
products (Bernard, Redding, and Schott 2011), and
reduce managerial slack and generate efficiency gains
(Hicks 1935). Trade liberalization has also been found
to stimulate innovation by firms as reflected in their
research and development spending and patenting as
they attempt to increase their presence in the world
marketplace (Bloom, Draca, and Van Reenen 2016).
Finally, firms benefit from the larger variety, cheaper,
and potentially higher-quality intermediate inputs
international trade can offer (Grossman and Helpman 1991; Rivera-Batiz and Romer 1991).
Both consumers and producers broadly benefit
from the international exchange of goods and services
and the efficiencies it creates. Trade lowers the prices
faced by consumers and producers, thereby raising real
incomes. It also increases the variety of products available to consumers and producers (Broda and Weinstein 2006). Both of these channels can significantly
boost welfare (Box 2.3). Economic theory also suggests
that the consumption gains and the more efficient use
of resources generated by trade should boost GDP
even if a robust causal relationship between trade and
growth is difficult to detect in cross-country data.9
8For

a discussion of the impact of trade on intra-industry reallocation and productivity, see, for example, Melitz (2003); Bernard,
Jensen, and Schott (2006); and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). Lileeva
and Trefler (2010) and Bustos (2011) present evidence of export-induced technology investments, while De Loecker (2007, 2013) and
Atkin, Khandelwal, and Osman (2014) study the “learning-by-exporting” channel. Pavcnik (2002), Erdem and Tybout (2003), Amiti
and Konings (2007), and Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) examine
the productivity effects of trade liberalization, including through the
intermediate inputs channel.
9Frankel and Romer (1999) provide some of the first estimates
of the causal effects of trade on income; for a more recent analysis,
see Feyrer (2009a, 2009b). Rodríguez and Rodrik (2001) instead
conclude that the nature of the relationship between trade policy and
economic growth remains ambiguous on empirical grounds.

CHAPTER 2

However, while trade increases the size of the pie, its
benefits may not often be evenly distributed—a source
of much of the public opposition against increased
trade openness. Trade has a distributional impact
within an economy through two distinct channels.
It differentially affects the earnings of workers across
sectors and skills (see, for example, Stolper and Samuelson 1941).10 It can also differentially impact the
cost of living faced by different consumers through its
effects on the relative prices of goods and services.
Numerous studies have examined the effect of trade
on the distribution of earnings.11 On one hand, sectors
and firms that expand in response to greater foreign
market access create new and often higher-quality
employment opportunities.12 On the other hand, the
earnings and employment prospects of workers in
sectors and firms competing with foreign imports may
be adversely affected, and these adverse effects could
be long lasting if expanding firms and sectors cannot
promptly absorb the dislocated workers due to the
nature of their skills or geographical location. A widely
cited study by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) on
the impact of Chinese import competition on the
U.S. labor market finds that rising imports from China
have led to higher unemployment, lower labor force
participation, and reduced wages in local labor markets
with import-competing manufacturing industries.13
Trade can also have a distributional effect as consumers enjoy different baskets of goods whose prices
10See

also Jones (1971) and Mussa (1974) for discussions of the
Stolper-Samuelson theorem and the specific-factors model of trade.
Levchenko and Zhang (2013) provide a quantitative assessment
of the differential effects of the trade integration of China, India,
and central and eastern Europe on real wages across countries and
sectors.
11See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2004, 2007) and World Bank
(2010), and references therein, for a review of the evidence on the
distributional consequences of trade in developing economies. For
the United States, see Ebenstein and others (2014). For recent theory
and evidence on the link between inequality and trade, see Helpman
and others (forthcoming).
12A large number of studies document the higher wages paid to
workers employed in exporting industries or exporting plants in the
United States, with estimates for this export wage premium ranging
from 1¾ percent to 18 percent (see, for example, Bernard and
Jensen 1995, Bernard and others 2007, and Table 4 of Council of
Economic Advisers 2015).
13See also Lawrence (2014), who argues that while manufactured
imports from China have significantly raised the standard of living
overall in the United States, for some U.S. workers and regions, the
expansion of Chinese trade has meant costly and painful adjustment.
In Europe, rising Chinese import competition also led to declines in
employment and the share of unskilled workers (Bloom, Draca, and
Van Reenen 2016).

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

are differentially affected by trade-induced relative price
changes. In a recent study, Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal
(2016) develop a framework to isolate precisely this
effect and simulate the gains from reducing trade costs
in a large number of economies. They find that the
benefits of trade from lower prices tend to favor those
at the bottom of the income distribution because the
poor spend a larger share of their income on heavily
traded goods.
In sum, greater trade integration can strengthen
productivity and growth, raising overall welfare.
However, there are winners and losers from increasing trade openness, especially in the short term. The
adjustment costs that further trade liberalization entails
for certain workers should not be underestimated and
call for complementary policy measures to ensure trade
integration works for all (see also Box 2.2).

The Slowdown in Trade Growth: Key Patterns
An investigation into the evolution of global trade
in recent years yields two strikingly different pictures,
depending on whether trade is measured in real or
nominal U.S. dollar terms. In real terms, world trade
growth has slowed since the end of 2011; in nominal
U.S. dollar terms, it has collapsed since the second
half of 2014 (Figure 2.2, panels 1 and 2). The value of
goods and services trade fell by 10½ percent in 2015,
driven by a 13 percent drop in the import deflator as
oil prices fell sharply and the U.S. dollar appreciated;
the pace of decline has moderated in recent months.14
The volume of goods and services trade continued to
grow throughout this period, albeit at the relatively
low rate of just over 3 percent a year, with no sign of
acceleration.15 Because much of the decline in nominal
trade is due to the sharp drop in the price of oil and
the strength of the U.S. dollar, the rest of the stylized
facts and several of the analytical approaches focus on
the evolution of trade volumes—that is, trade in real
terms.16
Across economies, the slowdown in real trade
growth is widespread, both in absolute terms and
14See Chapter 3 of this WEO for a discussion of the effect of
import prices on global inflation.
15In fact, according to the CPB World Trade Monitor, as of July
2016, global merchandise trade volumes have remained almost flat
since the end of 2014.
16The general equilibrium analysis examines the evolution of
nominal values of trade relative to nominal GDP. Similarly, the gravity model, also discussed in this chapter, studies nominal bilateral
sectoral trade flows.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

67

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.2. World Trade in Volumes, Values, and across Countries
In real terms, world trade continued to grow since the end of 2011, albeit at a much lower rate, whereas in nominal U.S. dollar terms, it has collapsed
since the second half of 2014. Across economies, the slowdown in real trade growth is widespread, both in absolute terms and relative to GDP growth.
Value

Price

50 1. Goods and Services Import Growth
(Percent)
40

Volume
2. Goods Import Growth
(Year-over-year percent change)

50
40

30

30

20
10

20
10

0

0
–10
–20

–10
–20
–30

–30

–40
2003

06

09

12

15

2003

06

09

12

–40
Jul. 16

3. Difference in Average Real Import Growth between 2003–07 and 2012–151
(Percentage points)

Less than –12
–12 to –7
–7 to –4

–4 to 0
More than 0
No data

4. Difference in the Ratio of Average Real Import Growth to Average Real GDP Growth between 2003–07 and 2012–151
(Number)

Less than –2.4
–2.4 to –1.4
–1.4 to –0.7

–0.7 to 0
More than 0
No data

Sources: CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; and IMF staff calculations.
Different intervals, shown as different shades, correspond to quartile ranges that are calculated based on the distribution across countries that experienced a
decline in real import growth (panel 3) or in the ratio of average real import growth to average real GDP growth (panel 4).
1

68

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 2

relative to GDP growth (Figure 2.2, panels 3 and 4).
Compared with the five years leading up to the global
financial crisis, growth of goods and services imports
during 2012–15 slowed in 143 of 171 countries.
When measured relative to GDP growth, the slowdown occurred in 116 countries.
The contours of the 2012–15 slowdown in the
growth of real imports varied by broad country group
(Figure 2.3) and sector (Figure 2.4). For advanced
economies, the slowdown was sharp at the outset of
the period following the euro area debt crises, but
import growth picked up thereafter in line with the
modest recovery in those economies. In emerging
market and developing economies, the slowdown was
initially milder, but became more severe during the
past two years. This was driven by weaker imports
in China and macroeconomic stress in a number of
economies, including commodity exporters affected by
sharp declines in their export prices (see also Chapter 1
of the April 2016 WEO).
As was the case during the global financial crisis,
services trade has been more resilient than trade in
goods (Figure 2.4, panel 1). Services and goods trade
volumes grew at an annual rate of about 9½ percent
and 9 percent, respectively, during 2003–07, but
during 2012–15 the growth rate for services fell to
5½ percent. For goods, it dropped much more, to just
under 3 percent.17 Many have argued that the growth
in services trade may be even stronger than is reflected
in these numbers.18 New business models and advances
in information and communications technology have
rapidly expanded trade in digital services, including
in digitally enabled data and services delivered free of
charge (for example, e-mail, social media, maps, and
search engine services). Measuring such trade, however,
will remain a challenge until important conceptual and
methodological issues are resolved.19
Across goods, the trade slowdown during the past
four years has been broad based (Figure 2.4, panels 2
17Services trade has remained relatively robust compared with
goods trade since 2012, so trade refers specifically to goods trade for
the remainder of the chapter, unless specified otherwise.
18A closer examination of nominal services trade across sectors
reveals that trade in information and communication technologies,
travel, and financial services has been significantly more resilient
than trade in other services. (See Annex 2.1.)
19Magdeleine and Maurer (2016) provide an overview of the
statistical challenges of measuring trade in “digitized ideas.” A recent
report by the McKinsey Global Institute (Manyika and others 2016)
also discusses the impact of an increasingly digital era of globalization on trade, arguing that cross-border data flows generate more
economic value than traditional flows of traded goods.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

and 3). The analysis for this chapter uses a novel data
set to separately compute import price and volume
indices by product and end-use categories using
disaggregated data for about 5,300 products for 52
countries.20 This novel data set suggests that the entire
distribution of trade volume growth across the roughly
100 separately analyzed product lines shifted to the left
during 2012–15 relative to the distribution of growth
rates observed in 2003–07. More than 85 percent of
product lines experienced a decline in the average trade
volume growth rates between the two periods, including oil-related products, which account for more than
10 percent of total trade.
However, the severity of the slowdown in goods
trade growth varied across types of products. Trade
in nondurable consumption goods held up relatively
well. Trade growth in capital goods declined the most,
followed by primary intermediate goods, durable
consumption goods, and processed intermediate goods
(Figure 2.4, panel 4). The sharper slowdown of trade in
capital and durable consumption goods (including cars
and other nonindustrial transportation equipment),
which is a large part of investment expenditures, points
to the potential role of investment weakness in holding
back global trade growth in recent years.

Understanding the Slowdown in Trade Growth
Assessing the appropriate policy responses to the
weakness in trade requires a clear diagnosis of its
causes. Has trade growth been held back primarily
by the protracted weakness in the global economic
environment? If so, policymakers may best focus their
attention on reinvigorating growth, and in particular
on strengthening investment where it is particularly
depressed. Or do the causes lie with other types of
impediments, such as a slower pace of trade reform,
which would suggest a different set of actions?
This analysis starts by quantifying the influence of
the overall economic environment and the composition of growth in the trade growth slowdown, using
both an empirical and a model-based approach. Since
both methodologies suggest that output, and its composition, cannot fully predict the observed weakness in
trade since 2012, the analysis moves on in the subse20United

Nations Comtrade International Trade Statistics provide
information on the nominal value and quantity of goods imports,
so it is possible to compute unit value changes for each product over
time. (See Annex 2.2 and Boz and Cerutti (forthcoming) for more
details.)

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

69

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.3. Trade Dynamics across Broad Country Groups
(Percent)

Figure 2.4. Trade Dynamics across Types of Trade and
Products

Not all economies experienced the slowdown in trade at the same time. In advanced
economies, import growth fell sharply in 2012. In emerging market and developing
economies, the decline in import growth became more severe in 2014 and 2015.

Services trade has been more resilient than goods trade. Among goods, the trade
slowdown has been broad based with imports of capital goods experiencing the
most pronounced decline in growth.

20

25 1. World Real Goods and Services Import Growth
(Percent)
20
15
10
5
0
–5
Goods
Services
–10
–15
2003
05
07
09
11

1. Real Import Growth

15
10
5
0

World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and
developing economies

–5
–10
–15
2003 04

05

06

07

25
08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

5
0
–10

4

25

2

20
0

2. Distribution of Average Real Import Growth across Products,
2003–071
(Percent)

10

World
Advanced economies
Emerging market and developing economies

6

2003–07

12

13

14

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Imports include goods and services. Annual aggregate import growth is
calculated as the weighted average of country-speciﬁc real import growth rates,
where nominal import shares are the weights used.

quent sections to disentangle the role of other factors—trade policies and changes in the pace of global
value chain expansion—using disaggregated product
and bilateral-sectoral trade flows.

The Role of Output and Its Composition: Insights from
an Empirical Investigation
To gauge the role of economic activity and shifts in
its composition, this section examines the historical
relationship between import volumes of goods and
services and aggregate demand during 1985–2015
to predict a country’s import growth from observed
fluctuations in its domestic expenditures, exports, and
relative prices. This predicted import growth is then
compared with actual trade dynamics to assess whether
70

15

15

10 2. Contributions to Real Import Growth
8

20

13

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

–5

0

5

10

15

20

3. Distribution of Average Real Import Growth across Products,
2012–151
(Percent)

15
10
5
0
–10

–5

0

5

10

1
18 4. Real Import Growth of Different Product Groups
(Percent)
16
2003–07
2012–15
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Capital
Primary
Durable
Processed
intermediate consumption intermediate

15

20

Nondurable
consumption

Sources: United Nations Comtrade; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 2–4 are computed using import volume indices constructed from
quantity and value trade data at HS 6-digit level for 52 economies. See Boz and
Cerutti (forthcoming) and Annex 2.2 for more details.
1
Goods only.

CHAPTER 2

trade has been unusually weak since 2012 given its
historical relationship with economic activity.
For each of the 150 countries in the sample, the
chapter estimates a standard import demand model
that links import volume growth of goods and services
separately to growth in demand, controlling for relative
import prices.21 Most studies use a country’s GDP as
a proxy for absorption. In contrast, the analysis here
follows the innovation of Bussière and others (2013)
and computes the import-intensity-adjusted aggregate
demand (IAD) as a weighted average of traditional
aggregate demand components (investment, private
consumption, government spending, and exports).
The weights used are the import content of demand
computed from input-output tables.22,23 The approach
explicitly accounts for differences in the import content of the various aggregate demand components and
captures the effect of changes in the overall strength
of economic activity and across its drivers. The latter
is especially important. Investment, together with
exports, has a particularly rich import content, and
it has been weak in many advanced economies still
recovering from the global financial and European
debt crises. It has also decelerated significantly in many
emerging market and developing economies, including
21An import demand equation, which relates growth in real
imports to changes in absorption and relative price levels, can be
derived from virtually any international real business cycle model.
The exact empirical specification estimated is

​  ​​  + ​β​  P,c​​  ∆ ln​Pc,t
​  ​​  + ​ε​  c,t​​​,
​∆ ln​Mc,t
​  ​​  = ​δ​  c​​  + ​β​  D,c​​  ∆ ln​Dc,t
​  ​​,​ and ​​Pc,t
​  ​​​denote, respectively, real imports, aggrein which ​​M​ c,t​​, ​Dc,t
gate demand, and relative import prices of country ​c​in year ​t​. As in
Bussière and others (2013), the baseline specification assumes that
import growth depends only on contemporaneous growth of the
explanatory variables; however, the findings discussed in the chapter
are robust to the inclusion of lags of the dependent and explanatory
variables growth rates to allow for richer dynamics. See Annex 2.3
for the estimation results.
22Import-intensity-adjusted demand is computed as ​IA ​D​  ​​  = ​
t
ω
​
C​ t​  ​  C​​​ ​Gt​  ​ω​  ​  G​​​ ​It​  ​ω​  ​  I​​​ ​Xt​  ​ω​  ​  X​​​​, in which ​​ω​  k​​​is the import content of each of the
expenditure components for k ∈ {C, G, I, X}, normalized to sum
to 1. Import content is computed from the Eora Multi-Region
Input-Output country-specific tables, averaged over 1990–2011.
Note that if import intensity were perfectly measured in each period
and the import intensity weights were allowed to vary over time,
the model would be able to fully account for the level of imports
(although not their growth rates). This chapter uses the 1990–2011
average import intensity, recognizing that the change in import
intensity over time may be a consequence of changing trade costs
and international production fragmentation, factors that are examined separately in this chapter.
23See Hong and others (2016), IMF (2015e), Jääskelä and
Mathews (2015), Martinez-Martin (2016), and Morel (2015) for
further examples of analysis of trade growth based on IAD, with
substantially smaller samples of countries.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

in China, which is undergoing a necessary and welcome rebalancing of its economy away from investment as discussed in Chapter 4 of this WEO.
In addition to the measure proposed by Bussière and
others (2013), the chapter estimates two alternative
models of import demand using: (1) IAD including
only the domestic components of aggregate demand
(domestic IAD) and (2) domestic IAD and exports
predicted by trading partners’ domestic IAD. These
alternative models are useful given the global nature of
the trade slowdown: they help focus more precisely on
the dynamics of import growth driven only by domestic demand at home and domestic demand in trading
partners (rather than exports, which are the sum of the
imports of trading partners). A single country can take
external demand for its goods and services as given,
but for the world as a whole, only the sum of individual countries’ domestic demand determines global
import growth.
The empirical model closely tracks the dynamics
of import growth (Figure 2.5), particularly when
predicted values are calculated using the IAD measure based on all four aggregate demand components
instead of only those for domestic demand. This is to
be expected as country-level imports and exports are
increasingly linked given the rise in the internationalization of production (Bussière and others 2013).
The model does reveal, however, that predicted
versus actual trade growth for goods differed from that
of services during 2012–15. For services, the actual
and predicted import growth series are close to each
other for the entire estimation period. In contrast,
the annual growth of goods imports was, on average,
significantly lower than predicted for 2012–15. For the
average economy, the “missing” goods import growth
averaged 1 percentage point over the past four years
according to the model using all four components of
aggregate demand to predict imports. The two alternative models suggest an even larger gap between actual
and predicted goods import growth, of about 2¼ and
1¾ percentage points, respectively (Figure 2.6, panel
1).24
The results are also consistent with the time profile
of the trade slowdown across countries discussed in the
previous section. For advanced economies, the unpre24These findings are robust to controlling for the role of
uncertainty, global financial conditions, and financial stress in the
economy when analyzing the import demand model residuals. (See
Annex 2.3.)

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

71

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.5. Empirical Model: Actual and Predicted Evolution
of Real Import Growth
(Percent)
Post 2012, predicted import growth is consistently above actual for trade in goods,
especially in emerging market and developing economies. For services, actual and
predicted import growth track each other closely.
Actual
Predicted based on domestic import-intensity-adjusted demand
Predicted based on import-intensity-adjusted demand
Predicted based on domestic and partner’s domestic import-intensityadjusted demand
Full Sample
2. Real Services Imports

30 1. Real Goods Imports

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

–10

–10

–20
1985 90

95 2000 05

10

15 1985 90

95 2000 05

10

–20
15

Advanced Economies
4. Real Services Imports
30 3. Real Goods Imports

30

20

20

10

10

0

0
–10

–10
–20
1985 90

95 2000 05

10

15 1985 90

95 2000 05

10

–20
15

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
6. Real Services Imports

30 5. Real Goods Imports

30

20

20

10

10

0

0

–10

–10

–20
1985 90

95 2000 05

10

15 1985 90

95 2000 05

10

–20
15

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Actual and predicted lines display the average of country real import growth
rates, weighted by import shares. Predictions are based on an import demand
model, estimated country by country, linking real import growth to growth in
import-intensity-adjusted demand and relative import prices. See Annex 2.3.

72

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

dicted slowdown in import growth occurred in 2012.
Since then, goods import growth has recovered and is
close to model-predicted values on average (Figure 2.6,
panel 2). For emerging market and developing economies, the missing goods import growth is larger and
has become more pronounced over time (Figure 2.6,
panel 3).
Overall, these results suggest that the strength of
economic activity and its composition are unable
to fully account for the slowdown in goods import
growth beginning in 2012, especially in emerging
market and developing economies.
But how large is the missing goods import growth
compared with the overall decline in import growth?
To answer this question, the chapter decomposes the
observed slowdown in goods import growth rates prior
to and following the global financial crisis. The analysis
takes both a long view (1985–2007) and a short view
(2003–07) of the precrisis period, comparing each of
these intervals with the 2012–15 period to establish
what share of the slowdown the empirical model could
and could not match (Figure 2.7). It further allocates
the predicted slowdown into the shares attributable
to the different aggregate demand components. Two
findings stand out:
•• From an individual country’s perspective, the unpredicted portion of the goods import growth slowdown is relatively small when compared with the
overall decline in import growth. Comparing 2012–
15 with 2003–07, the model, using all four aggregate demand components to predict import growth,
can account for 85 percent of the slowdown for the
average economy in the full sample.25
•• The declines in investment and export growth
account for the lion’s share of the slowdown in trade
growth, especially relative to 2003–07, when capital
spending in many emerging market and developing
economies, including China, was growing at an
unusually brisk pace.
Regarding the second result, the extent to which
the decline of exports underlies the slowdown of
import growth in individual economies reflects two
factors: (1) the tight linkages between a country’s
imports and exports as production processes become
increasingly fragmented across borders and (2) the
25The unpredicted portion is larger if the change in import growth
relative to 1985–2007 is considered, especially for emerging market
and developing economies.

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Figure 2.6. Empirical Model: Difference between Actual and
Predicted Growth of Real Goods Imports

Figure 2.7. Empirical Model: Decomposing the Slowdown in
Real Goods Import Growth

In advanced economies, “missing” goods import growth during 2012–15 is
smaller than in emerging market and developing economies. For the former,
the largest unpredicted component occurred in 2012, with real goods import
growth subsequently recovering to levels predicted by the model. For the latter,
missing goods import growth has instead become more pronounced over time.

The empirical model can predict a sizable fraction of the difference in average
real goods import growth between 1985–2007 or 2003–07 and 2012–15. The
lion’s share of the slowdown in import growth can be attributed to the
weakness in investment and external demand.

(Percent)

(Percentage points)

Full Sample

1. Average Residuals: Full Sample

2

Predicted by own and partners’
domestic import-intensityadjusted demand
Unpredicted

Predicted by consumption and
relative prices
Predicted by investment
Predicted by exports

Predicted based on domestic import-intensity-adjusted demand
Predicted based on import-intensity-adjusted demand
Predicted based on domestic and partners’ domestic importintensity-adjusted demand

2. 2012–15 less 2003–07

1. 2012–15 less 1985–2007

1

A

B

C

A

B

C

0

0

–1

–1

–1

–2

–2

–3

–3

–4

–4

–5

–5

–6

–6

–2
–3
–4
–5

1985–2011

2

2012–15

2012

13

14

15

0

–7

–7
Advanced Economies

2. Average Residuals: Advanced Economies

3. 2012–15 less 1985–2007
A
B
C
0

1
0

4. 2012–15 less 2003–07
A

B

C

0

–1

–1

–1

–2

–2

–2

–3

–3

–3

–4

–4

–4
–5

1985–2011

2012–15

2012

13

14

15

–5

–5
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

4
2

3. Average Residuals: Emerging Market and Developing
Economies

5. 2012–15 less 1985–2007
A
B
C
0

6. 2012–15 less 2003–07
A
B
C

0

0
–2

–5

–5

–10

–10

–15

–15

–4
–6
–8
–10

1985–2011

2012–15

2012

13

14

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars display the average residuals, weighted by import shares, from an
import demand model, estimated country by country, linking real import growth
to growth in import-intensity-adjusted demand and relative import prices. Black
markers denote the 90 percent conﬁdence interval. See Annex 2.3.

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bar A decomposes the difference in average real goods import growth
between the two periods into portions predicted by consumption and relative
prices, investment, exports, and an unpredicted residual. Bar B apportions the
component predicted by exports into what can and cannot be predicted by
domestic demand from trading partners, using an iterative procedure. Bar C
decomposes the difference into the sum of domestic demand and external
demand predicted by trading partners’ domestic demand.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

73

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

globally synchronized weakness in economic growth in
recent years. These two factors have contributed to the
widespread nature of the trade growth slowdown across
countries and have amplified its magnitude.
To trace the role of domestic demand in the global
trade slowdown, the analysis breaks down for each
country the share of the decline in import growth
accounted for by its exports into: (1) the predicted
value of its trading partners’ import demand, attributable to domestic demand; (2) the predicted value of
its trading partners’ import demand, attributable to
exports; and (3) a residual portion unaccounted for
by the model. Iterating in this fashion, it is possible
to fully allocate the global goods import slowdown to
domestic demand components and an unpredicted
portion as depicted in the middle bar of each panel of
Figure 2.7. This procedure reveals that, for the world
as a whole, changes in economic activity can account
for about three-fourths of the decline in the global
goods import growth rate. The unpredicted portion of
the slowdown in global goods import growth is larger
than for the average economy, as impediments to trade
at the individual country level are compounded in
the aggregate. Using the import demand model based
on domestic IAD and exports predicted by partners’
domestic IAD yields a very similar pattern, as revealed
in the right bar of the panels in Figure 2.7.
Ultimately, the slowdown in goods import growth
during 2012–15 is not just a symptom of weak activity. About three-fourths of the global trade slowdown
can be traced to the combined effect of slower overall
growth, a change in the composition of economic
activity away from more import-intensive components—namely, investment—and the synchronized
nature of the growth slowdown across countries,
which may be in part effected via trade. However, at the global level, goods import growth rates
during 2012–15 have fallen short by about 1¾ percentage points on average relative to what would be
expected based on the historical relationship between
trade flows and economic activity. This is not a trivial
amount: the level of real global goods trade would
have been 8 percent higher in 2015 had it not been
for this missing trade growth.
The empirical approach described above is well
established in the literature, but carries two important caveats.26 First, as previously discussed, it focuses
26Some recent examples of studies that recover trade wedges—that
is, components of trade growth that cannot be explained by models

74

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

narrowly on only one side of the relationship between
economic activity and trade: the link from the former
to the latter. Other factors can simultaneously affect
economic activity and trade, in particular, trade policies. Not taking these into account would likely lead
to an upward bias in the estimated role of economic
activity in predicting trade flows. As demonstrated in
Annex 2.3, this bias, however, is relatively small.27
Second, as a partial equilibrium analysis—the
empirical model takes each country’s external demand
as given—it is insufficient on its own to analyze a
synchronized trade slowdown across many countries.
To overcome the second limitation, the chapter uses
a multicountry general equilibrium structural model,
which is described in the next section. The general
equilibrium approach also allows for an endogenous
response of the level of economic activity and output
to changes in trade patterns and trade costs through
their effect on intermediate and consumption goods’
prices, thus addressing partially the first limitation of
the empirical approach as well.28

The Role of Demand Composition and Trade Costs:
Insights from a Structural Investigation
This section examines the slowdown in the growth
of trade in goods relative to GDP growth in nominal terms by adapting the multisector, multicountry,
static model of production and trade in Eaton and
others (2010).29 Since this is a general equilibrium
of trade demand, based on the one-way relationship from demand
and relative prices to imports—include Levchenko, Lewis, and Tesar
(2010); Alessandria, Kaboski, and Midrigan (2013); and Alessandria
and Choi (2016). See also Bussière and others (2013); Constantinescu, Mattoo, and Ruta (2015); Ollivaud and Schwellnus (2015);
and the studies cited in footnote 23.
27Purging growth in aggregate demand components from the
effects of policy-driven changes in trade costs before constructing
IAD yields slightly larger “missing” trade growth during 2012–15.
For the average economy, the share of the decline in import growth
predicted by changes in economic activity—by construction orthogonal to trade policies—and relative prices is 79 percent, compared to
the 85 percent using the baseline specification.
28As is the case with most general equilibrium models of trade,
certain channels through which trade affects output, for example,
the dynamic productivity gains from greater trade openness, are not
captured.
29This model incorporates the canonical Ricardian trade model of
Eaton and Kortum (2002). Eaton and others (forthcoming) extend
the static model of their 2010 work to explicitly model the role of
investment in a dynamic framework. However, the dynamic version
of the model has a heavier data and computational requirement,
making its estimation for a large number of emerging market and
developing economies not feasible for this study.

CHAPTER 2

model, which endogenously computes equilibrium
wages and prices, the main object of interest is nominal import growth in relation to GDP growth. In this
framework, countries trade to exploit their comparative
advantage in goods production. However, international
trade is costly: it involves transportation costs and manmade trade barriers, such as tariffs. Countries weigh
these trade-related costs against the efficiency gains
from trade to determine whether and how much to
produce, export, and import. The model also includes
a rich input-output structure allowing the output from
each sector—durable, nondurable manufacturing, and
commodities and a residual sector that mostly includes
nontradables—to be used as an input to other sectors.
According to the model, observed trade dynamics
can be attributed to changes in four specific factors, or
“wedges”: (1) composition of demand, (2) trade costs
(or frictions), (3) productivity, and (4) trade deficits.
These time-varying wedges act as shocks to preferences,
cost of trade, productivity, and trade deficits, thereby
influencing agents’ economic decisions, including
whether to trade. When the observed patterns of
sectoral trade, production, and prices are analyzed
through the lens of the model, the model endogenously allocates changes in actual trade flows to these
four wedges so that the implied trade dynamics match
those in the data exactly. The four factors are sector
and country specific and are identified within the
framework as follows:
•• The demand composition wedge captures changes in
the share of a sector’s output in total final demand.
For example, if weak investment reduces demand
for durable manufactured goods disproportionately
more than the demand for other goods, changes in
trade flows will be attributed to this wedge.
•• The trade costs wedge accounts for changes in preferences between domestically produced and imported
goods that are not due to relative price changes. For
example, if prices in all countries remain fixed, but
a country consumes more domestically produced
durables than imported durables, this would be
attributed to rising trade costs. These trade costs
may include tariffs, subsidies for domestic production, nontariff barriers, cross-border transportation
costs, and so forth.30
30The

model does not feature any nominal rigidities or variations
in the length of global value chains. This implies that observed
fluctuations in trade flows due to these two factors will be imperfectly attributed to one of the four wedges. For example, the recent
depreciation of stressed emerging market and developing economies’

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

•• The productivity wedge reflects countries’ comparative advantage. As a country becomes more productive in a particular sector, it exports more output
from this sector to its trading partners and consumes
more of this sector’s output domestically.
•• The trade deficit wedge is necessary to ensure that
the model can perfectly match imports and exports
for countries that run trade deficits or surpluses.
Many of the key hypotheses about the causes of
the slowdown in global trade relative to GDP can be
mapped to these factors. A slowdown in trade growth,
which mostly reflects shifts in the composition of
economic activity, will be captured in the demand
composition wedge. On the other hand, if the erection
of trade barriers or a slower pace of trade liberalization
underpins the slowdown, the model would attribute
this to a rise in the trade cost wedge. By generating
counterfactual scenarios in which only one factor is
allowed to change, the model can quantify the role of
these wedges in the current trade slowdown in a general equilibrium setting. For example, in the scenario
with only the demand composition wedge active, the
model allows the demand composition to change as
observed in the data but keeps trade costs, productivity, and trade deficits constant. For the purposes of this
chapter, only the results of the counterfactual scenarios
for the first two wedges (demand composition and
trade costs) are presented.31
The analysis here uses annual sectoral data on
production, bilateral trade, and producer prices
for 2003–15 to apply the accounting procedure for
34 advanced and emerging market and developing
economies (accounting for 75 percent of world trade),
thus extending both the geographical and temporal
coverage of Eaton and others (2010).32 Furthermore,
the chapter enriches the model’s structure by explicitly modeling a commodity sector in addition to the
currencies appears to have boosted the trade cost wedge as trade
values declined more than domestic absorption and production in
U.S. dollars due to incomplete exchange rate pass-through. Similarly,
changes in global value chain growth also tend to be absorbed by the
trade cost wedge as exemplified by significant declines in measured
trade costs for Vietnam.
31The trade deficit wedge played a negligible role during the recent
trade slowdown. The productivity wedge exhibits some interesting
dynamics, but they can be ascribed mostly to the recent supply-side-​
induced price changes in the commodity sector.
32The very large data requirement precludes the application of the
procedure over a longer historical period for a large number of economies. See Annex 2.4 for a description of the data and parameters
used in this exercise.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

75

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

three sectors included in the original setup. This is
an essential addition in light of recent price shifts in
this sector, which affect the ratio of trade growth to
GDP growth.33 However, the model does not separate
investment from consumption, and the findings on the
role of demand composition should be interpreted in
light of this limitation.
Comparing the results from the two counterfactual
scenarios with the actual data on the gross growth of
nominal imports-to-GDP ratio for 2003–15 (Figure 2.8,
panels 1, 3, and 5) yields the following insights:
•• During 2003–07, nominal goods trade grew faster
relative to GDP because of both shifts in the
composition of demand and reduced trade costs. In
advanced economies, these two factors were about
equal in importance; in emerging market and developing economies, falling trade costs took a leading
role, particularly for China, which is consistent
with its accession to the World Trade Organization
in 2001.
•• The 2012–15 slowdown in the growth of the nominal goods import-to-GDP ratio was characterized
by a shift in demand toward nontradables and by a
shift within tradables toward nondurable manufactured goods. For the world, the expenditure shares
of all three tradable sectors declined; the share of
commodities fell more than others given that sector’s
price declines. The further decline in 2015 in the
ratio of nominal import growth to GDP growth was
mostly due to the decline in commodity prices.
•• The model attributes that largely to wedges in the
commodity sector. However, other wedges played
a role, too, with their relative contribution varying
across countries. For example, China stands out in
terms of a rise in trade costs. Although it is difficult
to pinpoint the driver of this finding, it may be
indicative of the flattening of global value chains.
Brazil experienced a significant decline in the share
of durable manufacturing goods in its expenditures,
which depressed the growth of imports.
Comparing results of the alternative scenarios
for 2003–07 with those for 2012–15 reveals that
changes in demand composition alone accounted for
almost 60 percent of the slowdown in world trade
33In this Ricardian model of trade, trade in commodities occurs
as a result of differences in the efficiency of production. This can be
mapped to the real world—for example, oil importers have reservoirs
deep underground and extraction is more inefficient than for oil
exporters.

76

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

growth relative to GDP growth (Figure 2.8, panels 2,
4, and 6). In addition, the shift in the composition
of demand has been more important in advanced
economies than in emerging market and developing
economies. For the world, trade costs also played
a nonnegligible role: the model attributes close to
25 percent of the slowdown in the growth of nominal imports-to-GDP ratio to changes in this factor.
Reductions in trade costs boosted trade in 2003–07,
while their pace of decline fell considerably in 2012–
15. When combined—that is, when changes in the
composition of demand and in trade costs are allowed
to shape trade flows simultaneously—the model can
account for close to 80 percent of the slowdown.34
Despite their significant differences, the two
analytical approaches deliver a consistent message.
The global slowdown in trade reflects to a significant
extent, but not entirely, the weakness of the overall
economic environment and compositional shifts in
aggregate demand. According to both methodologies, demand composition shifts have played a larger
role in the slowdown in advanced economies’ trade,
relative to that in emerging market and developing
economies. And, finally, both the structural model
and the reduced-form approach suggest a role for
other factors, including trade costs, in the observed
slowdown in trade.

The Role of Trade Costs and Global Value Chains:
Insights from Disaggregated Trade Data
Motivated by the findings of the first two analytical exercises of the chapter, this section examines the
role of trade costs and changes in global production
processes in the recent trade slowdown. Since many
trade policies—for example, tariffs and nontariff barriers—are set at the product level, and global value chain
participation varies significantly across sectors within
the same economy, properly disentangling their role
requires the use of disaggregated data.35 To do so, this
section follows a three-step approach.
34Adding up the results under four counterfactual scenarios, each
featuring a different wedge, does not necessarily yield the scenario
containing all wedges at the same time. The wedges can amplify or
dampen each other when they are present simultaneously, so that the
sum of the fraction of the data they can account for individually can
be greater or less than one.
35Analysis performed at the aggregate (country) level may fail to
uncover the association between these factors and trade growth since
it cannot account for a large part of the variation in the data (across
products and sectors).

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Figure 2.8. Structural Model: Actual and Model-Implied Evolution of Nominal Import-to-GDP Ratio
During 2003–07, nominal imports grew faster than GDP due to both shifts in the composition of demand and reductions in trade costs. During the slowdown period of
2012–15, however, changes in demand composition played a more prominent role relative to trade costs, particularly in advanced economies.

Gross Growth of Nominal Imports-to-GDP Ratio
Data

Demand composition

Change in the Gross Growth of Nominal Imports-to-GDP Ratio
between 2012–15 and 2003–07
(Percentage points)

Trade costs

2. World

1.2 1. World

3

1.1

0

1.0

–3

0.9

–6

0.8

–9

0.7
2003

05

07

09

11

13

15

Data

Demand composition

–12

Trade costs

4. Advanced Economies

1.2 3. Advanced Economies

3

1.1

0

1.0

–3

0.9

–6

0.8

–9

0.7
2003
1.2

05

07

09

11

13

15

5. Emerging Market and Developing Economies

Data

Demand composition

–12

Trade costs

6. Emerging Market and Developing Economies

3

1.1

0

1.0

–3

0.9

–6

0.8

–9

0.7
2003

05

07

09

11

13

15

Data

Demand composition

–12

Trade costs

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Actual and simulated lines in panels 1, 3, and 5 display the ratio of gross growth of nominal goods imports to gross growth of nominal world GDP, (Mt /Mt -1)/(Yt /Yt -1),
and their period averages (solid lines). A value of 1 indicates that nominal imports and GDP grow at the same rate. The simulated effect of demand composition and trade
costs are obtained through counterfactual exercises in which only the corresponding wedge is allowed to operate, holding all other factors affecting production and trade
constant. A decline in trade costs corresponds to an increase in the depicted trade wedge as it boosts model-implied trade values. Bars in panels 2, 4, and 6 display the
difference in the average growth of the imports-to-GDP ratio described above between 2003–07 and 2012–15 implied by: (1) the data; (2) the model with the demand
composition wedge only; and (3) the model with the trade cost wedge only, that is, the differences in the period averages depicted in panels 1, 3, and 5. See Annex 2.4 for
further details of country coverage, data sources, and methodology.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

77

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

First, it presents comprehensive evidence on how
trade costs and production chains have evolved over
time. Second, it analyzes disaggregated trade flows and
measures of trade costs and global value chain participation at the country-product level to estimate the
elasticity of real import growth with respect to these
factors. Third, the analysis combines the first two steps
to obtain an estimate of how much each potential
factor can account for in the slowdown in trade growth
during 2012–15. It should be emphasized that this
analysis does not attempt to identify causation, only
association; the ultimate goal is to uncover how much
of the import growth decline can be predicted by the
behavior of the various correlates.
The Evolution of Trade Costs and Global Value
Chains
Overall Trade Costs
The term “trade costs” typically encompasses a
broad range of factors that drive a wedge between the
producer price of the exporter and the consumer prices
in the importing country. Factors can include measurable components, such as transportation costs and
tariffs, availability and cost of trade credit, and other
harder-to-quantify elements, such as language barriers,
regulations, and other informational asymmetries.36
To get a bird’s eye view of how trade costs in the
broadest sense have evolved, the analysis infers them
from the patterns of observed bilateral trade, production, and absorption across countries, following Head
and Ries (2001) and Novy (2012). Intuitively, if bilateral trade flows increase relative to domestic trade flows
(proxied by gross sectoral output less total exports),
the methodology concludes that it must have become
easier for the two countries to trade with each other,
and therefore trade costs must have fallen.37
Global average manufacturing trade costs vis-à-vis
the world’s 10 largest importers declined significantly
during 1990–2008, spiked with the retrenchment in
international trade during the global financial cri36Trade costs can be fixed (for example, institutional and behindthe-border barriers, which force a firm to pay a fixed cost to access
a new market) or variable (such as transportation costs, import
tariffs, costs linked to trade logistics, and facilitation services). See
Annex 2.5 for details on the construction of the index of trade costs
and Arvis and others (2013) for a discussion of trade costs in the
developing world.
37Trade costs calculated this way are conceptually the same as the
trade cost wedges recovered from the general equilibrium model
previously described.

78

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

sis, and flattened thereafter (Figure 2.9, panel 1).38
The same pattern can be observed across economies
and across sectors (Figure 2.9, panel 2). While more
dispersed, the decline in trade costs was substantially larger for emerging market and developing
economies—which face significantly higher trade
costs—than for advanced economies over this period
(Figure 2.9, panels 3 and 4). What halted the decline
of trade costs? The following subsections examine the
role of some specific influences on trade costs: tariffs,
nontariff barriers, free trade agreements, and transportation and logistics.39
Tariffs
Import tariffs are the most easily observable and
measurable form of trade cost. Trade negotiation and
unilateral trade liberalization lowered the importweighted average tariff rates for all economies by
almost 1 percentage point a year between 1986 and
the conclusion of the Uruguay Round in 1995, with a
significant narrowing in the dispersion of tariffs across
countries and products (Figure 2.10, panels 1 and
2). Subsequently, tariff reductions continued, albeit
at a more moderate rate of ½ percentage point a year
until 2008. In the absence of tariff agreements since
then, tariff declines have been minimal.40
Nontariff Barriers
Nontariff barriers are arguably the most difficult
to measure. As the name suggests, they cover any
nontariff measure that restricts trade flows, such as
quotas, bailouts, state aid, and trade defense measures,
as well as mandated preferences for local over foreign
products.
Two complementary sources of data, the Centre for
Economic Policy Research Global Trade Alert initiative
and the World Bank Temporary Trade Barriers data38The 10 largest importers include Canada, China, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Mexico, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.
39The availability and cost of trade finance are also an important
part of trade costs faced by businesses, and could limit trade growth,
as witnessed during the great trade collapse (Chor and Manova
2012). However, anecdotal evidence on the availability of trade
finance suggests that it is unlikely to play a major role in the current
trade slowdown (International Chamber of Commerce 2015). Annex
2.5 presents some survey data on trends in the availability of trade
credit lines offered by banks.
40It is important to note that the continuous decline in average
tariffs occurred even though the sample of countries grew significantly over time and included increasing numbers of developing
economies, which tend to have higher import tariffs.

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.9. Trade Costs in Historical Perspective: A Top-Down
Approach
(Percent)

Trade costs fell somewhat consistently up until the global ﬁnancial crisis but have
since ﬂattened. The same pattern can be observed across advanced and emerging
market and developing economies and globally across sectors.
Trade-weighted mean
Food and beverages
Other manufacturing
Textiles and wearing apparel
Transport equipment

120 1. World
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
1990 95 2000

Interquartile range
Wood and paper
Metal products
Electrical and machinery
Petroleum, chemical, and nonmetallic mineral products
2. World, across Sectors

120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40

05

180 3. Advanced Economies
160

10 13 1990

95

2000

05

30
10 13

4. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

180
160

140

140

120

120

100

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20
1990

95

2000

05

10 13 1990

95

2000

05

20
10 13

Sources: Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The index follows the Head and Ries (2001) and Novy (2012) methodology
to understand how trade costs in a broad sense have evolved over time. These
costs are inferred from the patterns of observed bilateral trade, production, and
absorption across countries. See Annex 2.5 for a detailed description of country
coverage, data sources, and methodology.

base, show a steady increase in protectionist measures
(Figure 2.10, panels 3 and 4).41 The stock of three
41We thank Chad Bown, Simon Evenett, and Johannes Fritz
for generously sharing their databases on nontariff barriers. The
Global Trade Alert database has the most comprehensive coverage
of all types of trade-discriminatory and trade-liberalizing measures,
although it only begins in 2008 (Evenett and Fritz 2015). The World
Bank data generally cover a longer period but only for national governments’ use of three specific policies: antidumping, countervailing
duties, and safeguard measures (Bown 2016).

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

specific temporary trade barriers (antidumping, countervailing duties, and safeguards) suggests that while
temporary barriers affect only a small share of products
(2½ percent in 2015), the share of products affected
by them has grown since 1990, with a significant
uptick in 2014 and 2015. The Global Trade Alert, currently the most comprehensive database for all types of
trade-related measures imposed since the global financial crisis, also shows a steady increase in protectionist
measures since 2012, with 2015 recording the largest
number of harmful trade measures. While the limited
time coverage of the Global Trade Alert precludes a
more rigorous analysis, there is clear evidence that
the real import growth of products subject to trade
discriminatory measures experienced a deeper decline
in 2012–15 relative to 2003–07 (Figure 2.10, panel 5).
An additional indication of the extent to which
trade issues have become a concern for businesses can
be gleaned from firms’ lobbying activity (Ludema,
Mayda, and Mishra 2015).42 According to U.S. firms’
mandatory lobbying disclosure reports, there has been
a steady increase in lobbying on trade issues since 2009
(Figure 2.10, panel 6). These trends may be part of
the reason for the halt in the decline of overall trade
costs.43
Free Trade Agreements
Free trade agreements can also reduce trade costs,
not only by curtailing tariff and nontariff barriers but
also by including provisions on various other issues
that may impede trade in goods and services, such as,
for example, regulatory cooperation. The proliferation of free trade agreements was particularly strong
in the 1990s, averaging nearly 30 signed agreements
a year according to the Design of Trade Agreements
database. In the run-up to the global financial crisis,
the number dropped slightly (to 26) but, since 2011,
the rate has fallen sharply to about 10 agreements
signed a year (Figure 2.10, panel 7).
However, compared with earlier pacts, recent agreements are deeper—they cover a much broader spectrum of measures than tariffs alone. And unlike earlier
arrangements, they include more trading partners—
42We

thank Prachi Mishra for updating and sharing her database
on firms’ lobbying activity.
43Henn and McDonald (2014) find that the trade-restrictive
measures captured in the Global Trade Alert database as of 2010 had
a sizable adverse effect on product-level trade flows during 2008–10,
although their aggregate impact was muted by their limited adoption
during the sample period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

79

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.10. Trade Policies in Historical Perspective
The pace of tariff reduction and the coverage of free trade agreements has slowed. There are signs that protectionism is on the rise.
2. Tariffs in Emerging Market and Developing Economies
(Percent; simple average)

20 1. Tariffs in Advanced Economies
(Percent; simple average)

60

15

40

10
20

5
0
1980

90

2000

10

15 1980

3 3. Temporary Trade Barriers
(Percent of products)

90

2000

0
15

10

4. Measures Recorded by Global Trade Alert
(Number of products; thousands)

12
9
6
3
0
–3
–6
–9
–12

Temporary trade barriers
Antidumping
Countervailing duties
Safeguards

2

1

Liberalizing
0
1990

95

2000

05

10

15

3 5. Slowdown in Real Goods Import Growth
(Percentage points; difference between 2012–15 and 2003–07)

2009

10

Discriminatory
11

12

Net measures
13

14

15

6. Lobbying on Trade Issues in the United States
(Number; hundreds)

0

Reports

Lobbyists

80
60

Firms

–3

40

–6

20

–9

No trade discriminatory measures

Trade discriminatory measures

2009

10

11

12

13

70 7. Free Trade Agreements by Year of Signature
(Number)
60

70 8. Free Trade Agreements Coverage

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

10

10

0

1980

90

2000

14

0

15

31

60

10

15

0
1980

25

Average number of trading partners
Percent of global GDP (right scale)

19
12
6

90

2000

10

15

0

Sources: Bown 2016; Design of Trade Agreements database; Evenett and Fritz 2016; Global Trade Alert database; Ludema, Mayda, and Mishra 2015; United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development Trade Analysis and Information System; World Bank Temporary Trade Barriers database; World Trade Organization (WTO) Tariff
Download Facility; WTO Regional Trade Agreements database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Blue shaded areas in panels 1 and 2 denote the interquartile ranges. See Annex 2.5 for a detailed description of country coverage, data sources, and
methodology of each indicator.

80

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 2

for example, the recently concluded megaregional
Trans-Pacific Partnership, the Regional Comprehensive
Economic Partnership, and the Transatlantic Trade and
Investment Partnership, which are still being negotiated. Such arrangements encompass large groups of
countries with a major share of world trade and foreign
direct investment. Such deeper and larger agreements
tend to have a bigger impact on trade growth.44
To calculate the coverage of these agreements,
the analysis measures the average number of trading
partners with which a representative country is in a
free trade agreement and the average share of world
GDP of those trading partners. On that measure,
free trade agreements’ coverage continues to increase,
albeit at a slightly slower rate more recently (Figure 2.10, panel 8).
Transportation and Logistical Costs of Trade
International transportation costs and costs associated
with domestic transportation and border and documentary compliance have been shown to hurt trade flows
(Hummels 2007a; Djankov, Freund, and Pham 2010).
However, according to most available measures, such
costs have been continuously declining since 2006.
Both the monetary cost in connection with the logistics of trade, such as documentary compliance fees
and movement of goods to ports and borders, and the
time involved in this process have significantly fallen in
emerging market and developing economies since 2006
(Figure 2.11, panels 1 and 2). These costs have remained
flat in advanced economies at their already low levels.
Countries are also increasingly connected to global shipping networks, as reflected in such measures as the size
of their maritime fleets, container-carrying capacity, and
so forth (Figure 2.11, panel 3). An exception to this pattern is air freight costs, which rose more or less steadily
between 2002 and 2012, but have since fallen during
the trade slowdown on the back of lower oil prices. The
decline in oil prices since 2014 has likely lowered the
cost of other modes of transport as well. The time pattern of international transportation and logistical costs
44For more recent evidence on the trade-creation effect of trade
agreements, see, for example, Carrère (2006); Baier and Bergstrand
(2007, 2009); and Cipollina and Salvatici (2010) for a meta-analysis.
Osnago, Rocha, and Ruta (forthcoming) demonstrate that deeper
trade agreements also contribute to greater vertical foreign direct
investment between countries, potentially fostering firms’ integration
into global value chains. More recently, Conconi and others (2016)
find evidence that preferential rules of origin embodied in free trade
agreements can instead increase the level of protectionism faced by
nonmember countries.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

of trade suggests that they probably did not contribute
to the decline in the growth rate of global trade.
Global Value Chains
In addition to trade costs, some have argued that the
dispersion of production across countries in the 1990s
and early 2000s, which resulted from the creation or
extension of global value chains and boosted gross
trade flows, may have run its course.45 The claim is
hard to assess, however. Information on the degree of
production sharing is typically available only with a
significant time lag.46 And the cause of any detected
slowdown in global value chains would be hard to
assign: it could stem from deceleration in the decline
in trade costs, higher obstacles to cross-border investment, or inherent maturation.47
A standard measure of participation in global
value chains calculates the sum of: (1) the domestic
content in a country’s exports that is reused in the
exports of its trading partners and (2) its exports’
foreign value added as a share of gross exports (see,
for example, Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) for
a discussion of vertical specialization measurement).
On this measure, there is wide variation in participation in global value chains across countries, with
many emerging market and developing economies
yet to fully integrate into global production processes
(IMF 2015a, 2015d). Participation rose steadily
across both advanced and emerging market and developing economies until the global financial crisis (Figure 2.12, panels 1, 2, and 3). A notable exception is
China, where participation peaked during the second
half of the 2000s (Figure 2.12, panel 4). However,

45See, for example, Constantinescu, Mattoo, and Ruta (2015);
Crozet, Emlinger, and Jean (2015); and Gangnes, Ma, and Van
Assche (2015).
46The timeliest source at publication is the Eora Multi-Region
Input-Output set of global input-output matrices, which covers
26 sectors for 173 countries in the IMF World Economic Outlook
database sample for 1990–2013. See Lenzen and others (2013) for a
detailed description of the database.
47An example of maturation would be a rise in productivity and
skilled labor in China, which could cause companies to bring back
some production that previously took place abroad. Trade barriers, on the other hand, can lead to a similar outcome, as the costs
associated with goods that must cross borders many times as part
of the supply chain could become prohibitive. Yi (2003, 2010) and
Koopman, Wang, and Wei (2014) discuss the magnifying impact of
trade costs in multistage production, while Evenett and Fritz (2016)
summarize the evidence on the proliferation of trade-diverting
localization requirements, which can also restrict the development of
cross-border production.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

81

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.11. Logistics and Transportation Costs of Trade in
Historical Perspective

Figure 2.12. Global Value Chains in Historical Perspective

Monetary and time costs associated with domestic transport and border and
documentary compliance for importing goods have been continuously declining,
particularly in emerging market and developing economies. Countries are
increasingly more connected to global shipping networks. Air freight costs have
also fallen during the trade slowdown period amid lower oil prices.

Global value chain participation rose in both advanced and emerging market and
developing economies until the global ﬁnancial crisis. Since 2011, participation
appears to have plateaued across both country aggregates.

(Percent)

Simple average
Advanced economies weighted average
Emerging market and developing economies weighted average
3,500 1. Cost to Import
(Constant 2013 U.S.
3,000
dollars per container)

Weighted average

80 1. World

2. Time to Import
(Days)

35
30

Interquartile range

2. Advanced Economies

80

70

70

60

60

2,500

25

50

50

2,000

20

40

40

1,500

15

30

30

1,000

10

500

5

0
2006

08

10

12

80 3. Liner Shipping Connectivity
(Index; increasing from
0 to 100)
60

14 2006

08

10

12

0
14

4. U.S. Air Freight Cost

250

10

12

15 2000

04

08

12

2000

05

10

4. China

20
13
80
70

40

40

100

30

30

50

20
1995

16
H:1

0

since 2011, participation seems to have leveled off
across all country aggregates.
The Role of These Other Factors: Insights from
Product-Level Data
To explore the historical association of trade costs
and global value chains with trade growth, this section
draws on the novel data set described earlier in the
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

80 3. Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
70
Excluding China

13 1995

50

Sources: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD); U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics; World Bank, Doing Business Indicators; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The cost and time indicators measure the cost (excluding tariffs) and time
associated with three sets of procedures—documentary compliance, border
compliance, and domestic transport—within the overall process of importing a
shipment of goods across a balanced sample of 161 economies. The UNCTAD
Liner Shipping Connectivity Index captures how well countries are connected to
global shipping networks based on ﬁve components of the maritime transport
sector: number of ships, their container-carrying capacity, maximum vessel size,
number of services, and number of companies that deploy container ships in a
country’s ports.

82

10

50

150

08

05

60

40

0
2004 06

2000

60

Import (Index; 2000 = 100)
Oil price (U.S. dollars)
200

20

20
1995

2000

05

10

13 1995

2000

05

10

20
13

Sources: Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global value chain participation denotes the sum of the domestic content in a
country’s exports—which is reused in the exports of its trading partners—and the
foreign value added of its exports as a share of gross exports. See Annex 2.5 for a
detailed description of country coverage, data sources, and methodology of each
indicator.

chapter for real import flows of 700 products.48 The
analysis estimates the elasticity of import volumes of
noncommodity products with respect to four of the
factors discussed above—tariffs, free trade agreement
coverage (as a share of world GDP), temporary trade
barriers, and global value chain participation, con48These volume series were computed for imports starting in 2003
for 52 countries, which, as of 2015, accounted for more than 90
percent of both world imports and GDP. The data set is for products
at the four-digit level under Revision 2 of the Standard Industrial
Trade Classification. The nominal value of imports of these products
was adjusted with import price deflators constructed at the Harmonized System two-digit level, with the same deflator applied to all
Standard Industrial Trade Classification four-digit products that map
to a particular Harmonized System two-digit code.

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

trolling for sectoral domestic demand, relative prices
of imported goods, and country-product and time
fixed effects (see Annex 2.5 for details on estimation,
specification, and robustness). Given the steady decline
in the logistical costs of trade since 2006 and the
limited availability of time-series data on these costs,
the chapter does not investigate their role in the trade
slowdown.
The estimated elasticities of import growth with
respect to the various measures of trade costs are
outlined in Table 2.1. The estimates are highly statistically significant and of the expected sign.49 The
greater incidence of trade barriers is associated with
lower import volume growth, although the estimated
elasticity of imports to tariffs is smaller than estimates
from other studies. Likewise, expanding the set of
trading partners with which a country is in a free
trade agreement is associated with higher growth of
import volumes.
Higher participation in global value chains is also
associated with higher growth of import volumes:
a 10 percentage point increase in participation is
associated with a 1 percentage point increase in import
growth (Table 2.1, column 5). As noted, whether such
participation is also capturing additional policy effects
is difficult to know; therefore, this estimate likely represents an upper bound.
As a cross-check of the disaggregated product level
analysis, the chapter examines the relationship between
the country-specific residuals discussed earlier (the
difference between the actual and model-predicted
growth of aggregate real imports) and the same four
factors. The point estimates are similar to those from
the product-level regressions, but not as precisely estimated due to the more aggregated nature of the data
(Table 2.1, column 8). Overall, these results suggest
that the imposition of trade-distorting policy measures
hurts trade growth. At the same time, slower growth in
the coverage of free trade agreements and a slower pace
of global value chain participation are associated with
lower import growth.

Combining the estimated elasticities of import
growth with the differences in the growth rate of the
different factors between 2012–15 and 2003–07 allows
for an estimation of their relative contribution. This
exercise reveals that a sizable share of the trade slowdown not accounted for by weak economic activity
and its composition is attributable to changes in trade
policy and to the slowing expansion of global value
chains (Figure 2.13 and Annex 2.5).

49The literature provides a very wide range of estimates for the
elasticity of trade with respect to trade policy. Studies based on
cross-sectional data, typically thought of as capturing the long-term
elasticity, tend to find much higher elasticities. Studies based on
time-series variation, capturing the short-term effects of changing
trade costs, yield much lower estimates for the trade elasticity. The
approach used here is in the spirit of the latter strand of literature.
See Hillberry and Hummels (2013) and Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2016) for a review of the literature.

50See Feenstra, Markusen, and Rose (2001) or Feyrer (2009b) for
other examples of gravity models estimated separately for different
years and sectors. The results from the gravity estimations (available
from the authors upon request) are strictly in line with those of the
literature. The coefficients on the bilateral measures of trade costs
(such as distance, common language, common borders) have the
correct signs and are highly significant and stable across time. Such
stability indicates that bilateral trade flows have not become more
sensitive to bilateral trade costs.

The Connection between Trade and Global Value
Chains: Insights from the Gravity Model
The final piece of analysis uses a gravity model of
trade at the sectoral level to highlight the role of global
value chains during the slowdown. The gravity model
is widely used to explain the level of bilateral trade
flows on the basis of individual characteristics of each
country and the characteristics of the country pair
that capture trading costs, such as distance between
the countries or whether they share a common border,
language, or currency.
Estimated at the sectoral level, the gravity model has
two advantages that make it an especially useful tool to
isolate the importance of global value chain participation in trade growth: (1) it controls for compositional
changes in trade flows across sectors and partners
(unlike the aggregate import demand analysis reported
earlier in the chapter), and (2) it exploits the heterogeneity in the degree of production linkages across
trading partners (unlike the product-level analysis
reported earlier).
The analysis is performed in three stages (see also
Annex 2.6). The first stage involves estimating a gravity
model at the sectoral level to provide a benchmark for
bilateral-sectoral trade. The model is estimated separately for each year between 2003 and 2014 and for
each of the 10 traded sectors in the Eora Multi-Region
Input-Output database. In addition to the standard
gravity variables, the estimated specification controls
for importer and exporter fixed effects.50 These fixed
effects control for all sectoral source and destination
characteristics, such as sectoral demand and supply,

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

83

84

International Monetary Fund | October 2016
(4)

2003–13

Yes
...
Yes

0.095**
(0.041)

0.106**
(0.054)

–0.016**
(0.008)

–0.031***
(0.009)

(5)

2003–13

Yes
...
Yes

0.192***
(0.029)

0.139***
(0.040)

–0.021***
(0.005)

Yes
...
Yes

0.170***
(0.041)

0.205***
(0.055)

–0.034***
(0.007)

–0.029***
(0.007)

(7)

2003–13

Nominal

–0.028***
(0.006)

(6)

1990–2013

...
Yes
Yes

0.083*
(0.043)

0.227***
(0.056)

–0.015
(0.018)

–0.253
(0.196)

(8)

Import-IntensityAdjusted
Demand Residual

B. Country

R2
0.264
0.266
0.265
0.295
0.293
0.324
0.407
0.504
Adjusted R 2
0.193
0.190
0.192
0.212
0.208
0.281
0.338
0.449
Number of Observations
316,840
341,553
371,622
315,636
258,196
472,178
270,587
464
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global value chain participation is a measure of backward participation: foreign value added in exports as share of gross exports. In the product-country level regressions, this variable is
calculated at the sectoral level. Standard errors are clustered at the product-country level for regressions A and at the country level in regression B. Columns (1)–(7) control for growth in sectoral
demand and growth in relative prices.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

Yes
...
Yes

Yes
...
Yes

0.119**
(0.048)

(3)

Real

2003–15

Country x Product Fixed Effects
Country Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects

Yes
...
Yes

–0.008
(0.007)

(2)

2003–15

0.066*
(0.038)
Yes
...
Yes

–0.024***
(0.008)

(1)

2003–15

Global Value Chain Participation

Free Trade Agreement Coverage

Tariffs

Temporary Trade Barriers

Growth of:

Dependent Variable: Import Growth

Sample Period

A. Product and Country

Table 2.1 Historical Association among Real Import Growth at the Product Level, Trade Policies, and Participation in Global Value
Chains

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

CHAPTER 2

Figure 2.13. Contribution of Trade Policies and Global Value
Chains to the Slowdown in Real Goods Import Growth

(Percent)

The decline in global value chain participation and changes in trade policy are
weighing on trade growth, although their quantitative contribution is limited.
Predicted by own and partners’
domestic import-intensityadjusted demand
Unpredicted
1. From Import-Intensity-Adjusted
Demand Regression:
Full Sample (panel 2, B)
0
–1

Trade policies
Global value chain
participation
Unpredicted
2. From Product-Level
Regression (5)
0.0
–0.2
–0.4

–2
–3
–4

–6
–7

minants of trade growth.51 The findings of the gravity
model analysis suggest that greater production linkages
between countries are indeed positively associated with
growth of trade between them, corroborating the product-level analysis presented earlier.
Indeed, during 2003–07, country-pair trade in sectors that were in the top quartile of global value chain
participation grew on average 1¼ percentage points
faster than the rest (Figure 2.14). During 2012–14,
however, trade in these country-pair sectors was not
significantly different from trade in the rest. This
further supports the hypothesis that higher-value-chain
participation significantly boosted trade growth in
the period leading up to the global financial crisis.
However, since 2012, there is little evidence of such a
boost.

–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2

–5

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

–1.4
–1.6
–1.8

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure combines the estimated historical association between real import
growth and growth in trade costs and global value chain participation, and the
differences in the growth rate of these factors between 2003–07 and 2012–15 to
compute their contribution to the observed trade slowdown. See Annex 2.5 for a
detailed description of country coverage, data sources, and methodology.

and all country sectoral time-varying characteristics,
such as prices and trade costs, that do not vary across
trading partners in a particular year. The fixed effects
also control for the so-called multilateral resistance
term (Anderson 2011)—the barriers to trade that each
economy faces with respect to all its trading partners.
In the second stage, the residuals obtained from the
gravity estimation are collected and differenced when
in levels to obtain the growth of bilateral sectoral
trade that is unexplained by the gravity model. The
third step examines whether the degree of production
linkages between the two countries in this particular
sector—measured as the share of foreign value-added
component in bilateral-sectoral gross exports—is associated with trade growth between the two countries
in this sector, after controlling for all standard deter-

Summary and Policy Implications
The analysis in this chapter suggests that the slowdown in trade growth since 2012 is to a significant
extent, but not entirely, consistent with the overall
weakness in economic activity. Weak global growth,
particularly weak investment growth, can account for
a significant part of the sluggish trade growth, both in
absolute terms and relative to GDP. Empirical analysis
suggests that, for the world as a whole, up to threefourths of the decline in trade growth since 2012 relative to 2003–07 can be predicted by weaker economic
activity, most notably subdued investment growth.
While the empirical estimate may overstate the role
of output, given the feedback effects of trade policy
and trade on growth, a general equilibrium framework
suggests that changes in the composition of demand
account for about 60 percent of the slowdown in the
growth rate of nominal imports relative to GDP.
However, factors beyond the level and composition of
demand are also weighing on trade growth, shaving up
to 1¾ percentage points off global real import growth
during 2012–15. Among those, trade policies and global
value chain participation account for a sizable share of
the unpredicted shortfall in annual global trade growth
since 2012. The pace of new trade policy initiatives at
the global level has slowed notably. At the same time, the
uptick in protectionism since the global financial crisis
is not innocuous. While the quantitative contribution of
trade policies to the slowdown in trade growth has been
51Rose (2002) takes a similar approach in analyzing estimated
residuals from gravity models.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

85

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 2.14. Gravity Model: Global Value Chain Participation
and Bilateral Sectoral Trade Growth

(Percentage points)

A high degree of production linkages through global value chains between countries
in a particular sector was positively associated with trade growth between them in
that sector in the period prior to the global ﬁnancial crisis. However, there is little
evidence that high participation in global value chains has provided a boost to trade
growth after 2012.
Gravity model estimated in levels
Gravity model estimated in growth rates

3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0

Full sample period

Pre-slowdown period

Trade slowdown period

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars depict the average difference in bilateral sectoral trade growth residuals
between country-sector pairs in the top quartile in terms of global value chain
integration and the rest in 2003–13, 2003–07, and 2012–13. The vertical lines are
the 90 percentile conﬁdence intervals. Residuals are obtained from gravity models
of trade estimated separately for each sector and year, controlling for all standard
gravity variables, as well as importer and exporter ﬁxed effects. See Annex 2.6 for a
detailed description of country coverage, data sources, and methodology.

limited so far, protectionist measures could significantly
weigh on global trade if they become more widespread.
The apparent decline in the growth of production
fragmentation across countries is also putting the brakes
on trade growth, although it is still difficult to judge
whether this is a natural maturation of existing global
value chains or the result of policy-induced distortions.
The general equilibrium framework also suggests that
a slower reduction in trade costs, broadly defined, can
account for about one-quarter of the decline in the
growth rate of nominal imports relative to GDP.
What does this mean for the outlook for global
trade? As the findings of the chapter suggest, trade
growth and economic growth are closely linked.
Current projections anticipate only a limited pickup
in global activity and weak investment growth over
86

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

the medium term due to both cyclical and structural
factors (see Chapter 1 of this WEO), so slow global
trade growth will most likely persist. Moreover, even as
global growth eventually gathers speed, trade growth
is unlikely to achieve the rates seen prior to the global
financial crisis when investment growth in many
emerging market and developing economies, including
China, was unusually high, trade costs were falling due
to policy cooperation and technological advances, and
global value chains were rapidly developing.52
What can be done so that trade can play its role in
helping promote productivity and growth in the context
of slow and fragile global activity? First, this chapter’s
findings suggest that much of the trade slowdown
appears to be a symptom of the many forces that are
holding back growth across countries, possibly including
the slower pace of reduction in trade costs and slow
trade growth itself as discussed in the section titled “The
Slowdown in Trade Growth: Key Patterns” and Box 2.1.
Addressing these constraints to growth, and in particular
investment, should lie at the heart of the policy response
for improving the health of the global economy, which
would strengthen trade as a by-product. As discussed
in Chapter 1 and Chapter 3 of the April 2016 WEO,
a combination of near-term demand support, balance
sheet repair to relieve financial constraints where needed,
and productivity-enhancing structural reforms, including further progress in trade integration, could help
boost global growth and strengthen investment. These
policies, by lifting trade growth indirectly, can reinforce
each country’s economic expansions given trade’s role in
transmitting economic activity and raising productivity
and economic growth.
Second, this chapter’s findings also suggest that trade
policies, which shape the costs of the international
exchange of goods and services, are still relevant. With
other factors, notably weak investment, already weighing
on trade, resisting all forms of protectionism and reviving
the process of trade liberalization to dismantle remaining
trade barriers would provide much-needed support for
trade growth, including through possibly kicking off a
new round of global value chain development. As elaborated in Box 2.2, there is substantial scope to further
reduce trade costs through cutting tariffs where they
remain elevated, ratifying and fully implementing com52There

are reasons for trade growth optimism as well: many
emerging market and developing economies have substantial scope
to increase trade flows by integrating into global value chains and
reducing still-high trade barriers. For a discussion, see IMF (2015a,
2015d).

CHAPTER 2

mitments made under the Trade Facilitation Agreement,
and establishing a way forward in the post-Doha trade
agenda. Future trade reforms would need to focus on the
areas most relevant to the contemporary global economy,
such as regulatory cooperation, reducing barriers to trade
in services, and leveraging complementarities between
investment and trade (see IMF 2016b).
Such initiatives could help strengthen global economic growth and raise overall living standards over
time. As discussed in Box 2.3, an illustrative scenario
in which existing tariffs are completely eliminated and
the Trade Facilitation Agreement is fully implemented
could improve welfare. Various trade models deliver an
array of possible outcomes (see Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare 2014), but gains in real incomes from lower
trade costs could range from less than 1 percent to
more than 6 percent in the long term for the average
country.53 Given the relatively low levels of tariffs for
53Note that the calculations presented likely underestimate the
real income gains from the Trade Facilitation Agreement as they treat
nontariff barriers as tariffs.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

many advanced economies, advancing trade reform in
services and other “frontier” areas would likely yield
even larger aggregate gains.
But to sustain popular support for trade integration and preserve its economic and welfare benefits,
policymakers should be mindful of the adjustment
costs that deepening trade integration entails. Although
the analysis of these effects is beyond the scope of the
chapter, a number of studies document significant
and long-lasting adjustment costs for those whose
employment prospects were adversely affected by the
structural changes associated with trade, even if the
gains from trade from lower prices may tend to favor
those at the bottom of the income distribution. An
increasingly popular narrative that sees the benefits of
globalization and trade accrue only to a fortunate few
is also gaining traction. Policymakers need to address
the concerns of trade-affected workers, including
through effective support for re-training, skill building,
and occupational and geographic mobility, to mitigate
the downsides of further trade integration for the trade
agenda to revive.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

87

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 2.1. Is the Trade Slowdown Contributing to the Global Productivity Slowdown? New Evidence
This box attempts to quantify the effect of the
decline in trade growth on productivity. Using an
instrumental variable approach to identify the historical impact of trade on productivity in a sample of 18
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development economies,1 the findings suggest that the trade
slowdown could weigh significantly on the already
weak productivity growth in advanced economies.
As discussed in this chapter, trade can shape the
productivity of an economy in a variety of ways. This
box focuses on three distinct channels through which
international trade can affect productivity:2
•• Imports—Imports can promote productivity by
increasing competitive pressure on domestic firms
with the entry of foreign producers in domestic
markets. This is often referred to as the “procompetition” channel.
•• Imported inputs—Imported inputs can improve
firm-level productivity by expanding the variety and
enhancing the quality of the intermediate goods
to which firms have access. This is the called the
“input” channel.
•• Exports—Exporting can increase firm-level productivity via learning from foreign markets both
directly, through buyer-seller relationships, and indirectly, through increased competition from foreign
producers, externalities, and so forth. Together,
these form the “export” channel.
These channels operate both through their effect at
the firm level, by pushing companies to adopt more
efficient production processes, improve product quality,
or undertake specific investments, and at the sectoral
level, by bringing about reallocation of resources toward
more productive firms within a sector. This box focuses
on estimating the effects of trade at the sectoral level.

Empirical Analysis
All three different types of trade grew steadily
between the mid-1990s and mid-2000s. In line with
The authors of this box are JaeBin Ahn and Romain Duval.
1The modern empirical literature on this topic traces to Sachs
and Warner (1995) and Frankel and Romer (1999), among
others. For a recent study that looks at the growth impact of the
recent global trade slowdown, see Constantinescu, Mattoo, and
Ruta (2016).
2The first two (import) channels are discussed in more detail
in Ahn and others (2016), whose summary appears in IMF
(2016c). A recent discussion on the export channel can be found
in De Loecker (2013).

88

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

aggregate trends, trade in most sectors fell during the
global financial crisis and has recovered only slowly
since then (Figure 2.1.1). An examination of sectoral
data reveals wide dispersion in these trends across
countries and industries, providing a source of variation that can be used to identify the impact of each
trade channel on growth.
To quantify the effect of each of these channels
on productivity at the sector level, Ahn and Duval
(forthcoming), estimate an econometric specification
using data from the WORLD KLEMS and World
Input-Output Database covering 18 sectors across 18
advanced economies from 1995 to 2007:
input ​ ​​
​ln​TFP​ i,s,t​​  = ​β​  1​​ ​IMP​ i,s,t-2​​  + ​β​  2​​ ​IMP​ i,s,t-2
	​+ + ​β​  2​​ ​EXP​ i,s,t-2​​  + ​FE​ i,s​​  + ​FE​ i,t​​  + ​ε​  i,s,t​​,​

in which ​​TFP​ i,s,t​​​denotes total factor productivity (TFP) in country i and sector s in year t, while ​​
input ​​,​ and ​​EXP​ 
IMP​ i,s,t-2​​​, ​​IMP​ i,s,t-2
i,s,t-2​​​ are the corresponding country-sector-level imports (as a share of total
domestic sectoral output), imported inputs (as a share
of total input used in the sector), and exports (as a
share of total domestic sectoral output), respectively,
all lagged two years.3 The specification also includes
country-sector (​​FE​ i,s​​​) and country-year (​​FE​ i,t​​​) fixed
effects to control for any time-invariant variation that
is common to all sectors in a country and all country-specific shocks that may equally affect all industries
within the country in a particular year.
Identifying the causal effect of trade on growth is
challenging due to potentially severe reverse causality
and measurement issues. Several studies have addressed
these issues through the use of instrumental variables
for overall trade (Frankel and Romer 1999; Noguer
and Siscart 2005). Because the analysis in this box
attempts to identify the causal effect of the three
distinct channels through which trade may shape productivity, it requires a separate instrumental variable
for each of them. The following instrumental variables
are used:
•• China’s import penetration in other countries—In the
absence of a proper instrument for imports from all
trading partners, the box focuses on estimating the
impact of imports from China. The analysis uses
a well-established methodology of instrumenting a
country’s own imports from China in a particular
3All the results reported below are robust to alternative
productivity measures (for example, labor productivity) or alternative lags (namely, one- or three-year lags).

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Box 2.1 (continued)
Figure 2.1.1. The Evolution of Trade across
Industries in Major Economies
(Percent)

70 1. Imports-to-Total-Output Ratio
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1995

2000

05

11

70 2. Imported-Inputs-to-Total-Input Ratio
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

1995

2000

05

11

70 3. Exports-to-Total-Output Ratio

sector with all other countries’ imports from China
in that particular sector. The identifying assumption
is that sector-level import demand shocks are not
correlated across sample countries, as confirmed
by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013). As such,
the analysis estimates the procompetition effect of
China’s penetration on productivity.
•• Input tariffs—To the extent that input tariffs, the
tariffs applied to imported inputs, are not driven by
expected future productivity in the sector considered or by other unobserved factors correlated with
it,4 they can be employed as an instrumental variable for imported inputs. The input tariff in each
sector s is computed as a weighted average of tariff
rates in all sectors, with weights reflecting the share
of inputs imported directly and indirectly from each
of these sectors used in the production of sector
s’s output.5 Its two-year lagged value is used as an
instrument for imported inputs.
•• Export tariffs—For a given country, the export tariff
in each sector s is computed as a weighted average
of output tariff rates in major destination countries, with weights equal to the share of total sector
s exports to each destination. Its two-year lagged
value is a valid instrument for exports insofar as the
import tariff applied by the destination country in
sector s is not influenced by the overall exports of
any particular country in that sector.

60
50

Findings

40

International trade boosts productivity through
all of the channels discussed above (Table 2.1.1).6
Moreover, the instrumental variable strategy employed
in this box suggests that the magnitude of its

30
20
10
0

1995

2000

05

11

Sources: World Input-Output Database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The horizontal line inside each box represents the
median value across all country-industry observations; the
upper and lower edges of each box show the top and bottom
quartiles. They are all expressed in percent. Countries
included in the sample are Australia, Austria, Canada, Czech
Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Korea, Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom, and United States.

4Such simultaneity bias is more likely for output tariffs, which
governments may be more inclined to adjust depending on
expected future productivity and competitiveness in the sector
considered. For this reason, tariffs are not used as instruments for
imports above.
5To avoid potential endogeneity issues, we pick one vintage of
the input-output table for the country-sector-level weights and
keep them constant throughout the sample period.
6Compared with ordinary least squares (OLS—columns [1]–
[4]), the magnitude of the estimated effects is typically stronger
when using instrumental variables (columns [5]–[8]). This
suggests that measurement bias—which leads OLS to underestimate the impact of trade on productivity—is in practice a more
serious concern than simultaneity bias—which is likely instead to
inflate OLS estimates—as already flagged by Frankel and Romer
(1999).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

89

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 2.1 (continued)
Table 2.1.1. Baseline Estimation Results
OLS
Dependent Variable: ln (TFP)i,s,t
(Imports from China/Total Output) × 100i,s,t – 2

(1)
0.004
(0.004)

(Imports Inputs/Total
Input) × 100i,s,t – 2
(Exports/Total Output)*100i,s,t – 2

(2)

IV
(3)

0.005**
(0.002)

(4)
0.021***
(0.004)

(5)

(6)

0.033***
(0.009)
0.006***
(0.002)

0.032**
(0.015)
3.7
0.05
2,976

First Stage F-stats
154.3
4.3
First Stage p-value
0.00
0.04
Number of Observations
2,634
2,634
2,976
2,634
2,634
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dependent variable is log total factor productivity (TFP) in country i and sector s in year t. Independent variables are corresponding
country-sector-level imports from China (as a ratio to total domestic output), total imported inputs (as a ratio to total input), and total exports (as
a ratio to total domestic output), all lagged two years. Average value of imports from China relative to domestic output in all other countries, input
tariff rates, and export tariff rates, all lagged two years, are used as instrumental variables (IVs) in columns (4) and (7), (5) and (8), and (6) and (9),
respectively. Coefficient estimates in bold in columns (7)–(9) denote instrumented variables. Country-sector as well as country-year fixed effects
are included in all columns. Robust standard errors are provided in parentheses.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

productivity-enhancing effect can be sizable. For example, a 1 percentage point increase in China’s import
penetration in a given sector is associated with a 1.5
percent increase in the level of total factor productivity of that sector. A 1 percentage point increase in
the ratio of imported inputs to total inputs, or in the
ratio of exports to domestic output, leads to about a

90

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

0.9 percent increase in productivity in a given sector.
Assuming for simplicity that the recent global trade
slowdown has led the trade-to-GDP ratio to level
off—and hence that there has been no further increase
in the share of imported inputs, imports from China,
or exports in output—advanced economies are missing
out on the productivity boost from international trade.

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Box 2.2. The Role of Trade Policies in Reinvigorating Trade
An ambitious yet achievable trade policy agenda
would help reinvigorate trade and bolster global
economic growth more generally. At a country and
global level, trade reforms complement other reforms
in goods and services markets, boosting growth by
enhancing efficiency, promoting competition, and
encouraging innovation (Melitz and Redding 2014).
This box discusses the scope for trade policy to remove
existing barriers to the cross-border exchange of goods
and services and reduce trade costs.
Trade policy needs to address “frontier” areas, such
as services trade barriers, as well as remaining traditional barriers, such as tariffs. Firms’ investment,
sourcing, and export decisions increasingly reflect
many different types of policies, especially in global
value chains that link companies in many countries in
the production of a single end product. While trade
policy priorities vary from country to country, there
are a number of elements common to each of the
main country income groups (Table 2.2.1).

Traditional Barriers
Traditional barriers—tariffs, subsidies, custom procedures, domestic tax policies, and other regulations
that de facto discriminate against imports or provoke
unwanted tax competition (IMF 2016a)—still pose an
obstacle for trade and remain high in many countries.
Recent advances by the World Trade Organization
(WTO) illustrate how flexible negotiating approaches
can lower remaining barriers:
•• Tariffs—Despite earlier progress through multilateral, regional, and unilateral liberalization, the
process of reducing tariffs remains incomplete,
particularly in low-income countries and in some
emerging market and developing economies. The
WTO’s Information Technology Agreement (ITA),
which eliminated import duties for participating
countries on many information technology products, underscores the sizable gains that countries
can achieve through tariff reduction, including by
developing export industries (Figure 2.2.1, panel
1). The expansion of the ITA to an additional set
of 201 products accounting for about 7 percent of
world merchandise trade came into force in July
2016.1 However, in other areas, namely agricultural
The authors of this box are Diego Cerdeiro and Christian
Henn.
1Tariff eliminations apply to all WTO members’ exports,
regardless of whether the exporter is a signatory of the ITA.

products in some emerging market and developing
economies, tariffs remain relatively high.
•• Subsidies—WTO trade ministers agreed in December 2015 to eliminate outstanding agricultural
export subsidies, which should support the exports
of agricultural products of low-income and developing countries. Lower trade-distorting domestic
subsidies, particularly in agriculture in advanced
economies, would strengthen the global trading
environment.
•• Trade facilitation—In every region of the world,
delays in customs represent a larger obstacle to trade
than tariffs (Hummels 2007b). Studies estimate that
a one-day customs delay decreases imports as much
as a 1 percent increase in the distance between the
importing and exporting countries (Djankov, Freund,
and Pham 2010). For exporters, a 10 percent increase
in customs delays can reduce foreign sales by nearly
4 percent (Volpe Martincus, Carballo, and Graziano
2015). The 2013 WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement
(TFA) contains provisions to lower trade costs by
strengthening customs practices (Figure 2.2.1, panel
2).2 The WTO estimates that its implementation
would increase world trade by $1 trillion and
developing economies’ growth by 0.9 percent (WTO
2015). It will enter into force when two-thirds of
WTO members have concluded domestic approval
processes; as of September 26, 2016, 93 of the 108
members needed had approved. Once approved,
developing economies will have flexibility in the pace
of implementation coupled with expanded technical
assistance.

Trade Policy “Frontier” Areas
Addressing behind-the-border barriers can complement and augment other structural reforms. The
increasing importance of global value chains and
services trade—including as catalysts of foreign direct
investment (FDI)—has moved policy cooperation in
However, the ITA is on a positive-list basis, which implies that,
to retain a comprehensive coverage, it would need to be updated
regularly as new products appear.
2Among its disciplines, the TFA includes prearrival processing and electronic payment for clearance of goods (Article 7), a
single window for submission of custom forms (Article 10), and
provisions to ensure nondiscrimination and transparency in the
application of border controls of food products (Article 5)—the
latter is particularly relevant for some developing economies. See
Table B.1 in WTO 2015 for an overview of TFA disciplines.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

91

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 2.2 (continued)
Table 2.2.1. Trade Policy Challenges Vary across Countries
Advanced Economies

Advanced economies can address remaining protection in traditional trade areas (for example,
agriculture and textiles), further open services markets (for example, transport), make their
regulatory systems more coherent, and advance trade policy frontiers. The preference should be for
nondiscriminatory approaches that will minimize fragmentation and facilitate raising initiatives to the
multilateral level.

Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

Many emerging market and developing economies, including Latin America and South Asia, can still
benefit greatly from integrating via traditional liberalization, including on a unilateral basis; they should
strive to anchor their economies to global value chains, moving further away from failed importsubstitution policies and avoiding protectionism through opaque nontariff measures. Trade reform
would complement the strengthening of policy and institutional frameworks.

Low-Income Countries

To promote the development and growth, most low-income countries need to prioritize trade
facilitation in order to integrate with global value chains, especially by upgrading their hard and soft
trade infrastructure and improving economic institutions.1 They should also address traditional trade
barriers and promote competition in those service industries that are critical to local participation
in global value chains, such as transport and finance services. Technical assistance can support the
development of trade infrastructure, address the fiscal implications of reform, and help to sequence
and coordinate the reform process.

Source: IMF 2015c.
1 Hard infrastructure includes quality of ports, airports, roads, rail, and information and communications networks. Soft infrastructure includes
border efficiency (for example, number of documents necessary for import/export, speed of customs clearance) as well as other regulations and
institutional frameworks directly impinging on trade.

areas previously outside the sphere of trade policy to
the forefront of trade policy discussions. Reforms in
these areas carry high potential to bolster productivity
and increase medium-term growth:
•• Regulatory cooperation—While WTO rules already
contain meaningful provisions, recent regional
agreements have put a stronger emphasis on promoting active regulatory cooperation. This can be
challenging because it involves multiple domestic
agencies, procedures rooted in domestic legal systems, and differences in domestic policy priorities.
As such, provisions in trade agreements can range
from transparency provisions to recognizing others’
regulatory processes (Mavroidis 2016).
•• Leveraging complementarities between investment
and trade—Sales by FDI affiliates are larger than
recorded exports of goods and services (Figure
2.2.2, panel 1), with trade and investment increasingly complementary. FDI is one of the most
important channels of technology diffusion, but
start-up FDI often faces significant policy-related
fixed costs (OECD 2015a). Governance is fragmented: there are more than 3,000 bilateral
investment treaties and other agreements without a
common template (González 2013). Complementary structural reforms promoting competition and
opening government procurement policies would
bolster the productivity gains of FDI.

92

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

•• Reducing barriers to trade in services—Services
comprise some two-thirds of global GDP and
employment, but their share in international trade
is smaller: cross-border services represent a quarter of global trade. This rises to almost half when
considering value-added trade, which can account
for services embodied in traded goods. With policy
barriers still very large (Figure 2.2.2, panel 2) and
even increasing for e-commerce (OECD 2015b),
reforms have tremendous potential to promote trade
and growth in the services sector. For example,
countries could expand specific commitments under
the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services.

The Way Forward
It will be important to build on the ground covered
on frontier issues under regional trade agreements by
bringing them to the multilateral level. Megaregional
agreements recently signed or under negotiation—for
example, the Trade in Services Agreement and the
Trans-Pacific Partnership—offer such opportunities
because they address a number of frontier issues. These
agreements must remain open and harnessed accordingly to reinvigorate trade integration more broadly by
forging a post-Doha round agenda at the WTO. This
would bring them to a global level and reduce the risk
of further proliferation of regional trade agreements

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Box 2.2 (continued)
Figure 2.2.1. Potential Gains from Tackling
Traditional Trade Barriers

Figure 2.2.2. Trade Policy Frontier Areas

(Percent)

220 1. Market Share Index in Global WTO ITA
Products of “Passive Signatories”
200
(Index, 0 = 100)
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
–7 –6 –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3
Years in ITA

50 1. Trade and Investment Linkages
(Percent of world GDP)
1990
40
30
20
10
0

4

5

20 2. Estimated Reductions in Ad-Valorem Tariff
Equivalent Trade Costs Due to WTO TFA
(Percent)
15
10
5
0

Developed

G-20
developing

Other
developing

2012

Leastdeveloped

Sources: Henn and Mkrtchyan (2015); and World Trade
Organization (WTO) Statistics database.
Note: ITA = Information Technology Agreement; TFA = Trade
Facilitation Agreement. Panel 1 shows the evolution (pre- and
post-WTO ITA accession) of information technology exports
of “passive signatories,” that is, those countries that joined
the agreement as part of a large policy objective rather than
due to an established comparative advantage in the sector.

resulting in unintended fragmentation. Meanwhile,
at the national level, countries should ensure that
the benefits of trade accrue to all. Sufficiently broad
social safety nets would likely be most important as
trade often only serves as a catalyst of (skill-biased)
technological change, although more specific trade

Exports of goods and
services

Sales of foreign afﬁliates

200 2. Tariff Equivalents of Barriers to
Trade in Services
180
(Average, 1st, and 9th deciles)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Communication Finance
Business
Trade
Construction Insurance Other services Transport
Sources: United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development 2013; and Fontagné, Guillin, and Mitaritonna
(2011).

adjustment assistance schemes could also have a role to
play in certain cases. In this regard, effective support
for re-training, skill building, and occupational and
geographic mobility can help those who bear the
burden of adjusting.
A successful global agenda on trade policy must
address both new and long-standing issues while preserving a focus on economic development. Promoting
the resilience of the global trading system also calls for
countries to resist recent trends toward protectionism
and roll back trade-restrictive measures put in place
since the global financial crisis.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

93

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 2.3. Potential Gains from Jump-Starting Trade Liberalization
Trade liberalization has slowed over the past decade.
This box aims to quantify potential welfare gains from
stimulating this liberalization process through an experiment in which all existing tariffs are eliminated and
the 2013 World Trade Organization Trade Facilitation
Agreement, discussed in Box 2.2, is fully ratified and
implemented. Average import-weighted tariffs for the
world stand at 8 percent. The World Trade Organization estimates that the implementation of the Trade
Facilitation Agreement would reduce trade costs by
an ad-valorem tariff equivalent of 14 percent (Figure
2.2.1; Box 2.2). Progress on these two fronts, entailing a
total of a 22 percent reduction in trade costs, can bring
significant benefits by boosting international trade.
The benefits of tariff reductions, computed as changes
in real consumption from initial to counterfactual
equilibria, depend crucially on the class of model used
for the analysis. Following Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare
(2014), this box considers a range of gravity models of
trade, which differ in their assumptions about market
structure, the existence of firm-level heterogeneity, the
number of sectors, and the role of intermediate goods.
Models assuming perfect competition can typically be
solved to capture the impact of tariff reductions at the
country level. Models with monopolistic competition are
computationally more challenging, hence countries are
aggregated to 10 geographic regions. These alternatives on
model specification and level of aggregation yield a total
of nine different cases; the first three are solved at the
country level and the remaining six at the regional level.1
The simple average of the welfare gains from eliminating all existing tariffs and implementing the Trade
Facilitation Agreement across countries (or regions)
ranges from less than 1 percent to more than 6 percent
depending on the model at hand (Figure 2.3.1).2,3
The author of this box is Emine Boz.
1These cases correspond to columns 5–7 of Table 4.2 and all
columns of Table 4.3 in Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014).
2These numbers likely underestimate the gains for two reasons.
First, modeling the Trade Facilitation Agreement as a tariff reduction
assumes a tariff revenue loss when the agreement is implemented,
but there would be no such revenue loss in reality. Second, the exercise is conducted with a tariff increase of 22 percent (whose implications are interpreted with a negative sign). Computing the negative
of the welfare loss from a higher value of consumption to a lower
one would lead to a smaller percentage change than computing the
welfare gain from a lower base value of consumption.
3All the models considered quantify only the static gains
from trade reform and are silent on some potentially important

94

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 2.3.1. Gains from Eliminating
Tariffs and Implementing the World
Trade Organization Trade Facilitation
Agreement
(Percent)

Median

Simple average

Country Level:
One sector (1)
Multiple sectors:
No intermediates (2)
With intermediates (3)
10-Region Aggregation:
No intermediates:
Perfect competition (4)

Weighted average

1
2
3

4

Monopolistic competition: 5
Homogenous ﬁrms (5)1
Heterogeneous ﬁrms (6)2 6
With intermediates:
Perfect competition (7)

7
Monopolistic competition:
Homogenous ﬁrms (8)1 8
Heterogeneous ﬁrms (9)2 9
0

2

4

6

8

10

Source: IMF staff calculations.
1 Krugman (1980).
2 Melitz (2003).

Weighing countries or regions by their shares in world
population in the spirit of utilitarian welfare yields
even higher potential gains, while medians suggest
that these gains can be more moderate but still sizable,
especially considering that they would be permanent. These results highlight that there is potential
to improve global well-being through further trade
liberalization. However, for these global benefits to
be reaped, policymakers would also need to limit the
adjustment costs of deeper trade integration, and make
the case to an increasingly skeptical public.

benefits and costs. Such elements as technological spillovers
through trade or its distributional implications are absent in all
cases studied.

CHAPTER 2

Annex 2.1. Data
Data Sources
The primary data sources for this chapter are the
IMF’s World Economic Outlook, Information Notice
System, and Global Assumptions and Economic Environment databases; the United Nations Commodity
Trade Statistics database; and the Eora Multi-Region
Input-Output database. For each section of the chapter, several other databases are also used. Annex Table
2.1.1 lists all indicators used in the chapter as well as
their sources.
The sample of economies included in the various
analytical exercises varies due to data constraints.
Annex Table 2.1.2 lists the samples of economies used
in each exercise. Economies are grouped based on the
analytical exercise in which they are included.

Data Definitions
Trade flows are measured using imports denominated in U.S. dollars throughout the chapter, except in
the section “The Role of Output and Its Composition:
Insights from an Empirical Investigation,” where they
are denominated in local currency units. Imports are
used in both value and volume terms depending on
the exercise undertaken and are specified accordingly.
Similarly, the chapter indicates whether imports cover
both goods and services or only one of these categories.

Services Trade
For imports of services, the chapter investigates the
nominal import growth for different categories using
the United Nations Service Trade Statistics database.
That database contains 11 different sectors of services
imports: (1) transport; (2) travel; (3) communication; (4) construction; (5) insurance; (6) financial; (7)
computer and information; (8) royalties and license
fees; (9) other business; (10) personal, cultural, and
recreational; and (11) governmental. Data coverage
varies across countries and sectors.
Annex Figure 2.1.1 aggregates these categories in
four main broad categories of import services: (1)
travel (sectors 1 and 10), (2) information and communication technologies (sectors 3 and 7), (3) financial
(sectors 5 and 6), and (4) other (remaining sectors).
The figure displays the average annual nominal growth
rates for these categories, as well as for total services,
for two different periods (2003–07 and 2012–13) for

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

a balanced sample of 36 economies. This examination
reveals that trade in information and communication
technologies, travel, and financial services has been
more resilient during the recent period while trade in
other services has slowed more markedly.

Annex 2.2. Constructing Disaggregated Import
Volume and Price Indices
The disaggregated volume data set used in Figure
2.4 and in the subsection on the role of other factors
is based on data from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics database for about 5,300 products
classified according to the Harmonized Commodity
Description and Coding Systems (HS) at the six-digit
level. Data include information on U.S. dollar values
and quantities (for example, units or kilograms) of
total goods imports for 52 countries during 2003–15.
The disaggregated data are used to construct price
and volume indices for products at the HS two-digit
level, as well as by end use. The procedure involves
three steps: (1) examine growth rates of unit values
at the most disaggregate level to eliminate potential
outliers, (2) calculate chained Fisher price indices at
the HS two-digit level and by end use based on the
clean disaggregated unit values, and (3) deflate values
of trade at the HS two-digit level or by end use using
the constructed Fisher price indices to arrive at trade
volumes.
Because value and unit value changes at the six-digit
level are noisy, simple procedures to identify outliers are applied to construct these price and volume
indices. Boz and Cerutti (forthcoming) document
in detail two steps for eliminating outliers for each
country individually. First, a cross-section truncation is
performed after computing the distribution of annual
changes in the log unit value of all six-digit products.
Truncating both tails of this distribution eliminates
extreme positive and negative values stemming from
cases such as typos during recording import values
and/or quantities. Second, a time series truncation
is applied to the distribution of the standard deviation of unit value changes over time for each product
within each HS vintage. This second step is intended
to alleviate the unit value bias: unit values capture
not only true price changes but also variations in the
composition of products, even within narrowly defined
HS six-digit categories. Products that suffer from a
more severe unit value bias are more likely to have
a high standard deviation of unit value changes over
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

95

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Table 2.1.1. Data Sources
Indicator
Banking Crisis Indicator
Bilateral Nominal U.S. Dollar Exchange Rate
Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX)
Cost to Import
Discriminatory Trade Measures
Domestic Value Added Embedded in Exports of Other
Countries
Export Prices of Goods and Services
Export Value of Goods and Services
Export Volume of Goods and Services
Foreign Value Added of Exports
Free Trade Agreements by Year of Signature
Free Trade Agreements Coverage
Global Value Chain Participation
Industrial Production
Import Prices of Goods and Services
Import Prices of Goods at Product Level
Import Value of Goods and Services
Import Value of Services by Categories
Import Volume of Goods and Services
Import Volume of Goods at Product Level
Liner Shipping Connectivity Index
Lobbying on Trade Issues in the United States
Measures Implemented by Global Trade Alert
Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
Nominal GDP
Oil Price in U.S. Dollars
Producer Price Index
Real Effective Exchange Rate
Real GDP
Real Interest Rate
Sectoral Gross Production
Tariffs
Nontariff and Temporary Trade Barriers
Time to Import
Trade Finance Availability

Source
Laeven and Valencia (2012)
IMF, Global Assumptions database
Chicago Board Options Exchange; Haver Analytics
World Bank, Doing Business Indicators
Bown 2016; UNCTAD, Trade Analysis Information System
OECD–WTO, Trade in Value Added database; Eora MRIO database; IMF staff
calculations
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF staff calculations
using export value divided by export volume
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database
Eora MRIO database; IMF staff calculations; OECD–WTO, Trade in Value Added
database
DESTA, Free Trade Area Database
WTO Regional Trade Agreements Database
Eora MRIO database; IMF staff calculations
CEIC database; Haver Analytics
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF staff calculations
using import value divided by import volume
United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics (Comtrade) Database; World Bank,
World Integrated Trade Solution
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database
United Nations Service Trade Statistics Database; IMF staff calculations
CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database
Eora MRIO database; United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics (Comtrade)
Database; World Bank, World Integrated Trade Solution
UNCTAD, World Maritime Review
Ludema, Mayda, and Mishra (2015)
Centre for Economic Policy Research, Global Trade Alert Database
IMF, Information Notice System
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
IMF, Global Assumptions database
Haver Analytics; CEIC database
IMF, Information Notice System
IMF, World Economic Outlook database
Haver Analytics
Eora MRIO database; Haver Analytics; OECD, Structural Analysis Database, InputOutput Tables
UNCTAD, Trade Analysis Information System; WTO Tariff Download Facility; IMF,
Structural Reforms database
Bown 2016; Centre for Economic Policy Research, Global Trade Alert Database;
UNCTAD, Trade Analysis Information System
World Bank, Doing Business Indicators
International Chamber of Commerce, Global Trade and Finance Survey; IMF staff
calculations
IMF staff calculations
IMF, Global Economic Environment database
IMF staff calculations
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

Trade-Weighted Foreign CPI
Trade-Weighted Foreign Demand
Trade-Weighted Foreign PPI
U.S. Air Freight Cost
Source: IMF staff compilation.
Note: CPI = consumer price index; DESTA = Design of Trade Agreements database; MRIO = Multi-Region Input-Output database; OECD = Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development; PPI = producer price index; UNCTAD = United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; WTO = World Trade
Organization.

96

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 2

Annex Figure 2.1.1. Nominal Import Growth
across Categories of Services
(Percent)

2003–07

16

2012–13

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Total

Travel

ICT

Financial

Other

Sources: United Nations Service Trade Statistics database;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ICT = information and communication technologies.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

time. Hence, eliminating such products based on the
product-specific time series standard deviations can
help reduce the bias.54 The truncation thresholds are
set at percentiles 2.5 and 97.5 for the cross-section and
at the 80th percentile for the time series, respectively.
Once this procedure is complete, chained Fisher
price indices are calculated that are then used to deflate
U.S. dollar values.
It is important to note that the aforementioned
procedures do not eliminate the products identified as
outliers from the volume indices, as they affect only
the calculation of price indices. When the unprocessed
value index is used in the numerator to compute volume
indices as opposed to one that ignores products with
missing quantity data or extreme unit value changes, the
implicit assumption is that the missing unit values grow
at the same rate as the aggregate price index.
54However, for some products this time series standard deviation
may be intrinsically high, which may not be a reflection of the
severity of the unit value bias—for example, commodities, which
experience fluctuations as a result of discoveries of new reserves,
disruptions in supply, and so forth.

Annex Table 2.1.2. Sample of Economies Included in the Analytical Exercises
Group1

Exercise3

Economies2

I
X

A

Argentina, Australia,* Austria,* Belgium,* Brazil, Canada,* Chile, China, Colombia, Czech Republic,*
Denmark,* Finland,* France,* Germany,* Hungary, India, Indonesia, Italy,* Japan,* Korea,* Malaysia,
Mexico, Norway,* Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Spain,* Sweden,* Thailand, Turkey, United
Kingdom,* United States,* Vietnam

B

Algeria, Estonia,* Greece,* Hong Kong SAR,* Ireland,* Israel,* Kazakhstan, Lithuania,* Netherlands,*
New Zealand,* Portugal,* Romania, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,* Slovak Republic,* Slovenia,*
Switzerland,* Taiwan Province of China,* Ukraine

X

C

Albania, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Armenia, Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus, Benin, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Congo,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, Iran, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Lesotho, Luxembourg,*
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Moldova, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Niger, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Sri
Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Syria, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia

X

D

Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Fiji, Georgia, Guatemala, Iraq, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lao P.D.R., Latvia,* Libya, Macedonia, Malta,* Mauritania, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Panama, Paraguay, Samoa, São Tomé and Príncipe, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu

E

Guinea, Mauritius, Myanmar, Tanzania

II
X

III
X

IV
X

X

X

X

X

X

Source: IMF staff compilation.
Group of countries according to their use in different analytical exercises.
2 Asterisk (*) denotes advanced economies as classified by the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database.
3 Analytical exercises performed in the chapter: I = Import Demand Model; II = Structural Model; III = Product-Level Regression Framework; IV = Gravity
Model.
1

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

97

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex 2.3. Analysis Using an Empirical Model of
Import Demand

Annex Figure 2.2.1. Real Import Growth
(Percent)
Processed

Unprocessed

WEO

WTO

20 1. Australia
10
0
–10
–20
2003

05

07

09

11

13

15

​∆ ln​Mc,t
​  ​​  = ​δ​  c​​  + ​β​  D,c​​  ∆ ln​Dc,t
​  ​​  + ​β​  P,c​​  ∆ ln​Pc,t
​  ​​  + ​ε​  c,t​​,​	
(A.2.3.1)

180 2. Brazil
140
100
60
20
–20
–60
–100
2003

05

07

09

11

13

15

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook (WEO) database;
United Nations Comtrade; World Bank World Integrated
Trade Solution database; World Trade Organization (WTO)
Statistics database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Processed” refers to the index obtained from the
truncated data as described in the main text, while the
“unprocessed” index is calculated using raw data without
any elimination of outliers. Both “processed” and
“unprocessed” indices are calculated using chained
Fisher price indices.

A comparison of the country-level aggregate import
volume indices obtained from the above methodology
with those obtained from unprocessed data as well as with
those in the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database
and the World Trade Organization’s Statistics database
reveals the effectiveness of the proposed methodology
(Annex Figure 2.2.1). For Australia, for example, using the
cross-section and time series truncations brings the Fisher
volume index significantly closer to the two benchmarks
relative to the index constructed from unprocessed data.
These differences are more striking in the case of emerging
market and developing economies, as shown for Brazil.55
55In addition to these mechanical truncation procedures, all
disaggregated indices are thoroughly inspected. In this context,

98

This annex provides further details on the empirical
model of import demand, which is used to quantify
the role of economic activity and its composition
in the slowdown of trade in the section “The Role
of Output and Its Composition: Insights from an
Empirical Investigation.” The analysis in that section estimates a standard model of import demand
that links real imports growth to growth in absorption and growth in relative prices. Such an import
demand equation can be derived from virtually any
international real business cycle model. The estimated
equation is

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

​  ​​​ and ​​Pc,t
​  ​​​ denote, respectively, real
in which ​​M​ c,t​​, ​Dc,t
imports, absorption, and relative import prices of
country ​c​in year ​t​. Relative import prices are defined
as the ratio of the import price deflator to the GDP
deflator. The baseline specification assumes that import
growth depends only on the contemporaneous growth
rate of the explanatory variables; however, the findings
discussed in the chapter are robust to the inclusion
of lags of the dependent and explanatory variables’
growth rates to allow for richer dynamics. The model
is estimated separately for each country and separately
for imports of goods and services, as well as for overall
imports. The period of analysis is 1985–2015, though
data are not available for all countries in all years.
The chapter builds on Bussière and others (2013) and
proxies absorption with IAD. Import-intensity-adjusted
demand is computed as
​ω​  C​  ​​​ ​G​  ​ω​  G​  ​​​ ​I​  ​ω​  I​  ​​​ ​X​  ​ω​  X​  ​​​​,
​IA ​Dc,t
​  ​​  = ​C​ c,t
c,t c,t c,t

(A.2.3.2)

in which ​​ω​  k​​​is the import content of each of the
expenditure components for ​k ∈ ​{C, G, I, X}​​, normalized to sum to 1. Import content is computed from
the Eora Multi-Region Input-Output country-specific
input-output tables averaged over 1990–2011. Similar
to patterns described by Bussière and others (2013),
who rely on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Trade in Value Added database,
some further adjustments are applied in the case of a few countries
in which deviations arose with respect to benchmark indices. For
example, large spikes in the unit values of product numbers 710,812
(gold) in 2012 in Switzerland and 880,240 (airplanes) in 2015 in
Ireland led to adjustments of those unit value changes to better align
them with their historical evolution.

CHAPTER 2

Annex Table 2.3.1. Import Content of Aggregate
Demand Components
Mean

25th
Percentile

Median

75th
Percentile

(1)
(2)
(3)
Consumption
23.3
20.7
13.7
Govt. Spending
14.9
12.1
8.8
Investment
29.6
26.1
19.0
Exports
31.7
25.9
14.6
Sources: Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database; and IMF staff
calculations.

(4)
27.7
17.4
35.7
43.0

Note: The table reports the mean, median, 25th percentile, and 75th percentile of the import content of the four components of aggregate demand
across the 150 countries included in the sample. For each country, the
import content refers to the average import content over 1990–2011. See
Bussière and others 2013 for the exact definition of import content and its
computation from national input-output tables.

there are significant differences in the usage of imports
across aggregate demand components (Annex Table
2.3.1). Investment and exports have a much richer
import content compared with consumption and government spending.
In addition to the measure proposed by Bussière and
others (2013), the chapter estimates two alternative
models of import demand. In the first alternative model,
absorption is proxied by import-intensity-adjusted
demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand, namely
d

d

d

​DIA ​Dc,t
​  ​​  = ​​C​  c,t​ ​ω​ ​C ​​​​​​ ​​G​  c,t​ ​ω​ ​G​     ​​​​​​ ​​I​  c,t​ ​ω​ ​I​     ,
and the following equation is estimated
​∆ ln​Mc,t
​  ​​  = ​δ​  c​​  + ​β​  DD,c​​  ∆ ln​DIAD​ c,t​​ ​
+​ ​β​  P,c​​  ∆ ln​​P​  c,t​​ ​+ ​ε​  c,t​​​.

(A.2.3.3)

In the second model, absorption is proxied by ​
DIAD​and exports are predicted by trading partners’ ​
DIAD​, ​​ˆ
∆ ln​Xc,t
​  ​​​​. To compute the latter, the chapter
first estimates equation (A.2.3.3) and recovers the
model-predicted import growth for each country, ​​
ˆ
∆ ln​Mc,t,DIAD
​ 
​​​​. It constructs a measure of external
demand as the trade-weighted average of partners’ ​​
ˆ
∆ ln​Mc,t,DIAD
​ 
​​​​and estimates a model of export demand
using this measure as a proxy of the demand for a
country’s exports:
​∆ ln​Xc,t
​  ​​  = ​δ​  Xc​  ​ + ​β​  XD,c
 ​ ​∑​ 
​ c,t,p​​ ​ˆ
∆ ln​Mp,t,DIAD
​ 
​​​ ​
X
	​+ ​β​  P,c ​ ∆
​ ln​Pc,t
​  X ​ + ​
​  ε​  Xc,t ​​.​ 

(A.2.3.4)

The procedure then recovers countries’ predicted
export growth ˆ
∆
​​ ln​Xc,t
​  ​​​​. Finally, a country’s import
growth is modeled as

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

ˆ
​∆ ln​Mc,t
​  ​​  = ​δ​  c​​  + ​β​  DD,c​​  ∆ ln​DIAD​ c,t​​  + ​β​  DX,c∆
​​​ ln​Xc,t
​  ​​​ ​
	​+ ​β​  P,c​​  ∆ ln​Pc,t
​  ​​  + ​ε​  c,t​​​.
(A.2.3.5)
Annex Tables 2.3.2–2.3.4 present the results
from estimating equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and
(A.2.3.5), for real import growth of goods and services,
as well as separately for goods and services. The tables
also provide the results from estimating equation
A.2.3.1 in a panel framework in columns (1), (5), and
(9) for comparison with other studies (in other words,
where all the countries in the sample are pooled, and
the same elasticities of import growth with respect to
its determinants are imposed across countries). The
remaining columns report the mean and the interquartile range of the estimated coefficients from a country-by-country estimation.
The results show that estimating the import demand
model separately for each country is noticeably
superior to estimation in a panel framework (see, for
example, column [2] versus column [1]). This is due
to the substantial variation in the income elasticity of
imports across countries. On average, advanced economies’ imports have higher income elasticity than do
those of emerging market and developing economies,
particularly in the case of goods imports (Annex Table
2.3.3). This finding is in line with Slopek (2015), who
demonstrates that the shift in relative growth from
advanced toward emerging market and developing
economies can account for much of the decline in
the global trade elasticity in light of the lower income
elasticity of trade of the latter. Moreover, regressions
using measures of import demand based solely on the
domestic components of aggregate demand (columns
[3], [7], and [11]) have a significantly worse fit.
To examine whether there is anything unusual in
the 2012–15 period, the chapter pools the residuals
from estimating equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and
(A.2.3.5) for each country in the sample and estimates
the following specification:
​​ˆ
​ε​  c,t​​​  = θConst​(1 - ​D2012-15,t
​ 
​​)​ ​
	​+ τConst​(​D2012-15,t
​ 
​​)​ + ​ϛ​  c,t​​​,

(A.2.3.6)

where ​​D2012-15,t
​ 
​​​is an indicator that takes the value of
{2012, 2013, 2014, 2015}​.​The coefficients ​
1 for ​t ∈ ​
θ​and ​τ​capture the average value of the residuals of
the 1985–2011 and 2012–15 periods, respectively.
Regressions are weighted by countries’ nominal import
shares (in U.S. dollars) to more accurately capture the
deviations from predicted growth for the world as a
whole (or groups of countries).
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

99

100

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

0.53

0.70
0.58 0.85

0.57
0.43 0.72

–0.16
–0.41 0.07
0.02
0.00 0.03

(3)
1.03
0.66 1.29

DIAD

Country-Specific

0.67
0.53 0.80

(4)
0.87
0.58 1.19
0.45
0.16 0.81
–0.15
–0.38 0.00
0.00
–0.03 0.01

DIAD+E

0.75

–0.05
(0.04)
0.00
(0.00)

(5)
1.33
(0.07)

IAD

Panel

0.86
0.74 0.88

0.04
–0.15 0.16
0.00
–0.01 0.01

(6)
1.38
1.27 1.54

IAD

0.60
0.53 0.73

0.22
0.04 0.43
0.02
0.01 0.04

(7)
1.08
0.92 1.49

DIAD

Country-Specific

Advanced Economies

0.72
0.64 0.80

(8)
0.91
0.58 1.06
0.61
0.36 0.85
–0.03
–0.19 0.15
0.00
–0.01 0.01

DIAD+E

0.52

–0.25
(0.08)
0.01
(0.00)

(9)
0.96
(0.07)

IAD

Panel
IAD

0.65
0.52 0.79

–0.25
–0.47 –0.05
0.00
–0.02 0.01

(10)
1.25
0.87 1.50

0.54
0.38 0.72

–0.26
–0.57 –0.08
0.01
–0.01 0.03

(11)
0.99
0.59 1.28

DIAD

Country-Specific

0.61
0.47 0.79

(12)
0.86
0.58 1.20
0.40
0.10 0.78
–0.23
–0.42 –0.08
–0.01
–0.03 0.01

DIAD+E

Emerging Market and Developing Economies

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E = DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table
presents results from estimating equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and (A.2.3.5). Columns (1), (5), and (9) report point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from estimating equation (A.2.3.1) in a
panel framework including country fixed effects. The remaining columns report the average point estimates as well as the interquartile range of these estimates from a country-by-country estimation. Absorption is measured as
import-intensity-adjusted aggregate demand based on all four components of GDP in columns (1), (2), (5), (6), (9), and (10). In the rest of the columns, absorption is proxied by the import-intensity-adjusted domestic demand.
The specifications presented in columns (4), (8), and (12) also control for predicted exports, as estimated according to equation (A.2.3.4).

R2

Constant

Relative Prices

Predicted Exports

–0.18
–0.40 0.04
0.00
–0.02 0.01

(1)
0.99
(0.07)

–0.24
(0.07)
0.01
(0.00)

(2)
1.31
0.94 1.51

IAD

Measure of Import
Demand

Import Demand

IAD

Panel

Estimation

Full Sample

Annex Table 2.3.2. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Goods and Services

Sample

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

(1)
0.94
(0.08)

0.40

R2
0.66
0.50 0.78

0.54
0.41 0.69

–0.06
–0.38 0.20
0.02
0.00 0.03

(3)
1.07
0.66 1.37

DIAD

Country-Specific

Full Sample

0.63
0.50 0.76

(4)
0.90
0.55 1.23
0.47
0.12 0.85
–0.17
–0.40 0.03
0.00
–0.03 0.02

DIAD+E

0.72

0.01
(0.08)
0.00
(0.00)

(5)
1.52
(0.05)

IAD

Panel

0.79
0.71 0.87

0.10
–0.11 0.25
0.00
–0.01 0.01

(6)
1.51
1.38 1.74

IAD

0.56
0.48 0.73

0.27
0.11 0.60
0.03
0.01 0.03

(7)
1.26
1.03 1.58

DIAD

Country-Specific

Advanced Economies

0.72
0.61 0.78

(8)
1.00
0.58 1.21
0.66
0.40 0.94
0.01
–0.21 0.23
0.00
–0.02 0.01

DIAD+E

(10)
1.18
0.77 1.54

IAD

0.38

0.61
0.45 0.71

–0.21
–0.25
(0.09) –0.49 0.00
0.01
0.00
(0.00) –0.02 0.02

(9)
0.91
(0.09)

IAD

0.52
0.38 0.65

–0.24
–0.52 0.01
0.01
–0.01 0.03

(11)
0.93
0.60 1.32

DIAD

Country-Specific

0.59
0.46 0.73

(12)
0.86
0.55 1.23
0.40
0.05 0.75
–0.26
–0.46 0.00
–0.01
–0.04 0.02

DIAD+E

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Panel

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E = DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table
presents results from estimating equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and (A.2.3.5). Columns (1), (5), and (9) report point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from estimating equation (A.2.3.1) in a
panel framework including country fixed effects. The remaining columns report the average point estimates as well as the interquartile range of these estimates from a country-by-country estimation. Absorption is measured as
import-intensity-adjusted aggregate demand based on all four components of GDP in columns (1), (2), (5), (6), (9), and (10). In the rest of the columns, absorption is proxied by the import-intensity-adjusted domestic demand.
The specifications presented in columns (4), (8), and (12) also control for predicted exports, as estimated according to equation (A.2.3.4).

Constant

–0.20
(0.09)
0.01
(0.00)

Relative Prices

Predicted Exports
–0.16
–0.42 0.13
0.00
–0.02 0.01

(2)
1.32
0.95 1.59

IAD

Measure of Import
Demand

Import Demand

IAD

Panel

Estimation

Sample

Annex Table 2.3.3. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Goods

CHAPTER 2
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

101

102

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

(1)
1.39
(0.33)

0.08

R2

0.38
0.16 0.55

0.29
0.14 0.48

–0.19
–0.61 0.15
0.02
–0.01 0.04

(3)
0.89
0.50 1.41

DIAD

Country-Specific

Full Sample

0.41
0.19 0.57

(4)
0.83
0.31 1.44
0.30
–0.02 0.84
–0.22
–0.58 0.17
0.00
–0.05 0.03

DIAD+E

0.24

–0.32
(0.11)
0.01
(0.00)

(5)
1.11
(0.13)

IAD

Panel

0.47
0.30 0.59

–0.07
–0.37 0.11
0.01
0.00 0.03

(6)
1.03
0.86 1.26

IAD

0.41
0.20 0.50

0.08
–0.33 0.28
0.02
0.01 0.04

(7)
1.02
0.71 1.31

DIAD

Country-Specific

Advanced Economies

0.46
0.33 0.58

(8)
0.81
0.29 1.22
0.52
0.28 0.83
–0.06
–0.42 0.16
0.01
–0.02 0.02

DIAD+E

0.08

0.02
(0.22)
0.00
(0.01)

(9)
1.41
(0.35)

IAD

Panel
IAD

0.35
0.15 0.55

–0.25
–0.60 0.07
0.00
–0.03 0.02

(10)
1.06
0.61 1.92

0.26
0.13 0.45

–0.23
–0.65 0.01
0.01
–0.01 0.04

(11)
0.82
0.38 1.48

DIAD

Country-Specific

0.39
0.18 0.57

(12)
0.83
0.37 1.61
0.17
–0.11 0.86
–0.25
–0.69 0.17
–0.01
–0.05 0.03

DIAD+E

Emerging Market and Developing Economies

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E = DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table
presents results from estimating equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and (A.2.3.5). Columns (1), (5), and (9) report point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from estimating equation (A.2.3.1) in a
panel framework including country fixed effects. The remaining columns report the average point estimates as well as the interquartile range of these estimates from a country-by-country estimation. Absorption is measured as
import-intensity-adjusted aggregate demand based on all four components of GDP in columns (1), (2), (5), (6), (9), and (10). In the rest of the columns, absorption is proxied by the import-intensity-adjusted domestic demand. The
specifications presented in columns (4), (8), and (12) also control for predicted exports, as estimated according to equation (A.2.3.4).

Constant

0.01
(0.21)
0.00
(0.01)

Relative Prices

Predicted Exports

–0.14
–0.56 0.10
0.00
–0.01 0.02

(2)
1.04
0.64 1.69

IAD

Import Demand

IAD

Panel

Estimation

Measure of Import
Demand

Sample

Annex Table 2.3.4. Empirical Model of Real Imports of Services

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Annex Table 2.3.5. Residuals: Real Goods Import Growth
Full Sample

Indicator 1985–2011
Indicator 2012–15

Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

IAD

DIAD

DIAD+E

IAD

DIAD

DIAD+E

IAD

(1)
0.003
(0.002)
–0.009
(0.002)

(2)
0.000
(0.003)
–0.023
(0.004)

(3)
0.001
(0.002)
–0.018
(0.004)

(4)
0.003
(0.002)
–0.005
(0.003)

(5)
0.000
(0.003)
–0.014
(0.004)

(6)
0.001
(0.002)
–0.011
(0.004)

(7)
0.002
(0.005)
–0.018
(0.004)

DIAD

DIAD+E

(8)
(9)
–0.001 0.002
(0.007) (0.006)
–0.040 –0.031
(0.007) (0.007)

Number of Observations
3,427
3,427
3,427
910
910
910
2,517
2,517
2,517
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E =
DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table reports point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from
estimating equation (A.2.3.6). Regressions are weighted by countries' nominal goods import shares.

Annex Tables A.2.3.5 and A.2.3.6 present the
regression results for goods and services real import
growth, respectively. On average, for goods imports,
the residuals are significantly less than zero across all
samples and specifications in the 2012–15 period.
The extent of “missing” goods import growth varies
across advanced and emerging market and developing
economies, with emerging market and developing
economies having significantly larger (in absolute
value) residuals. According to the baseline specification, which proxies import demand with ​DIAD​
and exports predicted by trading partners’ ​DIAD​
—equation (A.2.3.5), residuals in columns (3), (6),
and (9) in Annex Table 2.3.5—the missing goods
import growth amounted to about 1 percentage
point in advanced economies, 3 percentage points for
emerging market and developing economies, and 1¾
percentage points for the world as a whole.

In the case of services, there is no robust evidence of
an unexplained slowdown in import growth during the
2012–15 period for the world as a whole. However, in
emerging market and developing economies, services
import growth seems to have been lower than predicted
in the post-2012 period according to models based on
the domestic components of aggregate demand. The
findings presented in Annex Tables A.2.3.5 and A.2.3.6
are robust to the inclusion of country fixed effects or to
clustering the standard errors by country.
To account for the potential role of uncertainty,
global financial conditions and financial stress in
shaping countries’ import demand, Annex Table 2.3.7
presents the results from the estimation of equation
(A.2.3.6) augmented to include these variables. The
findings of unexplained negative real goods import
growth residuals during 2012–15 are robust to this
alternative specification.

Annex Table 2.3.6. Residuals: Real Services Import Growth
Full Sample

Indicator 1985–2011
Indicator 2012–15

Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

IAD

DIAD

DIAD+E

IAD

DIAD

DIAD+E

IAD

DIAD

(1)
0.003
(0.003)
0.008
(0.007)

(2)
0.002
(0.003)
–0.003
(0.007)

(3)
0.003
(0.003)
–0.003
(0.007)

(4)
–0.001
(0.002)
0.010
(0.004)

(5)
–0.002
(0.002)
0.007
(0.005)

(6)
–0.001
(0.002)
0.006
(0.004)

(7)
0.015
(0.013)
0.004
(0.021)

(8)
0.019
(0.013)
–0.024
(0.021)

DIAD+E
(9)
0.016
(0.013)
–0.024
(0.021)

Number of Observations
3,359
3,359
3,359
909
909
909
2,450
2,450
2,450
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E =
DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table reports point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from
estimating equation (A.2.3.6). Regressions are weighted by countries’ nominal services import shares.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

103

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Table 2.3.7. Residuals: Real Goods Import Growth Controlling for Global Uncertainty, Global Financial
Conditions, and Financial Stress
Full Sample

IAD
(1)
0.003
(0.002)
–0.009
(0.002)

Indicator 1985–2011
Indicator 2012–15
VIX Growth

(2)
0.005
(0.002)
–0.011
(0.003)
–0.015
(0.006)

DIAD+E

(3)
0.005
(0.002)
–0.006
(0.002)

Change in Global Real
Interest Rate

(4)
0.004
(0.002)
–0.009
(0.002)

0.008
(0.003)

Banking Crisis

–0.022
(0.007)

(5)
0.007
(0.002)
–0.007
(0.003)
-0.011
(0.007)

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
0.001
0.003
0.004
0.002
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
–0.018 –0.020 –0.013 –0.018
(0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004)
-0.026
(0.007)

0.008
(0.003)
–0.014
(0.009)

0.013
(0.003)

(10)
0.006
(0.002)
–0.015
(0.004)
–0.024
(0.008)

0.013
(0.003)
–0.020 –0.005
(0.008) (0.010)

Number of Observations
3,427
2,987
2,987
3,427
2,987
3,427
2,987
2,987
3,427 2,987
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E =
DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table reports point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses from
estimating equation (A.2.3.6) augmented to include the growth rate of the VIX (Chicago Board of Volatility Index), change in real global interest rates, and an
indicator for the beginning of a banking crisis from Laeven and Valencia (2012). Regressions are weighted by countries’ nominal goods import shares.

Annex Table 2.3.8 decomposes the predicted decline
in the growth rate of real goods imports between the
2012–15 period and 1985–2007 and 2003–07 across
the various components of import demand for the full
sample of economies.56

As mentioned in the main text, other factors can
simultaneously affect economic activity and trade,
in particular trade policies. If ignored, these would
likely lead to an upward bias in the estimated role of
economic activity in explaining the slowdown in trade

56Sectors are aggregated along the lines of Eaton and others
(2010) with the exception that mining and quarrying, coke, refined

petroleum products, and nuclear fuel are stripped out from the residual services sector and used to quantify the commodities sector.

Annex Table 2.3.8. Decomposing the Decline in Real Goods Import Growth: Full Sample
Import Growth Predicted by IAD Model and Its
Components

1985–2007
2003–07
2012–15

Relative
Prices Constant

Actual

Overall

C

G

I

X

(1)
8.1
8.9
2.3

(2)
8.0
8.8
3.2

(3)
1.4
1.4
0.9

(4)
0.7
0.7
0.4

(5)
2.7
3.5
1.4

(6)
4.6
4.8
2.0

(7)
0.3
0.2
0.3

Import Growth Predicted by DIAD+E Model and Its
Components
Overall

C

G

I

X

(8)
–1.9
–1.7
–1.7

(9)
7.8
9.2
4.0

(10)
1.5
1.5
1.0

(11)
0.8
0.7
0.4

(12)
2.9
3.7
1.7

(13)
4.6
5.1
3.0

0.2
0.0

–3.8
–5.2

–0.6
–0.6

–0.4
–0.3

–1.3
–2.0

–1.6
–2.1

Relative
Prices Constant
(14)
0.3
0.3
0.1

(15)
–2.3
–2.1
–2.1

Average Growth in 2012–15 Minus Average Growth
1985–2007
2003–07

–5.7
–6.6

–4.7
–5.6

–0.6
–0.6

–0.4
–0.3

–1.3
–2.0

–2.7 –0.1
–2.9 0.1

–0.2
–0.2

0.2
0.0

Fraction of Import Growth Decline Predicted by Model
1985–2007
0.82
0.66
2003–07
0.85
0.79
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E =
DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table reports actual and predicted real goods import growth rates. Individual economies’ growth rates
are aggregated using average import shares over the 1985–2015 period to minimize fluctuations in the contribution of the constant to aggregate import growth.
Columns (2)–(8) decompose predicted import growth based on equation (A.2.3.2). Columns (9)–(15) decompose predicted import growth based on equation
(A.2.3.5), with column (13) denoting the contribution of export growth predicted based on trading partners’ import-intensity-adjusted domestic demand.

104

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 2

Annex Table 2.3.9. Residuals: Real Goods Import
Growth, Corrected for Potential Effect of Trade
Policies on Aggregate Demand

of import-intensity-adjusted demand as in equation
(A.2.3.2):

Correcting for Role of Trade Policies
Full Sample
Indicator 1985–2011
Indicator 2012–15

IAD*
0.002
(0.002)
–0.012
(0.002)
2,840

(DIAD+E)*
0.001
(0.002)
–0.021
(0.004)
2,817

Number of Observations
Source: IMF staff calculations
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-​
adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate
demand; DIAD+E = DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD.
The table reports point estimates and heteroscedasticity-robust standard
errors in parentheses from estimating equation (A.2.3.6). Regressions are
weighted by countries’ nominal goods import shares.

flows. Part of this bias can be corrected by purging
the aggregate demand components of the effect of
trade policies prior to constructing the measure for
import-intensity-adjusted demand. This is done in a
first stage regression of these demand components on
the factors of interest:
k ​ = ​
​∆ ln​AD​ c,t
​  δ​  c​​  + ​𝛄​  c​​ ​´​  ∆ ln ​F​  c,t​​  + ​ν​  kc,t ​​,​ 

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

(A.2.3.7)

k ​​​  is a component of aggregate demand, ​k ∈ ​
where ​​AD​ c,t
{C, G, I, X}​​ and ​​F​  c,t​​​is the vector of trade policies, in
this case tariffs and participation in free trade agreements. The residuals from this first stage regression, ​​
ν​  kc,t ​​​ , which are by construction orthogonal to the trade
policy variables, are used to construct the measure

* ​ ​  = ​​ ​ν​  C ​​  ​​​  ​ω​  C​​​ ​​ ​ν​  G ​​  ​​​  ​ω​  G​​​ ​​ ​ν​  I ​
​ω​  ​​
X ​ω​  ​​
​​IAD​ c,t
( c,t) ( c,t) ( c,t)​  ​​​  I​ ​​(​ν​  c,t ​)​  ​​​  X​​.` (A.2.3.8)

The analysis is repeated as before using this measure,
as well as for the alternative measures: (1) ​​DIAD​​  *​​ and
(2) absorption proxied by ​​DIAD​​  *​​and exports predicted by trading partners’ ​​DIAD​​  *​​.
Annex Table 2.3.9 presents the results from estimating equation (A.2.3.6) using the residuals obtained
from the goods import demand model specified in
equations (A.2.3.1), (A.2.3.3), and (A.2.3.5) using
these alternatives measures of demand. The “missing”
trade growth is slightly larger during 2012–15 when
changes in aggregate demand have been purged of the
role of trade policies.
Annex Table 2.3.10 decomposes the observed
decline in trade growth between the 2012–15 and
2003–07 periods into shares predicted and unpredicted
by the import demand model. A slightly smaller share
of the slowdown is now attributed to changes in economic activity. For example, comparing 2012–15 with
2003–07, the baseline model can predict 85 percent of
the decline in import growth for the average economy,
while the model based on the import growth predicted
by ​​DIAD​​  *​​and exports predicted by trading partners’ ​​
DIAD​​  *​​can predict 79 percent of the observed slowdown. The corresponding numbers using the alternative trade-policies-corrected measure are 79 percent
and 70 percent, respectively.

Annex Table 2.3.10. Decomposing the Decline in Real Goods Import Growth Controlling for Trade Policies
Baseline
Full Sample
2003–07
2012–15

Baseline Corrected for Trade Policies

Actual

IAD

DIAD+E

IAD*

(DIAD+E)*

(1)
8.9
2.3

(2)
8.8
3.2

(3)
9.2
4.0

(4)
8.8
3.6

(5)
9.1
4.4

–5.6

–5.2

–5.2

–4.6

Average Growth in 2012–15 Minus Average Growth
2003–07

–6.6

Fraction of Import Growth Decline Predicted by Model
2003–07
0.85
0.79
0.79
0.70
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: IAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand; DIAD = import-intensity-adjusted demand using only the domestic components of aggregate demand; DIAD+E =
DIAD and exports predicted by trading partners’ DIAD. The table reports actual and predicted real goods import growth rates. Individual economies’ growth rates
are aggregated using average import shares over the 1985–2015 period to minimize fluctuations in the contribution of the constant to aggregate import growth.
Columns (2) and (4) estimate predicted import growth based on equation (A.2.3.3). Columns (3) and (5) estimate predicted import growth based on equation
(A.2.3.5).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

105

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex 2.4. Analysis Using a General Equilibrium
Model
The structural analysis presented in the section
“The Role of Demand Composition and Trade Costs:
Insights from a Structural Investigation” closely follows
the model framework of Eaton and others (2010)—a
multisector, multicountry, static general equilibrium
model of production and trade, which nests the
canonical Ricardian trade model of Eaton and Kortum
(2002). A full description and derivation of this model
can be found in Eaton and others (2010). This annex
describes some of the key changes to the model as well
as the data sources used.

Framework
One important modification is the inclusion of a
fourth sector composed of commodities in addition
to two manufacturing sectors (producing durable
and nondurable goods) and the residual sector, which
covers primarily services.57 Production and trade in
the commodity sector are modeled as for the manufacturing sectors, and so the functional forms of the
equations for the latter can be applied to the former.
This means there is an additional set of equilibrium
conditions that serve to pin down prices, trade shares,
and spending in the commodity sector.58
As described in the main text, observed trade
dynamics can be attributed to changes in four factors
in the model framework: (1) composition of demand,
(2) trade costs (or frictions), (3) productivity, and (4)
trade deficits. Following the business cycle accounting
approach of Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007),
these factors are often referred to as “wedges.”
The solution method for the model uses the procedure developed by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2007).
The key endogenous variables (wages, spending, prices,
trade shares) are expressed as a ratio of their end-of-​
period to beginning-of-period value (gross changes
form) given values for the four wedges. Next, the wedges
are solved for in a way that the variation in the key
endogenous variables implied by the model’s equations
matches their variation in the actual data. Counter57Sectors

are aggregated along the lines of Eaton and others
(2010) with the exception that (1) mining and quarrying, and (2)
coke, refined petroleum products, and nuclear fuel are stripped out
from the residual services sector and used to quantify the commodities sector.
58The modified system of equations is available on request from
the authors.

106

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

factual scenarios—in which certain wedges are turned
on and off—rely on the first step of this procedure, in
which outcomes are pinned down taking the values
of wedges as given. Since the framework is static, the
solution procedure is run separately for consecutive yearpairs by feeding in data for two years at a time.
Calibrated parameters include the input-output
coefficients, value-added coefficients, and the inverse
measure of the dispersion of inefficiencies that governs
the strength of comparative advantage in each sector.
Following Eaton and others (2010), the inverse measure
of the dispersion of inefficiencies is set to 2 and assumed
to be the same for all sectors. The literature’s estimates
for this parameter vary greatly. Setting it to equal 8 as
in Eaton and Kortum (2002) yields similar results. The
remaining parameters are pinned down using the 2011
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Trade in Value database. The only
exceptions to this are the value-added coefficients for
the “rest of the world” category consisting of countries
outside of the sample. Those coefficients are set so as to
match the exports-to-production ratio of each sector in
the data. The exports-to-production ratios are calculated
by aggregating exports and production in 2013 for all
countries in the Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database excluding the 34 countries used in the exercise.

Data
The estimation requires sectoral data on absorption,
gross production, prices, and bilateral trade—very heavy
data input. Numerous data sources were spliced to obtain
the necessary time coverage through 2015. The sample
consists of 17 advanced economies and 17 emerging
market and developing economies listed in Group A of
Annex Table 2.1.2. In 2015, six of those countries are
excluded (Austria, Belgium, Colombia, Indonesia, Korea,
Philippines) due to lack of disaggregated trade data at the
time of the analysis. The data sources for the analysis are
described in Annex Table 2.1.1.
For sectoral gross production, data through 2009 or
2011 are from the OECD Structural Analysis Database,
where available. For countries not included in this database, World KLEMS, OECD Input-Output Tables, and
Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database are used. For
most advanced economies, national sources provide data
through 2014, which are used to extrapolate forward the
data from the multinational sources. Remaining gaps
in the data are filled using the growth rates of sectoral
industrial production and producer price indices. These

CHAPTER 2

indices tend to be more disaggregated than the four
sectors considered in the analysis. The weights for this
aggregation are based on the latest available production
data. For the bilateral sectoral import and export flows,
data for Belgium and the Philippines are rescaled such
that total import and exports from the United Nations
Commodity Trade Statistics database match those from
the IMF World Economic Outlook database to adjust
for the inclusion of re-exports in the former.

Annex 2.5. Analysis at the Product Level
This annex provides additional details on the empirical analysis carried out in the section “The Role of
Trade Costs and Global Value Chains: Insights from
Disaggregated Trade Data.” It starts with an overview
of the data used to construct the measures for the
other factors that could be relevant to explaining the
trade slowdown (see also Annex Table 2.1.1), followed
by a technical overview of the baseline specification
used in that section. It also presents alternative specifications that assess the robustness of the main results.

Data
Trade costs—The chapter uses the methodology set
out by Novy (2012). (Tariff-equivalent) trade costs, ​​t​ ij​​​,
are derived from a gravity model of trade as a geometric average of bilateral trade flows between countries i
and j, ​​Xij​  ​​  ≠ ​X​ ji​​​, relative to domestic trade flows within
each country, ​​X​ ii​​  ≠ ​X​ jj​​​:
_____
​  1  ​

​Xii​  ​​ ​Xjj​  ​​ 2​(​​σ-1​)​​
​​tij​  ​​  = ​​ ____
​ 
 ​ ​​​ 
​  - 1​.
X
​
( ij​  ​​ ​Xji​  ​​ )

(A.2.5.1)

Countries trading more with each other than they
trade with themselves is an indication that international
trade costs must be falling relative to domestic trade
costs. Trade costs are computed at the sectoral level
using bilateral sectoral trade data and domestic shipments (that is, intranational trade), which, following the
literature, is proxied by gross sectoral output minus total
exports. All the data for this exercise is from the Eora
Multi-Region Input-Output (MRIO) database.
Tariffs—Data on tariffs are constructed from two
sources with detailed information on tariffs for products at the Harmonized System six-digit level: (1) the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Trade Analysis and Information System database,
and (2) the World Trade Organization (WTO) Tariff
Download Facility. To extend the historical cover-

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

age for average tariffs at the country level, the series
on average ad valorem tariffs from United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and WTO
is spliced with the country-level series from the IMF
Structural Reform database (IMF 2008).
Nontariff barriers—Detailed data on more than 30
different national governments’ use of policies, such
as antidumping, countervailing duties, and safeguard
measures, are obtained from the World Bank Temporary Trade Barriers database for 1990–2015 (see Bown
2016). This data set lists temporary trade barriers
at a highly disaggregated level (Harmonized System
eight-digit or more detailed), including information on
their revocation, which makes it possible to calculate
the stock of barriers effective in each year.59 More
comprehensive data on a broader range of nontariff
barriers are taken from the Center for Economic and
Policy Research Global Trade Alert initiative. This
includes not only the trade defense measures, but also
other state measures taken since 2009 that are likely to
discriminate against foreign commerce—for example,
localization requirements, bailouts, and state aid.
Free trade agreements—Data on flows of agreements by
year of signature are obtained from the Design of Trade
Agreements database. This data set is complemented
by the stock of free trade agreements in force from the
WTO Regional Trade Agreements database. The former
builds on the latter, supplementing it with data from
other multilateral institutions and national sources.
Global value chain participation—Input-output
matrices from the Eora MRIO database for 173
countries are used. The measure of vertical specialization employed (developed by Hummels, Ishii, and Yi
2001) is computed as the sum of the import content
in a country’s exports (also known as foreign value
added) and the domestic content of a country’s exports
that is used by trading partners for their own exports
(see Koopman, Wang, and Wei 2014). This total is
expressed as a ratio of gross exports.
Trade finance—Changes in trade finance availability
also directly influence overall trade costs. Data from
the International Chamber of Commerce Global Trade
and Finance Survey were used to gauge whether the
availability for trade credit has been growing or shrinking since the global financial crisis. The proportion of
banks reporting a decrease in trade credit lines to both

59These calculations follow those described in the appendix of
Bown (2011).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

107

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Figure 2.5.1. Trade Finance Availability
(Percent of responding banks reporting a decrease in
trade ﬁnance credit lines offered)

60

Corporate clients

Financial institutions

50

40

30

20

10

2007– 2008– 2009– 2010– 2011– 2012– 2013–
08
09
10
11
12
13
14

Sources: International Chamber of Commerce, Global Trade
and Finance Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The chart is based on an unbalanced sample of banks
comprising 122 banks in 59 countries in 2009 and 482 banks
in 112 countries in 2015.

corporate clients and financial institutions has more
than halved since 2008–09 (Annex Figure 2.5.1).

Product-Level Regressions
The analysis in the section on the role of trade costs
and global value chains uses an augmented model of
import demand that relates the product-level growth
rate of imports to product, country, or product-country
characteristics that are meant to capture factors proposed
in the literature that could help explain the recent trade
slowdown. The analysis uses data on import volumes
across about 780 products, defined using Standard International Trade Classification revision 2, for 52 economies
since 2003 (see the list of economies of Groups A and B
in Annex Table 2.1.2). The baseline specification is
​∆ ln​Mp,c,t
​  ​​  = α + ​δ​  p,c​​  + ​δ​  t​​  + ​​b​1​´​ ​X​  p,c,t​​  + ​​β​  2​​  ∆ lnD​ s,c,t​​ ​
	​+ ​β​  3​​  ∆ ln​Pc,t
​  ​​  + ​ε​  p,c,t​​​,
(A.2.5.2)
in which ​∆ ln​Mp,c,t
​  ​​​is the growth rate of real imports
of product ​p​by country ​c​ in period ​t​; ​​δ​  p,c​​​ are product-country fixed effects; and ​​δ​  t​​​are time fixed effects.
108

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

The equation also controls for the demand (or
absorption) in sector ​s​to which a particular product
can be mapped, ​​D​ s,c,t​​​, and relative import prices at
the country level, ​​P​ c,t​​​. In the absence of a measure of
demand at the product level, the chapter maps all products to more aggregated sectors. The chapter uses the
Eora Multi-Region Input-Output matrices to compute
the intensity with which each of the 10 nonservices
sectors is used both directly or indirectly in the four
components of an economy’s aggregate demand. As with
the empirical exercise using import-intensity-adjusted
demand, these intensities are used as sector-specific
weights for aggregate consumption, investment, government spending, and exports to construct a proxy for the
absorption of a particular sector.60 Relative prices are
computed as the ratio of the import price deflator to the
GDP deflator, as in the analysis discussed in the section
“The Role of Output and Its Composition: Insights
from an Empirical Investigation.”61
The variable, ​​X​  p,c,t​​​, represents a vector of trade
policy measures and other factors, which are included
in the regression at either the product-country,
sector-country, or country level to understand how
product-level import growth varies with them. These
include: (1) growth in tariff rates at the product level,
(2) a dummy variable that captures whether a particular product category was subject to a temporary
trade barrier (trade defense measure) in year ​t​, (3) the
growth in the share of global GDP that is covered by
the free trade agreements a country is party to, and (4)
growth in a measure of backward global value chain
participation, expressed as the share of foreign value
added in sectoral gross exports. Of these, only participation in free trade agreements varies at the country-year level, while participation in global value chains
varies at the sector-country-year level. Tariffs and
nontariff barriers are measured at the product level.
In addition (and as a cross-check) to the product-level analysis, a similar augmented import demand
model is estimated at the aggregate level. In particular, the analysis pools the estimated residuals from
the empirical import demand model estimated in the
60All products within each of the 10 nonservices sectors used in
the standardized input-output matrices are assumed to have the same
absorption.
61Ideally, equation (A.2.5.1) should include sector-level prices.
While the import deflator for a particular product can be constructed, disaggregated data on domestic prices are not available.
Hence, the same relative price change is applied for all products in
an economy.

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Annex Table 2.5.1. Alternative Specifications for Real Imports in Product-Level Regressions
A. Product and Country
Dependent Variable (Real)
Sample Period: 2003–13

Level of
Imports

Import Growth

Importsto-Sectoral
Demand

(1)

(2)

(3)

Temporary Trade Barriers

–0.031***
(0.009)

–0.037***
(0.009)

–0.036***
(0.011)

–0.033*
(0.017)

–0.031*
(0.016)

Tariffs

–0.016**
(0.008)

–0.030***
(0.008)

–0.038***
(0.009)

–0.146***
(0.022)

–0.131***
(0.021)

Free Trade Agreement Coverage

0.106**
(0.054)

0.143***
(0.053)

0.304***
(0.060)

0.134***
(0.013)

0.110***
(0.012)

Global Value Chain Participation

0.095**
(0.041)

0.474***
(0.038)

0.835***
(0.030)

0.410***
(0.058)

0.322***
(0.056)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Country x Product Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Control for Demand and Relative Prices

(4)

(5)

R2
0.293
0.261
0.176
0.978
0.979
Adjusted R 2
0.208
0.173
0.077
0.975
0.977
Number of Observations
258,196
258,196
262,340
292,068
292,068
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global value chain participation is a measure of backward participation: foreign value added in exports as share of gross exports. In the product-country-​
level regressions, this variable is calculated at the sectoral level. Standard errors are clustered at the product-country level for regressions A and at the country
level in regression B.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

section “The Role of Output and Its Composition:
Insights from an Empirical Investigation,” according to
equation (A.2.3.5) (in other words, real goods import
growth that cannot be predicted by fluctuations in
import-intensity-adjusted demand and relative prices).
The product- and sector-level measures for trade policy
and global value chain participation are aggregated up
to the country level and used as right-hand-side variables in the following regression equation:
​ε​  c,t​​​  = α + ​ϕ​  c​​  + ​ϕ​  t​​  + ​b´​ ​X​  c,t​​ + ​ξ​  c,t​​​,
​​ˆ

(A.2.5.3)

​  c,t​​​​are the estimated residuals and ​​X​c,t​​​ are the
where ​​​εˆ
same trade policy and global value chain factors at the
country level.
Decomposing the Slowdown into the Role for Other
Factors
The final step of the analysis quantifies how much
additional decline in import growth one would have
expected based on the historical association between
trade policies, global value chain participation and
import growth, and the evolution of these other fac-

tors. The elasticities from the country-level equation
(A.2.5.3), ​​b​, are combined with differences in the
growth rate of the different factors at the product level, ​​
X​  p,c,t​​​, between 2012–15 and 2003–07 to compute the
relative contribution of each factor. Annex Figure 2.5.2
shows the proportion of the estimated country-specific residuals according to equation (A.2.3.5)—that
is, that component of import growth not accounted
for by import-intensity-adjusted demand—that can be
attributed to these other factors, for both real and nominal import growth.

Robustness
The baseline specification in equation (A.2.5.1) for
the product-level regressions was subject to a number
of robustness tests. In particular, because the relationship between imports and other factors beyond
demand was specified in terms of growth rates, it was
important to understand whether similar elasticities
were recovered using the levels of the same of variables,
as is often done in the literature (see, for example, Box
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

109

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Figure 2.5.2. Contribution of Trade
Policies and Global Value Chains to the
Slowdown in Real and Nominal Goods Import
Growth
(Percent)

TTBs
Tariffs

0.0

FTA coverage
GVC participation

Unpredicted

From Product- From Product- From ProductLevel Regression Level Regression Level Regression
(7)
(5)
(6)

–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
–1.2

of the channels through which trade policies affect
import growth, a specification that does not control for
sectoral demand could also be useful in gauging what
is the correct elasticity of import growth with respect
to these other factors.
The exercises show that the findings are generally
robust to various modifications of the estimated specifications (Annex Table 2.5.1). However, the exclusion
of time fixed effects leads to an increase in the role
of tariffs and global value chain participation. This is
likely due to the fact that the reduction in trade costs
and gradual increase in global value chain participation
over time was common to all countries.
The same alternative specifications were also
run using nominal imports (growth and level and
as a ratio of sectoral demand). The results were
once again broadly similar, with a stronger role
for import tariffs and global value chains once the
common time trends were no longer controlled for
(Annex Table 2.5.2).

–1.4
–1.6
–1.8
–2.0
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: TTB = temporary trade barrier; FTA = free trade
agreement; GVC = global value chain. The ﬁgure combines
the estimated historical association between real and
nominal product-level import growth, and growth in trade
costs and global value chain participation, and the
differences in the growth rate of these factors between
2003–07 and 2012–15 to compute their contribution to the
observed trade slowdown.

2.1). A version using the ratio of real-imports-to-GDP
(with the denominator proxied by sectoral demand)
on the left-hand side was also estimated.62 In addition,
alternative specifications that omitted the time fixed
effects and controls for demand and relative prices were
also tested. Omitting time fixed effects can be justified
given the synchronicity in the timing of reduction on
trade barriers and development of global value chains
across countries. In such a setting, including time fixed
effects would absorb a large fraction of the variation
in trade policies and global value chain measures. To
the extent that sectoral demand (and growth) is one
62At the product level, the ratio used was that of product-level
imports to sectoral demand.

110

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Annex 2.6. Analysis Using Gravity Model of
Trade
This annex provides additional details on the empirical analysis carried out in the section “The Role of
Trade Costs and Global Value Chains: Insights from
Disaggregated Trade Data” using the gravity model of
trade. It provides an overview of the data and describes
the methodology used.

Data
The data set used in the gravity model is an extension of the bilateral-sectoral database of trade flows
from Chapter 2 of the October 2010 World Economic
Outlook. The data set is extended by using United
Nations Commodity Trade Statistics data on bilateral
trade flows at the Standard International Trade Classification revision 2, four-digit level. It includes about 780
uniquely identified products and their bilateral trade
flows from 1998–2014. To analyze the connection
between trade and global value chains, the 780 sectoral
trade flows are mapped into the 10 nonservices sectors
used in the Eora Multi-Region Input-Output database
and aggregated accordingly. Those resulting bilateral-sectoral trade flows are combined with the IMF
Direction of Trade Statistics database and the Head,
Mayer, and Ries (2010) database on gravity variables.
Countries’ participation in free trade agreements is

CHAPTER 2

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Annex Table 2.5.2. Alternative Specifications for Nominal Imports in Product-Level Regressions
A. Product and Country
Dependent Variable (Nominal)
Import Growth
Sample Period: 2003–13
Temporary Trade Barriers

Importsto-Sectoral
Demand

Level of
Imports

(1)
–0.029***
(0.007)

(2)
–0.037***
(0.009)

(3)
–0.035***
(0.011)

(4)
–0.020
(0.019)

(5)
–0.018
(0.018)

Tariffs

–0.034***
(0.007)

–0.057***
(0.007)

–0.067***
(0.009)

–0.205***
(0.021)

–0.167***
(0.020)

Free Trade Agreement Coverage

0.205***
(0.055)

0.325***
(0.056)

0.534***
(0.063)

0.218***
(0.017)

0.186***
(0.016)

Global Value Chain Participation

0.170***
(0.041)

0.719***
(0.043)

1.220***
(0.031)

1.109***
(0.065)

0.916***
(0.061)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Yes
No
No

Country x Product Fixed Effects
Time Fixed Effects
Control for Demand and Relative Prices

R2
0.407
0.337
0.213
0.975
0.977
Adjusted R 2
0.338
0.260
0.122
0.972
0.975
Number of Observations
270,587
270,587
275,424
303,727
297,374
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Global value chain participation is a measure of backward participation: foreign value added in exports as share of gross exports. In the product-country-​
level regressions, this variable is calculated at the sectoral level. Standard errors are clustered at the product-country level for regressions A and at the country
level in regression B.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

updated using the World Trade Organization Regional
Trade Agreements database.

Methodology
The analysis is performed in the three stages
described below.
First and Second Stages: Gravity Model Estimation
and Residuals Collection
The first stage of the methodology estimates the
gravity model for each year t (between 2003 and 2014)
and sector s. The gravity model is first estimated in
levels:
→

→

​∀ s, t : ln​Mi,e,s,t
​  ​​  = ​α​  i,s,t​​  + ​μ​ e,s,t​​  + ​​​β​  s,t​​​​  ​ Gravity​ i,e,s,t​​  + ​ε​  i,e,s,t​​,​	
(A.2.6.1)
in which ​ln​Mi,e,s,t
​  ​​​is the log of nominal imports
between an importer i and an exporter e, ​​α​  i,s,t​​​ denotes
importer fixed effects, and ​μe,s,t
​ ​​​ denotes exporter fixed
→
effects. ​​Gravity​ i,e,s,t​​is a vector of standard variables used
in gravity models: distance; number of hours differ-

ence between exporters and importers; and indicators
for contiguity, common official language, common
ethnological language, common colonizer, existence of
colonial relationship post-1945, trade from colonizer
to colony, trade from colony to colonizer, currently in
colonial relationship, regional trade agreement in force,
common legal system, common religion, common
currency, and generalized system of preferences. Finally,​​
ε​  i,e,s,t​​​is the error term, which is collected for the third
stage of the analysis.
The gravity model is also estimated in terms of
annual growth rates for 2004–14:
→

​∀ s, t : ln​Mi,e,s,t
​  ​​  - ln​Mi,e,s,t-1
​ 
​​  = ​σ​  i,s,t​​  + ​π​ e,s,t​​  + ​​​ω​  s,t​​​​ 
→

Gravity​ i,e,s,t​​​  + ​ς​  i,e,s,t​​,​
(A.2.6.2)
in which similarly ​​σ​  i,s,t​​​denotes importer fixed effects, ​​
→
π​ e,s,t​​​denotes exporter fixed effects, Gravity​ i,e,s,t​​ is the
same vector of gravity variables discussed above, and ​​
ς​  i,e,s,t​​​is an independent and identically distributed
error term, which is collected for the third stage of the
analysis.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

111

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Third Stage: Linking Value Chains to the
Unexplained Component of Trade Growth
In the third stage, the analysis investigates whether
there is an association between the initial value of
value chain linkages between two economies in a particular sector and trade growth for that country-pair
sector. Using the same notation, the estimated equation is

or

​ε​  i,e,s,t​​​  - ​ˆ
​ε​  i,e,s,t-1​​​  = γ + ​φ​  s​​ ​GVC​ i,e,s,t-1​​  + ​ϑ​  i,e,s,t​​,​	
​​ˆ

(A.2.6.3)

​ς​​ ​  i,e,s,t​​​  = γ + ​φ​  s​​ ​GVC​ i,e,s,t-1​​  + ​ϑ​  i,e,s,t​​,​	
ˆ

(A.2.6.4)

in which ​γ​is a constant, ​​GVC​ i,e,s,t-1​​​ measures the
lagged share of foreign value added exports to gross
exports in a particular economy-pair-sector, and ​​ϑ​  i,e,s,t​​​
is an independent and identically distributed error
term. The estimation allows for sector-specific effects of
GVC, ​​φ​  s​​​.
The results of this test are reported in columns (1),
(4), (7), (10), and (13) of Annex Tables 2.6.1 (estimation of gravity in levels) and 2.6.2 (estimation of gravity in growth rates) for different country and sectoral
samples. They indicate a robust positive association
between sectoral trade growth and value chain link
linkages over the 2003–14 period.
The second test investigates whether trade in country-pair-sector combinations with high degree of value

112

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

chain linkages during the 2003–07 period grew more
rapidly than trade in country-pair-sector combinations
with lower degree of value chain linkages in different
sample periods. In this exercise, the analysis considers a
time-invariant measure of global value chain linkages,
which is an indicator that takes the value of 1 if the
average global value chain participation for a particular country-pair-sector over the 2003–07 period is
in the top quartile of the distribution of those value
chain linkages (​​High GVC participation​)​​​​. The following
regression is then estimated:

​​ˆ
​ε​  i,e,s,t​​​  - ​ˆ
​ε​  i,e,s,t-1​​​  = δ ​
	​+ ​θ​  s​​ ​​​(​​High GVC participation​)i,e,s,2003-07​​​ ​
	​+ ​ξ​  i,e,s,t​​​	
(A.2.6.5)

or

​ς​​ ​  i,e,s,t​​​  = δ + ​θ​  s​​ ​​​(​​High GVC participation​)​​​ i,e,s,2003-07​​​ ​
ˆ
	​+ ​ξ​  i,e,s,t​​,​ (A.2.6.6)

in which ​δ​is again a constant and ​​ξ​  i,e,s,t​​​ is the error
term. Again, the estimation allows for sector-specific
effects of global value chains​, ​θ​  s​​​.
The results of this test are reported in the remaining
columns of Annex Tables 2.6.1 and 2.6.2. Figure 2.14
displays the results from columns (8) and (9) of those
tables, whereas the other columns show the robustness of the findings when using different country and
sectoral samples.

-0.064

(0.591)

(0.548)
0.547

1.289**

(6)2

1.185**

(0.499)

(5)2

(0.476)

(4)2
0.027***
(0.010)
1.256**

(3)

1.403***

(2)

(0.738)

1.379*

(8)3

-0.909

(0.821)

1.770**

(9)3

(Percent, year over year)
(7)3
0.026***
(0.010)

(10)4
0.028***
(0.010)

(0.759)

0.857

(11)4

-0.929

(0.793)

1.251

(12)4

(13)5
0.032***
(0.012)

(0.552)

1.103**

(14)5

–1.510*

(0.638)

1.693***

(15)5

1.732**

1.225*

0.861

0.322

0.183

(0.838)
(0.874)
(1.351)
(1.442)
(0.900)
–0.603** –0.474** –0.474** –1.046*** –0.709*** –0.709*** –0.910*** –0.539** –0.539** –1.017*** –0.524** –0.524** –1.243*** –0.761*** –0.761***
(0.281)
(0.220)
(0.220)
(0.330)
(0.238)
(0.238)
(0.311)
(0.227)
(0.227)
(0.312)
(0.225)
(0.225)
(0.350)
(0.243)
(0.243)

(1)
0.021**
(0.008)

Unpredicted Bilateral Import Growth by Year (Gravity Model Estimated on Level of Nominal Imports), 2003–14

(0.730)
(0.741)
(1.189)
(1.300)
(0.792)
3.720*** 4.100*** 3.240*** 3.720*** 4.080*** 3.290*** 4.340*** 3.850*** 3.010*** 4.580*** 2.630*** 2.210*** 3.550*** 3.520*** 2.890***
F -Test
Analytical Weights
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-Pair-Sectors
31,126
31,126
31,126
20,492
20,492
20,492
19,263
19,263
19,263
17,220
17,220
17,220
15,642
15,642
15,642
Number of Observations
364,968 364,968 364,968 252,064 252,064 252,064 229,799 229,799 229,799 204,260 204,260 204,260 202,293 202,293 202,293
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Regressions allow (Eora Multi-Region Input-Output) sector-specific coefficients jointly estimated with standard errors clustered by country-pair-sector. GVC = global value chain. GVC participation is measured as foreign
valued added in exports as share of gross exports. Weights are defined as levels of nominal imports.
1 Dummy equaling 1 for those country-pair-sectors in the top quartile of the distribution of the mean of GVC participation across time (time invariant using period 2003–07 to compute the mean).
2 Excludes commodity exporters.
3 Keeps data from importers with national input-output tables; see Lenzen and others (2013).
4 Uses the same importing-country sample employed in the product level analysis.
5 Excludes commodity exporters and low-income countries, the commodity sector, and outlier values of GVC participation above 150 percent.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

High GVC Participation Total
Effect (2012–14) [I + II]

Constant

High GVC Participation Dummy1
× Post–2012 Dummy [II]

High GVC Participation Dummy1
(pre–2012) [I]

High GVC Participation Dummy1
(2003–14)

GVC Participation (t – 1)

Dependent Variable

(Percentage points; year-over-year increase in nominal import growth for country-pair-sectors)

Annex Table 2.6.1. Link between Global Value Chain Integration and Yearly Nominal Import Growth Using Gravity Model Estimated in Levels

CHAPTER 2
Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

113

114

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

–0.598*
(0.308)

(1)
0.023***
(0.008)

(0.594)

(0.689)

1.067

(8)3

1.788**

0.888

0.630

(1.364)
–0.451*
(0.254)

–0.767

(0.792)

1.397*

(9)3

(Percent, year over year)
(7)3
0.031***
(0.009)

(0.886)
(0.851)
–0.464** –0.464** –0.925** –0.651** –0.651** –1.017*** –0.451*
(0.230)
(0.230)
(0.372)
(0.273)
(0.273)
(0.341)
(0.254)

–0.517

(0.578)
0.229

1.405**

(6)2

1.559***

(0.502)

(5)2

(0.464)

(4)2
0.023***
(0.010)
1.202**

(3)

1.647***

(2)

(0.621)

2.131***

(11)4

0.113

(0.765)

2.087***

(12)4

(13)5
0.032***
(0.011)

(0.522)

0.975*

(14)5

–1.408

(0.632)

1.530**

(15)5

2.200*

0.122

(1.474)
(0.887)
–1.075*** –0.547** –0.547** –1.335*** –0.837*** –0.837***
(0.344)
(0.256)
(0.256)
(0.349)
(0.241)
(0.241)

(10)4
0.032***
(0.010)

Unpredicted Bilateral Import Growth by Year (Gravity Model Estimated on Growth Rate of Nominal Imports), 2003–14

(0.712)
(0.730)
(1.154)
(1.165)
(0.741)
4.810*** 4.870*** 4.310*** 4.450*** 3.680*** 3.550*** 5.210*** 2.790*** 2.590*** 5.370*** 2.770*** 2.570*** 3.890*** 3.420*** 3.680***
F -Test
Analytical Weights
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country-Pair-Sectors
48,329
48,341
48,341
29,580
29,589
29,589
28,171
28,176
28,171
24,418
24,420
24,420
20,451
20,458
20,458
Number of Observations
446,968 448,302 448,302 297,500 298,202 298,202 266,479 266,992 266,479 231,657 232,040 232,040 228,559 228,954
228,954
Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Regressions allow (Eora Multi-Region Input-Output) sector-specific coefficients jointly estimated with standard errors clustered by country-pair-sector. GVC = global value chain. GVC participation is measured as foreign
valued added in exports as share of gross exports. Weights are defined as levels of nominal imports.
1 Dummy equaling 1 for those country-pair-sectors in the top quartile of the distribution of the mean of GVC participation across time (time invariant using period 2003–07 to compute the mean).
2 Excludes commodity exporters.
3 Keeps data from importers with national input-output tables; see Lenzen and others (2013).
4 Uses the same importing-country sample employed in the product level analysis.
5 Excludes commodity exporters and low-income countries, the commodity sector, and outlier values of GVC participation above 150 percent.
* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01.

High GVC Participation Total
Effect (2012–14) [I + II]

Constant

High GVC Participation Dummy1
× Post–2012 Dummy [II]

High GVC Participation Dummy1
(pre–2012) [I]

High GVC Participation Dummy1
(2003–14)

GVC Participation (t – 1)

Dependent Variable

(Percentage points; year-over-year increase in nominal import growth for country-pair-sectors)

Annex Table 2.6.2. Link between Global Value Chain Integration and Yearly Nominal Import Growth Using Gravity Model Estimated in Growth Rates

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

CHAPTER 2

References
Ahn, JaeBin, Era Dabla-Norris, Romain Duval, Bingjie Hu, and
Lamin Njie. 2016. “Reassessing the Productivity Gains from
Trade Liberalization: A Sector-Level Approach.” IMF Working Paper 16/77, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Ahn, JaeBin, and Romain Duval. Forthcoming. “Global Trade
and Productivity Slowdown: Are They Related?” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Alessandria, George, and Horag Choi. 2016. “The Dynamics of
the U.S. Trade Balance and Real Exchange Rate: The J Curve
and Trade Costs?” Unpublished.
Alessandria, George, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan.
2013. “Trade Wedges, Inventories and International Business
Cycles.” Journal of Monetary Economics 60: 1–20.
Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings. 2007. “Trade Liberalization,
Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence from Indonesia.” American Economic Review 97 (5): 1611–38.
Anderson, James E. 2011. “The Gravity Model.” Annual Review
of Economics 3 (1): 133–60.
Arvis, Jean-Francois, Yann Duval, Ben Shepherd, and Chorthip
Utoktham. 2013. “Trade Costs in the Developing World,
1995–2010.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
6309, World Bank, Washington.
Atkin, David, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Adam Osman. 2014.
“Exporting and Firm Performance: Evidence from a Randomized Trial.” NBER Working Paper 20690, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson. 2013. “The
China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import
Competition in the United States.” American Economic Review
103 (6): 2121–68.
Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. “Do Free Trade
Agreements Actually Increase Members’ International Trade?”
Journal of International Economics 71: 72–95.
———. 2009. “Estimating the Effects of Free Trade Agreements
on Trade Flows Using Matching Econometrics.” Journal of
International Economics 77 (1): 63–76.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and
Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Trade Costs, Firms and Productivity.” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (5): 917–37.
Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen. 1995. “Exporters,
Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing: 1976–87.” Brookings
Papers on Activity: Microeconomics: 67–112.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding,
and Peter K. Schott. 2007. “Firms in International Trade.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3): 105–30.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott.
2006. “Plants and Productivity in International Trade.” American Economic Review 93 (4): 1268–90.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding, and Peter K. Schott.
2011. “Multi-Product Firms and Trade Liberalization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3): 1271–1318.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Bloom, Nicholas, Mirko Draca, and John Van Reenen. 2016.
“Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of Chinese
Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity.” Review of Economic Studies 83 (1): 87–117.
Bown, Chad P. 2011. “Taking Stock of Antidumping, Safeguards
and Countervailing Duties, 1990–2009.” The World Economy
34 (12): 1955–98.
———. 2016. “Temporary Trade Barriers Database.” June.
World Bank, Washington. http://econ.worldbank.org/ttbd/.
Boz, Emine, Matthieu Bussière, and Clément Marsilli. 2015.
“Recent Slowdown in Global Trade: Cyclical or Structural?”
Chapter 3 of The Global Trade Slowdown: A New Normal?
edited by Bernard Hoekman. Vox EU E-book. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research Press. http://www.voxeu.
org/article/recent-slowdown-global-trade.
Boz, Emine, and Eugenio Cerutti. Forthcoming. “Dissecting the
Global Trade Slowdown: A New Database.” Unpublished.
Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization
and the Gains from Variety.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
121 (2): 541–85.
Bussière, Matthieu, Giovanni Callegari, Fabio Ghironi, Giulia Sestieri, and Norihiko Yamano. 2013. “Estimating Trade Elasticities:
Demand Composition and the Trade Collapse of 2008–09.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (3): 118–51.
Bustos, Paula. 2011. “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology
Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms.” American Economic Review 101 (1): 304–40.
Carrère, Céline. 2006. “Revisiting the Effects of Regional Trade
Agreements on Trade Flows with Proper Specification of the
Gravity Model.” European Economic Review 50: 223–47.
Chari, Varadarajan V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen McGrattan.
2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.” Econometrica 75 (3):
781–836.
Chor, Davin, and Kalina Manova. 2012. “Off the Cliff and
Back? Credit Conditions and International Trade during the
Global Financial Crisis.” Journal of International Economics 87
(1): 117–133.
Cipollina, Maria, and Luca Salvatici. 2010. “Reciprocal Trade
Agreements in Gravity Models: A Meta-Analysis.” Review of
International Economics 18 (1): 63–80.
Conconi, Paola, Manuel García-Santana, Laura Puccio, and
Roberto Venturini. 2016. “From Final Goods to Inputs: The
Protectionist Effect of Preferential Rules of Origin.” CEPR
Discussion Paper 11084, Center for Economic and Policy
Research, Washington.
Constantinescu, Cristina, Aaditya Mattoo, and Michele Ruta.
2015. “The Global Trade Slowdown: Cyclical or Structural?”
IMF Working Paper 15/6, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
———. 2016. “Does the Global Trade Slowdown Matter?”
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7673, World
Bank, Washington.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

115

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2014. “Trade
Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of
Globalization.” Chapter 4 in Handbook of International Economics 4: 197–261.
Council of Economic Advisers. 2015. “The Economic Benefits
of U.S. Trade.” Chapter 7 of the Economic Report of the President, Washington.
Crozet, Matthieu, Charlotte Emlinger, and Sébastien Jean. 2015.
“On the Gravity of World Trade’s Slowdown.” Chapter 9 of
The Global Trade Slowdown: A New Normal?, edited by Bernard
Hoekman. Vox EU E-book. London: Centre for Economic
Policy Research Press. http://www.voxeu.org/sites/default/files/
file/Global%20Trade%20Slowdown_nocover.pdf.
De Loecker, Jan. 2007. “Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Slovenia.” Journal of International
Economics 73 (1): 69–98.
———. 2013. “Detecting Learning by Exporting.” American
Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5 (3): 1–21.
Dekle, Robert, Jonathan Eaton, and Samuel Kortum. 2007.
“Unbalanced Trade.” American Economic Review: Papers and
Proceedings 67 (4): 351–55.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Victor Norman. 1980. Theory of
International Trade: A Dual, General Equilibrium Approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Djankov, Simeon, Caroline Freund, and Cong S. Pham. 2010.
“Trading on Time.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 92
(1): 166–73.
Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum. 2002. “Technology,
Geography, and Trade.” Econometrica 70 (5): 1741–79.
———, Brent Neiman, and John Romalis. 2010. “Trade and
the Global Recession.” National Bank of Belgium Working
Paper Research 196, October, Brussels.
———. Forthcoming. “Trade and the Global Recession.” American Economic Review.
Ebenstein, Avraham, Ann Harrison, Margaret McMillan, and
Shannon Phillips. 2014. “Estimating the Impact of Trade
and Offshoring on American Workers Using the Current
Population Surveys.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 96
(3): 581–95.
Erdem, Erkan, and James Tybout. 2003. “Trade Policy and
Industrial Sector Responses: Using Evolutionary Models
to Interpret the Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 9947,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Ethier, Wifred J. 1985. Modern International Economics. New
York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Evenett, Simon J., and Johannes Fritz. 2015. “The Tide Turns?
Trade Protectionism and Slowing Global Growth.” Global
Trade Alert, Centre for Economic Policy Research Press.
———. 2016. “Global Trade Plateaus.” Global Trade Alert,
Centre for Economic Policy Research Press.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, and Amit Khandelwal. 2016. “Measuring the
Unequal Gains from Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
131(3): 1113–80.

116

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and Andrew K. Rose.
2001. “Using the Gravity Equation to Differentiate among
Alternative Theories of Trade.” Canadian Journal of Economics
34 (2): 430–47.
Feyrer, James. 2009a. “Distance, Trade, and Income—The 1967
to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a Natural Experiment.”
NBER Working Paper 15557, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
———. 2009b. “Trade and Income—Exploiting Time Series in
Geography.” NBER Working Paper 14910, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Fontagné, Lionel, Amélie Guillin, and Cristina Mitaritonna.
2011. “Estimations of Tariff Equivalents for the Services Sectors.” CEPII Document de Travail 2011–24, CEPII, Paris.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer. 1999. “Does Trade Cause
Growth?” American Economic Review 89 (3): 379–99.
Freund, Caroline. 2016. “The Global Trade Slowdown and Secular Stagnation.” Peterson Institute of International Economics
blog. https://piie.com/blogs/trade-investment-policy-watch/
global-trade-slowdown-and-secular-stagnation.
Gangnes, Byron, Alyson Ma, and Ari Van Assche. 2015. “Global
Value Chains and Trade-Income Relationship: Implications for
the Recent Trade Slowdown.” Chapter 6 of The Global Trade
Slowdown: A New Normal?, edited by Bernard Hoekman. Vox
EU E-book. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research
Press. http://www.voxeu.org/article/recent-slowdown-global-trade.
Goldberg, Pinelopi, and Nina Pavcnik. 2004. “Trade, Inequality,
and Poverty: What Do We Know? Evidence from Recent
Trade Liberalization Episodes in Developing Countries.”
Brookings Trade Forum 2004, 223–69.
———. 2007. “Distributional Effects of Globalization in
Developing Countries.” Journal of Economic Literature 45 (1):
39–82.
———. 2016. “The Effects of Trade Policy.” Chapter 3 in
Handbook of Commercial Policy, edited by Kyle Bagwell and
Robert W. Staiger. New York: Elsevier North Holland.
González, Anabel. 2013. “Executive Summary.” In Foreign Direct
Investment as a Key Driver for Trade, Growth and Prosperity:
The Case for a Multilateral Agreement on Investment. Global
Agenda Council on Global Trade and FDI, World Economic
Forum, Geneva.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman. 1991. Innovation and
Growth in the Global Economy. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer, and John Ries. 2010. “The Erosion
of Colonial Trade Linkages after Independence.” Journal of
International Economics 81 (1): 1–14.
Head, Keith, and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus
National Product Differentiation as an Explanation for the
Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade.” American Economic Review
91: 858–76.
Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler, and
Stephen Redding. Forthcoming. “Trade and Inequality: From
Theory to Estimation.” The Review of Economic Studies.

CHAPTER 2

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman. 1985. Market Structure
and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition,
and the International Economy. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press.
Henn, Christian, and Brad McDonald. 2014. “Crisis Protectionism: The Observed Trade Impact.” IMF Economic Review 62
(1): 77–118.
Henn, Christian, and Arevik Mkrtchyan. 2015. “The Layers
of the IT Agreement’s Trade Impact.” WTO Staff Working
Paper ERSD-2015-01, World Trade Organization, Geneva.
Hicks, John. 1935. “Annual Survey of Economic Theory: The
Theory of Monopoly.” Econometrica 3 (1): 1–20.
Hillberry, Russell, and David Hummels. 2013. “Trade Elasticity
Parameters for a Computable General Equilibrium Model.”
Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling 1:
1213–69.
Hoekman, Bernard, editor. 2015. The Global Trade Slowdown:
A New Normal? Vox EU E-book. London: Center for
Economic and Policy Research Press. http://voxeu.org/
sites/default/files/file/Global%20Trade%20Slowdown_
nocover.pdf.
Hong, Gee Hee, Jaewoo Lee, Wei Liao, and Dulani Seneviratne.
2016. “China and Asia in the Global Trade Slowdown.”
IMF Working Paper 16/105, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Hufbauer, Gary C., and Euijin Jung. 2016. “Why Has Trade
Stopped Growing? Not Much Liberalization and Lots of
Micro-Protection.” Peterson Institute of International Economics blog.
Hummels, David. 2007a. “Transportation Costs and International Trade in the Second Era of Globalization.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21 (3): 131–54.
———. 2007b. “Calculating Tariff Equivalents for Time in
Trade.” USAID Report, U.S. Agency for International Development, Washington, March.
———, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and
Growth of Vertical Specialization in World Trade.” Journal of
International Economics 54 (1): 75–96.
International Chamber of Commerce. 2015. “Rethinking Trade
and Finance.” Paris, France.
International Monetary Fund. 2008. “Structural Reforms and
Economic Performance in Advanced and Developing Countries.” Research Department paper, Washington. https://www.
imf.org/external/np/res/docs/2008/pdf/061008.pdf.
———. 2015a. “Global Value Chains: Where Are You? The
Missing Link in Sub-Saharan Africa’s Trade Integration.”
Chapter 3 of the April 2015 Regional Economic Outlook:
Sub-Saharan Africa, Washington. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2015/afr/eng/pdf/chap3.pdf.
———. 2015b. “Private Investment: What’s the Holdup?”
Chapter 3 of the World Economic Outlook,
Washington, April.
———. 2015c. “Review of the Role of Trade in the Work of the
Fund.” IMF Staff Report, Washington.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

———. 2015d. “Trade Integration in Latin America and the
Caribbean: Hype, Hope, and Reality.” Chapter 4 of the
Regional Economic Outlook: Western Hemisphere, Washington,
October. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/reo/2015/whd/
eng/wreo1015.htm.
———. 2015e. “Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown.” Box 1.2 of the
World Economic Outlook, Washington, April.
———. 2016a. “Is the WTO a World Tax Organization? A
Primer on WTO Rules for Tax Policymakers.” IMF Technical
Notes and Manuals, 16/03, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
———. 2016b. “Reinvigorating Trade to Support Growth: A
Path Forward.” Note for Ministers and Governors for the July
G-20 Ministerial.
———. 2016c. “The Potential Productivity Gains from Further
Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization.” Box 3.3
of the April 2016 World Economic Outlook, Washington.
Jääskelä, Jarkko, and Thomas Mathews. 2015. “Explaining the
Slowdown in Global Trade.” Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, September, 39–46.
Jones, Ronald W. 1971. “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade
and History.” Chapter 1 in Trade, Balance of Payments and
Growth, edited by Jagdish Bhagwati, Ronald Jones, Robert
Mundell, and Jaroslav Vanek. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Kee, Hiau Looi, and Heiwai Tang. 2016. “Domestic Value
Added in Exports: Theory and Firm Evidence from China.”
American Economic Review 106 (6): 1402–36.
Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2014. “Tracing Value-Added and Double Counting in Gross Exports.”
American Economic Review 104 (2): 459–94.
Krugman, Paul. 1979. “A Model of Innovation, Technology
Transfer, and the World Distribution of Income.” Journal of
Political Economy 87 (2): 253–66.
———. 1980. “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and
the Pattern of Trade.” American Economic Review 70 (5):
950–59.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia. 2012. “Systemic Banking
Crises Database: An Update.” IMF Working Paper 12/163,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Lawrence, Robert Z. 2014. “Adjustment Challenges for US
Workers.” Chapter 3 in Bridging the Pacific: Toward Free Trade
and Investment between China and the United States, edited
by C. Fred Bergsten, Gary Clyde Hufbauer, and Sean Miner.
Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Lee, Jong-Wha. 1993. “International Trade, Distortions, and
Long-Run Economic Growth.” IMF Staff Papers 40 (2):
299–328.
Lenzen, Manfred, Daniel Moran, Keiichiro Kanemoto, and Arne
Geschke. 2013. “Building EORA: A Global Multi-Region
Input-Output Database at High Country and Sector Resolution.” Economic Systems Research 25 (1): 20–41.
Levchenko, Andrei, Logan Lewis, and Linda Tesar. 2010. “The
Collapse of International Trade during the 2008–09 Crisis: In

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

117

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Search of the Smoking Gun.” IMF Economic Review 58 (2):
214–53.
Levchenko, Andrei, and Jing Zhang. 2013. “The Global Labor
Market Impact of Emerging Giants: A Quantitative Assessment.” IMF Economic Review 61 (3): 479–519.
Lileeva, Alla, and Daniel Trefler. 2010. “Improved Access
to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level Productivity…For
Some Plants.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3):
1051–99.
Ludema, Rodney, Anna Maria Mayda, and Prachi Mishra. 2015.
“Information and Legislative Bargaining: The Political Economy of U.S. Tariff Suspensions.” Unpublished manuscript,
Georgetown University, Washington.
Magdeleine, Joscelyn, and Andreas Maurer. 2016. “Understanding Trade in Digitized Idea – What are the Statistical
Challenges?” WTO Working Paper ERSD-2016-11, World
Trade Organization.
Manyika, James, Susan Lund, Jacques Bughin, Jonathan Woetzel, Kalin Stamenov, and Dhruv Dhingra. 2016. “Digital
Globalization: The New Era of Global Flows.” McKinsey
Global Institute.
Martinez-Martin, Jaime. 2016. “Breaking Down World Trade
Elasticities: A Panel ECM Approach.” Bank of Spain Working
Paper 1614, Bank of Spain, Madrid.
Mavroidis, Petros. 2016. “Regulatory Cooperation.” Policy
Options Paper for the E15 Initiative.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry
Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity.” Econometrica 71 (6): 1695–1725.
———, and Gianmarco Ottaviano. 2008. “Market Size, Trade,
and Productivity.” Review of Economic Studies 75: 295–316.
Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding. 2014. “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade.” Handbook of International Economics 1–54.
Morel, Louis. 2015. “Sluggish Exports in Advanced Economies:
How Much is Due to Demand?” Bank of Canada Discussion
Paper 2015–3, Bank of Canada, Ottawa.
Mussa, Michael. 1974. “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income:
The Importance of Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and
Intensity in the Short and Long Run.” Journal of Political
Economy 82 (6): 1191–203.
Noguer, Marta, and Marc Siscart. 2005. “Trade Raises Income:
A Precise and Robust Result.” Journal of International Economics 65: 447–60.
Novy, Dennis. 2012. “Gravity Redux: Measuring International
Trade Costs with Panel Data.” Economic Inquiry 51 (1):
101–21.
Ollivaud, Patrice, and Cyrille Schwellnus. 2015. “Does the
Post-Crisis Weakness in Global Trade Solely Reflect Weak
Demand?” OECD Economics Department Working Paper
No. 1216, OECD, Paris.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2015a. Business and Finance Outlook 2015. Paris:
OECD.

118

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

———. 2015b. “Emerging Policy Issues: Localising Data in a
Globalised World – Methodology.” TAD/TC/WP (2015) 7.
Paris: OECD.
Osnago, Alberto, Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta. Forthcoming.
“Do Deep Trade Agreements Boost Vertical FDI?” World
Bank Economic Review.
Pavcnik, Nina. 2002. “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from Chilean Plants.” Review of
Economic Studies 69 (1): 245–76.
Ricardo, David. 1817. On the Principles of Political Economy
and Taxation. In The Works and Correspondence of David
Ricardo, 11 vols, edited by Piero Sraffa, with the collaboration of M. H. Dobb. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rivera-Batiz, Luis A., and Paul M. Romer. 1991. “Economic
Integration and Endogenous Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 106 (2): 531–55.
Rodríguez, Francisco R., and Dani Rodrik. 2001. “Trade Policy
and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-​
National Evidence.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000 15:
261–338.
Rose, Andrew K. 2002. “Estimating Protectionism through
Residuals from the Gravity Model.” Background paper for the
October 2002 World Economic Outlook. http%3A%2F%2Ffaculty.haas.berkeley.edu%2Farose%2FWEO.
pdf&usg=AFQjCNH9us3oDmhsUdLt274yVtFyaw-bQA&sig2=uJfzpfrxQLFSmdB5E-Jtsg&bvm=bv.126130881,d.
dmo.
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform
and the Process of Global Integration.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 1–95.
Slopek, Ulf. 2015. “Why Has the Income Elasticity of Global
Trade Declined?” Deutsche Bundesbank, Economics Department, unpublished manuscript.
Stolper, Wolfgang F., and Paul A. Samuelson. 1941. “Protection and Real Wages.” The Review of Economic Studies 9 (1):
58–73.
Topalova, Petia, and Amit Khandelwal. 2011. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 93 (3): 995–1009.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2013.
“Global Value Chains: Investment and Trade for Development.” World Investment Report 2013, New York and Geneva.
Volpe Martincus, Christian, Jerónimo Carballo, and Alejandro
Graziano. 2015. “Customs.” Journal of International Economics
96: 119–37.
World Bank. 2010. Trade Adjustment Costs in Developing Countries: Impacts, Determinants and Policy Responses, edited by
Guido Porto and Bernard M. Hoekman. Washington: World
Bank.
World Trade Organization. 2015. “World Trade Report 2015:
Speeding Up Trade: Benefits and Challenges of Implementing
the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement.” Geneva: World
Trade Organization.

CHAPTER 2

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the
Growth of World Trade?” Journal of Political Economy 111
(1): 52–102.
———. 2010. “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias
in Trade?” American Economic Review 100 (1): 364–93.

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

Young, Alwyn. 1991. “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic
Effects of International Trade.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
106 (2): 369–405.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

119

CHAPTER

3

GLOBAL DISINFLATION IN AN ERA OF CONSTRAINED MONETARY POLICY

Inflation has declined markedly in many economies over
the past few years. This chapter finds that disinflation is
broad based across countries, measures, and sectors—albeit
larger for tradable goods than for services. The main
drivers of recent disinflation are persistent economic slack
and softening commodity prices. Most of the available
measures of medium-term inflation expectations have
not declined substantially so far. However, the sensitivity
of expectations to inflation surprises—an indicator of
the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations—has
increased in countries where policy rates have approached
their effective lower bounds. While the magnitude of this
change in sensitivity is modest, it does suggest that the
perceived ability of monetary policy to combat persistent
disinflation may be diminishing in these economies.
Inflation rates in many economies have steadily
declined toward historically low levels in recent years
(Figure 3.1). By 2015, inflation rates in more than 85
percent of a broad sample of more than 120 economies were below long-term expectations, and about
20 percent were in deflation—that is, facing a fall in
the aggregate price level for goods and services (Figure
3.2). While the recent decline in inflation coincided
with a sharp drop in oil and other commodity prices,
core inflation—which excludes the more volatile categories of food and energy prices—has remained below
central bank targets for several consecutive years in
most of the major advanced economies.
Disinflation can have multiple explanations and
is not necessarily a cause for concern. For instance, a
temporary decline in inflation due to a supply-driven
decline in energy prices can be beneficial to the overall
economy. Even when low demand is behind a temporary disinflation, its negative implications may not
The authors of this chapter are Samya Beidas-Strom, Sangyup
Choi, Davide Furceri (lead author), Bertrand Gruss, Sinem Kılıç
Çelik, Zsoka Koczan, Ksenia Koloskova, and Weicheng Lian, with
contributions from Jaebin Ahn, Elif Arbatli, Luis Catão, Juan Angel
Garcia Morales, Keiko Honjo, Benjamin Hunt, Douglas Laxton,
Niklas Westelius, and Fan Zhang, and support from Hao Jiang
and Olivia Ma. Refet Gürkaynak was the external consultant for
the chapter. Comments from Jesper Linde and Signe Krogstrup are
gratefully acknowledged.

necessarily go beyond those of depressed demand
itself. However, if persistently low inflation leads firms
and households to revise down their beliefs about the
future path of inflation, it can have negative implications. In particular, if medium-term inflation expectations drift down significantly, a deflationary cycle may
emerge in which weak demand and deflation reinforce
each other. Eventually, the economy may end up in
a deflation trap—a state of persistent deflation that
prevents the real interest rate from decreasing to the
level consistent with full employment. Moreover, even
if deflation is avoided, a persistent downward shift in
inflation to very low levels would not be desirable:
lower nominal interest rates would leave little room to
ease monetary policy if needed, the economy would
still not be far from slipping into deflation and, given
stickiness in wages, a weakening in demand would be
more likely to cause large job losses.
The risk of disinflation potentially leading to a
deflation trap or to persistently weak inflation is closely
related to whether monetary policy is perceived to
be effective in ensuring that inflation converges to its
objective once temporary effects fade. At the current
juncture, the ability of central banks to keep inflation expectations anchored could be challenged by
several factors. First, the scope of monetary policy to
further stimulate demand is perceived to be increasingly constrained in many advanced economies where
policy rates are not far from their effective lower
bounds. Second, in many countries, the weakness in
inflation to some extent reflects price developments
abroad—in particular substantial slack in tradable
goods–producing sectors in several large economies.1
Although domestic monetary policy can do little to
combat deflation pressure from abroad, its credibility
may end up undermined if weakness in import prices
combines with weak demand at home to keep inflation
1Investment in tradable goods sectors in some large economies,
notably China, grew strongly in the aftermath of the global financial
crisis, in part because of a sizable macroeconomic policy stimulus.
The increase in investment was underpinned by a path of projected global and domestic demand that subsequently fell short of
expectations, leaving several manufacturing sectors with substantial
overcapacity (see IMF 2016b).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

121

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.1. Oil Prices and Consumer Price Inﬂation

Figure 3.2. Share of Countries with Low Inﬂation

Inﬂation has steadily declined toward historically low levels in recent years, both in
advanced and emerging market economies.

A large number of countries are currently facing low inﬂation or even deﬂation.

(Percent)

(Percent)

Below zero
Below 2 percent

CPI inﬂation, median
CPI inﬂation, interquartile range
Change in oil prices (right scale)
10 1. Advanced Economies 1
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
1990
95
2000

05

10

Below 1 percent
Below target1

100
60

90

40

80

20

70

0

60

–20

50

–40

40

–60
16

30
20

2. Emerging Market Economies 2
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
1990

60
40
20
0
–20

10
0
1990

95

2000

05

10

Sources: Consensus Economics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure is based on an unbalanced sample of 120 countries.
1
Target refers to long-term inﬂation expectations from Consensus Economics
(10-year inﬂation expectations) or inﬂation forecasts from the World Economic
Outlook database (5-year inﬂation expectations).

–40
95

2000

05

10

–60
16

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CPI = consumer price index.
1 Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong SAR, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Portugal, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, United States.
2 Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey,
Venezuela.

rates persistently below target. After a long period of
stability, certain measures of medium-term inflation
expectations have indeed fallen in some advanced
economies—especially after the decline in oil prices
in 2014 (Figure 3.3).2 Against this backdrop, there is
a growing concern that further disinflationary shocks
2As measured by inflation compensation embedded in long-maturity nominal bonds or swaps.

122

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

could keep inflation persistently low and eventually
lead to deflation trap conditions.
To assess these risks and contribute to the policy debate, this chapter investigates the following
questions:
•• How widespread is the recent decline in inflation
across countries? Does the extent of the decline vary
by type of measure—headline, core, wages—and by
sector?
•• Can the weakening in commodity prices and economic slack explain recent inflation dynamics? What
is the role of other factors, including cross-border
spillovers from industrial slack in large economies?3
3Industrial slack in light and heavy industries (including commodities)—generated either by weak demand or an excess of supply
stemming from previous overinvestment—results in lower producer
prices and, in the case of traded goods, lower export prices. Several
studies point to marked overcapacity in a range of industrial sectors
(National Association of Manufacturers 2016; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2015). Estimates presented
in Box 3.1 suggest that industrial slack in the first quarter of 2016

15

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.3. Medium-Term Inﬂation Expectations and Oil Prices
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

Medium-term inﬂation expectations have fallen over the recent past, especially
since the sharp drop in oil prices in 2014.
Oil prices (year-over-year percent change, right scale)
Medium-term inﬂation expectations1
3.5 1. United States

20

3.0

10
0

2.5

–10

2.0

–20

1.5

–30

1.0

–40

0.5

–50

0.0

2013

14

15

–60
May
16

2.5 2. Euro Area

20
10

2.0

0
–10

1.5

–20
1.0

–30
–40

0.5
0.0

–50
2013

14

15

–60
May
16

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
1 Medium-term inﬂation expectations are based on ﬁve-year/ﬁve-year inﬂation
swaps.

•• Have inflation expectations become more sensitive to inflation outturns in recent years, especially
in countries where monetary policy is perceived
as being constrained? How large is the risk that
a decline in inflation will lead to lower inflation
expectations? How do monetary policy frameworks affect the degree of anchoring of inflation
expectations?
The chapter starts by discussing the potential costs
of persistently low inflation and deflation. Next, it
examines the evolution of inflation across countries
stood at about 5.5 percent in China, 5 percent in Japan, and 3
percent in the United States.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

and the factors driving it during the past decade. It
then explores the sensitivity of inflation expectations
to changes in inflation and the role of monetary policy
frameworks in affecting this sensitivity.
The key findings of the chapter suggest that
persistently below-target inflation poses downside
risks and calls for a number of policy responses.
Specifically,
•• Disinflation is a broad-based phenomenon. Inflation
has declined across many countries and regions, in
both headline and core measures, but more markedly in tradable goods sectors than in services.
•• Economic slack and changes in commodity prices
are the main drivers of lower inflation since the
Great Recession. In addition, industrial slack in
large exporters (such as Japan, the United States,
and especially China) may also have contributed to
lower inflation by putting downward pressure on
global prices of tradable goods (Box 3.1).4 However,
the recent decline in inflation goes beyond what
these factors can explain—suggesting that inflation
expectations may have dropped more than implied
by available measures or that economic slack is
greater than estimated in some countries.
•• The response of inflation expectations to inflation
surprises has been decreasing over the past couple
of decades in both advanced and emerging market
economies, partly as a result of improvements in
monetary policy frameworks. The sensitivity remains
larger among the latter, suggesting further scope for
improvements in emerging market economies.
•• However, in countries where monetary policy is constrained, inflation expectations have recently become
more responsive to oil price changes or unexpected
movements in inflation itself.
Many advanced economies with low inflation and
persistent economic slack run the risk of chronically
undershooting their inflation targets, which would
erode the credibility of monetary policy. To avoid
this risk, policymakers in these economies need to
boost demand and firm up expectations. With limited policy space, a comprehensive and coordinated
approach that exploits the complementarities among
all available tools to boost demand and that amplifies the effects of individual policy actions through
4Industrial production in China, Japan, and the United States
accounts for a significant share of total world industrial production
(about 45 percent), which is even larger than the share of these economies in global GDP (about 38 percent).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

123

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

positive cross-border spillovers would be the most
effective (Gaspar, Obstfeld, and Sahay forthcoming).
This approach should be centered on continued
monetary policy accommodation to help keep medium-term inflation expectations anchored—including
a transparent commitment to more aggressive accommodation where there are signs that expectations
are becoming unanchored.5 But monetary stimulus
should be complemented with a combination of a
more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policy, an
expansionary fiscal stance in countries with credible
medium-term fiscal frameworks and available fiscal
space, and structural reforms that stimulate consumption and investment through higher expected
incomes and profits. Income policies could be used
in countries where wages are stagnant and deflation
expectations appear entrenched (IMF 2016a). Distortionary policies that perpetuate overcapacity should
be avoided as they not only worsen resource allocation—and weaken asset quality in the banking system
where financed by credit—but also exert disinflationary pressures on other economies.
Although low inflation is a less pervasive phenomenon among emerging market economies, improving
monetary policy frameworks is also a policy priority
in many of these countries. Additional efforts to
strengthen the credibility, independence, and effectiveness of central banks would improve the degree
of anchoring of inflation expectations, enhancing the
ability to fight deflationary forces in some cases and
above-target inflation in others.

A Primer on the Costs of Disinflation,
Persistently Low Inflation, and Deflation
Like high inflation, persistently low inflation,
disinflation, and deflation can potentially have a
severe impact on an economy. Whether they entail
costs, and how large these costs are, depends on their
underlying sources, their extent and duration, and,

5Several empirical studies have documented that certain unconventional monetary policies adopted in the aftermath of the Great
Recession had significant impacts on inflation expectations or asset
prices that convey information about these. In particular, a number
of recent papers have found significant effects on break-even inflation rates (Guidolin and Neely 2010; Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011), survey-based inflation expectations (Hofmann
and Zhu 2013), and firms’ inflation expectations (Cloyne and others
2016), as well as on interest rates and asset prices (Krishnamurthy
and Vissing-Jorgensen 2011; Swanson 2016; Wright 2012; Yu 2016).

124

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

most importantly, the degree of anchoring of inflation
expectations.
Unexpected Disinflation
An unexpected decline in the inflation rate can
harm demand in an economy with high debt by
increasing the real debt burden of borrowers and the
real interest rate they face—a phenomenon called
“debt deflation”—and increase difficulties in achieving
deleveraging (see the October 2016 Fiscal Monitor).
The increase in the real burden of servicing debt
would be more severe under outright deflation. While
creditors’ wealth rises with debt deflation, they are
unlikely to increase their spending enough to offset the
macroeconomic consequences of debtors’ losses, meaning that debt deflation has a net negative effect on the
economy (Fisher 1933). The reduction in collateral
values—including house prices—that tends to accompany deflation can result in lower or negative equity,
magnifying the problem through costly defaults. Debt
deflation not only affects mortgage holders, firms, and
banks, but also governments that hold long-maturity
debt.6
Persistent Disinflation and the Deflation Trap
Persistently low inflation increases the possibility
that an adverse shock will reduce the aggregate price
level and tip the economy into a deflation trap. But
falling into this trap is far from automatic. Inflation
expectations would need to drop significantly for this
to happen.
In periods of low inflation, even small disinflationary shocks can lead to a fall in the level of prices of
goods and services. If economic agents expect prices
to continue to fall, they can become less willing to
spend—particularly on durable goods whose purchases
can be postponed—since the ex-ante real interest rate
increases and holding cash generates a positive real
yield. Consumption and investment would be deferred
farther into the future, leading to a contraction in
aggregate demand that would in turn exacerbate deflation pressures. A deflation cycle would then emerge,
with weak demand and deflation reinforcing each
other, and the economy could end up in a deflation
trap. In this context, the behavior of prices and output
6The

effect on governments is especially important in the current
environment because as debt rises, fiscal space is reduced. Persistently
weak growth in the GDP deflator, and hence in nominal GDP, worsens the interest-rate-growth differential and contributes to a higher
debt burden. See End and others (2015) for further details.

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.4. Effect of Disinﬂationary Shocks in Advanced
Economies under Constrained Monetary Policy and
Unanchored Inﬂation Expectations

(Years after the shock on x-axis)

Demand-driven deﬂationary shocks can have particularly large and persistent
negative effects if monetary policy is constrained and inﬂation expectations become
unanchored.

Core Inﬂation

GDP

Constrained monetary policy
Constrained monetary policy and unanchored inﬂation expectations
0.4
0.2

2. United States
(Percentage points)

1. United States
(Percent)

0.4
0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2

–0.2

–0.4

–0.4

–0.6

–0.6

–0.8

–0.8

–1.0

–1.0

–1.2
0
0.4
0.2

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

4. Euro Area
(Percentage points)

3. Euro Area
(Percent)

–1.2
6
0.4
0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2

–0.2

–0.4

–0.4

–0.6

–0.6

–0.8

–0.8

–1.0

–1.0

–1.2
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

5

6. Japan
(Percentage points)

0.4 5. Japan
(Percent)
0.2

–1.2
6

0.2
0.0

–0.2

–0.2

–0.4

–0.4

–0.6

–0.6

–0.8

–0.8

–1.0

–1.0
1

2

3

4

5

6

0

1

2

3

4

could become unstable if monetary policy is constrained by the effective lower bound on interest rates
(see, for instance, Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé, and Uribe
2002; Cochrane 2016).7 These difficulties are aggravated if fiscal policy cannot be readily and efficiently
deployed to stimulate demand.
The capacity of monetary authorities to maintain
medium-term inflation expectations anchored at the
target (that is, persuade agents that inflation will
eventually converge to the target once the effect of
temporary factors fades out) is critical to mitigate
such concerns. Indeed, model simulations in Annex
3.2 illustrate that even with constrained monetary
policy, an economy would escape the deflation trap
induced by a negative demand shock as long as medium-term inflation expectations were well anchored.
But if expectations drifted down, it could take a very
long time for the economy to emerge from deflation
(Figure 3.4).8
Persistently Low Inflation
An environment of subdued but positive inflation could carry significant economic costs even if
a deflation trap is avoided. A prolonged period of
below-​target inflation may lead to a belief that the
central bank is willing to accept low inflation for longer, effectively reducing inflation expectations for the
medium term to positive but below-target levels.
The main cost of this low-inflation environment is
reduced effectiveness of monetary policy. Low inflation
constrains the ability of monetary policy to respond to
depressed demand. In a severe downturn, real interest

0.4

0.0

–1.2
0

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

5

–1.2
6

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure reports the deviation of output and core inﬂation from their
baseline path after a temporary decline in domestic demand. It is assumed that
conventional monetary policy in all countries is constrained at the effective lower
bound on nominal interest rates. The alternative scenario (red line) also assumes
that inﬂation expectations are affected by inﬂation shocks in line with the empirical
evidence presented in the chapter. See Annex 3.2 for further details.

7Estimates of the probability of a situation of constrained monetary policy with unstable output and price dynamics vary substantially depending on the shocks considered. Previous studies find this
probability to be nonnegligible and as high as 5–10 percent when
inflation is around 2 percent and financial shocks similar to those
in 2007–08 are considered (Blanco 2015; Chung and others 2012;
Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Wieland 2012; Williams 2014).
While the probability associated with an episode of monetary policy
at the effective lower bound lasting several years—as in the current
juncture—is more difficult to estimate with existing models, it is
likely to be larger than previous estimates and associated with greater
economic costs.
8Many theoretical studies have examined the behavior of the
economy in a long-lasting liquidity trap in a context in which prices
are slow to move—or sticky—and have proposed distinct solutions
to escape from it (Buiter and Panigirzoglous 1999; Cochrane 2016;
Eggertsson and Woodford 2003; Svensson 2001; Werning 2012).
The solutions range from a combination of devaluation, prolonged
monetary policy accommodation, and price level targeting to more
aggressive approaches, including negative interest rates or “helicopter
money.”

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

125

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

rates (the nominal rate minus the expected inflation rate)
must decrease significantly to restore full employment and
bring output back to its potential. With normal levels of
inflation, a central bank can accomplish that by reducing
the nominal policy interest rate, but when the economy is
experiencing low inflation and nominal interest rates, the
central bank would have little room to reduce real interest
rates, even if it resorted to unconventional tools.9
A low-inflation environment may also lead to higher
unemployment in the face of adverse demand shocks.
When the demand for goods and services declines, firms
seek to reduce costs. In this context, inflation facilitates
adjustment because it pushes down real wages—even in
the presence of downward nominal wage rigidity. Real
wages would be less flexible under lower average inflation. In the context of low inflation, cost reduction by
firms is more likely to take the form of job cuts (Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry 1996; Bernanke 2002; Calvo,
Coricelli, and Ottonello 2012), because it is typically
difficult to lower costs by reducing nominal wages.10
In Sum: Slow Growth?
While the above economic costs are difficult to quantify, the Great Depression and the more recent Japanese
deflation experience (IMF 2003, Box 3.2) suggest that
prolonged weak inflation and, especially, persistent deflation may dampen medium-term growth prospects.

Inflation Dynamics: Patterns and Recent Drivers
How Widespread Is the Decline in Inflation?
The evidence points to a broad-based decline in
inflation across countries and regions as well as among
different measures of inflation, but more markedly in
manufacturing than in services. The breadth of the
decline in inflation across countries and the fact that it
is stronger in the tradable goods sectors underscore the
global nature of disinflationary forces.
Headline Inflation
Inflation was surprisingly stable during the Great
Recession (2008–10). Indeed, while previous recessions were usually associated with marked disinflation,
9Even if unconventional monetary policies such as quantitative
easing are adopted, their effects on long-term interest rates and
output are uncertain (Williams 2014).
10Bernanke and Bewley (1999) suggest that an important reason
for the reluctance of firms to cut nominal wages is their belief that
such cuts would harm workers’ morale.

126

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

inflation proved broadly resilient among advanced
economies even as unemployment rates climbed to
multidecade highs.11
However, since 2011, inflation rates began to decline
across many advanced and emerging market economies. Headline inflation—the change in the prices of a
broad range of goods and services, including food and
energy—recently reached historical lows in many countries (Figure 3.5; Box 3.3).12 Moreover, many advanced
economies—notably in the euro area—experienced outright deflation in 2015, and price declines became more
widespread in the first quarter of 2016. In many emerging market economies, headline inflation also declined
sharply following the drop in oil prices, despite large
currency depreciations in some of these economies—
even though in some of these economies inflation actually has recently increased, as evidenced by a relatively
wider interquartile range in the past year (Figure 3.5,
panels 2, 4, and 6).13 Some emerging market economies
with close links to the euro area or with exchange rates
pegged to the euro also experienced some deflation. The
evidence of a broad-based decline in headline inflation is
supported by principal component analysis (Figure 3.6).
The results of this analysis show that the contribution
of the first common factor—a proxy for the “global”
component—to the variation in headline inflation was
broadly similar before and after the Great Recession for
an entire sample of about 120 countries. However, the
contribution increased substantially (from 47 percent
to 60 percent) in advanced economies during 2009–15,
11Headline inflation did decline during the crisis, but rebounded
quickly. A number of hypotheses were put forward to explain the
resilience of inflation, or the missing disinflation—“the dog that did
not bark.” These include improved credibility of central banks, which
helped stabilize inflation outcomes by anchoring inflation expectations
(Bernanke 2010); a more muted relationship between cyclical unemployment and inflation—implying a flatter Phillips curve (Chapter 3
of the April 2013 World Economic Outlook); and increased wage rigidity
that prevented nominal wages from falling as much as during previous
recessions. In addition, low inflation contributed to holding up real
wages (Daly, Hobijn, and Lucking 2012), and the increase in commodity prices in 2011 may have partly offset the disinflationary impact of
increased cyclical unemployment (Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015).
12Box 3.3 explores the role of food price inflation and shows that in
some economies, particularly emerging market and developing economies, the global deflation pressure from tradables was mitigated by low
pass-through of international food prices to domestic headline inflation.
13In emerging market economies, headline inflation has been on a
downward trend—in part due to improved monetary policy frameworks. Globalization may have helped reduce inflation in emerging
market economies (IMF 2006) by limiting the ability of central banks
to temporarily stimulate the economy (Rogoff 2003) and increasing
the cost of imprudent macroeconomic policies through the adverse
response of international capital flows (Tytell and Wei 2004).

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.5. Consumer Price Inﬂation

Figure 3.6. Share of Consumer Price Inﬂation Variation
Explained by First Common Factor

(Percent)

Inﬂation declined substantially during the global ﬁnancial crisis in many countries
but quickly rebounded afterward. Since 2011, however, there has been a broad based slowdown in inﬂation across advanced and emerging market economies.

Median
Interquartile range

Median
Interquartile range

1. Advanced Economies1

2. Emerging Market Economies2

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0
10

16 2000

3
10 3. Euro Area

05

10

4. Emerging Asia4

–2
16
10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

–2
2000

05

10

16 2000

5. Other Advanced Economies5

05

10

–2
16

6. Other Emerging Market
Economies6

10

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0

0

–2
2000

05

10

16 2000

05

10

The share of consumer price inﬂation variation across advanced economies that
can be attributed to global factors increased during 2009–15.
2009–15

70
10

05

(Percent)

2000–08

10

–2
2000

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

–2
16

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Labels in footnotes 1–6 below use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1 AUS, AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GRC, HKG, ISL, ITA,
IRL, ISR, JPN, KOR, LVA, LTU, LUX, NLD, NOR, NZL, PRT, SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, GBR,
USA.
2 ARG, BGR, BRA, CHN, CHL, COL, DOM, ECU, EGY, HUN, IND, IDN, JOR, KAZ, MAR,
MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, VEN, ZAF.
3 AUT, BEL, DEU, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GRE, IRL, ITA, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, PRT, SVK,
SVN.
4 CHN, IDN, IND, MYS, PHL, THA.
5 AUS, CAN, CHE, CZE, DNK, GBR, ISL, ISR, JPN, KOR, NOR, NZL, SGP, SWE, USA.
6 ARG, BGR, BRA, CHL, COL, DOM, ECU, EGY, HUN, JOR, KAZ, MAR, MEX, PER, POL,
ROU, RUS, TUR, VEN, ZAF.

60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Advanced economies

Emerging market and
developing economies

Full sample

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports the share of variation in headline consumer price inﬂation
explained by the ﬁrst common factor based on a principal component analysis. The
sample comprises 120 economies, including 31 advanced economies.

likely reflecting the importance of large movements in
commodity prices for headline inflation in largely net
commodity importers and the synchronized increase in
economic slack since the Great Recession (Annex 3.3).14
Core Inflation, Wages, and Sectoral Developments
Core inflation—the change in the prices of goods
and services excluding food and energy—has also
declined widely across countries and regions (Figure
3.7). This measure, which captures the underlying
trend in inflation better than headline inflation, has
recently been higher than headline inflation given the
sharp decline in energy prices. However, core inflation
has declined in all advanced economies to rates below
central banks’ targets and, since 2016, it has also done
so in several emerging market economies.
14Additional analyses using Bayesian modeling average and weighted
least squares confirm that commodity prices stand out among several
variables as being strongly linked with the first common factor.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

127

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.7. Core Consumer Price Inﬂation
(Percent)

The decline in core inﬂation over the past few years was broad based across
regions.
Median
Interquartile range

Median
Interquartile range
10 1. Advanced Economies 1

2. Emerging Market
Economies2

10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0
2000

04

08

12

16 2000

04

08

12

4. Emerging Asia 4

10 3. Euro Area 3

0
16
10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0
2000
10

04

08

12

16 2000

5. Other Advanced Economies 5

04

08

12

6. Other Emerging Market
Economies6

0
16
10

8

8

6

6

4

4

2

2

0
2000

04

08

12

16 2000

04

08

12

0
16

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Labels in footnotes 1–6 below use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.
1 AUS, AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GRC, HKG, ISL, ITA,
IRL, ISR, JPN, KOR, LVA, LTU, LUX, NLD, NOR, NZL, PRT, SGP, SVK, SVN, SWE, GBR,
USA.
2 ARG, BGR, BRA, CHN, CHL, COL, DOM, ECU, EGY, HUN, IND, IDN, JOR, KAZ, MAR,
MEX, MYS, PER, PHL, POL, ROU, RUS, THA, TUR, VEN, ZAF.
3 AUT, BEL, DEU, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GRE, IRL, ITA, LTU, LUX, LVA, NLD, PRT, SVK,
SVN.
4 CHN, IDN, IND, MYS, PHL, THA.
5 AUS, CAN, CHE, CZE, DNK, GBR, ISL, ISR, JPN, KOR, NOR, NZL, SGP, SWE, USA.
6 ARG, BGR, BRA, CHL, COL, DOM, ECU, EGY, HUN, JOR, KAZ, MAR, MEX, PER, POL,
ROU, RUS, TUR, VEN, ZAF.

128

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Wage growth has been increasing recently but
remains subdued in many advanced economies despite
some improvements in labor markets (Figure 3.8).
One reason for the muted behavior, suggested by Daly
and Hobijn (2015) for the United States, may be that
many firms were unable to reduce wages enough to
avoid job cuts during the 2008–09 recession, but as
they resumed hiring thereafter, employers were able
to keep a lid on wage gains to effectively work off
“pent-up wage cuts.” The cyclical slack in labor market
participation rates may also have kept wages in check
during the postrecession recovery.
Sectoral developments in producer prices in advanced
economies show that, although inflation has recently
softened in all sectors, the decline has been larger in
manufacturing producer prices—a typical proxy for
the price of tradable goods (Figure 3.9).15 This may
reflect a larger effect of lower commodity prices and
lower import prices in manufacturing—given the larger
commodity and imported input content in this sector
(Box 3.4)—but, for some large advanced and emerging
market economies, it is also associated with an increase
in excess manufacturing capacity (Box 3.1).
While distinguishing tradable from nontradable
components in consumer price indices is challenging,
the comparison of inflation across expenditure categories
provides supportive evidence that the recent decline in
inflation in advanced economies has been substantially
stronger in tradable goods (Figure 3.10). On average,
the decline in goods inflation has been steeper than in
the case of services. Indeed, there has been a widespread
decline in the average price level of nonfood goods across
advanced economies over the past two years. Instead, food
price inflation has slowed but remains generally positive
despite the decline in international food prices over the
same period—suggesting a rather low pass-through from
international to domestic food prices (Box 3.3).

Explaining the Recent Decline in Inflation
To what extent can declines in oil and other commodity prices and economic slack explain recent inflation
patterns? How important is the cross-border transmission
15Producer price inflation for manufactured goods has, on average,
been lower than total producer price inflation during 1990–2016,
while business services inflation has been higher (IMF 2006).
Together, manufacturing, business services, and utilities services
account for about 70 percent of a typical advanced economy in the
sample. The other sectors are agriculture, mining, construction, and
social and personal services (including government).

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Figure 3.8. Wage Inﬂation in Advanced Economies

Figure 3.9. Sectoral Producer Prices in Advanced Economies

Despite improvements in labor markets, wage growth remains subdued in many
advanced economies.

While producer price inﬂation in advanced economies has slowed across sectors,
the slowdown has been particularly sharp for manufacturing industries.

(Percent change)

(Year-over-year percent change of nominal wages)

Median

Interquartile range

All commodity prices1 (right scale)
Oil prices (right scale)

PPI (median)
PPI (interquartile)

1. Advanced Economies 1

10

10 1. Manufacturing PPI

8

100

6

8

80

4

6

60

2

4

40

0

2

20

–2

0

0

–4

–2

–20

–4

–40

–6

2000

16

02

04

06

08

10

12

14 15

–6
2000

8

4

6

0

4

–4

2

–8

0

–12

–2
2000

02

04

06

08

10

12

14 15

–60
15

12

–4
–6
2000

03

06

09

12

15

3. Other Advanced Economies 3

8

Sources: Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, Structural Analysis Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample includes Australia, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Norway, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. PPI = producer price index.
1 Price index using weights based on 2002–04 average world export earnings.
2 Services comprise wholesale and retail trade; hotels and restaurants;
transportation, storage, and communications; and ﬁnance, insurance, real estate,
and business services.

6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6

09

10 2. Services PPI 2

8

10

06

2. Euro Area 2

12

–16

03

2000

02

04

06

08

10

12

14 15

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
1 Australia, Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States.
2 Austria, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain.
3 Australia, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Israel, Japan, Sweden, United
Kingdom, United States.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

129

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

of deflation pressure from industrial slack in large economies? How large is the portion of disinflation that cannot
be attributed to these factors? To answer these questions,
an econometric analysis is performed to assess the contribution of various factors to recent inflation developments.
The empirical framework follows the approach of IMF
(2013) and Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015),
building on the hybrid New Keynesian Phillips Curve of
Fuhrer (1995) and Galí and Gertler (1999). Specifically,
the following version of the Phillips curve is estimated:16
​​π​  t​​  = ​γ​  t​​ ​​​π​ te + h​ + ​(​​1

- ​γ​ t​​ ​​)​​ ​π​​   ​​t̃ - 1​​  +

θ​ t​​​ ​u​  ct​  ​ 

+

​μ​t​​ ​π​  m
t​  ​ + ​ε​  t,​​​	

Figure 3.10. Sectoral Consumer Prices in Advanced Economies
(Percent change)

Consumer price inﬂation declined more for goods than for services, with deﬂation
for nonfood goods in most advanced economies.
Median

Interquartile range

8 1. Food
6
4

(3.1)

2

in which ​​π​  t​​​is headline consumer price inflation; ​​​
π​  te + h​​​ ​is inflation expectations h years in the future
(with 10-year-ahead expectations used in the baseline
specification); ​​ ​π ​​̃ t ​​  - 1​​​​is the moving average of inflation
over the previous four quarters, to allow for inflation
persistence;​​​ u​  ct​  ​is cyclical unemployment—that is, the
deviation of the unemployment rate from its level
consistent with stable inflation (the nonaccelerating
inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU); ​​π​ m
t​  ​​ is
inflation in the relative price of imports—defined as
the import-price deflator relative to the GDP deflator—to account for the impact of import prices,
including commodity prices, on domestic consumer
prices; and ​​ε​  t​​​captures the impact of other factors, such
as fluctuations in inflation driven by temporary supply
shocks, or measurement error in other variables in the
specification—particularly in unobservable variables,
such as inflation expectations and cyclical unemployment.17 The coefficient ​γ​captures the degree to which
inflation is driven by long-term inflation expectations
as opposed to lagged inflation; ​θ​denotes the strength
of the relationship between cyclical unemployment and

0
–2
–4
–6
2000

03

06

09

12

16

06

09

12

16

12

16

8 2. Other Goods
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
2000
8

03
3. Services

Services excluding housing

6
4
2
0
–2

16There is a vast literature on the ability of alternative Phillips curve specifications to fit the data, particularly for advanced
economies (see, for instance, Ball and Mazumder 2011; Fuhrer
1995; Stock and Watson 2007). The specification used here aims for
sufficient versatility to accommodate a large sample of heterogeneous
economies over a long period.
17Some studies use core inflation, producer price inflation, or
GDP deflator inflation when estimating a Phillips curve. However,
because for many countries measures of expectations are available
only for consumer price inflation, which also tends to be the focus
of central bank targets, equation (3.1) is estimated for consumer
price inflation. The expectation term in the equation should ideally
capture the expectations of firms that set prices for consumer goods
and services. Since firms’ inflation forecasts are not widely available,
the analysis uses long-term inflation projections—at a 10-year
horizon—from professional forecasters reported by Consensus Economics (Annex 3.4 discusses the choice of forecast horizon and the
robustness of results to using different measures).

130

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

–4
–6
2000

03

06

09

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: “Food” comprises food and beverages. “Other goods” comprises fuels,
purchases of vehicles, and all categories under the following expenditure groups:
clothing and footwear; electricity, gas, and other fuels; and furnishings, household
equipment, and routine maintenance. All other consumer price categories are in
“Services.” Country sample includes Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and
the United States.

CHAPTER 3

inflation—the slope of the Phillips curve; and ​μ​ is the
effect of relative import prices on inflation.
The estimation allows for time variation in all the
parameters to capture possible changes in the structure
of each economy.18 The model is estimated for each
advanced and emerging market economy for which
data are available, yielding estimates for a set of 44
countries from the first quarter of 1990 to the first
quarter of 2016. The estimates are then used to assess
the contribution of labor market slack and import
prices to recent inflation dynamics in each country.19
Before turning to examine which factors have contributed to the recent decline in inflation, it is useful
to assess whether the parameters of the Phillips curve
have changed over time. The results suggest that the
parameters are broadly stable and, in particular, there is
no strong evidence that the slope of the Phillips curve
has declined since the mid-1990s (Figure 3.11).20 A
notable exception, particularly for advanced economies,
is the degree to which inflation is driven by long-term
inflation expectations as opposed to past inflation.
The estimated coefficient on expected inflation (​​γ​)​​​​
steadily increased up to the Great Recession but has
been declining since then and now stands at levels
comparable to those in the early 1990s (about 0.6).21
The consequent increase in the coefficient on lagged
inflation (​​1 - γ​)​​​​implies that inflation has become more
backward looking. This implies that the effect of cyclical unemployment and import prices on inflation has
become more persistent in the recent period.
Despite some heterogeneity across countries, the
results of the country-by-country decompositions
show that unemployment slack and weaker import
prices are, on average, the most important factors in
explaining deviations of inflation from inflation targets
in advanced economies since the Great Recession
(Figure 3.12). Instead, changes in long-term inflation
18For example, improvements in the conduct of monetary policy
and structural factors—such as globalization and changes in rigidities
in product and labor markets—may have affected the sensitivity of
inflation to fluctuations in domestic production (April 2006 World
Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, and references therein; Rogoff 2003).
19The decomposition of inflation dynamics is conducted in a
manner similar to that in Yellen (2015). See Annex 3.4 for details.
20This finding is in line with that of the April 2013 World Economic
Outlook, Chapter 3, and Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015),
which document that the flattening of the Phillips curve from the
1960s to the 2000s was largely completed by the mid-1990s.
21The finding that the parameter increased during the 1990s is
consistent with earlier research, including IMF (2013). That study
also finds that the link between current and past inflation started to
strengthen since the Great Recession.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

expectations (as measured by 10-year-ahead expectations by professional forecasters) have played a limited
role—although repeating the exercise with expectations
at shorter horizons suggests a larger contribution from
inflation expectations (see Annex 3.4).
Although parameters are allowed to vary over
time—therefore capturing possible nonlinearities
(Swamy and Mehta 1975)—the model residuals
(“others” in Figure 3.12) have increasingly contributed
to the decline in inflation over the past few years. This
could reflect a host of factors, including measurement
errors in some of the explanatory variables. In particular, expectations of actual price setters may have
dropped more than those of professional forecasters
(Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2015). Also, underestimation of the extent of unemployment slack could be
reflected in larger residuals.22
As an aside, the results also suggest that the reason
inflation in advanced economies did not fall more
between 2008 and 2012 is that the positive effect on
inflation of import prices, notably oil prices, partly offset the disinflationary effect stemming from high labor
market slack.23 Accordingly, as import prices started to
fall in 2012, inflation began to weaken and undershoot
targets.
The decomposition for emerging market economies
shows significant heterogeneity. In countries where
inflation has recently fallen below long-term inflation
expectations, labor market slack, import prices, and,
to a lesser extent, currency appreciations explain, on
average, the bulk of the recent decline (Figure 3.13,
panel 1). In contrast, currency depreciations—notably
in commodity exporters—contributed to the increase
in inflation in those emerging market economies with
inflation currently above long-term expectations. The
model residuals over the recent years are particularly
large in these economies (Figure 3.13, panel 2), possibly reflecting greater measurement error on inflation expectations as well as changes in administered
prices in some cases.24 Similar to the case of advanced
economies, the roles played by these factors vary across
countries (Figure 3.13, panels 3 and 4).
22The exercise reported in Annex 3.4 shows that the results are typically robust to using alternative measures of cyclical unemployment but
somewhat sensitive to using inflation expectations at different horizons.
23Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015) and Yellen (2015) find
similar results for the United States.
24Indeed, robustness exercises in Annex 3.4 show that the residuals
vary considerably across different measures of inflation expectations
and are much smaller when using inflation expectations at shorter
horizons.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

131

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.11. Estimated Phillips Curve Parameters

Figure 3.12. Contribution to Inﬂation Deviations from Targets:
Advanced Economies

Estimation results suggest that the degree of anchoring of inﬂation to long-term
expectations increased in the 1990s and early 2000s but declined more recently
toward the level attained in the early 1990s. Other parameters, including the slope
of the Phillips curve, have been broadly stable.

(Percent)

Advanced Economies

Emerging Market Economies
Median
Interquartile range

Median
Interquartile range

2.0 1. 2000–15 Cross-Country Average

Inﬂation Expectations (γ)
1.0 1.

2.

Cyclical unemployment and weaker import prices can account for the bulk of the
deviation of inﬂation from targets in advanced economies since the global ﬁnancial
crisis, but other unexplained factors have been playing an increasingly larger role
more recently.

1.5

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

1.0
0.5

Inﬂation expectation minus
target1
Exchange rate2
Others

Relative inﬂation of import price
in U.S. dollars
Cyclical unemployment
Inﬂation minus target1

0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
–2.0

2000–07

08–12

13

14

15

Others

Inﬂation
expectation
minus target1

2. 2015 Cross-Country Distribution

0.0
1990 94

98 2002 06

10 13 16: 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12
Q1

0.0
15:
Q4

3.

4.

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0
1990 94

98 2002 06

10 13 16: 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12
Q1

0.0
15:
Q4

Relative Import Price Inﬂation (μ)
6.

0.14 5.

0.14

0.12

0.12

0.10

0.10

0.08

0.08

0.06

0.06

0.04

0.04

0.02

0.02

0.00
1990 94 98 2002 06 10 13 16: 2000 02 04 06 08 10 12
Q1

0.00
15:
Q4

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sample is deﬁned in Annex Table 3.1.1. Venezuela is excluded because
of missing data.

132

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Mean

Median

0.0

Cyclical Unemployment (θ)
1.6

0.5

–0.5
–1.0
–1.5

Cyclical
Relative import
unemploy- price inﬂation
ment
in U.S. dollars

Exchange
rate2

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines in panel 2 denote interquartile ranges. The sample is deﬁned in
Annex Table 3.1.1. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia are
excluded as outliers.
1 Target refers to the average of long-term inﬂation expectations in 2000–07, which
are from Consensus Economics (10-year inﬂation expectations) or World Economic
Outlook inﬂation forecasts (5-year inﬂation expectations).
2 Exchange rate is deﬁned as currency value per U.S. dollar.

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.13. Contribution to Inﬂation Deviations from Targets:
Emerging Market Economies
Economic slack and weak import prices also account for a large share of the
observed disinﬂation in emerging market economies with inﬂation below long-term
inﬂation expectations over the recent past. In contrast, exchange rate depreciations
and other unexplained factors played a key role in emerging market economies in
which inﬂation has been above long-term expectations.

2000–15 Cross-Country Average
Inﬂation expectation minus target1
Exchange rate2
Others
8
6

1. Countries with inﬂation
below long-term
expectations in 2015 3

Relative inﬂation of import price in
U.S. dollars
Cyclical unemployment
Inﬂation minus target1
2. Countries with inﬂation
above long-term
expectations in 2015 4

8
6

4

4

2

2

0

0

–2

–2

–4

–4

–6
2000–07
13
08–12

14

15

2000–07
13
08–12

14

15

–6

2015 Cross-Country Distribution
Mean
8 3. Countries with inﬂation
below long-term expectations
6
in 20153

Median
4. Countries with inﬂation
8
above long-term expectations
6
in 20154

Inﬂation expectation
minus target1

–4

Others

–4

Exchange rate2

–2

Relative import price
inﬂation in U.S. dollars

–2

Cyclical unemployment

0

Inﬂation expectation
minus target1

0

Others

2

Exchange rate2

2

Relative import price
inﬂation in U.S. dollars

4

Cyclical unemployment

4

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines in panels 3 and 4 denote interquartile ranges. The sample is
deﬁned in Annex Table 3.1.1. Venezuela is excluded because of missing data.
Ukraine is excluded as an outlier.
1 Target refers to the average of long-term inﬂation expectations in 2000–07, which
are from Consensus Economics (10-year inﬂation expectations) or World Economic
Outlook inﬂation forecasts (5-year inﬂation expectations).
2 Exchange rate is deﬁned as currency value per U.S. dollar.
3 Bulgaria, China, Hungary, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Thailand.
4 Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, India, Indonesia, Peru, Russia, Turkey.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Given the important role played by import prices, the
rising slack in tradables sectors in large economies and
systemic trading partners (such as China, Japan, and the
United States; Box 3.1) raises an interesting question:
are spillovers from industrial slack in large economies an
important factor in the decline in import prices and inflation?25 Further analysis provides suggestive evidence that
this may be the case. In many advanced and emerging
market economies, the contribution of import prices to
inflation over time is correlated with manufacturing slack
in China, Japan, and the United States. The average correlation with manufacturing slack in all three countries is
important, but is particularly strong in the case of China
(Figure 3.14, panel 1; Annex Figure 3.4.3).26,27
Causal relationships cannot be inferred from this simple exercise, as many factors could drive manufacturing
slack in each of these large economies (including weak
demand elsewhere) or be associated with it (for instance,
lower international oil prices) and could therefore bias the
results. Indeed, the conditional correlation between manufacturing slack and the contribution of import prices to
inflation is significantly lower when other global variables—such as oil prices and global demand conditions—
are also taken into account (Figure 3.14, panel 2; Annex
Figures 3.4.3 and 3.4.4). Nonetheless, the correlation
with manufacturing slack in China remains significant
and economically meaningful: the recent widening in
manufacturing slack of about 5 percentage points would
be associated, on average, with a decline in inflation in
advanced and emerging market economies of about 0.2
percentage point—down from 0.5 percentage point when
the estimation does not control for global conditions.28
25A single country can take the price of its imports as given, but
the world as a whole does not have import prices. Changes in import
prices depend on the degree of excess supply or excess demand in
globally integrated markets for tradable goods and services.
26The impact of industrial slack cannot be directly tested in the
empirical framework because reliable estimates for it are available only
from the mid-2000s (as discussed in Box 3.1). To avoid shortening the
Phillips curve estimation period, the analysis instead regresses, country
by country, the contribution of import prices on measures of industrial
slack in China, Japan, and the United States. See Annex 3.4 for details
on the estimation framework as well as robustness checks.
27The association between import price contributions and China’s
manufacturing slack appears to be stronger for advanced economies
than emerging market economies (see Annex Figure 3.4.3).
28The correlation of the contribution of import prices to inflation
and manufacturing slack in China is negative for 84 percent of the
sample, and additional results from panel regressions confirm the
statistical significance of this result (see Annex 3.4). Further analysis
finds that this correlation is higher in countries with stronger trade
links with China, providing additional evidence of direct spillover
effects through tradable goods. However, slack in China could exert
disinflationary pressure on the price of domestic tradable goods

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

133

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUbDUED DEMaND—SyMpTOMS aND REMEDIES

Figure 3.14. Correlation of Manufacturing Slack in China,
Japan, and the United States with Import Price Contribution to
Inﬂation in Other Economies

(Percentage points)

Subdued inﬂation across a large number of countries is associated with
manufacturing slack in Japan, the United States, and especially China.
Mean
0.05

Median

1. Bivariate Correlations

0.00
–0.05
–0.10
–0.15
–0.20

China slack1

Japan slack1

United States slack1

0.05 2. China Manufacturing Slack—Robustness Exercises
0.00
–0.05

How Well Anchored Are Inflation Expectations?
The previous results suggest that economic slack
and the sharp drop in the global price of tradable
goods explain a large fraction of the undershooting of
inflation targets observed in many countries over the
past few years. The contribution of long-term inflation
expectations to recent inflation dynamics has been
much smaller—although the results are somewhat
sensitive to the inflation expectations horizon. But if
inflation expectations drift down substantially even as
a result of temporary shocks, this would lead to a protracted period of disinflation—especially in the context
of constrained monetary policy.29
Therefore, a key question in the current juncture
is how well anchored inflation expectations are. In
particular, is there evidence that recent inflation developments are affecting inflation expectations? To explore
that question, the analysis investigates the sensitivity
of inflation expectations to changes in actual inflation,
examines the role of monetary policy frameworks in
influencing this sensitivity, and assesses whether this
sensitivity has increased in countries with policy rates
at, or close to, their lower bound.

–0.10

Measuring Inflation Expectations

–0.15

In sum, while an accounting of the drivers of
global manufacturing slack is beyond the scope of
this chapter, these findings suggest that manufacturing slack in large economies may add deflation
pressure in other economies.

The link between inflation and economic activity
stems in part from the pricing decisions of firms and
their beliefs about future macroeconomic outcomes.
Because firms’ inflation expectations are not generally known, they are approximated by: (1) surveys of
inflation expectations of professional forecasters or
households and (2) market-based measures of inflation
expectations, such as estimates of inflation compensation embedded in the returns of financial instruments.
Survey-based and market-based measures of inflation
expectations measure somewhat different concepts and
have different statistical properties. Surveys collect one
measure of central tendency—the mean, median, or
mode—of the believed distribution of individual professional forecasters or households, and different individuals may report a different measure of their believed
distribution. It is customary to use the median of this
distribution of individual responses as a summary statistic
of survey-based expectations to reduce the distortionary

in other countries—when these prices are set in global markets—beyond what is captured through import prices. Indeed, the
correlation of model residuals with manufacturing slack in China is
statistically significant.

29See Annex 3.2 for simulations on the effect of temporarily
subdued import prices—stemming from a decline in oil prices and
industrial slack in a key large economy—under constrained monetary policy and unanchored inflation expectations.

–0.20

China slack1

China slack2

China slack3

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines denote interquartile ranges. The ﬁgure shows the means,
medians, and interquartile ranges of coefﬁcients of manufacturing slack from
country-speciﬁc regressions. See Annex 3.4 for the regression speciﬁcations.
1 No controls.
2 Controlling for manufacturing slack in the other two economies, change in oil
prices, and global output gap.
3 Controlling for global output gap and change in oil prices in current and previous
four quarters.

134

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 3

effect of outliers. The dispersion of expectations in the
survey is a measure of heterogeneity of beliefs rather than
a measure of uncertainty—although these tend to move
together (Gürkaynak and Wolfers 2007). Survey-based
measures of professional forecasters’ inflation expectations
(such as those from Consensus Economics) are available at
different horizons for a large set of countries while surveys
on the expectations of households (such as the University
of Michigan survey for the United States) are available
only for a few advanced economies.
Market-based measures of inflation expectations can
be extracted from inflation compensation embedded in
long-maturity inflation-linked and nominal bonds or
from inflation-linked swaps.30 The break-even inflation
rate measured by the yield spread between conventional bonds and comparable inflation-linked bonds
provides an estimate of the level of expected inflation
at which a (risk-neutral) investor would be indifferent
between holding either type of bond. It is widely used
as a timely measure of investors’ inflation expectations,
although it is effectively based on the pricing of the
marginal investor and includes a liquidity premium
and an inflation risk premium.31
It is thus not surprising to observe differences in
the behavior of survey- and market-based measures
over time, including during the most recent period of
30Inflation-linked bonds are now issued in more than 20 countries. In addition to the United Kingdom, the United States, and
four large euro area countries, these countries include Brazil, South
Africa, Korea, and Turkey. For a historical overview of international
inflation-linked bond markets, see Garcia and van Rixtel (2007) and
references therein. Inflation-linked swaps are derivatives through
which one party pays a fixed rate of inflation in exchange for actual
inflation over the length of the contract. The rate of inflation quoted
as the fixed leg of the swap can be used to provide an alternative
measure of inflation compensation. Inflation-linked swaps are less
prone to incorporate a liquidity premium than inflation-linked
and nominal bonds because the swaps do not require an upfront
payment and are settled by the net exchanges of flows at the end of
the contract.
31The liquidity premium may arise from factors unrelated to
inflation expectations, such as trading frictions or insufficient market
activity and could be gauged by looking at relative trade volumes or
asset-swap spreads (see, for example, Celasun, Mihet, and Ratnovski
2012; Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright 2010). The inflation risk
premium captures markets’ pricing of risk surrounding inflation
expectations and is much more difficult to estimate than the liquidity premium. Estimates of the inflation risk premium are typically
taken from term-structure models. But, even for a single country,
estimates vary significantly over time, across maturities, and across
specifications, which makes the interpretation of changes in inflation
compensation far from straightforward. For term-structure models
applied to the United States, see, for example, Abrahams and others
(2012); Christensen, Lopez, and Rudebusch (2010); and D’Amico,
Kim, and Wei (2014). For the euro area, see, for example, Garcia
and Werner (2014).

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

disinflation. Inflation expectations from professional
forecasters for horizons of up to three years vary over
time, but expectations for horizons of five years or
more are remarkably stable. Households’ expectations
are also highly stable over longer horizons. In contrast,
historical market-based measures of inflation expectations exhibit more variation over time.
Turning to the most recent period, medium-term
market-based expectations (five years or more) in
the United States and the euro area have fallen by
about 0.9 percentage point and 0.8 percentage point,
respectively, since 2009—and by about 0.6 percentage
point and 0.5 percentage point, respectively, since the
sharp drop in oil prices in 2014—and are now significantly below their historical averages and survey-based
measures (Figure 3.15, panels 1 and 2). Survey-based
inflation expectations have instead declined by much
less—about 0.15 percentage point on average since
2009.32 But, although survey-based medium-term
expectations have remained near central banks’ targets
since the Great Recession, the deviations of inflation
expectations from targets in key advanced economies
after the crisis have become large even at relatively long
horizons such as three years—while under well-anchored inflation expectations these deviations should
be zero (Figure 3.15, panels 3 and 4).33

Empirical Analysis
The sensitivity of inflation expectations is estimated
empirically in a framework that relates changes in
inflation expectations to inflation surprises. In particular, the following equation is estimated:
​​∆ π​  et+h
 ​ = ​
​ β​  ht​  ​ ​π​  news
t​  ​ + ​ϵ​  t+h​​,​

(3.2)

 ​​​ denotes the first difference in expecin which ​​∆ π​  et+h
tations of inflation h years in the future, and ​​π​ news
t​  ​​
32Although the expectations of professional forecasters and households have barely declined since the precrisis period, the skew of the
distributions has changed. Evidence for the United States suggests
that for both of those measures, the share of respondents expecting
1–2 percent inflation has increased, while most of the declines reflect
a reduction in expectations for above-target inflation. Inflation
expectations based on professional forecasts show a marked reduction
in the upper tail, whereas those based on household forecasts point
to a reduction in uncertainty.
33Empirical evidence for the United States and the euro area
suggests that three-year-ahead inflation expectations were not
statistically different from inflation targets during the precrisis period
but were statistically significantly lower in 2009–15. The analysis
controls for the magnitude of inflation shocks in the two periods.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

135

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.15. Survey- and Market-Based Inﬂation Expectations

0.1

is a measure of inflation shocks.34 The coefficient ​​β​​  h​​
captures the degree of anchoring in ​h​-years-ahead
inflation expectations—a term usually referred to as
“shock anchoring” (Ball and Mazumder 2011)—and
it is allowed to vary over time in some specifications. If monetary policy is credible, the value of
this parameter at a sufficiently long horizon should
be close to zero. That is, inflation shocks should
not lead to changes in medium-term expectations if
agents believe that the central bank is able to counteract any short-term developments to bring inflation
back to the target over the medium term. Given
uncertainty about the relevant horizon for firms’
pricing decisions and in light of the previous results,
the exercise is performed using inflation expectations
at various horizons.
The model is estimated for each advanced and
emerging market economy for which data are available,
which produces estimates for 44 countries from the
first quarter of 1990 to the first quarter of 2016. The
specification allows for the parameter ​​β​​  h​​to vary over
time to capture changes in the sensitivity of inflation
expectations due, for instance, to changes in monetary policy frameworks. The analysis is performed for
survey-based inflation expectations using data available
at quarterly frequency and for market-based inflation
expectations using data available at daily frequency.

0.0

0.0

Results—Survey-Based Inflation Expectations

–0.1

–0.1

–0.2

–0.2

–0.3

–0.3

(Percent)

Medium-term market-based inﬂation expectations have decreased substantially in
the United States and the euro area recently. Survey-based inﬂation expectations
fell by much less, but they have deviated signiﬁcantly from inﬂation targets even
at a three-year horizon.

Survey- and Market-Based Inﬂation Expectations
Market based
3.5 1. United States

Survey based
2. Euro Area

3.5

3.0

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.0

2.0

1.5
2005 07

09

11

13

16: 2005 07
Q1

09

11

1.5
16:
Q1

13

Deviations of Inﬂation Expectations at Various Horizons
from Inﬂation Targets
2000–07

4. Euro Area

0.1 3. United States

–0.4

1

2
3
Years ahead

2009–15

5

1

2
3
Years ahead

5

–0.4

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Survey-based inﬂation expectations in panels 1 and 2 correspond to 5-yearahead inﬂation forecasts from Consensus Economics; market-based expectations
are based on 5-year/5-year inﬂation swaps. Panels 3 and 4 show the estimated
constant in a regression of deviations of survey-based inﬂation expectation at
different horizons from the inﬂation target (proxied by 10-year-ahead inﬂation
expectation) on deviations from target of actual annualized quarterly inﬂation.
Estimated coefﬁcients are set to zero if they are not signiﬁcant at the 5 percent
conﬁdence level. Euro area forecasts correspond to the GDP-weighted average of
the forecasts for France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain.

136

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

The analysis starts by using a static framework—that
is, ​​β​​  h​​is assumed constant over time—to explore how
the sensitivity of survey-based inflation expectations
varies across countries and how this is related to
characteristics of monetary policy frameworks.35 The
34Inflation

shocks are defined as the quarterly difference between
actual inflation and short-term expectations for the analysis based on
survey forecast–based measures of inflation expectations and as the
daily change in oil price futures for the analysis using market-based
expectations. The quarterly forecast error is used as a baseline
measure of inflation shocks for the analysis based on survey-based
measures of inflation expectations because it is less subject to reverse
causality than other measures, such as changes in inflation or deviations of inflation from target. The results using these two alternative measures are, however, not statistically significantly different.
Measures of inflation surprises are not available at daily frequency,
so changes in oil price futures are used as proxies for inflation shocks
for the analysis based on market-based expectations. While the scope
of this measure is clearly narrower, inflation expectations have been
shown to be strongly related to oil price developments (see Coibion
and Gorodnichenko 2015).
35This part of the analysis is carried out using a static framework
since data for several characteristics of monetary policy frameworks,
such as transparency and independence, are available only for a

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.16. Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to Inﬂation
Surprises
(Years on x-axis)

Inﬂation expectations are less sensitive to inﬂation surprises in advanced
economies than in emerging market economies.
Median

Interquartile range

Median

0.5 1. Advanced Economies

Interquartile range

2. Emerging Market
Economies

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0
1

2
3
Years ahead

5+

1

2
3
Years ahead

0.0
5+

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the response of inﬂation expectations at various horizons to
a 1 percentage point unexpected increase in inﬂation based on coefﬁcients from
country-speciﬁc static regressions. The sensitivity for 5+ years corresponds to the
average of estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead inﬂation expectations.

estimates show that the sensitivity of inflation expectations is significantly lower in advanced economies than
in emerging market economies (Figure 3.16). This is
particularly true for inflation expectations at short-term
horizons—for example, a 1 percentage point increase
in inflation results in a 0.25 percentage point increase
in inflation expectations one year ahead for advanced
economies, whereas this increase is 0.37 percentage
point for emerging market economies. The difference
in sensitivity is present, albeit to a lesser degree, even
at longer horizons—a 1 percentage point increase in
inflation leads to an increase of 0.05 percentage point
in three-year-ahead inflation expectations in advanced
few points in time. The sensitivity of inflation expectations for the
survey-based forecast is normalized to measure how much inflation
expectations are updated in response to a 1 percentage point change
in inflation. See Annex 3.5 for details on the estimation and the
computation of inflation shocks.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

economies, and of 0.13 percentage point in emerging
market economies.
The average lower sensitivity of inflation expectations to inflation shocks in advanced economies points
to the credibility of monetary policy frameworks as a
possible determinant of the cross-country heterogeneity. An exploration of the differences in estimated
sensitivities shows that they are related to measures of
central bank independence and transparency—two key
areas of central bank governance that have improved
dramatically over the past few decades and are positively associated with monetary policy performance
(Crowe and Meade 2007).
Medium-term inflation expectations—that is,
inflation expectations at three years and at five or more
years—are typically better anchored in countries where
the central bank is more independent. On average, a 1
unit increase in an index based on the turnover of the
central bank’s governor—a de facto measure of central
bank independence, with higher values associated with
a lower degree of independence—is associated with an
increase of about 0.3 unit in the sensitivity of inflation
expectations (Figure 3.17, panels 1 and 2).36 This suggests that if a country moves from the 25th percentile
to the 75th percentile in terms of turnover—which is
similar to the average gap in this independence indicator between the United States and Indonesia in the
past 20 years—the sensitivity will increase by 0.03, a
nontrivial change considering that the median sensitivity across countries is 0.08.
Analogously, the sensitivity of medium-term inflation expectations to inflation surprises is lower the
more transparent the central bank is about its objectives and policy decisions. The results show that, on
average, a 1 unit increase in an index of central bank
transparency is associated with a 0.16 unit decrease in
the sensitivity of three-year-ahead inflation expectations (Figure 3.17, panels 3 and 4).37 The magnitude
36The central bank governor’s term in office shortens relative to
that of the executive as turnover increases, making the governor
more vulnerable to political interference from the government and
reducing the degree of independence of the central bank. Cukierman, Webb, and Neyapti (1992) find that the link between central
bank independence and inflation outcomes is stronger when using
the de facto measure based on governor turnover than in the case of
de jure metrics based on legal measures. Therefore, the analysis uses
the governor turnover index from Crowe and Meade (2007), which
extended Cukierman, Webb, and Neyapti’s (1992) index up to 2004
and includes a large number of emerging market and developing
economies.
37The central bank transparency index is taken from Crowe and
Meade (2007) and corresponds to 1998.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

137

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.18. Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to Inﬂation
Surprises before and after Adoption of Inﬂation Targeting

Medium- and long-term inﬂation expectations are less sensitive to inﬂation
surprises in countries with more independent and transparent central banks.

Inﬂation targeting is associated with lower sensitivity of medium- and long-term
inﬂation expectations to inﬂation surprises.

0.40 1. Three Years Ahead

2. 5+ Years Ahead

0.40

0.35

y = 0.09x + 0.04
R 2 = 0.05
y = 0.05x + 0.02
R 2 = 0.08

0.35

0.20

0.15
y = 0.24x + 0.04
R 2 = 0.13

0.10
0.05
0.00
0.0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Central bank turnover

0.40 3. Three Years Ahead
0.35

y = –0.14x + 0.16
R 2 = 0.15

0.30

Sensitivity

0.25
0.20

0.15

0.25
0.20

0.10
0.05
1.0 0.0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Central bank turnorver
4. 5+ Years Ahead
y = –0.16x + 0.15
R 2 = 0.23
y = –0.12x + 0.11
R 2 = 0.40

y = –0.17x + 0.18
R 2 = 0.14

0.15

0.7

0.30

Sensitivity

0.30 y = 0.32x + 0.03
R 2 = 0.23
0.25

Median

0.00
1.0

0.40
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05

0.05

0.00
0.0

0.00
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Central bank transparency
Central bank transparency

Sources: Consensus Economics; Crowe and Meade (2007) data set; Haver
Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The sensitivity is measured as the response of inﬂation expectations at
various horizons to a 1 percentage point unexpected increase in inﬂation based on
coefﬁcients from country-speciﬁc static regressions. The sensitivity for 5+ years
corresponds to the average of estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead inﬂation
expectations. Black lines denote the ﬁtted lines for the entire sample. Red lines
denote the ﬁtted lines excluding outliers.

of the estimated coefficient suggests that if a country
moves from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile in terms of transparency—which is similar to the
average gap in the transparency indicator between Peru
and Canada over the past 20 years—the sensitivity
would decline by 0.05.
Many central banks have adopted inflation targeting over the past few decades precisely to make their
decision-making process more transparent. Comparing
the sensitivity of inflation expectations to inflation
surprises in each country before and after the adoption
of inflation targeting suggests that those monetary
reforms are associated with a considerable decrease
in sensitivity (Figure 3.18). The drop in sensitivity is
138

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Interquartile range

1. Before Inﬂation Targeting

2. After Inﬂation Targeting

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.35

Sensitivity

Sensitivity

Figure 3.17. Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to Inﬂation
Surprises and Monetary Policy Frameworks

0.0
2

3
Years ahead

5+ 2

3

0.0
5+

Years ahead

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; World Economic Outlook (2011,
Chapter 3); and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the response of inﬂation expectations at various horizons to
a 1 percentage point unexpected increase in inﬂation based on coefﬁcients from
country-speciﬁc static regressions. The sensitivity for 5+ years corresponds to the
average of estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead inﬂation expectations.

observed for all countries in the sample, as evidenced
by a relatively narrow interquartile range.38
Overall, the results using a static framework suggest
that stronger monetary policy frameworks are associated with better-anchored inflation expectations.
Allowing the estimate of the sensitivity of inflation
expectations (​​β​​  h​​) to vary over time shows that it has
declined steadily in both advanced and emerging
market economies over the past two decades (Figure
3.19). The decline was steeper at the beginning of
the sample period, precisely when many economies
significantly improved their frameworks, including

38See Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004) for a similar finding.
Clarida and Waldman (2008) find that higher-than-expected inflation leads to an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate in countries with inflation targeting regimes—but not in others—suggesting
that inflation targeters are successful in anchoring expectations of
inflation and the monetary path required to meet the target.

CHAPTER 3

Figure 3.19. Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to Inﬂation
Surprises over Time
The sensitivity of inﬂation expectations to inﬂation surprises has been steadily
declining over time. But this downward trend seems to have come to a halt more
recently, especially among advanced economies.

Advanced Economies
Median

Emerging Market Economies

Interquartile range

1. Three Years Ahead

Median

Interquartile range

2. Three Years Ahead

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0
1992 96 2000 04

08

3. 5+ Years Ahead

12 16: 1996 2000
Q1

04

08

12

0.0
16:
Q1

4. 5+ Years Ahead

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0.0
1992 96 2000 04

08

12 16: 1996 2000
Q1

04

08

12

0.0
16:
Q1

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the response of inﬂation expectations at various horizons to
a 1 percentage point unexpected increase in inﬂation based on time-varying
coefﬁcients from country-speciﬁc estimations using a Kalman ﬁlter. The sensitivity
for 5+ years corresponds to the average of estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead
inﬂation expectations.

by adopting inflation targeting regimes.39 It has also
been broad based across countries, as illustrated by the
evolution of the interquartile range. The observation
39For example, in 1996 only about 20 percent of countries in the
sample had an inflation-targeting regime; by 2015 the proportion
had increased to about 75 percent. Similarly, the sample average of
the transparency indicator increased from 0.55 in 1998 to 0.61 in
2006, and the turnover indicator decreased from 0.29 in 1980–89 to
0.20 in 1995–2004.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

that the sensitivity of inflation expectations to inflation
surprises remains lower in advanced economies than
among emerging market economies suggests there is
scope for further improvements in the monetary policy
frameworks in the latter group.
However, the downward trend in the sensitivity
of expectations seems to have come to a halt in the
mid-2000s, especially among advanced economies.
In addition, the sensitivity of medium-term inflation
expectations over the recent past has been increasing
steadily faster in countries with policy rates at, or close
to, their lower bound than in other countries (Figure
3.20).40 This has happened even though many of these
economies adopted unconventional monetary policies
during this period, suggesting that constrained monetary policy may be affecting the degree of anchoring of
inflation expectations.
An analysis of the response of inflation expectations
to positive and negative inflation shocks also points to
constrained monetary policy as the underlying cause of
a possible unanchoring of expectations. If constraints on
monetary policy are the source of the increased sensitivity
of inflation expectations, this sensitivity should be higher
for negative shocks than for positive ones—a central
bank constrained by the effective lower bound on policy
rates can always respond to higher inflation by raising the
policy interest rate, but has little scope to reduce it when
inflation is declining. This creates an unavoidable asymmetry in the ability of the monetary authority to handle
downward and upward inflation shocks.
Indeed, most of the increased sensitivity for countries
with constrained monetary policy seems to stem from
negative inflation shocks (Figure 3.21). After 2009, when
policy rates approached their effective lower bounds,
the response of medium-term inflation expectations
to negative shocks exceeded the response to positive
shocks, while the response to positive shocks was larger

40In this analysis, the effective-lower-bound constraint refers
to the policy rate being equal to or less than 50 basis points. The
monetary authorities of the following 19 advanced economies faced
this constraint at some point during 2009–15: Canada, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Singapore, the Slovak Republic,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the
United States. Singapore does not use an interest rate as a monetary
policy instrument, but the level of short-term market interest rates
is at the effective lower bound. The statistical significance of the
difference is tested using Mood’s median test. The difference between
the two groups is statistically significant for expectations at a threeyear horizon and, to a lesser extent, for inflation expectations at a
five-year horizon.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

139

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 3.20. Change in Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to
Inﬂation Surprises

Figure 3.21. Average Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations to
Inﬂation Surprises in Countries at the Effective Lower Bound

The sensitivity of medium-term inﬂation expectations to inﬂation surprises is higher
in countries whose monetary policy is constrained.

In countries whose monetary policy is constrained, medium-term inﬂation
expectations are more sensitive to negative than to positive inﬂation surprises.

Countries at the ELB
0.08 1. Three Years Ahead

Countries not at the ELB

Negative shock

2. 5+ Years Ahead

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.02

0.02

0.01
0.00
–0.01
Before 2007
10–15***
15**
08–15***

Before 2007
10–15
08–15

0.07
0.06

0.05

0.05

0.04

0.04

0.03

0.03

0.01

0.02

0.02

0.00

0.01

0.01

–0.01
15*

before 2009.41 The estimates imply that if countries with
policy rates currently at the effective lower bound faced
inflation surprises comparable to those observed over the
past two years, long-term inflation expectations would
on average drift further down by about 0.15 percentage
point. This is not particularly large in absolute terms
but still three times larger than if their sensitivity had
remained unchanged—while under well-anchored expectations, there should be no impact at all.
The sharp drop in oil prices played an important
role in global inflation dynamics over the past few
41The difference between the sensitivity for positive and negative
shocks is generally not statistically significant, probably due to the
limited number of observations (Annex 3.5).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

2. 5+ Years Ahead

0.06

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: ELB = effective lower bound. ***,**,* denote that the differences in the
change in sensitivity of inﬂation expectations between countries at the ELB and
the rest are signiﬁcant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent conﬁdence level, respectively,
using Mood’s median test. The sensitivity of inﬂation expectations corresponds to
the response of inﬂation expectations to a 1 percentage point unexpected increase
in inﬂation based on time-varying coefﬁcients from country-speciﬁc estimations
using a Kalman ﬁlter. The sensitivity for 5+ years corresponds to the average of
estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead inﬂation expectations. The change in
sensitivity is constructed as the average deviation of the median sensitivity across
countries from a linear trend (an exponential trend) ﬁtted over the period
1997–2007 for countries at the ELB (not at the ELB). Countries at the ELB are
deﬁned as those with policy rates or short-term nominal interest rates of 50 basis
points or lower at some point during 2008–15 and include: Canada, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania,
the Netherlands, Singapore, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

140

0.07 1. Three Years Ahead

Positive shock

0.00

Before 2009

09–15

Before 2009

09–15

0.00

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the response of inﬂation expectations at various horizons to
a 1 percentage point unexpected positive or negative change in inﬂation based on
coefﬁcients from country-speciﬁc time-varying estimation. The sensitivity for 5+
years corresponds to the average of estimations using 5- and 10-year-ahead
inﬂation expectations. Countries at the Effective Lower Bound (ELB) are deﬁned as
those with policy rates or short-term nominal interest rates of 50 basis points or
lower at some point during 2008–15 and include: Canada, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, France, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, the
Netherlands, Singapore, the Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the United Kingdom, and the United States. Japan is excluded from the analysis,
because it reached the ELB much earlier than 2009.

years, and potentially also in the increase in the
sensitivity of medium-term inflation expectations to
inflation surprises. However, an additional exercise
decomposing inflation surprises into oil and nonoil price movements suggests that the latter also
contributed to the increase in expectations sensitivity. This result implies that positive inflation shocks
stemming from a faster-than-expected recovery in
oil prices would only lead to a partial rebound in
inflation expectations if economic slack remains
significant.42
42For countries with policy rates at their effective lower bound, the
sensitivity of inflation expectations to shocks is decomposed between
those driven by changes in oil price inflation and those driven by
news on core inflation—proxied by the residuals in the regression of
inflation shocks on the oil price (see Annex 3.5). The results suggest
that, since 2009, the sensitivities of inflation expectations to oil price
shocks and core inflation shocks are comparable.

Figure 3.22. Sensitivity of Longer-Term Inﬂation Expectations
to Changes in Oil Prices
The sensitivity of market-based inﬂation expectations to inﬂation surprises in the
United States and the euro area increased after policy rates reached their effective
lower bounds.
0.25

43An additional estimation was used to explore whether inflation
surprises have a larger impact on inflation expectations when they
occur after a long period of relatively large and negative inflation
outcomes. There is indeed some evidence that, under constrained
monetary policy, protracted deviations of inflation from the target
can be associated with increased sensitivity of inflation expectations
to inflation surprises. However, the results are somewhat sensitive to
the sample periods.
44The responses of professional and household survey-based longterm inflation expectations to changes in oil price futures over the
same period are in both cases smaller and statistically insignificant.

0.25

**
0.20

0.20

0.15

0.15

*

Results—Market-Based Inflation Expectations
0.10

**

Swaps

0.10

ELB

0.05

Pre-ELB

Professional

ELB

Households

0.00

Full sample

**

0.05

Professional

The analysis so far provides evidence that: (1)
the sensitivity of inflation expectations to inflation
surprises depends on monetary policy frameworks
and (2) this sensitivity has increased during the
most recent period in countries with policy rates
close to their effective lower bound, particularly in
the case of negative inflation surprises. An analysis
using high-frequency data for the United States and
the euro area further underscores the relevance of
constraints to monetary policy for the unanchoring
of inflation expectations. Long-term market-based
inflation expectations (approximated by five-year/
five-year inflation swaps) are affected by inflation
surprises proxied by changes in oil price futures
(Figure 3.22). The responses are statistically significant—albeit economically small—both in the
United States and in the euro area.44 Splitting
the sample around the time monetary policy rates
reached their effective lower bounds shows that the
sensitivity of inflation expectations was actually
indistinguishable from zero before reaching the
lower bound on interest rates, but increased substantially thereafter. The higher elasticities imply
that surprises in oil prices can account for about
one-third of the decline in market-based inflation

2. Euro Area

1. United States

Pre-ELB

Taken together, this set of results suggests that it is
not just the characteristics of recent inflation outcomes—such as the large negative inflation surprises
related to the drop in oil prices—that have led to some
unanchoring of medium-term inflation expectations.
It is rather the combination of such persistent negative
inflation surprises and the perception that monetary
policy is constrained and may be less effective in bringing inflation back to the central banks’ targets that is
behind this apparent unanchoring of medium-term
inflation expectations.43

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Full sample

CHAPTER 3

0.00

Swaps

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Consensus Economics; University of Michigan Consumer
Survey; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: **,* denote signiﬁcance at the 5 and 10 percent conﬁdence level, respectively. The ﬁgure shows coefﬁcient estimates of inﬂation expectations on changes in oil
price futures (simple average of 1-year-ahead Brent and West Texas Intermediate)
controlling for changes in the Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index and
scaled by a 50 percent drop in oil price futures. Blue bars denote estimation results
using survey-based inﬂation expectations: “Professional” denotes the results using
5-year-ahead inﬂation forecasts from Consensus Economics; while “Households”
denotes results using inﬂation expectations (5–10 years) from the Michigan survey.
Red bars denote results using market-based inﬂation expectations based on ﬁveyear/ﬁve-year inﬂation swaps. The effective lower bound (ELB) is deﬁned as
starting in 2009. The full sample refers to the period 2004–16.

expectations since June 2014 in the United States
and almost one-fifth in the euro area.45
All in all, these empirical findings underscore vulnerabilities at the current juncture, as inflation shocks
are predominantly negative and central banks have
little space to respond. While the economic significance of the current degree of unanchoring of inflation
expectations is still modest, the steady increase in their
sensitivity to inflation surprises in cases where monetary policy is constrained is a reason for concern if the
undershooting of inflation targets persists.
45The results are robust to alternative measures of market-based
inflation expectations: inflation compensation embedded in Treasury
inflation-protected securities and Treasury inflation-protected
securities break-even inflation rates cleaned of a liquidity premium,
following Celasun, Mihet, and Ratnovski (2012).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

141

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Summary and Policy Implications
Inflation rates have declined substantially in a large
number of countries in recent years, with several
advanced economies experiencing outright deflation.
The decline in inflation is widespread across sectors,
but stronger for tradable goods. Its main drivers are
persistent labor market slack and weaker import price
growth. The results in the chapter suggest the latter are
associated with falling commodity prices and widening
industrial slack in a few key large economies, particularly in China. At the same time, the part of disinflation not explained by the Phillips curve has tended
to become larger in the past few years, especially in
advanced economies. This shortfall in inflation relative
to model-based predictions could be a sign that price
setters’ inflation expectations have declined more than
what is captured by survey-based measures used in the
econometric analysis or that economic slack is larger in
some countries.
The chapter finds that monetary policy frameworks
play an important role in influencing the sensitivity of
inflation expectations to inflation surprises. Improvements in these frameworks over the past few decades
have led inflation expectations to be much better-​
anchored than in the past—although there is scope
for further improvements in some emerging market
economies.
However, the chapter’s analysis also suggests that
medium-term inflation expectations in advanced economies with constrained monetary policy have recently
become more sensitive to unexpected movements in
actual inflation or in commodity prices. Although
the increase in this sensitivity is small, it does suggest
that faith in central banks’ ability to combat persistent
disinflationary forces might be diminishing—this sensitivity should be zero if medium-term expectations are
perfectly anchored. An implication of this finding is
that in advanced economies where perceived monetary
policy space is limited, medium-term inflation expectations could become unanchored in the event of further
unexpected declines in inflation.
What do these findings imply for the inflation
outlook in countries that have experienced sizable
disinflation over the past few years? Since most
measures of medium-term inflation expectations have
not declined significantly and commodity prices are
projected to gradually recover, the most likely outcome is a gradual recovery of inflation toward central
bank targets as slack diminishes and the effect of past

142

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

declines in commodity prices fades. But the increase
in the sensitivity of inflation expectations to downside inflation surprises, the finding that inflation has
become more persistent, and the possibility that slack
might be larger than currently estimated in some countries, suggest downside risks to that central forecast.
The possibility of a gradual further downward drift in
medium-term inflation expectations and consequent
prolonged period of low inflation is more than trivial
in some countries.
The main findings of the chapter—the broad
reach of the disinflation across countries, evidence of
cross-border spillovers of disinflationary forces, the
increased sensitivity of medium-term expectations to
news, as well as the confluence of slack in many large
economies—call for a comprehensive and coordinated
effort to tackle the risks of low inflation. Given limited
policy space in many economies, exploiting synergies
between all available policy levers and across countries
will be essential.46
•• In countries with persistent economic slack and
inflation consistently below central bank targets, it
is crucial to maintain an appropriate degree of monetary accommodation to help keep medium-term
inflation expectations anchored and ease the perception that monetary policy has become ineffective.
While unconventional monetary policy actions
taken in the aftermath of the Great Recession lifted
inflation expectations (see footnote 5), estimates
of natural interest rates have been revised down
substantially over time, suggesting that monetary
policy more recently may have been providing less
accommodation than previously thought (see Chapter 1 of this WEO for a further discussion). Where
medium-term inflation expectations appear to have
shifted down, a more aggressive approach should be
considered. In particular, a credible and transparent
commitment to a modest and temporary overshooting of the inflation target would provide valuable
insurance against deflationary and recessionary
risks by reducing longer-term real rates even if the
nominal policy rate is at the effective lower bound,
generating a path of stronger demand and bringing
inflation to target sooner (see Box 3.5; IMF 2016c;
and Gaspar, Obstfeld, and Sahay forthcoming).
•• Other policy levers need to be aligned with accommodative monetary policy in boosting demand.
46See Gaspar, Obstfeld, and Sahay (forthcoming) for a further
discussion and case studies.

CHAPTER 3

Given the broad-based nature of the disinflation
and the corresponding fact that many countries are
easing monetary policy at the same time, dampening
the downward pressure that monetary policy easing
exerts on the exchange rate, monetary policy stimulus on its own may not be sufficient to keep medium-term inflation expectations anchored at central
bank targets. A comprehensive package consisting of
a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policy,
an expansionary fiscal stance where fiscal space is
available, demand-supportive structural reforms, and
measures aimed at addressing weaknesses in bank
and corporate balance sheets should play a complementary role in mitigating the risk of protracted
weak demand and low inflation. Income policies
could also be considered in countries with stagnant
wages and entrenched deflationary dynamics to set
in motion a healthy upward wage-price spiral.
•• Distortionary policies that perpetuate overcapacity
in tradables sectors should be avoided: they not only
worsen resource allocation and, where financed by
credit, weaken asset quality in the banking system,

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

but they also exert disinflation pressure in the
domestic economy that could spill over to other
countries via import prices, reinforcing global disinflation pressures.47
•• Finally, the breadth of the disinflation and evidence of
meaningful cross-border spillovers of disinflationary
forces through import prices also point to the value of
a coordinated approach to supporting demand across
the larger economies. Through positive spillovers,
simultaneous action across countries would amplify
the effects of each individual country’s actions. A
coordinated effort to simultaneously tackle weak
demand and inflation in advanced economies and
to redouble ongoing efforts to reduce overcapacity
in countries with elevated industrial slack would be
more impactful than a go-it-alone approach.
47In

China, the authorities have already signaled their intent to
address overcapacity, starting with the coal and steel sectors where
capacity reduction targets have been set, together with the establishment of a fund to absorb the welfare costs for affected workers.
Restructuring has begun at the local level in provinces with relatively
strong public finances and more diverse economies (IMF 2016b).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

143

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.1. Industrial Slack and Producer Price Inflation
The recent decline in inflation has been much
more pronounced in the manufacturing sector than
in services. Consistent with this trend, an increasing
body of evidence points to marked overcapacity in
a range of industrial sectors, with industrial output
growth decelerating significantly (National Association
of Manufacturers 2016; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development 2015).1 This box presents estimates of slack in the industrial sector in three
large economies: China, Japan, and the United States.2
All three economies have recently experienced outright
declines in the producer price index (PPI) and generally subdued trends in consumer price inflation—
although to varying extents (Figure 3.1.1). Estimates
of slack—output gaps—for each economy as a whole,
and separately for the industrial sector, are obtained
through an extended multivariate filter that includes
information on GDP, consumer price inflation, PPI
inflation, and industrial production. The identification strategy relies on equations, for each economy
separately, relating inflation to the estimated gaps.3
The key equation resembles the standard Phillips curve
but is confined to the industrial sector. It expresses
PPI inflation as a function of the estimated industrial
sector output gap; expected inflation; and leads and
lags in headline inflation.
The results suggest that the industrial slack in
the first quarter of 2016 stood at about 5.5 percent
in China, 5 percent in Japan, and 3 percent in the
United States (Figure 3.1.2). For China, the estimates
incorporate a disaggregated treatment of light and
heavy industry, derived from electricity consumption
in the two subsectors. This shows a marked difference
between slack in light industry (about 4.5 percent)
The authors of this box are Kevin Clinton, Zoltan Matyas
Jakab, Douglas Laxton, and Fan Zhang.
1Industrial production comprises manufacturing, mining, and
utilities (with relative weights in the United States of 78 percent,
12 percent, and 10 percent, respectively). Total industrial output
is used instead of manufacturing output because of limited data.
Annual average industrial production growth in the United
States fell from about 2.5 percent in 2011–13 to 0.3 percent
during 2014:H2–2016:H1. In Japan and China, the growth
rate decreased from 0.3 percent to –2.5 percent and from 10.7
percent to 6.3 percent, respectively, over the same period.
2Industrial production in China, Japan, and the United States
accounts for 45 percent of total world industrial production (as
of 2014 and at constant 2005 prices, according to the United
Nations National Accounts Main Aggregates Database): United
States (19 percent), China (18 percent), and Japan (8 percent).
3For details see Alichi and others (2015).

144

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 3.1.1. Producer Price and Consumer
Price Inﬂation in China, Japan, and the
United States
(Percent)

CPI inﬂation

PPI inﬂation

12 1. China
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
2006 07 08

09

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

12 2. Japan
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
2006 07 08

09

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

12 3. United States
10
8
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
2006 07 08 09

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: CPI = consumer price index; PPI = producer price
index.

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.1 (continued)
Figure 3.1.2. Industrial Slack in China,
Japan, and the United States
(Percent)

Figure 3.1.3. Decomposition for Total
Producer Price Inﬂation for China, Japan, and
the United States
(Annualized percentage points)

6 1. China
4

15 1. China

2

10

0

5

–2

0

–4

–5

–6

–10

–8
–10

15

2006 07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

–20

2008

09

10

11

Raw materials
Other
12

13

14

2. Japan

15 16:
Q1

15 2. Japan

10
5

10

0

5

–5

0

–10

–5

–15

–10

–20
–25

PPI1
Industrial gap

–15

PPI1
Industrial gap

–15

2006 07

08

09

8 3. United States
6
4
2
0
–2
–4
–6
–8
–10
–12
2006 07 08 09

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

–20

2008

09

10

11

12

Energy
Other
13

14

15 16:
Q1

14

15 16:
Q1

15 3. United States
10
5
0
–5
–10
PPI1
Industrial gap

–15
–20

10

11

12

13

14 15 16:
Q1

–25

2008

09

10

11

12

Energy
Other
13

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: PPI = producer price index.
1 Historical contribution of all shocks (difference between
actual values and an unconditional forecast estimated using a
vector autoregression model).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

145

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.1 (continued)
and in heavy industry (about 10.5 percent). In all
three countries, the size of industrial slack correlates
with the change in PPI inflation.
Although the filtering approach yields estimates
of industrial slack consistent with the steep drop in
PPI inflation rates, it does not allow for a decomposition of the relative contributions of various
factors. For this purpose, the analysis uses structural
vector autoregression models for PPI inflation that
include the estimated industrial slack and energy or
raw materials prices.4 The historical decompositions
4Producer prices for finished consumer energy goods were
used as energy prices in the United States; the electric power, gas,
and water component of the Domestic Corporate Goods Price
Index was used in the case of Japan (both denoted as “Energy” in
Figure 3.1.3). In the case of China, the raw materials component of the PPI was used and is denoted “Raw materials” in the
figure. The identifying assumptions are that over the long term:
(1) the relative price of energy or raw materials prices (vis-à-vis

146

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

of PPI inflation suggest that the energy shock (or
raw material shock in China) has been a key driver
of the recent decline in PPI inflation, especially
in the United States (Figure 3.1.3). In China and
Japan, however, industrial slack has also played an
important role. In particular, the estimated contribution of the industrial slack to PPI deflation in
China over the past four years is as large as that of
raw materials prices.

the PPI) is driven exclusively by energy and raw materials price
shocks and not by shocks to industrial slack, (2) industrial slack
is affected by both the “Industrial gap” and “Energy” or “Raw
materials” shocks, and (3) PPI inflation is driven by all three
shocks (Energy, Raw materials, Industrial gap, and by other
PPI-specific shocks).

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.2. The Japanese Experience with Deflation
The Japanese economy has experienced weak
inflation for most of the past two decades. Inflation
measured by the GDP deflator has been particularly low, averaging –0.3 percent between 1990 and
2015 compared with 0.5 percent for consumer price
inflation (Figure 3.2.1). Continued efforts to reflate
the economy have so far fallen short, highlighting the
difficulty in escaping a deflation trap once expectations
are anchored around a deflation equilibrium. A great
deal of literature has sought to identify the causes and
consequences of Japan’s deflation experience, offering
useful insights into the current disinflation trend in
many economies. This box attempts to shed light on
the following questions: What drove the Japanese
deflation episode that started in the mid-1990s? How
has it affected the Japanese economy? How relevant
is the Japanese experience to the current disinflation
trend?

Figure 3.2.1. Inﬂation Dynamics
(Year-over-year percent change)

Advanced economies
6 1. CPI Inﬂation
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
1990

95

2000

05

10

14 16:
Q3

2000

05

10

14 16:
Q3

5 2. GDP Deﬂator
4

Drivers of Deflation

3

The bursting of the asset price bubble in the early
1990s is often mentioned as the initial shock leading
Japan into deflation. Inflation and inflation expectations declined gradually as efforts by households,
banks, and businesses to strengthen balance sheets and
rebuild net worth suppressed demand (IMF 2014;
Koo 2008). Supply-side shifts and exchange rate
appreciation were also highlighted as factors contributing to deflation momentum during this period (Leigh
2010; Posen 2000). The external shock from the
1997–98 Asian Crisis further weakened demand, and a
slow response to the problem of nonperforming loans
resulted in a banking crisis, tipping the economy into
deflation in 1998. The commodity price boom that
started in the early 2000s pushed headline inflation
up, offering some temporary relief, but core inflation
remained in negative territory (Figure 3.2.1). Further
shocks, such as the bursting of the information technology bubble and the 2008–09 global financial crisis,
reinforced weak demand, and the output gap remained
negative (Figure 3.2.2). The yen appreciation leading
up to the introduction of Abenomics in 2013 and the
commodity price decline since 2014 have further complicated efforts to reflate the economy.1 While there
has been some recent success in raising core inflation,

2

The authors of this box are Elif Arbatli, Samya Beidas-Strom,
and Niklas Westelius.
1See the main chapter text for an analysis of the impact of
commodity prices on headline inflation.

Japan

1
0
–1
–2
–3
1990

95

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Quarterly seasonally adjusted data are used and
weighted by purchasing-power-parity GDP to aggregate for
advanced economies. Advanced economies comprise
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Hong Kong SAR, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Taiwan Province of China, the United Kingdom,
and the United States. CPI = consumer price index.

deflation risks are rising again amid low demand and
declining inflation expectations.
Structural factors exacerbated the effect of demand
shocks, feeding into deflation pressure. Several of
these factors are relevant for many advanced economies today: a decline in labor’s bargaining power and
an aging and slow-growing population. The decline
in labor’s bargaining power—evident in the trend fall
in unit labor costs starting in the late 1990s (Figure
3.2.2)—together with firms’ sluggishness, as seen
in large corporate cash holdings, are argued to have

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

147

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.2 (continued)
Figure 3.2.2. Cyclical and Structural
Indicators in Japan
(Average annual percent change)

Low inﬂation period (1990–97)
Deﬂation period (1998–2013)

3

2

1

0

–1

–2

Real unit
labor cost

Nominal
Real wage
wage growth
growth

Output gap

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.

fed deflation by weakening wage-price dynamics
(Porcellacchia 2016). Firms became less likely to hire
workers on permanent contracts (“regular workers”)
in an environment of low expected growth. The
share of regular workers among salaried employees
fell over this period, contributing to lower unit labor
costs, permanent income, and benefits for employees. Japan’s aging and declining population growth
have also been blamed for deflationary pressure as
lower potential growth, and its implication on fiscal
sustainability, are cited as holding back demand
(Anderson, Botman, and Hunt 2014). At the same
time, the aging population could also lead to excess
demand and inflation pressure since retirees tend
to consume more than they produce (Juselius and
Takáts 2015)—even though the net effect of aging on
inflation is ambiguous.
The timidity and low credibility of the policy
response during the 1990s have also been widely
cited as contributors to deflation. In particular, the

148

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

pace and extent of the initial monetary easing were
likely insufficient, and the fiscal policy response has
been criticized as ineffective in stimulating growth
(Bernanke and Gertler 1999; Ito and Mishkin 2006;
Kuttner and Posen 2002; Leigh 2010). The fiscal
position remained broadly accommodative throughout the period of deflation (Figure 3.2.3, panel 1),
but periodic attempts at consolidation also led to
stop-and-go implementation of fiscal policy (Kuttner
and Posen 2002; Syed, Kang, and Tokuoka 2009),
and its effectiveness was stymied by lack of coordination with monetary policy (Eggertsson 2006).
In addition, the Bank of Japan was moving toward
independence and a price stability mandate in the
1990s, with an explicit inflation target introduced
only in 2013.2 As a result, long-term inflation expectations in Japan were not well anchored in the 1990s
(Figure 3.2.3, panel 2), making the economy more
vulnerable to deflation shocks. Finally, cleaning up
weak financial sector balance sheets took long and
inhibited financial intermediation, contributing to a
prolonged recession and deflation pressure (Ito and
Mishkin 2006).

Impact of Deflation and Relevance Today
Sustained deflation is generally believed to have
acted as a headwind for the Japanese economy. Firms
became more reluctant to invest and hire regular
workers, and consumers postponed purchases of
durable goods in anticipation of future price declines.
A vicious cycle of declining prices, decreasing profits,
and wage restraint reinforced weak demand in a
“coordination failure” (Kuroda 2013). The increase
in borrowers’ real debt burden raised default risk and
reduced asset prices, collateral valuations, and credit
intermediation to the real economy. Deflation supported a shift in portfolio allocations toward so-called
safe assets, reducing the supply of risk capital.
Persistently weak growth in the GDP deflator, and
hence in nominal GDP, worsened the interest-rategrowth differential and contributed to a higher debt

2Measures of central bank credibility (Crowe and Meade
2007; Dincer and Eichengreen 2014) suggest that the Bank of
England, the Federal Reserve, and the European Central Bank,
for example, ranked higher (on policy transparency) going into
the global financial crisis than Japan during both its low-inflation
and deflation episodes.

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.2 (continued)
Figure 3.2.3. Policy Indicators in Japan
25
20

1. Policy Indicators
(Cumulative percent change)
Low inﬂation episode (1990–97)
Deﬂation episode (1998–2012)

15
10
5
0

Policy rate cut

Fiscal stimulus Expansion in B/S
(structural balance of BoJ (ratio to
2008 GDP)
to GDP)

3.0 2. CPI Inﬂation Expectations in Japan
(Percent)
2.5

burden (End and others 2015).3 On the monetary
side, as nominal interest rates reached their effective
lower bounds and inflation expectations declined,
real interest rates could not be lowered sufficiently,
contracting the economy further. Despite the large
expansion in the Bank of Japan’s balance sheet through
unconventional monetary operations in recent years,
inflation remains stubbornly low.
In sum, the Japanese experience underscores the
importance of credible, decisive, and strong policy
responses to prevent inflation expectations from
becoming unanchored. The impact of persistent
deflation can be large, and once deflation expectations
emerge, it may be difficult to push the economy out of
the liquidity trap. Structural factors in many advanced
economies, including a secular decline in labor’s bargaining power, could generate additional headwinds.4

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1990

95

2000

05

10

16

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Inﬂation expectations are the 10-year forecast from
Consensus Economics; the policy rate is the uncollateralized
average overnight call rate. BoJ = Bank of Japan; B/S =
balance sheet; CPI = consumer price index.

3While it is difficult to quantify the impact of deflation
on debt accumulation, a mechanical calculation assuming a
zero inflation rate for the years with deflation alone suggests a
contribution of about 36 percent of GDP since 1990 through
automatic debt dynamics.
4IMF (2016a) and Arbatli and others (2016) discuss the
potential role for income policies and labor market reforms to
strengthen wage-price dynamics in Japan.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

149

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.3. How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

The authors of this box are Emre Alper, Luis Catão, Niko
Hobdari, Daniel Te Kaat, and Ali Uppal.
1A statistical horse race between food and oil prices as leading
indicators of worldwide inflation over the past four decades
points to a prominent role of food over oil (Catão and Chang
2011). For instance, the great inflation of the 1970s was preceded by a faster pace of food inflation relative to both oil and
overall consumer prices. The first post–World War II outburst of
global inflation in the 1950s was preceded by rising inflation in
food commodities but not in oil. More recently, the widespread
rise in consumer price index inflation above central bank targets
in 2007–08 was largely due to food rather than oil.
2The analysis uses country-specific weights to compute the
equivalent world market price of the domestic food consumption
basket—that is, the price that consumers of that country would
pay if they were to buy that approximate commodity basket
in the world market. For sub-Saharan Africa, data availability
allowed this computation for 17 of the 41 countries, with mean
weights of low-income countries and middle-income countries
of that sample applied to the entire sample. The analysis focuses
on free-on-board import prices in local currency to control for
exchange rate movements.

150

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 3.3.1. Food Weights in Consumption
and per Capita GDP
80
70

Share of food in CPI basket (percent)

Bursts of inflation have often been accompanied or
preceded by spiraling food prices.1 This partly reflects
the sizable share of food in consumption, particularly
in lower-income countries (Figure 3.3.1). Waning
global food prices since 2011 have therefore rekindled
interest in the extent to which changes in international
food prices pass through to domestic food prices and
thus put downward pressure on overall consumer price
inflation.
Comparing changes in world prices with changes in
the domestic price of food in more than 80 economies, however, points to a low correlation between
them.2 Indeed, the patterns of domestic food inflation are strikingly different from inflation patterns in
world food markets (which are denominated in U.S.
dollars). In many advanced and especially emerging
market economies, such a decoupling reflects exchange
rate depreciation relative to the U.S. dollar, which has
limited or more than offset the decline in world food
prices (Figure 3.3.2, panels 1 and 2). By contrast, the
exchange rate has played a lesser role in many low-​
income developing economies. The rapid increases
in domestic food prices in these economies were
driven by higher inflation in local food production,
which is mostly nontradable (Figure 3.3.2, panel 3).
Overall, food inflation has been generally higher than
nonfood inflation in all country groups, especially in
sub-​Saharan Africa and emerging market economies
(Figure 3.3.3). Thus, domestic food inflation has

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0

10

20 30 40 50 60 70 80
GDP per capita (thousands of dollars,
corrected by purchasing power parity)

90

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: CPI = consumer price index.

generally offset the ongoing nonfood deflationary
pressures in many economies.3
Evidence of limited pass-through from free-onboard (that is, excluding the transportation cost to
the final national market destination) food prices to
consumer food prices is corroborated by regression
analysis for a sample of 81 countries using monthly
data for 2000–15 (Figure 3.3.4).4 Despite the
3On average, food inflation exceeded nonfood inflation by 1.4
percentage points a year during 2010–15 in the 41 sub-Saharan
African countries comprising the sample. In advanced and emerging market economies, the respective differentials are 0.8 percentage point and 0.5 percentage point during the same period.
4The explanatory variables in the individual country regressions are the current and up to six lags of the free-on-board food
price inflation index in local currency (computed as the percentage change of the product of the world food price index in U.S.
dollars and the country’s exchange rate against the U.S. dollar),
augmented by lags of domestic food price inflation (with the lag
length for each country regression being determined by standard
statistical criteria). The pass-through coefficient is then computed
as the sum of the coefficients on the free-on-board food inflation
divided by 1 minus the sum of the lagged domestic food inflation coefficients (that is, the autoregressive coefficients).

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.3 (continued)
Figure 3.3.3. Food Prices Relative to Nonfood
Prices

Figure 3.3.2. World Food Prices and
Consumer Food Prices

(January 2000 = 100)

(January 2000 = 100)

Advanced economies
Emerging market economies
Sub-Saharan Africa

Consumer food prices
World food prices in U.S. dollars
World food prices in local currency
400

120

1. Advanced Economies

350
115

300
250

110

200
150

105

100
50
2000

05

10

15

400 2. Emerging Market Economies

100

95

350
300

90
2000

250
200

05

10

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.

150
100
50
2000

05

10

15

10

15

400 3. Sub-Saharan Africa
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
2000

05

Source: IMF staff calculations.

mass of the distribution of the pass-through coefficients being centered between 0.1 and 0.2 (the median
is about 0.12), there is considerable variation across
countries. The pass-through is close to 0.4 for some
countries and larger than 1 for one outlier (Ethiopia).
In general, sub-Saharan Africa not only has a higher
average pass-through but also higher cross-country dispersion of pass-through coefficients than advanced and
emerging market economies. In addition, when the
sample is broken into two subperiods—the first comprising the high food price inflation of 2006–08 and
the second the decline in world food prices of 2009
and from 2011 onward—the pass-through appears to
be higher on average and more dispersed in the former
period (Figure 3.3.5). To explain the dispersion of
pass-through coefficients across countries and periods,
a regression of the various pass-through coefficients
obtained from the full sample period is run on a variety of factors, including those identified by previous
studies (for example, Gelos and Ustyugova 2012). The
results of this empirical exercise point to the role of

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

151

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.3 (continued)

Mean

Median

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

Figure 3.3.5. Distribution of Food PassThrough Coefﬁcients
Frequency distribution (observations)

Figure 3.3.4. Food Pass-Through Coefﬁcients
for Various Country Groups

0.05

0.00

Advanced
economies

Emerging market
economies

Sub-Saharan
Africa

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines denote interquartile ranges.

income levels, exchange rate regimes, openness to food
trade, and output volatility in shaping pass-through
coefficients (Table 3.3.1):
•• Higher per capita income is associated with lower
international food price pass-through. One explanation for this result is that richer countries on
average consume food products with higher value
added, for which nontradable components, such as
distribution services, represent a larger share of the
overall cost.
•• A more stable exchange rate regime is associated with a
higher pass-through. With a fixed exchange rate, freeon-board prices in local currency are a more direct
reflection of world prices, mitigating deviations
from the law of one price associated with unexpected exchange rate volatility.
•• Countries that are either large net exporters (that is,
with food exports exceeding food imports) relative to
GDP or larger net importers of food relative to GDP
are characterized by higher pass-through. The rationale for this result is that the tradable component

152

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Frequency distribution (observations)

0.10

25

1. 2000–08

20
15
10
5
0
< –0.5 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
–0.4 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 > 1.0
Pass-through coefﬁcients

25

2. 2009–15

20
15
10
5
0
< –0.5 –0.3 –0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9
–0.4 –0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 > 1.0
Pass-through coefﬁcients

Source: IMF staff calculations.

of domestic food is likely to increase with either net
food exports or net food imports.
•• Countries with higher average tariff rates on agricultural products have a lower pass-through, consistent
with the notion that tariffs reduce the tradability of
some domestic food items.
•• The pass-through is higher in countries where growth
is more volatile. There may be different explanations
for this finding. One straightforward explanation
is that more volatile economies display less price
stickiness, so the pass-through from higher world
food prices to retail food prices is higher.
These findings suggest that a low pass-through
of international to domestic food prices might not
necessarily enhance welfare. This may be, for instance,
the case if the pass-through is low as a result of high

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.3 (continued)
Table 3.3.1. Cross-Country Determinants of PassThrough of Free-on-Board Food Prices to Food
Consumer Price Inflation
Log of per Capita GDP

(1)
–0.0385***
(–3.15)

Openness

0.0174
(0.88)

Food Trade Balance/GDP

0.00838*
(1.71)

Food Trade Balance/GDP,
Squared

0.00124***
(3.72)

Average CPI Inflation

Exchange Rate Regime

Quality of Institutions

Constant

0.00151***
(3.88)

–0.00135
(–1.34)
0.0296**
(2.3)

Average Agricultural Tariff –0.00527**
(–2.39)
Growth Volatility

(2)
–0.0333***
(–3.31)

tariffs that distort resource allocation, or if it reflects
a high share of local produce (such as fresh fruits and
vegetables) that—given its nontradability—is produced, stored, or transported inefficiently.5 Indeed,
when world prices are falling, low tradability limits
the benefits of falling world food prices to consumers.
Conversely, when world food prices are rising, low
tradability tends to limit the benefits of higher world
prices to producers and thus postpone needed adjustments to production, which would eventually benefit
domestic consumers as well.

0.0116*
(1.68)

0.0235*
(1.96)
–0.00741***
(–4.90)
0.0134**
(2.08)

–0.00484
(–0.88)
0.168***
(3.32)

0.151***
(3.06)

Number of Observations 81
81
0.564
0.517
R2
0.509
0.484
Adjusted R 2
Sources: IMF, National authorities; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: The dependent variable is the estimated pass-through coefficient reported in Figure 3.4. Robust t-statistics are in parentheses.
CPI = consumer price index. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1,
5, and 10 percent level, respectively.

5See Chapter 1 for evidence on the share of local produce in
domestic food consumption and a broad discussion of the role of
food in production and consumption.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

153

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.4. The Impact of Commodity Prices on Producer Price Inflation
The chapter documents a generalized decline in producer price inflation across advanced economies over
the past few years, especially in manufacturing. The
drop in producer price inflation has been particularly
marked among commodity importers, suggesting that
international input linkages are a key channel through
which deflation pressure spills across countries (Figure
3.4.1). Against this backdrop, this box uses sectoral
data from four selected advanced economies—France,
Germany, Korea, and the Netherlands—to explore
how much of the decline in producer price inflation
can be attributed to weakening international commodity prices and other import prices.1
The empirical approach used to decompose the
contribution of different input prices to sector-level
producer price inflation follows the methodology developed in Ahn, Park, and Park (2016). In particular, the
following specification is used to estimate the effect of
domestic input prices (​​DOM​ it​ ​​)​  , imported input prices
(​​IMP​ it​ ​​​ ), and labor costs (​​​ULC​ it​ ​​​ )​​​​ on domestic producer
prices (​​​Pit​  ​ ​​)​  ​​​​ at the country-sector level:2
l​n​(​Pit​  ​ ​)​  ​​ ​=​ ​​β​  1​​ ​α​  i,DOM​​  ln​(​DOM​ it​ ​)​  ​ + ​β​  2​​ ​α​  i,IMP​​  ln​(​IMP​ it​ ​)​  ​ ​
	​+ ​β​  3​​ ​α​  i,ULC​​  ln​(​ULC​ it​ ​)​  ​ + ​ε​  it​​​,
(3.4.1)
in which it denotes sector i at time t, ln denotes logs,
and ​​α​  i,X​​​is the share of each type of input in the total
cost structure of sector i (with ​​∑​  X​​ ​α​  i,X​​  = 1​), obtained
from input-output tables.3 The degree of pass-through
from input prices to producer prices (​β​) is allowed to
vary across inputs to account for a possible heterogeneous response to underlying cost shocks. The equation is estimated separately in panel settings for Korea
(including sector fixed effects) and for the three European economies (with country-sector fixed effects). An
error correction setup is used to take into account the
potential cointegrating relationship between nonstationary producer and input prices.
Following the novel approach in Ahn, Park,
and Park (2016) and Auer and Mehrotra (2014),
The author of this box is JaeBin Ahn.
1The focus on these four advanced economies is based on
high-frequency sector-level price data availability.
2A possible limitation of the methodology is that prices in
other sectors as well as exchange rates—which affect import
prices denominated in local currency—are taken as given in the
estimation. Also, by relying on a reduced-form specification,
the analysis does not take a stand on the underlying source of
variation in commodity or other imported input prices.
3The source for input shares is the World Input-Output Table
(http://www.wiod.org/).

154

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 3.4.1. Commodity Prices and Producer
Prices
(January 2014 = 100; simple average by country
groups)
World commodity prices (right scale)
Commodity importers (PPI)
Commodity exporters (PPI)
110

120

105
100

100

95
90

80

85
80

60

75
70
2014

15

40
April
16

Sources: Bank of Korea; Eurostat; Haver Analytics; and IMF,
International Financial Statistics database.
Note: Commodity importers: 18 euro area countries, China,
Japan, Korea, United Kingdom, United States; Commodity
exporters: Brazil, Chile, Colombia, South Africa. PPI =
producer price index.

input-output tables and sector-level price data are
combined to construct input price and labor cost
indices for each domestic sector ​i​. For instance, the
imported input price index for sector ​i​is obtained as:
​ln​(​IMP​ it​ ​)​  ​ = ​∑ j​ ​​ ​(​α​  ij,IMP​​  / ​α​  i,IMP​​)​ln​(​Ijt​  ​ ​​ )​,​	

(3.4.2)

in which ​​α​  ij,IMP​​​is the share of imported inputs from
sector j​​in total inputs used for sector ​i​’s production
from input-output tables, and ​​I​ jt​ ​​​  is the price index
of sector ​j​imported goods from sector-level import
price data.4 Imported inputs can be further split into
4All the price series data are available from the Statistics Database at the Bank of Korea (Economic Statistics System), which
is publicly accessible on the Web (ecos.bok.or.kr), or from the
Eurostat database (http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/data/database).

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.4 (continued)
commodity and noncommodity components, allowing
for separate estimation of their contributions to
producer price inflation.5 The sector-specific domestic
input price and unit labor cost indices are constructed
analogously using input-output tables, sector-level
domestic producer price indices, and sector-level unit
labor cost indices.
The results suggest that the pass-through from
import prices to domestic producer prices is high. The
short-term pass-through from commodity to domestic producer prices in Korea is about 40 percent and
reaches about 60 percent over the long term. The passthrough from commodity input prices is even higher
in the three European countries—90 percent in the
short term and almost 100 percent in the long term.6
The estimated pass-through coefficients from noncommodity import prices are comparable.
Combining these pass-through estimates with actual
sector-level import prices over the past two years suggests the following results:
•• The sharp drop in commodity prices was a major
driver of aggregate producer price deflation in
France, Germany, and the Netherlands over the
past two years (Figure 3.4.2). Its contribution was
somewhat smaller but still important in the case of
Korea.
•• The differences across countries in the relative contribution of commodity import prices to aggregate
producer price inflation are mostly due to variations
in input weights—rather than to differences in
import price dynamics.
•• Most of the impact of commodity prices on aggregate producer price deflation during this period
is indirect—stemming from a decline in input
prices for domestic noncommodity sectors. The
direct contribution—through commodity imports
by the domestic commodity sector—is almost
zero in all countries except the Netherlands where
oil re-exports are significant—and even there it

5The commodity sector is defined as the “mining and quarrying” industry at the two-digit industry classification.
6The difference in the estimated coefficients across country
groups might reflect, among other factors, distinct market structures and degree of competition.

Figure 3.4.2. Contribution to Cumulative
Producer Price Inﬂation

(Percent, January 2014–March 2016)

Imported commodity inputs (indirect)
Imported commodity inputs (direct)
Imported noncommodity inputs
Other factors
Aggregate PPI inﬂation
5

0

–5

–10

–15

–20

Germany

France

Netherlands

Korea

Sources: Bank of Korea; Eurostat; Haver Analytics; IMF,
International Financial Statistics database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The direct contribution of imported commodity inputs
captures the commodity sector’s own use of imported
commodities, and the indirect contribution reﬂects other
sectors’ use of imported commodities as inputs. PPI =
producer price index.

accounts for only one-fifth of the total commodity
price contribution.
•• The contribution of noncommodity import prices
to aggregate producer price inflation over the past
two years is much smaller. This is mainly due to
the fact that international manufacturing prices
declined much less than international commodity
prices over the past two years—rather than due to
differences in pass-through coefficients or differences in the relative weights of commodity versus
noncommodity inputs in production.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

155

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 3.5. A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy
A risk-management approach to monetary policy
seeks to avoid severe outcomes, including deflation.
Policymakers do not worry about small deviations
from desired outcomes but they attach an increasing
marginal cost to inflation and output gap deviations as
they grow larger. This implies prompt and aggressive
actions to move the economy away from situations
in which the risk of conventional policy instruments
losing their effectiveness becomes larger—such as in a
context of persistent economic slack and low inflation with the policy interest rate at the effective lower
bound (ELB).
Expectations play a crucial role in the effectiveness
of monetary policy. Adjusting the central bank’s conventional policy instrument—a very short-term interest rate—in itself has a negligible effect on the overall
economy. Its impact stems from its influence over
market expectations about the future path of shortterm interest rates which, in turn, affect the mediumand longer-term interest rates at which households and
firms invest and borrow.
However, the path for policy interest rates that
can bring inflation to the central bank’s target is not
unique. For example, the central bank may intend to
pursue a strategy that returns inflation to target gradually, with small steps in the policy instrument over
a period of several quarters. Or it may be planning a
quick, aggressive approach. In the absence of direct
guidance from policymakers, market expectations will
not necessarily match the central bank’s intended path
for policy rates.
This box presents model simulations to illustrate
how a credible and transparent commitment to
aggressive monetary accommodation can reduce the
risk of recession and deflation even if the monetary
policy rate is at the ELB.1 A standard New Keynesian
model of the Canadian economy is used to simulate
a counterfactual repeat of the history of the global
financial crisis under two alternative policy strategies. In the first strategy, based on the principle of
risk management, the central bank minimizes a loss
function imposing a steeply increasing marginal cost
on output gaps and deviations of inflation from the
target. The second policy strategy follows a linear
inflation forecast–based policy reaction function—that
is, a forward-looking Taylor rule. The counterfactual
The authors of this box are Kevin Clinton, Douglas Laxton,
and Hou Wang.
1See Obstfeld and others (forthcoming) for further details.

156

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Figure 3.5.1. Forecast as Envisaged at
2009:Q2: Loss Minimization versus Linear
Reaction Function
(Percent, unless noted otherwise)

Inﬂation-forecast-based reaction function
Loss minimization
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

1. Policy Rate

2

2. Output Gap

2009

10

11

12

10

11

12

1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4

2009

4 3. Headline Inﬂation
(Year-over-year percent change)
3
2
1
0
–1

2009

10

11

12

11

12

10 4. Unemployment Rate
9
8
7
6
5

2009

10

Source: IMF staff estimates.

simulated scenarios start in the second quarter of 2009
and are summarized in Figure 3.5.1:
•• The risk-management strategy (red line) implies
holding the policy rate at the ELB (assumed here
to be 0.25 percent) until the first quarter of 2011,
long enough to result in a temporary overshooting

CHAPTER 3

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Box 3.5 (continued)
of the inflation target. As the public is aware of this
intention, expectations for longer-term nominal
interest rates shift down and medium-term inflation
expectations increase. This reduces real interest rates,
which in turn increases asset prices and depreciates
the local currency, boosting output and inflation. The
inflation overshoot makes up for the initial undesired
well-below-target inflation and, on average, inflation
ends up being very close to the target.
•• The linear policy reaction function plan (blue line),
in contrast, implies raising the policy rate already
by mid-2010 and a much slower convergence to the
target—en route, this means wider output gaps and
deviations of inflation from the target and higher
unemployment than under the risk-management
strategy.
The logic for a more aggressive strategy that deliberately overshoots the inflation target is straightforward. Further negative demand shocks in a context
of policy rates already at the ELB pose the risk of
pushing the economy into a deflation situation from
which escape is increasingly difficult. Relative to this,

the prospect of a short period with inflation above
target is acceptable.
But transparency is a key ingredient of this strategy.
Publishing the expected path of all the variables used at
policy decision meetings, including the projected path
for the policy interest rate, would help the central bank
give a credible public account of its strategy.2 This would
reinforce public confidence in the central bank’s inflation
objective and strengthen the transmission of policy
actions to the economy: if the published path for policy
interest rates is credible, the term structure of interest
rates and asset prices, such as the exchange rate, will move
in support of the policy objectives. In contrast, forecasting an overshooting of the inflation rate without communicating the whole breadth of the central bank’s strategy
might undermine confidence in the nominal anchor—it
might look as though the central bank is doing “too little,
too late” in terms of normalizing interest rates.
2See Poloz (2014) for arguments in favor of forward guidance, including by publishing the projected path of policy rates,
when interest rates are at the effective lower bound but not in
normal times.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

157

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex 3.1. Sample and Data
Country Sample
The broadest sample used for regression analysis
in this chapter comprises 44 advanced and emerging
market economies, listed in Annex Table 3.1.1. These
economies are selected based on the availability of their
inflation expectation measures from the Consensus
Forecasts database.
Data Sources
The primary data sources for this chapter are the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Economic Outlook and Structural Analysis
databases, CEIC China database, Consensus Economics Consensus Forecasts database, Global Data Services
database, IMF World Economic Outlook database,
World Bank World Development Indicators database,
and Haver Analytics and Bloomberg L.P. All variables
are of quarterly frequency (with the exception of the
variables used in the analysis of market-based inflation
expectations, which are available at daily frequency).
Medium-term inflation expectations from the Consensus Forecasts database are interpolated to quarterly frequency from biannual surveys. The coverage of GDP
and import price deflators is expanded by interpolation
from annual data. Annex Table 3.1.2 lists all indicators
used in this chapter as well as their sources.

Annex 3.2. Model Simulations
Model simulations are used to assess the deflationary
effects of depressed demand and subdued import prices
in three large economies—the United States, the euro
area, and Japan—when monetary policy is constrained
and inflation expectations become unanchored.48
The simulations are carried out under two alternative
macroeconomic environments. In both environments,
monetary policy is assumed to be constrained—that
is, the policy rate is at its effective lower bound. The
second assumes, in addition, that inflation surprises
have a direct effect on inflation expectations.49
48Simulations

are performed using the IMF’s G20MOD model.
effect of inflation on inflation expectations is introduced in
the model via shocks to the expected inflation term that enters the
model’s reduced-form Phillips curve. An inflation surprise equal to
1 percentage point that occurs in year 1 would shift inflation expectations by 0.25 percentage point in year 2, 0.10 percentage point in
year 3, 0.05 percentage point in year 4, and would decline to zero
in year 5 and beyond. These magnitudes are based on the empirical
evidence in the chapter on the degree to which inflation surprises
shift the private sector’s inflation expectations at various horizons.
49The

158

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Annex Table 3.1.1. Sample of Advanced and
Emerging Market Economies
Advanced Market Economies
Australia, Canada, Czech
Republic, Estonia, France,
Germany, Hong Kong SAR,
Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia,
Lithuania, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Singapore,
Slovak Republic, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Taiwan Province of China, United
Kingdom, United States

Emerging Market Economies
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Chile, China, Colombia,
Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Mexico, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Russia, Thailand, Turkey,
Ukraine, Venezuela

Annex Table 3.1.2. Data Sources
Variable
Commodity Prices
Consumer Price, Core
Consumer Price,
Producer Price, and
Wage Indices
Import Value, Import
Volume, and ImportPrice Deflator

Industrial Production
Index
Nominal and Real GDP,
and GDP Deflator

Nominal Effective
Exchange Rates
Output Gap
Unemployment Rate

Inflation Swaps, Stock
Market Indices, and
Treasury Bill Interest
Rates
Survey-Based Inflation
Expectations

Source
Bloomberg L.P., Haver Analytics, IMF
Commodity Price System
Haver Analytics; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database; Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development
CEIC database; Haver Analytics; IMF,
World Economic Outlook database;
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; World
Development Indicators database
IMF, World Economic Outlook
database
Haver Analytics; IMF, World Economic
Outlook database; Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and
Development; World Development
Indicators database
Global Data Services database
IMF, World Economic Outlook
database
Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF,
World Economic Outlook database;
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development;
Thomson Reuters Datastream
Bloomberg L.P.; Haver Analytics

Bank of England, Survey of External
Forecasters; Consensus Economics;
European Commission, Business
and Consumer Surveys; IMF,
World Economic Outlook database;
University of Michigan, Survey of
Consumers
Consensus Economics

Unemployment
Expectation
Central Bank Transparency Crowe and Meade (2007)
and Governor Turnover
Rate
Inflation-Targeting Regime World Economic Outlook, October
2011, Chapter 3

CHAPTER 3

The first shock considered in the simulations is a
temporary decline in domestic demand of 1 percent
in each of the three economies. The results reported
in Figure 3.4 show that even if monetary policy is
constrained, the economy would escape from the
deflation trap within a reasonable timeframe as long
as inflation expectations remained well anchored.
But if inflation expectations drifted down, it could
take a very long time for the economy to emerge
from deflation.
The results in the chapter suggest that reduced
import prices have also played an important role in
driving inflation down in many economies over the
recent past. While in normal circumstances import
prices typically have temporary effects on inflation
and therefore should not be a source of concern for
inflation dynamics going forward, they could be potentially worrisome at the current juncture of constrained
monetary policy and evidence of inflation expectations
becoming unanchored.
To gauge the possible deflationary consequences
of these developments, two shocks to import prices
are considered. The first shock is a sharp decline in
oil prices.50 The second shock is a decline in China’s
export prices—taken as an example of a shock to
global prices of tradable goods stemming from manufacturing slack in a key large economy.51 The results
reported in Annex Figures 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 show that
shocks to import prices may lead to persistent disinflation pressure when monetary policy is constrained
and medium-term inflation expectations become
unanchored:
•• Constrained monetary policy—In countries with
constrained monetary policy, lower prices for oil and
manufactured goods from China may keep inflation
below the baseline—that is, the path in the absence
of shocks—for up to four years (Annex Figure
3.2.1). A decline in import prices directly reduces
inflation in the short term but also indirectly
reduces it through lower demand. The indirect
effect arises from lower inflation interacting with the
unchanged nominal policy rate: real interest rates
rise, putting downward pressure on both consump50The shock to oil prices is calibrated so that its magnitude
matches the actual drop in international oil prices in 2014 and its
persistence is consistent with prices in the futures market.
51The decline in China’s export prices has been set to broadly
match the impact of excess capacity in China on consumer price
inflation in key advanced economies in 2015 documented in the
chapter.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Annex Figure 3.2.1. Effect of Disinﬂationary Shocks on Core
Inﬂation in Advanced Economies under Constrained Monetary
Policy

(Percentage points; years after the shock on x-axis)
Oil prices
Oil prices + China export prices
1.0

China export prices

1. United States

0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1

2

3

4

5

1.0 2. Euro Area
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0
1.0 3. Japan
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure reports the responses of core inﬂation after a shock to
international oil prices and a shock to China’s export prices. The model assumes
that conventional monetary policy is constrained at the effective lower bound on
nominal interest rates in all countries.

tion and investment. However, in the medium
term, the decline in import prices raises households’
wealth, which stimulates consumption enough to
more than offset the downward pressure exerted
by higher real interest rates. Higher consumption
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

159

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Figure 3.2.2. Effect of Disinﬂationary Shocks on Core
Inﬂation in Advanced Economies under Constrained Monetary
Policy and Unanchored Inﬂation Expectations
(Percentage points; years after the shock on x-axis)

Constrained monetary policy
Constrained monetary policy + unanchored inﬂation expectations
1.0 1. United States
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0

1

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

1.0 2. Euro Area
0.5
0.0
–0.5

demand and lower input costs also stimulate investment. The resulting increase in domestic demand
is eventually sufficient to halt and then reverse the
decline in inflation. The effect of lower import
prices on inflation varies by economy depending on
(1) its degree of dependence on oil imports, (2) the
extent of its trade links with China, (3) the wealth
effect generated by lower import prices, and (4) the
degree of flexibility in wages and prices.
•• Constrained monetary policy and unanchoring of inflation expectations—If monetary policy is constrained
and inflation expectations become unanchored,
lower import prices may lead to persistent disinflation. Inflation rates remain below the baseline
for more than five years (Annex Figure 3.2.2). The
result is driven by additional deflation pressure
stemming from lower inflation expectations, which
may more than offset the positive inflation effects
associated with increased household wealth effects
in the medium term. The results of this scenario
suggest that if inflation expectations become unanchored, mitigating the impact of declining import
prices on core inflation could be quite challenging
without additional measures to stimulate demand.

–1.0
–1.5
0

1

1.0 3. Japan
0.5
0.0
–0.5
–1.0
–1.5
0

1

2

3

4

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The ﬁgure reports the responses of core inﬂation after a combined shock to
international oil prices and China’s export prices. The model assumes that
conventional monetary policy is constrained at the effective lower bound on
nominal interest rates in all countries. The alternative scenario (red line) assumes
also that inﬂation expectations are affected by inﬂation shocks.

5

Annex 3.3. Principal Component Analysis
A principal component analysis is used to assess the
extent to which the recent decline in inflation is common
across countries.52 The results of the analysis suggest
that the first three common factors explain about 80
percent to 90 percent of the variation in inflation among
advanced economies in 2000–08 and 2009–15, respectively, and about 75 percent among emerging market and
developing economies in both subperiods. There is, nonetheless, significant heterogeneity across countries in the
importance of these factors. For example, common factors
play a larger role in France and Spain, while country-specific factors play a larger role in countries such as Iceland,
Israel, and South Africa (Annex Figure 3.3.1).
While numerous variables may be correlated
with the first three common factors, the evolution
over time of the first common factor, for instance,
is closely related to changes in commodity prices

52The principal component analysis is a statistical procedure that
transforms the data into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated variables—principal components. See Rabe-Hesketh and Everitt (2007).

160

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CHAPTER 3

Annex Figure 3.3.1. Share of Consumer Price Inﬂation
Variation Explained by Different Factors

Annex Figure 3.3.2. First Common Factor and Commodity
Prices

(Percent)

1st factor
100

2nd factor

3rd factor

GLObaL DISINFLaTION IN aN ERa OF CONSTRaINED MONETaRy pOLICy

(Percent)

First common factor (right scale)
Change in fuel prices
Change in all commodity prices1

Country speciﬁc

1. Advanced Economies

80
60

60

3

40

2

20

1

0

0

–20

–1

–40

–2

40
20
0

FRA DEU LUX ITA AUT FIN IRL GRC CAN GBR NLD LVA HKG SGP NOR KOR CZE SVN
ESP BEL DNK CHE USA CYP PRT EST SWE NZL LTU SVK MLT ISL AUS ISR JPN TWN

100

2. Euro Area

3. Asian EMDE

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

FRA DEU LUX AUT CYP PRT EST LTU SVK SVN
ESP BEL ITA FIN IRL GRC NLD LVA MLT

4. European EMDE and CIS
100

PHL

MYS
CHN
PAK
IND
THA
VNM
IDN

5. Latin American EMDE and
South Africa

0

100

80

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0
MDA HUN POL UKR SRB TUR
HRV BLR RUS BGR ROU

BRA

VEN

MEX

PER

CHL

COL

ZAF

0

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff estimates.
Note: CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States; EMDE = emerging market and
developing economies. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.

(Annex Figure 3.3.2).53 Additional analyses using
Bayesian modeling average and weighted least squares
find that, indeed, commodity prices stand out among
several variables—including slowing global industrial
production, growth disappointments in emerging
53See the April 2015 Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and
Pacific and the IMF’s 2015 Spillover Report (IMF 2015) for similar
evidence.

–60

2000

05

10

15

–3

Sources: Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Prices database; and IMF staff
estimates.
1 Price index using weights based on 2002–04 average world export earnings.

market economies, and financial market conditions—
as being strongly linked with the first common factor.

Annex 3.4. Drivers of the Recent Decline in
Inflation
Empirical Framework
The following version of the Phillips curve equation
is estimated:
πt = γ t π te + h + (1 - γt ) π̃ t - 1 + θt utc + ​μt​ πtm + ε t , (3.4.1)
in which πt denotes annualized quarterly headline consumer price inflation, π te + h denotes inflation expectations
h years ahead (with 10-year-ahead expectations used in
the baseline specification), π̃ t - 1 is the moving average
of inflation over the previous four quarters, utc denotes
cyclical unemployment, πtm denotes the relative price
of imports (defined as the import-price deflator relative
to the GDP deflator), and ε t denotes the residual.
The coefficients and the nonaccelerating inflation
rate of unemployment (NAIRU) are assumed to
follow constrained random walks (γ t ∈ (0,1), θ t < 0, ​
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

161

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

μ​t​​  > 0​, and no restrictions on NAIRU). Cyclical
unemployment is assumed to follow an AR(1) process: ​​
c ​ + ​
u​ tc​  ​  = ρ ​u​ t-1
​  ε​  ut​  ​​, with ​​uc​  t​  ​ = ​ut​  ​​  - ​u​ t*​  ​​, in which ​​ut​  ​​​ denotes
the unemployment rate, ​​u​ t*​  ​​denotes the NAIRU, and ​​
ε​  ut​  ​​is assumed to follow ​​N​(​​0, ​σ​  2u​ )​​ ​​​​.
The model is estimated country-by-country using
maximum likelihood based on a constrained nonlinear
Kalman filter for a sample of 44 advanced and emerging market economies from the first quarter of 1990 to
the first quarter of 2016.
An important feature of the model is that it allows
for time variation in all parameters to capture changes
in the structure of each economy. The advantages of
such a model compared with rolling regressions are
fourfold: (1) it uses all observations in the sample
to estimate the magnitude of the parameters in each
year—which by construction is not possible in rolling
regressions; (2) changes in the parameters in a given
period come from innovations in the same period,
rather than from shocks occurring in neighboring
periods; (3) it reflects the fact that economic structures
typically change slowly and depend on the immediate past; and (4) it allows for possible nonlinearities
(Swamy and Mehta 1975).
Decomposition
The decomposition of inflation dynamics is conducted in a way similar to Yellen (2015). The exercise
is constructed in terms of deviations of inflation from
inflation targets—using the average of 10-year-ahead
inflation expectations during 2000–07 as a proxy for
inflation targets. The contribution of each explanatory
variable is obtained by setting its value to zero and
comparing the model’s prediction with that when all
explanatory variables are set at their historical values.54 The contribution of import prices to inflation is
further decomposed into the contribution of import
prices in U.S. dollars and variations in the domestic
exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. The contribution of labor market slack is computed by substituting
the cyclical unemployment series estimated with the
Kalman filter—and possibly subject to end-sample
bias—with a measure derived from output gap estimates in the IMF World Economic Outlook database
and country-specific Okun’s law coefficient estimates
reported in Ball, Furceri, and Loungani (forthcoming);
54The analysis assumes that labor market slack and import prices
do not affect 10-year-ahead inflation expectations, which is supported by additional analysis of the effect of these two variables on
inflation expectations.

162

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

the residuals are adjusted accordingly. The simulation
is dynamic in that the lagged inflation term is set to
its simulated values. Therefore, the decomposition
incorporates the effects of changes in lagged inflation
that are attributable to previous movements in the
explanatory variables—which become more relevant as
inflation is more persistent.
Robustness Checks
Inflation expectations measure—The baseline specification is estimated using 10-year-ahead inflation
expectations from Consensus Economics, for two
reasons: (1) long-term inflation expectations are a
close proxy for central banks’ inflation targets, so that
the parameter ​γ​can be interpreted as the degree to
which the headline inflation is linked to the central
bank’s target—a phenomenon typically referred to as
“level anchoring” (Ball and Mazumder 2011) and (2)
long-term inflation expectations are less correlated with
current and lagged inflation and hence are less subject
to problems of multicollinearity and reverse causality.
To test for the robustness of the results, two alternative versions of equation (3.4.1) are estimated. The
first uses 1-year-ahead inflation expectations instead
of 10-year-ahead expectations. The second one uses
1-year-ahead inflation expectations but omits the
lagged inflation term. For advanced economies, the
results are broadly similar to those obtained in the
baseline (Annex Figure 3.4.1, panel 1).55 In emerging market economies, however, using shorter-term
expectations results in substantially smaller residuals,
especially in countries with inflation above long-term
expectations (Annex Figures 3.4.2, panels 2 and 3).
Cyclical unemployment measure—Estimates of
cyclical unemployment are typically subject to large
uncertainty. To check the robustness of the results,
two alternative estimates of cyclical unemployment
are used: (1) the Hodrick-Prescott filtered unemployment rate and (2) deviations of unemployment rates
from five-year moving averages. The results presented
in Annex Figure 3.4.2 suggest that the contribution
of import prices to inflation is robust to alternative
proxies of economic slack, but the contribution of
slack itself and other factors varies somewhat when
different measures are used.

55The results of two-year- or three-year-ahead inflation expectations (not reported here due to space constraints) are broadly similar
to those of one-year-ahead inflation expectation.

CHAPTER 3

Annex Figure 3.4.1. Contribution to Inﬂation Deviations from
Targets Using Various Measures of Inﬂation Expectations
Inﬂation expectation minus target
Exchange rate1
Others

Inﬂation expectation minus target
Exchange rate1
Others
0.2

–0.4

–0.4

–0.6

–0.6

–0.8
10-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and no lagged inﬂation

2. Emerging Market Economies with Inﬂation below Long-Term
Inﬂation Expectation in 20154

4

2

2

0

0

–2

–2

4

10-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and no lagged inﬂation

3. Emerging Market Economies with Inﬂation above Long-Term
Inﬂation Expectation in 20155

–4

3

4

2

3

1

2

0

1

–1

0

–2

–1

–3

1. Advanced Economies 3

–0.2

–0.2

–4

Relative import price in U.S. dollars
Cyclical unemployment
Inﬂation deviation from target2

0.0

0.0

4

Annex Figure 3.4.2. Contribution to Inﬂation Deviations from
Targets Using Various Measures of Cyclical Unemployment

Relative import price in U.S. dollars
Cyclical unemployment
Inﬂation deviation from target2

3
0.2 1. Advanced Economies

–0.8

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

10-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and lagged inﬂation

1-year expectation
and no lagged inﬂation

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports average contributions in 2008–15. Okun’s law
coefﬁcients come from Ball and others 2016.
1
Exchange rate is deﬁned as currency value per U.S. dollar.
2
The target is deﬁned as the average of 10-year inﬂation expectation in 2000–07.
3
Advanced economies in Annex Table 3.1.1. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Slovak
Republic, and Slovenia are excluded as outliers.
4
Bulgaria, China, Hungary, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Thailand.
5
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, India, Indonesia, Peru, Russia, Turkey.

Cyclical unemployment Cyclical unemployment Cyclical unemployment as
based on Okun’s Law
derived from HP-ﬁlter
deviation from 5-year
moving average trend
2. Emerging Market Economies with Inﬂation below Long-Term
Inﬂation Expectation in 20154

Cyclical unemployment
based on Okun’s Law

Cyclical unemployment Cyclical unemployment as
deviation from 5-year
derived from HP-ﬁlter
moving average trend

3. Emerging Market Economies with Inﬂation above Long-Term
Inﬂation Expectation in 20155

–2
–3

Cyclical unemployment
based on Okun’s Law

Cyclical unemployment Cyclical unemployment as
derived from HP-ﬁlter
deviation from 5-year
moving average trend

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports average contributions in 2008–15. Okun’s law
coefﬁcients come from Ball and others 2016.
1
Exchange rate is deﬁned as currency value per U.S. dollar.
2
The target is deﬁned as the average of 10-year inﬂation expectation in 2000–07.
3
Advanced economies in Annex Table 3.1.1. Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Slovak
Republic, and Slovenia are excluded as outliers.
4
Bulgaria, China, Hungary, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Thailand.
5
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, India, Indonesia, Peru, Russia, Turkey.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

163

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Annex Figure 3.4.3. Correlation of Manufacturing Slack in
China, Japan, and the United States with Import Price
Contribution to Inﬂation in Other Economies
Advanced Economies
Mean
0.05

Emerging Market Economies
Median
2.

1.

of the 44 advanced and emerging market economies in
the sample:

0.05

0.00

0.00

–0.05

–0.05

–0.10

–0.10

–0.15

–0.15

–0.20

China
slack1

China
slack2

China
slack3

China
slack1

China
slack2

China
slack3

4.

0.04 3.

–0.20

0.04

0.00

0.00

–0.04

–0.04

–0.08

0.20

Japan
slack1

Japan
slack2

Japan
slack3

Japan
slack1

Japan
slack2

Japan
slack3

6.

5.

–0.08

0.20

0.15

0.15

0.10

0.10

0.05
0.00

0.05

–0.05
–0.10

–0.05

0.00

U.S.
slack1

U.S.
slack2

U.S.
slack3

U.S.
slack1

U.S.
slack2

U.S.
slack3

–0.10

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Vertical lines denote interquartile ranges. The ﬁgure shows the coefﬁcients of
manufacturing slack from regressions of the import price contribution to inﬂation on
manufacturing slack and other variables.
1 No controls.
2 Controlling for manufacturing slack in the other two economies, change in oil
prices, and global output gap.
3 Controlling for global output gap and change in oil prices in current and previous
four quarters.

Manufacturing Slack in China, Japan, and the United
States, and Inflation in Other Economies
To explore the relationship between manufacturing
slack in key large economies—China, Japan, and the
United States—and inflation developments in other
countries, the following equation is estimated for each
164

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

​​Ii,t
​  ​​  = α + β ​St​  j​  ​  + δ ​Xt​  ​​  + ​ε​  i,t​​​,

(3.4.2)

in which I is the contribution of import price to
inflation as estimated using equation (3.4.1); S denotes
manufacturing slack; j refers to China, Japan, or the
United States; and X is a set of control variables,
including global factors such as current and past
changes in oil prices and global output gap—defined
as the U.S.-dollar-GDP-weighted average of the output
gap across countries.56
The results of the analysis suggest that the contribution of import prices to inflation in many advanced
and emerging market economies is significantly
correlated with manufacturing slack in China, Japan,
and the United States. The association is particularly
strong, robust, and more precisely estimated for China.
In particular, a 1 percentage point increase in manufacturing slack in China is, on average, associated
with a decline in inflation in other economies of about
0.04 percentage point to 0.1 percentage point (Figure
3.14), with the relationship being stronger in advanced
economies than in emerging market economies (Annex
Figure 3.4.3).
Equation (3.4.2) is also estimated in a panel setting
with country-fixed effects. The results show that the
correlation with manufacturing slack in China is
significant at the 90 percent confidence interval and
robust to controlling for global variables (Annex Figure
3.4.4). Finally, further analysis finds that this correlation is higher in countries with stronger trade links
with China, providing additional evidence of spillover
effects through tradable goods.

Annex 3.5. The Effect of Inflation Shocks on
Inflation Expectations
The econometric approach to assess the effect of
inflation shocks on inflation expectations follows the
one used in Levin, Natalucci, and Piger (2004), which
relates changes in inflation expectations to changes
56The contribution of import prices to inflation is used as a
dependent variable to provide a direct measure of the association
between excess capacity in manufacturing in large economies and
inflation rates in other advanced and emerging market economies.
Similar results are obtained when import prices are used as the
dependent variable (and the effect of manufacturing slack on inflation is computed by rescaling the effect of manufacturing slack on
import prices by the effect of import prices on inflation).

CHAPTER 3

Annex Figure 3.4.4. Correlation of China Manufacturing Slack
with Import Price Contribution to Inﬂation in Other Economies:
Results from Panel Regressions

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Annex Figure 3.5.1. Change in Inﬂation Expectations and
Inﬂation Shocks
(Percentage points)

Change in Expectations at 1-, 3-, and 10-Year Horizons

0.00
–0.02

Median 1-year

Median 3-year

Median 10-year

–0.04

0.6 1. Advanced Economies

–0.06

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

–0.2

–0.2

–0.4

–0.4

–0.08
–0.10
–0.12
–0.14
–0.16

–0.6
1992
No control

Controlling for Controlling for Controlling for Controlling for
MS in Japan change in OP
GOG
GOG and
and U.S.
change
in OP in
current and
previous four
quarters

Sources: Consensus Forecasts; Haver Analytics; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Economic Outlook database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure reports the coefﬁcients of manufacturing slack in China from
panel regressions. Bars denote coefﬁcient median values. Vertical lines denote 90
percent conﬁdence intervals. MS = manufacturing slack; OP = oil prices; GOG =
global output gap.

in inflation. In particular, the following equation is
estimated country by country:
​​∆ π​  et+h
 ​ = ​
​ β​  ht​  ​ ​π​  news
t​  ​ + ​ϵ​  t+h​​,​

(3.5.1)

e ​​​ denotes the first difference in expecin which ​​∆ π​ t+h
tations of inflation h years in the future; ​​π​ tnews
​  ​​ is a
measure of inflation shocks—defined as the difference
between actual inflation and short-term inflation
expectations from Consensus Economics; and the coefficient ​​β​​  h​​captures the degree of anchoring in h-yearsahead inflation expectations—a term usually referred
to as “shock anchoring” (Ball and Mazumder 2011).
Annex Figure 3.5.1 shows the evolution of the
left-hand-side (top panel) and right-hand-side (bottom
panel) variables in equation (3.5.1) for advanced and
emerging market economies. Changes in inflation
expectations have been more volatile at shorter horizons for both groups of countries. Expectations were

98

2004

10

2. Emerging Market
Economies

15 1996

2004

0.6

10

–0.6
15

Inﬂation Shocks
3. Advanced Economies
5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
1994 98
2004
10

4. Emerging Market
Economies

15 1994 98

2004

10

5
4
3
2
1
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
15

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Data used in this ﬁgure are quarterly. In panels 3 and 4, blue lines denote the
median of inﬂation shocks, and shaded areas denote interquartile ranges.

on a downward path throughout the 1990s in both
advanced and emerging market economies as monetary frameworks were improving and inflation was
falling. This trend was particularly strong in emerging
market economies. Inflation expectations have been
remarkably stable throughout the 2000s in advanced
economies, especially at longer horizons, but recently
their volatility has increased. In contrast, for emerging
market economies the volatility of expectations during
2009–15 has been lower than in the previous decade.
Inflation shocks have been relatively modest in
advanced economies, except for the period surrounding
the global financial crisis. These shocks were mostly
negative in the 1990s as inflation was declining, but
have been close to zero in the 2000s. Since 2011, the
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

165

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUbDUED DEMaND—SyMpTOMS aND REMEDIES

median inflation shock in advanced economies was
negative. In emerging market economies, inflation
shocks were negative on average in the 1990s and early
2000s, but less so more recently.

Annex Figure 3.5.2. Sensitivity of Inﬂation Expectations when
Controlling for Slack: Advanced Economies

Robustness Checks

0.40

It is possible that changes in current and expected
inflation are both driven by changes in expectations
about the future state of the economy. For example, if
firms and households expect that the economy will be
in a recession in the near future and inflation will be
lower than today, they will start cutting their consumption and investment expenditures now, putting downward pressure on inflation today. In that case, both
inflation expectations and inflation would decline, but
this would be driven by a third factor (expectations of
future slack), rather than a causal link from inflation
shocks to inflation expectations—especially on shortterm horizons.
To check whether the results are simply driven by
this mechanism, the baseline specification is augmented with the change in expectations about the
future state of the economy, proxied by the change in
one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations from
Consensus Forecasts (∆ u et+1):57
e +ϵ .
∆ π et+h = β ht π news
+ δ t ∆ u t+1
t
t+h

(3.5.2)

The results reported in Annex Figure 3.5.2 suggest
that the sensitivity values obtained controlling for
expectations about future slack are not statistically
different from those presented in the baseline.
Finally, the results are also robust when considering
changes in inflation or deviations of inflation from
targets as alternative measures of inflation shocks.
Oil Price Inflation versus Core Inflation
For countries with a zero-lower-bound constraint,
the sensitivity of inflation expectations to shocks is further decomposed into those originating from changes
in: (1) oil price inflation and (2) core inflation. To do
this, inflation surprises are first regressed on oil price
inflation country by country:

57While it would be preferable to include the change in expectations of the unemployment rate at the same horizon as inflation
expectations on the left-hand side, such data are not available.
Moreover, even one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations are
collected only for 12 advanced economies; therefore, the sample in
this robustness check is smaller than that in the main part of the
analysis.

166

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Baseline

Controlling for slack

0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
1 year

2 years

3 years

5+ years

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The ﬁgure shows the response of inﬂation expectations at various horizons
to a 1 percentage point unexpected increase in inﬂation based on coefﬁcients
from country-speciﬁc static regressions. The alternative speciﬁcation (red line)
controls for the change in one-year-ahead unemployment rate expectations. The
sensitivity for 5+ years corresponds to the average of estimations using 5- and
10-year-ahead inﬂation expectations. Solid lines denote the median response of
inﬂation expectations across countries while the shaded area denotes the
interquartile range of the responses under the baseline speciﬁcation.

πtnews = α + β πtoil + ϵ t,

(3.5.3)

in which π oil
t is the oil price inflation. Inflation shocks
are then decomposed into the part driven by changes
in oil prices (fitted values) and the part unrelated to oil
prices (residuals). Finally, the following equation is estimated for countries with policy rates at their effective
lower bounds over the period 2009–15:58
e
∆ πt+h
= α + ϑ πtnews,oil + γ πtnews,core + ϵ t+h,

(3.5.4)

in which πtnews,oil denotes the inflation shocks driven
by changes in oil prices, and πtnews,core is the inflation
shocks unrelated to changes in oil prices.
This analysis suggests that the sensitivity of
three-year-ahead inflation expectations to oil price
shocks over the recent past in countries facing the
effective-lower-bound constraint was very similar
58Zero-lower-bound economies are defined as advanced economies
whose policy rates or short-term nominal interest rates were 50 basis
points or lower at some point during 2009–15.

CHAPTER 3

to that of core inflation shocks. Both sensitivities
were around 0.03. The qualitative pattern remains
the same when examining inflation expectations at
longer-​year horizons (five years and beyond) and

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

overall commodity prices instead of oil prices. The
results imply that inflation expectations did not
become unanchored solely because of the sharp drop
in oil and other commodity prices.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

167

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

References
Abrahams, Michael, Tobias Adrian, Richard K. Crump, and
Emanuel Moench. 2012. “Decomposing Real and Nominal
Yield Curves.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports
570, September (revised October 2013).
Ahn, JaeBin, Chang-Gui Park, and Chanho Park. 2016. “PassThrough of Imported Inputs Prices to Domestic Producer
Prices: Evidence from Sector-Level Data.” IMF Working
Paper 16/23, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Akerlof, George, William T. Dickens, and George Perry. 1996.
“The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (1): 1–59.
Alichi, Ali, Olivier Bizimana, Silvia Domit, Emilio Fernandez
Corugedo, Douglas Laxton, Kadir Tanyeri, Hou Wang, and
Fan Zhang. 2015. “Multivariate Filter Estimation of Potential
Output for the Euro Area and the United States.” IMF Working Paper 15/253, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Anderson, Derek, Dennis Botman, and Ben Hunt. 2014. “Is
Japan’s Population Aging Deflationary?” IMF Working Paper
14/139, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Arbatli, Elif, Dennis Botman, Kevin Clinton, Pietro Cova, Vitor
Gaspar, Zoltan Jakab, Douglas Laxton, Constant Aime Lonkeng
Ngouana, Joannes Mongardini, and Hou Wang. 2016. “Reflating Japan: Time to Get Unconventional?” IMF Working Paper
16/157, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Auer, Rapahel, and Aaron Mehrotra. 2014. “Trade Linkages and
the Globalization of Inflation in Asia and the Pacific.” Journal
of International Money and Finance 49 (A): 129–51.
Ball, Laurence, Davide Furceri, and Prakash Loungani.
Forthcoming. “Does One Law Fit All? Okun’s Law in
Advanced and Developing Economies.” IMF Working Paper,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Ball, Laurence, and Sandeep Mazumder. 2011. “Inflation
Dynamics and the Great Recession.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring.
Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe.
2002. “Avoiding Liquidity Traps.” Journal of Political Economy
110 (3): 535–63.
Bernanke, Ben. 2002. “Deflation: Making Sure It Doesn’t
Happen Here.” Speech to the National Economists Club,
Washington, November 21.
———. 2010. “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy.”
Speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27.
———, and Truman F. Bewley. 1999. “Why Wages Don’t Fall
during a Recession.” Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Monetary Policy and
Asset Price Volatility,” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City’s symposium, “New Challenges for Monetary
Policy,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26–28.
Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers.
2015. “Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their

168

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Monetary Policy Implications.” NBER Working Paper
21726, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Blanco, Andres. 2015. “Optimal Inflation Target in an Economy
with Menu Costs and an Occasionally Binding Zero Lower
Bound.” Unpublished.
Buiter, Willem, and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou. 1999. “Liquidity
Traps: How to Avoid Them and How to Escape Them.”
NBER Working Paper 7245, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Calvo, Guillermo, Fabrizio Coricelli, and Pablo Ottonello. 2012.
“Labor Market, Financial Crises and Inflation: Jobless and
Wageless Recoveries.” NBER Working Paper 18480, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Catão, Luis A. V., and Roberto Chang. 2011. “Global Food
Prices and Inflation Targeting.” VoxEU, January 27.
Celasun, Oya, Roxana Mihet, and Lev Ratnovski. 2012.
“Commodity Prices and Inflation Expectations in the United
States.” IMF Working Paper 12/89, International Monetary
Fund, Washington.
Christensen, Jens H. E., Jose A. Lopez, and Glenn D.
Rudebusch. 2010. “Inflation Expectations and Risk Premiums
in Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and Real Bond Yields.”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42 (S1): 143–78.
Chung, Hess, Jean‐Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and
John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 44: 47–82.
Clarida, Richard H., and Daniel Waldman. 2008. “Is Bad News
About Inflation Good News for the Exchange Rate? And, If
So, Can That Tell Us Anything about the Conduct of Monetary Policy?” In Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, edited by
John Y. Campbell. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.
Cloyne, James, Lena Boneva, Martin Weale, and Tomas Wieladek. 2016. “The Effect of Unconventional Monetary Policy
on Inflation Expectations: Evidence from Firms in the United
Kingdom.” External MPC Unit Discussion Paper 47.
Cochrane, John. 2016. “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap.”
Stanford University. Unpublished.
Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2015. “Is the
Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? Inflation Expectations
and the Missing Disinflation.” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 7 (1): 197–232.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Johannes Wieland.
2012. “The Optimal Inflation Rate in New Keynesian Models: Should Central Banks Raise Their Inflation Targets in
Light of the Zero Lower Bound?” Review of Economic Studies
79 (4): 1371–406.
Crowe, Christopher, and Ellen E. Meade. 2007. “The Evolution
of Central Bank Governance around the World.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21 (4): 69–90.
Cukierman, Alex, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti. 1992.
“Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect

CHAPTER 3

on Policy Outcomes.” World Bank Economic Review 6 (3):
353–98.
D’Amico, Stefania, Don H. Kim, and Min Wei. 2014. “Tips
from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014–24, Federal Reserve Board, Washington.
Daly, Mary, and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So
Slow?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter
2015–01, January 5.
Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, and Brian Lucking. 2012. “Why Has
Wage Growth Stayed Strong?” Federal Reserve Bank of San
Francisco Economic Letter 2012–10, April 2.
Dincer, N. Nergiz, and Barry Eichengreen. 2014. “Central Bank
Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures.”
International Journal of Central Banking 10 (1): 189–259.
Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2006. “Fiscal Multipliers and Policy Coordination.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 241.
———, and Michel Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on
Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brooking Papers
on Economic Activity 1: 139–211.
End, Nicolas, Sampawende J. A. Tapsoda, Gilbert Terrier, and
Renaud Duplay. 2015. “Deflation and Public Finances:
Evidence from the Historical Records.” IMF Working Paper
15/176, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Fisher, Irving. 1933. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great
Depressions.” Econometrica 1 (4): 337–57.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey. 1995. “The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well.”
New England Economic Review (March/April).
Galí, Jordi, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation Dynamics: A
Structural Econometric Approach.” Journal of Monetary Economics 44 (2): 195–222.
Garcia, Juan Angel, and Adrian Van Rixtel. 2007. “Inflation-Linked Bonds from a Central Bank Perspective.”
Occasional Paper Series No. 62, European Central Bank,
Frankfurt.
Garcia, Juan Angel, and Thomas Werner. 2014. “Inflation Compensation and Inflation Risk Premia in the Euro Area Term
Structure of Interest Rates.” Developments in Macro-Finance
Yield Curve Modelling, edited by Jagjit S. Chadha, Alain C.
J. Durré, Michael A. S. Joyce, and Lucio Sarno. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gaspar, Vittor, Maurice Obstfeld, and Ratna Sahay. Forthcoming. “Macroeconomic Management when Policy Space Is
Constrained: A Comprehensive, Consistent, and Coordinated
Approach to Economic Policy.” IMF Staff Discussion Note,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Gelos, Gaston, and Yulia Ustyugova. 2012. “Inflation Responses
to Commodity Price Shocks: How and Why Do Countries
Differ?” IMF Working Paper 12/225, International Monetary
Fund, Washington.
Guidolin, Massimo, and Christopher J. Neely. 2010. “The Effects
of Large-Scale Asset Purchases on TIPS Inflation Expectations.”
Economic Synopses 26, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright.
2010. “The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation Compensation.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (1): 70–92.
Gürkaynak, Refet S., and Justin Wolfers. 2007. “Macroeconomic
Derivatives: An Initial Analysis of Market-Based Macro Forecasts, Uncertainty, and Risk.” NBER International Seminar on
Macroeconomics 2005 (2): 11–50.
Hofmann, Boris, and Feng Zhu. 2013. “Central Bank Asset
Purchases and Inflation Expectation.” BIS Quarterly Review
(March): 23–35.
International Monetary Fund. 2003. “Deflation: Determinants,
Risks, and Policy Options—Findings of an Interdepartmental
Task Force.” Washington, June.
———. 2006. Chapter 3, “How Has Globalization Affected
Inflation?” In World Economic Outlook. Washington, April.
———. 2013. Chapter 3, “The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has
Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?” In World
Economic Outlook. Washington, April.
———. 2014. “Japan: 2014 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report.” IMF Country Report 14/236. Washington.
———. 2015. 2015 Spillover Report. Washington, June.
———. 2016a. “Japan: 2016 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report.” IMF Country Report 16/267, Washington.
———. 2016b. “The People’s Republic of China: 2016 Article
IV Consultation—Staff Report.” IMF Country Report
16/270, Washington.
———. 2016c. “United States: 2016 Article IV Consultation—
Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 16/226, Washington.
Ito, Takatoshi, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 2006. “Two Decades
of Japanese Monetary Policy and the Deflation Problem.” In
Monetary Policy with Very Low Inflation in the Pacific Rim.
NBER-EASE 15: 131–202. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Juselius, Mikael, and Előd Takáts. 2015. “Can Demography
Affect Inflation and Monetary Policy?” BIS Working Paper
485, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Koo, Richard. 2008. The Holy Grail of Macro Economics: Lessons from
Japan’s Great Recession. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons (Asia).
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgenson. 2011.
“The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates:
Channels and Implications for Policy.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity (2).
Kuroda, Haruhiko. 2013. “Overcoming Deflation and After.”
Speech at the Meeting of Councillors of Nippon Keidanren
(Japan Business Federation), Tokyo, December 25.
Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Adam S. Posen. 2002. “Fiscal Policy
Effectiveness in Japan.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 16 (4): 536–58.
Leigh, Daniel. 2010. “Monetary Policy and the Lost Decade:
Lessons from Japan.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42
(5): 833–57.
Levin, Andrew T., Fabio M. Natalucci, and Jeremy M. Piger.
2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting.”

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

169

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 86 (July/August):
51–80.
National Association of Manufacturers. 2016. “Global
Manufacturing Economic Update: June 2016.”
http://www.nam.org/Newsroom/eNewsletters/
Global-Manufacturing-Economic-Update/2016/
Global-Manufacturing-Economic-Update--June-2016.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Kevin Clinton, Douglas Laxton, Ondra
Kamenik, Yulia Ustyugova, and Hou Wang. Forthcoming.
“How to Improve Inflation Targeting in Canada.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2015.
“Capacity Developments in the World Steel Industry.” http://
www.oecd.org/sti/ind/Capacity-Developments-Steel-Industry.pdf.
Poloz, Stephen S. 2014. “Integrating Uncertainty and Monetary Policy-Making: A Practitioner’s Perspective.” Discussion
Papers 14–6, Bank of Canada.
Porcellacchia, Davide. 2016. “Wage-Price Dynamics and
Structural Reforms in Japan.” IMF Working Paper 16/20,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Posen, Adam S. 2000, “The Political Economy of Deflationary
Monetary Policy.” In Japan’s Financial Crisis and Its Parallels
to U.S. Experience, edited by Adam S. Posen and Ryoichi
Mikitani, 194–208. Washington: Institute for International
Economics.
Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia, and Brian Everitt. 2007. A Handbook of
Statistical Analyses Using Stata, Fourth Edition. Boca Raton,
Florida: Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Rogoff, Kenneth. 2003. “Globalization and Global Disinflation.”
Paper presented at “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City Conference, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 29.
Stock, James, and Mark W. Watson. 2007. “Why Has U.S.
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 39 (s1): 3–33.

170

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Svensson, Lars E. O. 2001. “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap.”
Monetary and Economic Studies 277–321.
Swamy, P. A. V. B., and J.S. Mehta. 1975. “Bayesian and
Non-Bayesian Analysis of Switching Regressions and a Random Coefficient Regression Model.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association 70: 593–602.
Swanson, Eric T. 2016. “Measuring the Effects of Federal
Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial
Markets.” https://www.economicdynamics.org/meetpapers/2016/paper_1222.pdf.
Syed, Murtaza, Kenneth Kang, and Kiichi Tokuoka. 2009.
“Lost Decade in Translation: What Japan’s Banking Crisis
Could Portend about Recovery from the Great Recession.”
IMF Working Paper 09/282, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2004. “Does Financial
Globalization Induce Better Macroeconomic Policies?”
IMF Working Paper 04/84, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Werning, Iván. 2012. “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary
and Fiscal Policy.” Manuscript. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge.
Williams, John. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower
Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Brookings Institution,
Washington.
Wright, Jonathan H. 2012. “What Does Monetary Policy Do
to Long-Term Interest Rates at the Zero Lower Bound?” The
Economic Journal 122: 447–466.
Yellen, Janet L. 2015. “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary
Policy.” The Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
Yu, Edison. 2016. “Did Quantitative Easing Work?” Economic
Insights, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Research
Department, First Quarter.

CHAPTER

4

SPILLOVERS FROM CHINA’S TRANSITION AND FROM MIGRATION

Spillovers are a key factor shaping the path of the global
economy and the risks around it, but their nature
is changing. The growing clout of emerging markets
means that shocks originating there—including those
of a noneconomic nature—are playing an increasingly
important role around the world. Illustrating these
trends, this chapter examines the global impact of
China’s rebalancing toward a more sustainable growth
model, and the effects of increasing migration flows
on the originating and recipient economies. While the
source and transmission channels of these spillovers
vary, a common theme is that, despite the negative
short-term impact on recipient economies, they offer
potential gains in the long term. If handled well,
China’s economic transition will eventually result in
more sustainable global growth, and migration can help
reduce challenges from population aging in recipient
countries. Based on recent IMF publications and new
analytical work by the IMF Spillover Taskforce, this
chapter documents these spillovers and discusses policy
implications at the national and multilateral level.1

Introduction
As in the past, economic spillovers across national
borders continue to shape global prospects, but their
The authors of this chapter are Patrick Blagrave, Sweta Saxena,
and Esteban Vesperoni (team leader), with research and editorial
support from Chanpheng Fizzarotti, Gabi Ionescu, and Jeffrey
Lam. It is based on work by the IMF’s Spillover Taskforce, with
contributions from Patrick Blagrave, Allan Dizioli, Davide Furceri,
Jesus Gonzalez-Garcia, Ermal Hitaj, Ben Hunt, Joao Jalles, Florence
Jaumotte, Christina Kolerus, Ksenia Koloskova, Wojciech Maliszewski, Montfort Mlachila, Nkunde Mwase, Papa N’Diaye, Hiroko
Oura, Frantisek Ricka, Christian Saborowski, Sweta Saxena, Katya
Svirydzenka, Esteban Vesperoni, Arina Viseth, Mustafa Yenice,
Aleksandra Zdzienicka, and Yuanyan Zhang.
1The IMF introduced specific reports on spillovers in 2011.
Until 2013, these reports focused on the external effects of domestic policies in five systemic areas: China, the euro area, Japan, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. Since 2014 the reports
took a more thematic approach focusing on global, cross-cutting
issues centered on economic policies. Beginning with this World
Economic Outlook report, spillovers analysis will be highlighted in
every other report.

scope has expanded. While previous spillover analysis
has mostly focused on economic shocks emanating
from advanced economies—such as shifting monetary
policies in systemic economies—the increasing clout
of emerging market economies, which explained the
bulk of global growth over the past decade and now
represent more than 50 percent of global GDP in
purchasing-power-parity terms, suggests that they are
a significant source of spillovers shaping the global
outlook. In addition, noneconomic shocks are playing
a more important role.
The global repercussions of China’s welcome transition to a more balanced growth path furnish a case in
point. China’s rapid, investment-driven growth in the
past decade fostered a remarkable expansion of global
trade and boosted commodity prices (Figure 4.1).
More recently, China’s necessary slowdown in investment and its current transition to consumption-led
growth has coincided with a very sharp decline in
global trade growth.2 Given the size and openness of
the Chinese economy—the sharp increase in its share
of global imports over the past decade has made it
a main source (top 10) of export demand for over
100 economies that account for about 80 percent of
world GDP—the potential for large spillover effects
has increased. This suggests that China’s transition
has the potential to change the global outlook and
the risks surrounding it. Not surprisingly, possible
bumps around China’s transition count among the
risks to the global recovery, along with the persistent
weak demand and low productivity growth in some
key advanced and emerging market economies (see
Chapter 1).
The rising trend in migration, compounded by
refugees fleeing geopolitical conflicts, is an example of a noneconomic development with significant
spillovers. The rapid increase in economic migration
has become a pressing issue, and the ongoing refugee
crisis in the Middle East and North Africa has added

2See

Chapter 2 in this World Economic Outlook report.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

171

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.1. China: GDP and Trade Growth

Figure 4.2. Number of International Migrants and Refugees
(Millions)

(Percent change, year-over-year)
Real GDP

Export volume

Import volume

Total world migration

30

300

25

275

20

250

15

225

10

200

5

175

0

150

–5

125

–10
2000

03

06

09

12

15

Source: IMF staff calculations.

to this trend.3 The number of international migrants
increased from 150 million in 1990 to 250 million
as of the end of 2015 (Figure 4.2). And refugee
flows—driven by geopolitical factors, wars, and
conflict—have surged over the past couple of years,
and continue, with over half a million applications
for asylum during the first half of 2016. This surge
increased the number of refugees to about 16 million
as of the end of 2015—although they still represent
a small share in total migration. Large migration,
whether triggered by economic or noneconomic
forces, has significant repercussions both for sending
and for receiving countries. Moreover, against a background of low growth along with rising inequality in
many countries, migration can add to anxiety about
globalization, and feed a political climate that stalls
structural reforms and growth.
The first part of this chapter focuses on the impact
of China’s transition on the global economy, with an
emphasis on the complexities of its diverse transmission
channels. The following section focuses on migration
issues and their impact on source and recipient econ-

3Migrants are defined as individuals who are living in countries
other than their country of birth.

172

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

100
1980

Refugees (right scale)
20

16

12

8

85

90

95

2000

05

10

4
15

Sources: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and IMF staff calculations.

omies. Both sections document spillovers and discuss
policy issues at the national and multilateral level.

China’s Transition
Rapid growth has made China one of the largest
economies in the world, and its increasing global links
lifted trade and economic activity across the world
during its expansion. In this context, China’s economic
transition toward more balanced growth also has global
repercussions, transmitted through trade and commodity markets and amplified by financial markets. These
repercussions entail a negative direct impact on global
demand, an indirect impact through prices—notably
for commodities—and an effect on exchange rates
and asset markets. However, some countries stand to
gain, such as commodity importers—including some
emerging markets—and producers of labor-intensive
goods, as China moves up the value chain and imports
more consumption goods. A well-managed transition
will benefit the global economy in the long term:
it will result in more sustainable growth in China,
improved resource allocation, and a reduction of risks
of a disruptive adjustment—which credit booms have
often triggered in other economies. China can help
by managing its transition well, notably by accepting

CHAPTER 4

the slowdown and by clearly communicating its policy
intentions. Globally, it will be important to avoid protectionism and continue to facilitate trade-integration
initiatives.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.3. China: Global Clout and Rebalancing
14 1. China's Share of Global GDP and Imports
(Percent)
12
GDP

10

Slowdown, Rebalancing, and Transmission Channels of
Spillovers

8

As the second largest economy in the world, China
has become a significant source of global demand.
GDP growth averaged 9.6 percent since 2000,
increasing China’s share of global GDP from about
3 percent to almost 13 percent in 2015 (Figure 4.3,
panel 1).4 Since the early 2000s this growth has been
fueled by investment and exports as the economy built
infrastructure and housing, and leveraged its abundant
labor supply to boost manufacturing. Reinforcing this
trend, China’s response to the global financial crisis
prompted a further push to infrastructure investment
in 2009–10—increasing by an average of 17 percent
in each of those years. The large size of the economy
implies that developments in China had significant
spillovers to the global economy through its demand
for trade-partner exports. Given the key role of infrastructure investment in China’s expansion, commodity
exporters also benefited from the boost in prices caused
by stronger demand in China, particularly for base
metals.
More recently, China has begun to rebalance its
economy from investment and exports toward consumption, partly reversing its contribution to global
trade growth in previous years.5 Economic growth has
slowed, and rebalancing implies that investment has
slowed faster than consumption—between 2010 and
2015, the consumption share of GDP rose from about
49.1 percent to 51.6 percent, while the investment
share fell from about 47.2 percent to 46.4 percent,
both in real terms (Figure 4.3, panel 2). This implies
a sharper decline in demand for imports and commodities than the slowdown in headline GDP growth
would suggest, given that investment activity is more
import intensive and relies more heavily on commodities. In fact, a striking development of the slowdown in
the Chinese economy in 2014–15 is the disproportionate deceleration in exports and imports—GDP growth
fell from 7.8 percent in 2013 to 6.9 percent in 2015,

4

4Based

on GDP at market exchange rates.
a richer discussion of China’s economic rebalancing, see IMF
(2015g).
5For

Imports

6

2
0
1990

95

2000

05

65 2. China: Real Consumption and Investment
(Percent of GDP)
60
Consumption
55

10

15

Investment

50
45
40
35
30
2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Source: IMF staff calculations.

while export and import growth fell by 7 percentage
points and 8 percentage points, respectively, over this
same period.
Spillovers from China are transmitted primarily via
trade links. A deceleration in China’s domestic demand
affects imports from trading partners—and more
generally, global trade. But this impact differs among
countries—creating winners and losers from China’s
rebalancing—and the analysis of the trade channel is
not straightforward, for several reasons:
•• China has become deeply integrated into global
supply chains, which implies that it often transmits
shocks from other countries. The analysis of spillovers needs to differentiate China’s direct impact on
global demand by disentangling variations in GDP
growth due to its own demand from those associated with global shocks.
•• Countries have different exposures to China’s final
demand. While total exposure—the share of exports
to China relative to total exports—plays a role,
countries differ in terms of sectors of the Chinese
economy to which they are exposed. With China’s
investment demand slowing disproportionately,
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

173

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

exporters of investment goods—such as some countries in the euro area—will be more affected than
exporters of consumption goods. Finally, China is
now producing at home some previously imported
intermediate goods (onshoring), adding complexity
to the analysis.
•• As China moves up the value chain, reducing its
production of some labor-intensive goods, opportunities are being created for countries with abundant
labor to take its place in the production of these
goods, particularly in southeast Asia.
Another important transmission channel relates
to China’s impact on global prices, particularly in
commodity markets. China is both a large producer
and consumer of commodities. Its demand for
commodities surged since the early 2000s, particularly in energy and base metals markets; by the end
of 2014 China’s demand for metals accounted for
more than 40 percent of global demand. Its large
footprint in commodity markets suggests that a
slowdown in China’s demand can have a material
and lasting impact on prices, particularly given
short-term price-inelasticity of supply in commodity
markets and the additional increases in the supply of
metals in recent years.6 Chinese industries may also
be contributing to global “overcapacity” in some sectors, for example, steel and cement. Subsidies on key
production inputs—such as energy—as well as credit
flows to loss-making enterprises have contributed to
an excessive expansion of capacity in these industries and are hindering their adjustment, depressing
global prices.
Direct spillovers through financial channels are
still limited but will increase, and developments in
China are already affecting global asset prices. China’s
financial integration into global markets remains
limited, which suggests that direct financial spillovers
from China—for example, through the adoption of
domestic financial regulation affecting credit growth or
China’s foreign assets and liabilities—have been modest
so far. However, financial linkages are increasing, and
the scope for financial spillovers is likely to increase,
as China eases capital-account restrictions. Moreover,
developments in China are already affecting volatility
in financial markets. For example, policy uncertainty
over the past year—related to the exchange rate regime
and renminbi depreciation, and the response to a
6See

174

IMF (2015a).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

domestic-equity-market adjustment—was coupled with
falling global equity prices and exchange rate depreciation in emerging market economies.

Increasing Clout in Global Trade
As China became a larger and more open economy
after its accession to the World Trade Organization,
spillovers to the rest of the world increased. Its rapid
growth over the past 15 years has made China a key
player in global trade—its share in global imports
increased from 3 percent in 2000 to approximately
10 percent as of 2015. The gradual increase in
China’s trade suggests that spillovers could vary
over time. Furceri, Jalles, and Zdzienicka (2016)
perform time-varying coefficient analysis using local
projection methods on a sample of 148 countries
over 1990–2014, and show that spillovers from a
1 percentage point negative shock to China’s final
demand growth have nearly doubled over the past
two decades (Figure 4.4). These shocks now have
a cumulative impact on global GDP of about 0.25
percent, after one year. This coefficient is broadly in
line with those in other studies, which find spillovers
between 0.1 percent and 0.2 percent on global GDP,
but this new research better exploits rich cross-time
dynamics and showcases the increased importance of
spillovers from China in recent years and their potential to increase in the future.7
Trade links stand out as the main transmission channel of spillovers from China in this recent research,
which finds that countries’ exports to China, and a
larger share of manufacturing exports in total exports,
increase the magnitude of spillovers.8 In particular, a
10 percent rise in exports to China is associated with
an increase in the spillover coefficient of about 0.01—
that is, close to 5 percent.
Given the importance of this channel, what is
the direct impact of China’s transition on global
7Other work on GDP-to-GDP spillovers includes Cashin,
Mohaddes, and Raissi (2016); Cesa-Bianchi and Stratford (2016);
Dizioli and others (2016); IMF 2014; Hong and others (2016);
Duval and others (2014); and Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski
(2016).
8See Furceri, Jalles, and Zdzienicka 2016, which introduces the
countries’ time-varying coefficients into a rich panel environment.
The panel captures the importance of different factors in explaining
the evolution of spillover coefficients, including exports to China,
the composition of such exports (commodities and manufacturing),
and financial factors—as captured by the Chicago Board Options
Exchange Volatility Index (VIX).

CHAPTER 4

trade? New research (Blagrave and Vesperoni 2016)
addresses two critical empirical challenges to answering this question. First, to capture China’s direct role
as a source of spillovers, China-specific final demand
shocks—that is, those not associated with external
demand—were estimated. Second, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) Trade in Value Added (TiVA) database was
used to build country-specific China-demand shocks to
account for the impact of rebalancing, which implies
that spillovers depend on countries’ exposures to various sectors in China, specifically its secondary sector
(associated mainly with investment) as opposed to its
tertiary sector (mainly consumption).9
The evidence suggests that China’s transition
has played a role in the recent slowdown in global
exports and that its impact has differed across
countries.10 Panel vector autoregression estimates
for a sample of 46 advanced and emerging market
economies show that for a country with an average trade exposure to China, a 1 percentage point
negative shock to China’s final demand growth (in
one quarter) reduces export growth rates by 0.1–0.2
percentage point over the course of a year.11 This
finding suggests that, just as China fostered strong
global-trade growth during the expansion, its transition is likely playing a role in the current slowdown.
Estimated impacts differ across countries, with those
in Asia most affected: in level terms, following a
1 percent shock to China’s final demand, exports
in these countries are reduced by nearly 1 percent
after a year (Figure 4.5). Commodity exporters and
countries with stronger trade linkages to China’s
manufacturing sector are also affected significantly,
with much smaller effects in other countries.12 In
line with these results, in-sample projections help
9These

data allow for the identification of partners’ exports that
are directed to specific sectors in China’s final demand, even if those
exports reach China indirectly, through a third country.
10A broader analysis of the determinants of the global trade slowdown (which the China-specific impact provided here complements)
is provided in Chapter 2 of this World Economic Outlook report. The
chapter finds that overall weakness in economic activity has been the
primary restraint on trade growth, which is consistent with results
suggesting that weaker demand in China played a role in the reduction of global export growth.
11The limited availability of TiVA and quarterly trade volume data
requires the use of a relatively small sample (2013:Q1–2015:Q3).
12Although data limitations prevent an examination of trade
spillovers for low-income and developing countries in this analysis,
Drummond and Xue Liu (2013) point to an important role for
changes in China’s investment in explaining export dynamics in
sub-Saharan Africa.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.4. Spillovers from China over Time

(Average response of GDP to a 1 percentage point shock to growth in
China, percent)
0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
1990

95

2000

05

10

Source: Furceri, Jalles, and Zdzienicka (2016).
Note: Sample includes 148 advanced and emerging market economies.

explain the dynamics of the recent deceleration in
global trade (Figure 4.6). These projections suggest
that about a sixth of Asia’s export-growth slowdown
in 2014–15 could be explained by China’s transition,
with smaller impacts elsewhere.13
Demand rebalancing—from public investment to
private consumption—has a negative, albeit modest,
impact on global activity. Disentangling the impact of
a general slowdown from that of demand rebalancing
is challenging. Hong and others (2016), using TiVA
data, find that the impact of growth-neutral rebalancing is likely to be modest, but stronger in emerging
Asia. Using the IMF’s Flexible System of Global
Models (FSGM), Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski
(2016) reach a similar conclusion.14 Simulating a scenario in which public investment in China declines
by 1.5 percent of GDP each year for five years, and
transfers to liquidity-constrained households rise by
an equivalent amount, demand rebalancing would
reduce import demand from China: investment is
more import intensive than consumption, and a shift
13Since the first quarter of 2014 China’s transition may have
depressed average export growth rates in a group of six Asian countries by about 1 percentage point a quarter, and less than half this
amount in advanced and other emerging market economies.
14For details on the FSGM, see Andrle and others (2015).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

175

14

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.5. Impact on Exports of a 1 Percent Shock to China's
Demand after One Year

Figure 4.6. Decline in Average Export Growth Rate Attributed
to China Demand, 2014:Q1–2015:Q3

(Percent; GDP-weighted average)

(Percent)
Forecast decline

1.0
0.9

95 percent conﬁdence interval

0.0

0.8
–0.2

0.7
0.6

–0.4

0.5
–0.6

0.4

–0.8

0.3
0.2

–1.0

0.1
0.0

–1.2

Asia

Commodity
exporters

Systemic Eastern Europe
advanced
economies

All other
countries

Source: Blagrave and Vesperoni 2016.
Note: Asia = HKG, IDN, KOR, PHL, SGP, THA. Commodity exporters = AUS, BRA,
CHL, COL, RUS, ZAF. Eastern Europe = CZE, EST, HUN, LTU, LVA, POL, SVK, SVN,
TUR. Systemic advanced economies = DEU, JPN, USA. All other countries = ARG,
AUT, BEL, CAN, CHE, DNK, ESP, FRA, FIN, GBR, GRC, ISR, IRL, ISL, ITA, LUX, MEX,
NLD, NOR, NZL, PRT, SWE. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

in demand toward the latter triggers a net reduction
in imports. The effect on China’s GDP depends on
assumptions about the impact of public investment
on productivity—that is, if the latter is negligible,
GDP would fall in the short term but then recover
afterward. Assuming some impact on productivity,
however, would imply a permanent decline in GDP
below baseline. From a global perspective, under both
scenarios, GDP falls by less than 0.1 percent after five
years, with emerging Asia most affected.
Finally, structural shifts and higher wages in China’s
transition play a role as well, affecting both trade
volumes and global prices. One such shift is China’s
move to a higher position in the value chain, which
prompted a return to domestic production (onshoring)
of previously imported intermediate goods, but led to
opportunities for some countries. Another shift relates
to the persistent buildup of capacity in some sectors of
the Chinese economy, which is likely affecting global
prices. More specifically,
176

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

–1.4

AEs

Asia

Other EMs

Source: Blagrave and Vesperoni 2016.
Note: Blue bars depict the marginal impact of weaker GDP growth in China
(relative to the January 2012 World Economic Outlook (WEO) forecast) on average
export growth rates from 2014:Q1 to 2015:Q3. They represent the difference
between an unconditional forecast (with China’s growth rates based on the
January 2012 WEO baseline) and a conditional forecast with the same information
set, but adding estimated China demand shocks. AE = advanced economy; EM =
emerging market economy.

•• Onshoring—China is increasingly producing intermediate inputs domestically (Figure 4.7).15 IMF
(2016c) provides evidence that the gradual increase
of production of domestic intermediate goods in
China has displaced imports from trade partners.
This effect has been strongest in recent years and
seems to be affecting imports of more sophisticated
goods as China increasingly produces more complex medium-high-technology, capital-intensive
goods—generally referred to as moving up the value
chain. Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski (2016) show
that onshoring in China likely entails little change
to global GDP, but could have a mild negative
15A number of indicators support this conclusion, including
recent increases in the domestic-value-added content of China’s
exports (from about 50 percent in 2000 to just under 60 percent in
2011, according to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development–World Trade Organization Statistics on Trade in Value
Added data), a steady decline in processing trade, and declining
import intensity in some sectors. See Dizioli and others (2016).

CHAPTER 4

effect on countries that trade more with China. To
produce a greater share of exported goods domestically, China must increase its capital stock, implying stronger investment. Although China’s import
demand declines because of onshoring, which
depresses activity in Asia and the euro area, the
boost to domestic investment offsets these negative
spillovers, resulting in little change to global GDP
or commodity prices.
•• Market shares in labor-intensive goods—Some
countries stand to benefit from China’s move
up the value chain. This is the case for economies positioned to replace China’s production of
labor-intensive goods or to supply consumer goods
to the Chinese market. The decline in China’s
export market shares of some labor-intensive consumer goods suggests a loss of competitiveness in
these categories in recent years (see IMF 2016c and
Abiad and others 2016). IMF 2016b discusses how
countries such as Cambodia, Lao P.D.R., Myanmar,
and Vietnam stand to benefit from China’s rise up
the value chain.
•• Overcapacity—In the context of economic expansion during the 2000s, China has built up large
capacity in certain sectors, notably those associated with infrastructure investment (for example,
steel and cement). As the Chinese economy slows,
excess capacity in these sectors has the potential to
drive down global prices. Measuring overcapacity
is complicated, and a thorough analysis of the issue
is beyond the scope of this chapter, but a number of economic indicators—including declining
profit margins in some sectors, as well as more
conventional measures of capacity relative to total
demand—point to overcapacity in some industries in China.16 An analysis of the spillovers to
trade-partner inflation from overcapacity in China
is provided in Chapter 3 of this World Economic
Outlook report—it suggests that lower prices across
a number of goods have been associated with lower
import prices from China.

A Large Footprint in Commodity Markets
As with intermediate and final goods, China’s
demand for commodities has increased markedly over
the past two decades. Since the mid-1990s China’s
16See IMF (2016f ), IMF (2016i), Morgan Stanley Research
(2016a) and (2016b), among others.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.7. China: Processing Trade

(Percent of total exports, three-month moving average
)
Processing exports

Processing imports

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1993 95

97

99

2001

03

05

07

09

11

13

Sources: CEIC China database; and IMF staff calculations.

share of global demand for base metals—iron ore,
aluminum, copper, and nickel—has risen from about
3 percent to about 40 percent (Figure 4.8, panel 1),
while its share of demand for oil has increased from
about 1 percent to 11 percent. Some food items
show the same pattern—for instance, China’s share
of demand for soybeans represents 30 percent of
global demand.17 At the same time, China is a major
producer of some metals, and domestic supply has
increased substantially over the same period.
This large footprint in commodity markets implies
that both China’s boom and its ongoing economic
transition have had a significant impact on commodity
markets. China’s rapid economic growth in the 2000s
likely played a role in the sharp increase in prices. In
particular, the infrastructure-investment-led stimulus
following the global financial crisis (which arguably
created incentives for commodity producers—including China—to build capacity), contributed to higher
commodity prices. Subsequently, China’s growth transition and the ensuing slowdown in demand for com17For a more thorough discussion of global base metals demand
and supply, see IMF (2015a).

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

177

Jan.
16

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.8. A Large Footprint in Commodity Markets
70
60

1. China's Share of Global Consumption1
(Percent)
2000

2015

50
40
30
20
10

Percent price impact of 1-std shock2

0

Iron ore

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8

Aluminum

Copper

Nickel

2. Futures-Price Response to China Industrial-Production
News Surpise
Copper
Oil

Nickel
Soybeans

0.6

Lead

Tin
Aluminum

0.4
0.2
0.0

–0.2
10

Oil

Beef

Corn

15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
Chinese consumption share (percent of world total, 2015)

60

Sources: Bloomberg L.P.; Kolerus, N'Diaye, and Saborowski 2016; World Bureau
of Metal Statistics; U.S. Department of Agriculture; and IMF staff calculations.
1
Latest available data for oil are from 2014.
2
1-std = one standard deviation.

modities have proved suppliers’ previous production
decisions overly optimistic. The result is oversupply
and lower prices in many commodity markets. This has
likely affected economies that are beyond production
value chains in which China plays a critical role. Moreover, analysis in Nose, Saxegaard, and Torres (2016)
indicates that there are spillovers from extractive to
nonextractive sectors within these economies, which
implies that the effects of negative terms-of-trade
shocks are not limited to the extractive sector.
Shocks to economic activity in China have a
significant impact on commodity prices, which is
stronger in markets in which China’s footprint is
larger. Kolerus, N’Diaye, and Saborowski (2016)
assess this impact under two analytical approaches.
One gauges the response of commodity prices in
futures markets to surprises in Chinese industrial-production data announcements using high-frequency data, while the other uses a more structural
approach to assess the cumulative impact of shocks
to China’s demand on commodity prices at quarterly
178

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

frequency.18 These are complementary approaches
that look both at market pricing of new information
and at the economic significance of the price response
to activity shocks. Both find that China’s shocks have
a significant impact on commodity prices; effects are
larger in markets in which China represents a greater
share of global demand (Figure 4.8, panel 2). Results
from a structural vector autoregression also suggest
that these effects are economically significant—over
a one-year horizon, a 1 percent change in industrial
production growth leads to a 5–7 percent increase
in metal prices and a rise in fuel prices by about 7
percent.19 Conversely, high-frequency data offer an
additional insight, showing that initial market reactions
in commodity futures markets are larger when financial
market uncertainty—as proxied by the Chicago Board
Options Exchange Volatility Index (VIX)—is higher.
China’s commodity price clout has increased over
time. Structural vector autoregression estimates of 1-year
price elasticities to China’s demand estimated over a
10-year rolling window—estimated consecutively for
each year, beginning in 1986–95, and ending with the
2006–15 window—show that the sensitivity of commodity prices to China’s demand was negligible before
China’s accession to the World Trade Organization (Figure 4.9). However, since the early 2000s the sensitivity
of oil and metal prices to China’s demand has become
statistically significant and has increased. For instance,
the impact of developments in China on the price of
iron ore rose throughout the sample period, in line with
its increasing footprint in this market—from 3.5 percent
of total demand in 1986 to 52 percent in 2015. Similar
patterns are observed for copper and aluminum.
In line with these findings, recent IMF research
suggests that weak demand in China accounts for a
significant portion of the decline in commodity prices
since 2013. Analysis in IMF 2016c builds on the strong
common factor in commodity-price fluctuations—
typically interpreted as a reflection of global economic
conditions—and estimates a factor-augmented vector
autoregressive model for a sample of about 40 com18In the first approach, future commodity prices at daily frequency
are regressed on China’s industrial production announcement surprises—that is, deviations of industrial production growth from the
median Bloomberg consensus before the announcement. The second
approach employs a structural vector autoregression to estimate the
reaction of commodity prices to Chinese demand using quarterly
data from 1986 to 2015.
19Aastveit and others (2012); Gauvin and Rebillard (2015);
Roache (2012); and Roache and Rousset (2015) also find that shocks
to China’s demand have a significant impact on commodity prices.

CHAPTER 4

modity prices and shocks to economic activity in China
and in the rest of the world. The estimates suggest that
most of the decline in commodity prices is explained by
shocks to economic activity in the rest of the world until
2013, but that China’s demand shocks have played a
significant role since then, and that the effect on nonfuel
commodity prices is larger. These estimates are corroborated by simulations using the IMF’s FSGM.20
The decline in commodity prices will benefit commodity importers, including some emerging market and developing economies. Lower prices may dampen spillovers
from trade in some countries, notably in Asia. Dizioli,
Hunt, and Maliszewski (2016) conduct simulations of
a gradual slowdown in China over the course of five
years that reduces the level of GDP by about 5 percent
by 2020 compared with a baseline in which it does not
decelerate (Figure 4.10). This shock entails a reduction in
investment and consumption in China and thus compression of its demand for imports. Weaker demand also
depresses commodity prices—oil and metals prices are
lower by about 7 percent. The simulation suggests that
oil exporters are significantly worse off: Latin America
suffers moderate output losses, and emerging Asia, the
euro area, and Japan experience losses in between. Lower
commodity prices are behind the positive impact in the
United States.21 An interesting insight from this exercise
is that, despite being strongly affected through trade channels, spillovers to emerging Asia are comparable to those
in the euro area because the region’s heavy reliance on
imports of commodities curbs direct spillovers from trade.
Indeed, staff calculations indicate that while the impact
of lower commodity prices in Asian economies partially
offset spillovers through trade, commodity exporters in
all regions have experienced negative spillovers from both
channels (Figure 4.11).22

Financial Markets
Direct transmission of spillovers through financial
channels is still limited, but developments in China
20Simulations

are presented in IMF 2016e.
impact of lower commodity prices is complex. For exporters, it will reduce export values and negatively impact the terms
of trade, but will also affect domestic growth more broadly, by
tightening credit conditions and weakening balance sheets, which
can also erode the fiscal position (see IMF 2015b, IMF 2015f, and
IMF 2016g). The impact on commodity importers depends on the
pass-through of lower prices to consumers and their impact on real
interest rates in the presence of monetary policy constraints—that is,
the zero lower bound.
22Calculations are based on the empirical analysis in the previous two
sections and on country shares of commodity exports in Gruss (2014).
21The

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.9. Cumulative One-Year Price Impact from a
1 Percent Shock to China’s Industrial Production
(Percent)

Weighted mean
15

Interquartile range
2. Copper

1. Iron

15

10

10

5

5

0

0

–5

–5

–10

–10

–15
1995
15

99

2003

07

11

15

3. Oil

1995

99

2003

07

11

4. Aluminum

–15
15
15

10

10

5

5

0

0

–5

–5

–10

–10

–15
1995

99

2003

07

11

15

1995 99 2003 07

11

Source: Kolerus, N'Diaye, and Saborowski 2016.
Note: x-axis indicates the last year of a rolling 10-year period.

are increasingly affecting asset prices globally and likely
amplifying the impact of real shocks. The relatively limited transmission of financial shocks so far is associated
with China’s integration into global markets—there are
still significant capital-account restrictions, including
limitations on inward foreign direct investment, quotas
on portfolio flows, and caps on foreign borrowing by
domestic residents. However, financial linkages are
increasing, and the impact of events in China on financial markets over the past year suggests that they can
amplify real shocks by affecting asset prices and hence
financing costs, especially in emerging markets. Increasing financial vulnerabilities in China could also lead to
a disorderly deleveraging that could trigger contagion in
emerging market financial markets and exchange rates
by affecting confidence.23 A closer look at the comovement of China’s and global asset prices and the repercus23See

IMF 2016g.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

179

–15
15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.10. China: Slowdown Scenario

Figure 4.11. Spillovers from China
(Percent of GDP)1

(Percent deviation from no-slowdown baseline)

2. Global Real GDP

1 1. China: Real GDP

0.2

0

0.0

–1

–0.4

–3

–0.6

–4

16

17

18

19

2 3. Global Real Price of Oil
and Metals

20 2015

16

17

18

19

–1.0
20

0.0

Emerging Asia
Japan
–0.1

Oil
Metals

–4

–0.2

–6

–0.3

16

17

18

19

5. Real GDP

20 2015

16

17

18

19

6. Real GDP

0.0

–0.4
20
0.2

United States
Latin America

–0.2

–0.2

0.1
0.0

–2

0.1

–0.4

–0.6
–0.8

Asia

Commodity exporters

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Asia = HKG, IDN, JPN, KOR, PHL, SGP, THA; Commodity exporters = AUS,
BRA, CAN, CHL, COL, ISL, NOR, RUS, ZAF. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes. "Impact of trade" denotes
the impact on exports as a percent of GDP from a 1 percent shock to Chinese ﬁnal
demand. "Impact of commodities" denotes the impact on exports as a percent of
GDP from a change in commodity prices due to a 1 percent shock to Chinese
industrial production. "Impact of commodities and trade" denotes the aggregate
spillovers from trade and commodity channels.
1
Nominal GDP; average 2011–13.

0.0

–0.6
–0.1

–0.8

Euro area
Oil exporters

–1.0

–0.2

–1.2
–1.4
2015

0.2

–0.4

4. Real GDP

0

0.2

0.4

–0.8

–5

–8
2015

Impact of trade
Impact of commodities
Impact of commodities and trade

–0.2

–2

–6
2015

0.6

16

17

18

19

20 2015

16

17

18

19

–0.3
20

Source: Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski (2016).
Note: This scenario considers a gradual slowdown in China's GDP growth over a ﬁveyear period. This slowdown is assumed to be driven by weaker productivity growth,
and leaves the level of real GDP 5 percent lower than it would have been if no
slowdown occurred.

sions of policy uncertainty in China on global financial
markets can shed some light on these issues.
Comovement between asset prices in China and
elsewhere has strengthened. Mwase and others (2016)
assess this comovement using the connectedness
indicator proposed by Diebold and Yilmaz (2011).24
24This indicator has also been applied, for example, to assess
directional connectedness in IMF (2016d) and Guimaraes-Filho and
Hong (2016).

180

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

They show that comovement between stock market
returns and exchange rates in China and elsewhere
has increased since mid-2015 (Figure 4.12, panel 1),
and that the latter is larger in economies with stronger
trade links with China—notably in emerging Asia—
and in commodity producing countries. The overall
magnitude of comovement attributed to China has
increased, although it remains relatively modest—it
explains about 1 percent of the forecast error variance
elsewhere, even during events over the past year.25 This
may in part be related to the inability of Diebold and
Yilmaz’s (2011) framework to identify structural shocks
originating in China.
Developments in China—including policy uncertainty—have an impact on asset prices, particularly in
emerging market economies and in countries with stronger trade links to China. Mwase and others (2016) also
use a stronger identification strategy of China’s shocks
25To put this in context, financial market comovements attributed
to China are about one-fifth the magnitude of those attributed to
the United States but are similar to those attributed to Japan.

CHAPTER 4

developed by Arslanalp and others (2016)—relying on
information on asset prices, global developments, and
China-specific news—to get further insights into China’s
role in driving events since early 2015. They find that
adverse shocks in China reduce equity prices both in
advanced and in emerging market economies, with
stronger effects on countries with higher trade exposure
to China (Figure 4.12, panel 2).26 Exchange rates in
emerging markets depreciate while those in advanced
economies appreciate, in particular in safe haven
economies. Arslanalp and others (2016) focus on Asian
financial markets and also find that spillovers through
financial channels are increasing and are larger for
countries with greater trade exposure to China. These
results, and the timing of the events, suggest that recent
policy uncertainty—related to the exchange rate regime
and renminbi depreciation and the policy response to
a domestic-equity-market adjustment—affected asset
prices elsewhere. The event study evidence is corroborated by structural vector autoregression analysis,
which suggests that a decline in equity prices and weak
industrial production lead to lower U.S. and emerging
market economy stock valuations and weaker oil and
metal prices. It also shows that adjustments in China’s
exchange rate have a large impact on commodity prices,
equity prices, and exchange rates in emerging markets.
Over the past year, market reactions to renminbi depreciations have been strong because, compared with other
asset prices, adjustment in exchange rates have implications beyond financial market developments.
China’s large foreign assets and liabilities imply that
the financial channel will be more relevant in the future
as the capital account opens up. China’s international
investment position is large, it is long on debt and short
on equity, and its main assets are reserve holdings and
foreign direct investment.27 At $3.3 trillion as of June
2016, China’s foreign exchange reserves represent about
30 percent of global reserves. Changes in the latter could
have a material impact on the price of China’s holdings,
most of which are U.S. Treasury bonds, although to date
there has not been a strong correlation between China’s
reserve accumulation and U.S. Treasury bond yields.28
China’s foreign direct investment is especially important for low-income countries in particular because it
26These

findings echo those of IMF (2016d).
and others (2016).
28The recent fall in reserves—$750 billion between June 2014 and
June 2016, of which about $240 billion were U.S. Treasury bonds—
was met with declining yields, as it took place amid risk-off global
conditions.
27Mwase

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.12. Transmission of Spillovers through Financial
Channels
1.6 1. Asset Price Comovement with China
(Forecast error variance explained by China)
1.4
Stock market returns
Exchange rate changes

1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Jan.
2015

Mar.
15

May
15

Jul.
15

Sep.
15

Nov.
15

Jan. Feb.
16 16

1.0 2. Event Study: Response of External Financial Variables to a
China-Speciﬁc Event
0.5
(Percent)
0.0
–0.5
–1.0

Trade exposure: high
Trade exposure: low

–1.5
–2.0
–2.5

AEs

Equities

EMs

AEs
EMs
Nominal effective exchange rate

Source: Mwase and others 2016.
Note: AE = advanced economy, EM = emerging market economy.

holds large investments in small emerging Asian and
sub-​Saharan African economies (see Box 4.1). As for
liabilities, cross-border banking linkages are comparable
to some Group of Seven economies. Foreign banks’
claims on Chinese entities stood at less than $1 trillion
as of the first quarter of 2016, declining by more than
25 percent compared with the end of 2014, and is
concentrated within a few large systemically important
financial institutions. Stress testing suggests that even a
substantial shock from Chinese banks would not lower
banking system capital below Basel III requirements in
countries with exposure to China.

Policy: The Importance of Managing the Transition
China’s slowdown has spillover implications, but a
smooth transition will benefit the global economy over
the long term. Just as rapid growth in China fostered
global growth in the past, the ongoing slowdown and
rebalancing entail significant spillovers through trade,
and a large impact on commodity prices. Spillovers
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

181

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.13. China: Cyclical Slowdown Scenario
(Percent deviation from no-slowdown baseline)

2. China: Investments and
Imports

0.5 1. China: Real GDP

2
0

0.0

–2
–4

–0.5

–6
–1.0

–8

–1.5
–2.0
2015 16

17

18

19

20 2015

16

–10
Real imports
Real investment –12
–14
17
18
19
20

4. Global Real Price of Oil
and Metals

0.1 3. Global GDP

1

0.0

0

–0.1

–1

–0.2

–2
Oil
Metals

–0.3
–0.4
2015 16

17

18

19

20 2015

16

17

18

–3
–4
20

19

6. Real GDP: Oil Exporters

0.4 5. Real GDP

0.1

United States
Euro area
Latin America
Japan

0.3
0.2

0.0
–0.1

0.1
–0.2

0.0

–0.3

–0.1
–0.2
2015 16

17

18

19

20

2015 16

17

18

19

20

–0.4

Source: Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski (2016).

through these channels have become larger over time,
as has the impact of events in China on asset prices
elsewhere, amplifying spillovers from the real economy.
Even a smooth transition will require China’s trading
partners to adjust to slowing demand in the short
term, developing new export markets and reallocating
resources away from the most affected sectors. However,
a well-managed transition will reduce the risk of a disorderly adjustment with larger spillovers and ensure more
sustainable growth with potential gains for the global
economy. Sustaining progress on reforms and tackling
vulnerabilities will reduce downward risks, which can
182

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

boost sentiment and lift investment in trading partners.
China’s announced capacity reductions in coal and steel
production, if implemented, could have a sizable effect
on global markets. Moreover, some elements of China’s
rebalancing—such as its move up the value chain and
the prospective boost to domestic consumption growth
in the years ahead—will create opportunities for some
economies, notably in emerging Asia, and the increase in
services trade and China’s investment abroad are likely to
produce short-term benefits for some countries.29
In contrast, a bumpy or incomplete transition may
exacerbate spillovers. Policy uncertainty since mid-2015
highlights growing challenges to management of China’s
slowdown in a highly leveraged economy and may give
rise to a disruptive transition. Dizioli, Hunt, and Maliszewski (2016) build a scenario in which a reassessment
of risk in China illustrates the possible costs of such a
transition (Figure 4.13).30 A decline in asset prices by 10
percent and an increase in the corporate risk premium
by 150 basis points during the first year would reduce
investment and private consumption in China by about
10 percent and 2.5 percent, respectively, and real GDP
by about 1.5 percent. Despite some offset from lower
commodity prices, spillovers would be uniformly negative, and worse than those on the global economy under
a smooth transition.
This highlights the benefits of a transition in which
China strengthens transparency—especially in communicating policy objectives—and accepts lower growth.
Clear communication of policy intentions, including
further steps to move toward a floating exchange rate
regime, is of the essence. Policy uncertainty and financial sector risk may trigger large adjustments in equity
prices and exchange rates, which are destabilizing for
global growth. Accepting lower growth entails keeping
credit growth in check by tackling its root causes—
notably, the pursuit of unsustainably high growth
targets—and can produce higher and better-quality
growth in the long term. A comprehensive plan to
address vulnerabilities in the financial sector is needed,
including restructuring or resolving weak firms, requiring banks to recognize and manage impaired assets and
29For a discussion on short-term costs and long-term gains of
China’s transition, see IMF (2016f ) and Hong and others (2016).
30This exercise can be thought as one in which China does not
rebalance, only to suffer a larger fall in activity later. The reassessment of risk in China would be related to a continued building of
vulnerabilities in the financial sector due to rapid credit growth. An
explicit risk scenario without reforms in the short term and a larger
fall in activity over the medium term is shown in IMF (2015g).

CHAPTER 4

boosting their buffers, hardening budget constraints by
reducing access to credit of weak firms, creating a more
market-based system to resolve distressed debt, reining
in shadow bank and product risks, and dampening
excessive housing price growth. On the fiscal front, the
large deficit should be reduced over the medium-term
to ensure debt sustainability. Temporary, targeted,
on-budget, proconsumption fiscal stimulus can be used
if growth threatens to fall excessively. Off-budget public
investment should be scaled down.
As for recipient economies, efforts to boost trade and
integrate them into value chains are called for, as are
structural reforms to foster growth or change existing
growth models. Policy responses will depend on countries’ circumstances—and, in particular, their trade links
with China and their export mix. More specifically,
•• In countries with significant trade links to China—
while available policy space and exchange rate flexibility should be used to cushion the negative impact
of weaker external demand—adjustment is needed
to permanently lower demand from China. Achieving this goal may imply a reduction in domestic
absorption with a possible depreciation of the real
exchange rate unless alternative exports markets can
be developed (see below).
•• Global and regional agreements can bolster trade.
These also provide opportunities to push the
frontier on such issues as services and regulatory
cooperation, and foreign direct investment policies, which can boost efficiency and productivity
through greater investment, technology transfer,
and integration into global value chains. But it is
also important to move ahead with an ambitious
agenda in the World Trade Organization, and to
leverage its unique reach and well-developed legal
and institutional structure to help ensure coherence
across the global trading system. Flexible negotiation
approaches should allow for different speeds and
depths of liberalization among countries.
•• Because commodity prices are likely to remain low
as a result of weaker demand from China, commodity exporters should use buffers where available, but
also plan for adjustment, including through reduced
and more efficient public expenditures and stronger fiscal frameworks, and the mobilization of new
revenue sources. Some countries may also need to
pursue new growth models. Commodity importers
stand to benefit from lower prices; the appropriate
use of windfall savings in these countries would
depend on their cyclical and fiscal positions.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

•• China’s transition creates an opportunity for
low-wage, labor-rich countries to increase their
production of labor-intensive goods, as well as for
producers of consumption goods. To support such
an increase, sound structural policies are important,
including improvements in infrastructure, governance, the business climate, and trade openness.
From a global perspective, protectionist policies
must be avoided, as these would be detrimental to
trade over the long term. Spillovers from China’s
transition may prompt countries to pursue trade
restrictions to protect domestic producers against
weaker external demand or perceptions that China
is contributing to oversupply in some markets. Such
protectionist measures—not necessarily in response
to developments in China—have likely played some
role in depressing global trade over recent years, and
could deter it over the long term. In the past, legal
commitments, Group of Twenty pledges, and the
recognition of potential economic damage from trade
restrictions have discouraged countries from imposing new restrictions, particularly during the global
financial crisis. Global leadership and a collective effort
should promote trade agreements that would counteract movement toward protectionism. Moreover, trade
reforms can complement other reforms in goods and
services markets as they boost productivity by enhancing efficiency, promoting competition, and encouraging innovation and adoption of existing technologies.

The Challenges and Opportunities of Migration
Geopolitical conflicts and economic disparity are
contributing to large migration flows with far-reaching
social and economic repercussions and, especially in the
case of refugees, humanitarian issues. Migration may
stir social tensions and provoke a political backlash in
recipient economies, but past experience suggests it may
also offer gains in terms of higher growth, productivity,
and relief from population aging. Swift labor market
integration is key to harnessing the gains in terms of
growth, increasing the contribution of migrants to the
fiscal accounts, and reducing tensions. In source countries, migration can take a toll on long-term growth
prospects as the young and the educated population
leave—­usually known as “brain drain”—which can be
mitigated by remittances. Depending on the underlying
drivers of migration, source countries need policies to
address brain drain and maximize the benefits from
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

183

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.14. International Migrants and Refugees
10 1. Stock of International Migrants
(Percent of population)
8
Advanced to advanced
Emerging to advanced
Advanced to emerging
Emerging to emerging

6
4
2
0
1990
20

95

2000

05

10

15

2. Refugees (Including Refugee-Like Situations)
(Millions of people)

15
10
5
0
1955 60

65

70

75

80

85

90

95 2000 05

10

15

Sources: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and IMF staff
calculations.

remittances and diaspora networks. Global cooperation
is needed to address humanitarian issues.

Trends, Drivers, and Challenges of Migration
Migration has risen steadily over recent decades. The
stock of international migrants increased from 150 million in 1990 to 250 million in 2015.31 While the number of migrants between emerging market economies is
the largest, it comprises a small and stable proportion
of their population—about 2 percent. Migration from
emerging to advanced economies has been larger in
relative terms and more dynamic: the share of migrants
in the population of host countries almost doubled from
about 5 percent to 10 percent between 1990 and 2015
(Figure 4.14, panel 1), with significant country differences. In 2015, migrants represented about 5 percent
of the population in Finland and about 30 percent in
Australia. There are two types of migrants: economic
(voluntary, in search of better prospects) and humanitarian (refugees, escaping conflict and strife).
31This number and the analysis in the chapter exclude illegal
migration.

184

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

The stock of international migration is dominated
by economic migrants, but the recent surge in refugees
has raised their number close to record levels. Economic
migrants constitute almost 95 percent of the total stock
of migrants, and they appear to be on a stable and
increasing rise, whereas refugees represent a relatively
small share, but their numbers have been volatile. The
recent civil war in Syria and unrest throughout the
Middle East have raised the number of refugees to the
highest level since the 1990s (Figure 4.14, panel 2).
The flow of new refugees surged in 2014–15, reaching
4.5 million—about half of the flows of total migration
over those years. Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey were the
main recipients, hosting about 2.2 million new refugees
over the same period. The European Union also received
an unparalleled number of refugees recently—about
1.25 million first-time asylum applications were submitted in 2015, and applications continued to increase in
2016, although at a decreasing rate.
Total international migration is dominated by people of working age but, among refugees, the number of
children is much larger. More than 70 percent of the
stock of migrants is in the 20–64 age group (Figure
4.15, panel 1). In fact, migrants represent a significant
share of the labor force in many advanced economies.
Their presence increases the working-age population
and reduces dependency ratios; in some countries,
they have contributed about half of the growth in the
working-age population between 1990 and 2010 (Figure 4.15, panel 2). The stock of refugees has a stronger
presence of children; in 2015, for instance, more than
half of refugees were under the age of 18.
Increasingly, migrants to advanced economies have
high- and medium-level skills, although the number
of low-skill migrants is still higher compared with the
latter.32 By 2010, high-skilled migrants constituted
about 6 percent of the population across advanced
economies—up from 2 percent in the 1990s—while
medium- and low-skilled migrants represented about 4
percent and 5 percent, respectively (Figure 4.15, panel
3). This likely reflects in part the global rise in educational attainment over the past decades. Skill-based
immigration policies, particularly in some Anglo-Saxon
countries, which tend to have a larger proportion of
high-skilled migrants, may have played a role as well.
32The skill level refers to education level: higher than high school
leaving certificate or equivalent (high-skilled); high school leaving
certificate or equivalent (medium-skilled); primary or no schooling
(low-skilled).

CHAPTER 4

The share of migrants with low skills in continental Europe and medium skills in Nordic countries
(Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden) remains
relatively high—although skill levels of migrants have
been on the rise there as well.
Migration is shaped by a combination of social
and economic conditions at home and abroad, raising
difficult humanitarian issues and potential tensions in
recipient countries. Refugee flows are driven by the
need to flee violence and persecution, leaving people no
choice but to leave their homes amid political instability
and conflicts. As for economic migration, a number
of factors are at play. Lack of opportunities and deteriorating economic conditions in source countries can
push migrants to greener pastures abroad. Pull factors in
recipient economies are more complex and determine
not only the extent of migration but also its distribution
among host countries (Jaumotte, Koloskova, and Saxena
2016). First, economic conditions in recipient economies are critical. There is a positive association between
long-term real GDP per capita growth and the change
in the share of migrants (Figure 4.16, panel 1). Second,
some structural factors matter. For migrants, the choice
to move entails important geographic and cultural factors, such as distance to destination countries, common
language, contiguous borders, and common colonial
links (Figure 4.16, panel 2). Third, immigration policies
in host countries affect migration flows. Reforms that
tighten entry laws reduce migration flows, while less
restrictive laws—as a result of signing the Maastricht
treaty, for example—have the opposite effect (see Ortega
and Peri 2009). Despite the opportunities associated
with migration, it also poses challenges for both sending
and recipient countries, mainly the loss of human
capital in the former and potential social tensions with
political consequences in the latter.

Recipient Countries: Challenges and Long-Term Gains
International migration is both a boon and a
challenge for host countries. Migrants can boost the
labor force and have a positive impact on growth
and public finances over the long term, especially in
countries with aging populations. However, receiving
migrants poses challenges. There are concerns about
displacement of native workers and short-term fiscal
costs, especially in the case of refugees. This can add to
possible social tensions related to differences in culture
and language—given the compositional effects that
migration may have on the population—and security-​

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.15. Migration by Age and Skill
100 1. Age Distribution of Total International Migrants, 2015
(Percent)
80

Total
Male
Female

60
40
20
0

0–9

20–64

65+

70 2. Contribution to Working-Age (25–64) Population by
Migrants and Natives, 1990–2010
60
(Percent)
50
Natives
40
Migrants
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
IRL
AUS
CAN
NOR
PRT
NLD
AUT
SWE
FIN
ESP
NZL
USA
CHE
GRC
GBR
FRA
DNK
DEU
7 3. Stock of Migrants by Skill
(Percent of population, simple average)
6
5
4
3
2
High

1
0
1980

85

90

95

Medium
2000

Low
05

10

Sources: IAB; United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division 2015 and World Population Prospects 2015 Revision; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.

related incidents in some countries.33 These tensions
may prompt a political backlash, as demonstrated by
the referendum in the United Kingdom on European
Union membership, in which migration played a role.
The speed of integration is key. Past experience suggests that swift integration into labor markets is critical
to harness the economic gains from migration, both in
33See Card, Dustmann, and Preston (2009), who show that people have stronger concerns about migration than trade.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

185

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Cumulative 20-year real GDP growth

Figure 4.16. Determinants of Migration
180 1. Real GDP Growth versus Immigration
(Percent, 1990–2010)
160
IRL
140
LUX
120
GBR
AUS
100
NZL
80
NOR
CAN
NLD
SWE
60
FIN
USA
ESP
FRA
AUT
GRC
40
PRT
DEU CHE DNK
20
0
0
5
10
15
20
Change in stock of migrants over 25
(percent of 1990 population over 25)

25

60 2. Determinants of Destination Choice
(Percent of total migration)
50
40
30
20
10
0

Colonial link Common
ofﬁcial
language

Common
ethnic
language

Contiguous Schengen
countries

EU

Sources: CEPII database; United Nations Global Migration database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The numbers are based on total stocks of migrants between all origin and 18
destination countries, that share the listed characteristics. The numbers are
expressed as a percent of the total stock of migrants in 18 destination countries.
Schengen = Schengen area countries that allow free movement of their citizens
across their borders. Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.

the short and the long term. It can also speed up the
positive impact on fiscal accounts, bolstering positive spillovers in recipient economies. Arguably, swift
economic integration can accelerate and deepen social
integration, with positive feedback effects between the
two, although it may create tensions in the short term
as well, especially when unemployment is high.
Labor Markets: The Central Role of Integration
The impact of migration on labor markets depends
on complementarity between migrants and native
workers. In principle, migrants with skills similar to
those of natives would compete with them in the labor
market and affect employment and wages, especially
in the short term—before the capital stock adjusts to
more labor. However, if migrants’ skills complement
186

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

those of native workers, the impact could be positive
(Aiyar and others 2016). This may be relevant, for
instance, in a number of countries where labor market
participation of highly skilled native women tends to
be greater when there are lower-skilled female labor
migrants (Jaumotte, Koloskova, and Saxena 2016; see
Figure 4.17). The availability of relatively low-cost
workers in the services or health care sector may allow
high-skilled women to enter the labor force or work
longer hours, increasing productivity.
Past experience suggests that migration has little
effect on employment rates and average wages of native
workers, although it may have an impact in certain
labor market segments. Most of the academic literature
suggests that the impact of migration on average wages
or employment of native workers is very limited.34
Instead, the literature suggests that migrants can contribute to labor markets through the complementarities
just mentioned, which allow for: (1) natives to move
into different segments of labor markets, often performing more complex tasks that promote skill upgrading
and hence foster efficient specialization; (2) an increase
in female labor market participation; (3) more efficient market functioning, with migrants filling up
occupations for which natives are in short supply; (4)
contributions of high-skilled migrants to technological
progress; and (5) an increase in demand, which is likely
to boost consumption in the short term and investment
over the medium term.35 Some studies, though, find a
negative impact on wages of low-skilled workers.36
The labor market performance of migrants themselves suggests that labor market integration is complex.
Aiyar and others (2016) find that migrants have lower
participation, employment rates, and wages than natives
in advanced economies (Figure 4.18, panel 1). The earnings and employment gaps are pronounced in the initial
years and fall as migrants gain language proficiency and
obtain more relevant job experience—migrants from
34See Peri (2014a), (2014b) for a survey of studies on the impact
of immigration on employment and wages of native workers. See also
IMF (2015c) and Aiyar and others (2016), and references therein.
Some case studies have also found no significant impact of migration
on labor markets for natives, for example Card (1990) for the Mariel
boatlift in early (1980); and Akgunduz, van den Berg, and Hassink
(2015), for the impact of the recent flow of Syrian refugees into Turkey.
35See, for example, Alesina, Harnoss, and Rapoport (2015); Cattaneo,
Fiorio, and Peri (2015); D’Amuri and Peri (2014); Farré, González, and
Ortega (2011); Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010); Ortega and Peri
(2014); Peri, Shih, and Sparber (2015); and Peri and Sparber (2009).
36Borjas (2003, 2006) and Aydemir and Borjas (2007, 2011)
document a negative impact on low-skilled natives’ wages in the U.S.
labor market.

CHAPTER 4

Figure 4.17. Females: Low Education versus High Skilled,
2000

Figure 4.18. Labor Market Performance
1
0.05 1. Employment Relative to Native Workers: Conditional Gap
(Share)
0.00

(Percent of total)

Difference between low-educated female
migrants and natives

25

DEU

AUT

20

–0.05

CHE

15

USA

10
5

SWE

ESP

CAN

0
–5

–0.25

–15

50

PRT

–20
–25
20

40

25

30

35

40

Refugees
Other immigrants

–0.20

NLD

AUS

IRL

GBR

DNK

–0.15

NOR
NZL

GRC

–10

–0.10

FIN

FRA

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

45

Proportion of female natives in high-skilled jobs

<6

6–10
11–20
Years since arrival in country

> 20

2. Highly Educated Workers in Lower-Skill Jobs, by Region, 2000
(Percent of respective highly educated population,
simple average)
Migrants
Natives

30
20

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes.

advanced economies or with better initial language skills
often do better than other groups. Challenges for female
migrants and refugees seem to be particularly acute;
their labor market outcomes are worse, especially in the
short term (Aldén and Hammarstedt 2014; Ott 2013).
The challenges at play include:
•• Skill recognition—Migrants tend to be under-​
represented in high-skill jobs and over-represented
in low-skill jobs.37 This may be in part justified by
differences in education—for instance, a degree in
the country of origin may not be of the same quality
as one in host countries—but it may also reflect
policies, a lack of recognition of skills, or disadvantages linked to cultural differences. These translate
into a missed opportunity for the host country. For
example, benchmarking against natives, continental European and Nordic countries have a higher
proportion of highly educated migrants employed
in lower-skill occupations than other countries.
In contrast, the opportunities for highly educated
migrants and natives tend to be similar in AngloSaxon countries (Figure 4.18, panel 2).
•• Labor market regulations—Excessive employment
protection or high taxes and social security contri37See, for example, Aleksynska and Tritah (2013) for occupation-​
educational mismatch of immigrants in Europe.

10
0

Anglo-Saxon countries

Continental Europe

Nordic countries

Sources: European Social Survey, Rounds 1–6; Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; and IMF staff calculations.
1
Conditional gap measures the difference in the relevant outcome between
natives and immigrants; depending on age, sex, years of education, language
skills, host country, and time period.

butions can take a toll on employment, in particular for workers whose productivity is a priori
uncertain (see, for example, Blanchard, Jaumotte,
and Loungani 2013). Employment rates for
migrants are higher in countries with low entrylevel wages and less employment protection (Ho
and Shirono 2015).
•• Additional challenges for refugees—Uncertainty
about refugees’ legal status—the acceptance of
their application for asylum—can delay their labor
market entry. While their applications are being
considered, asylum seekers often face legal barriers
to employment (Hatton 2013) and, in European
countries, application processing may take from
two months to a year. Finally, given that migration
drivers for refugees are less determined by pull
factors—such as high growth in the host country—arrival in an environment of high unemployment may lower their employment rates and wages
for a prolonged period (Äslund and Rooth 2007),
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

187

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.19. Germany: Present Value of Expected Future Net
Fiscal Contribution by Age Group
(Thousands of euros, based on generational account approach;
base year = 2012)
400
Natives
Migrants

300

200

100

0

–100

–200

0

10

20

30

40

50
Age

60

70

80

90

100

Source: Bonin (2014).

highlighting the importance of the phase of the
business cycle in the integration process.
Migration and Fiscal Challenges
Labor market integration also plays a critical role in
the fiscal impact in recipient economies. Over time,
given their impact on the working-age population and
economic activity, migrants can generate additional
tax revenues and social contributions. But integration
takes time, especially in the case of refugees, which
means there will be a delay before they begin making
a fiscal contribution. In the short term, they may need
recourse to welfare services and claim social benefits—
notably, health care and social assistance. Migration
may also affect natives’ use of fiscal resources to the
extent that the presence of migrants increases natives’
unemployment rate or lowers their wages.38 The
impact of migration on fiscal accounts depends not
only on migrants’ income, but also on the generosity
of the social security system in host economies.
38As discussed, most of the literature suggests that such effects are
small. These effects could also be mitigated if migration increases the
income from capital accruing to natives (Borjas 1999). Conde Ruiz,
Ramón Garcia, and Navarro (2008) document such effects for Spain
in the early 2000s.

188

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Over their lifetime, migrants tend to contribute less
than natives to the fiscal accounts, mainly because they
pay less in taxes and social security payments. This
points again to the importance of their integration
into labor markets—their smaller contributions reflect
less time in the labor force and lower-paying jobs.39
Migrants depend more on some social transfers, but
differences between them and natives do not seem to
have large budgetary implications. Relative to unemployed native-borns, unemployed migrants are more
likely to receive social assistance, but less likely to
receive generally more generous unemployment benefits. The case of Germany illustrates that both natives
and migrants have an increasing contribution as they
approach working age, which diminishes during retirement (Figure 4.19)—the contribution of migrants,
though, tends to become positive later, peak at a lower
level, and turn negative at an earlier stage (see Aiyar
and others 2016 and IMF 2015c).
Past experience suggests that the net fiscal impact
of migrants is small for OECD countries. Estimates
depend critically on a number of assumptions—
notably the many elements that determine the
employment prospects of migrants (as noted above),
their age profile, and how the analytical approach takes
into account the dynamic macroeconomic effects of
migration. OECD (2013) presents a cross-country
study based on a static accounting (cash flow) model
that assesses the tax and social security contributions
as well as the receipt of social security benefits and government services of the stock of migrants in 27 OECD
countries between 2007 and 2009. The impact, either
positive or negative, rarely exceeds 0.5 percent of GDP
in a given year and is about zero on average. There is a
positive fiscal impact in 19 countries—that is, 70 percent of the sample of countries.
Higher short-term costs of caring for refugees, however, could add fiscal pressure in recipient economies.
On arrival, refugees receive housing, subsistence, and
integration support. Moreover, as noted above, they
are often not allowed to work until their legal status
is cleared. This lowers their short-term fiscal contribution relative to that of other migrants and natives.
Less developed countries have typically shouldered the
largest burden associated with refugees—for instance,
39This also explains the rationale of labor migration management
systems. In the Australian system, for example, age has a strong
weight—up to 38 percent of the pass mark—and there are maximum-age thresholds for admission.

CHAPTER 4

in Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey, spending on refugees is estimated at 2.4 percent, 3.2 percent, and 1.3
percent of GDP, respectively, during the recent surge.40
But this is also relevant for many European countries,
which have relatively generous welfare systems and a
significant number of humanitarian migrants. IMF
staff estimates for the euro area suggest that average budgetary expenditures on refugees could reach
0.2 percent of GDP in 2016, with Austria, Finland,
Germany, and Sweden expected to shoulder the largest
spending increases. For Sweden, expenditure on migration is expected to be 1 percent of GDP in 2016.
Over the longer term, migration has the potential
to reduce fiscal pressure related to population aging in
recipient countries (Figure 4.20). For example, continued migration in line with current trends could slow the
expected increase in the old-age dependency ratio and
associated health care and pension spending relative to
GDP (Clements and others 2015; European Commission 2015). These effects will be larger, the larger the
impact of migration on GDP growth. Migration cannot
fully address challenges from population aging, but it
can provide time to phase in entitlement and other
reforms, which are still necessary in many countries.
Positive Growth Effects over the Longer Term
Migration can boost aggregate income in recipient
countries over the long term. It can do so through
several channels. First, by expanding the labor force,
migration can boost capital accumulation. Second,
properly integrated into labor markets, migrants can
increase the employment-to-population ratio. Finally,
migrants can foster labor productivity through complementarities with native workers and by increasing
diversity in productive skills. This section explores the
impact of migration on output per capita over the
long term.
Past experience suggests that migration could indeed
have a positive impact on output per capita in host
countries. While much of the literature on migration is
microeconomic and focuses on employment, innovation, or productivity, some studies have analyzed the
macro relevance of these channels. But such analysis is
complicated by the fact that some of the pull factors
driving migration can bias the findings—for example,
if migrants settle in countries experiencing high GDP
growth, it would be easy to conclude that migration is
“causing” that growth. To circumvent this complication,
40IMF

(2015d, 2015e, 2016h).

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.20. Estimated Impact of Migration in More Developed
Economies, 2100
(Percent of GDP)
0

–1

–2

–3

–4

Old-age dependency
ratio

Pension spending

Health spending

Source: Clements and others (2015).
Note: The impact of migration is calculated as the difference between the baseline
scenario, which assumes the continuation of current migration trends, and the zero
migration scenario.

Alesina, Harnoss, and Rapoport (2015) and Ortega
and Peri (2014) use a gravity model to disentangle
the effects of migration driven by push factors. In a
cross-sectional setting, they find a large positive impact
of migrants on output per capita in recipient countries.
They relate this to a positive impact on employment,
capital accumulation, and labor productivity from highskilled migrants, which not only increases productivity
on its own, but also fosters diversity in the labor force.
Recent research suggests that migration improves
GDP per capita in host countries by boosting investment and increasing labor productivity. Jaumotte,
Koloskova, and Saxena (2016) estimate that a 1 percentage point increase in the share of migrants in the working-age population can raise GDP per capita over the
long term by up to 2 percent (Figure 4.21, panel 1).41
While this impact is somewhat lower than previous estimates, it is economically significant. Decomposing these
estimates into the effect on employment and on labor
productivity, they find that migration has a positive and
41To address endogeneity issues, the study uses a pseudo-gravity
model to estimate migration caused by push factors from source
countries, such as socioeconomic and political conditions, and by
bilateral costs of migration, factors that are largely independent of
host countries’ income levels.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

189

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.21. Migration: Positive Longer-Term Growth Effects
4 1. Effect of Increase in Migration Share
(Percent per 1 percentage point increase)
3
2
1
0

GDP per capita

Productivity

160 2. Growth of Capital-to-Labor Ratio versus Immigration
1990–2010
140
(Percent)
PRT
IRL
120
100
80
GBR

60

AUS

40
20

CHE

0
–5

FRA

DEU
FIN
NLD

CAN

SWE USA
NOR

DNK AUT

ESP

NZL

GRC

0
5
10
Change in migrant share (percent of population)

15

7 3. Effect on Productivity of Increase in Migrant Share by Skill
(Percent per 1 percentage point increase)
6
5
4
3
2

of migrants, consistent with investment adjusting over
time to a larger pool of potential workers (Figure 4.21,
panel 2). Moreover, the impact is distributed evenly
across income groups—that is, migration has a positive
effect on the incomes of both the top earners and of
those of the rest of the population, although the impact
of high-skilled migrants is larger for top earners.
Both high- and low-skilled migrants increase productivity. High-skilled migrants are likely to have a
larger impact on GDP per capita through their larger
impact on productivity. However, lower-skilled migrants
may also increase productivity if their skills are complementary to those of natives. Jaumotte, Koloskova,
and Saxena (2016) find that both high- and low-skilled
migrants have a positive impact on productivity of a
similar magnitude (Figure 4.21, panel 3). They attribute
this finding to the “over-qualification of migrants”—as
noted above, some countries show a higher proportion
of highly educated migrants employed in lower-skill
occupations—and to the complementarities mentioned
previously. Low-skilled workers allow higher-skilled
natives to move into different labor market segments,
encouraging them to take higher-skill jobs and obtain
additional education. They also promote female labor
force participation by taking housekeeping and childcare
jobs. This interpretation is supported by evidence on the
relationship between low-skilled migrants and female
labor participation presented earlier in this chapter.
Farré, González, and Ortega (2011) come to a similar
conclusion in the case of Spain.

1

Source Countries: Costs and Mitigating Factors

0
–1

High skilled

Low and medium skilled

Sources: Jaumotte, Koloskova, and Saxena (2016); Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development; United Nations Global Migration database; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) country codes. Red lines indicate 95 percent conﬁdence interval.

significant impact on labor productivity.42 In addition,
they find no relationship between the long-term growth
in the capital-to-labor ratio and the change in the stock
42While these results apply to the panel estimation, labor markets
issues and the skill composition of the migrant population vis-à-vis
the natives can play a role. For instance, a sudden large increase in
the employment of low-skilled immigrants in low productivity sectors—as, for example, during the precrisis boom in Spain—can have
a negative impact on aggregate labor productivity (see Kangasniemi
and others 2012).

190

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Migration may impose significant costs in source
countries, although there are some mitigating factors.
Although push factors for migration can differ—from
conflicts (for example, in the Middle East; see Box 4.2)
to differences in the economic outlook, such as in eastern
Europe during the past decade—the repercussions for
source countries are similar. Migration can take a toll
on population growth, which is especially costly when
migrants are young and educated, damaging prospects for long-term growth. It may also affect the fiscal
accounts and increase the challenges posed by population aging. These costs, though, could be mitigated by
migrants’ remittances, which can increase household
income and potentially foster investment. And migrants
may facilitate knowledge transfer between host and
source countries, which ultimately could promote trade,
investment, and growth.

CHAPTER 4

The migration of young and high-skilled people can
result in significant losses of human capital. Highskilled people are more likely to migrate than others—
they tend to have more resources to relocate and find
more favorable conditions in recipient countries.43 As
a result, migration has had a substantial impact on
the high-skilled labor force for some countries and
regions (Figure 4.23, panel 1). For instance, Caribbean
countries lost more than 50 percent of their highskilled workers between 1965 and 2000 (see Mishra
2006). Atoyan and others (2016) find that, for central,
eastern, and southeastern European countries, several
decades of migration have exacerbated the shortage
of skilled labor. They show that the share of migrants
with tertiary education in such countries as the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Latvia, and Poland was well above
43For instance, Atoyan and others (2016) show that in 2010,
about three-quarters of migrants in central, eastern, and southeastern
European countries were of working age and younger and better
educated that the population at large.

(Percent change from 1993 to 2012)
40

Underlying population growth
Contribution of migration outﬂows
Observed population growth

30
20
10
0
–10

SEE-XEU

TUR

BLR
UKR

RUS

BIH
ALB

ROU
BGR

HUN
HRV

SEE-EU

MDA

CE-5

MKD

Baltics

SVK

–30

POL

–20

LVA
SVN
CZE

While a natural response to demographic trends in
some countries, migration may dent population growth
in others. Some examples can illustrate these differences:
•• Rapid emigration from sub-Saharan Africa has been
associated with an ongoing demographic transition
involving strong growth in the working-age population. This migration—which is set to continue in
coming years—represents a shift in the labor force
from countries with young populations to those with
aging ones, and should help smooth asynchronous
demographic patterns across economies (see Box 4.3).
•• However, migration has taken a toll on demographic
trends in other regions. For example, Caribbean
countries lost between 7 percent and 27 percent of
their labor force to the United States in 1965–2000
(Mishra 2006). Since the collapse of the Soviet Union
Georgia’s and Armenia’s populations have contracted
by 15 and 27 percent, respectively. In central, eastern,
and southeastern Europe, about 5.5 percent of the
population left the region during the past 25 years—
southeastern European countries have witnessed
cumulative outward migration of more than 8 percentage points between 1990 and 2012. Local populations in most countries in the central, eastern, and
southeastern Europe have been stagnant or shrinking;
the Baltics and Commonwealth of Independent States
countries show similar trends (Figure 4.22).

Figure 4.22. Contributions of Outward Migration to Population
Growth

EST
LTU

Costs of Brain Drain

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

CIS

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, International
Migration database; World Bank, World Development Indicators; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Baltics = EST, LTU, LVA; CE-5 = CZE, HUN, POL, SVK, SVN; SEE-EU =
Southeast Europe EU members; SEE-XEU = Southeast Europe non -EU members;
CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States.
Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
country codes.

the equivalent ratio in the general population (Figure 4.23, panel 2).
Brain drain can have profound effects on labor
markets and growth prospects in sending countries.
Migration dampens working-age population growth
and can put upward pressure on wages, as documented
in Mishra (2014) in a number of national case studies.44 At the same time, it can have a negative impact
on productivity. Low substitutability between skilled
migrants and natives reduces labor productivity, which
is compounded by the fact that more educated people
usually transfer know-how to others. Atoyan and others (2016) conduct a counterfactual analysis suggesting that cumulative real labor productivity growth in
central, eastern, and southeastern European countries
between 1995 and 2012 might have been about 5 per44Depending on the skill level of migrants, migration can also
change relative wages—if migrants are more educated, a decrease in
the supply of high-skilled labor can increase the wage gap between
high-and low-skill workers. Mishra (2007) finds some evidence of
this in the case of Mexico, where emigration has the greatest impact
on wages of workers with 12–15 years of schooling.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

191

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Figure 4.23. Migration of Population with Tertiary Education
120
100

fiscal accounts, to a great extent associated with lower
revenue.46

1. Emigration Rate of Tertiary-Educated
(Percent of total tertiary-educated population, 2000)
Caribbean

80

Remittances and Diasporas
CESEE

Region average

60
40
20

Percent of migrants with tertiary
education

0

GUY

HTI

ATG

BHS

HRV

POL

SVN

50 2. Education of Migrants and Sending Country Population,
2010
LVA
40 BLR
HUN
LTU
UKR
POL
RUS
MDA
30
CZE
EST
BGR
SVK
ROU
20 MNE
SVN
BIH HRV
10
SRB
MKD
TUR
ALB
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percent of population with tertiary education

60

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Database on
Immigrants in OECD Countries 2010; World Bank, World Development Indicators;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: CESEE = central and southeastern Europe. Data labels in the ﬁgure use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

centage points higher in the absence of migration. As
a consequence, these countries witnessed lower GDP
growth not only on account of migration-induced loss
of labor but also because of worsening skill composition. Arguably, this has lessened the prospects for
income convergence in emerging Europe.
Finally, migration can also affect fiscal accounts.
Atoyan and others (2016) argue that emigration has
no significant impact on public debt but has led to
higher fiscal pressure in central, eastern, and southeastern European countries. This is because labor outflows
tend to dampen tax revenue more than they reduce
spending. Because migrants are mostly young, health
care and pension spending tend to be little affected,
which forces governments to increase tax rates or find
additional revenue sources.45 Some case studies have
documented that emigration has a negative impact on
45See Gibson and McKenzie (2012) on revenue issues, and
Clements and others (2015) on pension and health care spending.

192

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Remittances provide a source of income for a number
of small migration source countries, notably for poor
households. Remittances to developing countries reached
$450 billion in 2015, more than half of foreign direct
investment inflows (Figure 4.24, panel 1). For some small
countries, remittances can reach over 25 percent of GDP
(for example, Tajikistan, Nepal, and Moldova). Caribbean
countries provide a clear example of the importance of
remittances: after losing a significant portion of their
labor force over the past decades, they are now the world’s
largest recipient of remittances as a percent of GDP
as a region—about 7½ percent of the region’s GDP
in 2015. This can make a significant contribution to
poor households’ income. A cross-country study of 71
emerging market and developing economies by Adams
and Page (2005) has found that a 10 percent increase in
remittances per capita leads to a 3.5 percent decline in the
share of people living in poverty. Remittances have been
shown to increase education and health care spending
relative to consumption as well (Ratha 2014).47
Remittances may also have macroeconomic effects.
As a source of financing, remittances can contribute
to investment, financial development, and growth by
increasing domestic savings and easing credit constraints. For eastern Europe, Atoyan and others (2016)
find a positive impact on private investment, suggesting that remittances ease collateral constraints and
lending costs for entrepreneurs. Goschin (2013) also
finds a positive impact on growth in central and eastern Europe in 1995–2011. But remittances may have
adverse effects on labor markets and exchange rates as
well. Atoyan and others (2016) argue that remittances
reduce incentives to work due to a relaxation of the
budget constraint and an increase in the reservation
wage.48 Remittance flows can also lead to real appre46See Campos-Vazquez and Sobarzo (2012) for the case of
Mexico; Desai, Kapur, and Rogers (2009) for India; and Gibson and
McKenzie (2012) for Ghana, Micronesia, New Zealand, Papua New
Guinea, and Tonga.
47In light of de-risking—the withdrawal of correspondent banking
relationships and the closing of bank accounts of remittance service
providers—the benefits of remittances are possibly lower in the
current environment. See Alwazir and others (forthcoming) for small
states in the Pacific.
48An increase of 1 percentage point of GDP in remittances is associated with a 2–3 percent increase in the economy-wide inactivity
rate in Balkan and central European countries.

CHAPTER 4

ciations and a contraction of the tradable sector, as
documented in Magud and Sosa (2013) and Atoyan
and others (2016) for Eastern Europe.
Finally, diaspora networks of emigrants may convey
knowledge and expertise back to the source country,
potentially raising productivity (Figure 4.24, panel 2).
Mitra and others (2016) suggest that, by contributing to
the curriculum design, diaspora networks can raise the
quality of education in their home countries. They can
also provide rigorous professional development and leadership training programs. Combining their skills, contacts,
and know-how with their insight into global opportunities and local customs, diaspora networks of emigrants
may help strengthen the home-country business environment, raise efficiency, and expand into new markets.49 In
the same vein, they can also advise governments and help
to improve the quality of public institutions.50

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Figure 4.24. Remittances and Diasporas
1,000
800
600

Remittances

FDI

400

Portfolio equity

ODA

200
0
–200
1990
1.6
1.4
1.2

93

96

99

2002

05

08

11

14

2. Boost to Long-Term Growth when Diaspora's
Potential Is Realized 1
(Percentage points)

1.0
0.8
0.6

Policy: The Importance of Integration

0.4

Migration has significant spillovers for recipient and
source countries alike, and policy plays an important
role in shaping their economic impact. In recipient
countries, the degree to which migration increases labor
supply and productivity, and contributes to the public
finances over the long term, depends on the speed with
which migrants integrate into labor markets. For source
countries, the right policy response depends on the
underlying drivers of migration—that is, whether it is
driven by domestic or foreign developments.
Fast integration of migrants is key for recipient
economies. Well-designed integration policies are
essential for harnessing the benefits of migration and
should, in particular,
•• Improve labor market policies. Simple, affordable, and
transparent procedures for hiring foreign workers
and recognition of foreign qualifications and work
experience can help smooth labor market integration. Proactive job placement and other incentives
can reduce entry costs. Any fiscal incentives, such as
wage and employment subsidies, should be temporary and targeted.
•• Provide access to education and financing. Access to
education and language and job training can help

0.2

49Migrants could also foster trade; see Cohen, Gurun, and Malloy
(forthcoming) and Parsons and Vezina (2014); and foreign direct
investment (see Burchardi, Chaney, and Hassan 2016).
50For example, Indian-born executives working in U.S.-based
technology companies played a critical role in giving the latter confidence to outsource work to India.

1. Financial Flows to Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

0.0

Emerging market and developing
economy average

Developing and Middle East
emerging Asia and central
Asia

Latin America Sub-Saharan
and the
Africa
Caribbean

Emerging
Europe

Sources: Mitra and others (2015, 2016); World Bank, World Development Indicators;
and IMF staff calculations.
1Potential growth if diaspora rises to best performers' benchmark. For simulation
details see Mitra and others (2016).

achieve a good skill-balance among migrants and
minimize the potential for social tension. Ensuring access to financial services—for example, bank
accounts and financial transactions—can broaden
opportunities.
•• Support migrant entrepreneurs. Encouraging migrant
entrepreneurship could help foster competitiveness
and innovation.
Refugees require special attention. A key issue is
reducing the time asylum seekers must wait before
they are allowed to work. Targeted support can reduce
language and skill gaps, and such measures as temporary wage subsidies can create incentives for employers
to hire. Improving geographic mobility, including
through the availability of affordable housing, will help
refugees move where labor demand is high.51 Where
51In the European Union, flexibility built into the Stability and
Growth Pact should be allowed for a marginal loosening of fiscal
targets to accommodate refugee-related short-term costs.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

193

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

countries receive refugees from neighboring conflict
zones, international support remains crucial—including from donors—to ensure that refugees are appropriately cared for, including through complementary
central government assistance.
Source countries should strive to tilt the balance
between positive and negative effects of emigration
in their favor. If home-grown policy distortions are
driving emigration, correcting them is a natural way
to avoid brain drain. If emigration is driven by pull
factors, the response should stress adjustment and
policies to:
•• Retain and re-attract migrants. Strong institutions
and growth-enhancing reforms will foster income
convergence and make emigration less attractive—
for instance, improvements to the business environment, governance, and the quality of institutions
would create greater incentives for people to stay or
emigrants to return. Recognition of skills acquired
abroad, targeted tax benefits, and portable social
security benefits could also persuade migrants to
return.
•• Leverage diaspora networks and make remittances
count. This could include, for example, the issuance
of diaspora bonds (as, for example, in India, Israel,
Nigeria, the Philippines) and outreach to diaspora
communities. Reducing the cost of remittances and
enhancing incentives for their financial intermediation can also make a difference.
•• Mitigate the effects of migration. Policies that boost
labor supply, including raising female labor force
participation, can overcome the labor shrinking
effects of migration. Improving the efficiency of
social and health care spending can ease possible
fiscal pressure, and if there is a need to raise tax

194

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

revenue, greater reliance on consumption instead of
labor taxes will protect growth.
An effective policy response in postconflict source
countries should protect economic institutions,
prioritize budget allocations that serve basic needs of
the population, and use monetary and exchange rate
policies to shore up confidence. Once conflicts subside,
successful rebuilding requires well-functioning institutions and robust yet flexible macroeconomic frameworks to absorb capital inflows and maintain debt
sustainability. To prevent future violence, postconflict
countries should accelerate inclusive growth reforms
aimed at reducing inequality.
An enhanced multilateral framework is warranted to
better govern international migration. Global efforts
should focus on encouraging cooperation between
source and recipient countries, including by facilitating remittance flows, protecting labor rights, and
promoting a safe and secure working environment
for migrants. Cooperation is also vital to address
challenges from humanitarian migration, including
through enhanced global development diplomacy—
aimed at preventing, containing, and responding to
humanitarian crises—and more flexible and innovative
financing instruments to ensure effective assistance and
resources for refugees wishing to return home. Given
the increasing flows of refugees over the past years,
and the impact that they have on neighboring countries that are shouldering a large share of the cost of
receiving them, high-income donor countries (including international institutions, the Group of Seven, the
Gulf Cooperation Council, and the European Union)
need to coordinate their approach to provide more
financial support to improve conditions for refugees.

CHAPTER 4

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Box 4.1. Chinaʼs Ties with Low-Income and Developing Countries
Trade linkages between China and low-income and
developing countries have risen markedly in recent
years. Exports to China as a share of these countries’
total exports have more than doubled, from less than
5 percent before 2000. Although China’s share of
low-income and developing country exports appears
modest, at 13 percent in 2015, it was among the
three largest export destination markets for about half
of these countries, which tend to trade across a large
number of trading partners. As discussed in this chapter, countries with significant trade exposure to China
have faced downward pressure on demand for their
exports in recent years, and export volume growth
in low-income and developing countries has slowed
accordingly.
The sectoral composition of trade with China
is dominated by fuel, minerals, and metals, which
accounted for about 60 percent of total exports in
2014 (Figure 4.1.1, panel 1). The share of commodities, although still high, shows a slight decline relative
to the early 2000s, when exports of raw materials
represented about 70 percent of the total. Some of
the share once occupied by these exports has recently
given way to capital-goods exports, which now represent about 10 percent of total exports.
China is a major source of foreign direct investment inflows into low income and developing
countries (Figure 4.1.1, panel 2). Although the two
largest beneficiaries of Chinese direct investment
(Lao P.D.R. and Mongolia) are geographically close
to China, China is also a major source of foreign
direct investment for several countries in sub-Saharan
Africa. As China continues its transition and allows
firms to seek new investment opportunities abroad,
there may be positive spillovers for these countries.
Lower demand for commodities may, however, get
in the way somewhat, since foreign direct investment
has usually been associated with commodity proThe author of this box is Nkunde Mwase.

Figure 4.1.1. China’s Ties with Low-Income
and Developing Countries
1. Sectoral Decomposition of LIDC Exports to
China
(Percent)
Fuel
Minerals
Metals
Vegetables
Other
Mach. and elec.
100
80
60
40
20
0

45
40
35

2000

05

10

14

2. Outward FDI from China 1
(Percent of recipient economy's GDP, end2014)

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

LAO
LUX
LBR NAM
GIN
MUS MOZ
MNG KGZ
GUY COG COD MWI KAZ

Sources: CEIC; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: FDI = foreign direct investment; LIDC = low-income
and developing country; Mach. and elec. = machinery and
electrical equipment. Data labels in the ﬁgure use
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes.
1Excludes Hong Kong SAR.

duction. In addition, as discussed in IMF 2016j, the
recent “One Belt One Road” initiative will involve
a further strengthening of foreign direct investment
flows from China to the Caucasus and Central Asia,
south Asia, and southeast Asia.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

195

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 4.2. Conflicts Driving Migration: Middle East and North Africa
The Middle East and North Africa is facing a new
wave of conflict with significant economic costs and
spillovers within the region. Since the end of World War
II, countries in this region have suffered more conflicts
than those in any other region in the world. Conflicts
are more protracted and violent as well—between
1946 and 2014, 12 out of 53 episodes of conflict in
the region lasted more than eight years, and a significant number of former conflict countries relapsed into
violence within 10 years. The economic costs of conflict
are massive for some countries and the spillovers large.
GDP in Syria has fallen by half, and growth in Jordan
and Lebanon has slowed significantly over recent years.
Based on Rother and others (2016).

196

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

The humanitarian and economic costs of conflict
are massive. An estimated 10 million refugees from
conflict countries have mostly stayed within countries in the region—for example, since 2010, refugees
from Iraq and Syria have boosted the populations of
Lebanon and Jordan by one-quarter and one-fifth,
respectively. More than 1.7 million refugees have
reached Europe since July 2014, and Turkey hosts
about 3 million. Countries hosting refugees face difficult decisions about access to labor markets and social
programs. This highlights the importance both of
humanitarian aid aimed at addressing the immediate
needs of refugees and those displaced within their own
countries, and of scaled-up development assistance to
the region as a whole.

CHAPTER 4

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Box 4.3. Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa
In the coming decades sub-Saharan African
migration will be shaped by a profound demographic
transition that has already begun. The working-age
population is growing more rapidly than the population overall, which means migration outside the region
is set to continue to expand.

Key Trends
Amid rapid population growth, sub-Saharan Africa
migration has increased rapidly over the past 20 years.
Although the migration rate—migration-to-total
population—has remained stable at about 2 percent,
the population has doubled over the past 25 years.
Until the 1990s intraregional migration dominated and
early in that decade represented 75 percent of the total.
Over the past 15 years, though, migration outside
the region—mainly to Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries—
has picked up sharply, and represented one-third of the
total stock of migrants by 2013 (Figure 4.3.1, panel 1).
Migration from sub-Saharan Africa is set to continue
to increase very rapidly. The region is undergoing a
demographic transition as a result of strong population
growth combined with reduced infant and maternal
mortality. The latter implies that the working-age
population—which typically feeds migration—is set to
increase even more rapidly (Figure 4.3.1, panel 2). IMF
staff projections using a gravity model of sub-Saharan
African migration to OECD countries indicate that population growth will continue to shape migration. They
suggest that the region’s migrants in OECD countries
could increase from about 7 million in 2013 to about
34 million by 2050. Given the relatively slow population growth expected for OECD countries, the ratio
of sub-Saharan African migration as a share of OECD
population could increase sixfold, from just 0.4 percent
in 2010 to 2.4 percent by 2050 (Figure 4.3.1, panel 3).1
Migration is increasingly driven by economic
considerations. The flow of refugees—about half of
sub-Saharan African migration within and outside the
region in 1990—had decreased to only one-tenth of
the total in 2013. By 2013 most migrants outside the
region—about 85 percent—were in OECD countries.
Based on Gonzalez-Garcia and others (2016).
1The determinants of migration to OECD countries are relative per capita income and working-age population, the existing
diaspora in OECD countries, distance between countries, public
health spending in OECD countries, and indicators of common
language, previous colonial relationship, wars in sub-Saharan
Africa, and landlocked countries.

Figure 4.3.1. Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa
24 1. Sub-Saharan Africa: Migrants, 1960–2013
(Millions of people)
20
Within sub-Saharan Africa
To the rest of the world

16
12
8
4
0

1960

70

80

90

2000

10

13

350 2. Evolution of the Working-Age Population
(Cumulative changes for ﬁve-year periods,
300
millions)
250
200
150

Rest of the world
Sub-Saharan Africa
OECD

100
50
0
–50
1955

70

80

90 2000 10

20

30

40

50

3 3. Sub-Saharan Africa Migrants in OECD Countries
(Stock as percent of population)
Share of sub-Saharan African
population
Share of OECD population

2

1

0

2000

10

20

30

40

50

Sources: United Nations World Population Prospects; World
Bank, Migration and Remittances database; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.

France, the United Kingdom, and the United States
host about half of the total diaspora outside the region.
Although a few sub-Saharan African countries—for
example, Ethiopia, Nigeria, and South Africa, with
close to 0.7 million people each––have a large number
of migrants, they represent only a small share of their
population. With a relatively small number of migrants,
these are proportionately more important for some

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

197

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Box 4.3 (continued)
small economies—such as Cabo Verde (about one-third
of its population) and Mauritius, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Seychelles (about 10 percent).

Economic Impact
Brain drain is particularly acute in sub-Saharan Africa.
The migration of young and educated workers takes a
large toll on a region whose human capital is already
scarce. The concentration of migrants among those who
are educated is higher than in other developing economies (Figure 4.3.2). The migration of highly skilled
workers entails a high social cost, as is evidenced by
the departure of doctors and nurses from Malawi and
Zimbabwe, which may mean welfare losses beyond those
that are purely economic. Nevertheless, recent studies
suggest some positive effects: returning migrants bring

Figure 4.3.2. Age and Education of Migrants
and Origin Country Population

back new skills, and prospects for migration motivate
human capital accumulation, which may be supported
by large remittances from current migrants and returning
migrants bringing knowledge and experience.2
Remittance inflows represent an important source of
foreign exchange and income in several countries in the
region. After the global financial crisis, while foreign direct
investment entered a clear downward trend, remittances
became one of the largest sources of external inflows, currently at a level similar to foreign investment. Remittances
represented 25 percent of Liberia’s GDP in 2013–15;
about 20 percent in Comoros, the Gambia, and Lesotho;
and roughly 10 percent in Cabo Verde, São Tomé and
Príncipe, Senegal, and Togo (Figure 4.3.3). Remittances
provide a relatively stable source of income that helps
smooth consumption and support growth in sub-Saharan
Africa. They also help alleviate poverty and promote access
to financial services––many receiving families develop a
relationship with a financial institution, usually a wire
transfer company or bank, to receive their funds easily.

Percent of migrants 15–64 years old

(Percent)

100

2For literature on brain gain in sub-Saharan Africa, see Nyarko
(2011); Easterly and Nyarko (2008); and Batista, Lacuesta, and
Vicente (2007).

1. Age of Migrants and Origin Country
Population

90

Figure 4.3.3. Top Receivers of Remittances
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2013–15

80
70

(Percent of GDP)

60

Sub-Saharan Africa
Rest of emerging market
and developing economies

50
40
40

50
60
70
80
90
Percent of population 15–64 years old

30

100

Percent of migrants with
tertiary education

25

20

70 2. Tertiary Education of Migrants and
Origin Country Population
60

15

50
40

10

30
20
10

Sub-Saharan Africa
Rest of emerging market
and developing economies

0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Percent of population with tertiary education

70

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, International Migration Database; World Bank,
World Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.

198

From rest of the world
From sub-Saharan African countries

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

5

0

LBR

GMB

LSO

COM

SEN

CPV

STP

TGO

MLI

GNB

MDG

NGA

Source: World Bank, Migration and Remittances database.
Note: Data labels in the ﬁgure use International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) country codes.

CHAPTER 4

References
Aastveit, Knut Are, Hilde C. Bjørnland, and Leif Anders
Thorsrud. 2012. “What Drives Oil Prices? Emerging
versus Developed Economies.” Working Paper 2012/11,
Norgesbank.
Abiad, Abdul, Madhavi Pundit, Minsoo Lee, and Arief
Ramayand. 2016. “Moderating Growth and Structural
Change in the People’s Republic of China: Implications for
Developing Asia and Beyond.” ADB Briefs 53, Asian Development Bank, Manila.
Adams Jr., Richard H., and John Page. 2005. “Do International
Migration and Remittances Reduce Poverty in Developing
Countries?” World Development 33 (10): 1645–69.
Aiyar, Shekhar, Bergljot Barkbu, Nicoletta Batini, Helge Berger,
Enrica Detragiache, Allan Dizioli, Christian Ebeke, Huidan
Lin, Linda Kaltani, Sebastian Sosa, Antonio Spilimbergo,
and Petia Topalova. 2016. “The Refugee Surge in Europe:
Economic Challenges.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/02,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Akgunduz, Yusuf, Marcel van den Berg, and Wolter Hassink.
2015. “The Impact of Refugee Crises on Host Labor Markets:
The Case of the Syrian Refugee Crisis in Turkey.” IZA Discussion Paper 8841, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA),
Bonn.
Aldén, Lina, and Matts Hammarstedt. 2014. “Integration of
Immigrants on the Swedish Labor Market: Recent Trends and
Explanations.” Centre for Labour Market and Discrimination
Study, Linnaeus University, Växjö, Sweden.
Aleksynska, Mariya, and Ahmed Tritah. 2013. “Occupation–
Education Mismatch of Immigrant Workers in Europe:
Context and Policies.” Economics of Education Review 36 (C):
229–44.
Alesina, Alberto, Johann Harnoss, and Hillel Rapoport. 2015.
“Birthplace Diversity and Economic Prosperity.” NBER
Working Paper 18699, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Alwazir, Jihad, Fazurin Jamaludin, Dongyeol Lee, Niamh
Sheridan, and Patrizia Tumbarello. Forthcoming. “De-Risking
in the Small States of the Pacific: Evidence and Policy
Options.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Amuedo-Dorantes, Catalina, and Susan Pozo. 2006. “Migration,
Remittances, and Male and Female Employment Patterns.”
American Economic Review 96 (2): 222–26.
Andrle, Michal, Patrick Blagrave, Pedro Espaillat, Keiko Honjo,
Benjamin Hunt, Mika Kortelainen, René Lalonde, Douglas
Laxton, Eleonora Mavroeidi, Dirk Muir, Susanna Mursula,
and Stephen Snudden. 2015. “The Flexible System of Global
Models – FSGM” IMF Working Paper 15/64, International
Monetary Fund, Washington.
Arslanalp, Serkan, Wei Liao, Shi Piao, and Dulani Seneviratne.
Forthcoming. “China’s Growing Influence on Asian Financial
Markets.” IMF Working Paper, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

Äslund, Olof, and Dan-Olof Rooth. 2007. “Do When and
Where Matter? Initial Labor Market Conditions and Immigrant Earnings.” Economic Journal 117: 422–48.
Atoyan, Ruben, Lone Christiansen, Allan Dizioli, Christian
Ebeke, Nadeem Ilahi, Anna Ilyina, Gil Mehrez, Haonan
Qu, Faezeh Raei, Alaina Rhee, and Daria Zakharova. 2016.
“Emigration and Its Economic Impact on Eastern Europe.”
IMF Staff Discussion Note 16/07, International Monetary
Fund, Washington.
Aydemir, Adburrahman, and George Borjas. 2007. “Cross-​
Country Variation in the Impact of International Migration:
Canada, Mexico, and the United States.” Journal of the European Economic Association 5 (4): 663–708.
———. 2011. “Attenuation Bias in Measuring the Wage Impact
of Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 29 (1): 69–113.
Banerji, Angana, Sergejs Saksonovs, Huidan Lin, and Rodolphe
Blavy. 2014. “Youth Unemployment in Advanced Economies
in Europe: Searching for Solutions.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 14/11, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Barajas, Adolfo, Ralph Chami, Connel Fullenkamp, Michael
Gaspen, and Peter Montiel. 2009. “Do Workers’ Remittances
Promote Economic Growth?” IMF Working Paper 09/153,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Batista, Cátia, Aitor Lacuesta, and Pedro C. Vicente. 2007.
“Brain Drain or Brain Gain? Micro Evidence from an African
Success Story.” IZA Discussion Paper 3035, Institute for the
Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.
Blagrave, Patrick, and Esteban Vesperoni. 2016. “China’s Slowdown: Implications for International Trade.” Spillover Note 4,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Blanchard, Olivier, Florence Jaumotte, and Prakash Loungani.
2013. “Labor Market Policies and IMF Advice in Advanced
Economies during the Great Recession.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 13/02, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Borjas, George. 1999. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.”
In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, 1697–760. Philadelphia: Elsevier.
———. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor
Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1335–74.
———. 2006. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration.” Journal of Human Resources XLI
(2): 221–58.
Borjas, George J., and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “The Evolution
of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States.” In
Mexican Immigration to the United States, edited by George J.
Borjas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Burchardi, Konrad, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek Hassan. 2016.
“Migrants, Investors, and Investments.” NBER Working
Paper 21847, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Campos-Vazquez, Raymundo, and Horacio Sobarzo. 2012. “The
Development and Fiscal Effects of Emigration on Mexico.”
Migration Policy Institute, Woodrow Wilson Center for
Scholars, Washington.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

199

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the
Miami Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
43 (2): 245–57.
———, Christian Dustmann, and Ian Preston. 2009. “Immigration, Wages, and Compositional Amenities.” NBER Working
Paper 15521, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Cashin, Paul, Kamiar Mohaddes, and Mehdi Raissi. 2016.
“China’s Slowdown and Global Financial Market Volatility:
Is World Growth Losing Out?” IMF Working Paper 16/63,
International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Cattaneo, Cristina, Carlo V. Fiorio, and Giovanni Peri. 2015.
“What Happens to the Careers of European Workers When
Immigrants ‘Take Their Jobs?’” Journal of Human Resources 50
(3): 655–93.
Cesa-Bianchi, Ambrogio, and Kate Stratford. 2016. “How
Could a Shock to Growth in China Affect Growth in the
United Kingdom?” In Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 56
(1): 4–11.
Chami, Ralph, Adolfo Barajas, Thomas Cosimano, Connel
Fullenkamp, Michael Gapen, and Peter Montiel. 2008. “Macroeconomic Consequences of Remittances.” IMF Occasional
Paper 259, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Chami, Ralph, Dalia Hakura, and Peter Montiel. 2009. “Remittances: An Automatic Output Stabilizer?” IMF Working
Paper 09/91, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Christiansen, Lone, Huidan Lin, Joana Pereira, Petia Topalova,
and Rima Turk. 2016. “Unlocking Female Employment
Potential in Europe: Drivers and Benefits.” Departmental
Paper; European Department and Strategy, Policy, and Review
Department; International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Clements, Benedict, Kamil Dybczak, Vitor Gaspar, Sanjeev
Gupta, and Mauricio Soto. 2015. “The Fiscal Consequences
of Shrinking Populations.” IMF Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Cohen, Lauren, Umit Gurun, and Christopher Malloy. Forthcoming. “Resident Networks and Corporate Connections: Evidence
from World War II Internment Camps.” Journal of Finance.
Conde Ruiz, J. Ignacio, Juan Ramón Garcia, and Maria Navarro.
2008. “Immigration and Regional Growth in Spain.”
FEDEA Working Paper 2008–08, Fundación de Estudios de
Economía Aplicada, Madrid.
D’Amuri, Francesco, and Giovanni Peri. 2014. “Immigration,
Jobs, and Employment Protection: Evidence from Europe
before and during the Great Recession.” Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (2): 432–64.
Desai, Mihir, D. Kapur, J. McHale, and K. Rogers. 2009. “The
Fiscal Impact of High-Skilled Emigration: Flows of Indians to
the US.” Journal of Development Economics 88 (1): 32–44.
Diebold, Francis X., and Kamil Yilmaz. 2011. “On the Network
Topology of Variance Decompositions: Measuring the
Connectedness of Financial Firms.” NBER Working Paper
17490, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.

200

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Dizioli, Allan, Jaime Guajardo, Vladimir Klyuev, Rui Mano,
and Mehdi Raissi. 2016. “Spillovers from China’s Growth
Slowdown and Rebalancing to the ASEAN-5 Economies.”
IMF Working Paper 16/170, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Dizioli, Allan, Ben Hunt, and Wojciech Maliszewski. Forthcoming. “Spillovers from the Maturing of China’s Economy: A
General Equilibrium Model-Based Analysis.” IMF Working
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Drummond, Paulo, and Estelle Xue Liu. 2013. “Africa’s Rising
Exposure to China: How Large Are Spillovers through
Trade?” IMF Working Paper 13/250, International Monetary
Fund, Washington.
Duval, Romain, Nan Li, Richa Saraf, and Dulani Seneviratne.
2016. “Value-Added Trade and Business Cycle Synchronization.” Journal of International Economics 99: 251–62.
Easterly, William, and Yaw Nyarko. 2008. “Is the Brain Drain
Good for Africa?” Brookings Global Economy and Development Working Paper 19, The Brookings Institution,
Washington.
Ebeke, Christian Hubert. 2010. “Remittances, Value Added Tax
and Tax Revenue in Developing Countries.” CERDI Document de travail de la série Etudes et Documents E 2010.30,
Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches sur le Développement
International, Clermont-Ferrand.
Farré, Lidia, Libertad González, and Francesc Ortega. 2011.
“Immigration, Family Responsibility and the Labor Supply of
Skilled Native Women.” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy 11 (1), Article 34.
Furceri, Davide, Joao Tovar Jalles, Aleksandra Zdzienicka.
2016. “China Spillovers: New Evidence from Time-Varying
Estimates.” Spillover Note 7, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Gauvin, Ludovic, and Cyril Rebillard. 2015. “Towards Recoupling? Assessing the Global Impact of a Chinese Hard Landing through Trade and Commodity Price Channels.” Working
Paper 562, Banque de France, Paris.
Gibson, John, and David McKenzie. 2012. “The Economic
Consequences of ‘Brain Drain’ of the Best and Brightest:
Microeconomic Evidence from Five Countries.” Economic
Journal 122 (560): 339–75.
Gonzalez-Garcia, Jesús, Ermal Hitaj, Montfort Mlachila, Arina
Viseth, and Mustafa Yenice. 2016. “Sub-Saharan African
Migration: Patterns and Spillovers.” Spillover Note 9, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Guimarães-Filho, Roberto, and Gee Hee Hong. 2016. “Dynamic
Interconnectedness of Asian Equity Markets.” IMF Working
Paper 16/57, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Gruss, Bertrand. 2014. “After the Boom: Commodity Prices
and Economic Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
IMF Working Paper 14/154, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Hatton, Timothy J. 2013. “Refugee and Asylum Migration.” In
International Handbook on the Economics of Migration, edited

CHAPTER 4

by Amelie F. Constant and Klaus F. Zimmermann. Cheltenham, United Kingdom, and Northampton, Massachusetts:
Edward Elgar.
Ho, Giang, and Kazuko Shirono. 2015. “The Nordic Labor
Market and Migration.” IMF Working Paper 15/254, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Hong, Gee Hee, Jaewoo Lee, Wei Liao, and Dulani Seneviratne.
2016. “China and Asia in the Global Trade Slowdown.”
IMF Working Paper 16/105, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. “How
Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation?” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 31–56.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2014. Chapter 3, “Spillovers from a Potential Reversal of Fortune in Emerging
Market Economies.” In IMF Multilateral Policy Issues Report.
Washington, July.
_____. 2015a. “Special Feature: Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World
Economy.” In World Economic Outlook. Washington, October.
_____. 2015b. “Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed?
Output Growth in the Aftermath of the Commodity Boom.”
In World Economic Outlook. Washington, October.
_____. 2015c. “International Migration: Recent Trends, Economic Impacts, and Policy Implications.” Staff Background
Paper for G20 Surveillance Note. Washington.
_____. 2015d. Lebanon: 2015 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report. IMF Country Report 15/190. Washington.
_____. 2015e. Jordan: Sixth Review under the Stand-By Arrangement, Request for Waivers of Applicability of Performance
Criteria, and Rephasing of Access—Staff Report. IMF Country
Report 15/115. Washington.
_____. 2015f. Fiscal Monitor. Washington, October.
_____. 2015g. People’s Republic of China: 2015 Article IV
Consultation—Staff Report. IMF Country Report 15/234.
Washington.
_____. 2016a. People’s Republic of China—Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region: 2015 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report. IMF Country Report 16/17. Washington.
_____. 2016b. “China’s Changing Trade and the Implications
for the CLMV Economies.” Departmental Paper, Asia and
Pacific Department. Washington.
_____. 2016c. Chapter 3, “China’s Evolving Trade with Advanced
Upstream Economies and Commodity Exporters.” In Regional
Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific. Washington, April.
_____. 2016d. Chapter 2, “The Growing Importance of Financial Spillovers from Emerging Market Economies.” In Global
Financial Stability Report. Washington, April.
_____. 2016e. Chapter 2, “Navigating the Transition: Trade
and Financial Spillovers from China.” In Regional Economic
Outlook: Asia and Pacific. Washington, April.
_____. 2016f. People’s Republic of China: 2016 Article IV
Consultation—Staff Report. IMF Country Report 16/270.
Washington.

Spillovers from China’s Transition and from Migration

_____. 2016g. Global Financial Stability Report. Washington,
April.
_____. 2016h. Turkey: 2016 Article IV Consultation—Staff
Report. IMF Country Report 16/104. Washington.
_____. 2016i. Chapter 1, “Too Slow for Too Long: Recent
Developments and Prospects.” In World Economic Outlook.
Washington, April.
_____. 2016j. Regional Economic Outlook: Middle East and
Central Asia. Washington, forthcoming October.
Jaumotte, Florence, Ksenia Koloskova, and Sweta C. Saxena.
2016. “Impact of Migration on Income Levels in Advanced
Economies.” Spillover Note 8, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Jorda, Oscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review
95 (1): 161–82.
Kangasniemi, Mari, Matilde Mas, Catherine Robinson, and
Lorenzo Serrano. 2012. “The Economic Impact of Migration: Productivity Analysis for Spain and the UK.” Journal of
Productivity Analysis 38 (3): 333–43.
Kolerus, Christina, Papa N’Diaye, and Christian Saborowski.
2016. “China’s Footprint in Global Commodity Markets.”
Spillover Note 5, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Magud, Nicolás, and Sebastián Sosa. 2013. “When and Why
Worry About Real Exchange Rate Appreciation? The Missing
Link Between Dutch Disease and Growth.” Journal of International Commerce, Economics and Policy 4 (2).
Mansuri, Ghazala. 2006. “Migration, Sex Bias, and Child
Growth in Rural Pakistan.” Policy Research Working Paper
3946, World Bank, Washington.
Mishra, Prachi. 2006. “Emigration and Brain Drain: Evidence
from the Caribbean.” IMF Working Paper 06/25, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
_____. 2007. “Emigration and Wages in Source Countries:
Evidence from Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 82:
180–99.
_____. 2014. “Emigration and Wages in Source Countries:
A Survey of the Empirical Literature.” In International
Handbook of Migration and Economic Development, edited
by Robert E. B. Lucas. Cheltenham, United Kingdom, and
Northampton, Massachusetts: Edward Elgar.
Mitra, Pritha, Amr Hosny, Gohar Minasyan, Mark Fischer, and
Gohar Abajyan. 2016. “Avoiding the New Mediocre: Raising
Long-Term Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia.”
Departmental Paper 16/01, Middle East and Central Asia
Department, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Morgan Stanley Research. 2016a. “Turnaround in Steel Outlook.” China Supply Side Reforms, January 16.
_____. 2016b. “Easing Overcapacity Drives Positive Outlook for Machinery Stocks.” China Supply Side Reforms,
February 16.
Mwase, Nkunde, Papa N’Diaye, Hiroko Oura, Frantisek Ricka,
Katsiaryna Svirydzenka, Camilo Ernesto Tovar, and Yuanyan
Sophia Zhang. 2016. “Spillovers from China: Financial

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

201

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

Channels.” Spillover Note 6, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
Nasser, Razan, and Steven Symansky. 2014. “The Fiscal Impact
of the Syrian Refugee Crisis on Jordon.” USAID paper,
United States Agency for International Development.
Nose, Manabu, M. Saxegaard, and J. Torres. 2016. “The Impact
of China’s Growth Slowdown and Lower Commodity Prices
on South Africa.” In South Africa: Selected Issues. IMF Country
Report 16/218, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Nyarko, Yaw. 2011. “The Returns to the Brain Drain and Brain
Circulation in Sub-Saharan Africa: Some Computations Using
Data from Ghana.” NBER Working Paper 16813, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2013. Chapter 3, “Fiscal Impact of Immigration in
OECD Countries.” In International Migration Outlook. Paris.
Ortega, Francesc, and Giovanni Peri. 2009. “The Causes and Effects
of International Migrations: Evidence from OECD Countries
1980–2005.” NBER Working Paper 14833, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
_____. 2014. “Openness and Income: The Role of Trade and
Migration.” Journal of International Economics 92: 231–51.
Ott, Eleanor. 2013. “The Labour Market Integration of Resettled
Refugees.” Evaluation Report 2013/6, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees Policy Development and Evaluation Services.
Parsons, Christopher, and Pierre-Louise Vezina. 2014. “Migrant
Network and Trade: The Vietnamese Boat People as a Natural

202

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Experiment.” Economic Working Paper 705, University of
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Peri, Giovanni. 2014. “Do Immigrant Workers Depress the
Wages of Native Workers?” IZA World of Labor 2014: 42.
______, Kevin Shih, and Chad Sparber. 2015. “STEM Workers,
H-1B Visas, and Productivity in US Cities.” Journal of Labor
Economics 33 (3): S225–55.
______, and Chad Sparber. 2009. “Task Specialization, Immigration, and Wages.” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 1(3): 135–69.
Ratha, Dilip. 2014. “A $100 Billion Idea—Tapping Migrants for
Financing Development.” “People Move” blog, World Bank.
Roache, Shaun K. 2012. “China’s Impact on World Commodity
Markets.” IMF Working Paper 12/115, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
Roache, Shaun K., and Marina Rousset. 2015. “China: Credit,
Collateral, and Commodity Prices.” HKIMR Working Paper
27/2015, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, Hong
Kong.
Rother, Bjorn, Greg Auclair, Risto Herrala, David Lombardo,
Karina Manasseh, Gaelle Pierre, Eric Roos, and Priscilla
Toffano. Forthcoming. “The Economic Impact of Conflicts
and the Refugee Crisis in the Middle East and North Africa.”
IMF Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund,
Washington.
World Bank. 2015. “Migration and Remittances: Recent Developments and Outlook.” Migration and Development Brief 24,
World Bank, Washington.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

T

he Statistical Appendix presents historical data as well as projections. It comprises
seven sections: Assumptions, What’s New,
Data and Conventions, Country Notes,
Classification of Countries, Key Data Documentation,
and Statistical Tables.
The assumptions underlying the estimates and projections for 2016–17 and the medium-term scenario for
2018–21 are summarized in the first section. The second
section presents a brief description of the changes to the
database and statistical tables since the April 2016 World
Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section provides a
general description of the data and the conventions used
for calculating country group composites. The fourth section summarizes selected key information for each country.
The classification of countries in the various groups presented in the WEO is summarized in the fifth section. The
sixth section provides information on methods and reporting standards for the member countries’ national account
and government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical
tables. (Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statistical Appendix B is available online.) Data in these
tables have been compiled on the basis of information
available through September 16, 2016. The figures
for 2016 and beyond are shown with the same degree
of precision as the historical figures solely for convenience; because they are projections, the same degree
of accuracy is not to be inferred.

Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average
levels measured during the period July 22 to August 19,
2016. For 2016 and 2017, these assumptions imply
average U.S. dollar/special drawing right (SDR) conversion rates of 1.398 and 1.403 (the Chinese renminbi,
which became an SDR currency on October 1, 2016, is
excluded from the calculations), U.S. dollar/euro conversion rates of 1.117 and 1.127, and yen/U.S. dollar
conversion rates of 106.8 and 99.9, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $42.96 a
barrel in 2016 and $50.64 a barrel in 2017.
Established policies of national authorities are
assumed to be maintained. The more specific policy

assumptions underlying the projections for selected
economies are described in Box A1.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) on six-month
U.S. dollar deposits will average 1.0 percent in 2016 and
1.3 percent in 2017, that three-month euro deposits will
average –0.3 percent in 2016 and –0.4 percent in 2017,
and that six-month yen deposits will average 0.0 percent
in 2016 and –0.1 percent in 2017.
As a reminder, with respect to introduction of the
euro, on December 31, 1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective January 1, 1999,
the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the euro
and currencies of the member countries adopting the
euro are as follows:

1 euro

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

13.7603
40.3399
0.585274
1.95583
15.6466
5.94573
6.55957
340.750
0.787564
1,936.27
0.702804
3.45280
40.3399
0.42930
2.20371
200.482
30.1260
239.640
166.386

Austrian schillings
Belgian francs
Cyprus pound1
Deutsche marks
Estonian krooni2
Finnish markkaa
French francs
Greek drachmas3
Irish pound
Italian lire
Latvian lat4
Lithuanian litas5
Luxembourg francs
Maltese lira1
Netherlands guilders
Portuguese escudos
Slovak koruna6
Slovenian tolars7
Spanish pesetas

1Established

on January 1, 2008.
on January 1, 2011.
3Established on January 1, 2001.
4Established on January 1, 2014.
5Established on January 1, 2015.
6Established on January 1, 2009.
7Established on January 1, 2007.
2Established

See Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO for details on
how the conversion rates were established.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

203

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

What’s New
No changes have been introduced for the October
2016 WEO database.

Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 191 economies form the
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department
and regional departments, with the latter regularly
updating country projections based on consistent
global assumptions.
Although national statistical agencies are the
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions,
international organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compilation of national statistics,
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions,
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the
production of economic statistics. The WEO database
reflects information from both national source agencies
and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data presented in the
WEO conform broadly to the 1993 version of the System
of National Accounts (SNA). The IMF’s sector statistical
standards—the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments
and International Investment Position Manual (BPM6), the
Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual (MFSM 2000),
and the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014
(GFSM 2014)—have been or are being aligned with
the SNA 2008. These standards reflect the IMF’s special
interest in countries’ external positions, financial sector
stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The process
of adapting country data to the new standards begins
in earnest when the manuals are released. However, full
concordance with the manuals is ultimately dependent on
the provision by national statistical compilers of revised
country data; hence, the WEO estimates are only partially
adapted to these manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries the impact, on major balances and aggregates, of
conversion to the updated standards will be small. Many
other countries have partially adopted the latest standards
and will continue implementation over a period of years.1
1Many

countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European
System of National and Regional Accounts (ESA) 2010, and a few
countries use versions of the SNA older than 1993. A similar adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please refer
to Table G, which lists the statistical standards adhered to by each
country.

204

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Composite data for country groups in the WEO are
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates
of change.2 Arithmetically weighted averages are used
for all data for the emerging market and developing
economies group except data on inflation and money
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The
following conventions apply:
•• Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates
are weighted by GDP converted to U.S. dollars at
market exchange rates (averaged over the preceding
three years) as a share of group GDP.
•• Composites for other data relating to the domestic economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are
weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parity
as a share of total world or group GDP.3
•• Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions. Annual data are not
adjusted for calendar-day effects. For data prior to
1999, data aggregations apply 1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
•• Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual
country data after conversion to U.S. dollars at the
average market exchange rates in the years indicated.
•• Composite unemployment rates and employment
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of
group labor force.
•• Composites relating to external sector statistics are
sums of individual country data after conversion to
U.S. dollars at the average market exchange rates
in the years indicated for balance of payments data
and at end-of-year market exchange rates for debt
denominated in currencies other than U.S. dollars.
•• Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes and
prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent
changes for individual countries weighted by the
2Averages for real GDP and its components, employment, GDP
per capita, inflation, factor productivity, trade, and commodity
prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of change,
except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based on the
simple arithmetic average.
3See “Revised Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014
WEO Update for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-paritybased weights, as well as Box A2 of the April 2004 WEO and Annex
IV of the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for
the World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic
Outlook (Washington: International Monetary Fund, December
1993), pp. 106–23.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

U.S. dollar value of exports or imports as a share
of total world or group exports or imports (in the
preceding year).
•• Unless noted otherwise, group composites are computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group
weights is represented.
•• Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of
a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to
Table F, which lists the economies with exceptional
reporting periods for national accounts and government finance data for each country.
For some countries, the figures for 2015 and earlier
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please
refer to Table G, which lists the latest actual outturns for
the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments indicators for
each country.

Country Notes
•• On February 1, 2013, the IMF issued a declaration
of censure, and since then has called on Argentina to
implement specified actions to address the quality
of its official GDP data. The new government that
took office in December 2015 released a revised
GDP series on June 29, 2016. At the IMF Executive
Board meeting that took place on August 31, 2016,
the revised series was considered to be in line with
international standards.
•• The consumer price data for Argentina before
December 2013 reflect the consumer price index
(CPI) for the Greater Buenos Aires Area (CPIGBA), while from December 2013 to October
2015 the data reflect the national CPI (IPCNu).
The new government that took office in December
2015 discontinued the IPCNu, stating that it was
flawed, and released a new CPI for the Greater
Buenos Aires Area on June 15, 2016. Given the
differences in geographical coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology of these series, the average
CPI inflation for 2014, 2015, and 2016 and
end-of-period inflation for 2015 are not reported
in the October 2016 World Economic Outlook. On
February 1, 2013, the IMF issued a declaration of
censure and since then has called on Argentina to
implement specified actions to address the quality of its official CPI data. At the meeting that
took place on August 31, 2016, the IMF Executive Board noted the important progress made in

strengthening the accuracy of the CPI data. The
Managing Director will report to the Executive
Board on this issue again by November 15, 2016.
•• Argentina’s authorities discontinued the publication
of labor market data in December 2015 and released
new series starting in the second quarter of 2016.
•• Argentina’s and Venezuela’s consumer prices are
excluded from all WEO group aggregates.
•• The series from which the nominal exchange rate
assumptions are calculated are not made public
for Egypt because the nominal exchange rate is a
market-sensitive issue in Egypt.
•• India’s growth rates of real GDP calculated from
1998 to 2011 are as per national accounts with base
year 2004/05, and thereafter are as per national
accounts with base year 2011/12.
•• Because of the ongoing IMF program with Pakistan, the series from which nominal exchange rate
assumptions are calculated are not made public—the
nominal exchange rate is a market-sensitive issue in
Pakistan.
•• Data for Syria are excluded from 2011 onward
because of the uncertain political situation.
•• Projecting the economic outlook in Venezuela is
complicated by the absence of Article IV consultations since 2004 and delays in the publication of
key economic data. General government revenue
(1) includes the IMF staff’s estimated foreign
exchange profits transferred from the central bank
to the government (buying U.S. dollars at the most
appreciated rate and selling at more depreciated rates
in a multitier exchange rate system) and (2) excludes
the IMF staff’s estimated revenue from PDVSA’s sale
of PetroCaribe assets to the central bank.

Classification of Countries
Summary of the Country Classification
The country classification in the WEO divides the
world into two major groups: advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies.4 This
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic
or otherwise, and it has evolved over time. The objective is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably
4As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate
and independent basis.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

205

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

meaningful method of organizing data. Table A provides an overview of the country classification, showing
the number of countries in each group by region and
summarizing some key indicators of their relative size
(GDP valued by purchasing power parity, total exports
of goods and services, and population).
Some countries remain outside the country classification and therefore are not included in the analysis.
Anguilla, Cuba, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, and Montserrat are examples of countries that
are not IMF members, and their economies therefore
are not monitored by the IMF. Somalia is omitted
from the emerging market and developing economies
group composites because of data limitations.

General Features and Composition of
Groups in the World Economic Outlook
Classification
Advanced Economies
The 39 advanced economies are listed in Table B.
The seven largest in terms of GDP based on market
exchange rates—the United States, Japan, Germany,
France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute the subgroup of major advanced economies often
referred to as the Group of Seven (G7). The members
of the euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup.
Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area
cover the current members for all years, even though
the membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced
economies in the WEO.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing
economies (152) includes all those that are not classified as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and
developing economies are Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), emerging and developing Asia, emerging and developing Europe (sometimes also referred to
as “central and eastern Europe”), Latin America and the
Caribbean (LAC), Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan (MENAP), and sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA).
Emerging market and developing economies are also
classified according to analytical criteria. The analyti206

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

cal criteria reflect the composition of export earnings
and a distinction between net creditor and net debtor
economies. The detailed composition of emerging
market and developing economies in the regional and
analytical groups is shown in Tables D and E.
The analytical criterion source of export earnings
distinguishes between categories fuel (Standard International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and nonfuel and
then focuses on nonfuel primary products (SITCs 0, 1,
2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized into one of
these groups when their main source of export earnings
exceeded 50 percent of total exports on average between
2011 and 2015.
The financial criteria focus on net creditor economies,
net debtor economies, heavily indebted poor countries
(HIPCs), and low-income developing countries (LIDCs).
Economies are categorized as net debtors when their
latest net international investment position, where
available, was less than zero or their current account
balance accumulations from 1972 (or earliest available
data) to 2015 were negative. Net debtor economies are
further differentiated on the basis of experience with debt
servicing.5
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are or
have been considered by the IMF and the World Bank
for participation in their debt initiative known as the
HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external debt
burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustainable” level
in a reasonably short period of time.6 Many of these
countries have already benefited from debt relief and
have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that were designated as
eligible to use the IMF’s concessional financing resources
under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT)
in the 2013 PRGT eligibility review and had a level of
per capita gross national income less than the PRGT
income graduation threshold for non–small states (that
is, twice the World Bank International Development
Association operational threshold, or US$2,390 in 2011
as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas method) and
Zimbabwe.

5During

2011–15, 20 economies incurred external payments
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or
rescheduling during 2011–15.
6See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and Sukwinder Singh, Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The Enhanced
HIPC Initiative, IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington: International
Monetary Fund, November 1999).

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and
Services, and Population, 20151
(Percent of total for group or world)

Number of
Economies
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
Excluding China and India
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Excluding Nigeria and South Africa
Analytical Groups3
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by DebtServicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or Rescheduling
during 2011–15
Other Groups
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
Low-Income Developing Countries

39
19

16
7

GDP
Advanced
Economies

World

Exports of Goods
and Services
Advanced
Economies
World

100.0
37.2
28.2
8.0
5.5
4.5
3.3
10.0
5.6
3.4
15.6

42.4
15.8
12.0
3.4
2.3
1.9
1.4
4.2
2.4
1.4
6.6

100.0
17.0
40.3
11.8
5.7
4.1
3.0
5.9
5.9
3.7
27.2

63.4
10.8
25.6
7.5
3.6
2.6
1.9
3.7
3.7
2.3
17.3

74.2

31.5

54.1

Population
Advanced
Economies
World
100.0
30.5
32.0
7.8
6.1
5.8
4.4
12.0
6.2
3.4
15.9

14.6
4.5
4.7
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.6
1.8
0.9
0.5
2.3

34.3

71.7

10.5

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

Emerging Market
and Developing
Economies

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

152

100.0

57.6

100.0

36.6

100.0

85.4

12

8.0
5.7
53.5
30.0
12.2
11.3
5.7
14.3
4.9
3.4

4.6
3.3
30.8
17.3
7.0
6.5
3.3
8.2
2.8
2.0

7.7
5.1
50.4
31.7
5.5
13.2
9.2
13.8
2.9
5.3

2.8
1.9
18.4
11.6
2.0
4.8
3.4
5.1
1.1
1.9

4.6
2.3
57.1
22.3
21.0
13.8
2.8
9.9
3.3
2.0

3.9
2.0
48.8
19.1
17.9
11.8
2.4
8.4
2.8
1.7

22
20
45
43

13.1
11.6
5.4
2.6

7.6
6.7
3.1
1.5

14.4
13.9
4.5
2.6

5.3
5.1
1.7
1.0

10.6
7.0
15.0
11.2

9.1
6.0
12.8
9.6

29
122
30

20.1
79.9
4.6

11.6
46.0
2.7

21.6
78.4
4.6

7.9
28.7
1.7

12.4
87.6
7.8

10.6
74.8
6.7

118

49.8

28.7

44.3

16.2

67.1

57.3

20

3.0

1.8

2.0

0.7

4.6

3.9

38
59

2.4
7.4

1.4
4.2

1.9
6.5

0.7
2.4

11.2
22.5

9.6
19.2

29

27
12
32

1The GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those
for which data are included in the group aggregates.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
3Syria is omitted from the source of export earnings and South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composites because of
insufficient data.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

207

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Belgium
Cyprus
Estonia
Finland
France
Germany

Greece
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta

Netherlands
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain

Italy
Japan
United Kingdom

United States

Korea
Macao SAR2
New Zealand
Norway
Puerto Rico
San Marino

Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan Province of China

Major Advanced Economies
Canada
France
Germany
Other Advanced Economies
Australia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Hong Kong SAR1
Iceland
Israel
1On

July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.

2On

December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a
Special Administrative Region of China.

Table C. European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France

208

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Malta
Netherlands

Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings
Fuel

Nonfuel Primary Products

Azerbaijan
Kazakhstan
Russia
Turkmenistan1

Uzbekistan

Brunei Darussalam
Timor-Leste

Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu

Bolivia
Colombia

Argentina
Chile

Ecuador
Trinidad and Tobago
Venezuela

Guyana
Paraguay
Suriname
Uruguay

Algeria
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Afghanistan
Mauritania
Sudan

Angola
Chad
Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Nigeria
South Sudan

Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Eritrea
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Niger
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia

Commonwealth of Independent States

Emerging and Developing Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan

Sub-Saharan Africa

1Turkmenistan, which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States, is included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

209

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Net External
Position1
Bulgaria

Commonwealth of Independent States

Croatia

Azerbaijan

*
•

Belarus

*

Kosovo

Georgia3

*

FYR Macedonia

Kazakhstan

*

Montenegro

Kyrgyz Republic

Turkmenistan3

*
*
•
*
*

Ukraine3

*

Uzbekistan

•

*

*
*
•
*
•
*

*
*

Armenia

Moldova
Russia
Tajikistan

Hungary

*
*

Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji

Romania
Serbia

*

Turkey
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia

*

Brazil
Chile
Colombia

India

*

Costa Rica

Indonesia

*
•
*
•

Dominica

Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina

210

*
*

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

*

Grenada

*
•
*
*
•
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*

Guatemala

Emerging and Developing Europe

*
*

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

•

*

•
•
•

*

•

*

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Latin America and the Caribbean

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh

Poland

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

*
*
*
*

Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama

*

Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago

*

Uruguay
Venezuela

*
•
*
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
•

*

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, and Status as Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
and Low-Income Developing Countries (continued)
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Low-Income
Developing
Countries
Republic of Congo

Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sudan
Syria4
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

•
•
•
*
*
•
•
*
•
*
•
*
*
•
*
•
•
*
...
*
•
*

•

*

Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea

*

The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho

•

*

Comoros
Democratic Republic of
the Congo

*

Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad

Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique

*

*

Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda

*

São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal

*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

Benin

Ethiopia
Gabon

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola

Côte d’Ivoire

Seychelles

•

*

Sierra Leone

•
•

*

South Sudan4

South Africa

*

Swaziland

•
•
•
•

*

Togo

•

*

*
*
*

Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Low-Income
Developing
Countries

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

*
*
•
*
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
*
•
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
•
...
*
*
*
*
*
*

•
•

*

*
•

*

•
•
•
•

*

*

*

*
*
*

*
*
•
•
•
•

*

•

*

•

*

*
*
*

*
•
•
•

*

•

*

*
*

*
•
•
•
•

*
*
*
*

*

1Dot

(star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).
instead of star indicates that the country has reached the completion point.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in
economic structure.
4South Sudan and Syria are omitted from the net external position group composite for lack of a fully developed database.
2Dot

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

211

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
National Accounts
The Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Bhutan
Botswana
Dominica
Egypt
Ethiopia
Haiti
Hong Kong SAR
India
Iran
Jamaica
Lao P.D.R.
Lesotho
Malawi
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Pakistan
Palau
Puerto Rico
Samoa
Singapore
St. Lucia
Swaziland
Thailand
Trinidad and Tobago
1Unless

212

Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar

Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun

noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Government Finance
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts

Country
Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

Currency
Afghan Afghani
Albanian lek
Algerian dinar
Angolan kwanza
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Argentine peso
Armenian dram
Australian dollar
Euro
Azerbaijan manat
Bahamian dollar
Bahrain dinar
Bangladesh taka
Barbados dollar
Belarusian ruble
Euro
Belize dollar
CFA franc
Bhutanese
ngultrum
Bolivian boliviano
Bosnia convertible
marka
Botswana pula
Brazilian real
Brunei dollar
Bulgarian lev
CFA franc
Burundi franc

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2014
2015
2014
2014

Base Year2
2002/03
1996
2001
2002
20066

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013
2014
2015
2015
2015
2012
2013/14

2004
2005
2013/14
2010
2003
2006
2010
2005
19746
2009
2013
2000
2007
20006

SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2015
2015

1990
2010

Other
ESA 2010

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO

2015
2014
2015
2015
2014
2015

2006
1995
2010
2010
1999
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
IMF staff
NSO
MEP
CB
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and CB
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

Cabo Verdean
escudo
Cambodian riel
CFA franc
Canadian dollar
CFA franc

NSO

2015

2007

SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2013
2014
2015
2012

2000
2000
2007
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Chilean peso
Chinese yuan
Colombian peso
Comorian franc
Congolese franc

CB
CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO

2013
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013

2005
2008
2010
2005
2000
2005

Other
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
Other
Other
SNA 1993

CFA franc
Costa Rican colón

NSO
CB

2014
2015

1990
2012

SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1996
From 2005

From 1980
From 1995
From 1994

From 2005
From 1995

From 2000

From 1996

From 2011

From 1980

From 2003
From 2000

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013
2014/15

NSO
NSO

2015
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO and GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015

NSO

2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2014
2014
2015
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

NSO
CB

2014
2015

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

213

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Country
Afghanistan
Albania

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
IMF staff

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2015

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001
1986

Balance of Payments

Subsectors
Coverage4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2015

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5
BPM 6

CB
CB
CB

2015
2014
2014

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5

C
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
Mixed
C
C
C

CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2013
2015
2015
2015
2015
2012
2013/14
2015

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5

A

CB

2014

BPM 6

C
C

CB
CB

2015
2014

BPM 5
BPM 6

C
C
CB
A
A
A
C
A
C

NSO, MEP, and GAD
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
MoF
NSO
CB

2014
2015
2014
2015
2015
2014
2013
2015
2013

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5

Accounting
Practice5
C
Other

Historical Data
Source1
NSO, MoF, and CB
CB

C
Other
C

CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG,TG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG
CG,SS,NFPC
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,MPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS

CG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG
CG,LG
CG

Algeria
Angola
Antigua and
Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
The Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia

CB
MoF
MoF

2015
2014
2014

1986
2001
2001

MEP
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2013/14
2015/16
2015
2015
2015/16
2013
2013/14
2015

1986
2001
2001
2001
Other
2001
2001
Other
1986
2001
ESA 2010
1986
2001
1986
2001

Bosnia and
Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil

MoF

2014

2001

MoF
MoF

2014/15
2014

1986
2001

Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Central African
Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Costa Rica

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2014
2014
2015
2014

Other
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,
MPC,NFPC
CG, BCG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG
CG,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001

CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG

C
A
C
Other
Mixed
A

CB
CB
GAD
CB and NSO
CB and IMF staff
CB

2012
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5

MoF
MoF and CB

2014
2015

2001
1986

CG
CG

A
C

CB
CB

2012
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5

214

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2012
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2014

Base Year2
2009
2010
2005
2010
2010
1990
2006

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

CB
CB
MEP
CB
MEP and CB
IMF staff
NSO

2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2013
2006
2015

2007
2007
2011/12
1990
2006
2005
2010

SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia

Currency
CFA franc
Croatian kuna
Euro
Czech koruna
Danish krone
Djibouti franc
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Dominican peso
U.S. dollar
Egyptian pound
U.S. dollar
CFA franc
Eritrean nakfa
Euro

Ethiopia
Fiji

Ethiopian birr
Fijian dollar

NSO
NSO

2014/15
2014

2010/11
20086

Finland
France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia

Euro
Euro
CFA franc
Gambian dalasi
Georgian lari

NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2013
2013
2015

2010
2010
2001
2004
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 1993/
2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2014

2010
2006
2010
2006

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

CB

2015

2001

SNA 1993

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland

Euro
Ghanaian cedi
Euro
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Guatemalan
quetzal
Guinean franc
CFA franc
Guyanese dollar
Haitian gourde
Honduran lempira
Hong Kong dollar
Hungarian forint
Icelandic króna

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO

2011
2013
2015
2014/15
2015
2015
2015
2015

2003
2005
20066
1986/87
2000
2014
2005
2005

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010

India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland

Indian rupee
Indonesian rupiah
Iranian rial
Iraqi dinar
Euro

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2015/16
2015
2014/15
2014
2015

2011/12
2010
2004/05
2007
2014

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1968
ESA 2010

Guatemala

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1995
From 1995
From 1980

From 2007

From 2010

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO and CB
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2014
2009
2015

NSO
NSO

2015
2015

NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2014
2015
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2013

From 2001

NSO

2015

From 1980
From 2005
From 1990

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
IEO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2015
2015
2015

From 1995

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2015/16
2015
2014/15
2014
2015

From 1980
From 1980

From 1996
From 1991
From 1995

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

215

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

CB
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
CB

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2012
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

Mixed
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C

CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2015
2014
2014/15
2015
2013
2008
2015
2014/15
2014

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2015

BPM 6

2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2014
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG

A
A
C
C
A
C
A
CB

CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
NSO and CB
CB
CB
CB
CB

2015
2014
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 4
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5

2015

1986

CG

C

CB

2015

BPM 5

2015
2014
2014
2014/15
2015
2015/16
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2014/15
2014
2015

2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001
2001

CG
CG
CG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS

Other
A
C
C
A
C
A
A
A
C
C
C
A

CB and MEP
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO

2015
2014
2014
2014/15
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015/16
2015
2014/15
2014
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013/14

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986
2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
2001
1986

2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2014
2008
2015
2014/15
2015

2001
1986
2001
1986
1986
2001
1986/2001
1986
2001

MoF

2015

France
Gabon
The Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada

NSO
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF
MoF

Guatemala

MoF

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong SAR
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
MoF and IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Country
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF

Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji

MoF
CB and MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Finland

216

Balance of Payments

CG
CG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG

Accounting
Practice5
A
A
Other
A
A
A
C

CG,SG,LG,SS,NMPC
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG,LG,SS,MPC
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
CG

2001

2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Subsectors
Coverage4

Historical Data
Source1

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Country
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua

Currency
New Israeli shekel
Euro
Jamaican dollar
Japanese yen
Jordanian dinar
Kazakhstani tenge
Kenya shilling
Australian dollar
South Korean won
Euro
Kuwaiti dinar
Kyrgyz som
Lao kip
Euro
Lebanese pound
Lesotho loti
U.S. dollar
Libyan dinar
Euro
Euro
Macanese pataca
Macedonian denar
Malagasy ariary
Malawian kwacha
Malaysian ringgit
Maldivian rufiyaa
CFA franc
Euro
U.S. dollar
Mauritanian
ouguiya
Mauritian rupee
Mexican peso
U.S. dollar
Moldovan leu
Mongolian tögrög
Euro
Moroccan dirham
Mozambican
metical
Myanmar kyat
Namibia dollar
Nepalese rupee
Euro
New Zealand dollar
Nicaraguan
córdoba

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
GAD
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
MEP and NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MoF and NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
IMF staff

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2014
2015
2013
2015
2013
2014
2014
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2011
2015
2014
2013
2015
2013/14
2014

Base Year2
2010
2010
2007
2005
1994
2007
2009
2006
2010
2015
2010
1995
2002
2010
2010
2004
1992
2003
2010
2010
2014
2005
2000
2010
2010
20036
1999
2010
2003/04
2004

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1968
SNA 2008
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

2015
2015
2013
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015

2006
2008
2004
1995
2010
2006
2007
2009

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2014/15
2014
2014/15
2015
2015
2015

2010/11
2000
2000/01
2010
2009/10
2006

Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3
From 1995
From 1980
From 1980
From 1994

From 1980

From 1995
From 2010

From 2005
From 1995
From 2001

From 2000

From 1999

From 1998

From 1980
From 1987
From 1994

Historical Data
Source1
Haver Analytics
NSO
NSO
GAD
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
CB
MoF
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013
2015
2015
2014
2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2013
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2013
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

NSO
NSO
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2015/16
2014
2014/15
2015
2015
2015

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

217

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Balance of Payments

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
2001

Subsectors
Coverage4
CG,LG,SS

Accounting
Practice5
Other

Historical Data
Source1
Haver Analytics

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6

Israel

Historical Data
Source1
MoF

Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea
Kosovo
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macao SAR
FYR Macedonia
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania

NSO
MoF
GAD
MoF
IMF staff
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF

2015
2015/16
2014
2015
2015
2015
2013
2015
2015
2014
2015
2012/13
2015
2014
2014/15
2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2014
2015
2015
2012/13
2014

2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
Other
1986
Other
2001
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986
2014
2001
2001
1986
1986
1986
1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
1986

CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,NFPC
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG,SG,LG
CG
CG
CG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG

A
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
Mixed
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
Mixed
A
A
C

NSO
CB
MoF
CB
CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
MoF
CB
CB
CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB
CB
NSO and GAD
NSO
CB
CB
NSO
NSO
CB

2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2013
2014
2014
2014
2013
2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014
2015
2014
2013
2015
2013
2013

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MEP
MoF

2015
2015
2013/14
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

2001
2001
2001
1986
2001
1986
2001
2001

CG,LG,NFPC
CG,SS,NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG

C
C
Other
C
C
C
A
Mixed

CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB
CB
GAD
CB

2015
2015
2013
2014
2015
2014
2015
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5
Other
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6

Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2015/16
2014/15
2014/15
2015
2014/15

2001
2001
2001
2001
2001

CG,NFPC
CG
CG
CG,LG,SS
CG

Mixed
C
C
A
A

IMF staff
CB
CB
CB
NSO

2015/16
2013
2014/15
2015
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6

Nicaragua

MoF

2015

1986

CG,LG,SS

C

IMF staff

2015

BPM 6

Country

218

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2015
2015
2015
2014/15

Base
2000
2010
2013
2010
2005/066

2013/14
2015

2005
2007

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1968/
1993
Other
SNA 1993

Country
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan

Currency
CFA franc
Nigerian naira
Norwegian krone
Omani rial
Pakistan rupee

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Palau
Panama

U.S. dollar
U.S. dollar

MoF
NSO

Papua New Guinea

Papua New Guinea
kina
Paraguayan
guaraní
Peruvian nuevo sol
Philippine peso
Polish zloty
Euro
U.S. dollar
Qatari riyal
Romanian leu
Russian ruble
Rwanda franc
Samoa tala
Euro
São Tomé and
Príncipe dobra
Saudi riyal
CFA franc
Serbian dinar
Seychellois rupee
Sierra Leonean
leone
Singapore dollar
Euro
Euro
Solomon Islands
dollar
South African rand
South Sudanese
pound
Euro
Sri Lankan rupee
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Eastern Caribbean
dollar

NSO and MoF

2013

1998

CB

2015

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
MoF
NSO
NSO
NSO

Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia

Prices (CPI)

Year2

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1980

Historical Data
Source1
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014/15

MoF
NSO

2013/14
2015

SNA 1993

NSO

2013

1994

SNA 1993

CB

2015

2015
2015
2015
2015
2014/15
2014
2015
2015
2014
2014/15
2014
2015

2007
2000
2010
2011
1954
2013
2010
2011
2011
2009/10
2007
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 2008
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA1968
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 2008
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993

CB
NSO
NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2015

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2014
2014

2010
2000
2010
2006
2006

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO and MEP
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2014
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
CB

2015
2015
2015
2014

2010
2010
2010
2004

SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2015

CB
NSO

2015
2014

2010
2010

SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO

2015
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2014

2010
2002
20066

ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2014

NSO

2014

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2015

From 2007

From 1995
From 1980

From 2000
From 1995

From 2010
From 2010
From 2010
From 1997
From 2000

From 1995

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

219

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015
2015
2014
2015
2014/15

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986
2001
2014
2001
1986

Balance of Payments

CB
CB
NSO
CB
CB

Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Palau
Panama
Papua New Guinea

MoF
MoF
MoF

2013/14
2015
2013

2001
1986
1986

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS,NFPC
CG

Other
C
C

MoF
NSO
CB

2013/14
2015
2013

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

Paraguay

MoF

2015

2001

C

CB

2015

BPM 5

Peru

MoF

2015

1986

CG,SG,LG,SS,MPC,
NMPC,NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2015

BPM 5

Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico
Qatar
Romania

MoF
MoF and NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2014
2014/15
2015
2015

2001
ESA 2010
2001
2001
1986
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
CG,LG,SS
Other
CG
CG,LG,SS

C
A
A
A
C
C

CB
CB
CB
…
CB and IMF staff
CB

2015
2015
2015
…
2014
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 5
BPM 6

Russia
Rwanda
Samoa
San Marino
São Tomé and
Príncipe
Saudi Arabia

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF and Customs

2014
2014
2014/15
2014
2015

2001
2001
2001
Other
2001

CG,SG,SS
CG,LG
CG
CG
CG

Mixed
Mixed
A
Other
C

CB
CB
CB
…
CB

2014
2015
2014/15
…
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
…
BPM 6

MoF

2015

1986

CG

C

CB

2015

BPM 5

Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2015
2014

1986
1986/2001
1986
1986

CG
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,SS
CG

C
C
C
C

CB and IMF staff
CB
CB
CB

2015
2015
2015
2014

BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5

Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands

MoF
NSO
MoF
MoF

2014/15
2015
2015
2014

2001
2001
1986
1986

CG
CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG

C
A
C
C

NSO
CB
NSO
CB

2015
2015
2015
2014

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

South Africa

MoF

2015/16

2001

CG,SG,SS

C

CB

2015

BPM 6

South Sudan

MoF and MEP

2015

Other

CG

C

MoF, NSO, and MEP

2015

BPM 5

Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis

MoF and NSO
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2014

ESA 2010
2001
1986

CG,SG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG

A
C
C

CB
CB
CB

2015
2015
2014

BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

St. Lucia

MoF

2013/14

1986

CG

C

CB

2014

BPM 5

220

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

CG
CG,SG,LG,NFPC
CG,LG,SS
CG
CG,SG,LG

Accounting
Practice5
A
C
A
C
C

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014
2015
2015
2015
2014/15

Historical Data
Source1
MoF
MoF
NSO and MoF
MoF
MoF

Country

Subsectors
Coverage4

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5

Historical Data
Source1

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014

Base Year2
20066

System of
National
Accounts
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2010
2014
2015
2015
2015
2010
2015

2007
2007
2011
2015
2010
2000
2011

Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
ESA 2010
ESA 2010
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

Tajik somoni
Tanzania shilling
Thai baht
U.S. dollar
CFA franc
Tongan pa’anga
Trinidad and
Tobago dollar
Tunisian dinar
Turkish lira
New Turkmen
manat
Australian dollar
Ugandan shilling
Ukrainian hryvnia
U.A.E. dirham

NSO
NSO
MEP
MoF
MoF and NSO
CB
NSO

2014
2015
2015
2014
2014
2014
2012

1995
2007
2002
20106
2000
2010
2000

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
Other
SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
NSO

2014
2015
2015

2004
1998
2005

SNA 1993
ESA 1995
SNA 1993

PFTAC advisors
NSO
NSO
NSO

2012
2014
2015
2014

2005
2010
2010
2007

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008
SNA 1993

Pound sterling
U.S. dollar
Uruguayan peso

NSO
NSO
CB

2015
2015
2014

2013
2009
2005

ESA 2010
Other
SNA 1993

NSO
NSO
CB

2014
2014
2015

1995
2006
1997

Vietnam
Yemen

Uzbek sum
Vanuatu vatu
Venezuelan bolívar
fuerte
Vietnamese dong
Yemeni rial

NSO
IMF staff

2015
2008

Zambia
Zimbabwe

Zambian kwacha
U.S. dollar

NSO
NSO

2014
2013

Country
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela

Currency
Eastern Caribbean
dollar
Sudanese pound
Surinamese dollar
Swazi lilangeni
Swedish krona
Swiss franc
Syrian pound
New Taiwan dollar

Historical Data
Source1
NSO

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1
NSO

Latest
Actual
Annual Data
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2011
2015

NSO
NSO
MEP
NSO
NSO
CB
NSO

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2015

NSO
CB
NSO
NSO

2013
2015/16
2015
2014

NSO
NSO
NSO

2015
2015
2014

SNA 1993
SNA 1993
SNA 2008

NSO
NSO
CB

2014
2015
2015

2010
1990

SNA 1993
SNA 1993

2015
2009

2010
2009

SNA 1993
Other

NSO
NSO,CB, and
IMF staff
NSO
NSO

From 1993
From 1980

From 1993

From 2009
From 2000

From 2005

From 1980
From 1980

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

2015
2014

221

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance

Balance of Payments

CB

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2015

Statistics
Manual
in Use at
Source
BPM 5

Mixed
CB
A

CB
CB
CB

2015
2015
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5

CG,LG,SS
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS

A
A
C
C

NSO
CB
CB
CB

2015
2015
2009
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6

1986
1986
2001
2001
2001
2001
1986
1986
2001

CG,LG,SS
CG,LG
CG,BCG,LG,SS
CG
CG
CG
CG,NFPC
CG
CG,LG,SS

C
C
A
C
C
C
C
C
A

CB
CB
CB
CB
CB
CB and NSO
CB and NSO
CB
CB

2014
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2012
2015
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6

2015

1986

CG,LG

C

NSO and IMF staff

2013

BPM 5

IMF staff
MoF
MoF

2013
2015
2015

Other
2001
2001

CG
CG
CG,SG,LG,SS

Mixed
C
C

IMF staff
CB
CB

2013
2015
2015

BPM 6
BPM 6
BPM 6

United Arab
Emirates
United Kingdom

MoF

2014

2001

CG,BCG,SG,SS

C

CB

2014

BPM 5

NSO

2015

2001

CG,LG

A

NSO

2015

BPM 6

United States
Uruguay

MEP
MoF

2015
2014

2001
1986

A
A

NSO
CB

2015
2014

BPM 6
BPM 6

Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Venezuela

MoF
MoF
MoF

2014
2015
2010

Other
2001
2001

C
C
C

MEP
CB
CB

2014
2014
2015

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 5

Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

2014
2013
2015
2014

2001
2001
1986
1986

CG,SG,LG
CG,LG,SS,MPC,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG,SS
CG
CG,LG,SS,BCG,
NFPC
CG,SG,LG
CG,LG
CG
CG

C
C
C
C

CB
IMF staff
CB
CB and MoF

2015
2009
2015
2013

BPM 5
BPM 5
BPM 6
BPM 4

Latest Actual
Annual Data
2014

Statistics
Manual in
Use at Source
1986

MoF
MoF
MoF

2015
2015
2015/16

Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Taiwan Province of
China
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Turkmenistan

CG

Accounting
Practice5
C

2001
1986
2001

CG
CG
CG

2015
2013
2009
2015

2001
2001
1986
1986

2015
2015
2014/15
2015
2014
2014
2014/15
2015
2015

MoF

Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine

Country
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland

Historical Data
Source1
MoF

MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF
CB and MoF
MoF
MoF
MoF

Subsectors
Coverage4

Historical Data
Source1

Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual (number following abbreviation signifies edition); CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National and Regional Accounts;
SNA = System of National Accounts.
1CB = Central Bank; FEO = Foreign Exchange Office; GAD = General Administration Department; IEO = International Economic Organization; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning,
Commerce, and/or Development; MoF = Ministry of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office; PFTAC = Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre.
2National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to
calculate the index.
3Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4For some countries, the structures of government consist of a broader coverage than specified for the general government. Coverage: BCG = Budgetary Central Government; CG =
Central Government; EUA = Extrabudgetary Units/Accounts; LG = Local Government; MPC = Monetary Public Corporation, including Central Bank; NMPC = Nonmonetary Financial
Public Corporations; NFPC = Nonfinancial Public Corporations; SG = State Government; SS = Social Security Funds; TG = Territorial Governments.
5Accounting Standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6Nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP.

222

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions Underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in the
World Economic Outlook (WEO) are based on officially
announced budgets, adjusted for differences between
the national authorities and the IMF staff regarding
macroeconomic assumptions and projected fiscal outturns. The medium-term fiscal projections incorporate
policy measures that are judged likely to be implemented. For cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to assess the authorities’ budget
intentions and prospects for policy implementation,
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions used
in regard to some of the advanced economies follow.
(See also Tables B5 to B9 in the online section of the
Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the available information regarding budget outturn for the
federal government, fiscal measures announced by the
authorities, and budget plans for provinces and on
IMF staff macroeconomic projections.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on Australian
Bureau of Statistics data, the 2016–2017 budget, and IMF
staff estimates.
Austria: For 2014, the creation of a defeasance structure
for Hypo Alpe Adria is assumed to increase the generalgovernment-debt-to-GDP ratio by 4.2 percentage points,
and the deficit effect arising from Hypo is assumed to be
1.4 percentage points.
Belgium: Projections reflect the IMF staff’s assessment
of policies and measures laid out in the 2016 budget
and the 2016–19 Stability Programme, incorporated
into the IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework.

1 The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors,
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations
in interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical
fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of
structural balances are based on IMF staff estimates of potential
GDP and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of
the October 1993 WEO.) Net debt is calculated as gross debt
minus financial assets corresponding to debt instruments. Estimates of the output gap and of the structural balance are subject
to significant margins of uncertainty.

Brazil: For 2015, outturn estimates are based on
the information available as of April 2016. Fiscal
projections for the end of 2016 take into account
budget performance through June 30, 2016, and the
deficit target revision announced by the authorities
in May 2016.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts
in the Update of Economic and Fiscal Projections
2015 (November 2015), Backgrounder: Canadian
Economic Outlook (February 2016), 2015 provincial budget updates, and 2016 provincial budgets as
available. The IMF staff makes adjustments to these
forecasts for differences in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff forecast also incorporates the
most recent data releases from Statistics Canada’s
Canadian System of National Economic Accounts,
including federal, provincial, and territorial budgetary outturns through the second quarter of 2015.
Chile: Projections are based on the authorities’
budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s
projections for GDP and copper prices.
China: The pace of fiscal consolidation is likely to
be more gradual, reflecting reforms to strengthen social
safety nets and the social security system announced as
part of the Third Plenum reform agenda.
Denmark: Estimates for 2015 are aligned with the
latest official budget estimates and the underlying
economic projections, adjusted where appropriate
for the IMF staff’s macroeconomic assumptions. For
2016–20, the projections incorporate key features
of the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the
authorities’ Convergence Programme 2016 submitted
to the European Union (EU).
France: Projections for 2016 reflect the budget law.
For 2017–19, they are based on the multiyear budget
and the April 2016 Stability Programme, adjusted for
differences in assumptions on macro and financial
variables, and revenue projections. Historical fiscal data reflect the statistical institute’s September
2016 revision and update of the fiscal accounts and
national accounts.
Germany: The IMF staff’s projections for 2016 and
beyond reflect the authorities’ adopted core federal
government budget plan and the German Stability
Programme: 2016 Update, adjusted for the differences
in the IMF staff’s macroeconomic framework. The
estimate of gross debt includes portfolios of impaired
assets and noncore business transferred to institutions
that are winding up, as well as other financial sector
and EU support operations.
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

223

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Box A1 (continued)
Greece: The fiscal projections reflect the IMF staff’s
assessment, assuming full implementation of the
authorities’ fiscal policy package under the European
Stability Mechanism–supported program.
Hong Kong SAR: Projections are based on the authorities’ medium-term fiscal projections on expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include IMF staff projections of the macroeconomic framework and of the
impact of recent legislative measures, as well as fiscal
policy plans announced in the 2016 budget.
India: Historical data are based on budgetary execution data. Projections are based on available information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments
for IMF staff assumptions. Subnational data are
incorporated with a lag of up to two years; general
government data are thus finalized well after central
government data. IMF and Indian presentations differ,
particularly regarding divestment and license auction
proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in certain minor categories, and some public sector lending.
Indonesia: IMF projections are based on moderate
tax policy and administration reforms, fuel subsidy
pricing reforms introduced in January 2015, and a
gradual increase in social and capital spending over the
medium term in line with fiscal space.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the 2016
Summer Economic Statement, adjusted for differences
between the IMF staff’s macroeconomic projections
and those of the Irish authorities.
Italy: IMF staff estimates and projections are based
on the fiscal plans included in the government’s 2016
budget and 2016 Economic and Financial Document, published in April of this year. Estimates of the
cyclically adjusted balance include the expenditures
to clear capital arrears in 2013, which are excluded
from the structural balance. After 2016, the IMF
staff projects convergence to a structural balance in
line with the authorities’ declared policy intentions,
which implies corrective measures in some years, as
yet unidentified.
Japan: The projections include fiscal measures
already announced by the government, including the
fiscal year 2016 supplementary budget, the upcoming
fiscal stimulus package for 2017, and the consumption
tax hike in October 2019.
Korea: The medium-term forecast incorporates the
government’s announced medium-term consolidation
path.

224

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Mexico: Fiscal projections for 2016 are broadly in
line with the approved budget; projections for 2017
onward assume compliance with rules established in
the Fiscal Responsibility Law.
Netherlands: Fiscal projections for the period
2016–21 are based on the authorities’ Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis budget projections, after differences in macroeconomic assumptions are adjusted for.
Historical data were revised following the June 2014
Central Bureau of Statistics release of revised macro
data because of the adoption of the European System
of National and Regional Accounts (ESA 2010) and
the revisions of data sources.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the
authorities’ 2016–17 budget and on IMF staff estimates.
Portugal: The estimate for 2015 reflects the cash
outturn and January through September data on a
national accounts basis; the projections for 2016 reflect
the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted to reflect the
IMF staff’s macroeconomic forecast and the first-half
cash outturn. Projections thereafter are based on the
assumption of unchanged policies.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are based on the Puerto
Rico Fiscal and Economic Growth Plan (FEGP), which
was prepared in 2015 pursuant to Governor Alejandro
García Padilla’s executive order, with subsequent further
updates on debt data in 2016. In line with assumptions
of this plan, IMF projections assume that Puerto Rico
will lose federal funding for the Affordable Care Act
(ACA) starting in 2018. Likewise, projections assume
federal tax incentives, which were neutralizing the
effects of Puerto Rico’s Act 154 on foreign companies,
will no longer be available, starting in 2018, leading to
additional revenue losses. In terms of policy assumptions, FEGP presents a scenario without measures and
an alternative scenario with various revenue and expenditure measures; IMF projections assume full implementation of the FEGP measures. On the revenue side,
the main measures are (1) an increase in the corporate
tax base and (2) improvement in tax administration
and enforcement. These are in addition to full transition to a value-added tax, which is an ongoing measure
and is expected to be completed by the end of 2016.
On the expenditure side, measures include extension
of Act 66, which freezes much government spending,
through 2021; reduction of operating costs; decreases in
government subsidies; and spending cuts in education
and health care. Although IMF policy assumptions are

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
exactly as in the FEGP scenario with full measures, the
IMF’s projections of fiscal revenues, expenditures, and
balance are different from FEGP’s. This stems from two
main differences in methodologies: first and foremost,
while IMF projections are on an accrual basis, FEGP’s
are on a cash basis. Second, the IMF and FEGP make
very different macroeconomic assumptions.
Russia: Projections for 2016–18 are IMF staff
estimates. Projections for 2019–21 are based on the oilprice-based fiscal rule introduced in December 2012,
with adjustments by the IMF staff.
Saudi Arabia: IMF staff projections of oil revenues
are based on WEO baseline oil prices. On the expenditure side, wage bill estimates incorporate 13th-month
pay awards every three years in accordance with the
lunar calendar. Expenditure projections take the 2016
budget as a starting point and assume that, to adjust to
lower oil prices, capital spending falls as a percentage of
GDP over the medium term.
Singapore: For fiscal years 2015/16 and 2016/17,
projections are based on budget numbers. For the
remainder of the projection period, the IMF staff
assumes unchanged policies.
South Africa: Fiscal projections are based on the
authorities’ 2016 Budget Review.
Spain: For 2016 and beyond, fiscal estimates and
projections are based on the measures specified in the
Stability Programme Update 2016–19 and the IMF
staff’s macroeconomic projections.
Sweden: Fiscal projections take into account the
authorities’ projections based on the 2016 Spring Budget. The impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal
accounts is calculated using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s 2005 elasticity
to take into account output and employment gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy
is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in line
with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Turkey: Fiscal projections assume that both current
and capital spending will be in line with the authorities’ 2016–18 Medium Term Programme based on
current trends and policies.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on
the 2016 budget, published in March 2016, with
revenue projections adjusted for the actual fiscal year
2015/16 outturn and with revenue and expenditure
projections adjusted for differences between IMF
staff forecasts of macroeconomic variables (such as

GDP growth and inflation) and the forecasts of these
variables assumed in the authorities’ fiscal projections. IMF staff data exclude public sector banks and
the effect of transferring assets from the Royal Mail
Pension Plan to the public sector in April 2012. Real
government consumption and investment are part
of the real GDP path, which, according to the IMF
staff, may or may not be the same as projected by the
U.K. Office for Budget Responsibility.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the
March 2016 Congressional Budget Office baseline
adjusted for the IMF staff’s policy and macroeconomic assumptions. The baseline incorporates the
key provisions of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015,
including a partial rollback of the sequester spending
cuts in fiscal year 2016. In fiscal years 2017 through
2021, the IMF staff assumes that the sequester cuts
will continue to be partially replaced, in proportions
similar to those already implemented in fiscal years
2014 and 2015, with back-loaded measures generating savings in mandatory programs and additional
revenues. Projections also incorporate the Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015, which
extended some existing tax cuts for the short term
and some permanently. Finally, fiscal projections are
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff’s forecasts for key
macroeconomic and financial variables and different
accounting treatment of financial sector support and
of defined-benefit pension plans and are converted
to a general government basis. Historical data start at
2001 for most series because data compiled according to the 2001 Government Finance Statistics Manual
(GFSM 2001) may not be available for earlier years.

Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the established policy framework in each country. In most cases,
this implies a nonaccommodative stance over the business cycle: official interest rates will increase when economic indicators suggest that inflation will rise above its
acceptable rate or range; they will decrease when indicators suggest that inflation will not exceed the acceptable
rate or range, that output growth is below its potential
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is
significant. On this basis, the London interbank offered
rate (LIBOR) on six-month U.S. dollar deposits is
assumed to average 1.0 percent in 2016 and 1.3 percent
in 2017 (see Table 1.1). The rate on three-month euro

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

225

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Box A1 (continued)
deposits is assumed to average –0.3 percent in 2016 and
–0.4 percent in 2017. The interest rate on six-month
Japanese yen deposits is assumed to average 0.0 percent
in 2016 and –0.1 percent in 2017.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent
with gradual convergence of inflation toward the
middle of the target range over the relevant horizon.
Canada: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with market expectations.
China: Monetary policy will remain broadly
unchanged from its current status, consistent with
the authorities’ announcement of maintaining stable
economic growth.
Denmark: The monetary policy is to maintain the
peg to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro
area member countries are in line with market
expectations.
Hong Kong SAR: The IMF staff assumes that the
currency board system remains intact.
India: The policy (interest) rate assumption is consistent with an inflation rate within the Reserve Bank
of India’s targeted band.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in line
with the maintenance of inflation within the central
bank’s targeted band by the end of 2016.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.
Korea: Monetary policy assumptions are in line with
market expectations.

226

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Mexico: Monetary assumptions are consistent with
attaining the inflation target.
Russia: Monetary projections assume increasing
exchange rate flexibility as part of the new inflationtargeting regime, with policy rates falling over the
next year as inflation continues to decline and
second-round effects are subdued.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are based
on the continuation of the exchange rate peg to the
U.S. dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in line
with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary projections are consistent
with South Africa’s 3–6 percent inflation target range.
Sweden: Monetary projections are in line with Riksbank projections.
Switzerland: The projections assume no change in the
policy rate in 2016–17.
Turkey: Broad money and the long-term bond yield
are based on IMF staff projections. The short-term
deposit rate is projected to evolve with a constant spread
against the interest rate of a similar U.S. instrument.
United Kingdom: Projections assume no change in
the Bank Rate over the forecast period, consistent with
market expectations.
United States: Following the Federal Reserve’s 25
basis point rate hike in mid-December, financial
conditions have tightened more than expected, and
wage growth has yet to exert significant price pressure.
The IMF staff expects the federal funds target rate to
increase by 50 basis points in 2016 and rise gradually
thereafter.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

List of Tables
Output
A1.
A2.
A3.
A4.

Summary of World Output
Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP

Inflation
A5.
A6.
A7.

Summary of Inflation
Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices

Financial Policies
A8.

Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt

Foreign Trade
A9.

Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices

Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account

Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances

Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing

Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

227

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)

World
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies2
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
Output per Capita
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
World Growth Rate Based on Market Exchange
Rates
Value of World Output (billions of U.S. dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
At Purchasing Power Parities

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

4.2
2.8
3.0
2.4
1.0
3.6
5.8

3.0
0.1
–0.3
0.4
–1.0
1.0
5.8

–0.1
–3.4
–2.8
–4.5
–5.5
–2.0
2.9

5.4
3.1
2.5
2.1
4.7
4.6
7.5

4.2
1.7
1.6
1.5
–0.5
2.9
6.3

3.5
1.2
2.2
–0.9
1.7
1.9
5.3

3.3
1.2
1.7
–0.3
1.4
2.2
5.0

3.4
1.9
2.4
1.1
0.0
2.8
4.6

3.2
2.1
2.6
2.0
0.5
1.9
4.0

3.1
1.6
1.6
1.7
0.5
1.9
4.2

3.4
1.8
2.2
1.5
0.6
1.9
4.6

3.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
0.6
2.3
5.1

6.2
7.6
4.2
3.1

5.3
7.2
3.1
4.0

–6.3
7.5
–3.0
–1.8

4.7
9.6
4.7
6.1

4.7
7.9
5.4
4.6

3.5
7.0
1.2
3.0

2.1
7.0
2.8
2.9

1.1
6.8
2.8
1.0

–2.8
6.6
3.6
0.0

–0.3
6.5
3.3
–0.6

1.4
6.3
3.1
1.6

2.4
6.4
3.2
2.7

5.3
5.3
5.2

4.8
4.8
5.9

1.5
1.5
3.9

4.9
5.2
7.0

4.5
4.6
5.0

5.0
5.1
4.3

2.4
2.2
5.2

2.7
2.6
5.1

2.3
2.1
3.4

3.4
3.2
1.4

3.4
3.2
2.9

3.9
3.6
4.2

2.7
6.0

0.6
5.7

–4.3
5.7

2.1
7.4

1.7
5.3

–0.4
5.2

0.3
6.2

1.6
6.0

2.3
4.6

1.9
3.7

1.7
4.9

1.7
5.4

5.6
5.9
3.8

5.1
6.0
4.1

–1.5
4.2
–0.8

5.2
8.1
6.8

5.0
6.6
4.8

4.8
5.4
2.6

2.5
5.6
4.0

2.3
5.2
1.6

0.0
5.0
2.8

0.8
5.0
1.1

1.8
5.3
2.8

2.7
5.6
3.7

4.7

4.5

2.3

6.9

5.1

4.3

4.6

4.2

3.8

3.9

4.6

5.4

5.6

5.1

–0.1

3.8

2.3

1.9

2.5

0.7

0.1

2.6

3.5

5.0

3.5
4.6
4.7

0.8
4.9
5.6

–3.8
1.7
3.8

2.3
4.5
6.2

2.0
4.5
5.6

1.1
4.0
5.2

1.4
4.0
5.4

2.2
3.7
5.0

1.6
3.1
4.4

1.7
3.0
3.9

1.9
3.5
4.5

2.0
4.0
5.4

2.1
4.4
3.8

–0.6
4.3
3.6

–4.0
1.7
3.6

2.5
6.3
5.3

1.2
5.1
4.1

0.7
4.0
2.8

0.7
3.8
4.0

1.2
3.5
3.9

1.5
3.0
2.6

1.0
3.1
1.7

1.3
3.6
2.9

1.2
4.2
3.5

3.2

1.5

–2.1

4.2

3.0

2.5

2.5

2.7

2.6

2.4

2.8

3.0

40,468
58,618

63,422
83,179

60,048 65,643 72,769 74,092 76,075 78,042 73,599 75,213 79,536
83,479 88,997 94,486 99,270 104,153 109,554 114,137 119,097 125,774

98,632
158,562

1Real

Projections
2017

2021

GDP.
the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
2Excludes

228

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)
Average
1998–2007 2008 2009
Real GDP
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Real Total Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2010

2011 2012

2013

Projections
2014 2015 2016 2017 2021
1.9
2.1
2.4
2.6
1.1
2.0
1.6
1.5
0.6
1.3
–0.3
0.8
1.4
3.2
1.4
2.0
1.3
1.4
0.4
0.9
0.7 –0.2
0.9
1.5
8.5 26.3
–0.7
0.2
2.5
3.6
3.0
1.6
3.1
2.3
4.1
4.8
2.0
2.7
2.9
1.1
–2.5
1.5
3.5
6.2
0.0
0.5
3.1
2.2
3.3
2.6
2.5
1.1
2.7
2.4
3.9
0.6
1.9
0.8
2.3
4.2
3.3
2.0
2.7
2.4
2.2
1.6
2.7
4.5
3.2
2.5
1.3
1.0
3.0
3.0
–1.4
0.0
–0.9 –20.3
2.0
4.0
–1.0
0.5

2.8
3.0
2.4
1.7
2.4
1.5
3.9
2.8
2.4
2.6
3.9
2.1
6.6
3.8
4.9
6.6
4.3
5.1
7.7
6.7
4.3
2.2
1.0
2.9
4.8
3.2
3.6
5.0
2.4
3.5
5.5
3.8
2.4
3.7
3.8
2.0
3.5
2.5
...
5.0
...

0.1
–0.3
0.4
0.8
0.2
–1.1
1.1
1.7
0.7
1.5
–0.3
0.2
–4.4
0.7
5.7
2.6
3.3
–0.8
–3.6
–5.4
3.7
3.3
–1.0
–0.6
2.8
1.0
2.6
0.7
2.2
–0.6
1.8
2.1
0.4
2.7
3.0
–0.7
–0.4
–1.8
3.4
1.5
1.7

–3.4
–2.8
–4.5
–5.6
–2.9
–5.5
–3.6
–3.8
–2.3
–3.8
–4.3
–3.0
–4.6
–8.3
–5.5
–14.8
–7.8
–5.4
–14.3
–14.7
–2.0
–2.4
–5.5
–4.3
0.7
–2.9
1.8
–1.6
–2.1
–5.2
–0.6
–2.5
–1.6
–4.8
1.4
–5.1
0.3
–2.0
1.3
–4.7
–12.8

3.1
2.5
2.1
4.0
2.0
1.7
0.0
1.4
2.7
1.9
–5.5
1.9
2.0
3.0
5.1
1.6
1.2
5.7
–3.8
2.5
1.4
3.5
4.7
1.9
6.5
3.1
2.3
10.6
2.9
6.0
15.2
6.8
0.6
2.3
5.7
1.6
2.0
–0.4
25.3
–3.6
–4.6

1.7
1.6
1.5
3.7
2.1
0.6
–1.0
1.7
1.8
2.8
–9.1
–1.8
0.0
2.6
2.8
6.0
0.6
2.6
6.2
7.6
0.4
1.8
–0.5
1.5
3.7
3.1
2.7
3.8
1.9
2.7
6.2
4.8
1.0
2.0
5.1
1.2
1.8
–0.4
21.7
2.0
–9.5

1.2
2.2
–0.9
0.7
0.2
–2.8
–2.6
–1.1
0.2
0.8
–7.3
–4.0
–1.1
–1.4
1.5
3.8
–2.7
–0.8
4.0
5.2
–2.4
2.8
1.7
1.3
2.3
1.7
3.6
2.1
1.1
–0.3
3.7
1.7
2.7
–0.8
2.4
–0.1
2.8
0.0
9.2
1.2
–7.5

1.2
1.7
–0.3
0.6
0.6
–1.7
–1.7
–0.2
0.0
0.3
–3.2
–1.1
1.1
–0.8
1.4
3.5
–1.1
4.3
2.9
1.6
–6.0
4.5
1.4
1.9
2.9
2.2
2.0
2.2
1.8
1.2
4.7
3.1
1.0
–0.5
4.4
–0.2
1.7
–0.3
11.2
4.4
–3.0

2.4

–0.3

–3.8

2.9

1.6

1.4

1.3

1.7

2.8
3.4
2.4
1.0
2.7
1.8
4.9
0.6
3.4
3.4
3.4

–0.3
–1.3
0.3
1.0
0.5
–1.2
–0.4
–1.3
–1.7
2.6
1.5

–3.7
–3.8
–4.0
–3.2
–2.5
–4.1
–6.0
–4.0
–4.9
–3.0
–2.7

3.0
2.9
1.5
2.9
2.1
2.0
–0.5
2.9
2.5
5.1
6.1

1.4
1.6
0.7
3.0
2.0
–0.6
–3.1
0.4
–0.6
3.4
3.1

0.8
2.1
–2.3
–0.8
–0.3
–5.6
–4.7
2.6
2.2
2.0
2.0

0.9
1.3
–0.6
1.0
0.7
–2.6
–3.1
1.7
2.1
1.9
1.4

2.5

–0.8

–3.7

2.8

1.4

1.2

1.1

Fourth Quarter2
Projections
2015:Q4 2016:Q4 2017:Q4

1.6
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.3
0.8
3.1
1.7
1.4
1.4
0.1
1.0
4.9
0.9
3.4
2.6
2.3
3.5
2.5
1.5
2.8
4.1
0.5
1.8
2.7
1.2
2.9
1.0
1.0
3.6
1.7
1.4
0.8
2.5
2.8
1.0
2.8
–1.8
–4.7
4.9
1.0

1.8
2.2
1.5
1.4
1.3
0.9
2.2
1.6
1.4
1.2
2.8
1.1
3.2
1.1
3.3
3.0
1.8
3.1
3.4
2.5
2.2
3.4
0.6
1.1
3.0
1.9
2.7
1.7
1.3
2.6
2.2
1.9
1.2
2.7
3.0
1.4
2.7
–1.4
0.2
3.8
1.2

1.7
1.6
1.5
1.2
1.8
0.8
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.1
1.8
1.2
2.8
1.6
3.7
3.3
1.5
3.0
4.0
3.3
2.0
3.0
0.6
1.9
3.0
1.9
2.8
2.7
1.7
2.0
2.6
2.9
2.1
2.2
2.9
1.8
2.6
–0.5
2.6
2.6
1.3

1.8
1.9
2.0
1.3
1.3
1.1
3.5
1.1
1.5
1.1
–0.8
1.3
27.4
0.6
4.0
2.1
2.1
3.6
2.3
1.0
2.8
6.2
0.8
1.8
3.1
0.3
2.8
–0.7
0.3
4.8
1.7
2.0
0.2
4.0
2.3
0.1
2.9
...
...
2.7
...

1.7
2.0
1.6
1.7
1.3
0.7
2.6
2.0
1.3
1.4
0.7
1.2
5.7
1.1
3.1
3.2
2.9
2.3
6.3
1.9
2.8
3.3
0.8
1.4
2.5
1.5
2.5
1.3
1.2
3.4
1.0
1.7
0.7
2.3
2.8
2.4
2.2
...
...
7.6
...

1.8
1.9
1.6
1.6
1.5
1.2
2.1
1.7
1.4
1.0
3.7
1.1
6.0
0.9
3.3
2.4
0.8
3.7
–2.1
2.7
2.2
3.3
0.8
0.8
3.1
1.9
3.3
2.1
1.2
1.2
2.7
1.8
2.3
2.4
3.0
–1.4
3.3
...
...
3.3
...

1.9

1.4

1.7

1.5

1.5

1.6

1.6

1.9
2.4
1.1
1.5
1.1
–0.4
1.6
0.0
3.4
1.3
2.5

2.2
3.2
1.9
1.4
1.5
1.1
3.8
0.1
2.5
0.0
2.1

1.7
1.8
1.8
1.9
1.7
1.0
3.0
0.6
1.8
1.5
1.7

2.0
2.5
1.6
1.7
1.3
1.0
2.1
0.8
0.1
2.1
2.6

1.7
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.8
0.7
1.5
0.7
2.1
2.0
2.8

2.1
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.2
1.8
4.3
0.9
1.9
–1.4
2.3

1.8
2.3
1.4
1.4
0.8
0.7
2.6
1.0
1.3
3.1
1.3

2.0
2.1
1.6
1.8
1.9
1.6
1.9
0.9
0.2
1.7
3.4

1.7

2.2

1.6

1.8

1.5

1.9

1.8

1.7

1In

this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
the fourth quarter of the preceding year.
3Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2From

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

229

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1998–2007 2008–17
Private Consumer Expenditure
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Public Consumption
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Gross Fixed Capital Formation
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

230

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

2.9
3.7
2.1
0.9
2.7
1.4
3.9
0.9
3.5
3.5
3.5

1.2
1.7
0.4
1.0
0.8
–0.4
–0.3
0.5
0.8
2.2
2.2

0.1
–0.3
0.3
0.5
0.4
–1.1
–0.7
–0.9
–0.7
2.9
1.1

–1.2
–1.6
–1.1
0.3
0.2
–1.5
–3.6
–0.7
–3.2
0.0
0.0

1.9
1.9
0.8
0.3
1.8
1.2
0.3
2.8
0.6
3.6
3.7

1.4
2.3
0.0
1.3
0.5
0.0
–2.4
0.3
–0.5
2.3
3.0

1.0
1.5
–1.1
1.3
–0.2
–4.0
–3.5
2.3
1.7
1.9
2.2

1.1
1.5
–0.6
0.9
0.5
–2.4
–3.1
1.7
1.6
2.4
2.2

1.8
2.9
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.6
1.2
–0.9
2.2
2.5
2.3

2.2
3.2
1.8
1.9
1.5
0.9
3.1
–1.2
2.5
1.9
2.6

2.2
2.9
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.0
3.3
0.5
2.7
2.2
2.3

2.1
2.7
1.5
1.5
1.4
1.0
2.3
1.2
0.8
2.0
2.6

2.7

1.2

–0.2

–1.2

1.8

1.4

1.1

1.2

1.8

2.1

2.2

2.0

2.2
2.0
1.9
0.9
1.4
1.4
4.9
2.1
3.2
2.4
2.8

1.0
0.3
1.0
2.0
1.4
–0.2
0.7
1.1
1.1
1.6
2.5

2.3
2.5
2.4
3.4
1.1
1.0
5.9
–0.1
2.1
3.8
2.9

3.0
3.7
2.4
3.0
2.4
0.4
4.1
2.3
1.1
2.7
3.4

0.9
0.1
0.8
1.3
1.3
0.6
1.5
1.9
0.2
2.3
2.8

–0.6
–2.7
–0.1
0.9
1.0
–1.8
–0.3
1.2
0.2
1.3
1.5

0.1
–0.9
–0.3
1.0
1.6
–1.4
–4.5
1.7
1.7
0.7
2.0

–0.3
–2.4
0.2
1.2
1.5
–0.3
–2.8
1.9
0.3
0.3
2.2

0.4
–0.7
0.6
1.2
1.2
–1.0
0.0
0.1
2.3
0.3
2.3

1.6
1.6
1.4
2.8
1.4
–0.7
2.7
1.2
1.4
1.7
2.3

1.5
0.7
1.7
3.5
1.4
0.6
0.9
1.7
0.8
1.6
3.1

1.0
0.8
1.1
1.9
1.0
0.5
0.4
–0.8
0.6
1.9
2.2

1.9

0.8

2.1

2.9

0.7

–1.0

0.1

–0.7

0.0

1.5

1.2

0.8

3.1
3.7
3.3
1.3
3.9
3.0
6.9
–1.1
3.3
5.1
3.7

0.3
0.7
–0.7
1.0
0.0
–3.2
–2.7
–0.5
–0.2
0.5
1.7

–2.7
–4.8
–0.7
0.8
0.8
–3.1
–3.9
–4.1
–6.5
1.5
–0.1

–11.1
–13.1
–11.2
–9.9
–9.1
–9.9
–16.9
–10.6
–15.2
–11.8
–5.1

1.8
1.1
–0.3
5.0
2.1
–0.5
–4.9
–0.2
5.0
11.4
6.0

2.9
3.7
1.6
7.4
2.1
–1.9
–6.9
1.4
1.9
4.6
4.0

2.4
6.3
–3.3
–0.1
0.2
–9.3
–7.1
3.4
2.3
4.9
2.9

1.2
3.1
–2.4
–1.1
–0.8
–6.6
–2.5
2.5
3.2
–0.4
2.4

2.9
4.2
1.5
3.5
–0.3
–3.4
3.5
1.3
6.7
0.7
2.1

2.5
3.7
3.1
1.2
1.0
0.8
6.4
0.0
3.3
–4.4
1.1

1.4
1.1
2.9
2.2
2.4
1.4
4.2
0.5
1.0
–1.4
1.2

2.4
3.0
2.5
1.5
1.7
1.8
3.0
1.6
–2.0
1.1
2.6

2.7

0.2

–3.4

–12.0

2.0

3.2

3.4

1.5

3.0

2.2

1.1

2.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1998–2007 2008–17
Final Domestic Demand
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Stock Building2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Foreign Balance2
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

2.8
3.4
2.3
1.0
2.6
1.8
4.9
0.6
3.4
3.7
3.3

1.0
1.3
0.3
1.2
0.8
–0.9
–0.8
0.4
0.7
1.7
2.1

–0.2
–0.9
0.5
1.1
0.7
–1.2
–0.5
–1.6
–1.2
2.8
1.1

–2.6
–3.1
–2.7
–1.4
–1.5
–2.9
–5.9
–2.3
–4.4
–2.2
–0.7

1.7
1.5
0.5
1.4
1.8
0.7
–0.7
2.0
1.1
5.0
4.3

1.3
1.7
0.3
2.5
0.9
–0.8
–3.0
0.7
0.0
2.6
2.9

1.1
1.9
–1.4
1.0
0.3
–4.5
–4.5
2.4
1.8
2.4
2.2

0.9
1.2
–0.8
0.5
0.4
–2.7
–2.9
1.9
1.6
1.3
2.2

1.8
2.6
0.9
1.5
0.6
–0.4
1.4
–0.3
2.9
1.6
2.3

2.2
3.1
2.0
1.9
1.4
0.6
3.7
–0.4
2.4
0.3
2.3

2.0
2.2
1.9
2.0
1.7
1.0
3.0
0.8
2.1
1.2
2.2

2.0
2.5
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.0
2.1
0.9
0.3
1.8
2.5

2.6

0.9

–0.5

–2.7

1.6

1.3

1.4

0.9

1.7

2.0

1.8

1.8

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1

0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.1
–0.1

–0.2
–0.5
–0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.5
0.0
0.3

–1.1
–0.8
–1.3
–1.7
–1.1
–1.2
–0.2
–1.5
–0.5
–0.7
–1.9

1.3
1.5
0.9
1.4
0.3
1.3
0.2
0.9
1.5
0.1
1.9

0.1
–0.1
0.4
0.5
1.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.2
–0.6
0.7
0.2

–0.2
0.1
–0.9
–1.6
–0.6
–1.1
–0.3
0.2
0.2
–0.3
–0.3

0.0
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.2
–0.3
–0.2
0.3
0.5
–0.8

0.1
–0.1
0.2
–0.1
0.5
0.0
0.3
0.2
0.7
–0.4
0.3

0.1
0.2
–0.1
–0.5
0.1
0.5
0.1
0.5
–0.2
–0.3
0.0

–0.2
–0.4
–0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.2
–0.4
–0.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.1

0.0

0.0

–0.3

–1.0

1.2

0.0

–0.2

0.2

0.0

0.1

–0.2

0.0

–0.1
–0.5
0.0
0.6
–0.3
–0.3
–0.9
0.4
–0.4
–0.3
0.6

0.2
0.1
0.3
0.1
–0.1
0.3
1.0
–0.1
0.1
–0.2
0.4

0.5
1.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.2
1.6
0.2
0.9
–1.9
0.4

0.3
1.2
–0.6
–2.6
–0.4
–1.3
2.8
–2.0
0.3
0.0
1.5

0.1
–0.5
0.7
1.1
–0.1
–0.3
0.5
2.0
–0.8
–2.1
0.1

0.3
0.0
0.9
0.9
0.0
1.2
2.1
–0.8
1.4
–0.3
0.5

0.4
0.1
1.4
1.4
0.5
2.8
2.1
–0.8
–0.7
–0.4
0.5

0.3
0.3
0.4
–0.3
–0.1
0.8
1.4
–0.2
–0.8
0.4
0.9

0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.3
–0.5
0.1
–0.2
0.3
–0.4
1.1
0.4

–0.2
–0.7
0.2
0.1
–0.3
–0.3
–0.5
0.4
–0.5
1.0
–0.2

–0.2
–0.3
0.0
0.0
–0.4
–0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.3
–0.1

–0.1
–0.4
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1
–0.2
1.2
–0.1
0.1

–0.2

0.0

0.5

–0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.0

–0.3

–0.2

–0.2

1Excludes

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

231

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Commonwealth of Independent States1,2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine3
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India4
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste5
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

232

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

6.2
5.8
7.5
10.4
14.1
7.3
6.7
8.1
4.2
3.4
7.9
14.4
5.8
5.6
7.6
5.7
7.8
2.0
9.3
9.9
2.3
7.1
2.7
1.9
6.3
4.2
8.8
1.8
1.0
5.7
12.0
3.8
...
2.6
4.2
3.7
1.1
4.3
3.8
...
1.2
...
2.5
6.8
4.2
7.0
6.2
5.3
3.7
3.7
...
3.4
...
4.2
4.0
3.8
4.0

5.3
5.2
5.6
6.9
10.8
10.3
2.4
3.3
7.6
7.8
7.9
14.7
2.2
9.0
7.2
5.5
10.8
–2.0
6.7
9.6
1.0
3.9
7.4
–1.8
7.8
4.8
12.7
–1.7
–2.2
7.8
3.6
6.1
–5.6
3.6
4.2
2.9
7.1
6.0
1.7
14.2
2.7
8.0
6.5
5.7
3.1
7.5
5.6
5.6
2.1
0.8
4.5
5.5
6.9
3.9
8.5
5.4
0.7

–6.3
–7.8
–2.4
–14.1
9.3
0.1
–3.7
1.2
2.9
–6.0
3.9
6.1
–15.1
8.1
7.5
5.3
5.7
–1.8
0.1
9.2
–1.4
8.5
4.7
0.3
7.5
–1.5
–5.3
6.2
1.0
–2.1
5.1
4.5
–9.1
2.9
1.1
–6.4
–4.7
3.5
–0.7
13.0
3.0
–4.4
3.3
5.4
–3.0
3.4
–0.8
–4.2
–7.4
–6.6
3.6
–0.4
–5.7
2.6
–7.1
–3.1
–4.8

4.7
4.5
5.1
2.2
5.0
7.7
6.2
7.3
–0.5
7.1
6.5
9.2
0.3
8.5
9.6
6.0
9.3
2.7
6.0
10.6
3.0
10.3
6.4
–1.6
8.1
7.5
7.2
1.3
3.5
7.3
5.3
4.8
3.3
11.6
7.6
–1.4
6.9
8.0
7.5
10.2
3.2
–2.7
1.6
6.4
4.7
3.7
0.8
0.1
–1.7
0.7
3.3
3.4
2.5
3.7
–0.8
0.6
9.2

4.7
4.0
6.2
4.7
0.1
5.5
7.2
7.5
6.0
6.8
7.4
14.7
5.5
8.3
7.9
6.5
9.7
3.7
7.1
9.5
2.7
6.6
6.2
0.5
8.0
5.3
8.7
4.0
1.8
17.3
5.6
3.4
5.0
3.7
3.7
5.4
12.9
8.4
0.8
8.3
1.8
8.5
1.2
6.2
5.4
2.5
0.9
1.6
–0.3
1.8
4.4
2.3
3.2
5.0
1.1
1.4
8.8

3.5
3.5
3.6
7.1
2.2
1.7
6.4
5.0
–0.9
–0.7
7.5
11.1
0.2
8.2
7.0
6.3
6.4
0.9
7.3
7.9
1.4
5.6
6.0
5.2
7.9
5.5
2.5
1.9
–0.5
12.3
7.3
4.8
3.2
6.1
6.7
0.4
4.7
9.1
7.2
5.8
–1.1
0.2
1.8
5.2
1.2
1.4
–0.9
0.2
–2.2
–1.7
2.8
–0.5
–2.7
1.6
0.6
–1.0
2.1

2.1
1.3
4.3
3.3
5.8
1.0
3.4
6.0
10.9
9.4
7.4
10.2
0.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
3.6
–2.1
7.4
7.8
4.7
6.6
5.6
5.8
8.0
4.7
4.7
–1.1
–3.6
11.6
8.4
4.1
–2.4
4.7
7.1
–1.9
3.0
3.4
2.7
2.9
–0.6
1.3
2.0
5.4
2.8
1.0
2.4
1.3
–1.1
1.9
3.4
2.9
3.5
1.3
3.5
2.6
4.2

1.1
0.7
2.0
3.6
2.8
1.7
4.6
4.3
4.0
4.8
6.7
10.3
–6.6
8.1
6.8
6.3
3.8
–2.3
7.1
7.3
5.3
7.2
5.0
2.4
7.5
6.0
6.5
0.4
–3.4
7.9
8.7
6.0
4.2
7.4
6.2
1.2
2.0
4.9
0.8
5.9
2.9
2.2
2.3
6.0
2.8
1.8
1.1
1.5
–0.4
3.7
1.2
3.5
1.8
3.3
3.0
–1.8
3.0

–2.8
–3.7
–0.5
3.0
1.1
–3.9
2.8
1.2
3.5
–0.5
6.0
6.5
–9.9
8.0
6.6
6.8
5.2
–0.6
7.0
6.9
4.3
7.6
4.8
3.5
7.6
5.0
1.5
1.4
–0.2
2.4
7.0
2.7
9.4
6.6
5.9
1.6
3.3
4.8
2.8
4.3
3.4
2.6
–0.8
6.7
3.6
2.8
3.2
3.0
1.6
2.9
4.0
3.7
3.2
3.6
3.8
0.7
4.0

–0.3
–0.8
0.9
3.2
–2.4
–3.0
3.4
–0.8
2.2
2.0
6.0
5.4
1.5
6.0
6.5
6.9
6.0
0.4
7.0
6.6
2.5
7.6
4.9
3.1
7.5
4.3
3.0
1.7
1.1
0.0
8.1
0.6
0.0
2.5
6.4
3.0
3.0
5.0
3.2
5.0
2.7
4.0
4.0
6.1
3.3
3.4
3.0
3.0
1.9
2.0
4.1
2.2
5.1
3.1
5.0
2.5
3.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Projections
2017
2021
1.4
1.1
2.3
3.4
1.4
–0.5
5.2
0.6
2.3
3.0
4.5
5.4
2.5
6.0
6.3
6.9
6.4
3.9
6.9
6.2
3.9
7.6
5.3
2.5
7.3
4.6
4.1
1.8
0.7
1.0
7.7
4.0
5.0
3.0
6.7
1.5
3.3
5.0
3.3
5.5
2.4
2.3
4.5
6.2
3.1
3.7
3.2
2.8
2.1
2.5
3.3
3.5
3.6
3.4
3.8
2.8
3.0

2.4
1.5
4.4
4.0
3.2
1.8
4.8
4.6
4.3
3.8
6.0
6.9
4.0
6.0
6.4
6.5
5.2
13.2
6.3
5.8
3.6
8.1
6.0
1.8
7.1
5.0
4.7
1.3
0.6
5.5
7.7
3.8
2.0
3.4
7.0
2.1
3.2
5.5
3.0
5.5
1.8
2.1
3.0
6.2
3.2
4.1
4.0
2.5
2.0
2.1
4.0
3.8
4.8
3.0
3.3
4.0
3.5

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina6
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sudan7
Syria8
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2021

3.1
4.6
2.6
2.8
2.2
5.7
3.3
3.0
4.0
3.1
5.5
2.4
5.6
3.0
2.9
4.8
3.8
1.4
0.9
4.4
1.3
2.9
4.0
5.6
1.6
4.1
3.5
2.4
4.0
3.9
8.2
1.2
2.9

4.0
1.5
4.1
–2.3
0.4
3.2
6.1
5.1
3.2
3.5
2.7
7.1
3.1
6.4
1.3
0.9
3.3
2.0
0.8
4.2
–0.8
1.4
2.9
8.6
6.4
9.1
3.4
4.2
–0.5
4.1
3.4
7.2
5.3

–1.8
–10.7
–5.9
–4.2
–4.0
0.8
3.4
–0.1
–1.1
1.7
–1.0
–1.2
0.9
0.6
–3.1
–6.6
0.5
3.3
3.1
–2.4
–3.4
–4.7
–2.8
1.6
–4.0
1.0
–3.8
–0.4
–2.0
3.0
–4.4
4.2
–3.2

6.1
–8.5
10.1
1.5
0.3
3.3
4.1
7.5
5.7
4.0
5.0
0.7
8.3
3.5
1.4
–0.5
2.9
4.4
–5.5
3.7
–1.4
5.1
3.2
5.8
13.1
8.5
–3.8
–1.7
–2.3
5.1
3.3
7.8
–1.5

4.6
–1.9
6.0
0.6
0.8
2.1
5.2
3.9
5.8
6.6
4.5
–0.2
2.8
7.9
2.2
0.8
4.2
5.4
5.5
3.8
1.4
4.0
6.2
11.8
4.3
6.5
–1.9
0.2
0.2
5.3
–0.3
5.2
4.2

3.0
3.6
–1.0
3.1
0.3
3.7
5.1
1.9
5.5
4.0
5.2
–1.1
2.6
5.6
1.9
–1.2
3.0
4.8
2.9
4.1
–0.5
4.0
5.6
9.2
–1.2
6.0
–0.9
–1.4
1.3
3.1
1.3
3.5
5.6

2.9
1.5
2.4
0.0
–0.1
1.3
6.8
3.0
4.0
4.9
1.8
0.8
4.8
4.6
1.8
2.4
3.7
5.2
4.2
2.8
0.2
1.4
4.5
6.6
14.0
5.8
6.2
0.1
2.5
2.8
2.3
4.6
1.3

1.0
4.2
–2.5
–0.5
0.2
4.1
5.5
0.1
1.8
4.4
3.0
4.2
7.3
3.7
1.4
7.3
4.2
3.8
2.8
3.1
0.5
2.2
4.6
6.1
4.7
2.4
6.1
0.4
0.2
1.8
–1.0
3.2
–3.9

0.0
2.2
2.5
–1.7
0.9
1.0
4.8
–3.8
2.3
3.1
3.7
–1.8
7.0
0.3
2.5
6.2
4.1
3.2
1.2
3.6
0.9
2.5
4.9
5.8
3.1
3.3
5.0
2.4
0.6
–0.3
–2.1
1.0
–6.2

–0.6
2.0
–1.8
0.3
1.7
0.0
3.7
–3.3
1.7
2.2
4.2
1.5
5.9
–2.3
2.4
3.0
3.5
4.0
1.5
3.6
1.5
2.1
4.5
5.2
3.5
3.7
3.5
1.5
1.8
–7.0
–2.7
0.1
–10.0

1.6
2.4
2.7
1.0
1.7
2.6
3.9
0.5
2.0
2.7
4.3
2.9
4.5
–2.7
2.4
2.7
3.8
4.1
3.2
3.7
2.0
2.3
4.3
5.8
3.6
4.1
3.5
1.9
2.5
0.5
2.3
1.2
–4.5

2.7
2.7
3.3
1.3
2.4
1.7
3.5
2.0
3.4
4.0
4.0
1.7
4.5
1.5
2.0
2.7
4.0
3.8
3.5
3.8
2.8
2.9
4.0
6.0
3.8
3.5
2.8
2.1
3.0
3.0
1.2
3.1
0.0

5.3
...
4.3
5.8
2.8
5.1
5.2
...
5.9
6.0
3.2
4.2
5.4
4.6
2.4
4.9
10.7
2.9
11.2
3.6
4.9
5.7
4.3

4.8
3.9
2.4
6.2
5.8
7.2
0.9
8.2
7.2
2.5
9.1
2.7
1.1
5.9
8.2
5.0
17.7
6.2
3.0
4.5
4.5
3.2
3.6

1.5
20.6
1.6
2.5
1.6
4.7
2.3
3.4
5.5
–7.1
10.3
–0.8
–1.0
4.2
6.1
0.4
12.0
–2.1
4.7
5.9
3.1
–5.2
3.9

4.9
8.4
3.6
4.3
4.1
5.1
6.6
6.4
2.3
–2.4
8.0
5.0
4.8
3.8
4.8
2.6
19.6
4.8
3.0
3.4
2.6
1.6
7.7

4.5
6.5
2.8
2.0
7.3
1.8
3.7
7.5
2.6
10.9
0.9
–62.1
4.7
5.2
4.1
3.6
13.4
10.0
–1.3
...
–1.9
4.9
–12.7

5.0
14.0
3.3
3.7
4.8
2.2
–6.6
13.9
2.7
7.9
2.8
104.5
5.8
3.0
5.8
3.8
4.9
5.4
–3.4
...
3.9
7.1
2.4

2.4
3.9
2.8
5.4
5.0
2.1
–1.9
7.6
2.8
0.4
2.5
–13.6
6.1
4.5
3.2
3.7
4.6
2.7
5.2
...
2.4
4.7
4.8

2.7
1.3
3.8
4.4
6.0
2.2
4.3
–0.4
3.1
0.6
2.0
–24.0
5.4
2.6
2.9
4.1
4.0
3.6
1.6
...
2.3
3.1
–0.2

2.3
0.8
3.9
2.9
6.5
4.2
0.4
–2.4
2.4
1.1
1.0
–6.4
1.2
4.5
3.3
4.0
3.7
3.5
4.9
...
0.8
4.0
–28.1

3.4
2.0
3.6
2.1
6.5
3.8
4.5
10.3
2.8
2.5
1.0
–3.3
3.2
1.8
1.8
4.7
2.6
1.2
3.1
...
1.5
2.3
–4.2

3.4
3.4
2.9
1.8
7.0
4.0
4.1
0.5
3.3
2.6
2.0
13.7
4.3
4.8
2.6
5.0
3.4
2.0
3.5
...
2.8
2.5
12.6

3.9
6.0
3.4
2.2
6.0
6.0
4.3
2.0
4.0
2.9
3.0
4.8
2.9
4.9
2.2
5.5
2.0
2.3
3.5
...
4.3
3.4
5.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

233

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe9

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

5.2
10.3
4.4
4.7
5.9
3.1
7.5
3.8
1.4
8.2
2.0
1.4
3.3
0.8
27.6
0.7
6.5
0.1
3.8
4.9
3.1
0.6
3.6
3.2
...
3.7
3.1
5.2
4.4
8.3
4.2
4.7
7.0
7.7
3.8
4.6
2.6
12.0
3.7
...
3.5
5.9
1.1
7.1
5.5
...

5.9
13.8
4.9
6.2
5.8
4.9
6.7
2.9
2.1
3.1
1.0
6.2
5.6
2.5
17.8
–9.8
11.2
1.7
5.7
9.1
4.9
3.2
0.2
5.1
6.0
7.2
7.6
4.8
5.5
6.9
2.6
9.6
7.2
11.1
8.1
3.7
–2.1
5.4
3.2
...
4.3
5.6
2.4
10.4
7.8
–16.6

3.9
2.4
2.3
–7.7
3.0
3.8
–1.3
1.9
1.7
4.2
1.8
2.9
7.5
3.3
1.3
3.9
10.0
–2.3
6.4
4.8
–0.3
3.3
3.3
4.5
5.1
–4.7
8.3
4.7
3.0
6.4
0.3
–0.7
8.4
6.3
4.0
2.4
–1.1
3.2
–1.5
...
1.9
5.4
3.5
8.1
9.2
7.5

7.0
3.4
2.1
8.6
8.4
5.1
1.5
3.3
3.0
13.6
2.1
7.1
8.7
2.0
–8.9
2.2
10.6
6.3
6.5
7.9
1.9
4.4
8.4
6.9
6.1
0.3
6.9
5.4
4.1
6.7
6.0
8.4
11.3
7.3
4.5
4.3
5.9
5.3
3.0
...
1.4
6.4
4.1
7.7
10.3
11.4

5.0
3.9
3.0
6.0
6.6
4.0
4.0
4.1
3.3
0.1
2.2
6.9
3.4
–4.2
6.5
8.7
11.4
7.1
–4.3
14.0
3.8
9.4
6.1
4.5
7.4
1.5
4.9
3.2
3.9
7.1
5.1
2.2
4.9
7.8
4.8
1.9
5.4
6.3
3.3
...
1.2
7.9
4.8
6.8
5.6
11.9

4.3
5.2
4.6
4.5
6.5
4.4
1.1
4.6
4.1
8.9
3.0
7.1
3.8
10.1
8.3
7.0
8.7
5.3
5.6
9.3
3.7
–1.8
4.6
5.3
8.2
3.0
1.9
–0.8
3.2
7.2
5.1
11.8
4.3
8.8
4.5
4.5
3.7
15.2
2.2
–52.4
3.0
5.1
5.9
2.6
7.6
10.6

5.2
6.8
6.9
9.9
6.6
5.9
0.8
5.6
–36.7
5.7
3.5
8.5
3.3
9.3
–4.1
3.1
9.9
5.6
4.8
7.3
2.3
0.8
5.7
3.6
8.7
2.3
5.2
2.3
3.2
7.1
5.7
5.3
5.4
4.7
4.0
3.6
5.0
20.7
2.3
29.3
2.9
7.3
5.4
4.0
5.1
4.5

5.1
4.8
6.5
3.2
4.0
4.5
1.9
5.9
1.0
6.9
2.0
9.5
6.8
7.9
–0.5
5.0
10.3
4.3
–0.2
4.0
1.1
2.5
5.3
3.4
0.7
3.3
5.7
7.0
3.6
7.4
6.5
7.0
6.3
7.0
4.5
4.3
6.2
4.6
1.6
2.9
2.5
7.0
5.4
4.9
5.0
3.8

3.4
3.0
5.0
–0.3
4.0
–4.0
1.5
5.8
4.8
1.8
1.0
6.9
2.3
8.5
–7.4
4.8
10.2
4.0
4.4
3.9
0.1
4.8
5.6
2.8
0.0
3.1
2.9
6.0
3.5
6.6
5.3
3.5
2.7
6.9
4.0
6.5
5.7
–21.1
1.3
–0.2
1.7
7.0
5.4
4.8
3.0
1.1

1.4
0.0
4.6
3.1
5.2
–0.5
3.6
4.8
5.2
–1.1
2.2
3.9
1.7
8.0
–9.9
3.7
6.5
3.2
2.3
3.3
3.8
4.8
6.0
2.4
2.0
4.1
2.7
5.3
3.5
4.5
4.2
5.2
–1.7
6.0
4.0
6.6
4.9
4.3
0.1
–13.1
0.5
7.2
5.3
4.9
3.0
–0.3

Projections
2017
2021
2.9
1.5
5.4
4.0
5.9
2.0
4.0
4.2
5.5
1.7
3.3
4.2
5.0
8.0
–5.8
3.3
7.5
4.5
3.3
7.4
4.4
5.0
6.1
3.8
4.0
4.5
4.5
5.2
3.9
5.5
5.3
5.0
0.6
6.0
5.0
6.8
3.5
5.0
0.8
–6.1
0.9
7.2
5.0
5.5
4.0
–2.5

4.2
3.5
5.6
4.0
6.0
4.5
4.0
4.3
5.8
3.5
4.0
5.5
2.9
7.0
0.1
3.9
7.3
4.9
5.5
4.5
4.7
5.0
6.5
2.9
6.6
5.0
5.5
4.7
3.9
6.8
4.5
6.9
3.3
7.5
6.0
7.0
3.3
6.5
2.2
0.5
1.0
6.5
4.4
6.4
5.5
1.6

1Data for some countries refer to real net material product (NMP) or are estimates based on NMP. The figures should be interpreted only as indicative of broad orders of magnitude because
reliable, comparable data are not generally available. In particular, the growth of output of new private enterprises of the informal economy is not fully reflected in the recent figures.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
3Data are based on the 2008 System of National Accounts. The revised national accounts data are available beginning in 2000 and exclude Crimea and Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
4See country-specific notes for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
5In this table only, the data for Timor-Leste are based on non-oil GDP.
6See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
8Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
9The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in U.S. dollars. IMF staff estimates of U.S. dollar
values may differ from authorities’ estimates. Real GDP is in constant 2009 prices.

234

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)

GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area2
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States4
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Memorandum
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products5
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017
2021

1.7
2.2
1.9
–1.2
2.0

1.9
2.0
2.0
–1.3
3.0

0.7
0.8
1.0
–0.5
0.9

0.9
1.2
0.7
–2.2
2.0

1.3
2.1
1.1
–1.9
2.0

1.2
1.8
1.3
–0.9
1.2

1.2
1.6
1.3
–0.6
1.4

1.4
1.8
0.8
1.7
1.3

1.2
1.1
1.2
2.0
0.9

1.0
1.3
1.0
0.6
0.7

1.5
2.1
1.0
0.4
1.6

1.8
2.2
1.5
0.9
2.1

2.0
2.6
2.0
–0.2
1.9
7.9

3.4
3.8
3.3
1.4
3.9
9.2

0.2
–0.3
0.3
–1.4
1.4
5.0

1.5
1.6
1.6
–0.7
2.4
5.6

2.7
3.1
2.7
–0.3
3.3
7.1

2.0
2.1
2.5
–0.1
2.1
5.8

1.4
1.5
1.3
0.3
1.7
5.5

1.4
1.6
0.4
2.8
1.5
4.7

0.3
0.1
0.0
0.8
0.6
4.7

0.8
1.2
0.3
–0.2
1.0
4.5

1.7
2.3
1.1
0.5
1.9
4.4

2.0
2.3
1.7
1.3
2.1
4.0

19.7
4.2
18.5
7.0

15.4
7.6
8.0
6.4

11.1
2.8
4.8
4.6

7.2
5.1
5.6
4.2

9.7
6.5
5.4
5.2

6.2
4.6
5.9
4.6

6.4
4.6
4.3
4.6

8.1
3.5
3.8
4.9

15.5
2.7
2.9
5.5

8.4
3.1
3.1
5.8

6.3
3.3
4.2
4.2

4.8
3.7
4.3
3.6

5.8
5.7
10.2

11.8
11.7
12.9

7.3
6.1
9.8

6.6
6.2
8.2

9.2
8.6
9.4

9.8
9.7
9.3

9.1
9.3
6.6

6.8
6.6
6.3

5.8
6.0
7.0

5.1
5.4
11.3

6.0
6.1
10.8

4.3
4.1
7.9

2.6
9.4

3.7
14.6

1.0
8.2

2.0
9.2

3.1
11.7

2.6
9.9

1.5
8.0

0.5
7.3

0.0
7.3

0.3
8.9

1.3
9.1

1.8
7.1

12.2
6.7
...

12.6
8.2
...

7.6
4.3
...

6.5
5.4
...

8.3
6.8
...

7.8
5.3
...

7.7
4.9
...

6.3
4.3
...

8.6
3.8
...

7.4
3.8
...

6.2
4.0
...

4.7
3.9
...

9.1

9.4

7.2

6.8

7.7

7.0

6.3

5.7

5.5

5.6

5.7

4.8

9.0

15.4

13.0

10.2

10.6

8.2

7.1

11.2

16.8

10.1

14.1

6.5

2.1
4.9

4.1
10.3

0.9
3.7

1.9
4.2

3.2
5.4

2.6
4.6

1.3
4.0

0.7
3.2

0.1
2.7

0.5
3.0

1.2
3.5

2.0
3.5

1Excludes

the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
3Excludes Argentina and Venezuela. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
5Data are missing because of Argentina, which accounts for more than 30 percent of the weights of the group. See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical
Appendix.
2Based

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

235

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus3
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom3
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Average
1998–2007
2.0
2.6
2.0
1.5
1.7
2.3
3.0
2.3
1.9
1.7
3.3
2.9
3.3
1.5
6.4
2.2
5.6
2.5
4.6
4.4
2.5
2.5
–0.2
1.6
3.2
2.1
2.8
0.9
0.8
1.5
0.7
–0.8
1.9
3.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.3
...
4.2
...
1.9

2008
3.4
3.8
3.3
2.8
3.2
3.5
4.1
2.2
4.5
3.2
4.2
2.7
3.1
3.9
4.0
11.2
5.7
4.1
15.3
10.6
4.4
4.7
1.4
3.6
4.7
2.4
4.3
3.5
2.4
3.3
6.6
4.3
3.8
6.3
4.6
3.4
4.0
5.2
8.5
12.7
4.1

2009
0.2
–0.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.8
–0.3
1.0
0.0
0.4
1.3
–0.9
–1.7
1.6
0.9
4.2
0.9
0.0
3.3
0.2
0.2
1.8
–1.4
2.2
2.8
0.3
1.8
–0.9
–0.5
1.9
0.6
0.6
2.2
1.0
3.3
1.3
2.1
0.3
1.2
12.0
2.4

2010
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.1
1.7
1.6
1.8
0.9
2.3
1.7
4.7
1.4
–1.6
1.7
0.7
1.2
1.8
2.8
–1.2
2.7
2.6
2.0
–0.7
3.3
2.9
1.8
2.9
1.0
0.7
1.9
2.8
2.3
2.4
1.5
2.7
2.3
2.3
2.5
2.8
5.4
2.6

2011
2.7
3.1
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.9
3.2
2.5
3.4
3.5
3.1
3.6
1.2
3.3
4.1
4.1
1.8
3.7
4.2
5.1
3.5
2.5
–0.3
4.5
4.0
2.9
3.4
1.4
0.2
1.4
5.2
5.3
1.3
1.9
3.5
2.8
4.0
2.9
5.8
4.0
2.0

2012
2.0
2.1
2.5
2.1
2.2
3.3
2.4
2.8
2.6
2.6
1.0
2.8
1.9
3.2
3.7
3.2
2.6
2.9
2.3
4.2
3.1
3.2
–0.1
2.8
2.2
1.5
1.7
1.9
–0.7
0.9
4.6
4.1
0.7
3.3
1.7
2.4
1.1
1.3
6.1
5.2
2.8

2013
1.4
1.5
1.3
1.6
1.0
1.2
1.4
2.6
1.2
2.1
–0.9
0.4
0.5
2.2
1.5
1.2
1.8
1.7
0.0
3.2
0.4
1.0
0.3
2.6
1.3
0.9
2.5
0.8
–0.2
0.4
2.4
4.3
2.1
1.4
1.5
0.8
1.1
1.1
5.5
3.9
1.3

2014
1.4
1.6
0.4
0.8
0.6
0.2
–0.1
0.3
0.5
1.5
–1.4
–0.2
0.3
1.2
–0.1
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.7
0.5
–0.3
0.8
2.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.5
1.2
0.0
0.2
1.0
4.4
2.0
0.4
0.5
0.6
1.2
0.6
6.0
2.0
1.1

2015
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.5
0.2
0.6
0.8
–1.1
0.5
0.0
–0.2
–0.3
–0.7
–0.5
0.1
0.2
0.1
–1.5
1.2
0.8
0.1
0.7
1.1
1.5
–0.3
–1.1
0.7
–0.5
3.0
2.2
0.3
–0.6
0.5
0.3
–0.8
4.6
1.6
0.14

3.2

–0.1

1.4

2.6

1.9

1.3

1.5

0.2

1Movements

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
2Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

236

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Projections
2016 2017 2021
0.8
1.7
2.0
1.2
2.3
2.3
0.3
1.1
1.7
0.4
1.5
2.0
0.3
1.0
1.7
–0.1
0.5
1.2
–0.3
1.0
1.6
0.1
0.9
1.3
2.1
1.6
1.5
0.9
1.5
2.0
–0.1
0.6
1.8
0.7
1.1
1.8
0.3
1.2
2.0
0.4
1.2
2.0
–0.2
1.1
2.0
0.5
1.2
2.2
–0.3
1.0
2.0
0.2
1.0
2.1
0.2
1.7
2.0
0.5
1.4
2.2
–1.0
0.5
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
–0.2
0.5
1.3
0.7
2.5
2.0
1.0
1.9
2.0
1.6
2.1
2.0
1.3
2.1
2.5
1.1
1.1
2.2
–0.4
0.0
1.0
1.1
1.4
2.1
–0.3
1.1
1.9
2.5
2.6
3.0
3.2
2.3
2.5
0.6
1.9
2.0
–0.6
0.8
2.0
0.4
1.1
2.0
0.7
1.6
2.0
–0.2
1.1
1.2
2.6
2.8
2.8
1.7
3.1
2.5
0.6
0.7
1.2
0.8

1.8

2.0

End of Period2
Projections
2015 2016 2017
0.5
1.2
1.8
0.7
1.8
2.6
0.2
0.6
1.0
0.3
1.2
1.6
0.3
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.6
0.8
0.0
0.7
0.7
0.2
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.5
1.2
1.1
1.2
1.3
0.4
–0.1
1.1
0.3
2.4
0.0
0.0
0.7
1.3
–0.2
0.9
1.4
–0.5
0.3
1.4
–0.2
0.5
2.2
–0.4
0.3
0.8
0.9
1.8
–1.0
0.4
0.3
1.8
–0.2
0.9
2.3
–0.5
0.0
0.5
1.3
1.8
1.5
0.2
–0.1
0.7
0.1
1.5
2.5
1.3
1.3
2.2
1.3
1.8
2.1
1.7
1.6
2.0
0.1
0.6
1.1
–1.3
0.0
0.2
0.7
1.2
1.6
–0.7
0.5
1.4
3.0
2.5
2.6
2.3
3.0
2.5
0.1
1.1
2.2
–1.0
–0.1
1.2
0.4
0.4
1.1
0.1
1.4
1.7
–0.2
–0.2
1.1
3.7
2.6
2.8
2.0
2.2
3.5
0.4
0.9
1.1
0.5

1.2

1.9

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

Commonwealth of Independent States3,4
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine5
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria6
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

19.7
21.2
15.3
3.2
3.8
55.3
7.3
8.3
9.7
15.0
20.2
10.4
12.1
18.9
4.2
5.7
5.1
0.2
3.8
1.1
3.0
5.2
14.1
1.8
24.0
2.4
1.8
...
2.0
7.3
23.4
5.5
...
8.6
5.2
4.5
8.7
9.8
2.8
...
7.6
...
2.5
4.9
18.5
4.1
2.4
7.3
3.4
7.5
...
1.9
...
4.6
24.2
25.3
33.9

15.4
14.1
19.3
9.0
20.8
14.8
10.0
17.1
24.5
12.7
20.4
14.5
25.2
13.1
7.6
8.9
6.8
2.1
25.0
5.9
7.7
9.2
9.8
13.7
7.6
5.4
12.0
14.7
6.6
26.8
11.5
6.7
9.9
10.8
8.2
11.6
17.3
22.4
5.5
7.4
7.5
10.4
4.8
23.1
8.0
3.4
7.4
12.0
6.1
6.0
9.4
7.2
9.0
4.2
7.8
12.4
10.4

11.1
11.7
9.5
3.5
1.6
13.0
1.7
7.3
6.8
0.0
6.4
–2.7
15.9
12.3
2.8
4.9
6.3
1.0
–0.7
–0.7
3.7
10.6
5.0
9.8
0.0
0.6
4.5
0.5
7.7
6.3
2.2
12.6
4.7
6.9
4.2
6.3
7.1
3.5
–0.9
–0.2
3.5
–0.3
4.3
6.7
4.8
2.3
–0.4
2.5
2.4
4.2
–2.4
–0.6
3.6
3.4
5.6
8.1
6.3

7.2
6.9
8.0
7.3
5.7
7.7
7.1
7.1
7.8
7.4
6.5
4.4
9.4
12.3
5.1
9.4
5.7
0.2
4.0
3.3
3.7
9.5
5.1
–3.9
6.0
1.7
6.2
1.8
3.7
10.2
8.2
9.6
1.1
5.1
3.8
0.8
0.9
6.2
3.3
5.2
3.9
–1.9
2.8
9.2
5.6
3.6
2.1
3.0
1.0
4.9
3.5
1.7
0.7
2.6
6.1
6.1
8.6

9.7
8.4
13.1
7.7
7.9
53.2
8.5
8.3
16.6
7.6
12.4
5.3
8.0
12.4
6.5
11.5
7.3
0.1
5.5
5.4
7.3
9.5
5.3
1.5
7.6
3.2
11.3
5.4
4.3
7.7
2.8
9.6
2.6
4.4
4.7
5.2
7.4
6.7
3.8
13.2
4.6
0.5
0.9
18.7
5.4
3.4
3.7
3.4
2.3
3.9
7.3
3.9
3.1
4.3
5.8
11.1
6.5

6.2
5.1
9.0
2.5
1.0
59.2
–0.9
5.1
2.8
4.6
5.8
5.3
0.6
11.9
4.6
6.2
9.3
0.1
2.9
2.6
3.4
9.9
4.0
–3.0
4.3
1.7
10.9
4.3
6.3
15.0
2.8
8.3
5.4
4.5
3.2
2.0
5.9
7.5
3.0
10.9
2.0
1.4
1.3
9.1
5.9
2.0
2.0
2.4
3.4
5.7
2.5
3.3
3.6
3.7
3.3
7.3
8.9

6.4
6.8
5.6
5.8
2.4
18.3
–0.5
5.8
6.6
4.6
5.0
6.8
–0.3
11.7
4.6
7.5
11.3
0.4
3.0
2.6
2.9
9.4
6.4
–1.5
6.4
2.1
4.0
1.9
2.0
8.6
5.7
9.9
2.8
5.0
2.9
0.6
5.4
6.9
2.2
9.5
1.5
2.0
1.5
6.6
4.3
1.9
–0.1
0.4
2.2
1.7
1.8
2.8
2.2
0.9
4.0
7.7
7.5

8.1
7.8
8.7
3.0
1.4
18.1
3.1
6.7
7.5
5.1
6.1
6.0
12.1
9.1
3.5
7.0
9.9
–0.2
3.9
2.0
0.5
5.9
6.4
2.1
5.5
3.1
2.5
1.1
0.6
12.9
5.9
9.0
4.0
5.2
4.2
–0.4
5.2
3.3
1.9
0.7
1.2
1.1
0.8
4.1
3.8
1.6
–0.9
–1.6
–0.2
–0.2
0.4
–0.1
–0.7
0.0
1.1
2.1
8.9

2015

Projections
2016 2017 2021

End of Period2
Projections
2015 2016 2017

15.5
15.5
15.3
3.7
4.0
13.5
4.0
6.5
6.5
9.6
5.8
6.4
48.7
8.5
2.7
6.4
6.3
–0.4
1.2
1.4
1.4
4.9
6.4
0.6
5.3
2.1
1.4
–2.2
–1.0
5.9
11.4
7.2
2.2
6.0
1.4
0.9
0.9
0.9
–0.9
0.6
–0.1
3.2
2.5
0.6
2.9
1.9
–1.0
–1.1
–0.5
–0.1
–0.5
–0.2
1.6
–0.9
–0.6
1.4
7.7

8.4
7.2
11.2
–0.5
10.2
12.7
2.6
13.1
1.1
6.8
6.3
5.5
15.1
8.4
3.1
6.7
4.4
–0.3
3.1
2.1
3.3
5.5
3.7
1.5
–3.3
2.1
2.1
0.6
1.9
2.4
9.8
10.0
2.0
6.9
2.0
0.3
2.4
4.1
0.3
–0.6
0.1
3.5
2.2
2.0
3.1
1.1
–0.7
–1.6
–1.0
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.5
–0.6
–1.5
1.3
8.4

13.9
12.9
16.3
–0.1
7.7
12.0
4.9
12.0
3.4
13.5
5.1
6.0
43.3
8.4
2.7
6.5
7.4
–1.0
2.8
1.6
1.6
5.3
3.4
0.6
5.5
2.7
1.9
–2.2
–1.0
1.1
10.7
7.6
0.8
6.3
1.5
0.4
3.5
2.8
–0.9
–0.6
–0.4
4.4
1.5
0.6
3.5
2.0
–1.2
–0.9
–0.1
0.5
–0.1
–0.3
1.4
–0.5
–0.9
1.6
8.8

6.3
5.0
9.2
2.5
8.5
12.0
3.6
9.3
7.4
4.4
7.3
5.0
11.0
9.6
3.3
6.9
4.6
0.0
2.7
2.3
2.8
5.2
4.2
2.0
2.3
3.0
2.6
1.1
1.3
6.7
9.0
9.9
2.0
7.5
3.4
1.0
4.0
5.3
1.6
1.3
1.5
2.9
2.6
3.6
4.2
2.2
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.9
0.9
0.7
1.3
1.1
1.7
3.2
8.2

4.8
4.0
6.6
4.0
4.0
9.0
3.0
7.1
5.1
5.0
6.0
6.9
5.0
10.0
3.7
5.7
4.7
0.1
0.2
3.0
2.8
4.9
4.0
2.5
3.1
3.0
4.2
2.1
3.0
6.5
6.9
6.5
2.0
6.0
3.5
3.0
2.9
5.0
2.5
4.0
2.7
2.5
3.0
4.0
4.3
3.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
3.0
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.5
2.5
4.0
6.5

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

7.1
5.9
9.8
1.0
12.8
13.0
3.2
9.0
3.3
3.5
7.0
5.0
13.0
8.0
3.2
7.0
7.6
0.4
3.2
2.3
3.3
5.3
3.4
1.5
–4.5
2.1
2.0
0.7
1.9
5.9
10.4
11.5
3.2
7.0
2.9
0.3
4.5
5.4
1.3
–0.6
0.5
3.5
2.5
3.5
3.9
1.8
–0.3
–0.8
–0.1
0.8
0.5
0.5
1.0
0.2
–0.3
2.0
9.1

237

5.8
4.9
8.1
3.5
4.2
11.0
4.0
9.0
5.7
4.7
6.4
5.0
8.5
9.8
3.3
7.0
6.9
0.1
2.9
2.3
2.8
5.3
4.4
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.2
1.1
1.3
5.8
7.7
8.3
0.8
7.5
3.2
1.7
2.7
5.2
1.7
3.3
2.5
2.9
2.7
3.8
3.7
2.3
0.7
1.4
1.2
2.6
1.7
1.0
1.4
1.5
2.7
3.5
6.2

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Latin America and the Caribbean7
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina8
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sudan9
Syria10
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

238

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

End of Period2
Projections
Projections
2016
2017
2021 2015 2016
2017

7.0
1.8
6.8
1.9
2.6
1.8
4.1
6.6
3.3
8.0
10.9
1.6
12.2
22.4
3.1
2.3
6.9
6.2
15.1
9.1
9.3
7.3
9.0
1.5
8.8
2.8
3.4
2.8
2.2
20.5
5.3
8.6
21.0

6.4
5.3
8.6
4.4
8.1
6.4
14.0
5.7
8.7
7.0
13.4
6.4
10.6
8.4
7.3
8.0
11.4
8.1
14.4
11.4
22.0
5.1
19.8
8.8
10.2
5.8
5.3
5.5
10.1
14.6
12.1
7.9
30.4

4.6
–0.6
6.3
1.7
3.6
–1.1
3.3
4.9
1.5
4.2
7.8
0.0
1.4
5.2
0.5
–0.3
1.9
3.0
3.4
5.5
9.6
5.3
3.7
2.4
2.6
2.9
2.1
–0.2
0.4
–0.4
7.0
7.1
27.1

4.2
3.4
10.5
1.6
5.8
0.9
2.5
5.0
1.4
2.3
5.7
2.8
6.3
3.6
1.2
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.1
4.7
12.6
4.2
5.5
3.5
4.7
1.5
0.7
3.3
0.8
6.7
10.5
6.7
28.2

5.2
3.5
9.8
3.1
9.4
1.7
9.9
6.6
3.3
3.4
4.9
1.1
8.5
4.5
5.1
3.0
6.2
4.4
7.4
6.8
7.5
3.4
8.1
5.9
8.3
3.4
7.1
2.8
3.2
17.8
5.1
8.1
26.1

4.6
3.4
10.0
1.9
4.5
1.2
4.5
5.4
3.0
3.2
4.5
1.4
3.7
5.1
1.7
2.4
3.8
2.4
6.8
5.2
6.9
4.1
7.2
5.7
3.7
3.7
1.4
4.2
2.6
5.0
9.2
8.1
21.1

4.6
1.1
10.6
0.4
1.8
0.5
5.7
6.2
1.9
2.0
5.2
0.0
4.8
2.7
0.8
0.0
4.3
2.2
6.8
5.2
9.4
3.8
7.1
4.0
2.7
2.8
1.0
1.5
0.8
1.9
5.3
8.6
40.6

4.9
1.1
...
1.2
1.9
1.2
5.8
6.3
4.4
2.9
4.5
0.8
3.0
3.6
1.1
–0.8
3.4
1.0
3.9
6.1
8.3
4.0
6.0
2.6
5.0
3.2
0.7
3.5
0.2
3.4
5.7
8.9
62.2

5.5
1.0
...
1.9
–1.1
–0.9
4.1
9.0
4.3
5.0
0.8
–0.8
0.8
4.0
–0.7
–0.6
2.4
–0.3
7.5
3.2
3.7
2.7
4.0
0.1
3.1
3.5
–2.8
–1.0
–1.7
6.9
4.7
8.7
121.7

5.8
4.2
3.6
6.2
5.1
3.9
1.4
1.8
2.5
0.9
1.4
2.2
...
23.2
9.7
. . . 39.4
20.5
1.0
1.5
1.3
2.0
1.0
1.5
0.3
2.0
2.5 –2.5
1.7
2.3
1.0
2.2
2.0 –0.6
2.0
2.3
3.9
5.1
5.0
3.0
5.1
5.0
9.0
5.4
4.5 10.7
7.2
5.0
4.0
3.0
3.0
4.4
3.5
3.0
7.6
4.1
3.0
6.8
6.0
3.7
0.7
2.6
3.0 –0.8
2.2
3.0
–0.2
1.6
2.2 –0.1
–0.1
1.8
2.3
4.0
4.0
2.3
3.0
4.0
2.4
1.1
0.7
3.4
2.9
–0.2
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.0
0.3
2.0
2.3
3.4
2.1
1.0
2.8
2.8
4.5
3.6
4.0
3.1
4.3
4.0
0.2
2.1
3.0 –1.8
2.2
2.0
13.3
9.1
5.0 11.3
12.0
7.0
3.1
4.1
4.5
2.4
4.7
4.5
4.4
5.2
4.9
3.7
5.2
5.2
2.8
3.3
3.0
2.1
3.2
3.1
6.2
7.3
7.7
3.1
6.2
7.3
0.7
1.5
2.0
0.3
1.0
1.5
4.1
4.1
4.5
3.1
3.8
4.1
3.6
2.5
2.5
4.4
2.9
2.5
–1.3
0.8
1.8 –2.9
0.2
1.3
–1.0
3.2
2.5 –2.6
0.6
4.0
–0.4
1.2
1.5 –2.1
1.0
1.3
67.1
30.7
4.0 25.0 76.7
9.2
4.8
5.3
4.6
1.5
5.2
5.3
10.2
8.7
6.3
9.4
9.9
8.8
475.8 1,660.1 4,505.0 180.9 720.0 2,200.0

5.8
...
2.9
0.8
2.3
5.1
14.9
...
2.7
2.2
1.7
–0.7
6.5
1.8
1.0
5.8
5.1
0.4
9.4
2.6
2.6
4.5
10.6

11.8
26.4
4.9
3.5
12.0
11.7
25.3
2.7
14.0
6.3
10.8
10.4
7.5
3.9
12.6
12.0
15.1
6.1
14.3
15.2
4.3
12.3
19.0

7.3
–6.8
5.7
2.8
1.7
16.2
10.7
–2.2
–0.7
4.6
1.2
2.4
2.1
1.0
3.5
19.6
–4.9
4.1
11.3
2.8
3.7
1.6
3.7

6.6
2.2
3.9
2.0
4.0
11.7
12.4
2.4
4.8
4.5
4.0
2.5
6.3
1.0
3.3
10.1
–2.4
3.8
13.0
4.4
3.3
0.9
11.2

9.2
11.8
4.5
–0.4
5.1
11.1
21.2
5.6
4.2
4.9
5.0
15.9
5.7
0.9
4.0
13.7
2.0
3.7
18.3
...
3.5
0.9
19.5

9.8
6.4
8.9
2.8
3.7
8.6
30.8
6.1
4.5
3.2
6.6
6.1
4.9
1.3
2.9
11.0
1.9
2.9
35.4
...
5.1
0.7
9.9

9.1
7.4
3.3
3.3
2.4
6.9
34.7
1.9
4.8
2.7
4.8
2.6
4.1
1.9
1.2
7.4
3.1
3.5
36.5
...
5.8
1.1
11.0

6.8
4.7
2.9
2.7
2.9
10.1
15.6
2.2
2.9
2.9
1.9
2.8
3.8
0.4
1.0
8.6
3.4
2.7
36.9
...
4.9
2.3
8.2

5.8
–1.5
4.8
1.8
2.1
11.0
11.9
1.4
–0.9
3.2
–3.7
14.1
0.5
1.5
0.1
4.5
1.8
2.2
16.9
...
4.9
4.1
39.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

5.1
4.5
5.9
3.6
3.0
10.2
7.4
2.0
–0.5
3.4
–0.7
14.2
1.3
1.3
1.1
2.9
3.0
4.0
13.5
...
3.7
3.6
5.0

6.0
6.0
4.8
3.0
3.5
18.2
7.2
2.0
2.3
3.8
2.0
12.5
4.2
1.3
3.1
5.2
3.1
2.0
16.1
...
3.9
3.1
18.0

4.3
7.0
4.0
2.4
3.0
7.1
5.0
2.0
2.5
3.6
2.0
7.3
5.1
2.0
2.8
5.0
2.2
2.0
13.7
...
3.5
3.6
9.0

5.1
0.1
4.4
0.7
1.9
11.4
8.3
2.3
–1.6
3.2
–3.4
23.3
–2.8
0.6
0.1
3.2
...
2.3
12.6
...
4.1
3.8
18.8

6.1
4.7
5.9
4.4
3.0
14.0
8.0
2.0
1.2
3.4
2.0
7.4
3.5
1.2
1.1
4.5
...
4.0
16.5
...
4.0
3.6
22.0

5.8
7.2
4.8
2.5
3.0
16.5
6.5
2.0
2.5
3.8
2.0
16.9
4.2
1.3
3.1
5.0
...
2.0
13.7
...
3.9
3.1
15.0

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe11

Average
1998–2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

10.2
93.1
2.9
8.1
2.1
8.9
2.1
2.2
1.8
1.3
3.6
79.5
2.5
2.8
5.4
15.3
6.6
0.3
6.1
17.9
13.7
2.6
5.9
7.2
...
10.0
19.5
1.7
6.1
9.6
7.4
1.8
11.3
5.9
16.2
1.8
3.2
11.6
5.4
...
7.0
6.3
1.9
5.1
19.7
–18.5

12.9
12.5
7.4
12.6
10.7
24.4
6.8
5.3
9.3
8.3
4.8
18.0
6.0
6.3
4.7
19.9
44.4
5.3
4.5
16.5
18.4
10.4
15.1
10.7
17.5
9.3
8.7
9.1
9.7
10.3
9.1
11.3
11.6
15.4
32.0
6.3
37.0
14.8
11.5
...
12.7
10.3
8.7
12.0
12.4
157.0

9.8
13.7
0.9
8.1
0.9
10.6
1.0
3.0
3.5
10.1
4.8
46.1
4.3
1.0
5.7
33.0
8.5
1.9
4.6
13.1
4.7
–1.6
10.6
5.9
7.4
9.0
8.4
2.2
2.5
3.3
9.5
4.3
12.5
10.3
17.0
–2.2
31.8
9.2
7.1
...
7.4
12.1
3.7
13.0
13.4
6.2

8.2
14.5
2.2
6.9
–0.6
6.5
2.1
1.3
1.5
–2.1
3.9
23.5
5.0
1.4
5.3
11.2
8.1
1.4
5.0
6.7
15.5
1.1
4.3
3.4
7.3
9.2
7.4
1.3
2.9
12.7
4.9
–2.8
13.7
2.3
13.3
1.2
–2.4
17.8
4.3
...
4.5
7.2
1.4
3.8
8.5
3.0

9.4
13.5
2.7
8.5
2.8
9.6
4.5
2.9
1.2
1.9
2.2
14.9
1.8
4.9
4.8
3.9
33.2
1.3
4.8
7.7
21.4
5.1
14.0
6.0
8.5
9.5
7.6
3.1
6.5
10.4
5.0
2.9
10.8
5.7
14.3
3.4
2.6
18.5
5.0
...
6.1
12.7
3.6
15.1
8.7
3.5

9.3
10.3
6.7
7.5
3.8
18.2
2.5
2.4
5.9
7.7
5.9
0.9
5.0
1.3
3.4
6.0
24.1
2.7
4.6
7.1
15.2
2.1
9.4
5.5
6.8
5.7
21.3
5.3
3.9
2.1
6.7
0.5
12.2
6.3
10.6
1.4
7.1
13.8
5.7
45.1
8.9
16.0
2.6
12.9
6.6
3.7

6.6
8.8
1.0
5.9
0.5
7.9
1.5
2.1
6.6
0.2
1.6
0.9
4.6
2.6
3.2
6.5
8.1
0.5
5.2
11.7
11.9
0.8
5.7
5.0
7.6
5.8
28.3
–0.6
3.5
4.2
5.6
2.3
8.5
4.2
8.1
0.7
4.3
9.8
5.8
0.0
5.6
7.9
1.8
5.0
7.0
1.6

6.3
7.3
–1.1
4.4
–0.3
4.4
–0.2
1.9
11.6
1.7
1.3
1.2
0.9
0.4
4.3
10.0
7.4
4.5
6.2
15.5
9.7
–1.0
6.9
4.0
9.9
6.1
23.8
0.9
3.2
2.3
5.3
–0.9
8.0
1.8
7.0
–1.1
1.4
8.3
6.1
1.7
5.7
6.1
0.2
3.1
7.8
–0.2

7.0
10.3
0.3
3.0
0.9
5.6
0.1
2.7
4.5
3.7
2.0
1.0
2.0
1.2
1.7
9.0
10.1
0.1
6.8
17.2
8.2
1.5
6.6
5.3
7.7
7.4
21.9
1.4
1.3
2.4
3.4
1.0
9.0
2.5
5.3
0.1
4.0
9.0
4.6
52.8
5.0
5.6
1.8
5.5
10.1
–2.4

Projections
2016 2017 2021
11.3
33.7
0.6
3.2
1.6
6.3
0.1
2.2
4.0
0.0
2.2
1.7
4.0
1.0
1.5
9.0
7.7
2.5
8.3
17.0
8.2
2.6
6.2
8.6
8.6
6.7
19.8
1.0
1.5
16.7
6.6
1.6
15.4
5.3
3.9
1.0
–0.8
9.7
6.4
476.0
7.0
5.2
2.1
5.5
19.1
–1.6

10.8
38.3
2.2
3.5
2.0
9.4
1.3
2.2
3.5
5.2
2.2
2.7
3.7
1.5
1.4
9.0
8.2
2.5
7.6
10.0
8.1
2.8
5.5
6.0
8.5
6.9
13.9
1.3
2.1
15.5
6.0
2.0
17.1
4.9
3.5
1.8
2.5
9.0
6.0
110.7
6.1
5.0
2.5
5.1
9.1
4.6

7.9
17.8
2.3
4.5
2.0
5.0
2.0
2.2
3.0
3.0
2.2
3.0
3.6
2.0
1.8
9.0
8.2
2.5
5.0
6.0
5.0
3.0
5.0
5.0
7.5
5.4
8.1
2.5
2.6
5.6
5.7
2.0
13.4
5.0
3.0
1.8
3.0
6.5
5.5
20.0
5.8
5.0
2.0
5.0
5.0
2.0

End of Period2
Projections
2015 2016 2017
8.2
14.3
2.3
3.1
1.3
7.1
–0.5
2.8
4.8
–0.3
3.3
0.9
2.2
1.3
1.6
9.0
10.0
0.1
6.7
17.7
7.3
2.4
8.0
6.0
8.0
7.6
24.9
1.0
1.3
11.1
3.7
2.2
9.6
4.5
4.0
0.4
3.2
10.1
5.2
109.9
4.9
6.8
1.8
8.5
21.1
–2.5

12.8
48.0
2.2
3.3
1.6
11.6
1.0
2.2
4.0
5.0
6.4
2.5
4.6
1.2
1.4
9.0
9.7
2.5
10.0
13.5
8.8
2.5
5.6
8.5
8.8
7.1
15.2
1.0
2.0
20.0
7.3
1.6
18.5
4.7
4.0
1.4
0.9
9.5
6.7
583.9
5.5
5.0
2.3
5.2
9.5
–1.2

1Movements

10.0
32.0
2.3
3.6
2.0
7.6
1.5
2.2
3.5
3.0
1.5
3.0
3.5
1.7
1.5
9.0
8.0
2.5
5.2
8.0
7.5
2.5
5.5
6.0
8.2
7.1
10.2
1.5
2.2
12.2
6.0
2.2
17.0
5.0
3.0
1.7
3.1
9.0
5.5
38.1
6.6
5.0
2.5
5.1
8.7
6.0

in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.
year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3For many countries, inflation for the earlier years is measured on the basis of a retail price index. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation data with broader and more up-to-date coverage are
typically used for more recent years.
4Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in the group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
5Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
6Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.
7Excludes Argentina and Venezuela.
8See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
10Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
11The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in U.S. dollars. IMF staff estimates of U.S. dollar values
may differ from authorities’ estimates.
2Monthly

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

239

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP unless noted otherwise)

Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Germany
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
France
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2,4
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt5
United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt
Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

Average
1998–2007

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

–3.2
0.9
–3.7

–8.8
–2.7
–7.4

–7.4
–2.2
–6.5

–6.4
–1.8
–5.3

–4.4
–1.7
–3.9

–3.8
–1.4
–3.3

–3.2
–0.8
–2.8

–3.6
–0.7
–3.2

–3.3
–0.4
–3.1

–2.5
–0.1
–2.5

–3.1
2.0
–3.7
41.7
60.7

–10.9
–3.4
–9.6
69.4
94.7

–9.6
–3.1
–8.2
75.9
99.0

–7.9
–2.2
–6.4
79.4
102.5

–4.4
–1.9
–4.3
80.8
104.6

–4.2
–1.3
–3.9
80.3
104.6

–3.5
–0.4
–3.3
79.8
105.2

–4.1
–0.5
–3.9
82.2
108.2

–3.7
0.0
–3.7
82.3
108.4

–3.7
0.1
–3.7
84.4
108.3

–2.0
0.5
–2.4
47.8
68.1

–6.2
–1.5
–4.6
57.8
84.1

–4.2
–0.6
–3.8
60.2
86.7

–3.7
–1.9
–2.1
65.7
91.3

–3.0
–2.7
–1.3
67.8
93.3

–2.6
–2.5
–1.1
68.3
94.3

–2.1
–1.8
–0.9
67.6
92.5

–2.0
–1.2
–1.2
67.4
91.7

–1.7
–0.8
–1.1
67.0
91.0

–0.6
0.2
–0.6
62.2
84.2

–2.3
–0.2
–2.4
44.3
61.9

–4.2
–1.3
–2.4
57.1
81.0

–1.0
1.0
–1.3
55.2
78.3

0.0
0.4
–0.2
54.4
79.5

–0.2
–0.3
0.0
53.4
77.1

0.3
0.0
0.6
50.1
74.5

0.7
0.0
0.7
47.5
71.0

0.1
0.4
–0.1
45.4
68.2

0.1
0.4
–0.2
43.7
65.9

0.6
0.2
0.5
36.8
56.7

–2.5
0.3
–2.8
53.8
62.4

–6.8
–1.9
–5.6
73.7
81.7

–5.1
–0.9
–4.5
76.4
85.2

–4.8
–1.7
–3.6
81.6
89.6

–4.0
–2.2
–2.6
84.4
92.4

–4.0
–2.5
–2.4
87.4
95.3

–3.5
–2.2
–2.0
88.2
96.1

–3.3
–1.8
–2.0
89.2
97.1

–3.0
–1.5
–1.9
89.8
97.8

–1.0
0.2
–1.1
85.8
93.8

–2.9
–0.2
–3.5
90.0
103.7

–4.2
–1.3
–3.7
98.3
115.4

–3.5
–0.5
–3.9
100.4
116.5

–2.9
–2.8
–1.6
105.0
123.3

–2.9
–4.1
–0.6
109.9
129.0

–3.0
–4.1
–1.1
112.5
132.5

–2.6
–3.3
–0.8
113.3
132.7

–2.5
–2.5
–1.2
113.8
133.2

–2.2
–1.7
–1.1
113.9
133.4

0.0
0.0
0.0
106.7
125.0

–5.8
–0.7
–5.6
70.0
162.4

–9.3
–2.7
–7.9
113.1
215.8

–9.8
–3.4
–8.4
127.2
231.6

–8.8
–2.0
–7.9
129.0
238.0

–8.6
–1.1
–8.3
124.2
244.5

–6.2
–1.5
–5.8
126.2
249.1

–5.2
–1.5
–4.8
125.3
248.0

–5.2
–1.5
–4.9
127.9
250.4

–5.1
–1.3
–4.8
130.7
253.0

–3.1
–1.2
–2.9
131.5
253.9

–1.6
1.0
–2.2
34.1
38.4

–9.5
–2.5
–7.4
68.5
75.7

–7.6
–2.0
–6.0
72.9
81.3

–7.7
–2.3
–6.0
76.2
84.8

–5.7
–1.7
–4.2
77.6
86.0

–5.6
–0.7
–4.9
79.5
87.9

–4.2
–0.2
–4.0
80.4
89.0

–3.3
–0.1
–3.2
80.5
89.0

–2.7
–0.4
–2.5
80.3
88.8

–0.7
0.0
–0.7
73.6
82.1

1.1
1.3
0.4
38.2
78.1

–4.7
–2.4
–3.4
26.8
81.1

–3.3
–1.1
–2.7
27.1
81.5

–2.5
–1.3
–1.8
28.2
84.8

–1.9
–0.9
–1.4
29.4
86.1

–0.5
–0.4
–0.5
28.1
86.2

–1.3
–0.9
–0.8
26.3
91.5

–2.5
–1.1
–1.9
26.9
92.1

–2.3
–0.6
–1.9
25.3
90.5

–0.9
–0.1
–0.8
17.2
82.2

Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the U.S. dollar
values for the relevant individual countries.
1Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have
adopted the System of National Accounts (SNA) 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of
government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans. Fiscal data for the aggregated Major Advanced Economies and the United States start in 2001, and the average for the aggregate and
the United States is therefore for the period 2001–07.
2Percent of potential GDP.
3Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4Excludes one-time measures based on the authorities’ data and, in the absence of the latter, receipts from the sale of assets.
5Includes equity shares; nonconsolidated basis.

240

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1998–2007 2008–17
Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In U.S. Dollars
In SDRs
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Trade in Goods
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In U.S. Dollars
In SDRs
World Trade Prices in U.S. Dollars2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal
World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

6.8

2.9

2.9

–10.5

12.4

7.0

2.8

3.5

3.8

2.6

2.3

3.8

2.7
1.6

–0.3
0.6

11.5
8.1

–10.4
–8.2

5.6
6.7

11.1
7.4

–1.7
1.3

–0.6
0.1

–1.8
–1.7

–13.2
–5.7

–2.8
–2.8

2.5
2.2

5.8
8.8

2.5
3.7

1.9
4.8

–11.1
–8.3

12.0
13.6

5.9
9.0

2.3
3.8

3.2
4.5

3.8
3.5

3.6
1.3

1.8
2.9

3.5
3.6

6.2
8.9

2.1
4.5

0.4
9.5

–11.6
–8.8

11.4
14.0

5.1
11.0

1.2
5.5

2.3
5.3

3.8
4.5

4.2
–0.6

2.4
2.3

3.9
4.1

–0.2
1.7

0.1
–0.1

–2.2
3.8

2.6
–5.0

–1.0
1.9

–1.5
3.3

–0.7
0.6

0.8
–0.1

0.3
–0.5

1.8
–4.1

0.9
–1.0

0.1
–0.1

6.9

2.8

2.5

–11.5

14.3

6.9

2.5

3.2

3.2

2.4

2.3

3.8

2.6
1.5

–0.5
0.4

12.4
8.9

–11.8
–9.7

6.6
7.7

12.5
8.7

–1.8
1.2

–1.1
–0.4

–2.5
–2.4

–14.4
–7.1

–3.7
–3.6

2.6
2.3

1.5
14.0
3.9
2.1
–0.6
0.2
10.4

0.4
–3.3
–0.7
1.2
3.4
–0.1
–4.3

6.2
36.4
7.9
24.3
23.3
–0.7
–7.8

–5.3
–36.3
–16.0
–15.2
1.6
–17.1
–19.2

2.6
27.9
26.6
12.1
14.1
33.2
48.2

6.4
31.6
18.0
20.2
16.6
22.7
13.5

0.9
1.0
–10.0
–2.4
–18.6
–12.7
–16.8

–1.5
–0.9
–1.4
0.7
–11.9
1.6
–4.3

–1.0
–7.5
–4.0
–4.1
20.7
1.9
–10.3

–2.9
–47.2
–17.5
–17.1
–3.1
–13.5
–23.1

–2.1
–15.4
–2.7
1.9
–3.3
–7.6
–7.5

1.4
17.9
0.9
–0.3
3.7
1.9
1.7

0.4
12.7
2.8
1.0
–1.6
–0.8
9.3

1.3
–2.5
0.2
2.1
4.3
0.8
–3.4

2.9
32.2
4.6
20.5
19.5
–3.8
–10.7

–3.0
–34.8
–13.9
–13.1
4.1
–15.1
–17.2

3.7
29.3
28.0
13.3
15.3
34.6
49.8

2.8
27.2
14.0
16.1
12.7
18.6
9.7

4.0
4.1
–7.3
0.6
–16.1
–10.0
–14.3

–0.7
–0.1
–0.6
1.5
–11.2
2.4
–3.5

–0.9
–7.5
–3.9
–4.1
20.8
2.0
–10.2

5.4
–42.7
–10.4
–10.0
5.2
–6.1
–16.6

–2.0
–15.4
–2.7
2.0
–3.3
–7.5
–7.5

1.1
17.5
0.5
–0.6
3.3
1.6
1.4

–0.5
11.8
1.9
0.2
–2.4
–1.7
8.4

2.4
–1.4
1.3
3.2
5.5
1.9
–2.4

–1.1
27.1
0.5
15.8
14.8
–7.5
–14.1

0.1
–32.7
–11.2
–10.4
7.3
–12.5
–14.6

7.7
34.3
32.9
17.7
19.8
39.8
55.5

1.4
25.5
12.5
14.6
11.2
17.0
8.3

9.2
9.3
–2.6
5.6
–11.9
–5.5
–10.0

–4.7
–4.1
–4.5
–2.5
–14.7
–1.6
–7.3

–1.0
–7.6
–4.0
–4.2
20.7
1.8
–10.3

16.3
–36.8
–1.2
–0.7
16.1
3.6
–7.9

–2.7
–16.0
–3.4
1.3
–3.9
–8.2
–8.1

0.4
16.8
–0.1
–1.2
2.7
0.9
0.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

241

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change)
Averages
1998–2007 2008–17
Trade in Goods
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States3
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Middle East and North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of U.S. Dollars
Goods and Services
Goods
Average Oil Price4
In U.S. Dollars a Barrel
Export Unit Value of Manufactures5

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

5.9
9.1
5.2
10.6

2.4
3.6
2.0
4.2

1.6
4.1
4.2
4.1

–13.0
–8.8
–7.9
–9.2

14.7
15.0
5.5
18.9

6.0
8.1
7.7
8.3

1.9
4.2
3.7
4.4

2.6
4.3
1.3
5.8

3.4
2.8
–0.2
4.1

3.4
1.1
1.7
0.9

1.7
3.0
2.7
3.1

3.5
3.4
2.2
3.7

6.3
8.9
9.6
8.8

2.0
4.3
2.3
4.7

–0.3
8.9
14.3
7.4

–12.8
–9.0
–13.0
–8.1

13.0
15.1
6.5
17.4

5.3
10.3
8.6
10.7

0.4
5.3
9.9
4.3

1.9
5.0
4.8
5.0

3.5
2.8
1.5
3.1

3.9
–0.2
–8.1
1.7

2.4
2.5
–2.6
3.6

4.1
3.9
4.4
3.8

0.8
4.0
9.1
2.0

0.0
1.0
–0.7
1.5

5.8
14.6
24.7
10.1

–7.4
–12.8
–24.6
–6.9

4.4
12.9
22.5
8.9

6.4
12.4
23.0
8.1

–0.3
2.8
3.6
2.4

0.5
–0.9
–1.9
–0.5

–1.9
–3.2
–7.0
–1.6

–6.4
–8.8
–28.6
–0.9

–2.0
–5.7
–11.1
–4.1

2.0
3.0
10.1
1.1

1.1
2.4
2.0
2.4

0.0
1.1
1.6
1.0

8.6
10.0
8.4
10.5

–10.7
–8.4
–5.5
–9.1

6.4
11.1
9.3
11.5

8.6
9.0
9.9
8.8

1.0
2.2
1.9
2.3

–0.4
–0.9
–1.2
–0.9

–2.0
–2.9
–2.8
–2.9

–8.0
–4.9
–1.9
–5.7

–3.2
–4.7
–2.8
–5.2

1.8
2.9
1.8
3.1

–0.3
1.6

0.0
–0.1

–2.6
4.1

3.7
–4.8

–1.8
1.6

–2.0
3.1

–1.3
0.6

0.8
0.0

0.1
–0.3

1.8
–4.0

1.2
–1.0

0.2
0.1

5.3
–1.8
0.0
2.8

–1.0
0.5
–0.2
–0.5

15.5
–1.4
–0.5
4.7

–16.7
3.3
3.4
–4.8

11.7
–6.5
–3.9
8.5

6.7
–2.5
–1.8
5.4

1.9
1.2
–1.1
–1.3

–1.3
1.1
1.9
–1.5

–0.5
2.6
1.0
–2.7

–20.1
9.1
2.4
–10.0

–7.4
1.5
0.5
–1.2

6.5
–2.4
–3.2
–0.3

6.1
6.4
3.0

–2.3
–2.4
–0.1

11.4
12.0
8.9

–17.6
–18.0
–10.4

8.3
8.2
12.5

12.9
13.0
11.0

0.3
0.9
–1.3

–0.7
–0.7
–0.8

–4.8
–4.9
–3.6

–25.7
–26.5
–14.7

–6.3
–7.0
–2.1

7.2
7.3
3.6

6.9
–0.4

–2.2
0.5

15.0
–0.4

–20.2
2.4

12.1
–2.4

11.9
–0.7

1.6
0.1

–0.7
0.4

–4.3
1.4

–27.2
5.1

–8.6
1.1

8.1
–2.0

10,172
8,084
14.0
36.40
1.5

20,916
16,476
–3.3
79.16
0.4

19,585
15,669
36.4
97.04
6.2

15,722
12,222
–36.3
61.78
–5.3

18,668
14,891
27.9
79.03
2.6

22,210
17,896
31.6
104.01
6.4

22,442
18,031
1.0
105.01
0.9

23,154
18,458
–0.9
104.07
–1.5

23,574
18,551
–7.5
96.25
–1.0

20,920
16,166
–47.2
50.79
–2.9

1Average

20,800 22,083
15,937 16,943
–15.4
17.9
42.96 50.64
–2.1
1.4

of annual percent change for world exports and imports.
represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 83 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods) weights;
the average of U.K. Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2002–04 shares in
world commodity exports.
3Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure.
4Percent change of average of U.K. Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
5Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.
2As

242

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

Projections
2017

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

–586.5
–690.8
–155.6
210.9
–27.6
–68.8
–152.0
142.6
–101.9
1.5
165.3
673.9

–87.9
–384.0
24.1
196.7
–22.5
–42.5
–64.3
145.3
–70.1
–40.4
210.1
237.7

0.8
–442.0
47.9
192.3
–22.2
–72.7
–56.2
221.0
–66.6
–58.2
284.9
277.5

–49.0
–460.4
55.6
229.0
–28.3
–68.6
–47.4
129.8
–46.6
–49.6
267.3
374.9

5.9
–446.5
165.2
248.9
–32.7
–7.5
–3.1
59.7
–97.4
–65.7
276.9
360.7

220.9
–366.4
285.8
252.9
–24.6
20.2
20.7
45.9
–119.6
–57.9
351.0
188.5

225.0
–392.1
334.0
282.9
–30.3
41.1
13.6
36.5
–140.0
–40.6
364.1
194.8

286.9
–463.0
365.7
284.2
–4.8
39.9
16.7
135.6
–153.3
–49.0
372.7
–39.5

317.5
–469.4
403.0
301.4
–11.5
40.2
24.3
176.1
–157.3
–56.7
355.8
–78.9

282.6
–518.5
382.5
291.7
–9.7
35.5
22.5
171.0
–112.3
–50.1
341.7
–138.3

219.2
–612.4
394.3
297.1
10.0
18.3
27.6
185.0
–115.4
–48.8
338.7
–253.3

108.4
103.9
4.4
424.4
420.6
–27.9
29.9
–148.9
–42.0
–30.6
–20.4

43.0
50.4
–7.4
272.9
243.3
–38.4
64.6
–53.9
–33.4
–26.3
–8.7

69.4
67.5
1.9
231.9
237.8
–48.1
43.9
–86.9
–96.6
–75.8
–5.2

108.4
97.3
11.1
97.1
136.1
–78.2
48.9
–119.7
–115.0
–77.0
–14.0

67.5
71.3
–3.7
121.8
215.4
–87.8
6.5
–82.0
–137.1
–74.2
–17.0

18.4
33.4
–15.0
99.2
148.2
–32.3
–3.9
–72.3
–165.8
–74.8
–31.0

56.1
57.5
–1.5
270.6
277.4
–26.8
23.0
–58.9
–187.6
–104.2
–26.2

55.0
69.0
–14.0
333.1
330.6
–22.1
31.5
–31.9
–182.1
–58.9
–32.7

22.2
38.6
–16.3
253.5
270.9
–32.0
26.4
–33.8
–114.0
–14.1
–29.0

36.1
50.0
–13.9
149.9
200.5
–49.2
17.3
–52.7
–125.4
–25.9
–31.0

88.1
79.9
8.2
25.7
138.3
–79.4
–9.8
–84.0
–153.2
–25.8
–38.3

328.5
3.5
–15.9

37.5
–28.4
–8.1

168.7
–8.8
–5.6

411.3
–7.2
–9.2

414.1
–23.7
–20.3

342.4
–33.5
–21.6

176.3
–61.7
–18.6

–125.4
–88.2
–13.7

–144.0
–62.8
–9.4

–88.8
–57.4
–9.2

–45.4
–84.5
–12.2

580.8
93.8
–20.7

132.4
106.9
–4.8

304.6
–25.3
–11.7

613.3
–238.5
–26.8

589.6
–228.9
–57.2

458.2
–269.8
–67.4

273.9
–79.0
–44.3

–96.7
57.2
–52.1

–110.2
31.3
–42.8

–29.9
–108.4
–49.8

74.8
–328.1
–77.2

–318.5

–179.1

–273.5

–370.0

–415.5

–388.9

–369.4

–312.4

–257.3

–313.5

–429.2

–20.4

–21.7

–15.6

–25.5

–39.3

–39.1

–23.3

–31.5

–37.2

–31.6

–31.0

87.4
–249.8
–10.5
342.1

149.8
–21.5
–24.8
45.2

278.3
–0.5
–19.2
171.5

325.9
74.1
–28.2
410.0

366.6
202.1
–33.7
417.6

409.4
299.5
–39.5
343.2

419.9
302.4
–49.0
178.9

247.4
344.3
–82.6
–123.7

238.6
364.7
–67.4
–142.3

144.3
385.5
–67.7
–84.3

–34.1
378.4
–103.7
–40.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

243

2021

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa

244

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

–1.3
–4.7
–1.1
5.6
–0.9
–2.9
–9.3
2.9
–3.5
0.1
3.1

–0.2
–2.7
0.2
5.7
–0.8
–1.9
–4.3
2.9
–3.0
–2.9
4.2

0.0
–3.0
0.4
5.6
–0.8
–3.4
–3.9
4.0
–2.7
–3.6
5.0

–0.1
–3.0
0.4
6.1
–1.0
–3.0
–3.2
2.2
–1.8
–2.8
4.1

0.0
–2.8
1.3
7.0
–1.2
–0.4
–0.2
1.0
–3.7
–3.6
4.2

0.5
–2.2
2.2
6.7
–0.9
0.9
1.5
0.9
–4.4
–3.2
5.2

0.5
–2.3
2.5
7.3
–1.1
1.9
1.0
0.8
–4.7
–2.3
5.3

0.6
–2.6
3.2
8.4
–0.2
2.2
1.4
3.3
–5.4
–3.2
5.9

0.7
–2.5
3.4
8.6
–0.5
2.2
1.9
3.7
–5.9
–3.7
5.6

0.6
–2.7
3.1
8.1
–0.4
1.9
1.7
3.3
–4.3
–3.1
5.1

0.4
–2.7
2.8
7.2
0.3
0.9
1.8
3.3
–3.8
–2.5
4.3

3.4

1.3

1.2

1.4

1.3

0.6

0.6

–0.1

–0.3

–0.4

–0.6

4.7
5.8
0.9
5.7
9.1
–2.3
2.2
–8.0
–1.0
–1.8
–1.9

2.5
3.8
–1.8
3.4
4.7
–2.8
4.8
–3.5
–0.8
–1.6
–1.0

3.3
4.1
0.4
2.4
3.9
–2.8
2.6
–5.1
–1.9
–3.4
–0.5

4.1
4.8
1.8
0.8
1.8
–4.3
2.5
–6.5
–2.0
–2.9
–1.2

2.4
3.3
–0.6
1.0
2.5
–4.8
0.3
–4.6
–2.3
–3.0
–1.4

0.6
1.5
–2.1
0.7
1.5
–1.7
–0.2
–3.8
–2.8
–3.0
–2.5

2.1
2.8
–0.2
1.8
2.6
–1.3
1.1
–3.1
–3.2
–4.3
–2.0

3.0
5.2
–2.6
2.1
3.0
–1.1
1.5
–1.9
–3.6
–3.3
–2.9

1.3
3.0
–3.7
1.6
2.4
–1.4
1.2
–2.0
–2.3
–0.8
–2.7

1.9
3.5
–2.9
0.8
1.6
–2.0
0.7
–3.0
–2.3
–1.3
–2.8

3.6
4.5
1.3
0.1
0.8
–2.2
–0.3
–3.8
–2.3
–1.1
–2.7

12.4
0.3
–5.5

1.6
–2.6
–2.7

6.1
–0.7
–1.5

12.7
–0.5
–2.2

12.5
–1.5
–5.1

10.1
–2.1
–5.9

5.1
–3.7
–5.3

–4.0
–5.9
–4.3

–4.6
–4.5
–3.3

–2.6
–3.9
–3.2

–1.0
–4.6
–3.6

11.4
0.6
–1.9

3.2
0.7
–0.4

6.0
–0.1
–0.9

9.9
–1.2
–1.7

9.0
–1.1
–3.5

6.9
–1.2
–4.0

4.2
–0.3
–2.7

–1.9
0.2
–3.2

–2.2
0.1
–2.8

–0.6
–0.4
–3.0

1.1
–0.9
–3.4

–3.2

–1.9

–2.4

–2.9

–3.2

–2.9

–2.7

–2.5

–2.0

–2.3

–2.4

–3.7

–4.2

–2.7

–3.9

–5.6

–5.3

–3.2

–4.4

–5.1

–4.5

–3.2

0.1
–1.3
–0.9
13.9

0.2
–0.1
–2.2
2.1

0.4
0.0
–1.5
6.7

0.4
0.4
–1.9
13.7

0.5
1.2
–2.1
13.6

0.5
1.7
–2.2
10.9

0.5
1.6
–2.5
5.6

0.3
2.1
–4.4
–4.4

0.3
2.2
–3.6
–5.0

0.2
2.3
–3.4
–2.8

0.0
1.9
–3.8
–1.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Russia
Excluding Russia
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
ASEAN-53
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and
Pakistan
Sub-Saharan Africa
South Africa
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Memorandum
World
European Union
Low-Income Developing Countries
Middle East and North Africa
1Excludes
2Georgia,

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

–4.5
–37.5
–5.0
12.9
–3.3
–10.6
–36.5
16.0
–13.1
0.3
5.1

–0.8
–24.3
1.0
15.2
–3.4
–8.6
–18.9
21.7
–11.2
–10.4
7.9

0.0
–23.8
1.7
13.3
–3.1
–13.5
–15.3
25.4
–9.7
–12.4
8.7

–0.3
–21.6
1.7
13.6
–3.4
–11.1
–11.0
13.9
–5.9
–9.1
6.9

0.0
–20.1
5.1
15.3
–4.1
–1.3
–0.8
6.5
–12.3
–11.9
7.1

1.5
–16.0
8.4
14.8
–2.9
3.3
4.7
5.5
–14.8
–10.4
8.6

1.5
–16.5
9.4
16.0
–3.5
6.5
3.0
4.2
–16.6
–7.2
9.0

2.2
–20.5
11.4
18.1
–0.6
7.3
4.2
17.3
–19.6
–10.0
10.3

2.4
–21.2
...
18.6
–1.5
7.1
5.8
22.2
–21.4
–12.1
10.0

2.0
–21.6
...
17.3
–1.2
6.0
5.0
20.9
–14.8
–10.0
9.1

1.3
–19.5
...
14.4
1.0
2.5
4.8
19.8
–13.3
–8.1
7.5

9.5

4.3

4.0

4.5

3.9

2.0

2.3

–0.3

–0.8

–1.5

–2.3

13.7
19.9
1.7
16.5
28.1
–9.5
4.2
–22.8
–4.2
–13.5
–6.6

8.2
14.7
–4.1
12.4
19.5
–13.8
10.7
–10.3
–4.2
–14.6
–3.6

10.4
15.3
0.8
8.3
14.8
–12.6
5.9
–14.8
–9.7
–32.7
–1.7

12.3
17.0
3.6
2.8
6.8
–17.3
5.5
–17.3
–9.4
–26.3
–3.8

7.4
12.1
–1.2
3.3
9.9
–19.4
0.7
–11.9
–11.0
–26.4
–4.4

2.0
5.6
–4.9
2.6
6.3
–6.9
–0.4
–9.7
–13.3
–26.8
–7.7

6.7
10.2
–0.5
6.6
11.0
–5.6
2.4
–7.5
–15.4
–39.5
–6.3

9.4
17.5
–7.2
8.6
13.6
–5.3
3.5
–4.5
–17.2
–26.3
–8.1

4.3
11.2
–9.2
6.6
11.4
–7.3
2.9
–4.6
–11.0
–6.1
–7.4

6.2
13.0
–7.2
3.7
8.2
–10.1
1.8
–6.8
–11.3
–10.7
–7.4

12.4
17.5
3.3
0.5
4.8
–11.1
–0.8
–8.7
–11.0
–9.3
–6.8

23.0
0.9
–15.5

3.0
–9.4
–9.8

13.4
–2.3
–5.2

26.9
–1.5
–7.3

24.5
–4.9
–17.3

20.9
–6.9
–19.0

12.6
–13.4
–17.0

–9.9
–25.3
–14.1

–11.8
–19.0
–9.6

–5.9
–15.5
–9.0

–1.8
–18.0
–10.6

25.9
2.1
–5.9

8.5
2.8
–1.6

15.8
–0.5
–3.1

24.5
–4.1
–6.0

21.7
–3.8
–13.6

17.4
–4.3
–16.0

11.8
–1.2
–10.9

–4.8
1.0
–14.9

–6.0
0.5
–12.3

–0.6
–1.7
–13.5

4.5
–4.1
–17.1

–10.8

–7.4

–9.1

–10.2

–11.2

–10.2

–9.6

–9.2

–7.5

–8.5

–8.8

–10.3

–14.9

–8.8

–12.3

–19.3

–19.3

–12.7

–21.0

–27.6

–20.7

–14.9

0.3
–3.3
–2.9
24.6

0.9
–0.4
–8.3
3.9

1.4
0.0
–5.0
14.0

1.4
1.0
–5.8
27.4

1.5
2.7
–6.8
25.2

1.7
3.9
–7.3
21.4

1.8
3.8
–8.9
13.1

1.3
4.8
–16.7
–10.0

1.2
5.0
–13.3
–12.0

0.7
5.0
–11.9
–5.7

–0.1
4.0
–12.3
–1.6

the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic

structure.
3Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

245

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A11. Advanced Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Netherlands
Belgium
Austria
Greece
Portugal
Ireland
Finland
Slovak Republic
Lithuania
Slovenia
Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta
Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Switzerland
Sweden
Singapore
Hong Kong SAR
Norway
Czech Republic
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
San Marino
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Euro Area2
1Data
2Data

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

–1.3
–4.7
–1.1
5.6
–0.9
–2.9
–9.3
4.1
–1.0
4.5
–15.1
–12.1
–6.3
2.2
–6.4
–13.3
–5.3
7.7
–12.4
–8.7
–15.6
–1.1
2.9
–3.5
0.3
0.1
–4.9
6.6
3.0
7.8
14.6
15.0
15.7
–1.9
1.0
2.7
–7.8
...
16.0
–22.8
...

–0.2
–2.7
0.2
5.7
–0.8
–1.9
–4.3
5.8
–1.1
2.6
–12.3
–10.4
–4.7
1.9
–3.5
2.1
–0.6
7.4
8.1
2.5
–7.7
–6.6
2.9
–3.0
3.7
–2.9
–4.6
10.9
8.0
6.0
17.0
9.9
10.6
–2.3
3.5
3.3
–2.2
...
28.2
–9.7
...

0.0
–3.0
0.4
5.6
–0.8
–3.4
–3.9
7.4
1.8
2.9
–11.4
–10.1
–1.2
1.2
–4.7
–0.3
–0.1
6.8
2.3
1.8
–10.7
–4.7
4.0
–2.7
2.6
–3.6
–3.6
8.9
14.9
6.0
23.8
7.0
10.9
–3.6
3.6
5.7
–2.3
...
39.4
–6.6
...

–0.1
–3.0
0.4
6.1
–1.0
–3.0
–3.2
9.1
–1.1
1.6
–10.0
–6.0
–1.6
–1.8
–5.0
–3.9
0.2
6.2
–2.8
1.3
–4.0
–2.5
2.2
–1.8
1.6
–2.8
–2.9
8.2
7.7
5.5
22.8
5.6
12.4
–2.1
2.3
5.7
–2.8
...
41.0
–5.3
...

0.0
–2.8
1.3
7.0
–1.2
–0.4
–0.2
10.8
–0.1
1.5
–3.8
–1.8
–2.6
–1.9
0.9
–1.2
2.6
6.1
–3.3
–2.4
–5.6
1.3
1.0
–3.7
4.2
–3.6
–4.2
9.5
10.3
5.6
18.1
1.6
12.4
–1.6
0.5
5.7
–3.9
...
39.3
–4.2
...

0.5
–2.2
2.2
6.7
–0.9
0.9
1.5
9.8
–0.2
1.9
–2.0
1.5
2.1
–1.6
2.0
1.5
4.8
5.7
–2.4
–0.1
–4.5
3.6
0.9
–4.4
6.2
–3.2
–3.4
10.4
11.1
5.3
17.9
1.5
10.2
–0.5
3.6
7.1
–3.2
...
40.2
5.7
...

0.5
–2.3
2.5
7.3
–1.1
1.9
1.0
8.9
–0.2
1.9
–2.1
0.1
1.7
–0.9
0.1
3.6
6.2
5.5
–2.0
1.0
–4.6
3.4
0.8
–4.7
6.0
–2.3
–2.9
12.0
8.8
4.6
17.5
1.3
11.9
0.2
4.0
7.7
–3.1
...
34.4
3.7
...

0.6
–2.6
3.2
8.4
–0.2
2.2
1.4
8.6
0.0
2.6
0.0
0.4
10.2
0.1
–1.3
–1.7
5.2
5.5
–1.2
2.1
–3.6
9.9
3.3
–5.4
7.7
–3.2
–4.7
14.6
11.4
5.2
19.8
3.1
9.0
0.9
4.6
7.0
–3.2
...
28.0
4.2
...

0.7
–2.5
3.4
8.6
–0.5
2.2
1.9
9.1
0.1
2.6
0.0
0.0
9.5
0.1
–1.0
–1.6
7.7
4.4
–2.0
0.6
–0.9
6.2
3.7
–5.9
7.2
–3.7
–3.5
15.0
9.2
5.0
19.3
2.8
7.0
1.5
3.1
6.7
–3.0
...
28.4
2.9
...

0.6
–2.7
3.1
8.1
–0.4
1.9
1.7
8.2
0.4
2.7
0.0
–0.7
9.1
0.2
–0.6
–2.8
7.2
4.3
–1.2
0.0
–3.7
5.8
3.3
–4.3
5.9
–3.1
–3.9
14.4
9.0
5.3
19.3
2.9
7.6
1.0
2.9
6.6
–3.5
...
29.2
1.9
...

0.4
–2.7
2.8
7.2
0.3
0.9
1.8
6.9
1.5
2.3
0.0
–1.6
8.6
0.2
2.1
–2.7
3.7
4.4
–1.3
–2.4
–4.3
5.2
3.3
–3.8
5.2
–2.5
–4.0
13.9
8.5
4.3
15.7
3.4
7.2
–0.8
2.0
5.9
–4.1
...
30.4
1.1
...

–1.6
–0.7

–0.7
0.4

–0.8
0.5

–0.8
0.8

–1.0
2.2

–0.7
2.8

–0.7
3.0

–0.6
3.8

–0.5
3.9

–0.5
3.6

–0.6
3.3

corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.

246

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account
(Percent of GDP)

States1

Commonwealth of Independent
Russia
Excluding Russia
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Georgia
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyz Republic
Moldova
Tajikistan
Turkmenistan
Ukraine 2
Uzbekistan
Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.
Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam
Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Hungary
Kosovo
FYR Macedonia
Montenegro
Poland
Romania
Serbia
Turkey

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

4.7
5.8
0.9
–14.2
35.5
–8.2
–22.0
4.7
–14.3
–16.1
–7.7
16.5
–6.8
8.7
5.7
1.2
–8.6
43.4
–6.6
9.1
–15.1
–2.3
0.0
–6.4
–19.3
16.5
–28.9
0.5
–16.5
–8.9
–4.2
2.7
–20.0
6.1
0.1
–5.8
–18.2
–9.5
0.3
45.5
–11.5
7.1
–10.8
–11.0
–8.0
–15.8
–14.1
–22.0
–8.8
–7.1
–16.2
–12.8
–49.8
–6.8
–11.8
–21.0
–5.4

2.5
3.8
–1.8
–16.5
23.0
–12.6
–10.5
–3.6
0.9
–8.2
–5.9
–14.7
–1.4
2.2
3.4
2.4
–6.3
32.3
–6.9
4.7
–4.2
–2.8
1.8
–13.3
–22.0
15.0
–10.5
–14.2
–18.8
–6.9
–1.2
4.2
–7.7
–8.4
5.0
–4.7
–21.9
–0.5
7.3
37.9
–20.9
6.9
–7.9
–6.5
–3.5
–15.9
–6.4
–8.4
–5.1
–0.8
–9.2
–6.8
–27.9
–4.1
–4.8
–6.2
–1.8

3.3
4.1
0.4
–13.6
28.0
–15.0
–10.2
0.9
–2.2
–7.5
–1.1
–10.6
–2.2
6.2
2.4
0.4
–22.2
36.6
–6.8
3.9
–4.5
–2.8
0.7
–2.2
–18.8
10.1
–8.2
–26.5
–15.0
–13.0
–1.1
–2.4
–6.7
–20.5
3.6
–7.6
–33.4
–2.2
2.9
39.3
–19.1
–11.9
–5.4
–3.8
–5.1
–11.3
–6.1
–1.7
–1.1
0.3
–11.7
–2.0
–22.7
–5.4
–5.1
–6.4
–6.1

4.1
4.8
1.8
–10.4
26.5
–8.5
–12.8
5.1
–2.9
–10.7
–4.8
2.0
–6.3
5.8
0.8
–1.0
–29.8
34.7
–10.2
1.8
–5.1
–4.3
0.2
–13.4
–18.4
10.9
–16.5
1.0
–17.8
–26.5
–1.8
–1.0
–9.2
–24.0
2.5
–5.1
–8.7
–7.8
2.4
39.4
–15.1
–36.5
–8.1
0.2
–6.5
–13.2
–9.5
0.3
–0.8
0.7
–13.7
–2.5
–17.6
–5.2
–4.9
–8.6
–9.6

2.4
3.3
–0.6
–10.0
20.2
–2.9
–11.7
0.5
3.7
–7.5
–2.5
0.0
–8.1
1.8
1.0
0.7
–21.5
29.8
–11.0
2.5
–1.3
–4.8
–2.7
–4.5
–29.3
5.2
–7.3
–3.4
–12.6
–27.4
–4.0
4.8
–8.7
–36.1
2.8
–8.5
1.8
–6.7
–0.4
40.2
–8.6
17.2
–6.5
6.0
–4.6
–10.1
–8.7
–0.9
–0.1
1.8
–7.5
–3.2
–18.5
–3.7
–4.8
–11.5
–6.1

0.6
1.5
–2.1
–7.3
16.4
–10.4
–5.8
0.4
–1.1
–5.1
–2.9
–7.2
–9.2
2.9
0.7
1.2
–25.4
20.9
–12.3
1.5
–9.8
–1.7
–3.2
8.2
–28.9
3.5
–4.5
–9.9
–10.0
–25.4
–4.9
3.3
–9.3
–31.5
4.2
–0.2
–3.5
–3.8
–1.2
42.4
–6.2
1.2
–3.3
4.5
–3.8
–10.8
–5.3
1.3
0.8
4.0
–6.4
–1.6
–14.5
–1.3
–1.1
–6.1
–7.7

2.1
2.8
–0.2
–7.6
13.9
–6.9
–10.6
2.6
–17.8
–3.8
–2.8
–7.5
–3.9
0.7
1.8
0.9
–26.4
31.9
–12.1
2.6
–7.5
–1.3
–3.1
24.0
–22.8
4.4
–3.9
–4.4
6.8
–11.5
–5.6
4.5
–11.8
3.0
3.8
–7.3
–4.3
–2.7
3.8
26.2
–9.4
19.3
–0.3
5.1
–3.1
–12.9
–7.5
0.9
0.9
2.0
–7.9
–0.8
–15.2
–2.0
–0.5
–6.0
–5.5

3.0
5.2
–2.6
–2.7
–0.4
–3.8
–11.7
–2.4
–10.4
–4.7
–6.0
–10.3
–0.3
0.1
2.1
0.7
–28.8
12.0
–10.6
3.0
–5.4
–1.1
–2.1
44.9
–23.1
3.0
–9.5
–3.2
1.0
–4.8
–7.8
5.0
–0.5
10.1
2.9
–3.7
–2.6
–2.5
7.8
8.3
–8.0
7.6
–11.1
0.5
–1.9
–11.2
–5.6
1.4
5.2
4.4
–8.7
–1.4
–9.7
–0.2
–1.1
–4.8
–4.5

1.3
3.0
–3.7
–2.5
0.7
–4.9
–12.1
–2.2
–15.0
–2.8
–5.0
–18.5
–1.5
0.1
1.6
–0.1
–27.8
4.3
–10.2
2.4
–7.2
–1.4
–2.3
–7.2
–18.0
1.2
–11.9
–7.6
–0.1
–11.1
–8.3
3.9
–5.3
7.5
1.8
–3.3
–4.4
–1.5
9.6
–9.9
–7.6
–4.0
–16.6
0.4
–2.0
–13.3
–5.1
0.8
3.0
4.9
–9.6
–1.8
–10.3
–0.1
–2.0
–4.2
–4.4

1.9
3.5
–2.9
–3.0
3.1
–4.8
–12.0
0.0
–14.9
–3.4
–5.0
–18.0
–2.1
0.2
0.8
–0.7
–31.5
–4.1
–9.4
1.6
–7.0
–2.0
–2.3
–2.5
–17.6
1.5
–14.1
–9.4
–0.7
–19.2
–8.1
–0.9
–7.0
6.1
1.4
–3.0
–7.7
–2.8
7.7
–11.6
–11.5
–5.7
–21.1
0.1
–3.0
–13.8
–6.0
0.0
2.2
4.6
–9.1
–2.4
–11.8
–1.0
–2.8
–3.9
–5.6

3.6
4.5
1.3
–4.7
11.3
–3.3
–8.6
3.9
–9.5
–4.5
–3.5
6.7
–2.2
0.5
0.1
–2.0
–5.3
15.1
–8.6
0.8
–5.7
–2.2
–2.3
2.2
–13.7
1.5
–9.8
–11.2
–2.9
–9.9
–5.7
–4.2
–4.9
3.2
0.2
–3.1
–3.3
–3.3
2.2
–8.4
–8.7
–1.9
–5.6
0.7
–3.8
–10.9
–5.0
–1.7
–0.7
1.4
–8.8
–3.0
–6.8
–2.6
–3.2
–3.9
–5.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

247

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina3
The Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Djibouti
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Sudan 4
Syria5
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen

248

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

2021

–1.0
–26.7
1.8
–10.6
–10.6
–10.6
11.9
–1.8
–3.2
–2.6
–9.1
–28.3
–9.4
2.9
–7.1
–29.0
–3.6
–13.7
–3.1
–15.4
–17.7
–1.9
–17.8
–10.8
1.0
–4.3
–26.8
–28.6
–33.1
9.2
30.5
–5.7
10.8

–0.8
–14.0
2.5
–10.3
–6.6
–4.9
4.3
–1.6
2.0
–2.0
–1.9
–22.7
–4.8
0.5
–1.5
–24.3
0.7
–9.1
–1.9
–3.8
–11.0
–1.0
–8.7
–0.8
3.0
–0.5
–25.7
–11.6
–29.2
2.9
8.5
–1.2
0.2

–1.9
–14.7
–0.3
–10.1
–5.7
–2.5
3.9
–3.4
1.7
–3.0
–3.4
–15.9
–7.4
–2.3
–2.5
–23.7
–1.4
–9.6
–1.5
–4.3
–8.0
–0.5
–9.0
–10.8
–0.3
–2.4
–20.8
–16.3
–30.6
13.0
18.9
–1.8
1.9

–2.0
–10.4
–0.8
–15.1
–12.8
–1.1
0.3
–2.9
–1.2
–2.9
–5.3
–14.1
–7.5
–0.5
–4.8
–23.6
–3.4
–13.0
–4.3
–8.0
–12.2
–1.2
–12.1
–13.2
0.4
–1.9
–15.9
–19.0
–29.4
5.7
11.4
–2.7
4.9

–2.3
–14.6
–0.2
–17.9
–9.3
–1.2
7.2
–3.0
–3.5
–3.1
–5.2
–17.3
–6.6
–0.2
–5.4
–21.1
–2.6
–11.6
–5.7
–8.6
–11.1
–1.4
–10.5
–10.5
–2.0
–2.7
–9.8
–13.6
–27.6
3.3
3.2
–5.1
0.8

–2.8
–14.6
–2.0
–17.5
–9.1
–4.6
2.4
–3.0
–3.7
–3.2
–5.0
–9.7
–4.1
–1.0
–6.5
–23.2
–2.5
–13.3
–6.3
–9.6
–9.2
–2.5
–10.9
–9.8
1.7
–4.2
–13.4
–11.4
–30.9
–3.8
7.3
–5.0
2.0

–3.2
–14.8
–1.4
–22.0
–9.9
–7.4
0.2
–4.3
–1.3
–5.1
–4.7
–11.1
–3.3
–0.6
–5.2
–16.5
–2.1
–10.7
–6.3
–7.4
–7.7
–2.0
–7.7
–9.8
–0.4
–4.0
–12.1
–6.8
–29.6
–8.0
4.6
–4.5
1.7

–3.6
–10.2
–2.5
–16.0
–7.2
–9.8
–5.8
–3.3
–2.0
–6.4
–4.0
–9.3
–1.9
–2.2
–3.6
–15.9
–0.3
–5.7
–2.5
–6.3
–3.4
–2.9
–8.2
–6.5
–1.7
–4.4
–12.3
–3.7
–26.2
–15.7
–5.4
–3.5
–7.8

–2.3
–9.4
–2.3
–11.4
–5.3
–12.4
–6.6
–0.8
–1.9
–5.2
–4.5
–13.1
–2.4
–1.5
–2.1
–12.7
–0.5
2.1
0.4
–5.7
–3.3
–2.7
–8.0
–5.5
0.6
–3.8
–17.2
–6.7
–23.0
–4.2
–8.7
–2.9
–3.4

–2.3
–10.2
–3.2
–10.7
–6.0
–9.9
–4.9
–1.3
–2.4
–4.2
–4.5
–14.2
–2.7
–0.9
–2.9
–14.1
–0.7
0.4
–1.0
–5.7
–3.6
–2.8
–8.7
–4.9
–0.5
–3.1
–19.4
–6.7
–22.0
4.2
–7.2
–3.1
–0.9

–2.3
–11.4
–4.2
–7.3
–7.5
–8.0
–2.0
–1.1
–2.7
–3.3
–4.5
–10.0
–4.0
–0.9
–4.4
–15.4
–1.9
–3.8
–1.3
–5.0
–3.8
–2.7
–10.4
–2.3
0.6
–2.2
–17.4
–7.4
–16.0
1.7
–4.0
–3.5
0.7

12.4
2.7
20.1
8.8
–24.3
–1.4
5.2
15.9
–9.4
40.9
–10.5
42.5
–12.0
–7.1
8.5
–8.1
23.1
25.5
–1.6
–1.3
–3.8
7.1
–4.6

1.6
13.1
0.3
2.4
–9.7
–3.8
2.2
–6.8
–5.2
26.7
–11.9
14.9
–22.2
–5.4
–1.1
–5.5
6.5
4.9
–9.6
–2.9
–2.8
3.1
–10.1

6.1
7.5
7.5
3.0
0.7
–1.9
4.4
3.0
–7.1
31.8
–20.7
19.5
–14.6
–4.4
8.6
–2.2
19.1
12.7
–2.1
–2.8
–4.8
4.3
–3.4

12.7
6.0
9.9
8.8
–13.7
–2.5
10.6
12.0
–10.3
42.9
–15.1
9.1
–10.6
–7.6
13.1
0.1
30.7
23.7
–0.4
...
–7.4
12.7
–3.0

12.5
5.9
5.9
8.4
–20.3
–3.7
6.1
6.7
–15.2
45.5
–23.9
29.1
–31.5
–9.3
10.3
–2.1
32.6
22.4
–9.3
...
–8.3
19.8
–1.7

10.1
8.7
0.4
7.4
–23.3
–2.2
7.0
1.4
–10.3
39.9
–26.7
13.5
–28.6
–7.6
6.7
–1.1
29.9
18.2
–8.7
...
–8.4
19.1
–3.1

5.1
2.4
–4.4
4.6
–25.6
–0.8
3.8
–0.8
–6.8
33.3
–28.1
–27.8
–33.3
–5.7
5.7
–1.3
23.5
9.8
–7.0
...
–9.1
10.0
–1.7

–4.0
4.7
–16.5
–3.1
–30.7
–3.7
2.1
–7.2
–9.0
5.2
–21.0
–42.1
–27.0
–1.9
–17.5
–1.0
8.2
–8.3
–7.8
...
–8.8
3.3
–5.5

–4.6
4.5
–15.1
–4.7
–17.2
–5.8
4.2
–10.8
–9.0
3.6
–20.4
–47.4
–21.9
–1.2
–21.3
–0.9
–1.8
–6.6
–5.9
...
–8.0
1.1
–6.1

–2.6
1.1
–13.7
–3.8
–14.4
–5.2
3.3
–3.6
–8.9
8.4
–20.6
–36.9
–24.9
–1.4
–17.6
–1.5
0.0
–2.6
–4.9
...
–6.9
3.2
–2.8

–1.0
–3.9
–6.3
–1.9
–18.5
–2.2
3.8
–0.8
–6.2
9.2
–19.7
–19.0
–21.5
–1.3
–8.3
–0.9
0.3
–1.2
–3.5
...
–4.0
2.1
–3.7

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Balance on Current Account (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan
Swaziland
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe 6

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Projections
2017

0.3
8.5
–7.5
–1.1
–11.5
–1.0
–13.7
–1.2
–9.9
3.7
–10.4
–0.8
–0.5
1.9
21.9
–5.5
–6.7
21.6
–12.2
–11.9
–10.2
–2.5
–5.5
21.1
–46.6
–20.6
–15.1
–13.7
–10.1
–9.9
–0.1
–12.0
8.8
–5.1
–33.1
–14.2
–18.5
–9.0
–5.5
...
–7.1
–7.8
–7.0
–7.1
–3.3
–16.7

–2.6
–10.0
–8.3
–6.3
–4.7
1.7
–14.6
–3.5
–9.1
–9.2
–6.2
–6.1
–14.1
6.6
–8.4
–7.6
–6.7
4.4
–12.5
–5.5
–8.2
–5.4
–4.6
3.9
–23.2
–21.1
–10.2
–10.8
–7.4
–10.9
–1.5
–24.4
4.7
–7.1
–23.2
–6.7
–14.8
–13.3
–2.7
...
–11.6
–7.6
–5.6
–5.7
6.0
–43.6

–0.7
9.1
–8.2
–2.6
–2.2
–12.2
–12.4
–2.8
–10.2
–9.0
–0.2
–10.5
7.5
1.9
–19.4
–5.6
–1.4
14.9
–16.3
–8.6
–9.3
–8.7
–5.9
–10.0
–32.0
–9.7
–8.6
–10.7
–10.3
–16.1
–3.5
–19.8
3.9
–7.3
–21.7
–4.4
–19.4
–22.7
–1.5
...
–8.6
–7.7
–6.3
–8.0
7.5
–13.3

–0.5
12.6
–7.3
3.1
–1.5
–14.4
–16.3
–3.0
–7.6
–5.6
–4.9
–5.2
4.9
10.4
6.7
0.6
–2.5
15.2
–12.3
–9.0
–24.7
–4.2
–9.1
–14.7
–27.5
–6.9
–8.6
–5.1
–13.8
–25.3
–3.0
–22.3
3.0
–7.5
–25.5
–8.1
–23.0
–65.0
–2.2
18.4
–6.8
–10.8
–8.0
–10.0
4.7
–22.2

–1.5
12.0
–7.4
–1.1
–7.2
–18.6
–12.6
–3.6
–4.6
–8.7
–7.2
–4.6
17.7
–1.2
4.1
2.3
–6.9
15.9
–7.9
–11.7
–26.0
–11.8
–8.4
–9.8
–21.5
–6.9
–9.3
–2.2
–7.3
–44.7
–5.7
–14.7
4.4
–11.4
–21.3
–10.8
–21.1
–31.8
–5.1
–15.9
3.1
–11.6
–7.5
–6.8
5.4
–14.6

–2.1
6.7
–8.0
9.3
–11.0
–19.3
–4.9
–3.9
–3.0
–9.2
–8.1
1.8
1.6
–2.0
0.1
–0.1
–5.9
11.6
–10.2
–11.9
–16.9
–7.4
–8.8
–10.3
–28.4
–5.9
–8.7
–2.9
–6.3
–42.9
–4.0
–15.0
3.9
–7.4
–13.8
–10.4
–12.1
–17.5
–5.9
–1.2
5.1
–10.6
–13.1
–7.0
–0.6
–18.2

–3.7
–2.9
–8.7
15.6
–8.0
–18.5
–9.0
–4.3
–5.6
–9.0
–6.3
4.0
–3.3
1.5
–5.6
0.6
–7.9
8.1
–10.9
–9.6
–17.3
–3.3
–10.3
–7.9
–32.7
–0.3
–8.5
–4.7
–5.7
–38.2
–10.7
–14.1
0.2
–10.5
–22.6
–8.9
–23.0
–18.2
–5.3
2.1
3.3
–9.5
–9.9
–8.7
2.1
–15.2

–5.9
–8.5
–10.5
7.2
–6.4
–15.9
–4.3
–4.2
–9.0
–12.4
0.8
–3.7
–21.0
–1.8
–16.8
–2.2
–12.0
–2.3
–15.2
–7.5
–18.7
–1.1
–6.8
–8.7
–34.7
–1.9
–8.3
–5.1
–4.9
–39.0
–12.9
–17.2
–3.1
–13.5
–17.2
–7.6
–18.6
–15.5
–4.3
–11.1
9.2
–8.8
–7.1
–9.4
–3.5
–10.7

–4.5
–5.4
–10.0
4.1
–6.0
–4.6
–7.7
–4.2
–10.0
–8.7
–9.0
–0.8
–8.2
–1.8
–11.8
0.2
–10.7
–5.3
–12.7
–6.3
–13.2
–1.7
–6.4
–8.0
–30.5
–2.3
–15.8
–6.0
–4.3
–33.5
–12.4
–17.8
–0.7
–16.6
–12.7
–8.4
–18.7
–16.2
–3.3
–0.5
–4.9
–8.8
–8.0
–8.7
–4.5
–7.5

–3.9
–5.4
–11.8
3.7
–5.0
–9.6
–9.2
–4.0
–9.7
–7.8
–9.7
5.2
–2.1
–2.1
–6.7
0.9
–9.3
–4.7
–13.7
–6.0
–11.3
–2.8
–6.1
–9.0
–26.5
–3.7
–9.3
–5.2
–4.5
–28.3
–6.9
–17.5
–0.4
–11.9
–13.3
–8.2
–18.3
–16.3
–3.2
–8.6
–2.4
–8.8
–8.2
–8.9
–2.2
–6.1

2021
–4.6
–2.5
–8.8
11.1
–8.0
–17.6
–7.3
–4.8
–6.6
–5.9
–13.7
7.1
0.5
–2.7
–3.5
–1.4
–7.8
–2.7
–13.7
–4.3
–17.7
–2.9
–5.7
–22.9
–25.6
–4.0
–8.1
–5.8
–4.9
–146.4
–6.9
–12.3
–0.1
–10.7
–8.7
–6.2
–16.5
–15.2
–3.6
–11.0
0.6
–7.9
–9.1
–7.2
2.9
–9.6

1Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.
2Starting in 2014 data exclude Crimea and Sevastopol.
3See country-specific notes for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4Data for 2011 exclude South Sudan after July 9. Data for 2012 and onward pertain to the current Sudan.
5Data for Syria are excluded for 2011 onward owing to the uncertain political situation.
6The Zimbabwe dollar ceased circulating in early 2009. Data are based on IMF staff estimates of price and exchange rate developments in U.S. dollars. IMF staff estimates of U.S. dollar
values may differ from authorities’ estimates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

249

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United States
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Germany
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
France
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Italy
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

250

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

–699.1
657.4
–1,212.9
323.2
–563.9
76.5

19.3
311.7
–377.6
–91.9
–287.8
469.7

–86.0
346.1
–738.5
–118.1
62.9
352.8

–191.7
376.9
–904.3
0.7
–41.9
350.7

–105.2
133.8
–202.0
–89.6
–222.7
274.0

246.8
81.8
–328.8
18.4
323.2
153.2

437.1
197.5
–143.5
–50.3
298.2
135.3

539.7
6.6
162.1
–46.9
190.9
227.4

410.9
184.4
152.9
–32.6
21.7
86.4

272.2
255.2
–27.8
–42.9
14.8
74.3

–730.6
19.0
–808.0
32.9
20.6
4.8

–231.0
159.9
18.5
–44.8
–416.9
52.3

–437.0
95.2
–620.8
–14.1
100.9
1.8

–515.8
183.0
–226.3
–35.0
–453.4
15.9

–440.5
135.2
–498.3
7.1
–89.0
4.5

–391.0
117.7
–30.7
2.2
–477.1
–3.1

–287.4
136.1
–119.2
–54.3
–246.3
–3.6

–195.2
–30.8
–97.0
–25.4
–35.8
–6.3

–377.3
81.0
–466.0
0.0
9.0
–1.2

–530.6
79.1
–600.2
–22.4
13.0
0.0

–470.1
336.6
–356.0
–34.9
–420.5
4.7

28.5
66.4
–350.3
15.1
239.1
58.1

–69.6
83.4
–109.8
–4.3
–53.0
14.1

–153.1
139.0
–454.5
5.5
142.3
14.7

150.1
14.4
–181.3
42.0
256.0
19.0

465.1
–77.7
–5.1
19.4
522.3
6.2

492.1
79.2
150.6
56.9
199.6
5.8

304.7
120.9
223.4
94.2
–145.6
11.7

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

179.9
67.1
–44.5
44.0
110.6
2.7

184.4
43.0
119.2
–7.5
17.4
12.4

123.7
60.6
154.1
17.6
–110.7
2.1

167.7
10.3
–51.4
39.8
165.1
3.9

185.8
33.6
66.8
30.9
52.7
1.7

291.3
28.1
212.8
31.9
17.4
1.2

323.9
105.6
180.6
42.1
–1.0
–3.3

250.0
62.6
220.3
28.7
–59.2
–2.4

301.4
23.0
265.7
34.6
–21.8
0.0

291.7
23.8
257.1
33.5
–22.7
0.0

–26.9
66.0
–37.8
24.1
–86.5
–12.5

–30.7
70.3
–328.7
23.6
212.0
–5.5

–34.2
34.3
–155.0
–34.8
105.1
7.7

–74.6
19.8
–333.7
–19.4
240.3
–7.7

–48.0
19.4
–50.6
–18.4
–3.6
5.2

–19.2
–13.9
–79.3
–22.3
98.2
–1.9

–10.0
47.9
–23.8
–31.5
–3.6
1.0

–7.8
–2.1
60.1
12.0
–85.7
8.0

–9.2
2.0
57.5
15.3
–86.2
2.3

–7.4
6.1
51.9
19.3
–87.1
2.3

–45.7
76.2
–110.7
–0.4
–19.0
8.2

–54.5
–0.3
–55.4
–6.9
–0.7
8.8

–111.2
21.3
58.4
6.6
–198.9
1.4

–89.6
17.2
15.9
–10.1
–113.9
1.3

–13.1
6.8
–31.3
7.5
2.1
1.9

16.9
0.9
–17.5
4.0
27.5
2.0

66.8
3.3
1.4
–4.8
68.1
–1.3

36.7
7.3
99.4
3.7
–74.3
0.6

42.1
7.6
28.1
0.0
6.4
0.0

37.4
8.0
10.4
0.0
19.0
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

Spain
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Japan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Canada
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Other Advanced Economies 1
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Projections
2016
2017

–149.8
–2.3
1.9
10.4
–160.8
0.9

–72.8
2.7
–69.6
8.4
–20.4
6.0

–58.9
–1.9
–46.6
–11.4
0.0
1.1

–43.4
12.8
43.1
2.9
–116.2
13.9

0.5
–27.2
53.7
–10.7
–18.2
2.8

44.1
–19.1
–59.1
1.4
120.2
0.7

26.8
12.4
–13.0
1.5
20.7
5.2

24.9
26.7
23.2
–1.4
–29.3
5.6

31.2
26.8
–22.8
0.0
27.2
0.0

29.7
27.3
–21.4
0.0
23.8
0.0

181.6
89.1
289.0
–24.9
–202.3
30.8

168.8
61.2
211.7
–10.5
–120.9
27.2

247.3
72.5
147.9
–11.9
–5.5
44.3

158.4
117.8
–162.9
–17.1
43.4
177.3

53.9
117.5
28.8
6.7
–61.1
–37.9

–4.3
144.7
–280.6
58.1
34.8
38.7

58.6
118.3
–42.2
34.0
–60.1
8.5

174.8
131.0
131.7
17.7
–110.7
5.1

172.8
116.7
257.6
–34.6
–176.4
9.5

167.7
129.9
247.0
–18.7
–200.5
10.0

–72.8
106.9
–454.8
225.5
52.2
–2.5

–45.4
–61.0
–48.5
–45.5
100.6
9.0

–46.8
–10.1
21.3
–39.4
–28.0
9.4

–37.6
53.4
11.4
4.8
–115.1
7.9

–83.7
–34.9
338.3
–58.6
–340.6
12.1

–122.9
–11.2
–86.8
18.1
–50.7
7.8

–129.5
–193.4
–204.4
–1.0
257.5
11.7

–152.1
–115.0
–405.8
–48.6
385.1
32.2

–158.2
–53.0
26.5
–15.0
–129.2
12.5

–113.2
–13.0
52.2
–17.9
–147.5
13.0

–3.0
17.7
–47.6
...
25.3
1.6

–41.6
16.9
–91.0
...
22.3
10.2

–58.3
6.3
–109.9
...
41.4
3.9

–49.4
12.5
–104.3
...
34.3
8.1

–62.7
12.8
–63.8
...
–13.4
1.7

–54.6
–16.9
–21.4
...
–21.1
4.7

–39.1
–2.8
–17.1
...
–24.4
5.3

–44.2
25.0
–25.6
...
–52.2
8.5

–56.7
–7.2
–17.8
...
–31.7
0.0

–50.1
2.1
–13.4
...
–38.7
0.0

62.9
17.7
178.4
–12.6
–166.2
44.8

150.7
21.7
–106.9
20.0
–114.0
332.5

287.9
94.3
–50.7
–17.9
–17.1
279.3

295.4
–6.7
42.7
41.0
93.4
125.1

265.7
–23.4
139.7
–28.8
–97.7
275.3

371.7
18.0
121.4
–28.8
160.8
101.4

368.5
–22.4
184.6
–33.9
134.0
106.8

375.7
–106.2
334.4
–22.0
–8.2
176.7

344.4
0.3
241.7
–27.5
67.8
64.1

329.6
7.1
211.2
–30.0
93.9
48.8

605.8
–467.8
124.8
...
229.2
713.3

68.9
–328.0
–85.1
...
–40.0
521.1

136.0
–455.8
–235.1
...
–8.1
834.1

255.8
–534.4
–142.8
...
183.1
749.0

107.6
–481.6
–245.0
...
424.6
411.8

80.7
–470.1
–139.4
...
129.1
576.3

–5.4
–417.2
–118.0
...
414.8
118.4

–215.9
–323.4
125.3
...
526.9
–544.8

–30.2
–246.4
48.5
...
398.3
–225.5

–86.1
–171.6
–65.0
...
188.4
–29.8

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

251

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Middle East, North Africa,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

252

Projections
2016
2017

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

111.3
–49.4
35.8
...
140.7
–17.0

36.7
–17.2
–6.1
...
46.0
10.8

89.9
–9.4
–14.3
...
50.9
60.9

116.2
–16.1
17.9
...
81.2
31.9

51.2
–27.9
3.5
...
61.8
12.2

28.2
3.6
17.4
...
48.8
–42.0

–5.4
19.4
23.4
...
82.9
–131.3

62.3
4.7
10.9
...
86.6
–39.5

32.7
–2.6
–0.6
...
32.6
4.0

55.2
3.0
–4.9
...
43.4
14.5

467.3
–151.4
6.0
...
114.0
497.5

211.3
–114.1
–67.0
...
–67.8
463.0

141.9
–224.3
–93.3
0.2
–103.5
563.9

65.7
–277.3
–57.9
–0.3
–28.8
432.0

9.2
–221.7
–115.5
1.5
208.5
137.7

32.9
–273.0
–64.6
–2.0
–78.3
450.8

148.9
–203.6
–124.0
1.0
280.0
195.9

129.1
–128.8
82.8
–1.6
493.6
–316.6

258.7
–35.1
57.4
–0.9
401.2
–163.5

154.4
46.6
–41.9
–1.1
193.0
–41.3

–160.6
–63.3
14.4
2.5
–120.0
5.9

–51.3
–30.7
–10.1
0.9
–42.4
31.0

–89.0
–27.0
–45.4
0.0
–52.5
35.9

–107.1
–40.0
–53.2
1.6
–30.1
14.6

–65.3
–27.2
–70.2
–3.0
7.2
27.9

–62.1
–25.3
–39.9
–1.4
–14.0
18.5

–41.7
–31.1
–19.2
0.3
8.6
–0.1

–0.2
–24.2
26.1
–1.7
9.9
–10.3

–13.1
–30.0
–4.3
–0.8
8.6
13.5

–33.9
–32.0
–4.2
–2.5
–5.3
10.1

–41.5
–103.0
–6.1
...
24.9
41.5

–31.7
–72.9
–25.4
...
11.6
54.5

–123.7
–112.0
–106.9
...
4.0
90.5

–125.5
–147.5
–107.2
...
16.3
110.5

–162.9
–150.7
–95.3
...
24.2
59.6

–205.9
–145.0
–107.0
...
38.8
6.4

–219.1
–141.7
–117.7
...
–1.5
38.2

–209.9
–134.6
–60.3
...
11.6
–32.5

–115.7
–134.1
–33.8
...
54.4
–1.9

–133.7
–133.6
–46.4
...
43.3
3.3

235.0
–64.3
51.0
...
80.1
168.3

–46.9
–64.0
32.0
...
15.8
–30.7

118.4
–49.3
25.0
...
59.4
83.3

313.3
–22.9
73.3
...
124.6
138.2

291.6
–25.3
57.3
...
105.0
154.7

334.0
–8.6
72.1
...
142.1
140.1

180.5
–32.8
132.9
...
62.0
24.1

–132.8
–12.5
73.9
...
–61.4
–132.2

–137.4
–23.1
32.0
...
–74.0
–71.0

–78.8
–25.2
32.2
...
–66.3
–17.7

–5.7
–36.4
23.8
0.0
–10.5
17.3

–49.3
–29.2
–8.4
–0.2
–3.3
–7.5

–1.5
–33.9
–0.3
–0.2
33.6
–0.4

–6.8
–30.7
–15.7
–1.7
19.9
21.7

–16.1
–28.8
–24.7
–1.7
17.8
19.7

–46.4
–21.8
–17.3
–0.8
–8.3
2.5

–68.6
–27.4
–13.5
–1.5
–17.2
–8.3

–64.5
–28.0
–8.3
–0.4
–13.5
–13.6

–55.4
–21.4
–2.1
–0.3
–24.5
–6.7

–49.3
–30.4
0.4
–0.3
–19.8
1.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of U.S. dollars)

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance

Projections
2016
2017

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

444.2
–88.8
91.0
...
274.8
166.1

14.2
–60.7
9.4
...
114.2
–51.3

260.9
–31.3
20.2
...
153.4
117.1

516.6
–31.1
82.8
...
265.0
198.7

445.9
–42.8
43.7
...
222.5
221.8

389.5
3.4
72.4
...
226.7
98.1

202.4
–11.8
151.8
...
180.8
–113.3

–103.4
–12.8
82.1
...
42.2
–215.5

–109.6
–20.3
27.5
...
–20.0
–95.1

–25.6
–18.2
27.5
...
–0.3
–32.1

157.2
–377.6
33.8
...
–46.4
542.3

57.2
–264.7
–94.7
...
–154.3
572.7

–123.3
–422.3
–255.3
...
–161.2
715.9

–260.8
–503.4
–225.6
...
–81.9
550.3

–338.3
–438.7
–288.7
...
202.1
189.9

–308.7
–473.6
–211.8
...
–97.6
478.2

–207.7
–405.4
–269.9
...
234.0
231.7

–112.4
–310.6
43.1
...
484.7
–329.4

79.4
–226.1
21.0
...
418.2
–130.5

–60.5
–153.5
–92.4
...
188.7
2.3

–304.8
–279.9
33.2
...
–140.5
78.1

–198.6
–203.0
–63.6
...
–78.5
148.3

–290.5
–222.2
–216.6
...
–88.4
237.7

–381.2
–281.7
–185.1
...
–60.4
144.7

–437.4
–273.7
–216.8
...
–61.5
116.1

–401.2
–257.8
–166.6
...
–31.0
57.4

–404.1
–285.9
–203.6
...
–33.3
115.2

–284.4
–263.7
–40.5
...
20.2
–2.0

–213.0
–283.1
–44.8
...
54.4
63.4

–262.2
–303.4
–81.3
...
31.6
96.3

–18.5
–28.7
3.5
...
0.4
6.2

–17.0
–16.5
14.2
...
–0.8
–13.6

–13.6
–16.8
–10.9
...
3.0
11.3

–21.5
–15.3
1.1
...
5.7
–12.4

–41.2
–19.9
–0.5
...
–0.9
–21.6

–12.8
–6.9
8.3
...
–11.3
–2.1

–34.1
–9.0
–5.4
...
–8.0
–10.9

–20.3
–10.0
–3.3
...
–15.2
8.9

–25.9
–13.7
1.3
...
–13.3
0.5

–11.9
–16.2
–0.1
...
–10.8
15.6

–93.3

88.2

50.0

64.1

2.4

327.5

431.7

323.8

380.7

186.1

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the U.S. dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available because
of data constraints.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

253

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1998–2007 2002–09
Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
France
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

254

Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Average
2018–21

–0.7
–0.7
22.4
22.8
0.0

–0.8
–0.8
21.4
22.2
0.0

0.0
0.0
20.3
20.4
0.0

0.0
–0.1
20.8
20.8
0.1

0.1
0.0
21.2
20.8
0.0

0.5
0.5
21.4
20.7
0.0

0.5
0.5
21.9
20.9
0.0

0.6
0.6
22.1
20.9
–0.1

0.7
0.7
21.5
20.6
0.0

0.6
0.6
21.3
20.7
0.0

0.4
0.4
21.5
21.1
0.0

–4.3
–4.3
18.9
22.6
0.0

–4.7
–4.7
17.1
21.6
0.0

–3.0
–3.0
15.1
18.4
0.0

–3.0
–3.0
15.7
18.5
0.0

–2.7
–2.8
17.7
19.4
0.0

–2.2
–2.2
18.3
19.8
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
19.2
20.0
0.0

–2.6
–2.6
19.1
20.3
0.0

–2.5
–2.5
17.6
19.8
0.0

–2.7
–2.7
17.1
19.8
0.0

–2.7
–2.7
17.4
20.1
0.0

...
–0.4
23.1
22.6
...

0.1
0.0
22.8
22.4
0.1

0.5
0.4
21.5
21.0
0.1

0.6
0.4
22.4
21.5
0.1

1.4
1.3
22.3
20.1
0.1

2.4
2.2
22.4
19.6
0.2

2.7
2.5
22.8
19.8
0.2

3.0
3.2
23.6
19.8
–0.1

...
3.4
23.8
19.9
...

...
3.1
23.7
20.1
...

...
2.8
24.0
20.6
...

2.0
2.1
23.2
21.1
0.0

4.5
4.5
24.1
19.6
0.0

5.7
5.6
25.2
19.6
0.0

6.1
6.1
27.2
21.1
0.1

7.0
7.0
26.3
19.3
0.0

6.7
6.7
26.2
19.5
0.0

7.3
7.3
27.0
19.8
0.0

8.4
8.4
27.7
19.2
0.0

8.6
8.6
27.9
19.3
0.0

8.1
8.1
27.5
19.4
0.0

7.4
7.4
27.1
19.7
0.0

1.9
1.9
23.9
22.0
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.9
22.4
0.0

–0.8
–0.8
21.1
21.9
0.1

–0.9
–1.0
22.2
23.2
0.1

–1.2
–1.2
21.4
22.6
0.0

–0.8
–0.9
21.4
22.3
0.1

–1.0
–1.1
21.4
22.5
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
22.2
22.4
0.1

–0.4
–0.5
21.9
22.4
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
21.8
22.2
0.1

0.1
0.0
22.1
22.1
0.1

0.0
–0.2
20.8
21.0
0.1

–1.2
–1.3
20.0
21.3
0.1

–3.4
–3.4
17.1
20.5
0.0

–2.9
–3.0
17.5
20.5
0.1

–0.1
–0.4
17.5
17.9
0.2

1.0
0.9
17.9
17.0
0.0

2.1
1.9
18.2
16.3
0.2

2.4
2.2
19.0
16.8
0.2

2.3
2.2
18.8
16.6
0.1

2.0
1.9
18.6
16.7
0.1

1.3
1.2
18.6
17.4
0.1

–4.5
–5.3
22.5
27.8
0.8

–5.9
–6.6
22.2
28.8
0.7

–3.5
–3.9
19.6
23.5
0.5

–2.8
–3.2
18.7
21.9
0.4

0.3
–0.2
20.0
20.2
0.5

2.2
1.5
20.7
19.1
0.7

1.4
1.0
20.8
19.8
0.4

1.9
1.4
22.0
20.7
0.6

2.5
1.9
22.9
21.0
0.6

2.3
1.7
22.9
21.2
0.6

2.3
1.8
23.3
21.5
0.6

3.1
3.3
26.8
23.6
–0.2

3.4
3.5
25.8
22.3
–0.1

3.9
4.0
23.8
19.8
–0.1

2.2
2.2
22.4
20.2
0.0

1.0
1.0
21.9
20.9
0.0

0.8
0.9
22.2
21.2
–0.2

0.8
0.8
22.6
21.8
0.0

3.2
3.3
25.3
22.0
–0.1

3.7
3.7
25.3
21.5
–0.1

3.3
3.3
25.0
21.6
–0.1

3.2
3.3
25.1
21.8
–0.1

–1.8
–1.8
16.4
18.2
0.0

–2.2
–2.2
15.2
17.4
0.0

–2.7
–2.7
13.2
16.0
0.0

–1.8
–1.8
14.1
15.8
0.0

–3.7
–3.7
12.4
16.0
0.0

–4.4
–4.4
12.0
16.4
0.0

–4.7
–4.7
12.7
17.3
0.0

–5.4
–5.4
11.9
17.2
–0.1

–6.0
–5.9
11.4
17.3
0.0

–4.3
–4.3
12.6
16.9
0.0

–3.8
–3.8
13.5
17.3
0.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1998–2007 2002–09
Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Regional Groups
Commonwealth of Independent States2
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Average
2018–21

1.2
1.2
22.7
21.4
0.0

0.8
0.8
23.1
22.3
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
19.9
23.5
0.0

–2.5
–2.8
21.4
24.2
0.3

–3.6
–3.6
21.3
24.9
0.0

–3.2
–3.2
21.5
24.6
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
22.0
24.3
0.0

–3.2
–3.2
20.4
23.6
0.0

–3.7
–3.7
19.4
23.1
0.0

–3.1
–3.1
19.8
22.9
0.0

–2.7
–2.7
20.4
23.1
0.0

3.8
3.9
29.7
25.7
–0.1

4.0
4.1
29.9
25.6
–0.1

5.0
5.0
31.0
25.6
0.0

4.2
4.1
30.7
26.3
0.1

4.2
4.2
30.4
26.1
0.0

5.2
5.2
30.5
25.2
0.1

5.2
5.3
30.7
25.3
–0.1

5.8
5.9
30.9
24.6
–0.1

5.4
5.6
30.4
24.6
–0.2

4.9
5.1
30.1
24.9
–0.2

4.4
4.5
29.7
25.0
–0.1

2.0
1.9
27.4
25.6
0.2

2.9
2.9
30.3
27.6
0.1

1.5
1.2
32.4
31.2
0.3

1.5
1.4
33.2
31.8
0.1

1.3
1.3
33.1
31.9
0.1

0.7
0.6
32.4
31.9
0.1

0.7
0.6
32.7
32.2
0.0

0.1
–0.1
32.5
32.5
0.1

–0.1
–0.3
31.7
31.8
0.1

–0.2
–0.4
31.5
31.9
0.1

–0.4
–0.6
31.6
32.1
0.1

6.2
6.5
26.5
20.3
–0.4

5.1
5.7
27.1
21.4
–0.7

3.7
3.3
24.9
21.5
0.4

4.1
4.1
27.6
23.5
0.0

2.2
2.4
25.8
23.4
–0.2

0.6
0.6
22.4
21.7
0.0

0.5
2.1
23.9
21.7
–1.5

3.0
3.0
24.1
20.8
0.0

1.3
1.3
24.4
22.6
0.0

1.9
1.9
25.0
22.7
0.0

3.1
3.1
26.4
23.4
0.0

3.2
3.1
35.8
33.1
0.1

4.1
4.0
40.1
36.4
0.1

2.5
2.4
44.4
42.0
0.1

0.9
0.8
43.8
42.9
0.1

1.0
1.0
43.6
42.6
0.1

0.8
0.7
43.1
42.3
0.1

1.8
1.8
43.7
41.9
0.0

2.1
2.1
42.8
40.7
0.0

1.6
1.6
41.3
39.7
0.1

0.9
0.8
40.3
39.4
0.0

0.4
0.3
39.0
38.6
0.0

–4.1
–4.4
18.0
21.8
0.2

–5.0
–5.3
17.1
22.0
0.4

–4.4
–5.1
16.0
21.0
0.7

–5.6
–6.5
17.0
23.2
0.8

–3.6
–4.6
16.8
21.1
1.0

–2.7
–3.8
17.0
20.6
1.2

–1.8
–3.1
18.0
20.8
1.3

–0.5
–1.9
18.6
20.2
1.4

–0.8
–2.0
17.7
19.6
1.2

–1.8
–3.0
17.4
20.3
1.2

–2.5
–3.5
17.1
20.5
1.0

–0.7
–0.8
19.2
20.1
0.1

0.3
0.2
20.8
20.7
0.1

–1.7
–1.9
20.3
21.7
0.2

–1.9
–2.0
20.4
22.2
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
19.9
22.3
0.0

–2.7
–2.8
19.2
22.3
0.0

–3.1
–3.2
18.1
21.9
0.0

–3.5
–3.6
18.9
22.2
0.0

–2.2
–2.3
18.6
20.7
0.0

–2.3
–2.3
18.6
21.0
0.0

–2.4
–2.4
19.3
21.7
0.0

7.1
7.4
32.1
24.9
0.2

9.1
9.4
35.2
26.4
0.2

6.0
6.1
33.8
29.0
0.3

12.8
12.7
38.4
25.6
0.0

12.0
12.5
37.6
25.4
0.0

10.0
10.1
35.4
24.8
0.0

5.6
5.1
32.1
25.5
0.1

–3.4
–4.0
23.7
26.5
0.1

–3.9
–4.6
21.8
25.1
0.1

–2.0
–2.6
24.0
25.4
0.1

–1.1
–1.6
25.6
25.8
0.1

1.4
0.2
18.9
18.5
1.2

2.2
0.8
20.3
19.4
1.4

1.0
–0.7
20.0
20.4
1.7

0.0
–0.5
19.7
20.1
0.5

–1.0
–1.5
19.2
20.6
0.6

–1.7
–2.1
18.7
20.9
0.4

–3.3
–3.7
17.8
21.5
0.3

–5.5
–5.9
14.9
20.6
0.4

–4.1
–4.5
15.4
19.9
0.4

–3.5
–3.9
16.1
20.0
0.4

–4.0
–4.4
16.9
21.3
0.4

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

255

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)
Averages
1998–2007 2002–09
Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2011–15
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Projections
2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Average
2018–21

7.9
8.2
30.9
23.1
0.0

9.1
9.6
32.7
23.6
–0.1

6.1
6.0
30.6
24.7
0.3

9.9
9.9
34.2
24.1
0.0

8.7
9.0
32.9
24.1
–0.1

6.8
6.9
30.0
23.2
0.0

3.8
4.2
28.4
24.0
–0.7

–1.6
–1.9
24.8
25.5
–0.1

–1.8
–2.2
23.4
24.4
0.0

–0.2
–0.6
24.8
24.4
0.0

1.0
0.6
26.4
24.8
0.0

0.4
0.2
26.4
26.4
0.2

1.1
0.9
29.6
28.8
0.2

0.1
–0.1
32.9
33.0
0.3

–1.0
–1.2
32.9
34.0
0.2

–0.9
–1.1
33.1
34.1
0.2

–1.0
–1.2
33.1
34.2
0.2

–0.2
–0.3
33.9
34.2
0.2

0.4
0.2
34.2
33.9
0.2

0.3
0.1
33.4
33.3
0.2

–0.3
–0.4
32.9
33.3
0.1

–0.7
–0.8
32.6
33.4
0.1

–1.0
–1.3
20.8
22.3
0.3

–1.0
–1.3
22.2
23.7
0.3

–1.9
–2.4
22.8
25.1
0.5

–2.7
–2.9
23.0
25.7
0.2

–2.9
–3.2
22.4
25.4
0.3

–2.6
–2.9
21.9
24.7
0.3

–2.4
–2.7
21.8
24.4
0.3

–2.2
–2.5
21.7
24.2
0.3

–1.8
–2.0
21.9
23.9
0.3

–2.1
–2.3
22.2
24.4
0.3

–2.2
–2.4
23.1
25.5
0.2

–0.1
–0.3
20.8
21.2
0.2

–0.6
–0.9
21.7
22.6
0.3

–2.3
–2.7
18.9
21.6
0.3

–3.6
–3.9
16.6
20.4
0.3

–5.2
–5.6
14.6
20.1
0.4

–5.2
–5.3
13.4
18.6
0.1

–3.0
–3.2
13.9
17.1
0.2

–4.2
–4.4
12.7
17.1
0.2

–5.0
–5.1
11.9
16.9
0.2

–4.3
–4.5
13.0
17.4
0.2

–3.3
–3.4
14.5
17.9
0.2

0.0
–0.1
23.5
23.5
0.0

0.2
0.1
23.8
23.6
0.1

0.5
0.4
24.4
24.1
0.1

0.5
0.4
25.3
24.8
0.1

0.5
0.5
25.7
25.0
0.1

0.6
0.5
25.7
25.0
0.1

0.6
0.5
26.2
25.3
0.0

0.4
0.3
26.2
25.4
0.0

0.4
0.3
25.4
25.0
0.1

0.3
0.2
25.4
25.1
0.1

0.1
0.0
25.8
25.7
0.0

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the U.S.
dollar values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were
weighted by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual
countries’ national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are
from the balance of payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S ) minus
investment (I ) is equal to the current account balance (CAB ) (S − I = CAB ). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB ) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account
balance (KAB ) (NLB = CAB + KAB ). In practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in
group composition due to data availability.
1Excludes the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2Georgia, Turkmenistan, and Ukraine, which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States, are included in this group for reasons of geography and similarity in economic
structure.

256

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
1998–2007
2008–17
World Real GDP
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies
World Trade, Volume1
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
World Prices in U.S. Dollars
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Interest Rates
Real Six-Month LIBOR2
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate3
Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2014

2015

2016

2017

Averages
2014–17 2018–21

4.2
2.8
5.8

3.2
1.1
5.0

Annual Percent Change
3.4
3.2
3.1
1.9
2.1
1.6
4.6
4.0
4.2

3.4
1.8
4.6

3.3
1.8
4.3

3.7
1.7
5.0

2.2
6.8

1.2
2.9

1.4
3.9

1.4
2.6

1.3
2.3

1.3
3.8

1.3
3.1

1.5
4.2

6.2
8.9

2.1
4.5

3.8
4.5

4.2
–0.6

2.4
2.3

3.9
4.1

3.6
2.5

4.1
4.7

5.8
8.8

2.5
3.7

3.8
3.5

3.6
1.3

1.8
2.9

3.5
3.6

3.2
2.8

3.8
4.5

–0.2
1.7

0.1
–0.1

0.3
–0.5

1.8
–4.1

0.9
–1.0

0.1
–0.1

0.8
–1.4

0.1
–0.2

1.5
14.0
3.9

0.4
–3.3
–0.7

–1.0
–7.5
–4.0

–2.9
–47.2
–17.5

–2.1
–15.4
–2.7

1.4
17.9
0.9

–1.2
–16.5
–6.1

1.0
3.3
–0.1

2.0
7.9

1.5
5.6

1.4
4.7

0.8
4.5

1.7
4.4

1.0
4.6

2.0
4.1

1.8
2.4

–0.6
0.8

–1.5
0.5

–0.4
0.3

–0.8
–0.5

–0.8
0.4

0.8
0.2

–0.7
1.9

0.1
0.9

0.5
0.6

Percent of GDP
0.6
0.7
–0.1
–0.3

0.6
–0.4

0.6
–0.1

0.4
–0.6

33.4

27.1

28.4

28.4

28.4

27.6

28.2

26.2

9.3

9.6

11.2

12.1

10.5

9.4

10.8

8.9

0.3
4.7
Percent
–0.6
1.3

1Data

refer to trade in goods and services.
interbank offered rate on U.S. dollar deposits minus percent change in U.S. GDP deflator.
3GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.
2London

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

257

CHAPTER

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS

World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Financial Systems and Economic Cycles

September 2006

World Economic Outlook: Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007

World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality

October 2007

World Economic Outlook: Housing and the Business Cycle

April 2008

World Economic Outlook: Financial Stress, Downturns, and Recoveries

October 2008

World Economic Outlook: Crisis and Recovery

April 2009

World Economic Outlook: Sustaining the Recovery

October 2009

World Economic Outlook: Rebalancing Growth

April 2010

World Economic Outlook: Recovery, Risk, and Rebalancing

October 2010

World Economic Outlook: Tensions from the Two-Speed Recovery—Unemployment, Commodities,
and Capital Flows

April 2011

World Economic Outlook: Slowing Growth, Rising Risks

September 2011

World Economic Outlook: Growth Resuming, Dangers Remain

April 2012

World Economic Outlook: Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth

October 2012

World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks

April 2013

World Economic Outlook: Transitions and Tensions

October 2013

World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven

April 2014

World Economic Outlook: Legacies, Clouds, Uncertainties

October 2014

World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors

April 2015

World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices

October 2015

World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long

April 2016

I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Measuring Inequality: Conceptual, Methodological, and Measurement Issues

October 2007, Box 4.1

New Business Cycle Indices for Latin America: A Historical Reconstruction

October 2007, Box 5.3

Implications of New PPP Estimates for Measuring Global Growth

April 2008, Appendix 1.1

Measuring Output Gaps

October 2008, Box 1.3

Assessing and Communicating Risks to the Global Outlook

October 2008, Appendix 1.1

Fan Chart for Global Growth

April 2009, Appendix 1.2

Indicators for Tracking Growth

October 2010, Appendix 1.2

Inferring Potential Output from Noisy Data: The Global Projection Model View

October 2010, Box 1.3

Uncoordinated Rebalancing

October 2010, Box 1.4

World Economic Outlook Downside Scenarios

April 2011, Box 1.2

Fiscal Balance Sheets: The Significance of Nonfinancial Assets and Their Measurement

October 2014, Box 3.3

Tariff Scenarios

October 2016, Scenario box

World Growth Projections over the Medium Term

October 2016, Box 1.1

II. Historical Surveys
Historical Perspective on Growth and the Current Account

October 2008, Box 6.3

A Historical Perspective on International Financial Crises

October 2009, Box 4.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

259

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

What Is the Effect of Recessions?

October 2015, Box 1.1

III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
Asia Rising: Patterns of Economic Development and Growth	September 2006, Chapter 3
Japan’s Potential Output and Productivity Growth

September 2006, Box 3.1

The Evolution and Impact of Corporate Governance Quality in Asia

September 2006, Box 3.2

Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy

April 2007, Chapter 4

Spillovers and International Business Cycle Synchronization: A Broader Perspective

April 2007, Box 4.3

The Discounting Debate

October 2007, Box 1.7

Taxes versus Quantities under Uncertainty (Weitzman, 1974)

October 2007, Box 1.8

Experience with Emissions Trading in the European Union

October 2007, Box 1.9

Climate Change: Economic Impact and Policy Responses

October 2007, Appendix 1.2

What Risks Do Housing Markets Pose for Global Growth?

October 2007, Box 2.1

The Changing Dynamics of the Global Business Cycle

October 2007, Chapter 5

Major Economies and Fluctuations in Global Growth

October 2007, Box 5.1

Improved Macroeconomic Performance—Good Luck or Good Policies?

October 2007, Box 5.2

House Prices: Corrections and Consequences

October 2008, Box 1.2

Global Business Cycles

April 2009, Box 1.1

How Similar Is the Current Crisis to the Great Depression?

April 2009, Box 3.1

Is Credit a Vital Ingredient for Recovery? Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2009, Box 3.2

From Recession to Recovery: How Soon and How Strong?

April 2009, Chapter 3

What’s the Damage? Medium-Term Output Dynamics after Financial Crises

October 2009, Chapter 4

Will the Recovery Be Jobless?

October 2009, Box 1.3

Unemployment Dynamics during Recessions and Recoveries: Okun’s Law and Beyond

April 2010, Chapter 3

Does Slow Growth in Advanced Economies Necessarily Imply Slow Growth in Emerging Economies?

October 2010, Box 1.1

The Global Recovery: Where Do We Stand?

April 2012, Box 1.2

How Does Uncertainty Affect Economic Performance?

October 2012, Box 1.3

Resilience in Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Will It Last?

October 2012, Chapter 4

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Spillovers from Policy Uncertainty in the United States and Europe

April 2013, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

Breaking through the Frontier: Can Today’s Dynamic Low-Income Countries Make It?

April 2013, Chapter 4

What Explains the Slowdown in the BRICS?

October 2013, Box 1.2

Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and Trade Linkages

October 2013, Chapter 3

Output Synchronicity in the Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan and in the
Caucasus and Central Asia

October 2013, Box 3.1

Spillovers from Changes in U.S. Monetary Policy

October 2013, Box 3.2

Saving and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 3.1

On the Receiving End? External Conditions and Emerging Market Growth before, during,
and after the Global Financial Crisis

April 2014, Chapter 4

The Impact of External Conditions on Medium-Term Growth in Emerging Market Economies

April 2014, Box 4.1

The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011

October 2014, Box 1.2

Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers	October 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output

April 2015, Chapter 3

Steady As She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output

April 2015, Box 3.1

260

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

SELECTED TOPICS

Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—
The Role of External Factors

April 2016, Box 1.2

Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market
Reforms in Advanced Economies

April 2016, Chapter 3

IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
The Boom in Nonfuel Commodity Prices: Can It Last?

September 2006, Chapter 5

International Oil Companies and National Oil Companies in a Changing Oil Sector Environment

September 2006, Box 1.4

Commodity Price Shocks, Growth, and Financing in Sub-Saharan Africa

September 2006, Box 2.2

Has Speculation Contributed to Higher Commodity Prices?

September 2006, Box 5.1

Agricultural Trade Liberalization and Commodity Prices

September 2006, Box 5.2

Recent Developments in Commodity Markets	September 2006,
Appendix 2.1
Who Is Harmed by the Surge in Food Prices?

October 2007, Box 1.1

Refinery Bottlenecks

October 2007, Box 1.5

Making the Most of Biofuels

October 2007, Box 1.6

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2008, Appendix 1.2

Dollar Depreciation and Commodity Prices

April 2008, Box 1.4

Why Hasn’t Oil Supply Responded to Higher Prices?

April 2008, Box 1.5

Oil Price Benchmarks

April 2008, Box 1.6

Globalization, Commodity Prices, and Developing Countries

April 2008, Chapter 5

The Current Commodity Price Boom in Perspective

April 2008, Box 5.2

Is Inflation Back? Commodity Prices and Inflation

October 2008, Chapter 3

Does Financial Investment Affect Commodity Price Behavior?

October 2008, Box 3.1

Fiscal Responses to Recent Commodity Price Increases: An Assessment

October 2008, Box 3.2

Monetary Policy Regimes and Commodity Prices

October 2008, Box 3.3

Assessing Deflation Risks in the G3 Economies

April 2009, Box 1.3

Will Commodity Prices Rise Again When the Global Economy Recovers?

April 2009, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2009, Appendix 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2009, Appendix 1.1

What Do Options Markets Tell Us about Commodity Price Prospects?

October 2009, Box 1.6

What Explains the Rise in Food Price Volatility?

October 2009, Box 1.7

How Unusual Is the Current Commodity Price Recovery?

April 2010, Box 1.2

Commodity Futures Price Curves and Cyclical Market Adjustment

April 2010, Box 1.3

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

October 2010, Appendix 1.1

Dismal Prospects for the Real Estate Sector

October 2010, Box 1.2

Have Metals Become More Scarce and What Does Scarcity Mean for Prices?

October 2010, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

April 2011, Appendix 1.2

Oil Scarcity, Growth, and Global Imbalances

April 2011, Chapter 3

Life Cycle Constraints on Global Oil Production

April 2011, Box 3.1

Unconventional Natural Gas: A Game Changer?

April 2011, Box 3.2

Short-Term Effects of Oil Shocks on Economic Activity

April 2011, Box 3.3

Low-Frequency Filtering for Extracting Business Cycle Trends

April 2011, Appendix 3.1

The Energy and Oil Empirical Models

April 2011, Appendix 3.2

Commodity Market Developments and Prospects

September 2011, Appendix 1.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

261

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

Financial Investment, Speculation, and Commodity Prices

September 2011, Box 1.4

Target What You Can Hit: Commodity Price Swings and Monetary Policy

September 2011, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Review	April 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Price Swings and Commodity Exporters

April 2012, Chapter 4

Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Price Shocks on Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.1

Volatile Commodity Prices and the Development Challenge in Low-Income Countries

April 2012, Box 4.2

Commodity Market Review

October 2012, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Unconventional Energy in the United States

October 2012, Box 1.4

Food Supply Crunch: Who Is Most Vulnerable?

October 2012, Box 1.5

Commodity Market Review

April 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Dog That Didn’t Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping?

April 2013, Chapter 3

Does Inflation Targeting Still Make Sense with a Flatter Phillips Curve?

April 2013, Box 3.1

Commodity Market Review

October 2013, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Energy Booms and the Current Account: Cross-Country Experience

October 2013, Box 1.SF.1

Oil Price Drivers and the Narrowing WTI-Brent Spread

October 2013, Box 1.SF.2

Anchoring Inflation Expectations When Inflation Is Undershooting

April 2014, Box 1.3

Commodity Prices and Forecasts	April 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Natural Gas
in the World Economy

October 2014, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment
in an Era of Low Oil Prices

April 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?

April 2015, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the World Economy

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature

The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift

October 2015, Chapter 1,
Special Feature Box 1.SF.1

Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath
of the Commodity Boom

October 2015, Chapter 2

The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon

October 2015, Box 2.1

Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?

October 2015, Box 2.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the
April 2016, Chapter 1,
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices	Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and
Markets in the World Economy
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

October 2016, Chapter 3
October 2016, Chapter 1,
Special Feature
October 2016, Box 3.3

V. Fiscal Policy
Improved Emerging Market Fiscal Performance: Cyclical or Structural?

September 2006, Box 2.1

When Does Fiscal Stimulus Work?

April 2008, Box 2.1

Fiscal Policy as a Countercyclical Tool

October 2008, Chapter 5

Differences in the Extent of Automatic Stabilizers and Their Relationship with Discretionary Fiscal Policy

October 2008, Box 5.1

262

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

SELECTED TOPICS

Why Is It So Hard to Determine the Effects of Fiscal Stimulus?

October 2008, Box 5.2

Have the U.S. Tax Cuts Been “TTT” [Timely, Temporary, and Targeted]?

October 2008, Box 5.3

Will It Hurt? Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal Consolidation

October 2010, Chapter 3

Separated at Birth? The Twin Budget and Trade Balances

September 2011, Chapter 4

Are We Underestimating Short-Term Fiscal Multipliers?

October 2012, Box 1.1

The Implications of High Public Debt in Advanced Economies

October 2012, Box 1.2

The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: 100 Years of Dealing with Public Debt Overhangs

October 2012, Chapter 3

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Public Debt Overhang and Private Sector Performance

April 2013, Box 1.2

Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

Improving the Efficiency of Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Fiscal Institutions, Rules, and Public Investment

October 2014, Box 3.5

Commodity Booms and Public Investment

October 2015, Box 2.2

VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
How Do Financial Systems Affect Economic Cycles?

September 2006, Chapter 4

Financial Leverage and Debt Deflation

September 2006, Box 4.1

Financial Linkages and Spillovers

April 2007, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Conditions in Industrial Countries and Financial Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2007, Box 4.2

Macroeconomic Implications of Recent Market Turmoil: Patterns from Previous Episodes

October 2007, Box 1.2

What Is Global Liquidity?

October 2007, Box 1.4

The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for Monetary Policy

April 2008, Chapter 3

Is There a Credit Crunch?

April 2008, Box 1.1

Assessing Vulnerabilities to Housing Market Corrections

April 2008, Box 3.1

Financial Stress and Economic Downturns

October 2008, Chapter 4

The Latest Bout of Financial Distress: How Does It Change the Global Outlook?

October 2008, Box 1.1

Policies to Resolve Financial System Stress and Restore Sound Financial Intermediation

October 2008, Box 4.1

How Vulnerable Are Nonfinancial Firms?

April 2009, Box 1.2

The Case of Vanishing Household Wealth

April 2009, Box 2.1

Impact of Foreign Bank Ownership during Home-Grown Crises

April 2009, Box 4.1

A Financial Stress Index for Emerging Economies

April 2009, Appendix 4.1

Financial Stress in Emerging Economies: Econometric Analysis

April 2009, Appendix 4.2

How Linkages Fuel the Fire

April 2009, Chapter 4

Lessons for Monetary Policy from Asset Price Fluctuations

October 2009, Chapter 3

Were Financial Markets in Emerging Economies More Resilient than in Past Crises?

October 2009, Box 1.2

Risks from Real Estate Markets

October 2009, Box 1.4

Financial Conditions Indices

April 2011, Appendix 1.1

House Price Busts in Advanced Economies: Repercussions for Global Financial Markets

April 2011, Box 1.1

International Spillovers and Macroeconomic Policymaking

April 2011, Box 1.3

Credit Boom-Bust Cycles: Their Triggers and Policy Implications

September 2011, Box 1.2

Are Equity Price Drops Harbingers of Recession?

September 2011, Box 1.3

Cross-Border Spillovers from Euro Area Bank Deleveraging

April 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

263

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

The Financial Transmission of Stress in the Global Economy

October 2012, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature

The Great Divergence of Policies

April 2013, Box 1.1

Taper Talks: What to Expect When the United States Is Tightening

October 2013, Box 1.1

Credit Supply and Economic Growth

April 2014, Box 1.1

Should Advanced Economies Worry about Growth Shocks in Emerging Market Economies?	April 2014, Chapter 2,
Spillover Feature
Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates

April 2014, Chapter 3

Housing Markets across the Globe: An Update

October 2014, Box 1.1

U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Box 2.2

A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy

October 2016, Box 3.5

VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
The Globalization of Labor

April 2007, Chapter 5

Emigration and Trade: How Do They Affect Developing Countries?

April 2007, Box 5.1

Labor Market Reforms in the Euro Area and the Wage-Unemployment Trade-Off

October 2007, Box 2.2

Globalization and Inequality

October 2007, Chapter 4

The Dualism between Temporary and Permanent Contracts: Measures, Effects, and Policy Issues

April 2010, Box 3.1

Short-Time Work Programs

April 2010, Box 3.2

Slow Recovery to Nowhere? A Sectoral View of Labor Markets in Advanced Economies

September 2011, Box 1.1

The Labor Share in Europe and the United States during and after the Great Recession

April 2012, Box 1.1

Jobs and Growth: Can’t Have One without the Other?

October 2012, Box 4.1

Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment

April 2016, Box 3.2

VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
How Emerging Market Countries May Be Affected by External Shocks

September 2006, Box 1.3

Exchange Rates and the Adjustment of External Imbalances

April 2007, Chapter 3

Exchange Rate Pass-Through to Trade Prices and External Adjustment

April 2007, Box 3.3

Depreciation of the U.S. Dollar: Causes and Consequences

April 2008, Box 1.2

Lessons from the Crisis: On the Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

April 2010, Box 1.1

Exchange Rate Regimes and Crisis Susceptibility in Emerging Markets

April 2014, Box 1.4

Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?

October 2015, Chapter 3

The Relationship between Exchange Rates and
Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade

October 2015, Box 3.1

Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness:
The Role of Global Value Chains

October 2015, Box 3.2

IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Capital Flows to Emerging Market Countries: A Long-Term Perspective

September 2006, Box 1.1

How Will Global Imbalances Adjust?

September 2006, Box 2.1

External Sustainability and Financial Integration

April 2007, Box 3.1

Large and Persistent Current Account Imbalances

April 2007, Box 3.2

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances

October 2007, Box 1.3

264

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

SELECTED TOPICS

Managing the Macroeconomic Consequences of Large and Volatile Aid Flows

October 2007, Box 2.3

Managing Large Capital Inflows

October 2007, Chapter 3

Can Capital Controls Work?

October 2007, Box 3.1

Multilateral Consultation on Global Imbalances: Progress Report

April 2008, Box 1.3

How Does the Globalization of Trade and Finance Affect Growth? Theory and Evidence

April 2008, Box 5.1

Divergence of Current Account Balances across Emerging Economies

October 2008, Chapter 6

Current Account Determinants for Oil-Exporting Countries

October 2008, Box 6.1

Sovereign Wealth Funds: Implications for Global Financial Markets

October 2008, Box 6.2

Global Imbalances and the Financial Crisis

April 2009, Box 1.4

Trade Finance and Global Trade: New Evidence from Bank Surveys

October 2009, Box 1.1

From Deficit to Surplus: Recent Shifts in Global Current Accounts

October 2009, Box 1.5

Getting the Balance Right: Transitioning out of Sustained Current Account Surpluses

April 2010, Chapter 4

Emerging Asia: Responding to Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.1

Latin America-5: Riding Another Wave of Capital Inflows

October 2010, Box 2.2

Do Financial Crises Have Lasting Effects on Trade?

October 2010, Chapter 4

Unwinding External Imbalances in the European Union Periphery

April 2011, Box 2.1

International Capital Flows: Reliable or Fickle?

April 2011, Chapter 4

External Liabilities and Crisis Tipping Points

September 2011, Box 1.5

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

External Rebalancing in the Euro Area

October 2013, Box 1.3

The Yin and Yang of Capital Flow Management: Balancing Capital Inflows with Capital Outflows

October 2013, Chapter 4

Simulating Vulnerability to International Capital Market Conditions

October 2013, Box 4.1

The Trade Implications of the U.S. Shale Gas Boom

October 2014, Box 1.SF.1

Are Global Imbalances at a Turning Point?

October 2014, Chapter 4

Switching Gears: The 1986 External Adjustment

October 2014, Box 4.1

A Tale of Two Adjustments: East Asia and the Euro Area

October 2014, Box 4.2

Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2015, Box 1.2

Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits

October 2015, Box 1.2

Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies

October 2015, Box 1.3

Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2016, Box 1.1

Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Chapter 2

Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2016, Box 2.1

The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization

April 2016, Box 3.3

Global Trade: What’s Behind the Slowdown

October 2016, Chapter 2

X. Regional Issues
EMU: 10 Years On

October 2008, Box 2.1

Vulnerabilities in Emerging Economies

April 2009, Box 2.2

East-West Linkages and Spillovers in Europe

April 2012, Box 2.1

The Evolution of Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area

April 2013, Box 1.3

XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Why Is the U.S. International Income Account Still in the Black, and Will This Last?

September 2005, Box 1.2

Is India Becoming an Engine for Global Growth?

September 2005, Box 1.4

Saving and Investment in China

September 2005, Box 2.1

China’s GDP Revision: What Does It Mean for China and the Global Economy?

April 2006, Box 1.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

265

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

What Do Country Studies of the Impact of Globalization on Inequality Tell Us?
Examples from Mexico, China, and India

October 2007, Box 4.2

Japan after the Plaza Accord

April 2010, Box 4.1

Taiwan Province of China in the Late 1980s

April 2010, Box 4.2

Did the Plaza Accord Cause Japan’s Lost Decades?

April 2011, Box 1.4

Where Is China’s External Surplus Headed?

April 2012, Box 1.3

The U.S. Home Owners’ Loan Corporation

April 2012, Box 3.1

Household Debt Restructuring in Iceland

April 2012, Box 3.2

Abenomics: Risks after Early Success?

October 2013, Box 1.4

Is China’s Spending Pattern Shifting (away from Commodities)?

April 2014, Box 1.2

Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade

October 2014, Box 3.1

Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?

October 2015, Box 3.3

The Japanese Experience with Deflation

October 2016, Box 3.2

XII. Special Topics
Climate Change and the Global Economy

April 2008, Chapter 4

Rising Car Ownership in Emerging Economies: Implications for Climate Change

April 2008, Box 4.1

South Asia: Illustrative Impact of an Abrupt Climate Shock

April 2008, Box 4.2

Macroeconomic Policies for Smoother Adjustment to Abrupt Climate Shocks

April 2008, Box 4.3

Catastrophe Insurance and Bonds: New Instruments to Hedge Extreme Weather Risks

April 2008, Box 4.4

Recent Emission-Reduction Policy Initiatives

April 2008, Box 4.5

Complexities in Designing Domestic Mitigation Policies

April 2008, Box 4.6

Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity
Windfalls Speed Up Human Development?

October 2015, Box 2.3

Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms

April 2016, Box 3.1

Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method

April 2016, Box 3.4

A Global Rush for Land

October 2016, Box 1.SF.1

266

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,
OCTOBER 2016

The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the Fiscal
Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 23, 2016.

E

xecutive Directors broadly shared the assessment of global economic prospects and risks.
They observed that global growth is likely to
remain modest this year, world trade growth is
declining, and low inflation persists in many advanced
economies. On the upside, commodity prices have
firmed up, and financial market volatility following the U.K. vote to leave the European Union has
generally been contained. Directors noted that, while
global growth is expected to pick up somewhat next
year, downside risks and uncertainty are elevated. The
potential for another setback cannot be ruled out.
Directors urged policymakers to employ all policy
levers—individually and collectively—and enhance
global cooperation, to avoid further growth disappointments, strengthen the foundations of the recovery,
revive global trade, and ensure that the benefits of
globalization are shared more broadly.
Directors noted that growth in advanced economies
is projected to weaken this year and edge up slightly
next year. Nevertheless, the overall outlook continues
to be weighed down by remaining crisis legacy issues,
persistently low inflation, weak demand, continued
large external imbalances in some countries, low labor
productivity growth, and population aging. At the
same time, the full macroeconomic implications of
the U.K. vote have yet to unfold. In emerging market
and developing countries, growth is expected to
strengthen gradually, on the back of improved external
financing conditions, rising commodity prices, and
a gradual stabilization in key economies currently in
recession. Many countries have made steady progress
in strengthening policy frameworks and resilience to
shocks, and market sentiment has recently improved.
Notwithstanding these positive developments, emerging market and developing economies remain exposed
to spillovers from subdued growth in advanced economies, developments in China during its transition
toward more sustainable growth, and volatility in capi-

tal flows and exchange rates, while domestic challenges
remain to be addressed. Globally, concerns are growing about political discontent, income inequality, and
populist policies, threatening to derail globalization.
Directors observed that, while financial markets have
shown resilience to a number of shocks in the past six
months, medium-term risks are rising. In advanced
economies where weak growth calls for continued
accommodative monetary policy, a prolonged period of
low growth and low interest rates could add to banks’
structural profitability challenges and put at risk the
solvency of many life insurance companies and pension funds. These risks and challenges could, in turn,
further weaken economic activity and financial stability
more broadly. In many emerging market economies,
high corporate leverage and the growing complexity of
financial products continue to pose challenges.
Against this backdrop, Directors emphasized the
urgent need for comprehensive, clearly articulated
strategies—combining structural, macroeconomic,
and financial policies—to lift actual and potential
output, manage vulnerabilities, and enhance resilience.
They recognized that the optimal policy mix will
vary according to country contexts and the particular priorities. Directors also stressed that intensified
multilateral cooperation is crucial to sustain global
growth and improvements in living standards. Specifically, concerted efforts are needed to promote strong,
sustainable, balanced, and inclusive growth; facilitate
cross-border trade and investment flows; implement
effective banking resolution frameworks; reduce policy
uncertainty, including through clear communication;
and sustain progress on global rebalancing. Strong
global safety nets are also vital to deal with shocks,
including those stemming from refugee flows, climate
events, and domestic strife.
Directors broadly concurred that, in most advanced
economies, policy action will need to continue to support demand in the short term and boost productivity
International Monetary Fund | October 2016

267

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: SUBDUED DEMAND—SYMPTOMS AND REMEDIES

and potential output in the medium term. Continued
monetary accommodation remains appropriate to lift
inflation expectations, while being mindful of negative
side effects, but monetary policy alone would not be
sufficient for closing output gaps and achieving balanced and sustainable growth. Growth-friendly fiscal
policy is therefore essential, calibrated to the amount
of space available in each country while ensuring
long-term debt sustainability, anchored in a credible
medium-term framework. Sustained efforts to repair
bank and corporate balance sheets would help improve
the transmission of monetary policy to real activity,
and proactive use of macroprudential policies would
safeguard financial stability. Structural reforms need
to be prioritized depending on country circumstances,
with a focus on raising labor force participation rates,
enhancing the efficiency of the labor market, reducing
barriers to entry, and encouraging research and development. In the corporate sector, reforms should focus
on eliminating debt overhangs, facilitating restructuring, and further improving governance.
Directors acknowledged that circumstances and
challenges in emerging market and developing countries vary depending on their level of development and
cyclical position. To achieve the common objective
of converging to higher levels of income, structural
reforms should focus on facilitating technology diffusion and job creation, and enhancing human capital.
Directors encouraged taking advantage of the current
relatively benign external financial conditions to press
ahead with needed corporate deleveraging, through a
comprehensive approach, where warranted. This should
be complemented by continued efforts to strengthen
financial sector oversight, upgrade regulatory and supervisory frameworks, and improve corporate governance
practices. Directors stressed that a smooth adjustment
in China’s corporate and financial sectors is crucial for
sustaining growth and stability in China and elsewhere.

268

International Monetary Fund | October 2016

Directors stressed the need for financial institutions, particularly in advanced economies, to adapt
their business models to new realities and evolving
regulatory standards. Greater vigilance by regulators
and improved data collection on nonbank financial
institutions are essential to preserve their financial
health and monitor their role in monetary policy
transmission. Policymakers can help reduce uncertainty by completing the regulatory reform agenda,
without significantly increasing overall capital requirements, while preserving the integrity of a robust
capital framework. Directors broadly agreed that,
in countries facing a private sector debt overhang
or where the financial system is seriously impaired
but fiscal space is available, well-targeted fiscal
measures—​with the support of strong insolvency and
bankruptcy procedures and safeguards to limit moral
hazard—could help facilitate private debt restructuring. Many emerging market countries should
continue to enhance resilience, including by curbing
excessive private debt build-up and strengthening the
government balance sheet in upturns.
Directors underscored that policy priorities in
low-income countries are to address near-term macroeconomic challenges and make progress toward
their Sustainable Development Goals. In commodity-​
dependent economies, building fiscal buffers will require
increasing the contribution of the non-commodity
sector to tax revenue, together with spending rationalization. For countries less dependent on commodities,
countercyclical macroeconomic policies should be
adopted where growth remains robust, and debt management practices strengthened to lower the impact of
potential shifts in capital flows. More broadly, achieving robust, sustainable, and inclusive growth requires
sustained efforts to diversify the economy, broaden the
revenue base, improve the efficiency of government
spending, and enhance financial deepening.

New Releases from IMF Publications

Modernizing China:
Investing in Soft Infrastructure

Women, Work, and Economic Growth:
Leveling the Playing Field

Challenges for Central Banking:
Perspectives from Latin America

$38. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51353-994-2. Approx. 186pp.

$30. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51351-610-3. 180pp.

From Great Depression to
Great Recession: The Elusive Quest
for International Policy Cooperation

Resilience and Growth in the Small
States of the Pacific

Collapse and Revival: Global
Recessions and Recoveries

$35. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51350-752-1. 458pp.

$65. Hardback with DVD
ISBN 978-1-51357-002-0. 292pp.

$27. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51351-427-7. Approx. 196pp.

$30. Paperback
ISBN 978-1-51359-176-6. 280pp.

To order visit bookstore.imf.org/weonro16

