Report
The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted and

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

led by UNESCO. WWAP brings together the work of 31 UN-Water Members as well
as 38 Partners to publish the United Nations World Water Development Report
(WWDR) series.
The annual World Water Development Reports focus on strategic water issues.
latest findings on a specific theme.
This edition of the World Water Development Report focuses on ‘Water and Jobs’
and seeks to inform decision-makers, inside and outside the water community,
about the importance of the water and jobs nexus for the social and economic

WATER AND JOBS

UN-Water Members and Partners — all experts in their fields — contribute with

development and environmental sustainability of countries, rich and poor.

WATER
AND JOBS

The importance of ‘water for jobs’ across economies is such that this report could
upon water, and therefore increasingly at risk under conditions of water scarcity. This
report also shows the importance for countries to have sufficient and an adequately
trained water-related workforce in order to seize development opportunities and
maximize benefits.
The first of its kind to address the multiple aspects of the water and jobs nexus, this
report further reveals the need for additional research and analysis to gain a better
understanding of the complex interactions between water, jobs and development to
support decision-making pertaining to the sound management of water, employment
policy and the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.

WWAP

This publication is financed by
the Government of Italy and Regione Umbria

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2016

be subtitled ‘No water - No jobs’. Indeed, a great majority of jobs are dependent

WWDR 2016

9 789231 001468

UNDESA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP,
UNESCWA

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

WATER
AND JOBS

Published in 2016 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2016
This report is published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water. The list of UN-Water Members and Partners
are available on: http://www.unwater.org
Chapter 9, Europe and North America, by Annukka Lipponen and Nicholas Bonvoisin, © United Nations
Chapter 10, Latin America and the Caribbean, © United Nations 2015
ISBN 978-92-3-100146-8
ePub ISBN 978-92-3-100155-0

Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2016. The United Nations
World Water Development Report 2016: Water and Jobs. Paris, UNESCO.
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO)
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the
users accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository
(http://www.unesco.org/open-access/terms-use-ccbysa-en).
The present license applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use of any material
not clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested from:
publication.copyright@unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP France.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily
those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. The contents were contributed by the UN-Water
Members and Partners listed on the title pages of the chapters therein. UNESCO and the United Nations
World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content provided or for
discrepancies in data and content between contributed chapters.
WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be listed as authors and contributors or to be
acknowledged in this publication. WWAP is not responsible for any omissions in this regard.

Original cover design by Phoenix Design Aid
Printed by UNESCO CLD
This publication is printed in vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources paper, supporting responsible use of
forest reserves, 100% recycled, acid-free and chlorine-free.
Printed in France

TABLE of CONTENTS
iv

Foreword
by Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General of the United Nations

v

Foreword
by Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO

vi

Foreword
by Guy Ryder, Chair of UN-Water and Director-General of ILO

vii

Preface
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator, and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief

ix

Acknowledgements

1

Executive summary

9

Chapter 1 – Introduction

10

1.1

Investing in water: A path to economic growth and jobs

11

1.2

A costly status quo

13

1.3

Water and jobs nexus

15

Chapter 2 – The global perspective on water

16

2.1

State of freshwater resources

21

2.2

Increasing pressures and growing demand

24

2.3

Climate change and extreme events

26

2.4

Ecosystem health

27

2.5

The challenges ahead

30

Chapter 3 – Economy, jobs and water

31

3.1

Terminology

32

3.2

Global employment trends

37

3.3

Water-dependent jobs

38

3.4

Water and jobs in the agri-food sector

39

3.4.1

Water, food and employment

42

3.4.2

Water investments and agri-food jobs

44

3.5

Water and jobs in the energy sector

47

3.6

Water and jobs in industry

50

Chapter 4 – Water jobs

51

4.1

Jobs in the water sectors

51

4.2

Human resources needs

i

54

Chapter 5 – Water, jobs and sustainable development

55

5.1

The human right to safe drinking water and sanitation

56

5.2

The human right to decent work

57

5.3

Job creation opportunities in a green economy

58

5.4

Water, jobs and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

61

5.5

Bridging the gender gap

61

5.5.1

Exploring the gender gap

63

5.5.2

Responses and opportunities

65

Chapter 6 – Africa

66

6.1

Challenges related to Africa’s water resources

66

6.2

Water, jobs and the economy

68

6.3

Jobs in water-dependent sectors

68

6.3.1

Agriculture

69

6.3.2

Fisheries

70

6.3.3

Manufacturing and industry

70

6.4

Expected future developments

70

6.5

African Water Policy Framework and impact on jobs

72

Chapter 7 – The Arab Region

73

7.1

Background

73

7.2

Jobs in the water sectors

74

7.3

Water-dependent jobs

74

7.4

Clean water for decent jobs and a healthy workforce

75

7.5

Education for better water-related jobs

76

Chapter 8 – Asia and the Pacific

77

8.1

Addressing gaps of water and sanitation through the improvement

78

8.2

Improving efficiency in water use to contribute to economic growth

8.3

Transitioning beyond sectorial issues and demonstrating the short-, medium- and

of water infrastructure

long-term values and benefits

79
80

ii

Chapter 9 – Europe and North America

82

9.1

Employment in water services and water-dependent economic sectors

83

9.2

Employment in the monitoring of water resources

83

9.3

Specific emerging employment opportunities

84

Chapter 10 – Latin America and the Caribbean

88

Chapter 11 – Investing in water is investing in jobs

92

Chapter 12 – Addressing capacity development needs and improving dialogue

93

12.1

Changing capacity needs

93

12.2

Approaches for addressing capacity development needs

97

12.3

National strategies for capacity development in the water sector and beyond

99

Chapter 13 – Improving water efficiency and productivity

101

13.1

Improving water efficiency and productivity in rural areas

104

13.2

Improving water efficiency and productivity in urban areas

104

13.3

Increasing industrial water-use efficiency

107

Chapter 14 – Employment in support of water, sanitation and hygiene

108

14.1

Financial and institutional mechanisms for universal access

109

14.2

Accelerating universal access through people-centred approaches

112

Chapter 15 – Opportunities for water source diversification

113

15.1

Alternative water sources

114

15.2

Wastewater as a resource

116

Chapter 16 – Scientific and technological innovation

121

Chapter 17 – Monitoring, assessment and reporting

122

17.1

Challenges

124

17.2

Opportunities

125

Chapter 18 – Policy responses

126

18.1

Ensure the sustainability of water resources and ecosystems

127

18.2

Develop, operate and maintain water infrastructure

127

18.3

Plan, build and manage capacity of human resources

128

18.4

Increase knowledge and innovate

129

18.5

Conclusion

130

References

145

Abbreviations and acronyms

146

Boxes, figures and tables

148

Photo credits

iii

FOREWORD
by Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

Sustainable development, human migration, conflict and natural disasters: water cuts across these and many other
major issues on the global agenda. Employment is another key factor in population movements, civil unrest and
environmental sustainability.
The 2016 edition of the United Nations World Water Development Report, which was coordinated by the United
Nations World Water Assessment Programme of UNESCO in collaboration with UN-Water Members and other
partners, illustrates how the connection between water and jobs holds the promise of inclusive and sustainable
economic growth for all countries. Its findings can serve to help reach the Sustainable Development Goals, which are
all interlinked, including Goal 6 covering water and sanitation for all, and Goal 8 addressing decent work for all.
Among its findings, this report shows that many jobs in the global workforce depend on water. It demonstrates that
water stress and the lack of decent work can exacerbate security challenges. It also traces the link between scarce or
poor quality water, damaged ecosystems and instability that can lead to forced migration.
The main message of the report is clear: water is essential to decent jobs and sustainable development. Now is the
time to increase investments in protecting and rehabilitating water resources, including drinking water, as well as
sanitation while focusing on generating employment.
I commend this report to all those interested in joining forces to realize our bold vision for sustainable development
aimed at creating a future where all people live in dignity on a healthy and peaceful planet.

Ban Ki-moon

iv

FOREWORD
by Irina Bokova
Director-General of UNESCO

Water and jobs are inextricably linked on various levels, whether we look at them from an economic, environmental
or social perspective. This edition of the World Water Development Report breaks new ground by addressing the
pervasive relationship between water and jobs to an extent not yet seen in any other report.
The report estimates that well over one billion jobs, representing more than 40% of the world’s total active workforce,
are heavily water-dependent. Such jobs are found in agriculture, forestry, inland fisheries, mining and resource
extraction, power generation and water supply and sanitation, as well as in several manufacturing and transformation
industries including food, pharmaceuticals and textiles. Another billion jobs, representing over one third of the world’s
total active workforce, are likely to be moderately water-dependent. Examples of sectors with moderately waterdependent jobs include construction, recreation, transportation and manufacturing/transformation industries such as
wood, paper, rubber/plastics and metals.
This means that nearly 80% of the jobs constituting the global workforce are dependent upon having access to
an adequate supply of water and water-related services, including sanitation. As such, jobs in the water sectors
themselves (including integrated water resources management and ecosystem restoration and remediation; building
and managing water infrastructure; and the provision of water-related services, such as water supply, sewerage, waste
management and remediation activities) help to create an enabling environment for the creation and maintenance of
decent jobs across most other sectors of the global economy.
As competition for freshwater resources grows and climate change impacts supplies, it is increasingly critical that
governments develop and adopt employment policies that take account of the limitations imposed by water
availability, while fulfilling the human rights to water, sanitation and decent jobs, according to each countries’ own
resource base, potential and priorities. Achieving the appropriate sectoral balance, and generating the highest possible
output of decent and productive jobs without compromising the support capacity of water resources and ecosystems,
is essential to ensuring long-term social, economic and environmental sustainability.
An important part of the policy package for addressing water-related challenges consists in ensuring that a sufficient
number of water experts and professionals are available to inform and assist the process of meeting these challenges.
As this report highlights, addressing the current and growing human resources gaps in the relevant water-related
sectors requires immediate consideration from policy-makers. Notably, the shift to a green economy in sectors such as
agriculture, forestry, fishing, energy, resource-intensive manufacturing, recycling, buildings and transport is changing
the range of tasks and required expertise associated with various jobs, as a result of new technologies, processes and
practices.
It is everyone’s responsibility, including States, the private sector, development banks and civil society, to partake in
global and local efforts to improve the living conditions of millions through the sustainable management of water,
and the provision of drinking water and sanitation and decent job opportunities for all. This report calls for concerted
long-term integrated decision-making to address the water and jobs nexus. The international community is already
showing the way, having given itself long-term goals with regards to water, sanitation, decent work and sustainable
development.
We trust that building on the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals and this report, policy-makers
everywhere will rise to the challenge and act at the water-jobs nexus to maximize its benefits to society and avoid the
costs of inaction.

Irina Bokova

v

FOREWORD
by Guy Ryder
Chair of UN-Water and Director-General of International Labour Organization

Water and jobs have many common denominators: water is central to human survival, the environment and the
economy – decent work is the chief locomotive of development and better standards of living.
Both have the power to transform people’s lives.
Last year, the United Nations adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Now, we have an
unprecedented opportunity to transform our world. We have committed to working tirelessly for the next fifteen years
to eradicate poverty, strengthen universal peace and urgently shift the world on to a sustainable and resilient path that
will leave no one behind.
For this to happen, we need to promote social justice in the world but also develop means of action and supporting
policies. This report shows how almost half of the world’s workers – 1.5 billion people – work in water-related sectors
and how nearly all jobs depend on water and those that ensure its safe delivery.
Yet, these millions of people are often not recognized or protected by basic labour rights. This needs to change. A first
step is recognizing these workers, changing their conditions and organizing the work.
The report shows how water affects workers’ lives through its presence, its quality and its quantity. It shows how
investments in water and sanitation can create paid and decent jobs and thereby contribute to a greener economy.
However, for all of this to happen, we need more qualified workers and for their work to be decent: that means
dignity, equality, a fair income and safe working conditions. We need to help countries ensure access to water and
sanitation for all, improve quality, increase efficient management, improve protection and expand cooperation.
In my capacity as the new Chair of UN-Water, I am proud of this year’s World Water Development Report. It is my
hope that it can help enhance the political understanding of how water and jobs create a crucial pillar to help support
sustainable development when we work to transform our world.

Guy Ryder

vi

PREFACE
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator
and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief

As the third in a series of annually released theme-oriented reports, the 2016 edition of the United Nations World
Water Development Report (WWDR) addresses a subject that has received only marginal attention, particularly at
the international level: the relationship between water and jobs.
The fact that water underpins economic development and social wellbeing is widely recognized. Water is essential
for food and energy production, and serves as a necessary and often irreplaceable input in a wide variety of
industrial value chains. Jobs in these sectors are therefore clearly water-dependent. However, the water-job nexus
does not stop there. In fact, that is only the beginning. Water is not so much a job ‘creator’ as a job ‘enabler’.
For example, access to safe water supply and adequate sanitation services, both at home and at the workplace,
are essential for maintaining a healthy and productive workforce. The provision of these services depends on people
with all sorts of jobs in water utilities. Likewise, jobs in water resources management and in the development,
maintenance and operation of water-related infrastructure are equally necessary to ensure water is available for
job creation in the various water-dependent sectors.
Describing the nature and extent of this circular relationship between water and jobs in comprehensive terms
proved to be a challenging undertaking. In preparing this report, it quickly became apparent that very little
information, and even fewer statistics, is available to examine and understand the linkages between water and jobs
and the importance of that nexus for sustainable economic and social development. Fortunately, thanks in large
part to the assistance and creativity of our staff and partners, we have managed to produce a comprehensive report
that we will provide a solid basis for further study and analysis. Our hope is that this report will galvanize interest in
filling this knowledge gap and raise awareness about the fact that sound management and forward looking policies
related to the water and jobs nexus hold the promise of better lives and a better future for all.
Like its predecessors, the WWDR 2016 is primarily targeted at national-level decision-makers and water resources
managers, as well as academics and the broader development community. It is hoped that this report will also be
particularly well received by national employment ministries, labour organizations, business councils and other
employment-focused people and institutions whose day-to-day decisions and actions impact – and are impacted
by – water.
This latest edition of the WWDR is the result of a concerted effort between WWAP and Lead Agencies (FAO, ILO,
UNECE, UNECLAC, UNEP, UNESCAP, UNESCO, UNESCWA, UNIDO, WMO), which all provided perspectives on water
and jobs.
The report also benefitted to a great extent from the inputs and contributions of several UN-Water Members and
partners, as well as from dozens of scientists, professionals and NGOs who provided a wide range of relevant
material. The members of WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee were particularly active and generous in providing
their guidance and knowledge to the production team. In line with the previous publications of WWAP, this report
is gender-mainstreamed thanks to the support of UN Women, the WWAP Advisory Group on Gender and the
UNESCO Division for Gender Equality.
We have endeavoured to present a fact-based, balanced and neutral account of the current state of knowledge,
covering the most recent developments pertaining to water and jobs. It is our sincere hope that this factual report
is received as a useful, informative and credible tool that will support and strengthen proactive discussions
pertaining to our common future, and ultimately help to identify and adopt appropriate responses to challenges
related to water and jobs, which as the report describes are often inseparable.

vii

On behalf of WWAP Secretariat, we would like to extend our deepest appreciation to Lead Agencies, members and
partners of UN-Water, and to authors, writers, editors and other contributors for collectively producing this unique
and authoritative report. A special recognition goes to ILO, who provided outstanding guidance and support from
the very beginning of the report’s development through to the final editing process.
Our special thanks go to Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, for her crucial support to WWAP and the
production of the WWDR.
We are profoundly grateful to the Italian Government for funding the Programme and to the Regione Umbria for
hosting the WWAP Secretariat in Villa La Colombella in Perugia. Their contributions have been instrumental to the
production of the WWDR.
We extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues at the WWAP Secretariat, whose names are listed in the
acknowledgements. This report could not have been completed without their dedication and professionalism.
Last but not least, our warm and heartfelt thanks to Michela Miletto, who served as WWAP Coordinator a.i. from
September 2013 through October 2015, and who played a key role in the design and development of the report.

Stefan Uhlenbrook

viii

Richard Connor

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) Secretariat would like to thank all the
organizations, institutions and individuals who made the preparation of this report possible.
WWAP recognizes the valuable contribution, useful revisions and timely endorsements of UN-Water
members and partners. Our special thanks go to ILO for their assistance and cooperation in developing
the structure and main messages of the report, and for hosting the Developmental Workshop for the
2016 edition of the World Water Development Report (WWDR 2016) in Geneva, Switzerland.
WWDR 2016 benefitted from the significant reviews, comments and guidance of WWAP’s Technical
Advisory Committee.
We wish to express our earnest thanks to Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO, whose support
was instrumental in preparing the report.
We would like to acknowledge the support of Blanca Jiménez-Cisneros, Director of the Division of
Water Sciences and Secretary of the International Hydrological Programme (IHP), and colleagues at IHP.
WWAP gratefully acknowledges the financial contribution of the International Labour Organization
(ILO) for the translation into Spanish of the WWDR 2016, and the Swiss Agency for Development and
Cooperation (SDC) for the translation in French. The printing in these languages was ensured by ILO,
SDC and Itaipu Binacional.
We also would like to express our gratitude to numerous UNESCO Field Offices, various UN agencies
and country partners as well as institutions for organizing national and regional promotional events to
widely disseminate the report and its findings.
We greatly appreciate the generous help extended to us by the UNESCO Field Offices in Almaty, Beijing,
Brasilia, Cairo and New Delhi for the translation of the Executive Summary into Russian, Chinese,
Portuguese, Arabic and Hindi languages. Thanks to the valuable collaboration between the National
Water Agency of Brazil and UNESCO Brasilia Field Office, the Portuguese language has been included in
the translation series.
WWAP is grateful for the generous financial contribution of the Italian Government, and for the
facilities provided by Regione Umbria.

ix

WWDR 2016 TEAM
Directors of the Publication
Stefan Uhlenbrook and Michela Miletto
Editor-in-Chief
Richard Connor
Process Coordinator
Engin Koncagül
Publications Officer
Diwata Hunziker
Publications Assistant
Valentina Abete
Layout
Marco Tonsini
Copy-editing
Elizabeth Kemf

WWAP Technical Advisory Committee
Uri Shamir (Chair), Dipak Gyawali (Deputy Chair), Fatma Abdel Rahman Attia, Anders Berntell,
Elias Fereres, Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, Daniel P. Loucks, Henk van Schaik, Yui Liong Shie,
Lászlo Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini and Albert Wright
WWAP Advisory Group on Gender Equality
Gülser Çorat and Kusum Athukorala (Co-Chairs), Marcia Brewster, Joanna Corzo, Irene Dankelman,
Manal Eid, Atef Hamdy, Deepa Joshi, Barbara van Koppen, Vasudha Pangare, Kenza Robinson,
Buyelwa Sonjica and Theresa Wasike
United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) Secretariat
Coordinator: Stefan Uhlenbrook
Deputy Coordinator: Michela Miletto
Programmes: Barbara Bracaglia, Richard Connor, Simone Grego, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara,
Engin Koncagül, Lucilla Minelli, Léna Salamé and Laurens Thuy
Publications: Valentina Abete, Diwata Hunziker and Marco Tonsini
Communications: Tiziano Agabitini and Simona Gallese
Gender: Francesca Greco, Roselie Schonewille and Jim Thompson
Administration: Lucia Chiodini, Arturo Frascani and Lisa Gastaldin
IT: Michele Brensacchi
Security: Fabio Bianchi and Francesco Gioffredi

x

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Farmers planting rice near Yogyakarta (Indonesia)
Photo: © Alexander Mazurkevich/Shutterstock.com

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1

Water is an essential component of national and local
economies, and is needed to create and maintain jobs
across all sectors of the economy. Half of the global
workforce is employed in eight water and natural
resource-dependent industries: agriculture, forestry,
fisheries, energy, resource-intensive manufacturing,
recycling, building and transport.
Sustainable water management, water infrastructure
and access to a safe, reliable and affordable supply
of water and adequate sanitation services improve
living standards, expand local economies, and lead to
the creation of more decent jobs and greater social
inclusion. Sustainable water management is also
an essential driver of green growth and sustainable
development.
Conversely, neglecting water issues runs the
risk of imposing serious negative impacts on
economies, livelihoods and populations with
potentially catastrophic and extremely costly results.
Unsustainable management of water and other
natural resources can cause severe damages to
economies and to society, thus reversing many
poverty reduction, job creation and hard-won
development gains.
Addressing the water-jobs nexus, notably through
coordinated policies and investments, is therefore
a prerequisite to sustainable development in both
developed and developing countries.

have been shown to foster economic growth, with
high rates of return. Access to a safe and reliable
water supply and sanitation services at home and
the workplace, coupled with appropriate hygiene,
is critical to maintaining a healthy, educated and
productive workforce.
A number of ancillary jobs also enable employment
in water-dependent sectors. These include jobs in
regulatory institutions within public administrations,
infrastructure financing, real estate, wholesale and
retail trade, and construction.
Together, water jobs and ancillary jobs provide the
enabling environment and necessary support to the
activities or operation of numerous organizations,
institutions, industries and systems, and the
jobs they generate. By estimating the potential
employment supported by investments in the
conservation, treatment and delivery of water,
governments can determine the investment and
employment policies that will increase and improve
jobs across the economy.

Water, economy and jobs
Failure to secure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to support heavily water-dependent sectors
results in the loss or disappearance of jobs (i.e.
no water, no jobs). Floods, droughts and other
water-related risks can also have economic and
employment repercussions that can go far beyond
the immediate affected areas.

Water jobs
Jobs in water sectors fall under one of three
functional categories: i) water resources
management, including integrated water resources
management (IWRM) and ecosystem restoration and
remediation; ii) building, operating and maintaining
water infrastructure; and iii) the provision of
water-related services including water supply,
sanitation and wastewater management.
These jobs serve as the building blocks for a wide
array of water-dependent job opportunities in
sectors such as agriculture (including fisheries and
aquaculture), energy and industry. Specifically,
investments in safe drinking water and sanitation

2

WWDR 2016

In addition to jobs in agriculture and industry,
sectors with heavily water-dependent jobs
include forestry, inland fisheries and aquaculture,
mining and resource extraction, water supply and
sanitation, and most types of power generation.
This category also includes some jobs in the health
care, tourism and ecosystem management sectors.
The analyses made in this report have allowed
estimating that more than 1.4 billion jobs, or 42%
of the world’s total active workforce, are heavily
water-dependent.
It is further estimated that 1.2 billion jobs, or 36%
of the world’s total active workforce, are moderately

water-dependent. These are sectors that do not
require access to significant quantities of water
resources to realize most of their activities, but for
which water is nonetheless a necessary component
in part(s) of their value chains. Examples of sectors
with moderately water-dependent jobs include
construction, recreation and transportation.
In essence, 78% of jobs constituting the global
workforce are dependent on water.

Agri-food sector
Insufficient or erratic water supplies affect the
quality and quantity of employment in the agri-food
sector. They constrain agricultural productivity and
compromise income stability with dramatic effects
for the poorest households with limited assets
and safety nets to cope with risks. Furthermore,
agriculture plays a wide role supporting livelihoods,
notably for the poorest, with an important selfconsumption aspect. Agricultural production, which
includes fisheries and forestry, is also a generator of
jobs and self-employment in the supply of inputs,
machinery and rural infrastructure, transformation
of agricultural products and distribution to the end
consumers. While agricultural investments often
increase agricultural productivity and raise the
quality of employment, it may do so at the expense
of the numbers of available jobs. In such cases,
appropriate policies are needed to limit the impacts
on displaced workers.

Energy sector
The demand for energy is increasing, particularly for
electricity in developing and emerging economies.
The energy sector, with growing water withdrawal
that currently accounts for about 15% of the
world’s total, provides direct employment. Energy
production, as a requirement for development,
enables direct and indirect job creation across all
economic sectors. Growth in the renewable energy
sector leads to growth in the number of green and
non-water-dependent jobs.

Industry sector
Industry is an important source of decent employment
worldwide and accounts for a fifth of the world’s
workforce. Industry and manufacturing account for
approximately 4% of global water withdrawals and
it has been predicted that by 2050, manufacturing
alone could increase its water use by 400%. As
industrial technology and understanding of the
essential role of water in the economy and of the
environmental stresses placed upon the resource
improve, industry is taking measures to reduce its
water use per unit produced, thereby improving
industrial water productivity. Increased attention
is being directed to water quality, particularly
downstream. Industry is also putting efforts to reuse
and recycle water, matching water quality to use and
moving towards cleaner production, with possible
benefits in terms of better paid jobs (for more
highly trained employees) within industry as well as
treatment equipment suppliers.

Global perspectives on water
Freshwater withdrawals have increased globally by
about 1% per year since the 1980s, mainly due to
growing demand in developing countries. In much
of the world’s highly developed countries, freshwater
withdrawals have stabilized or slightly declined.
Accelerated urbanization and rising living standards,
increased demand for water, food (especially meat)
and energy from an ever-growing global population
will inevitably lead to the creation of jobs in certain
sectors (i.e. municipal wastewater treatment) and to
the loss of jobs in others.
Water scarcity is likely to limit opportunities for
economic growth and the creation of decent jobs
in the upcoming years and decades. Unless there
is sufficient infrastructure to manage and store the
water, as is the case in many developed countries,
water availability might vary significantly, leaving
(parts of) countries ‘water scarce’ for extended
periods. Water availability is also highly dependent on
water quality. Poor quality water may not be fit for
several uses and the cost of the required treatment
may be a prohibiting factor, thus contributing to the
burden of economic water scarcity.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

3

Reduced water availability will further intensify
competition for water among users, including
agriculture, maintenance of ecosystems, human
settlements, industry and energy production. This will
affect regional water, energy and food security, and
potentially geopolitical security, prompting migration
at various scales. The potential impacts on economic
activity and the job market are real and possibly
severe. Many developing economies are located in
hotspots of water-related stress, particularly in Africa,
Asia, Latin America and the Middle East.
Climate change exacerbates the threats to water
availability and is expected to increase the frequency,
intensity and severity of extreme weather events.
Climate change will inevitably lead to the loss of jobs
in certain sectors. A proactive approach to adaptation
via employment policies may offset some of these
losses. At the same time, climate change is creating
job opportunities of its own in terms of mitigation
and adaptation activities.
Adopting an ecosystem-based approach to watershed
management, including the economic valuation
of ecosystem services, is one way of quantifying
their benefits for livelihoods and employment. In
that regard, the emerging market for payments for
ecosystem services (PES) schemes can offer lowincome populations the opportunity to create a new
type of entrepreneurship (with its related jobs) that
generates increased income while implementing
restoration/conservation practices.

Investing in water is investing in jobs
Water investments are a necessary enabling condition
for economic growth, jobs and reducing inequalities.
Conversely, failure to invest in water management not
only represents missed opportunities, but may also
impede economic growth and job creation.
Assessing the relationship between water, economic
growth and jobs is particularly challenging. It has
however been shown that countries exhibit a
strong positive correlation between water-related
investments and national income, as well as between
water storage capacity and economic growth.

4

WWDR 2016

Investments in infrastructure and operation of
water-related services can provide high returns
for economic growth and for direct and indirect
job creation. Water investments can also lead
to production systems that are more labour
intensive. Notably, green development can increase
employment opportunities through green jobs,
more labour intensive practices and PES.
It is essential to plan water investments in
conjunction with relevant sectors, such as
agriculture, energy and industry in order to
maximize positive economic and employment
results. Within a suitable regulatory framework,
public-private partnerships (PPPs) offer prospects for
much needed investment in water sectors, including
building and operating infrastructure for irrigation
and water supply, distribution and treatment.
With a view to promoting economic growth,
poverty reduction and environmental sustainability,
consideration must be given to methods that
mitigate job loss or displacement and maximize job
creation that may result from the implementation of
an integrated approach to water management.

Regional perspectives
In Africa, the demand for jobs will be a
major policy issue across a continent which is
already experiencing high unemployment and
underemployment, driving migration both within
the region and externally. For Africa to be able to
maintain its impressive growth rates of the last
10 years, the basic infrastructure of water and
electricity are prerequisites. Without these, African
economies could lose momentum, resulting in the
loss of direct water jobs and jobs in the waterdependent sectors.
In the Arab region, unemployment trends have
worsened in recent years as rural income fell due
to low agricultural productivity, drought, land
degradation and the depletion of groundwater
resources. These trends have fuelled rural to urban
migration, the expansion of informal settlements
and social unrest. As water scarcity is prevalent in
the Arab region, employment in many sectors is

water sensitive. Investments in water use efficiency
and conservation present politically palatable avenues
for governments that must weigh trade-offs between
water sustainability and employment targets.
In Asia and the Pacific, most of the industries driving
economic growth depend upon a reliable supply
of freshwater for large parts of their production
processes. Expanding economies will need increasing
supplies of energy, which will in turn require access to
more water. There is tremendous potential to create
employment opportunities in the region by increasing
access to water in the agricultural sector. There is also
potential in the industry and service sectors to create
and support water-dependent jobs, especially through
the improvement of water efficiency, pollution control
and wastewater usage.
In Europe and North America, among the
developments that have markedly influenced
employment in water management and water
services as well as qualifications required are the
following: in the European Union and North America,
increased automation, use of remote sensing and
standardization; in Eastern pan-Europe, investment
in infrastructure, resource constraints and reforms
of national administrations. Emerging employment
opportunities reside in the undeveloped potential
for hydropower (in parts of the region) and other
renewables. The need to repair, modernize and
construct different types of water infrastructure may
also create different job opportunities.
Economies in Latin America and the Caribbean rely
heavily on the exploitation of natural resources,
including water, particularly for mining, agriculture,
including biofuels, forestry, fishery and tourism. This
demands constant attention from policy-makers
in order to maximize the contribution of water to
development and job creation, starting with strong,
transparent and effective institutional arrangements
for integrated water management and the provision
of water and sanitation services. These actions protect
public interest, promote economic efficiency, and
provide the stability and flexibility necessary to attract
investment to the development of water resources
and related public utility services.

Human rights, sustainable development
and gender
Human rights, green economy, sustainable
development and gender are among the most
salient legal and policy frameworks to be considered
by policy-makers when addressing the water and
jobs nexus.
The right to safe drinking water and sanitation is a
prerequisite and integral to the realization of other
human rights, most notably the rights to life and
dignity, to adequate food and housing, as well as
the right to health and well-being, including the
right to healthy occupational and environmental
conditions. The right to decent work is also an
internationally recognized human right. A subset
of economic, social and cultural rights, the right to
work is enunciated in the 1948 Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (UN, 1948), which states: ’Everyone
has the right to work, to free choice of employment,
to just and favourable conditions of work and to
protection against unemployment.’
Despite these universally-recognized rights, there
are 2.3 million work-related deaths annually. Workrelated communicable diseases contribute to 17%
of these deaths and, in that category, the main
contributing and preventable factors comprised
poor-quality drinking water, poor sanitation, poor
hygiene and related lack of knowledge. These figures
underscore the need for countries to accelerate
efforts towards securing safe drinking water and
sanitation for all, including in the workplace.
In September 2015, the international community
adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Goal 6 aims to ensure the availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all, and
Goal 8 addresses the promotion of sustained,
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full
and productive employment and decent work for
all. Water- and labour-related concerns are also of
importance to several other SDG targets, notably
Goal 1 on poverty and Goal 3 on health, and as such
will be central to the realization of the SDGs.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

5

Evidence from various economic sectors
demonstrates the significant contribution women
can make in formal positions at the highest levels,
and qualitative analyses show that women’s
involvement in the management of water resources
and water infrastructure can improve efficiency and
increase outputs. Nevertheless, women continue
to experience widespread discrimination and
inequality in the workplace. In many parts of the
world, women often occupy undervalued and lowpaid jobs and still shoulder responsibility for most
unpaid care work. A number of measures can be
undertaken to improve women’s participation in,
and contribution to the water-related workforce,
including: adopting equal opportunity policies and
measures; improving sex-disaggregated workforce
data sets; addressing cultural barriers, social norms
and gender stereotypes; and expanding access to
public services and investment in time- and laboursaving infrastructure.

Innovation
Innovation contributes to the continuous
improvement of water management, with the
related benefits to economic development and
decent jobs. In addition to their potential efficiency,
effectiveness, and performance improvements,
innovations can have important implications for
water-dependent and water sector employment
opportunities in quantitative and qualitative terms.
Innovation resulting from the shift towards a greener
economy is changing the range of tasks associated
with various jobs, as well as working conditions,
due to new technologies, processes and practices.
Innovation will change the number and nature of
jobs and the required skill sets and competencies.
Policy mechanisms need to be in place to draw on
relevant research for capturing the job-creating
opportunities in the field of water innovation and to
ensure the required capacity for the generation and
diffusion of water-related innovations.

Improving water efficiency and
productivity
Both water-use efficiency and water productivity
can contribute to improving socio-economic
development and create opportunities for

6

WWDR 2016

employment and decent jobs in water-dependent
sectors, especially under conditions of water scarcity
(where inadequate water supplies may impede
development). New resource-efficient technologies
as well as enhanced competitiveness and innovation
are also generating shifts in employment and
changes in the workforce worldwide.
Governments can create policy frameworks
to enable, support and reward improvements
in resource efficiency or productivity bringing
increased competitiveness, resilience and security,
and new sources of jobs and growth. By doing
so, they can facilitate significant cost savings for
different agents from improved efficiency and
productivity, commercialization of innovations,
and enhanced water management over the entire
product life cycle. However, understanding and
considering the trade-offs and synergies between
water, energy, food, ecosystems and other issues at
the proper scale is essential for wise management
and to meet overall sustainability goals.

Opportunities for water source
diversification
The increased demand for water in sites where
the resource is scarce or where there is high
competition for water creates the need for using
so-called 'non-conventional sources' for water, such
as low yielding wells and springs, rainwater, urban
runoff, stormwater, and wastewater recycling.
This will create jobs not only through technology
development, but also because it enables new
forms of small-scale intensive uses of water, such as
cultivation of highly profitable crops in small plots,
and but also in the operation and maintenance of
treatment plants to reclaim water.
Provided that the health risks are adequately
managed, wastewater (treated to ‘fit-for-purpose’
levels) offers opportunities for source diversification,
especially in water scarce areas. It is estimated
that between four million and 20 million hectares
of land are irrigated with untreated wastewater.
Not only does this practice provide livelihoods for
farming families and those involved in marketing
the products, but with its expected scaling up and

formalization, substantial job creation in this sector
can also be expected.
Water source diversification will initially generate
jobs at the research level, leading to new jobs being
created for the operationalization, supervision, and
maintenance and fine-tuning of smart systems.
Beyond the jobs that water reuse will create
within the water, agriculture and public health
sectors, it is also likely to generate jobs in research,
agricultural extension, produce marketing and the
cultivation of non-food crops. These evolutions will
require a different type of skill sets from workers
and, consequently, stress the importance of
capacity development and continuous professional
development.

Addressing capacity development needs
and improving dialogue
The skills, qualities and capacities of employed human
resources are vital for the successful performance of
the water sectors and for the sustained use, adaptation
and development of scientific and technological
innovations. This is particularly salient in view of the
broadening fields of expertise that are needed for these
sectors, which include water resources management,
building and managing water infrastructure, and the
provision of water-related services.
The lack of capacity and the challenges facing the
water sectors require the design of adequate training
tools and innovative learning approaches to enhance
the competencies of staff as well as to strengthen
institutional capacity. This applies to government
and its agencies, river basin organizations as well as
other groups including private sector organizations.
Solutions to filling these gaps include: creating
an enabling policy environment for collaborative
frameworks between the education sector, sector
employers (public, private, NGOs), trade unions and
employees; developing incentives to attract and retain
staff; strengthening technical and vocational training;
and giving attention to human resources capacity
development in rural areas. New and transversal skills
also need to be instilled to respond to new needs.

Monitoring, assessment and reporting
Reliable and objective information concerning
the state of water resources in terms of their
quantity, quality and vulnerability at the local or
basin level is often poor or lacking, as are specific
metrics for water demand and use by different
economic sectors. Globally, water observation and
monitoring networks are in decline and improperly
funded. Development of technology and increased
use of remote sensing can help to fill gaps, but
only to a point.
In terms of jobs and employment, few statistics
reflect the current reality of work. They tend to
simplify the core situation (often due to their
objectives, measurement methods and conceptual
frameworks), resulting in partial coverage,
insufficient detail and an incomplete analysis of
complex topics. One of the greatest challenges
is gathering data and information concerning
informal, part-time and/or unpaid work. Another
challenge lies in identifying the level of ‘waterdependence’ of any given job.
Data from the World Input-Output Database
(WIOD) could be analysed to derive evidence on
how dependent the whole economy is on water
supply and how many jobs are created when a
government increases or improves water supply,
estimating backwards and forwards linkages of
water supply and related sectors to calculate total
multiplier effects of potential investments in a
given sector.

Policy responses
Critical relationships and essential linkages
exist between the management of water and
employment opportunities in countries at all levels
of development. Sustainable water management,
combined with access to safe and reliable supply
of water and appropriate sanitation services,
create an enabling environment for employment
opportunities to develop and grow across
economic sectors.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

7

The political will to set and implement water-related
policy objectives that mutually support sustainable
development and job creation is essential. However,
there is frequently a low level of appreciation of
the high risks and serious impacts to which neglect
of water issues can lead, often with catastrophic
and extremely costly results. Improving knowledge
and understanding, especially among politicians
and policy-makers, of the pervasive role of water
resources, infrastructure and services in the economy
and in employment creation would enhance benefits
in terms of generation of decent jobs, as well as serve
the broader objectives of sustainable development.
Meeting these societal goals requires coherence and
a shared vision, notably between water, energy, food,
environmental, social and economic policies, ensuring
that incentives are aligned for all stakeholders and
that negative impacts are mitigated, for example in
ensuring future employability of those displaced in
sectors where employment may fall. In the coming
years, governments and their partners will be required
to develop and implement sustainable, integrated and
mutually supportive water, employment and economic
strategies in order to respond to the challenges arising
from the risks and opportunities at the water and jobs
nexus highlighted in this report.

8

WWDR 2016

It will be important for each country, according
to its own resource base, potential and priorities
to identify and promote specific and coherent
strategies, plans and policies to achieve the
right sectoral balance and generate the highest
possible output of decent and productive jobs
without compromising the sustainability of water
resources and the environment. The international
community is already showing the way, having set
long-term goals for water, sanitation, decent work
and sustainable development that offer an action
framework for countries’ development objectives.
The allocation of water resources and the provision
of water services to different economic sectors
will largely dictate the growth potential for high
quality jobs at country and local levels. Focusing
on the economic sectors that are most relevant
for environmental sustainability and job creation
will prove to be the ultimate key to success.
Reaching these targets involves coherence and
shared vision, notably between water, energy, food
and environment policies, in order to ensure that
incentives are aligned for the benefit of
all stakeholders.

INTRODUCTION

1

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove and Katherine Manchester

Waterways for economic activity – Hamburg port (Germany)
Photo: © SergiyN/Shutterstock.com

This introduction frames the report by presenting the critical relationships between
water, jobs and sustainable development of any country, underlining the importance
that political and policy attention be paid to that nexus. The chapter also emphasizes
the benefits of investing in water and jobs and avoiding costly inaction.

The shift to a sustainable,
greener economy, in which
the central role of water is
fully recognized, leads to
the creation of more jobs,
an increase in the number of
decent jobs and much greater
social inclusion

Water permeates all aspects of life on Earth. Like the
air we breathe, water sustains human, animal and
plant life. It provides vital services for human health,
livelihoods and well-being and contributes to the
sustainability of ecosystems.
Water is an essential component of our economies
and required to create and maintain jobs in every
sector of the economy: in the primary sector
(e.g. agriculture, animal husbandry, inland fisheries,
aquaculture, mining and extraction of other natural
resources); in the secondary (e.g. heavy industry,
processing of goods, electricity and fuel production);
and in the services sectors (e.g. tourism and
recreation) (UNDP, 2006; OECD, 2012a). Many of
these sectors require large quantities of water at one
or more stages of their value chain.
Half of the global workforce is employed in eight
water and natural resource-dependent industries:
agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy, resourceintensive manufacturing, recycling, building and
transport. Over a billion people are employed in
the fisheries, agriculture and forestry sectors alone,
the last two representing some of the sectors most
threatened by freshwater disruptions (ILO, 2013a).
Sustainable water management in its broadest
sense encompasses ecosystems protection and
restoration, integrated water resources management
(IWRM), as well as infrastructure development,
operation and maintenance. Combined with access
to a safe, reliable and affordable supply of water
and adequate sanitation services, it creates an
enabling environment for long-term employment
opportunities, as well as development and growth
across different economic sectors (UN-EMG, 2011;
ILO, 2013a).
The basic provision of adequate water, sanitation
and hygiene (WASH) services at home and in the
workplace enables a robust economy by contributing
to a healthy and productive population and
workforce, with benefit-to-cost ratios as high as
7 to 1 for basic water and sanitation services in
developing countries (OECD, 2011a and 2012a)
(see also Chapter 11). Conversely, people who have

10

WWDR 2016

the least access to water and sanitation are usually
the most likely to have poor access to health care
and stable jobs, thus feeding the cycle of poverty
(UNEP, 2010 and 2012a). In this regard, equality
gaps persist between urban and rural dwellers,
across genders, and between the richest and poorest
segments of the population (UNICEF/WHO, 2015).

1.1
Investing in water: A path to
economic growth and jobs
While the dynamics of water, economic growth
and employment are complex, and highly
dependent upon specific physical, cultural, political
and economic circumstances, sound public
governance, together with public and private
investment in water resources management and
water infrastructure and services, can generate
and support employment across all sectors of the
economy. These opportunities range from full-time
decent jobs1 to more precarious informal ones –
encompassing a wide range of skill sets (ILO, 2013a).
When reinforced by appropriate measures governing
working conditions, these can be decent jobs (ILO,
2007a). Furthermore, if they contribute to preserving
or restoring a sustainable environment, these jobs
will also support the greening of an economy (ILO
2013b; UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC, 2008; SIWI/WHO, 2005).
In contrast, lack of good governance and failure to
invest in water can lead to economic slowdown (ILO,
2012, 2014a).

1

'Decent jobs' or 'decent work' involve opportunities for work that
is productive and delivers a fair income, security in the workplace
and social protection for families. For a more detailed definition,
see Chapter 3.1.

Indeed, the shift to a sustainable, greener economy,
in which the central role of water is fully recognized,
leads to the creation of more jobs, an increase in
the number of decent jobs and much greater social
inclusion (ILO, 2013a).
High returns for the economy and the environment
are associated not only with investments in
infrastructure – for water, agriculture and energy –
but also with provision of services in these sectors
(UNEP, 2012b). This includes employment in all water
use sectors such as industry, energy, agriculture,
tourism, recreation, research and development (R&D)
and various public sector organizations, including
municipalities, ministries, public research and
management organizations as well as international
organizations (UN-Water, 2014). ‘While evidence is
limited, it suggests that these jobs tend to be more
qualified, safer and better paid than comparable jobs
in the same or similar sectors’ (ILO, 2013a, p. xiv).
In addition, gains in eco-efficiency and access to
new and growing markets can lead to higher profits,
incomes and wages (ILO, 2013a).
In particular, infrastructure development for
productive water uses (e.g. irrigation, hydropower
and flood control) and investments made to
upgrade, replace or decommission existing works
create jobs (UN-Water, 2014).
In the irrigated agriculture sector, which represents
70% of freshwater withdrawals worldwide, the
potential efficiency savings from increased water
productivity could be as high as US$115 billion
annually by 2030 (in 2011 prices). Moreover, the
provision of more efficient water technologies to
some 100 million poor farmers would generate an
estimated direct total net benefit of US$100-200
billion (Dobbs, et al. 2011).
Investments in safe drinking water and sanitation
have paved a path to economic growth. Such
investments have high rates of return: for each US$1
invested, the World Health Organization (WHO)
estimates returns of US$3-34, depending on the
region and technology (WWAP, 2009). According to
the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP),

investments in small-scale projects that provide
access to safe water and basic sanitation in Africa
could return an estimated overall economic gain
of about US$28.4 billion a year, or around 5%
of gross domestic product (GDP) (UNEP, n.d.).
Another study found that in poor countries with
better access to improved water and sanitation
services, the annual economic growth rate reached
3.7%, while those without similar access to
improved services had an annual growth of just
0.1% (WHO, 2001). In spite of obvious benefits,
there are many areas worldwide that still suffer
from underinvestment in such infrastructure.
The market potential of water and sanitation
services, and related job creation, is expected to be
significant in the coming decades. In Bangladesh,
Benin and Cambodia alone, about 20 million
people should gain access to rural piped water
supplies by 2025, ten times the current number,
representing a market worth US$90 million/year.
On the sanitation side, a study in Bangladesh,
Indonesia, Peru and Tanzania reveals a market
potential for sanitation services of US$700 million
annually (Sy et al., 2014).

1.2

A costly status quo

It is important to consider economic and thus
employment losses that may result from the
mismanagement or lack of investment in the
water sectors. The high risks and serious negative
impacts on economies, livelihoods and populations
caused by neglect of water issues are frequently
overlooked, often with catastrophic and extremely
costly results. Unsustainable management of water
and other environmental assets cause damage to
economies and to society that have the potential
to reverse global gains in poverty reduction, job
creation and development (ILO, 2013a).
The cost of inaction may already be evident in
government, corporate or household budgets.
For instance, inaction results in heightened health
spending as a result of water pollution, increased
unemployment benefits for fishers or tourism
operators and higher property insurance costs

INTRODUCTION

11

around waterfront areas (OECD, 2008). For example,
it is estimated that that the global annual cost of
land degradation in irrigated areas could be between
US$11 billion and US$27.3 billion due to decreased
agricultural productivity, particularly from salinization
(Quadir et al., 2014; Postel, 1999). Regionally, the
World Bank estimates that degraded water quality
costs Middle Eastern and North African countries
between 0.5% and 2.5% of their annual GDP
(World Bank, 2007a).
Socio-economic inequity and the effects of climate
change are also exacerbating the impacts of
disasters beyond societies’ adaptation capacities and
destroying livelihoods while intensifying inequalities.
One looming cause of water disruption could be
increased competition for water among uses and
users. Global water demand is projected to increase
greatly over the next several decades; at best,
available resources will remain unchanged. This
will put a direct strain on economic development,
and indirectly through social unrest and unhealthy
ecosystems. Decreasing water waste and increasing
the productivity and efficiency of water use in
agriculture, energy and industry will be paramount,
with the added benefits of savings in production
costs for businesses and reduced need for
infrastructure expansion (UN-Water, 2014).
From 1992 to 2014, ‘floods, droughts and storms
… affected 4.2 billion people (95% of all people
affected by disasters) and caused US$1.3 trillion
worth of damage (63% of all damages)’ (UN-Water,
2014, p. 9). It is estimated that Kenya’s floods in
1997-1998 cost the equivalent of 11% of GDP, while
the cost of its drought between 1998 and 2000 was
equivalent to 16% of GDP (UN-Water, 2014). In the
United States, Hurricane Katrina led to the loss of
some 40,000 jobs in 2005, with African-American
women the hardest hit; in Bangladesh, Cyclone Sidr
disrupted several hundred thousand small businesses
and adversely affected 567,000 jobs (ILO, 2013a). In
many countries, droughts, floods and deforestation
increase the unpaid time girls and women spend to
retrieve water for household chores, leaving them
less time for education or earning an income
(ILO, 2013a; UNDP, 2014).

12

WWDR 2016

The sustainable management
of water for economic growth
and employment is not only
a question of resource
availability and money, but
also a matter of sound policy
frameworks and governance
Another growing concern is groundwater
depletion, which may result from pricing schemes
that inaccurately account for resource scarcity
and the environmental impacts of abstraction, or
water regimes that fail to incentivize sustained
and equitable use. Globally, some 38% of
irrigated areas depend on groundwater (Siebert
et al., 2013), which has contributed to a ten-fold
increase of groundwater abstraction for agricultural
irrigation over the last 50 years. At the same time,
almost half of the world’s population depend on
groundwater for drinking (Tushaar et al., 2007).
Projected increased water demand, primarily from
manufacturing, electricity and domestic use will
generate further stress on water resources and
possibly impact water allocation for irrigation
(OECD, 2012a).
Estimates indicate that about 30% of global water
abstraction is lost through leakage (Kingdom et al.,
2006; Danilenko et al., 2014). Given the growth
of urbanization and the rise of demand for water,
improving the efficiency of water use and reducing
leakages by maintaining and upgrading ageing
infrastructures are critical. Once these measures are
taken, they will generate jobs, most of which will
require skilled employees.
Water management and development strategies
play a central role in reducing the exposure and
vulnerability of people and assets to such waterrelated extremes (UN-Water, 2014). Planning,
preparedness and coordinated responses to
mitigate the risks associated with natural waterrelated disasters have been shown to be particularly
cost-effective, especially when combining
structural and non-structural flood management
approaches. In summary, ‘well designed national

public employment programs using local resourcebased work methods can have a large multiplier
effect on vulnerable communities by combining
the multiple objectives of employment generation,
income support, asset creation and restoring the
natural resource base’ (UN-Water, 2014, p. 30).
These economic benefits cannot be achieved without
the sustainable management of the complete water
cycle, from naturally available water resources,
through its various uses and related services, to its
ultimate return to the natural environment (OECD,
2012a; UN-EMG, 2011).

1.3

Water and jobs nexus

Water should be considered a fundamental driver of
green growth (OECD, 2012b). The political will to set
and implement water-related policy objectives that
support sustainable development and job creation
is essential (ILO, 2013a). Meeting these societal
goals involves coherence and shared vision, notably
between water, energy, food and environment
policies to ensure that incentives are aligned for all
stakeholders (OECD, 2012b). Studies have shown
that any negative effect of environmental reforms
(such as increased investment costs for upgrading
and job losses in certain sectors) are offset by
complementing environmental reform with labour
market and social policies, and that its overall impact
on employment is positive (ILO, 2013a).
The sustainable management of water for economic
growth and employment is not only a question of
resource availability and money, but also a matter of
sound policy frameworks and governance, including
the political, social, economic and administrative
systems necessary to develop, manage and govern
water resources, and the delivery of water services
(Rogers and Hall, 2003; OECD, 2012b).
Water resources and the range of services they
provide underpin economic growth, poverty
reduction and environmental sustainability (UNEP,
2012a). As stated in The United Nations World Water
Development Report (WWDR) 2015, ‘addressing the
challenges related to water requires changing the
way we assess, manage and use our water resources.

Progress calls for engaging a broad range of societal
actors to take account of water in their decisionmaking processes and responses’
(WWAP, 2015, p. 97).
Improved governance, technological innovation
and capacity development for water productivity
and management entail reforming institutions and
building capacity of communities and individuals,
including an adequate number of technicians and
professional experts (UN-Water, 2014). Shortages
of qualified workers are already hampering the
shift to a greener economy in most countries and
sectors (ILO, 2011a). This is also the case in the water
services sector specifically, as discussed in Chapter
4. Strengthening water governance will require a
concerted programme of education, knowledge and
skills development, including a focus on youth and
women (UN-Water, 2014).
Moreover, it should be emphasized that pursuant to
the human right to water and sanitation, countries
have an obligation to progressively provide safe
drinking water and adequate sanitation services,
including in the workplace. Countries also have the
obligation to guarantee that the right to water is
enjoyed without discrimination and equally between
men and women.
Meeting this obligation will remove one of the
major hurdles to women having the opportunity to
go to school, obtain the appropriate education and
training, and hold positions in the workplace, further
adding to the economies’ skilled human resource
capacity. Clean, safe and readily available water in
homes, schools and other training institutions is
therefore another prerequisite to a healthy economy
(OECD, 2011a). As such, investing in water is a
winning proposition from economic, environmental
and social standpoints.
A significant proportion of water-dependent jobs
hinge on private initiative and sustained investment,
and supported by predictable, reliable, secure
and efficient water management, infrastructure
and services. This requires long-term political
commitment and planning engagement by and

INTRODUCTION

13

on behalf of the community as a whole. Improved
water resources management, WASH services,
and wastewater management are prerequisites to
enhanced employment opportunities and other
related socio-economic benefits (UNEP, 2012b;
OECD, 2012b).
Policies and strategies to support sufficient
investments require mobilizing financing from a wide
range of sources, which can include savings from
cost reductions (from efficiency gains or cheaper
service options), increasing tariffs, taxes and transfers
and mobilizing loans (from market or public sources).
Innovation in regulatory approaches and standards
may be necessary to allow payments for ecosystem
services (PES) or to ensure that polluters internalize
the costs of pollution (UNEP, 2010; OECD, 2012b).
Funding for water infrastructure and services
continues to come primarily from the public sector,
which performs such vital functions as water rights
allocation, price setting, systems maintenance,
service delivery, and infrastructure and capacity
investments. While privatizing government services
is often linked with cost savings, research on such
reforms is incomplete, and the results are mixed. In
the case of Uruguay, a study shows that privatizing
water services had little effect on access to
sanitation, whereas the subsequent nationalization
increased access for poor households and also
improved the water quality (Borraz et al., 2013). The
best-fit scenario is likely to be highly situational, and
requires careful analysis of service costs, transaction
costs and policy environment, including the
competition aspect (Bel et al., 2008).

14

WWDR 2016

Increasing water scarcity presents not only
a substantial risk, but in some cases also an
opportunity for the private sector to stand out by
investing in water efficiency innovation. By one
estimate, improving water productivity to close
the worldwide gap between supply and demand
for water will cost US$50-60 billion annually over
the next 20 years. With private sector investment
comprising about half of that spending, positive
returns could be expected in just three years
(Boccaletti et al., 2009).
International institutions such as the World Bank
continue to promote the value of public-private
partnerships (PPPs), but stress the importance of
considering countries’ legal frameworks around
the regulation of water tariffs and regulatory risks
(World Bank, 2015). A 2010 World Bank review
of PPPs in developing countries emphasized the
importance of using private operators to improve
efficiency and quality of service, rather than simply
as a source of financing (World Bank, 2010).
Importantly, the review found several PPPs involved
substantial layoffs, particularly in Latin America, but
that this was often due to over-staffing; several PPP
arrangements were not associated with significant
reductions in employees. In turn, private sector
involvement can generate significant transfers of
technology and know-how to the benefit of public
utilities and users.

GLOBAL
PERSPECTIVE

2

THE

ON

WATER

River delta in Queensland (Australia)
Photo: © iStock.com/wosabi

This chapter provides an overview of the current state of the world’s
freshwater resources and how these are expected to evolve over the
short and medium term as a function of external driving forces, with
a special focus on climate change and ecosystem health.

2.1

State of freshwater resources

WWAP | Richard Connor
With contributions from Karen Frenken (FAO)

The world’s freshwater resources are renewed
through a continuous cycle of evaporation,
precipitation and runoff – commonly referred to as
the water cycle – that dictates their distribution and
availability over time and space.
There are different ways of defining and measuring
water scarcity and/or water stress. The best-known
indicator of national water scarcity is per capita
renewable water per year, where threshold values are
used to distinguish between different levels of water
stress (Falkenmark and Widstrand, 1992). An area or
country is under regular water stress when renewable
water supplies drop below 1,700 m3 per capita per
year. Populations face chronic water scarcity when
water supplies drop below 1,000 m3 per capita per
year and absolute scarcity below 500 m3 per capita
per year. Using these thresholds, significant disparities
exist between countries (Figure 2.1).

This crude approach to measuring water scarcity
was primarily based on estimates of the number
of people that can reasonably live with a certain
unit of water resources (Falkenmark, 1984; FAO,
2012). Although useful, it oversimplifies the water
situation of specific countries, ignoring local
factors determining access to water, as well as the
feasibility of solutions in different locations, among
others (FAO, 2012).
In an attempt to better capture the relation
between supply and demand, the Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) Water Indicator purports
to measure the level of human pressure on water
resources, based on the ratio between water
withdrawal by agriculture, municipalities and
industries over total renewable water resources
(UNSD, n.d.) (see Figure 2.2). The higher the ratioof-use to available water, the higher the stress on
the supply system and the more difficult it will be
to meet increasing demands.

FIGURE 2.1 TOTAL RENEWABLE WATER RESOURCES (CUBIC METRES PER CAPITA PER YEAR), 2014

Scale ca. 1:140 000 000 at the equator
Geographic Projection, WGS 1984

No data

500

500 - 1 000

1 000 - 1 700

1 700 - 5 000

/year
> 5 Scale
000 ca.
m31:140
000 000 at the equator
Geographic Projection, WGS 1984

Legend

Source: FAO
(2015a, http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/maps/TRWR.Cap_eng.pdf).
No Data
< 500
500 - 1 000
1 000 - 1 700
1 700 - 5 000
> 5 000 m≥/year
Source: AQUASTAT
Geographic Projection

16

WWDR 2016

FIGURE 2.2 PERCENTAGE OF RENEWABLE WATER RESOURCES WITHDRAWN

No data
< 10
10 -25
25 - 60
60 - 75
> 75%

Scale ca. 1:140 000 000 at the equator
Geographic Projection, WGS 1984

Source: FAO (2015a, http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/maps/MDG_eng.pdf).

A problem with national-level information is that for
some larger countries, averaging water availability
over their entire territory masks in-country variability;
Australia, China and the United States provide prime
examples. Another problem is the transboundary
nature of water.

In addition to showing how water stress levels can
vary significantly within larger countries, the basinlevel analysis shown in Figure 2.3 also demonstrates
the transboundary nature of water resources.

FIGURE 2.3 ANNUAL AVERAGE WATER STRESS BASED ON THE WITHDRAWALS-TO-AVAILABILITY RATIO (1981-2010)

Water withdrawals-to-availability ratio
0 - 0.1 (no water stress)
0.1 - 0.2 (low water stress)
0.2 - 0.4 (mid water stress)
more than 0.4 (high water stress)
No data

water withdrawals-to-availability ratio [-]
Water withdrawals-to-availability ratio
0 - 0.1

0.1 - 0.2

0.2 - 0.4

more than 0.4

(c) Center for Environmental
Systems Research,

0 - 0.1 (no water
stress) stress
0.1measures
- 0.2
(low water
stress)
0.2
- 0.4 annual
(mid[high
waterwater
stress)stress]
more than 0.4to
( high waterUniversity
stress) of Kassel
No data renewable supply, accounting for upstream
Note:
water
the[mid
ratio
ofstress]
total
water
withdrawals
annual
[low water
stress]
water
[no Baseline
water stress]
no datatotal available
consumptive use. Higher values indicate more competition among users.

Source: Center for Environmental Systems Research, University of Kassel (Generated in December 2014 using WaterGAP3 model), based on Alcamo
et al. (2007).

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

17

Variability in water availability over time can also
be significant. Some areas of the planet experience
dramatic changes in water availability over months,
creating seasonal variation in supply and demand
Index of
shortage
frequency
over
wet
and dry
seasons. This seasonal variability,
0
and 0the
water
stress
that result from dry periods,
- 0.2
can be
masked by annual averages of water
0.2 - 0.4

availability. Figure 2.4 illustrates the results of an
aggregate model of water scarcity that operates on
a monthly basis for every large river basin globally,
taking into account the seasonal variation in supply
and demand, and the buffering effect that storage
provides (Sadoff et al., 2015).

0.4 - 0.6
0.6 - 0.8
0.8 - 12.4
FIGURE
INDEX OF FREQUENCY OF SHORTAGES OF WATER AVAILABLE FOR USE ON A MONTH-TO-MONTH BASIS

Index of shortage
frequency

0
0 - 0.2
0.2 - 0.4
0.4 - 0.6
0.6 - 0.8
0.8 - 1

Note: The index shows how frequently reservoir levels are predicted to fall below 20% of the total storage, which the authors have taken as being
the storage level at which, on average, restrictions on water use may be applied. Their analysis tracked whether there is enough water available from
rivers, groundwater or reservoirs on a monthly basis to satisfy existing water use patterns.
Source: Sadoff et al. (2015, Fig. 8, p. 77).

Water scarcity emerges from a combination of
hydrological variability and high human use, which
may in part be mitigated by storage infrastructure.
According to Figure 2.4, while the risks of monthly
water shortages are most severe in South Asia and
northern China, some significant risks of seasonal
water scarcity appear on all continents. However,
since this analysis is based on river basins, it does
not address the most arid parts of the world, such
as North Africa and the Arabian Peninsula, through
which no rivers flow (Sadoff et al., 2015).
Since the water cycle is principally driven by climate,
increasing variability in precipitation and evaporation
patterns due to climate change are expected to
exacerbate spatial and temporal variations in water
supply and demand (see Section 2.3).

18

WWDR 2016

The indicators described above refer to physical
water stress and scarcity. However, low physical
water stress does not automatically ensure ready
access to water resources and water-related
services. Water scarcity is the result of multiple
causes, where three dimensions of water scarcity
can be considered: (1) physical water scarcity (as
above); (2) economic water scarcity, due to a lack
of infrastructure because of financial or technical
constraints, irrespective of the level of water
resources; (3) institutional water scarcity, due to
the failure of institutions in place to ensure reliable,
secure and equitable supply of water to users (FAO,
2012). Figure 2.5 illustrates the global distribution of
physical and economic water scarcity.

FIGURE 2.5 GLOBAL PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC WATER SCARCITY

Little or no water scarcity1
Physical water scarcity2
Approaching physical water scarcity3
Economic water scarcity4
Not estimated

Notes:
Little or no water scarcity. Abundant water resources relative to use, with less than 25% of water from rivers withdrawn for human purposes.
Physical water scarcity (water resources development is approaching or has exceeded sustainable limits). More than 75% of river flows are
withdrawn for agriculture, industry, and domestic purposes (accounting for recycling of return flows). This definition – relating water availability
to water demand – implies that dry areas are not necessarily water scarce.
3
Approaching physical water scarcity. More than 60% of river flows are withdrawn. These basins will experience physical water scarcity in the
near future.
4
Economic water scarcity (human, institutional, and financial capital limit access to water even though water in nature is available locally to meet
human demands). Water resources are abundant relative to water use, with less than 25% of water from rivers withdrawn for human purposes,
but malnutrition exists.
1
2

Source: CAWMA (2007, Map 2.1, p. 63), reproduced with permission from the International Water Management Institute (IWMI).

To summarize, some basins and countries receive
relatively abundant amounts of water over an
entire year (Figures 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3). However, in
some areas, rainfall can be highly concentrated
during a particular wet season. Conversely, rainfall
can be scarce in prolonged dry seasons that last
many months (Figure 2.4). Unless there is sufficient
human-made and natural infrastructure to manage
and store the water that arrives during the wet
season, parts of a country can remain arid for
extended periods. This is precisely the case in many
of the areas categorized under economic scarcity
in Figure 2.5. The notion of economic scarcity in
Figure 2.5 is not only due to a lack of available
funding for infrastructure. It also reflects the need
to build human and institutional capacity and/or
legal and regulatory frameworks in order to ensure
good governance in water resources management,
described above as a third type of water scarcity,
institutional water scarcity (see Chapters 12 and 18).

When withdrawn sustainably and recharged
during periods of abundant surface water supplies,
groundwater can provide opportunities for storage
that can act as a buffer to compensate for times
of drought (WWAP, 2012). However, this does not
apply to fossil groundwater, a resource that can be
several thousands of years old and is not naturally
replenished. Groundwater resources are abundant in
many parts of the world, but there is clear evidence
that supplies are diminishing. An estimated 21 of the
world’s 37 largest aquifers are severely over-exploited
in locations, from China and India to France and
the United States (Figure 2.6). Globally, the rate of
groundwater abstraction is increasing by 1% to 2%
per year (WWAP, 2012). The areas under the most
severe groundwater stress are in many of the same
places where surface water is severely stressed.

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

19

FIGURE 2.6 GRACE*-DERIVED GROUNDWATER STORAGE ANOMALIES IN MILLIMETRES PER YEAR
(AS AVERAGED OVER THE 2003-2013 BASE PERIOD)

* NASA's Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) satellites.
Source: Richey et al. (2015, Fig. 6b, p. 5228).

Water availability is also highly dependent on
water quality. Poor quality water may not be fit
for different uses and the cost of treatment may
be prohibitive, thus compounding the burden of
economic water scarcity. According to a recent
study by Veolia and the International Food Policy
Research Institute IFPRI (2015, p. 3): ‘Water quality
deterioration is projected to rapidly increase over
the next several decades which, in turn, will increase
risks to human health, economic development
and ecosystems.’ Industrial production, mining
and untreated urban runoff and wastewater
generate a wide range of chemical pollutants and
pathogenic contaminants that tend to increase with
unsustainable urban and industrial development.
Nutrient loads from intensive use of fertilizers in
agriculture (nitrogen, phosphorous and potassium),
which are expected to increase through 2050
(Figure 2.7), contribute to the eutrophication of
freshwater and coastal marine ecosystems.

20

WWDR 2016

It is estimated that the number of people living in
environments with high water quality risks due to
excessive biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) will
affect one-fifth of the global population in 2050,
while people facing risks from excessive nitrogen and
phosphorous will increase to one-third of the global
population over the same period (Veolia and IFPRI,
2015). As shown in Figure 2.7, projected changes in
water quality risks vary at country and basin levels.
The greatest increases in exposure to pollutants are
expected to occur in low- and lower-middle income
countries, primarily because of higher population and
economic growth within these countries, especially
those in Africa. Given the transboundary nature of
most river basins, regional cooperation will be critical
to addressing projected water quality challenges.

FIGURE 2.7 WATER QUALITY RISK INDICES FOR MAJOR RIVER BASINS DURING BASE PERIOD (2000-2005)
COMPARED TO 2050 (N INDEX UNDER THE CSIRO*-MEDIUM SCENARIO**)

No data
Low (0-2)
Moderate (2-5)
Elevated (5-15)
High (>15)

2000-2005 Base Period

No data
Low (0-2)
Moderate (2-5)
Elevated (5-15)
High (>15)

2050

* Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
** This scenario takes into account a drier future (as projected by the CSIRO climate change model) and a medium level of socio-economic growth.
Source: Veolia and IFPRI (2015, Fig. 3, p. 9).

2.2

Increasing pressures and growing
demand

WWAP | Richard Connor and Marc Paquin
With contributions from Karen Frenken (FAO) and
Catherine Cosgrove

Between 2011 and 2050, the world population
is expected to increase by 33%, growing from
seven billion to 9.3 billion (UN DESA, 2011), and
food demand will rise by 60% in the same period

(Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012). Furthermore,
it is projected that populations living in urban areas
will almost double, from 3.6 billion in 2011 to 6.3
billion in 2050 (UN DESA, 2011).
Population dynamics and an ever-increasing global
standard of living are driving production and
consumption of goods and services to meet the
escalating needs of a growing and richer population.
Market demand for water-intensive products, such as

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

21

Regardless of the magnitude
of future global, and more
importantly local, water
deficits, water scarcity is
likely to limit opportunities
for economic growth and the
creation of decent jobs in the
coming decades

meat, tends to increase with economic development,
thus dramatically raising the water demand from
agriculture. The growth in energy demand, which
is also water-intensive, is also expected to surge.
Moreover, population growth amplifies the challenge
of providing water and food to many more people
and generating enough decent jobs, which in turn
depend on economic development (UNEP, 2011a).
An estimated 663 million people lack ready access
to improved2 sources of drinking water, while the
number of people without reliable access to water
of good enough quality to be safe for human
consumption is at least 1.8 billion (UNICEF/WHO,
2015), and possibly significantly more. More than
one-third of the global population – some 2.4 billion
people – do not use improved sanitation facilities;
of these, one billion people still practice open
defecation (UNICEF/WHO, 2015).
Water use (withdrawals and consumption)3 by
different sectors is generally based on estimates,
rather than actual measurements. These estimates
indicate that freshwater withdrawals increased
globally by about 1% per year between 1987 and
2000 (FAO, 2015a), and available evidence suggests
a slightly lower growth rate (0.6%) over the past
15 years. The growth rate over the 20th century is
estimated at about 1.9% per year, with the highest
growth rate of 2.5% per year between 1950 and
1980 (Shiklomanov, 1997). In much of the world’s
most highly developed countries, freshwater
withdrawals have stabilized or slightly declined,
due in part to a combination of improved wateruse efficiency and increased importation of water
intensive products, including food. It can therefore
be deduced that the current increase in water use is
occurring mainly in developing countries.

2

An ‘improved water source’ is defined as one where human use
is kept separate from use by animals and faecal contamination.
However, water from an ‘improved source’ is not necessarily free
of bacteria or other contamination and is not necessarily safe.

3

Withdrawal is the total amount of water taken from a lake,
river or aquifer for any purpose. Consumption is the fraction
of withdrawn water that is lost in transmission, evaporation,
absorption or chemical transformation, or otherwise made
unavailable for other purposes as a result of human use.

22

WWDR 2016

Agriculture accounts for roughly 70% of total
freshwater withdrawals globally and for over
90% in the majority of Least Developed Countries
(LDCs) (FAO, 2011a). Developed countries generally
withdraw less for agriculture and more for energy
production and large industry, which account for
15% and 5% of global withdrawals, respectively.
Fulfilling the water-related needs of households
(for drinking water, sanitation, hygiene, cleaning,
etc.), institutions (e.g. schools and hospitals) and
most small- and medium-sized industries, municipal
systems account for the remaining 10% of global
freshwater withdrawals (WWAP, 2012).4
Without improved efficiency measures, agricultural
water consumption is expected to increase by about
20% globally by 2050 (WWAP, 2012). Domestic and
industrial water demands are also expected to rise,
particularly in cities and countries undergoing rapid
economic growth. Water demand for energy, and
electricity generation in particular, will also grow
significantly (WWAP, 2014), as energy demand is
expected to grow by more than one-third in the
period 2010-2035, with 90% occurring in nonOECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development) countries (IEA, 2012a).
The OECD’s 2012 Global Environmental Outlook’s
Baseline Scenario (OECD, 2012a)5 projects increasing
strains on freshwater availability through 2050,
with an additional 2.3 billion people (over 40%
of the global population) expected to be living in

4

For a detailed description of water use by sector, see WWAP, 2012.

5

The OECD’s Baseline Scenario is a business-as-usual scenario that
assumes linear growth rates in water demand trends and the
absence of new policies that would affect these growth trends

FIGURE 2.8 GLOBAL WATER DEMAND (FRESHWATER WITHDRAWALS): BASELINE SCENARIO, 2000 AND 2050

6 000

Water demand (km3)

5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000

0

2000

2050
OECD

Irrigation

2000

2050

2000

BRIICS
Domestic

Livestoc k

2050
RoW

Manufacturing

2000

2050
World

Electricity

Note: BRIICS (Brazil, Russia, India, Indonesia, China, South Africa); OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development);
RoW (rest of world). This figure only measures ‘blue water’ demand and does not consider rainfed agriculture.
Source: OECD (2012a, Fig. 5.4, p. 217).

areas with severe water stress, especially in North
and South Africa and South and Central Asia. As
shown in Figure 2.7, global water demand (in terms
of freshwater withdrawal) is projected to increase
by some 55% due to growing demands from
manufacturing (400%), thermal electricity generation
(140%) and domestic use (130%). Another report
predicts the world could face a 40% global water
deficit by 2030 under a business-as-usual (BAU)
scenario (2030 WRG, 2009). As described above in
Section 2.1, a number of countries and basins already
face severe water deficits.
While the OECD projects a global decrease in
future water withdrawals for irrigation, the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) (FAO, 2011a) estimates a 5.5% increase in
irrigation water withdrawals from 2008 to 2050.
Although OECD and FAO estimate are not necessarily
contradictory – provided irrigation efficiency enables
a larger proportion of water withdrawn to be
consumed by crops in the field – they do, however,

highlight the challenge of quantifying projected
global water demand and associated water stresses.
Despite improved modelling and computing capacity,
quantifying potential increases in water demand and
resulting water deficits is extremely difficult due to
uncertainties concerning future bio-physical, climatic,
economic and socio-political conditions (WWAP,
2012). This is particularly true for rapidly evolving
sectors such as industry and energy, and for smaller
countries that experience high levels of seasonal and
year-to-year variability in water availability. A review
of 13 Water Demand Projections by Amarasinghe
and Smakhtin (2014) concluded that current average
per capita domestic water withdrawal already
exceeds projections made by BAU scenarios for 2025
developed in the early 2000s.
Regardless of the magnitude of future global, and
more importantly local, water deficits, water scarcity is
likely to limit opportunities for economic growth and
the creation of decent jobs in the coming decades.

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

23

2.3

Climate change and extreme events

UNESCO-IHP, WMO and IAHS | Wouter Buytaert, Anil Mishra,
Siegfried Demuth and Blanca Jiménez Cisneros (UNESCO-IHP);
Bruce Stewart and Claudio Caponi (WMO); and Christophe
Cudennec (IAHS)

Climate change exacerbates multiple threats to water
availability and may increase the frequency, intensity
and severity of extreme weather events. There is high
agreement among scientists that climate change
will alter stream flow regimes, deteriorate water
quality, and change spatial and temporal patterns
of precipitation and water availability (IPCC, 2014).
Furthermore, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) 5th Assessment projects that for each
degree of global warming, approximately 7% of the
global population will be exposed to a decrease of
renewable water resources of at least 20% (Döll et al.,
2014; Schewe et al., 2014). This will put an increasing
portion of the global population under risk of water
scarcity. Although the geography of these changes is
highly variable and uncertain, regions that are currently
arid and semi-arid are expected to be most vulnerable
to increased drought risk.
Dry subtropical regions are specific hotspots
for a significant reduction in renewable surface
water and groundwater resources. More locally,
hydrogeomorphological settings currently under
water stress or overexploitation will, with increasing
demography, become more vulnerable to drought, such
as coastal plains, deltas, islands or high altitude areas.
Reduced water availability will intensify competition for
water among users, including agriculture, ecosystem
maintenance, settlements, industry (including tourism)
and energy production. This will affect regional
water, energy and food security, and potentially
geopolitical security. Regions that have been identified
as vulnerable to increasing water stress include the
Mediterranean, parts of South America, Western
Australia, China and sub-Saharan Africa.
Historic evidence shows changes in flood magnitude
and frequency due to anthropogenic climate change.
Moreover, future projections suggest that flood hazards
will intensify, particularly in parts of South, Southeast
and Northeast Asia, as well as tropical Africa and

24

WWDR 2016

The potential impact of climate
change on economic activity and
the job market could be severe
South America. Increased exposure and vulnerability
of burgeoning populations will exacerbate socioeconomic losses.
The potential impact of climate change on
economic activity and the job market could be
severe. While climate change is creating an industry
of its own in mitigation and adaptation, its effects
will inevitably lead to loss of jobs in certain sectors.
A proactive approach to adaptation via employment
policies may enable offsetting some of these losses.
An optimal use of these opportunities will require
flexible infrastructure approaches, greater mobility
of workforces, and capacity building and training
across all levels, especially in LDCs.
Many of the world’s developing economies are
located in hotspots of water-related stress, in
particular in Africa, Asia and the Middle East.
Worldwide, the cost of water insecurity to the
irrigation sector is estimated at US$94 billion
per year, and the total cost of water insecurity to
the global economy at US$500 billion annually
(Sadoff et al., 2015). Including environmental
impacts, this figure may rise to 1% of global GDP
(Sadoff et al., 2015). Worldwide flood damage
amounted to over US$50 billion in 2013 and is
increasing (Guha-Sapir et al., 2014). The impacts of
climate change are expected to lead to substantial
unemployment across the global economy through
employment cuts, and may amount to a reduction
of 2% of jobs by 2020 (Jochem et al, 2009).
By far the most vulnerable economic sector is
agriculture, which is globally one of the biggest
in terms of workers and still drives economic
development in many emerging economies. On
a global scale, the impact of climate change on
the growing conditions of major crops, such as
wheat, maize and rice, are predominantly negative
(IPCC, 2014). Even though positive impacts of
climate change may occur locally, smallholder

Flooding in Steyr (Austria)
Photo: © Lisa S./Shutterstock.com

farmers in many emerging economies do not have
the necessary capacity to flexibly adapt to these
opportunities. Additionally, the increasing stress on
water resources may inhibit adaptation efforts that
rely on increased irrigation or at least maintaining
current levels of irrigation. In those regions, a failure
to adapt may have dramatic consequences for local
employment, with potential follow-on effects to
trade and migration.
Many water supply systems still incur large losses
and inefficiencies. Even in developed countries
the loss in water supply systems can be higher
than 30%, with cities such as London reaching
25% (Thames London, 2014) and Norway 32%
(Statistics Norway, 2015). Urban water supply
systems are prone to leakage and spills, and
irrigation practices are often dominated by low
technology and inefficient methods such as basin
and furrow irrigation. However, short- and mediumterm adaptation activities could create jobs in the
infrastructure sector. Adaptation policies should,
therefore, focus on mobilizing the financial resources
to accelerate improved infrastructure design and
development. The construction and upgrade of
flood defence schemes is essential to protect the
most vulnerable, as well as the economic, social and
cultural assets that are at risk. In some instances, it
may be necessary to give consideration to additional
catchment storage to protect against increasing
intensity and frequency of droughts.
In the longer term, climate change will affect the
biogeography and potential of agriculture in many
regions. Inevitably, these changes will occur in a
context of multiple other pressures, such as land use

change, environmental degradation and economic
development. Adapting to these interdependent
changes will require a combination of scientific,
engineering, economic and sociological knowledge
and skills. But because of the inherent uncertainty
in these changes, it will also be necessary to adopt
flexible, ‘no-regret’ strategies. This will require
moving away from hard infrastructure-based
solutions to more intelligent and adaptive solutions,
including green and multi-purpose infrastructure.
For instance, green roofs, wetlands, landscape
features and intelligently managed sluices have the
potential to provide increased buffering and storage
capacity, and to increase the societal benefits well
as the adaptive capacity of water resources and
risk management. The design and implementation
of such solutions will create jobs, with additional
jobs for those systems that need continuous
and proactive operation. Intelligent monitoring
and control systems will be needed to guide the
operation and maintenance of such structures.
The development, implementation and operation
of these systems also provide great opportunities
for job creation. Even at present, it is estimated
that already around 5% of all jobs in England are
in the ‘green space’ sector (including public parks
departments, nature reserves, botanical/zoological
gardens, landscape services and architectural
services) (Gore et al., 2013).
Together with novel infrastructure design, there
is a need for the development, establishment and
operation of new systems and approaches for
monitoring, predicting, early warning, and risk
assessment and management. Early warning systems
improve preparedness and support response and
recovery where impacts cannot be avoided. Improved
risk assessment strategies, such as the development
of weather-index-based agricultural insurance
products (IFAD/WFP, 2011), allow for better
mitigation of losses, optimization of supply chain
resilience and a circular economy, among others.
In particular, the Sendai Framework for Disaster
Risk Reduction (2015-2030) calls for relevant UN
agencies to strengthen existing and implement new
global mechanisms to raise awareness and improve

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

25

understanding of water-related disaster risks and
their impact on society, and to advance strategies
for disaster risk reduction (UNISDR, 2015). These
strategies would shift the way water resources are
managed, especially in the context of high-impact
and record-setting extremes in floods and droughts.
Preparatory actions are required to decrease
exposure to disaster risk and vulnerability when
hazards occur and to increase societal resiliency
when disaster strikes.

2.4

Ecosystem health

UNEP | Eric Hoa and Birguy Lamizana

Ecosystem health relies on environmental flows that
ensure the sustainable and equitable distribution of
and access to water and related ecosystem services.
The quality, quantity and timing of water flows are
essential to maintaining the functions, processes and
resilience of aquatic ecosystems on which livelihoods
and economic opportunities depend. A special case
is ecosystems whose services are directly dependent
on the groundwater system.
Since the 1990s, water pollution has worsened in
almost all rivers in Latin America, Africa and Asia.
The main causes include increases in untreated
wastewater loadings to freshwater bodies (rivers and
lakes) and unsustainable land use practices which
enhance erosion and lead to increased nutrient and
sediment loadings. This trend is driven by population
growth, urbanization and the related increasing
number of small-scale industrial and agricultural
structures that are not always well-managed
and generate untreated wastewater. In 2010,
severe organic pollution (with monthly in-stream
concentrations of BOD above 8 mg/L) is estimated to
affect 6% to 10% of Latin American river stretches,
7% to 15% of African river stretches and 11% to
17% of Asian river stretches (UNEP, forthcoming).
The populations directly affected by organic
pollution include poor rural people, who mainly
rely on freshwater fish for protein, and low-income
fishers and workers who depend on the freshwater
fishery for their livelihoods. Inland capture fisheries

26

WWDR 2016

are indeed an important source of livelihood in
developing countries, providing employment for 21
million fishers (FAO, 2014a), as well as 38.5 million
jobs in post-catch processing and other related
activities (World Bank, 2012). Most activities take
place in small-scale fisheries, with over half of the
total workforce being women.
Although water pollution is serious and worsening
in Latin America, Africa and Asia, there are great
opportunities for reversing the trend. This entails
taking action to mitigate further pollution, restore
the degraded ecosystems (with rehabilitation
measures such as reforestation) and adopt a holistic
approach towards wastewater management. The
latter includes the implementation of conventional
and unconventional wastewater treatment schemes
and the consideration of wastewater reuse (e.g.
for irrigation and aquaculture) in line with health
safeguards (WHO, 2006). The monitoring and
assessment of water quality are also essential in order
to understand the intensity and scope of the global
water quality challenge and to implement proper
corrective actions that sustain ecosystem health.
For freshwater bodies, the flow regime is an
important determinant of the ecosystem services that
are provided. Base flows maintain water table levels
in the floodplain and soil moisture for plants, while
large floods recharge floodplain aquifers. Therefore,
it is crucial that, in water resources management
plans, a certain volume of water, or environmental
water requirements (EWR), is accounted for the
maintenance of freshwater ecosystem functions and
the services they provide to women and men. EWR
required for maintaining a fair condition of freshwater
bodies range globally from 20% to 50% of the mean
annual river flow in a basin (Boelee, 2011).
On a global scale, there is significant momentum to
incorporate environmental flows into policy making
and watershed management plans. They are already
addressed in international agreements, such as
the Ramsar Convention or the UN Watercourses
Convention (entered into force in 2014), regional
frameworks such as the European Water Framework

As competition for freshwater
resources grows and climate
change affects resource
availability, it will become
more difficult to meet socioeconomic-based demands while
maintaining ecosystem integrity
and environmental sustainability

Directive and national water policies such as the South
African National Water Act (Forslund et al., 2009).
Adopting an ecosystem-based approach to watershed
management, including the economic valuation of
ecosystem services, is one way of recognizing (and
quantifying) the benefits of ecosystem services for
livelihoods and employment. Ecosystems are part
of the sustainable growth challenge and should be
taken into account for broad policy- and decisionmaking contexts to ensure equitable share of benefits
and contribute to poverty alleviation, especially in
developing countries. In that regard, the emerging
market for PES schemes may offer low-income
populations the opportunity to create a new type of
entrepreneurship (with its related jobs) and thereby,
to generate increased income while implementing
restoration/conservation practices.

2.5

The challenges ahead

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove and Lucilla Minelli

Considering the finite nature of water resources
in any given region, unavoidable challenges in the
form of trade-offs loom over the coming decades.
As competition for freshwater resources grow and
climate change affects resource availability, it will
become more difficult to meet socio-economic-based
demands while maintaining ecosystem integrity and
environmental sustainability (UNEP, 2011b). A systemic
approach is called for in this context, which requires
overcoming multi-level governance challenges
(OECD, 2011b).

One challenge is to ensure that decisions pertaining to
water (and sanitation) are consistent with a country’s
human rights obligations. As noted in Chapter 5,
States are required, to the maximum extent of their
available resources, to take steps to progressively and
by all appropriate means achieve the full realization
of these rights. States are also required to gradually
provide safe drinking water and adequate sanitation
services to prevent, treat and control diseases linked
to water, including in the workplace. In addition,
States have the obligation to guarantee that the
right to water is enjoyed without discrimination and
equally between men and women (UN, 2003). In this
context, decision-makers must prioritize the fulfilment
of the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation over competing uses that could prevent the
progressive realization of this right.
A second challenge is to ensure the sustainability
of ecosystems as well as their water component. In
order to guarantee continued access to sufficient and
adequate water for people and the economy over
time, it is imperative that decision-makers from the
local level up assess the needs of water provisioning
ecosystems and take the actions required to preserve,
sustainably manage and, where necessary, restore
the ecosystems based on available knowledge
and datasets (WWAP, 2012; Ramsar Convention
Secretariat, 2010). The key decisions involve the
allocation of sufficient amounts of water to ensure
the sustainable functioning of the ecosystems
(Forslund et al., 2009). These necessary choices
seek to maximize the socio-economic opportunities
provided by healthy and sustainable ecosystems and
lower the risks associated with vulnerable water
resources. The adequate management of ecosystems
also supports their resilience, and the resilience of
those who depend upon them, to cope with stresses
such as drought, extreme weather events and
climate change (WWAP, 2012). A variety of concepts,
approaches and tools, such as IWRM and valuation of
ecosystem services, can be of assistance in this regard.
Other challenges can be tackled when the
sustainability of water resources is ensured through
adequate ecosystem protection and management,
and the human right to safe drinking water and

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

27

sanitation, as well as the other human rights that
depend on water, are prioritized in accordance with
international law. This requires allocating remaining
water resources to the competing socio-economic
needs and requirements (e.g. drinking water and
sanitation, agriculture, energy production, industry),
in keeping with a community or country’s social
and economic development priorities and strategies
(Speed et al., 2013).
Given that ecosystems may not hold enough water
to sustain all the economic activities that rely on it
(especially in a growth context), decision-makers,
in concert with stakeholders, must arbitrate among
competing demands. Policy decisions on the amount
of water each economic sector (and each water
consumer in these sectors) will be entitled to for its
activities must therefore be made. For example, in
terms of water availability, some regions will favour
certain economic sectors (e.g. energy production
or urban needs), while others will support different
ones (e.g. agriculture). The decision to allocate more
water to one sector rather than another can have
tremendous consequences on the performance,
and even the viability, of the affected sectors, with
resulting impacts on income generation and jobs
(SIWI/WHO, 2005). In this context, the shift to a
green economy in eight key sectors (agriculture,
forestry, fishing, energy, resource-intensive
manufacturing, recycling, buildings and transport)
can lead to significant benefits by supporting them
in the adoption of greener and more productive
practices (ILO, 2012; UNEP, 2011c).

28

WWDR 2016

Finally, a fourth challenge for policy-makers consists
of addressing trade-offs to offset the negative
impacts that may arise from the aforementioned
water allocation decisions. Examples of such tradeoffs include transitional assistance mechanisms
and the provision of adequate compensation and
adjustments for water surrendered, bearing in mind
that those in the value chain can be affected by
any fall-off in economic activity as a result of the
reductions in water allocation (Speed et al., 2013;
OECD, 2012a).
The water entitlement decision-making process
is also an occasion to explore opportunities for
maximizing the benefits of water allocation choices.
Water can be a powerful vector for shifting a
conventional economy towards a greener one
through the reduction of pollution or waste and
greater efficiency in the use of water, energy and
materials that are likely to generate a small positive
change in total employment in most instances
(UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC, 2008).
Failure to meet these concurrent challenges may
prove costly in many ways: declining ecosystems
and ecosystem services, unsustainable economic
development, social unrest and migration (see
Box 2.1) resulting from water insecurity and
compromised public health and resilience (OECD,
2008; Lant, 2004).

BOX 2.1 WATER STRESS, MIGRATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Climate change, water stress and environmental degradation are affecting large populations around the world
and represent major threats to international peace, human security and wellbeing. There is a clear connection
between water scarcity, food insecurity, social instability and potentially violent conflicts, which in turn can
trigger and intensify migration patterns throughout the world. Many Asian, African and Middle Eastern
nations as well as Small Islands Developing States are witnessing widespread migration flows exacerbated by
adverse climate change effects and political volatility. Several studies estimate that by 2050 between 150 and
200 million people could be displaced as a consequence of phenomena, such as desertification, sea level rise
and increased extreme weather events (Scheffran et al., 2012). However, environmental drivers are only a part
of the equation as poor governance, political instability, economic and cultural issues also contribute to this
multi-faced and complex phenomenon.
Water stress not only can underpin reasons for fleeing, but it can also turn into a consequence as migratory
groups put additional pressures on the water resources of recipient countries. Employment is also affected on
both sides of the coin: high joblessness rates and unrest are engines for migration, which in turn leave postconflict countries without active workforce for reconstruction. On the other hand, increased request for jobs or
subsidies represent a major challenge for hosting countries which dispose of inadequate established policy or
legislation to deal with these pressures and address the needs and rights of 'environmental migrants'.6
The case of Bangladesh is an example of the water-migration-employment nexus: poverty is widespread,
sea level rise is turning much of the country’s fertile land into a saline desert and extensive flooding occurs
regularly with increasing severity – all of which have led to a large, landless population. About 61% of
the population of Bangladesh is of working age (15 to 64 years old). However, those who are employed in
the formal labour market often work just a few hours a week at low wages. This context has favoured a
predominance of economically-motivated international migration from Bangladesh. Even if these temporary
movements7 can positively contribute to the economy of Bangladesh, the country’s migration stream comes
with its own set of problems (MPI, 2011). In fact, the arrival of migrants in receiving countries can add burdens
upon the local economy, social structure and ecosystems which need to be addressed in terms of the resilience
of hosting communities.
Policy responses aimed at mitigating ‘the stress associated with water scarcity and detrimental aspects of
migration strategies have many opportunities to reinforce community resilience and maintain coping options’
(Dow et al., 2005, p. 25). These may include: promotion of green jobs in the formulation and implementation
of climate adaptation and mitigation strategies; improved access to water services; increased efforts towards
women empowerment and education; fairer land tenure systems (vs land/water grabbing); investments in
modern assessments and monitoring of water resources; awareness raising to reduce disaster risk; protection
of cultural heritage and traditional knowledge; review of current international law and treaties on migration,
refugees and displacement; and development of urban areas based on more equitable distribution of water
resources and resource recovery approach, in addition to other region- and context-specific actions. Research
and policy should look beyond the two-way relationship between water scarcity and migration as ‘sustainable
development efforts must engage with the complexity of local livelihoods and social structures through which
water scarcity is understood and managed’ (Dow et al., 2005, p. 26).
Contributed by Lucilla Minelli (WWAP).

6

The International Organization for Migration (IOM, 2007, pp. 1-2) defines environmental migrants as 'persons or groups of
persons who, for compelling reasons of sudden or progressive change in the environment that adversely affects their lives or living
conditions, are obliged to leave their habitual homes, or choose to do so, either temporarily or permanently, and who move either
within their country or abroad'.

7

Receiving countries authorize workers to work for legally specified periods of limited duration.

THE GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE ON WATER

29

3

ECONOMY, JOBS
AND WATER

Collecting salt in Sambhar Salt Lake (India)
Photo: © Iryna Rasko/Shutterstock.com

This chapter provides a lexicon of the terminology used in this report followed
by an overview of global employment trends. It then describes the importance
of water for economies and many of the jobs they support, with a special focus
on the agri-food, energy and industrial sectors.

3.1

Terminology

WWAP | Marc Paquin and Richard Connor
ILO | Carlos Carrion-Crespo

For the purposes of this report, it is useful to define
some of the terms used when discussing jobs in
general and jobs as they relate to water in particular.
Jobs are an individual’s set of tasks that will deliver
the work within a single enterprise, farm, community,
household, or other production unit, including selfemployment (ICLS 2013, para. 12(b)). Jobs can be
formal or informal. A formal job refers to a job that
is, in law and in practice, subject to national labour
legislation, income taxation, social protection or
entitlement to certain employment benefits (advance
notice of dismissal, severance pay, paid annual or sick
leave, etc.). Conversely, an informal job refers to a
job that is, in law or in practice, not subject to national
labour legislation, income taxation, social protection
or entitlement to certain employment benefits (ILO,
2003a).
Direct jobs result from investment in any given
economic sector (e.g. jobs created at a recently-built
water treatment plant). Indirect jobs are created
when an investment in a sector leads to an increase
in jobs in suppliers and distributors of that sector
(e.g. jobs at a chemical plant that produces the
required products to be used in a recently-built water
treatment plant). The jobs resulting from direct and
indirect employees spending more (and thus increasing
consumption) will create a number of induced jobs
(ILO, 2013c; IFC, 2013). Growth-related jobs refer
to job creation through macro-benefits resulting, for
example, from improved infrastructure, such as an
increase in water supply that allows for additional
production, leading to economic growth, and hence
employment (IFC, 2013) (Figure 3.1).
Green jobs are decent jobs that contribute to preserve
or restore the environment; they are in traditional
sectors such as manufacturing and construction, or
in new, emerging green sectors including renewable
energy and energy efficiency (ILO, 2013b).

FIGURE 3.1 DIRECT, INDIRECT, INDUCED AND
GROWTH-RELATED JOBS
Growth-related jobs
Induced jobs
Indirect jobs

Direct jobs

Source: IFC (2013, Fig.6.1, p. 64, © World Bank.
License: CC BY 3.0 IGO).

Work is meant as any activity performed by any
person to produce goods or to provide services for use
by that person or others, irrespective of its formality
or legality (ICLS, 2013, para. 6). Work can be divided
in two broad categories: paid and unpaid. Paid work
describes work performed for others in exchange for
pay or profit, whereas unpaid work refers to the
production work for the person’s own use, unpaid
trainee work, volunteer work, unpaid work by
prisoners and unpaid military or alternative civilian
service (ICLS, 2013, paras. 28 to 39).
According to the International Labour Organization
(ILO) (2007b, p. 4), ‘decent work sums up the
aspirations of people in their working lives. It involves
opportunities for work that is productive and delivers
a fair income, security in the workplace and social
protection for families. Decent work means better
prospects for personal development and social
integration, and freedom for people to express their
concerns, organize and participate in the decisions
that affect their lives. It entails equality of opportunity
and treatment for all women and men.’
Persons in employment are defined as all those of
working age who, during a short reference period, are
engaged in any activity to produce goods or provide
services for pay or profit. They comprise: (a) employed
persons at work, i.e. who worked in a job for at least
one hour; and (b) employed persons not at work due
to temporary absence from a job, or to working-time

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

31

Agriculture is the primary
employment sector in most
developing countries and
currently accounts for 60% of
all jobs in sub-Saharan Africa,
where women account for one
half the sector’s workforce

arrangements (such as shift work, flexitime and
compensatory leave for overtime) (ICLS, 2013,
para. 27).
Underemployment exists when employed persons
have not attained their full employment level in
the sense of the Employment Policy Convention
adopted by the International Labour Conference
in 1964. According to this Convention, full
employment ensures that (i) there is work for
all persons who are willing to work and look
for work; (ii) that such work is as productive as
possible; and (iii) that they have the freedom to
choose the employment and that each worker has
all the possibilities to acquire the necessary skills
to get the employment that most suits them and
to use in this employment such skills and other
qualifications that they possess. The situations that
do not fulfil objective (i) refer to unemployment,
and those that do not satisfy objectives (ii) or (iii)
refer mainly to underemployment (ILO, 1964).
For the purposes of this report, the following
categories are used when discussing jobs as they
relate to water.
Water jobs (or jobs in the water sectors, or
water sector jobs) are the direct jobs in the water
sectors, which are mainly comprised of: a) water
resources management, including IWRM and
ecosystem restoration and remediation; b) building
and managing water infrastructure; and c) the
provision of water-related services, which includes:
water supply; sewerage, waste management and
remediation activities (UN DESA, 2008).
Water-dependent jobs refer to direct jobs in
heavily and moderately water-dependent economic
sectors. Heavily water-dependent economic sectors
consist of those requiring a significant quantity
of water as a major and necessary input to their
activities and/or production processes. Failure to
secure an adequate and reliable supply of water
to support these sectors results in the loss or
disappearance of jobs (i.e. no water, no jobs).
Moderately water-dependent economic sectors
can be defined as those that do not require

32

WWDR 2016

access to significant quantities of water resources
for their activities, but for which water is a
nevertheless an essential component in parts of
their production chains.
Ancillary water jobs are those that provide
the water-related enabling environment and
necessary support to the activities or operation of
an organization, institution, industry or system.
This encompasses, for example, legal and policy
specialists, engineers, planners, financiers and
hydrologists.
Finally, water-related jobs refer indiscriminately to
any job whose essential tasks relate to water. These
comprise mainly water sector jobs and ancillary
water jobs.

3.2

Global employment trends

WWAP | Richard Connor with contributions from Laurens Thuy

ILO’s employment statistics show that the global
active workforce (i.e. paid work) increased from 2.3
billion people in 1991 to an estimated 3.2 billion in
2014 (Table 3.1), while the global population grew
from 5.4 billion to 7.2 billion over the same period
(UN DESA, 2001, 2015). The industry and services
sectors account for this increase, while employment
in the agricultural sectors (agriculture, forestry and
fishing) experienced a slight decrease during this
period (Figure 3.2). The male to female employment
ratio has remained steady over the past 25 years,
with women accounting for 40% of the global active
workforce (Table 3.2).

TABLE 3.1 EMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR AND SEX, WORLD AND REGIONS (MILLIONS)
AGRICULTURE
BOTH SEXES

INDUSTRY

SERVICES

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

966.8

1 057.9

932.3

929.3

894.8

870.8

1 009.5

1 399.9

1 425.3

1 540.1

420.7

545.4

814.3

836.3

953.5

Developed Economies and European Union

28.7

24.5

16.7

16.6

15.3

221.1

217.6

213.4

215.3

216.0

167.7

206.1

245.0

248.6

261.5

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

32.7

35.1

26.8

26.6

25.0

73.5

68.4

82.7

83.1

82.7

40.8

42.2

56.3

56.7

58.7

East Asia

355.8

361.9

203.6

194.0

150.3

269.4

315.2

478.8

486.4

510.8

46.8

72.2

145.9

152.3

180.6

South-East Asia and the Pacific

112.6

120.3

117.0

116.9

109.1

59.2

86.1

126.3

128.9

144.7

24.1

35.9

64.0

66.5

81.4

South Asia

259.7

302.2

299.4

300.7

294.7

113.1

148.0

240.9

248.0

289.8

46.6

58.3

90.7

94.2

117.4

Latin America and the Caribbean

41.9

43.2

42.0

42.5

42.6

74.3

94.5

129.6

131.1

141.9

50.3

70.3

107.3

109.2

121.8

Middle East and North Africa

20.8

24.1

27.5

27.9

29.3

26.5

35.4

59.9

61.3

68.7

18.8

26.2

43.0

44.0

50.6

114.7

146.5

199.5

204.1

228.5

33.6

44.2

68.3

71.1

85.5

25.6

34.3

62.2

64.9

81.5

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

World

Sub-Saharan Africa
MALES

580.6

606.9

521.4

518.4

488.0

570.1

691.8

969.7

987.4

1 068.4

220.8

275.9

412.3

425.1

498.9

Developed Economies and European Union

17.6

15.2

10.9

10.9

10.1

148.4

147.7

146.4

147.9

149.9

74.0

88.9

101.5

103.1

109.0

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

17.3

19.1

12.9

12.9

12.8

46.3

43.3

54.4

54.7

54.5

16.9

18.0

23.9

23.9

24.6

200.8

183.0

87.3

81.3

52.9

143.6

195.2

302.6

306.9

320.2

26.6

34.6

74.0

78.4

100.5

World

East Asia

62.7

66.1

63.0

63.3

60.2

37.2

54.9

81.3

83.1

92.6

13.0

18.9

32.0

32.7

39.6

172.6

196.1

195.5

195.3

185.8

95.6

126.4

202.1

208.0

241.3

34.1

43.1

67.0

69.6

86.7

Latin America and the Caribbean

32.1

32.5

31.8

32.1

32.2

54.3

66.5

88.2

89.2

96.7

24.1

30.8

44.5

45.3

51.0

Middle East and North Africa

16.6

24.1

20.0

20.4

21.0

24.0

32.0

54.8

56.1

62.9

15.0

19.9

30.9

31.6

36.3

Sub-Saharan Africa

60.9

76.2

100.0

102.1

112.9

20.6

25.8

39.9

41.6

50.3

17.0

21.8

38.6

40.3

51.1

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

South-East Asia and the Pacific
South Asia

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

FEMALES

386.2

451.0

411.0

410.9

406.8

300.7

317.6

430.2

437.8

471.7

200.0

269.5

402.0

411.3

454.6

Developed Economies and European Union

11.0

9.2

5.7

5.7

5.2

72.7

69.9

67.0

67.4

66.1

93.7

117.2

143.5

145.5

152.4

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

15.4

16.0

13.9

13.7

12.1

27.2

25.1

28.3

28.4

28.2

23.9

24.2

32.4

32.8

34.0

155.0

178.9

116.3

112.7

97.4

125.8

120.0

176.2

179.5

190.6

20.2

37.6

71.9

73.8

80.1

49.9

54.3

54.1

53.6

48.9

22.0

31.1

45.0

45.8

52.1

11.1

17.1

32.0

33.8

41.9

103.9

105.4

108.8

17.5

21.6

38.8

40.1

15.2

23.7

24.6

30.6

World

East Asia
South-East Asia and the Pacific

87.2

106.1

48.5

12.5

Latin America and the Caribbean

9.7

10.8

10.2

10.3

10.4

20.0

28.0

41.3

41.8

45.1

26.2

39.5

62.8

63.9

70.8

Middle East and North Africa

4.2

5.5

7.4

7.6

8.3

2.6

3.4

5.1

5.2

5.8

3.8

6.3

12.1

12.4

14.3

53.8

70.3

99.5

102.0

115.6

13.0

18.5

28.4

29.6

35.2

8.6

12.5

23.7

24.6

30.4

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

33

* Projection

** Commonwealth of Independent States

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

Employment in the agriculture sector dropped
from just over one billion people in 2000 (when
it comprised 40% of the active workforce) to 930
million in 2014, accounting then for slightly less than
30%. This trend can be seen for both sexes across
nearly all regions and appears entirely decoupled
from regional and global population growth. The
notable exception to this trend is in sub-Saharan
Africa where employment in the agriculture sector

has increased significantly for both men and women
(Figure 3.3). Globally, in 2014 roughly 520 million
men and 410 million women were employed in
agriculture, accounting for one third of all employed
women. Agriculture is the primary employment sector
in most developing countries and currently accounts
for 60% of all jobs in sub-Saharan Africa where
women account for one half the sector’s workforce.

FIGURE 3.2 GLOBAL EMPLOYMENT TRENDS, BY SECTOR AND SEX

Service

35.0

Female

30.0

Number (100 million)

Male
25.0

Industry
20.0

Female
Male

15.0
10.0

Agriculture
Female
Male

5.0

0
1991

2000

2014

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

FIGURE 3.3 SUB-SAHARAN EMPLOYMENT TRENDS, BY SECTOR AND SEX

Number (100 million)

4.0

Service

3.5

Female

3.0

Male

2.5

Industry
Female

2.0

Male

1.5
1.0

Agriculture

0.5

Female
Male

0.0
1991

2000

2014

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

34

WWDR 2016

TABLE 3.2 EMPLOYMENT BY SECTOR AND SEX, WORLD AND REGIONS (%)
AGRICULTURE

SERVICES

INDUSTRY

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

42.8

40.5

29.6

29.1

26.4

38.5

38.7

44.4

44.7

45.5

18.7

20.9

25.8

26.3

28.2

6.9

5.5

3.5

3.5

3.1

52.9

48.6

45.0

44.9

43.7

40.2

46.0

51.6

51.7

53.1

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

22.3

24.1

16.1

16.0

15.0

50.0

46.8

49.8

50.0

49.7

27.6

28.9

34.1

33.9

35.3

East Asia

52.9

48.3

24.6

23.3

17.9

40.0

42.0

57.7

58.4

60.6

7.1

9.6

17.6

18.2

21.6

South-East Asia and the Pacific

57.5

49.7

38.1

37.4

32.5

30.2

35.6

41.1

41.2

43.3

12.2

14.8

20.8

21.4

24.3

South Asia

61.9

59.4

47.4

46.8

42.0

26.9

29.1

38.2

38.6

41.4

11.1

11.5

14.4

14.6

16.9

Latin America and the Caribbean

25.1

20.8

15.1

15.0

13.9

44.7

45.4

46.5

46.4

46.3

30.2

33.8

38.4

38.7

39.9

Middle East and North Africa

31.4

28.1

21.1

21.0

19.7

40.0

41.3

45.9

46.1

46.3

28.5

30.6

32.9

33.0

34.0

Sub-Saharan Africa

65.9

65.1

60.4

60.0

57.8

19.3

19.7

20.8

20.9

21.7

14.8

15.2

18.8

19.1

20.6

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

42.3

38.5

27.4

26.8

23.7

41.5

44.0

50.9

51.1

52.1

16.0

17.5

21.8

22.0

24.3

7.4

6.1

4.2

4.2

3.7

61.9

58.6

56.6

56.5

55.7

30.8

35.4

39.3

39.4

40.6

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

21.5

23.8

14.1

14.1

14.0

57.4

53.9

59.8

59.8

59.2

21.0

22.3

26.2

26.2

26.8

East Asia

54.1

44.3

18.8

17.4

11.2

38.8

47.1

65.3

65.7

67.6

7.2

8.4

15.9

16.7

21.2

South-East Asia and the Pacific

55.5

47.2

35.7

35.4

31.3

32.9

39.2

46.1

46.4

48.1

11.5

13.5

18.1

18.4

20.6

South Asia

57.1

53.6

42.1

41.3

36.2

31.6

34.6

43.5

44.0

47.0

11.4

11.7

14.3

14.7

16.8

Latin America and the Caribbean

29.1

25.0

19.3

19.3

17.9

49.2

51.3

53.6

53.4

53.8

21.7

23.8

26.9

27.2

28.4

Middle East and North Africa

29.9

28.1

19.0

18.9

17.5

43.0

45.4

51.8

51.8

52.4

27.1

28.3

29.4

29.3

30.1

Sub-Saharan Africa

61.8

61.6

56.0

55.5

52.7

21.1

20.8

22.3

22.6

23.5

17.2

17.6

21.6

21.9

23.8

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

1991

2000

2013

2014

2019*

43.5

43.4

33.1

32.6

30.5

34.0

30.5

34.5

34.8

35.4

22.7

26.0

32.4

32.6

34.1

2.6

2.6

2.3

41.0

35.6

31.0

30.9

59.6

66.4

66.6

68.2

BOTH SEXES
World
Developed Economies and European Union

MALES
World
Developed Economies and European Union

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

FEMALES
World

6.2

4.7

29.5

52.8

Central and South-Eastern Europe (non-EU) and CIS**

23.2

24.5

18.6

18.3

16.3

40.9

38.5

38.0

37.8

37.9

36.0

37.1

43.6

43.8

45.8

East Asia

51.5

53.2

31.9

30.8

26.5

41.6

35.6

48.4

49.0

51.8

6.6

11.2

19.7

20.2

21.7

South-East Asia and the Pacific

60.2

53.0

41.3

40.2

34.2

26.5

30.4

34.3

34.5

36.5

13.5

16.8

24.4

25.2

29.3

South Asia

74.4

74.3

62.4

62.0

57.9

15.0

15.2

23.4

23.6

25.8

10.7

10.7

14.2

14.5

16.2

Latin America and the Caribbean

17.4

13.8

8.9

8.9

8.2

35.6

35.7

36.2

36.1

35.7

46.9

50.5

54.9

55.0

56.0

Middle East and North Africa

39.5

35.9

30.3

30.0

29.1

24.4

22.6

20.7

20.8

20.4

36.0

41.6

49.1

49.3

50.5

Sub-Saharan Africa

71.3

69.4

65.6

65.3

63.8

17.3

18.2

18.8

18.9

19.4

11.2

12.4

15.6

15.8

16.7

Developed Economies and European Union

35

* Projection

** Commonwealth of Independent States

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

this growth has occurred across all regions with the
exception of countries with developed economies
(Figure 3.5). Men account for 70% of the global
industrial workforce.

Employment figures for the industrial sector have
grown dramatically in recent years, from 1 billion
to 1.4 billion people between 2000 and 2014,
accounting for just under 45% of the global active
workforce. Led by South and East Asia (Figure 3.4),

FIGURE 3.4 EAST ASIA EMPLOYMENT TRENDS, BY SECTOR AND SEX

Number (100 million)

9

Service

8

Female

7

Male

6

Industry

5

Female

4

Male

3

Agriculture

2

Female
Male

1
0
1991

2000

2014

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

FIGURE 3.5 DEVELOPED ECONOMIES AND EU EMPLOYMENT TRENDS, BY SECTOR AND SEX
6.0

5.0

Service

Number (100 million)

Female
4.0

Male
Industry

3.0

Female
Male

2.0

Agriculture
1.0

Female
Male

0.0
1991

2000

2014

Source: WWAP, based on the Supporting Datasets for the World Employment Social Outlook: Trends 2015 (ILO, 2015a).

36

WWDR 2016

Water-dependent jobs refer
to direct jobs in heavily and
moderately water-dependent
economic sectors
Employment in the services sector grew by 50%
between 2000 and 2014, increasing from 545
million to just over 835 million people, accounting
for a little over 25% of the global active workforce.
Globally, women account for slightly more than
half of the services sector workforce (Figure 3.2),
although the ratio differs from one region to
another: in Latin America and the Caribbean, and
in countries with developed economies (Figure 3.5),
women hold nearly 60% of the jobs, whereas in
South Asia, and in the Middle East and North Africa,
women hold less than 30% of services sector jobs.
Figures 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 also illustrate how
employment breaks down into different sectors
as a function of a region’s level of economic
development. In less developed countries in SubSaharan Africa (Figure 3.3), agriculture is the main
employment sector by far, outpacing employment
growth in other sectors. With several of its countries
undergoing economic transition, East Asia has seen
its share of employment in the agriculture sector
drop significantly between 2001-2014, with industry
taking over as the main sector of employment
(Figure 3.4). Employment in countries with highly
developed economies remained relatively stable
between 1991 and 2014, with some increases in
the services sectors; employment in the agricultural
sector remained relatively marginal (Figure 3.5).
As described in the next section of this chapter,
different economic sectors can have varying levels
of water-dependency. In the case of heavily waterdependent sectors such as agriculture, water
scarcity can pose a series of risks to the creation
and maintenance of decent jobs. In comparison,
the services sectors are generally much less waterdependent; thus, jobs in those sectors are not as
vulnerable to risks associated with water scarcity.

3.3

Water-dependent jobs

WWAP | Richard Connor and Marc Paquin
ILO | Carlos Carrion-Crespo

Water, from extraction to its return to the
environment and its different uses in between,
is essential for creating and supporting jobs, both
directly and indirectly. When productive and decent,
jobs contribute to sustainable development in
fundamental ways.
Water jobs (discussed in Chapter 4) include jobs
in a variety of sectors, such as water resources
management, infrastructure, water supply and
sewerage. As such, these jobs are fundamental to
the various water-dependent sectors and to the jobs
the sectors generate.
Water-dependent jobs (as opposed to water jobs)
are comprised in economic sectors that are heavily or
moderately water-dependent.
Sectors that are heavily water-dependent can
be defined as those requiring a significant quantity
of water resources as a major and necessary input
to their activities and/or production processes.
Failure to secure an adequate and reliable supply
of water to support these sectors results in the
loss or disappearance of jobs). Examples of sectors
with water-dependent jobs include agriculture,
forestry, inland fisheries and aquaculture, mining
and resource extraction, water supply and sanitation,
and most types of power generation, as well as a
number of jobs in manufacturing and transformation
industries such as food, pharmaceuticals and textiles.
Other heavily water-dependent sectors include jobs
in health care, tourism and ecosystem management.
As such, it is estimated that 95% of jobs in the
agriculture sector, 30% of jobs in the industry
sector, and 10% of jobs in the services sector are
heavily dependent on water. Applying this criterion
to the data presented in tables 3.1 and 3.2 reveals
that 1.35 billion jobs (42% of the world’s total
active workforce) are likely to be heavily waterdependent (2014 est.).

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

37

on the production floor because of lack of water
would likely render the office jobs superfluous.

Mining sludge
Photo: © Milos Muller/Shutterstock.com

Sectors that are moderately water-dependent
can be defined as those that do not require access
to significant quantities of water resources to
realize most of their activities, but for which water
is nonetheless a necessary component in part(s) of
their value chains. Water-related risks to jobs can
vary among different jobs and sectors, as a function
of how much water the tasks and inputs associated
with the job require, and whether or not access to
an adequate and reliable water supply is ensured.
Examples of sectors with moderately water-dependent
jobs include construction, recreation, transportation
(excluding inland navigation, which is heavily waterdependent) and manufacturing/transformation
industries, such as wood, paper, rubber/plastics
and metals, as well as a few specific types of jobs
in education. As such, it is estimated that 5% of
jobs in the agriculture sector, 60% of jobs in the
industry sector and 30% of jobs in the services sector
are moderately dependent on water. Applying this
criterion to the data in Tables 3.1 and 3.2 reveals that
1.15 billion jobs (36% of the world’s total active
workforce) are likely to be moderately waterdependent (2014 est.).
In essence, this means that 78% of the jobs
constituting the global workforce are waterdependent.
Nonetheless, not every job in the various subsector
categories is equally dependent on water. Water
availability, or efforts to reduce water use and
pollution, will inevitably impact some jobs more than
others. For example, jobs on the production floor of
a given manufacturing plant will often be more water
dependent than those in the plant’s administrative
offices. On the other hand, losing or eliminating jobs

38

WWDR 2016

In addition to the water jobs mentioned, a number
of ancillary jobs facilitate the creation of waterdependent jobs. These include many jobs in
regulatory institutions within public administrations,
infrastructure financing, real estate, wholesale and
retail trade, and construction. Such jobs provide
the enabling environment and necessary support
to the activities or operation of water-dependent
organizations, institutions, industries or systems.
By estimating the potential employment generated
by investments in the delivery, treatment and
conservation of water, governments can determine
the investment and employment policies that will
increase and improve jobs across the economy.
One way is to use, for example, input-output (I-O)
analysis and social accounting matrices (SAMs)8
which could help identify the most affected jobs,
investment needs and adequate employment
policies, and determine how water is used as an
input by different subsectors. These tools further
help quantify jobs created when a government
increases or improves water supply.

3.4

Water and jobs in the agri-food
sector

FAO | Marie-Aude Even with contributions from Elisenda
Estruch, Thierry Facon, Valentina Franchi, Moujahed Achouri,
Olcay Ünver, Karen Frenken, Turi Fileccia, Devin Bartley,
Sally Bunning, Sara MarjaniZadeh and Karine Frouin
(Independent consultant)
With contributions from Audrey Nepveu De Villemarceau (IFAD)

Jobs in the agri-food sector are difficult to estimate
and go beyond jobs, as food production has
multiple meanings for different people. Only 20%
of people working in agriculture are considered

8

The difference between I-Os and SAMs: While I-O tables provide
a disaggregation of the system of production and can illustrate
the interactions within it, SAMs go further by describing
the interrelationships of income and transfer flows between
different institutional units. Please refer to www.wiod.org for
data on these analyses.

to be employed as waged workers (World Bank,
2005), and the remaining are self-employed or
contribute family labour to around 570 million
farms in the world. At least 90% of these farms
are family farms. In low-income countries, farms
up to two hectares occupy about 40% of the
farmland and those up to five hectares about 70%,
underscoring their fundamental contribution to
food security (FAO, 2014b). Farm incomes and
agricultural wages represent 42% to 75% of rural
income in agricultural based countries, and 27%
to 48% in transforming and urbanizing countries
(see Table 3.3 for definitions) (World Bank, 2007b).
The significance of agriculture, however, is higher
relative to its income share as food production plays
a wider role supporting livelihoods, notably for the
poorest (World Bank, 2005), with an important selfconsumption aspect.

Increasing income and ensuring more decent work
can improve employment quality, albeit sometimes
at the expense of the quantity of employment.
Therefore, parallel attention to opportunities outside
agriculture is needed. Investing in the agri-food
sector remains crucial, as agricultural growth can
boost the incomes of the three poorest deciles 2.5
times more than growth in other sectors (World
Bank, 2007b) and is the basis for employment
creation in other sectors along the value chain.

There is also a wide diversity of farms, combining
various production systems and livelihoods, including
waged work in agriculture, with farming occupying
different shares of time worked and income source
(see Table 3.3) (World Bank, 2007b). In addition,
agriculture often offers a safety net for those
transitioning towards other employment sectors
(Davidova and Thomson, 2013). Production is also
the basis for further jobs and self-employment in the
supply of inputs, machinery and rural infrastructure,
transformation of agricultural products, and
distribution to end consumers. It spawns activities
in advisory and regulatory services, policy
administration, specialized education, collective
organizations, agribusiness finances, research
and trade. Food preparation generates additional
employment both in market and non-market
economies. Such food-related activities cut across
sectors and are rarely calculated together, but can
increase the agricultural share of employment by half
or more, notably in more developed countries (World
Bank, 2007b), and by up to five times in some
specific locations (Ferris, 2000).

All food production and utilization depends on water
(Figure 3.6). Rainfed systems produce more than
60% of the world’s crops (CAWMA, 2007) on 80%
of the world’s cultivated areas. Irrigated agriculture
thus accounts for about 40% of the production
on 20% of the world’s cultivated areas. Irrigated
agriculture accounts for approximately 70% of the
world’s total water withdrawals, with higher shares
in some developing economies (FAO, 2015a and
2015c). An estimated 38% of irrigated land uses
groundwater (Siebert et al., 2013). Livestock, food
processing and preparation are heavily reliant on
water as well (HLPE, 2015). Finally, inland fishery
production relies fully on natural and modified water
bodies (FAO, 2014a).

The agricultural sector is often associated with low
levels of income, poor and under-regulated working
conditions, no or limited social benefits, and issues
regarding child labour (FAO, 2014c and 2015b).

3.4.1 Water, food and employment
This section explores first the impacts of water
resources on the employment situation in the agrifood sector. It then highlights how investments
in water can contribute to solving employment
challenges.

Water resources are under pressure, with water
scarcity affecting around 40% of the global
population (CAWMA, 2007). The root cause can be
physical, economic or capacity-related (Section 2.1).
In addition, land and water resources are increasingly
degraded by intensive agriculture, industrial
development and growing cities (FAO, 2015b; HLPE,
2015) and subjected to increasing competition,
within agriculture (e.g. crop and animal production)
and outside (e.g. urban expansion). Increasing
pressures to meet rising food demand and climate

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

39

TABLE 3.3 TYPOLOGY OF RURAL HOUSEHOLDS BY LIVELIHOOD STRATEGIES IN THREE COUNTRY TYPES
Farm Oriented1
Market
oriented2

Agriculture-based
countries*

COUNTRY

YEAR

Subsistence
oriented3

Total

Labour
oriented4

Migration Diversified6
oriented5

Total

% of rural households in each group

Nigeria

2004

11

60

71

14

1

14

100

Madagascar

2001

n.a.

n.a.

54

18

2

26

100

Ghana

1998

13

41

54

24

3

19

100

Malawi

2004

20

14

34

24

3

39

100

Nepal

1996

17

8

25

29

4

42

100

Nicaragua

2001

18

4

21

45

0

33

100

Viet Nam

1998

38

4

41

18

1

39

100

Pakistan

2001

29

2

31

34

8

28

100

Transforming
countries**

Albania

2005

9

10

19

15

10

56

100

Indonesia

2000

n.a.

n.a.

16

37

12

36

100

Guatemala

2000

4

7

11

47

3

39

100

Bangladesh

2000

4

2

6

40

6

48

100

Panama

2003

1

5

6

50

6

37

100

Urbanized

Ecuador

1998

14

11

25

53

2

19

100

countries***

Bulgaria

2001

4

1

5

12

37

46

100

Notes:
Farm-oriented household: More than 75% of total income from farm production.
Farm, market-oriented household: More than 50% of agricultural production sold on market.
3
Farm, subsistence-oriented household: Less than or equal to 50% of agricultural production sold on market.
4
Labour-oriented household: More than 75% of total income from wage or nonfarm self-employment.
5
Migration/transfers-oriented household: More than 75% of total income from transfers/other non-labour sources.
6
Diversified household: Neither farming, labour, nor migration income source contribute more than 75% of total income.
n.a. = Not available
* Agriculture-based countries: Agriculture is a major source of growth, accounting for 32% of GDP growth on average – mainly because agriculture
is a large share of GDP – and most of the poor are in rural areas (70%).
** Transforming countries: Agriculture is no longer a major source of economic growth, contributing on average only 7% to GDP growth, but
poverty remains overwhelmingly rural (82% of all poor).
*** Urbanized countries: Agriculture contributes directly even less to economic growth, 5% on average, and poverty is mostly urban. Even so, rural
areas still have 45% of the poor, and agribusiness and the food industry and services account for as much as one third of GDP.
1
2

Source: Adapted from World Bank (2007b, Table 3.2, p. 76, citing Davis el al., 2007; © World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/5990 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.).

40

WWDR 2016

FIGURE 3.6. THE MULTIPLE INTERFACES BETWEEN WATER AND FOOD SECURITY AND NUTRITION
Water flows
Natural

Drinking
WASH

Water flows
Anthropic uses

Food
preparation

Natural
water
cycle
Ecosystems

Water
resources

Utilization/quality

Food
processing

Quality
Availability
Stability
Access

Stability

Water return
flows

Access

Food
production

Availability

Fisheries and
aquaculture

Food security
and nutrition

Crop

Ecosystem
functions

Livestock

Impacts on
ecosystems

Energy
Other uses:
Industry, etc.

Economic
development

Food chain

Contributes to

Source: HLPE (2015, Fig. 1, p. 27).

change will exacerbate such challenges. IFPRI points
out that ‘under business-as-usual scenario, 45% of
global GDP, 52% of the world’s population and 40%
of grain production could be at risk due to water
stress by 2050’ (IFPRI, n.d.). FAO highlights specific
farming systems at risk (Figure 3.7) ‘constrained to
a point where their capacity to meet current and
future needs is seriously jeopardized’ (FAO, 2011a).
Insufficient and erratic water supplies affect the
quality and quantity of employment in the food
sector. It constrains agricultural productivity and
compromises income stability with dramatic effects
for the poorest households with limited assets and
safety nets to cope with risks (FAO/WWC, 2015).
This limits rural inhabitants’ capacities to accumulate
the human capital and assets needed to sustainably
lift themselves out of poverty (FAO, 2014c; HLPE,
2013). In India, for example, a 30-year analysis
shows that wages are highly sensitive to rainfall
shocks (World Bank, 2007b). Prolonged drought
causes persistent unemployment, which often leads

to migration as a coping strategy, notably when offfarm options are limited, and short- and long-term
migration contributes to conflicts due to depleting
natural resources (IOM, 2014). Furthermore, growing
water scarcity is often associated with shorter
cropping seasons, affecting labour demand and
supply (HLPE, 2013). In Sahel countries, 80% of the
agricultural population is only engaged in agriculture
(productive work) during the three-month cropping
season (CILSS, n.d.). Many inland fisheries dependent
on seasonal floods and rainfall are also affected by
pollutants in contaminated runoff (FAO, 2010a).
Improved and equitable water access is required
to increase and stabilize income from agriculture
(HLPE, 2015), intensify production, accumulate
assets, invest in production and access credit. Such
a virtuous circle can break the poverty trap, improve
the quality of rural working conditions and generate
wage labour opportunities (FAO, 2008), reducing
distress migration.

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

41

FIGURE 3.7 SCHEMATIC OVERVIEW OF RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH MAIN AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION SYSTEMS

Floods/sea-level rise
Water scarcity
Pollution
Loss of biodiversity
Deforestation
Desertification/droughts
Loss/low soil fertility
Erosion
Land scarcity
Cropland

Source: FAO (2011a, Fig. 3.4, p. 133).

Securing and stabilizing access to water involves
investments in a long continuum of water
management practices in both irrigated and rainfed
systems. Irrigation systems enable farmers to
produce all year round, creating up to a fivefold
increase in the demand for agricultural labour
(FAO, 2003). Improved access to fresh water is the
basis for income generating activities in processing,
gardening, fisheries and animal production (FAO,
2010b). Investments in predominant rainfed
systems can benefit most and include water
harvesting systems, water conservation practices and
supplemental small-scale irrigation (FAO, 2011a).
Practices improving rainfall use efficiency and storage
are crucial, most often labour intensive and benefit
both rainfed and irrigated systems (IFPRI, 2002;
Rockström et al., 2007).
Water of adequate quality is needed for purposes
of safe food production and human consumption as
well as for protecting farmers and fisher folk against
threats of water-related diseases and other adverse
health impacts. In the absence of potable water
supply, water from irrigation canals, although not
meeting the adequate criteria, is often directly used
for drinking and food preparation, with direct (health
and productivity issues) and indirect (education, job

42

WWDR 2016

retention and employment opportunities) impacts.
Identifying the inter-linkages between agricultural
water quality, food safety and WASH could help
improve planning and investment in both sectors in
order to respond to such challenges (HLPE, 2015).

3.4.2 Water investments and
agri-food jobs
Agricultural investments often increase agricultural
productivity, contributing to the quality of
employment, but decreasing the quantity of jobs.
While in some cases there may be a decrease in
labour demand, these investments can contribute to
economic transformations towards more diversified
rural realities with less dependence on agriculture.
However, such transformations occur at various
rates according to countries and contexts (HLPE,
2013; Dorin et al., 2013). Different trajectories can
be adopted by countries depending on their own
specific needs and capacities. In a context of limited
off-farm jobs and reduced migration opportunities,
it is often crucial to pay specific attention to
implications of water investments and their potential
impacts on (quantity and quality of) employment,
especially for youth and women.

Water investments have different implications on
quality and quantity of jobs and can, therefore,
play a role in shaping future transformations
adapted to such national contexts. Investments may
lead to production systems that are more labour
intensive. Notably, green development can increase
employment opportunities through green jobs (FAO,
2014d), more labour-intensive practices (UNEP, 2015)
and payment for ecosystem services. High value
production and inclusive value chain development
models can create additional value and jobs (Pfitzer
and Ramya, 2007). Reusing resources from waste
in agriculture also offers various opportunities
to reduce pollution, improve sanitation, create
additional value and employment (Otoo and
Drechsel, 2015)
In addition, better attention to equity and social
impacts of water interventions is needed (FAO,
2008). Inequality weakens economic growth,
while more equitable access to resources by the
poor, including land and water, can generate
better growth and reduce poverty more effectively
(World Bank, 2005). Supporting the predominant
small family farmers, fishers and processors can
yield significant benefits (World Bank, 2007b;
FAO, 2010a and 2014b; Belières et al., 2014).
They can absorb the growing rural labour force by
better managing labour intensive production while
facilitating progressive transitions out of agriculture
(Losch et al., 2012). However, women’s access to
natural resources and participation in decisionmaking is limited. Yet, they may represent as much
as half of the population engaged in agriculture
(FAO, 2015a), and even much more if the non-paid
labour is considered, and 50% of the workforce
in the inland fisheries sector (FAO, 2014a). Their
overall involvement is difficult to measure and is
underestimated (World Bank, 2007b), with limited
sex-disaggregated data and unaccounted domestic
activities (see Box 17.1).
Reducing gender inequality would accelerate poverty
reduction strategies (FAO, 2011b). Similar issues
pertain to youth, who are key actors for the future
of agriculture. Hence, specific attention is required
to propose land and water interventions which can

Insufficient and erratic
water supplies affect the
quality and quantity of
employment in the food sector
meet the specific conditions and needs of different
types of food producers, including the poorest,
women and youth (Table 3.4) (WAW, 2014; Even and
Sourisseau, 2015). Further interventions are often
required, including on land and water rights, access
to credit, extension, education, market and rural
infrastructures and services.
In the context of limited water resources, countries
need to focus on the efficient use and allocation
of water to maximize economic, social and
environmental returns, employment being a key
element. In addition to examining the water and
food situation, attention to a wider territorial context
and on-going rural transformations is needed, with
consideration given to the employment situation both
on and off farm and future perspectives, including
demographic ones. Basin approaches can help
reconcile competing uses of water demands across
sectors and the resulting interconnected impacts on
employment. For example, draining wetlands for
agriculture may reduce employment in the fishery
sector; some agricultural investments may negatively
impact customary access of pastoralists to natural
resources, upstream irrigation development may
reduce downstream water availability, etc. Water
investments and policy can, therefore, be part of a
broader and multi-sectoral dialogue on the future of
farming to meet the aspirations of farmers and of
society seeking sustainable and inclusive development
in accordance with principles for Responsible
Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems (FAO,
2014e; CFS, 2014).
With the lowest level of irrigated agriculture (5% of
the cultivated area against more than 40% in Asia
and a world average of just over 20%), and only one
third of its potential in irrigation tapped, Sub-Saharan
Africa appears to be a priority for investment in water
and aquaculture (FAO/WWC, 2015). The region is
subject to widespread poverty and a high yield gap;
195 million new entrants are expected to enter the

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

43

TABLE 3.4 TARGETING WATER INTERVENTIONS TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF FARMERS IN ASIA

Type of farmers

Typical interventions in water

Typical interventions in water

Large

Modernization of irrigation infrastructure and
management, adoption of sustainable groundwater
governance mechanism, disaster risk management

Facilitating market linkages

Medium

Conjunctive use of canal water and groundwater,
investments in technologies and management models
that contribute to improved water productivity

Facilitating market linkages

Commercial, small

Adoption of sustainable groundwater governance
mechanisms, adoption of more effective management
models in community-based irrigation schemes

Development of entrepreneurship skills,
facilitating market linkages, promote linkage
with large agribusiness, improved access to
and quality of financial services

Subsistence, small

Rainwater management through intermediate forms of
water control, access to groundwater, access to smallscale technologies to capture, store and distribute water

Access to basic services, rural infrastructure,
diversification of income, social safety nets

Diversified

Multiple-use water services for domestic water and
household gardens, livestock, atomistic irrigation

Rural infrastructure, training and support for
non-farm activities

Women farmers

Empowerment: involvement in water users associations
and decision-making processes, development of
irrigation technologies adapted to their specific needs

Enhanced capacity and skills in farming,
marketing, access to microcredit

Landless

Design of water services that consider the specific needs
of the landless

Training to support non-farm activities

Source: FAO (2014d, Table 4.1, p. 80).

rural labour market by 2025 (World Bank, 2011) (see
Chapter 6). Special attention may also be required in
other regions, including in South Asia (FAO, 2014d)
and northern Africa.

3.5

Water and jobs in the energy sector

UNIDO | UNIDO Industrial Resource Efficiency Unit and John
Payne, John G. Payne & Associates Ltd

The strong interconnection between water and
energy has recently received much attention and
is well documented (WWAP, 2014). Most energy
production, and particularly electricity, is either
very dependent on cooling water or is generated
as hydroelectricity by using water. Biomass, an

44

WWDR 2016

increasingly important source of energy, is also
heavily water-dependent. Water withdrawals for
energy production were estimated for 2010 at
15% of the world’s total and over 90% of this
amount was for power generation. Electricity
generation is expected to grow by about 70%
between 2010 and 2035 (IEA, 2012b). However,
the International Energy Agency (IEA) indicates
that this increase is much greater than water
withdrawal which, under its New Policies Scenario,
is predicted to grow by 20%, reflecting in part the
enlarged influence of renewables.
The energy-generating sector provides direct
employment, and the electricity produced enables
society to create the direct and indirect jobs in

Most energy production, and
particularly electricity
is either very dependent on
cooling water or is generated
as hydroelectricity
agriculture, industry and services that depend on
power. The IEA predicts that about 7,200 gigawatts
(GW) of capacity needs building to keep up with
demand and replace existing facilities due for
retirement by 2040 (IEA, 2014a). This observation
is illustrated by the current almost non-stop
construction of power plants in China, and should
lead to many jobs in the engineering and contracting
sectors with all their associated suppliers and subcontractors as well as jobs to operate and maintain
the installations.
Nevertheless, specific worldwide data about
employment in the energy and power sectors
is either generally lacking or the statistics may
be included with other groupings. One analysis
(Rutovitz et al., 2015) compared jobs predicted by
IEA current policies projections (IEA, 2014b) with
those of Greenpeace’s Advanced Energy [R]evolution
scenario (Teske et al., 2015) for low-carbon global
energy supply up to 2030. The advanced Energy [R]
evolution scenario assumes decarbonisation by 2050,
and phases out coal, oil, gas and nuclear energy as
fast as technically and economically possible using
existing commercial technology. The scenario attains
a renewable energy share of 42% in 2030, 72% in
2040 and 100% in 2050, including the power, heat
and transport sectors. The only remaining use for
fossil fuels (mainly oil) is in the non-energy sector,
such as petrochemicals and steel production.
The report considered direct employment from
electricity production such as jobs in fuel production,
manufacturing, construction, and operations and
maintenance. The results (Table 3.5) reveal that the
reference scenario of the IEA shows an overall loss
of one million jobs by 2030. In contrast, the
[R]evolution scenario shows an increase of 10 million
jobs by 2030, with nearly 20 million more energy
sector jobs than the reference scenario, the main
difference being in the renewable energy sector.

Hydroelectric machine hall in Naberezhnye Chelny (Russia)
Photo: © Vladimir Salman/Shutterstock.com

The IEA forecasts that between 2012 and 2040, the
share of renewables, including hydroelectricity, in total
power generation will increase from 21% to 33% and
will supply almost half the growth in global electricity
generation (IEA, 2014c).
With the increasing growth in renewable energy,
there are new water/jobs dynamics as some types,
such as solar photovoltaic (PV), wind and geothermal,
essentially use no water, but show a growth in
jobs. As is seen in Figure 3.8, wind and solar PV are
predicted to show a steady increase in total (direct)
jobs into the future and have more jobs per megawatt
than biomass and conventional sources of energy.
The International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) (2015) paints an even more optimistic figure.
It estimates that 7.7 million people worldwide were
employed (directly or indirectly) in renewable energy
in 2014. Solar PV was the largest employer with 2.5
million, followed by liquid biofuels with 1.8 million.
Increased employment was noted across all types of
renewable energy. In decreasing order, China, Brazil,
the United States, India, Germany, Indonesia, Japan,
France, Bangladesh and Colombia were the countries
with the largest employment in the renewable sector.
In addition, the report includes an estimate of 1.5
million (direct) jobs in large hydropower and 209,000
(direct and indirect) in small hydropower (IRENA,
2015). The development of small-scale hydropower
near rural communities offers potential opportunities
for job creation and the improvement of livelihoods
(Box 3.1).

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

45

TABLE 3.5 WORLD EMPLOYMENT AND ELECTRICITY GENERATION BETWEEN 2010 AND 2030
World

Reference scenario*
(jobs in millions)

Advanced energy [R]evolution scenario**
(jobs in millions)

2015

2020

2030

2010

2020

2030

9.7

9.6

7.6

9.68

4.78

1.96

Gas, oil and diesel

3.5

4.0

4.4

3.51

3.91

3.93

Nuclear

0.7

0.8

0.7

0.71

0.51

0.49

Renewable

14.5

15.2

14.6

14.48

26.28

39.76

Total Jobs

28.4

29.6

27.3

35.5

45.2

46.1

Coal

Notes:
* IEA (2014b)
** Teske et al. (2015)
Energy-efficient jobs included are only those over and above efficiency jobs in the reference scenario.
Source: Adapted from Rutovitz et al. (2015).

FIGURE 3.8 DIRECT JOBS IN RENEWABLE ENERGY

Green jobs in the future
Scenarios

Reference

Average employment over life of facility
Moderate

Best case

Jobs per megawatt of average capacity

Thousands jobs per jear
Wind power

Solar photovoltaic

Source: UNEP/Grid-Arendal (n.d.).

BOX 3.1 RURAL MINI-HYDRO – CLEAN ENERGY PROVIDING JOBS
Rwanda’s efforts to reduce poverty and achieve greater economic growth are thwarted by a lack
of electricity. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the Ministry of
Infrastructure (MININFRA) implemented a project to promote renewable-based energy development for
productive uses, by providing access to affordable modern energy in rural areas through the establishment
of mini-hydropower stations. Four pilot sites were selected and throughout construction, operation,
maintenance and management of the facilities, UNIDO fostered the development of technical capacities and
skills. The project provided 2,000 households, small businesses, cottage industries, schools and health centres
with locally produced clean energy. The Government of Rwanda has decided to establish another 17 miniand small-hydro sites; if replicated throughout the country, the additional stations would greatly contribute
to employment creation and poverty reduction.
Source: Reproduced and adapted from UNIDO (2011).

46

WWDR 2016

3.6

Water and jobs in industry

UNIDO | UNIDO Industrial Resource Efficiency Unit and John
Payne, John G. Payne & Associates Ltd

FIGURE 3.9 WATER, DIRECT JOBS AND ELECTRICITY
Total Jobs - Reference Scenario
Renewable Jobs - Reference Scenario

Total Jobs - [R]evolution Scenario
Renewable Jobs - [R]evolution Scenario

Global Water Withdrawal

Global Water Consumption

Electricity Generation
200
180
160
140
120
PERCENT CHANGE

The relationship between water, (direct) jobs and
energy (electricity) based on data noted above are
shown in Figure 3.9 (Rutovitz et al., 2015; IEA,
2012b and 2014b). They highlight that energy jobs
will transfer into the renewable sector and that,
while energy generation will steadily increase, water
withdrawal will increase less and tend to level off,
again reflecting the contribution of renewables that
use less water. It is also interesting to note that water
consumption will increase faster than withdrawal,
mainly due to the move from once-through cooling
to wet towers (closed loop evaporation) and the
irrigation needs of biofuels (IEA, 2012b).

100
80
60
40
20

Jobs and employment are frequently mentioned in
the same sentence as industry, meant here to include
large companies and small- and medium-sized
enterprises (SMEs), comprising primary raw materials
industries and manufacturing. It is good for business
and for industry’s profile to create direct jobs and
this fits well into government agendas wishing to
combat unemployment. Moreover, industry creates
indirect spin off employment, as it requires suppliers
and services (Box 3.2).
Industry, an important source of decent employment,
provides almost 500 million jobs worldwide, which
is about a fifth of the world’s workforce (UNIDO,
2014). Within the OECD member countries in
2014, industry, including construction, employed
125.6 million people and manufacturing another
70.6 million (OECD, n.d.). Worldwide, some of
the most water-intensive industry sectors employ
great numbers of people: 22 million in food and
drink (with 40% women); 20 million in chemical,
pharmaceutical, and rubber and tyres; and 18 million
in electronics (ILO, n.d.a.). Overall, industry (including
energy) uses about 19% of the world’s total water
withdrawal (FAO, 2014f). In particular, according to
the IEA (2012b), energy uses about 15% of the total,
which implies approximately 4% for large industry

0
-20

2010

2015

2020

2030

2035

YEAR

Source: Authors, based on Rutovitz et al. (2015), IEA (2012b and 2014b).

Controlling water quality in a waste water treatment plant
Photo: © Avatar_023/Shutterstock.com

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

47

and manufacturing. However, it is predicted that by
2050 manufacturing alone will increase its use by
400% (OECD, 2012c).
Industry’s water-dependence ranges from the large
users in food and beverage and the mining industry
to SMEs. Water use is further expanded if the
total water footprint (particularly the supply chain)
of an industry or individual facility is considered.
Water scarcity can have very serious effects on
some major industrial sectors as noted in Table 3.6.
Industry must have a reliable quantity of water of
suitable quality for its use and has to manage it
at least adequately, if not efficiently. In 2014, the
Water Program of the Carbon Disclosure Project
(CDP) reported that 53% of industrial respondents
reported water risks in direct operations and 26%
in supply chains (CDP, 2014).
Before any jobs materialize, a company must find
a suitable location for its industrial investment.
A number of factors are taken into consideration
when an investment decision is made, and
water and its possible scarcity, is one of them
(others include local labour pools, raw materials,
transportation, and potential markets). Any
unsatisfactory factor can lead to the rejection of a
location with the resulting impact of loss of future
jobs. However, there is currently a lack of statistics
to better understand the connection between water
and jobs and the effect they have on one another.

Industry’s water-dependence
ranges from the large users
in food and beverage and the
mining industry to smalland medium-sized enterprises
Industry’s continuing improvement in its
understanding of the essential role of water in the
economy, and of the environmental stresses placed
upon the resource, has encouraged measures to
reduce use and improve water productivity as value
added per cubic meter of water (Grobicki, 2007).
The change from supply to demand management
in industry should, in theory, allow other sectors to
grow using this saved water and generate more jobs
as a result. If industry maintains production levels, the
downside to increased water efficiency is potential
job losses as high-tech equipment replaces parts
the workforce. Conversely, based on the rebound
effect (Ercin and Hoekstra, 2012), improved industrial
efficiency may be utilized to increase production
using the same amount of water, which may create
more jobs. Statistics from Sweden (Box 3.3) show
relationships between water abstractions, value added
and employment in water-intensive industries where,
interestingly, the level of employment has remained
essentially constant, notwithstanding the decoupling
(or not) of economic output from water use.
Attention is also being directed to water quality,
particularly at the downstream end. In the worst case

BOX 3.2 CONSERVING WATER AND MULTIPLYING JOBS IN AFRICA
By 2020, SABMiller aims to ‘reduce water use to three litres of water per litre of beer and 1.8 litres of water
per litre of soft drink’. The company invested US$1.75 billion in its operations in Africa between 2008
and 2013, ‘to create jobs, provide funding for infrastructure improvements and support a wide range of
businesses up and down the value chain’.
An independent academic study found that SABMiller activities over the 2008-2013 period had the
following impacts on jobs:
• In Ghana, the company directly employs 850 people, supporting 17,600 indirect jobs
• In Mozambique, at least 73,100 indirect jobs are supported
• In Uganda, each job at SABMiller supports over 200 indirect local jobs
• In Sub-Saharan Africa, 56 indirect jobs are supported for every direct employee, resulting in a total of
765,000 jobs.
Source: Reproduced and adapted from SABMiller (n.d.a., n.d.b and n.d.c).

48

WWDR 2016

TABLE 3.6 EFFECTS OF WATER SCARCITY IN MAJOR INDUSTRIAL SECTORS
Sector

Principal impacts

Food and beverages

Manufacturing disruptions, higher commodity costs, higher power costs, loss of
access to sources of bottled water

Manufacturing

Production disruptions, problems with discharge of liquid wastes

Semiconductor manufacturing

Production disruptions, higher costs for water purification, limits on expansion

Extractive industries

Potential restrictions on drilling, mining, use of slurry transport, and waste discharge

Source: Adapted from JPMorgan (2008, Table 2, p. 12, based on data from World Resources Institute).

scenario, severe effluent pollution could result in
regulators closing a plant with all the attendant job
losses. On the upside, efforts to reuse and recycle
water, matching water quality to use and moving
towards cleaner production, may lead to additional
and likely better paid jobs (for more highly trained
employees) within the industry, as well as outside for
the manufacturers of the treatment equipment.
When considering the idea of decent jobs, a
company or industry is likely to attract better-trained
people and have a more productive workforce if

it has a reputation of offering good workplace
conditions. These factors should result in higher
productivity. Higher profits could lead to increased
investment in business, enabling beneficial water
(and energy) saving technology. The reputational
advantage of being seen as a green industry further
compounds such benefits. Decent jobs are part of
Inclusive and Sustainable Industrial Development
(ISID), which is the cornerstone of UNIDO’s work for
sustainable economic growth, while safeguarding
the environment (UNIDO, 2014).

BOX 3.3 EVOLUTION OF WATER ABSTRACTIONS, VALUE ADDED, EMPLOYMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL
COSTS IN WATER-INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES IN SWEDEN’S RIVER BASIN DISTRICTS, 2000–2005
Index 2000 = 100
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
t
te
ga

ic
ag
er
Sk

So

ut
h

er

ra
kK

n

at

Ba
lt

ic
Ba
lt
No
rth

er
n

th
Bo

Gu
lf

of
B

ot

hn

ni
a

ia

0

Abstraction

Value addes

Employment

Environmental costs

• Water intensive industries achieved a clear
decoupling of economic output from water use
in the River Basin Districts of Gulf of Bothnia
and southern Baltic. Water abstraction remained
constant, and even decreased, while value added
increased significantly. Decoupling can be seen to
a lesser extent in the river basin districts of Bothnia
and Skagerrak-Kattegat.
• By contrast, water abstraction increased significantly
(60%) in the northern Baltic, while value-added
increased by only 22%, indicating a continued
strong link between water use and economic
activity in the water-intensive industries there.
• Investments for treating and preventing
environmental impact increased most in the
southern Baltic.
• In all cases employment remained almost constant.
Source: Reproduced and adapted from EEA (2012, Fig. 4.9,
p. 45, based on Sweden Statistics, 2007).

ECONOMY, JOBS AND WATER

49

4

WATER JOBS
WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from ILO, Kirsten de Vette, Robert Bos (IWA),
Archana Patkar and Emily Deschaine (WSSCC) and Catherine Cosgrove

Sewage treatment plant in Kavoor, Mangalore (India)
Photo: © Asian Development Bank

This chapter describes the different types of jobs found in traditional
water sectors (water resources management, water infrastructure,
and water services) and the related human resources needs.

4.1

Jobs in the water sectors

Overall, jobs in water sectors fall under one of
three functional categories: a) water resources
management, including IWRM and ecosystem
restoration and remediation; b) building and
managing water infrastructure; and c) the provision
of water-related services, including water supply,
sewerage, waste management and remediation
activities (UN DESA, 2008).
Water resources management is critical for sustained
economic development and aims at ensuring the
protection, sustainable use and regeneration of
water resources. This is the work of planners,
managers, professionals, specialists, technicians and
operators among others, whose work ranges from
protecting ecosystems, rivers, lakes and wetlands to
building the necessary infrastructure (e.g. dams and
aqueducts) to store water and regulate its flow.
Building and managing infrastructure covers
the provision and maintenance of water-related
infrastructure (natural and man-made) for the
management of the resource as well as for the
provision of water-related services, including the
management of floods and droughts. This requires
planners, engineers, environmental specialists, and
operators, to name but a few.
Water-related services for the provision of domestic
water supply, wastewater management, sanitation
and hygiene on one hand, and for economic uses
on the other, such as in the energy, agriculture and
industrial sectors, require jobs in many disciplines.
These include legal, policy, institutional and
regulatory frameworks, and functions addressing
technical and financial planning, operation
and maintenance, the construction of facilities,
community mobilization, health promotion, and
monitoring and evaluation.
Since water must be of sufficient quality to serve as
an input for economic and non-economic activities
and of adequate quality when it is returned to the
environment, jobs related to the operation and
maintenance of water and wastewater treatment

plants are essential. Water supply and wastewater
facilities operators employ about 80% of the
workers in the water industry (UNESCO-UNEVOC,
2012). Although industry-wide numbers are not
available on the global scale, the database of the
International Benchmarking Network for Water
and Sanitation Utilities (IBNET), an authoritative
source for utility performance indicators worldwide
and containing information from more than 4,000
utilities in 135 countries, estimates that the total
professional staff in these utilities number about
623,000 (Danilenko et al., 2014).
Jobs in the water sectors serve as the building
blocks for a wide array of water-dependent job
opportunities linked to agriculture, energy, and
the processing sector such as industrial and fuel
production. These require substantial amounts of
water, and in some instances they may also require
water of a high quality (e.g. food transformation and
production of pharmaceuticals).

4.2

Human resources needs

It is difficult to draw an accurate portrait of human
resources demand in the water sectors, given that
data concerning demand, capacity and availability
in the sector is poor. Nevertheless, studies show an
important human resources gap in the water services
sector (IWA, 2014a). Information concerning human
resources needs for water supply and sanitation is
much better than for water resources management,
mainly because of the assessments undertaken in
response to the water and sanitation MDG. The
more comprehensive Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) on water will provide an opportunity
to examine human resources needs more closely in
other water sectors.
A variety of countries, from Indonesia to the
Netherlands, are faced with systemic issues such
as staff attrition, erosion of experience and weak
interest from new graduates to join the water
sectors, and these will have an impact well beyond
2020. Across OECD countries in particular, the gap
is increasing due to an ageing workforce (Wehn and
Alaerts, 2013). Industry estimates indicate that 30%

WATER JOBS

51

to 50% of the current water utilities workforce in
the United States is eligible for retirement by 2020
(Snow and Mutschler, 2012).
In lower- and middle-income countries, efforts
to meet the water and sanitation MDG target to
halve the proportion of the population without
sustainable access to safe drinking water and
basic sanitation has led to substantial investments
in infrastructure, technological innovation
and institutional reform. However, sufficient
attention has not been paid to ensuring that the
corresponding human resource base needed to
design, construct, operate and maintain the services
is in place, nor whether it would be adequate to
carry longer-term efforts towards universal coverage
(IWA, 2014b). Similarly, the growing needs for
rehabilitation of ageing infrastructure in all
countries face the challenge of closing financial and
human resource gaps (United States Conference of
Mayors, 2008a; WWC/OECD, 2015).
According to the WHO’s biennial Global Analysis
and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
(GLAAS), those gaps constitute a real threat to
sustaining the achievements of the MDG’s efforts.
According to GLAAS, of the 67 countries that
reported on systems operation and maintenance,
only 27 countries had sufficient staff to operate and
maintain their urban drinking water systems, and
only 11 had the capacity to operate and maintain
their rural drinking systems. Less than 20% of
countries considered the supply of skilled labour
and technicians sufficient to meet the needs in rural
sanitation (WHO, 2014).
While more research is needed to further specify
the nature and size of these gaps, another study,
conducted in 10 countries (Burkina Faso, Ghana,
Laos, Mozambique, Niger, Papua New Guinea,
Senegal, Sri Lanka, and Tanzania) reveals a
cumulative shortfall of 787,200 trained water and
sanitation professionals in order to achieve universal
coverage in water and sanitation (IWA, 2014a).

52

WWDR 2016

Jobs in the water sectors serve
as the building blocks for a
wide array of water-dependent
job opportunities linked to
agriculture, energy, and the
processing sector such as
industrial and fuel production
Reasons for these gaps vary widely, but include:
lack of financial resources for hiring and retaining
staff (salaries and benefits), especially in the public
sector; the difficulty of attracting skilled workers to
live and work in rural areas; a mismatch between
courses offered and job requirements; shortage of
funding of educational institutions; cost of tuition;
absence of continuous training systems in many
countries; lack of government policies to create an
enabling environment; image problems and a stigma
associated with the sanitation sector in particular
(UNESCO-UNEVOC, 2012; IWA, 2014a; WHO,
2014). In many regions, including West Africa, it is
difficult to attract employees to work in sanitation
facilities, often due to taboos related to issues like
faeces (WaterAid, 2009).
WASH staff shortage in many developing countries
is severe (IWA, 2014a), due to a variety of reasons
ranging from reluctance to invest in this component,
rigidly imposed government staff quotas, poorly
targeted education, unattractiveness of the
sanitation sector, and the absence of continuous
learning and professional development.
Higher-income countries face different challenges
in getting the numbers and qualification of their
WASH personnel correct. Baby boomers who entered
the sector in the 1970s will soon be retiring, with
the risk of significant brain drain on the sector’s
knowledge base, experience and expertise.
The International Water Association (IWA, 2014a)
identified a number of critical bottlenecks, based on
analyses in some 15 countries in different developing
regions of the world. A selection of findings includes:

• The human resources shortage is the largest in
technical fields that are not specialized in water/
sanitation-mid-level technicians and engineers. The
areas of work with the highest need are Operations
and Maintenance, Monitoring and Evaluation and
the social development disciplines (WHO, 2014).
The latter is due to increased need for community
mobilization, as well as increased participatory
approaches (e.g. utility informal settlement
departments);
• Qualification levels and critical numbers of
professional capacity differ between rural and
urban systems, especially in countries where
piped supplies in rural settings are impractical
or impossible. Rural areas rely more on informal
workers, less complex technologies and or
community-managed systems; urban areas rely
on higher qualifications to handle larger volumes
(especially in light of urbanization) and more
complex technologies;
• The sector lacks incentives for workers (IWA,
2014a; WHO, 2014) in form of remuneration,
benefits for working in rural areas or the sanitation
sector. A general lack of human resource
management, planning, development and
evaluation of staff seemed to be non-existent in
many countries; and
• Lack of coordination between industry needs
and supply from education institutes (whether
Academia/Technical Vocational Education and
Training) result in a gap in skills required on the job.

Promoting adequate technical capacity to
support water and wastewater management
is an important part of the policy package for
addressing water challenges in many countries
(UNESCO-UNEVOC, 2012). Only one third of
the 94 countries surveyed in the 2014 GLAAS
report indicated that they have a human resource
strategy in sanitation, drinking water and hygiene
covering urban and rural areas (WHO, 2014).
Solutions to filling these gaps include creating
an enabling policy environment for collaborative
frameworks between the education sector, sector
employers (public, private and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), trade unions and
employees; developing incentives to attract and
retain staff; strengthening technical and vocational
training; and giving attention to human resources
capacity development in rural areas (IWA, 2014a,
2014b; Kimwaga et al., 2013; UNESCO-UNEVOC,
2012).
It is important to note, however, that lessons
from past green jobs efforts show that when
workers are specifically trained for occupations
that are green and entirely new, they can be left
with limited options for employment, unless their
training also prepares them for more conventional
occupations (Pacific Institute, 2013).

WATER JOBS

53

5

WATER, JOBS and
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT

Students wash their hands after using bathroom at Dima Guranda Primary School (Ethiopia)
Photo: © UNICEF Ethiopia/2014/Ose

This chapter tackles the most salient legal and policy frameworks (human
rights, the green economy, sustainable development and gender) to be
considered by policy-makers when addressing the water and jobs nexus.

5.1

The human right to safe drinking
water and sanitation

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove

The right to safe drinking water and sanitation
is an internationally recognized human right
and integral to the realization of other human
rights, most notably the right to life and dignity,
to adequate food and housing, and to health
and well-being, including the right to healthy
occupational and environmental conditions. In
spite of this, a very large proportion of the world’s
population does not enjoy this right in all its
dimensions (sufficient quantity, quality, regularity,
safety, acceptability, accessibility and affordability)
(UNGA, 2010a). Stark disparities, notably across
regions and between urban and rural areas, also
remain (UNICEF/WHO, 2015).
Moreover, there are altogether 2.3 million workrelated deaths annually (ILO, n.d.b.). According
to ILO, work-related communicable diseases
contributed to 17% of those deaths and, in that
category, the main contributing and preventable
factors comprised: poor-quality drinking water,
poor sanitation, poor hygiene and related lack of
knowledge (ILO, 2003b). Estimates indicate that
poor occupational safety and health practices
reduce global GDP by 4% each year (ILO, 2014b).

food, clothing, housing and medical care …’ (UN,
2004, p. 2). In 2010, the UN General Assembly
confirmed this interpretation by affirming ‘the
human right to safe drinking water and sanitation
is derived from the right to an adequate standard
of living and inextricably related to the right to the
highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health, as well as the right to life and human dignity’
(UNGA, 2010b, para. 4).9
For its part, the Committee on Economic Social and
Cultural Rights states: ‘The human right to water
entitles everyone to sufficient, safe, acceptable,
physically accessible and affordable water for
personal and domestic uses’ (UN, 2003, para. 3). The
Committee further asserted that the water supply for
each person must allow for personal and domestic
uses, including drinking, personal sanitation, food
preparation, personal and household hygiene.
Moreover, ensuring that everyone has access to
adequate sanitation is fundamental for human
dignity and privacy, is essential for protecting the
quality of drinking water supplies and resources (UN,
2003, paras. 2, 12 and 37).10

9

The right to water is also implicitly or explicitly recognized in a
number of other international agreements and declarations such
as: Human Rights Council Resolution A/HRC/RES/15/9 (UNGA,
2010c); International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights. Adopted by the UN General Assembly resolution 2200
A (XXI) of 16 December 1966. Entry into force: 3 January 1976
(UNGA, 1966); Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. Adopted by the UN General
Assembly resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979. Entry into
force: 3 September 1981 (UNGA, 1979); Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Adopted by the UN General Assembly
resolution 44/25 of 20 November 1989. Entry into force: 2
September 1990 (UNGA, 1989); Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities. Adopted by the UN General Assembly
resolution 61/106 of 13 December 2006. Entry into force: 3 May
2008 (UNGA, 2006).

10

Also note, the Outcome document of the high-level plenary
meeting of the UN General Assembly known as the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples, which the UN General
Assembly adopted on 22 September 2014, declared the right to
equal access to water and sanitation (UNGA, 2014a). The plenary
further committed to ensure ‘high-level education that recognizes
the diversity of the cultures of indigenous peoples and to health,
housing, water, sanitation and other economic and social
programmes to improve well-being, including through initiatives,
policies and the provision of resources’ (UNGA, 2014a, para. 11).

These figures underscore the need for countries
to accelerate the pace of their efforts towards
securing safe drinking water and sanitation for all,
including in the workplace. Implementation of the
post-2015 development framework and the SDGs
call for a substantial acceleration in the pace of
change in this regard.
In the words of the former UN Special Rapporteur,
El Hadji Guissé: ‘The Universal Declaration of
Human Rights has arguably recognized implicitly
the right to drinking water and sanitation in article
25 (1), which states that ‘everyone has the right to
a standard of living adequate for the health and
well-being of himself and of his family, including

WATER, JOBS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

55

The right to safe drinking
water and sanitation is an
internationally recognized
human right and integral to
the realization of other
human rights
Draft guidelines were elaborated to assist
government policy-makers, international agencies
and members of civil society working in the water
and sanitation sector to implement the right to
drinking water and sanitation (UN, 2005).

5.2

The human right to decent work

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove

The right to decent work is an internationally
recognized human right. A subset of economic, social
and cultural rights, the right to work is enunciated
in article 23 (1) of the 1948 Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (UN, 1948), which states: ‘Everyone
has the right to work, to free choice of employment,
to just and favourable conditions of work and to
protection against unemployment.’
To ensure that work conditions are decent, article 7
of the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights further stipulates ‘the right of
everyone to the enjoyment of just and favourable
conditions of work’ (UNGA, 1966) that ensure,
among others: remuneration that provides fair wages
and equal pay for equal work and a decent living
for the employees and their families; leisure and
reasonable limitation of working hours; the right to
form and join trade unions; and the right to safe and
healthy working conditions.11
ILO Convention No. 122 (ILO, 1964), or Employment
Policy Convention, which was ratified by 108
Member States, seeks to stimulate economic
growth and development, raise levels of living,
meet manpower requirements and overcome
unemployment and underemployment. For that
purpose, it requires ratifying states to pursue ‘an

11

To implement these goals, the ILO has adopted Conventions Nos. 1,
30, 87, 98, 100, 111, 155 (ILO, 1919, 1930, 1948, 1949, 1951,1958
and 1981), and several others for safety and health in specific waterintensive economic sectors, including mining (No. 176) (ILO, 1995) and
agriculture (No. 184) (ILO, 2001).

56

WWDR 2016

active policy designed to promote full, productive and
freely chosen employment’ (article 1.1). Employment
policies, however, ‘shall take due account of the
stage and level of economic development and the
mutual relationships between employment objectives
and other economic and social objectives, and
shall be pursued by methods that are appropriate
to national conditions and practices’ (article 1.3).
Therefore, social dialogue12 between government,
employers and workers are an important means to
deliberate on the desired policy.
Under the Global Jobs Pact (ILO, 2009), the ILO’s
constituents, comprising governments as well as
workers’ and employers’ organizations, agreed to
put the aim of full and productive employment and
decent work at the heart of the crisis responses
(item 11). In this context, item 14 provides that
'international labour standards create a basis for and
support rights at work and contribute to building a
culture of social dialogue'. Furthermore, the preface
to the pact underlines that ‘respecting fundamental
principles and rights at work, promoting gender
equality and encouraging voice, participation and
social dialogue are also critical to recovery and
development. Adopted in an integral and coordinated
manner, these policies can reduce social tensions,
mitigate the negative impact of the recession on
people, stimulate aggregate demand and reinforce
both competitive market economies and a more
inclusive growth process' (p. v).
It should be emphasized that human rights are
all interrelated, interdependent and indivisible,
and the improvement of one right facilitates
advancement of the others, while the deprivation
of one right adversely affects the others. (OHCHR,
n.d.) Notably, the right to safe and healthy work
conditions is incumbent on the fulfilment of the
right to safe drinking water and sanitation in the
workplace. Unsafe drinking water, poor sanitation
and inadequate hygiene can have severe negative
consequences for workers, including loss of ability to

12

Social dialogue consists of any form of information exchange,
consultation or negotiation, with the intent of transparent and
collaborative decision-making.

BOX 5.1 HUMAN RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH
The human rights based approach is a human development conceptual framework that is based on
international human rights standards and directed to promoting and protecting human rights, such as the
right to safe drinking water, sanitation and decent employment. This approach is also used to give legitimacy
and strengthen the voice of those who are not usually heard, the excluded individuals and groups, particularly
women, children and those who are discriminated against.
Source: de Albuquerque and Roaf (2012, p. 106).

work to secure a livelihood, poor health and loss of
life. Fulfilling both of these rights is therefore part
and parcel of the right to decent work (UN, 2004).
These linkages were evidenced in the 2014 report
of the UN Special Rapporteur on the human right
to safe drinking water and sanitation, which
states: ‘Violations of the human rights to water
and sanitation frequently correlate with broader
deprivations and other violations, including of
the human rights to life, health, food, housing,
education, work and a healthy environment ’
(UNGA, 2014b, para. 6) (Box 5.1).
For economic social and cultural rights, such as the
right to safe drinking water and sanitation and the
right to work, states undertake, to the maximum
of their available resources, to take steps to achieve
progressively and by all appropriate means the full
realization of these rights (UNGA, 1966, article 2).
Accordingly, State parties have an obligation to
progressively provide safe drinking water and
adequate sanitation services to prevent, treat and
control diseases linked to water, including in the
workplace. Similarly, they also have the obligation
to guarantee that the right to water is enjoyed
without discrimination, and equally between men
and women (UN 2003, paras. 2 and 13). The human
right to safe drinking water and sanitation often
conflicts with existing water rights and/or other
governance arrangements. Water rights systems that
discriminate or prevent the progressive realization
of the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation contradict State obligations and are in
violation of that human right.

5.3

Job creation opportunities in a
green economy

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove

The shift towards a greener economy is changing
the range of tasks associated with various jobs, as
well as well as working conditions, as a result of
new technologies, processes and practices. The
employment potential of the water sectors is likely
to increase following ‘green’ restructuring within
industry sectors, in a variety of countries (e.g.
Estonia, France, India, South Korea, Spain and the
United States) (ILO, 2011a).
Water planning and governance can be a powerful
instrument to coordinate advances in many areas
such as agriculture, energy, manufacturing, tourism
and land settlements, while managing growing
demands for limited water resources. This requires
considering water management as a horizontal axis
of economic public policy (UNW-DPC, 2012; OECD,
2012a). Chapter 11 of this report discusses in detail
the considerable multiplier effect water jobs have on
the economy and jobs in general.
Government decision-making plays a central
role in such an approach, with investments and
maintenance costs in the water sectors largely
stemming from public sources. For instance, in
developing countries large infrastructures are
predominantly (75%) funded through government
budgets and long-term finance from state banks.
Moreover, about 90% of the total funding of
catchment management and protection of aquatic

WATER, JOBS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

57

BOX 5.2 EXAMPLES OF NEW PROFESSIONS IN THE WATER SECTOR
Being an engineer in the water industry is a new profession in Australia. It entails technical skills in
hydrogeology, water-sensitive urban design, flood-plain assessment and aquifer storage and recovery,
management skills, knowledge of water trading, management of environmental flows, emerging and future
water quality issues, salinity solutions. etc. Skills for wastewater management are also included.
A new profession in Spain is that of the desalination plant maintenance and operation manager who oversees
the process of turning seawater into fresh drinking water (ILO, 2011a).

ecosystems in 2013 – estimated at US$9.6 billion
– came from public funds (WWC/OECD, 2014). As
such, it is not surprising that thematically the second
largest proportion of green stimulus spending has
been allocated to water and waste, after energy
efficiency (ILO, 2011a).
In the United States, it is estimated that investments
in traditional water infrastructure generate 10 to 26
jobs per US$1 million invested. In addition, some
data suggest that investments in sustainable water
projects, such as urban conservation and efficiency,
restoration and remediation and alternative water
supplies also generate large numbers of jobs, namely
between 10 and 72 jobs per US$1 million invested
(Pacific Institute, 2013).
Implementing sustainable water management
requires a broad range of occupations some of
which are quite new (Box 5.2). For instance, 136
occupations were identified by the Pacific Institute
as being involved in achieving more sustainable
outcomes in agriculture, urban residential and
commercial settings, restoration and remediation,
alternative water sources and stormwater
management (Pacific Institute, 2013).
For green strategies to succeed, the timely
identification of required skills is needed in targeted
sectors (ILO, 2011a). Sustainable water strategies
can create jobs in traditional occupations, which
require no new skill sets (from truck drivers to
lawyers); jobs in emerging occupations requiring
vocational qualifications at upper secondary level,
such as those dealing with the use and maintenance
of technology; and less frequently, the strategies can
create entirely new occupations that tend to require

58

WWDR 2016

high-level qualifications (ILO, 2011a; Pacific Institute,
2013). This seems to hold true in developing,
emerging and industrialized countries alike (ILO,
2011a).
Policy-makers, educational and vocational institutions
as well as industry stakeholders must consider these
elements in an integrated way and not in isolation
from one another as they address the increasing and
evolving demand in human resources.

5.4

Water, jobs and the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs)

WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Catherine Cosgrove

In September 2015, the international community
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which contains a set of SDGs. These
goals, built on the foundation laid by the MDGs, seek
to complete the unfinished business of the MDGs
and respond to new challenges. They constitute a
set of global priorities for sustainable development,
break away from the restricted MDG vision of water
that focused mainly on water supply and sanitation,
and return to the essential full water cycle view. As
opposed to the MDGs, the scope of the SDGs is not
limited to developing countries.
The process of national, regional and global
thematic consultations initiated by the UN to support
member States in formulating a global development
framework beyond 2015 was extensive in its scope
and content. It engaged nearly one million people
from countries in all regions, including representatives
of employers and unions. Increased job opportunities

in water and sanitation were among the top priorities
identified by the UN’s MY World 2015 global
survey for inclusion in the next agenda (UN, n.d.),
together with education, health care, and honest and
responsive governments. Job creation also emerged
as a pressing need in nearly all the countries where
the UN held national consultations, and it was among
the key priorities identified by the UN Regional
Commissions. The Future Goals Tracker by the
Overseas Development Institute (ODI, n.d.), with about
150 proposals, revealed a similar pattern.

Water planning and governance
can be a powerful instrument
to coordinate advances in many
areas such as agriculture,
energy, manufacturing, tourism
and land settlements

Goal 6 of the SDGs specifically aims to ensure
availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all (Box 5.3)

the agenda from WASH to cover the entire water
cycle, including wastewater management and
ambient water quality, water use and efficiency,
water resources management and water-related
ecosystems.

Goal 6 is wide-ranging, setting objectives spanning
from the protection and integrated management
of water resources to access to safe and affordable
drinking water and sanitation for all. It expands

Water also percolates across most of the other
SDG goals (Box 5.4). As stated in the WWDR
2015: ‘Water’s role in underpinning all aspects
of sustainable development has become widely

BOX 5.3 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL 6 – ENSURE AVAILABILITY AND SUSTAINABLE
MANAGEMENT OF WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL
6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end open
defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable situations
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing release of
hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially
increasing recycling and safe reuse globally
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable
withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the number
of people suffering from water scarcity
6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through
transboundary cooperation as appropriate
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers,
aquifers and lakes
6.a By 2030, expand international cooperation and capacity-building support to developing countries
in water- and sanitation-related activities and programmes, including water harvesting, desalination,
water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse technologies
6.b Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and
sanitation management
Source: UNGA (2015).

WATER, JOBS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

59

BOX 5.4 WATER-RELATED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
In addition to Goal 6, water has a bearing on, or is impacted by the following SDGs:
Goal 1
End poverty in all its forms everywhere
Goal 2
End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture
Goal 3
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
Goal 7
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy for all
Goal 8
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment
and decent work for all
Goal 9
Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation
Goal 10
Reduce inequality within and among countries
Goal 11
Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Goal 11.5 By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and
substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by
disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people
in vulnerable situations
Goal 12
Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
Goal 13
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
Goal 15
Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests,
combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss
Goal 16
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all
and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
Source: UNGA (2015).

BOX 5.5 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL 8 – PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE
ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL
[...]
8.3 Promote development-oriented policies that support productive activities, decent job creation,
entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation, and encourage the formalization and growth of micro-,
small- and medium-sized enterprises, including through access to financial services
8.5 By 2030, achieve full and productive employment and decent work for all women and men, including
for young people and persons with disabilities, and equal pay for work of equal value
8.8 Protect labour rights and promote safe and secure working environments for all workers, including
migrant workers, in particular women migrants, and those in precarious employment
Source: UNGA (2015).

60

WWDR 2016

There is inadequate sexdisaggregated data available
related to the participation
of men and women in waterdependent employment
recognized. It is now universally accepted that water
is an essential primary natural resource upon which
nearly all social and economic activities and ecosystem
functions depend’ (WWAP, 2015, p. 9).
Specifically, water is relevant to many aspects of SDG
8, which pertains to the promotion of sustained,
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all
(Box 5.5).
Additional references to labour-related concerns are
found in several other SDG targets. The question of
social protection is a core target for action under the
poverty and health goals (1 and 3) and is mentioned
together with wage and fiscal policies as a means
to address inequality. Technical and vocational skills
are the topic of three targets under the education
goal. Other references relate to rural workers,
workers in the health and education sectors, unpaid
care and domestic work, migrant workers, SMEs in
value chains, resilience to climate-related hazards
and economic, social and environmental shocks and
disasters, discrimination, and fundamental freedoms.13

5.5

Bridging the gender gap

WWAP | Vasudha Pangare with contributions from Lesha Witmer,
Richard Connor and Marc Paquin

The central role of women in the provision,
management and safeguarding of water has been
recognized at the international level, including at
the 1977 United Nations Water Conference at Mar
13

The findings of the ILO’s World of Work Report 2014 (ILO, 2014a,
p. xxiii) sustained the proposal to establish this goal: ‘sustained
development is not possible without making progress on the
employment and decent work agenda. By putting in place policies
and institutions that help create more and better jobs, the process of
development will be facilitated. Conversely, economic growth is not
sustainable when it is based on poor and unsafe working conditions,
suppressed wages and rising working poverty and inequalities. In
addition to their impact on economic growth, jobs, rights, social
protection and dialogue are integral components of development.’

Firefighter during a fire drill at Garantung village, Palangkaraya (Indonesia)
Photo: © Achmad Ibrahim/Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR)

del Plata, Argentina, and at the 1992 International
Conference on Water and the Environment in
Dublin, Ireland. Agenda 21 (UNSD, 1992, Chapter
18, para. 18.9.c.) and the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation (WSSD, 2002, para. 25) also
underlined the importance of women in water
management. Furthermore, the International Decade
for Action, ‘Water for Life’ (2005-2015), calls for
women’s participation and involvement in waterrelated development efforts.
Evidence from various economic sectors
demonstrates the significant contribution women
can make in formal positions at the highest levels.
A report by Catalyst (2011) stated that Fortune 500
companies with three or more women on their board
showed a significant performance advantage over
those with fewer women in these positions. Similarly,
McKinsey & Company (2013) found that companies
with a higher percentage of women on executive
committees performed significantly better than
their all-male counterparts. Qualitative analyses also
show that women’s involvement in the management
of water resources and water infrastructure can
improve efficiency and increase outputs (GWTF,
2006; van Koppen, 2002).

5.5.1 Exploring the gender gap
The gap in labour market participation between men
and women has decreased only marginally since
1995. Globally, about 50% of women were working
in 2014, compared to 77% of men. In 1995, these
figures were 52% and 80% respectively (ILO,

WATER, JOBS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

61

2015b). Women continue to experience widespread
discrimination and inequality in the workplace.
In many parts of the world, women often occupy
undervalued and low-paid jobs and still shoulder
responsibility for most unpaid care work. Unpaid
work, which often goes unrecognized, can hinder
women’s active participation in paid employment.
Many women lack access to education, training
and recruitment, and have limited bargaining and
decision-making power (ILO, 2015b). Affirmative
action, the implementation of supporting policies and
expanded access to public services and investment
in time- and labour-saving infrastructure can help to
speed-up the process of closing the gender gap (UN
Women, 2015).
Women’s role in making water available for the
household is an important area of ‘unpaid work’
that negatively impacts women’s participation in the
formal labour market. Time spent fetching water
(and fuel) reduces the time that can be devoted to
generating livelihoods or remunerated work, whether
in the formal or informal economy. Women (and
girls) perform most unpaid water fetching work.
About three quarters of households in sub-Saharan

Africa fetch water from a source away from their
home (UNICEF/WHO, 2012) and 50% to 85%of the
time, women are responsible for this task (ILO/UNDP
WGF, forthcoming). The likelihood of a woman being
the responsible person also increases the more time
is needed per trip (Sorenson et al., 2011). In South
Africa, in poor rural households, women who fetch
water and fuel wood spend 25% less time in paid
employment (Valodia and Devey, 2005) (see Box 5.6).
Access to sanitation is also an important determinant
to the participation of young girls and women in many
spheres of life, including, most importantly, education
and employment (Adukia, 2014; Pearson and
McPhedran, 2012; World Bank, 2011; WaterAid, n.d.).
Although this issue is more prevalent in developing
countries, access to toilets in the workplace is
something that women need in all parts of the world.
By addressing women workers’ menstrual needs,
workplace practices and human resource manuals
worldwide could achieve measurable productivity gains
(Box 14.1). Lack of gender-segregated toilet facilities
can also discourage girls from attending school during
their menstrual cycles. The Commission on the Status
of Women (CSW) at its 55th session underlined that

BOX 5.6 WATER FETCHING: ECONOMIC AND HEALTH IMPACTS OF WOMEN’S UNPAID WATER WORK
Carrying water appears to have direct detrimental impacts on the mental and physical health of the carrier, and
his or her ability to participate in domestic, formal and informal work. Both children and adults link persisting
pain or movement problems with water fetching (Geere et al., 2010a, 2010b; Lloyd et al., 2010) and the task may
be an important factor in pain and disability linked to spinal musculoskeletal disorders and cervical compression
syndromes (Evans et al., 2013).
In addition, water fetching can contribute to psychosocial and emotional distress, which can influence
perceptions of general health, disability related to musculoskeletal disorders as well as work performance and
satisfaction (Diouf et al., 2014; Stevenson et al., 2012; Wutich, 2009). Incidents and fear of physical and sexual
violence is widely reported by women and children in relation to water fetching (Sorenson et al., 2011).
The effects of water fetching on women’s health and abilities to work are more pronounced in low- and
middle-income countries where a greater proportion of people are engaged in physically demanding, informal
or poorly regulated work environments (Hoy et al., 2014). Furthermore, since economic, political and social
inequalities are reflected in the access to drinking water (UNICEF/WHO, 2014), it is likely that marginalized
groups suffer disproportionally from the negative economic and health impacts of water fetching.
Source: ILO/UNDP WGF (forthcoming).

62

WWDR 2016

BOX 5.7 WHERE THERE IS A WILL, THERE IS A WAY
In Uganda, the Directorate of Water Development (Ebila, 2006) measured the gendered levels of participation
in water and sanitation committees and collected sex-disaggregated data on staff in different positions in the
department. They found that the number of male staff was far greater than the number of women staff and
decided to improve the gender balance in the water sectors by 30% in five years. To address this challenge, a
gender working group was formed which included representatives from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and
Social Development.
The 19th International Conference of Labour Statisticians (2013) adopted new international statistical standards
that will refine the way in which countries measure traditional key headline indicators of the labour market,
including labour force participation rates, employment to population ratios and unemployment rates.
Importantly, a conceptual framework to separately measure all forms of work, paid and unpaid, was also
introduced, aiming to address the growing demand for gender sensitive indicators to inform a broader range
of economic and social policies. New measures of labour underutilization and access to labour markets will
have strong implications for women and for gender equality.

the provision of drinking water and separate and
adequate sanitation facilities as a factor of women’s
participation in the labour market which are rights
germane to gender equality, and adequate standard of
living and dignity.

5.5.2 Responses and opportunities
A number of measures can be undertaken to improve
women’s participation in, and contribute to, the
water-dependent workforce.
Collect and disseminate a baseline of sexdisaggregated data related to the participation
of men and women in the water-dependent
workforce
There is inadequate sex-disaggregated data available
related to the participation of men and women
in water-dependent employment. The collection
and dissemination of such data at global, regional,
national and local levels would not only provide
baseline information about men and women in the
water work force, but also help in monitoring progress
towards reducing the gender gap (Box 5.7). There is
also a need to recognize the existence of social and
cultural diversity among men and women in order
to understand the differences in opportunities for
employment that would be available to them.14
14

Address cultural barriers, social norms
and gender stereotypes through gender
sensitization
Social norms, perceptions and gender stereotyping
often act as barriers to securing employment for men
and women and limit the choices and opportunities
available to them. Jobs can be stereotyped as
being male or female and as a result influence not
only job seekers but also employers (for example,
employment opportunities in agriculture and
fisheries value chains are often restricted by gender
stereotyping). Boys and girls are also often steered
towards education choices that are socially predetermined.
In this respect, the importance of gender
sensitization has been reiterated often and still
remains a priority. More and better information on
the existence of these social and cultural norms
is required to understand the existing barriers to
employment applicable to each sex and to identify
ways to overcome them. The social acceptability of
men doing unpaid work, which can free up women’s
time to take on paid work, would also benefit from
focus gender sensitization.

A list of priority indicators for data collection, methodology, guideline
on how to collect the data and questionnaire for collecting the data
is available from the UN WWAP UNESCO Project for Gender Sensitive
Water Monitoring Assessment and Reporting at http://www.unesco.
org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/water-andgender/ (Seager, 2015; Pangare, 2015; WWAP Working Group on
Sex-Disaggregated Indicators, 2015).

WATER, JOBS AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

63

Adopt and support equal opportunity policies
and measures
No effort at reducing the gender gap in employment
can be successful unless proactive measures are put
in place to remove the barriers preventing women’s
equal access to employment opportunities.
First, governments and employers need to design
gender-sensitive recruitment and human resource
policies and practices that take into account the
often-distinct realities of men and women (Morton
et al., 2014). Second, women must be given equal
access to productive assets and resources, such as
land and water, which are crucial in areas of selfemployment such as in agriculture (FAO, n.d.).
Third, the technical capacity of women needs to be
developed. Many actors can contribute in this regard
be it at the local or community level, either formally

or informally. This is sine qua non to improve women’s
employability (see Box 5.8).
Through innovation and measures to green the
economy, new job opportunities arise that present an
opportunity for concerted efforts to raise women’s
employability for those jobs. Where new skills need
to be developed, training and skill-building initiatives
should be designed with women and men in mind.
It is important to remember, however, that economic
changes resulting from innovation or new priorities
(e.g. greening the economy policies) can lead to
both positive and negative impacts. From a gender
perspective, it is important to make sure that women
are in a position to secure the benefits that arise and
that women do not disproportionately suffer from the
negative consequences (see Box 5.9).

BOX 5.8 WOMEN WATER ENTREPRENEURS IN GHANA
Saha Global15 has trained women to treat contaminated water from the local village sources with locally
available technology to make the water safe to drink and then sell this clean drinking water to the local
community. The organization has provided jobs to 178 women entrepreneurs in northern Ghana over a sevenyear period. The women supplement their income from farming by selling water, earning an extra US$1-2
per week for five hours of work. For a family living on less than US$2 each day, the money they earn can be
significant, and these resourceful women can use it to invest in the welfare of their children and communities.
‘These women are empowered by the opportunity to use their skills and expertise to provide for their
community. They are proud to give back, to help others and to create a better world for their children.’

15

This blog post is part of the ‘WASH and the MDGs: The Ripple Effect’ blog series, in partnership with WASH Advocates, addressing the importance
of WASH to global development. Available at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/kate-clopeck/empowering-women-entrepre_b_7058122.html

BOX 5.9 GREEN TECHNOLOGY CAN DISPLACE WOMEN’S MANUAL LABOUR IN AGRICULTURE
Direct-seeded rice (DSR) can significantly reduce the amount of water needed to grow the crop. According
to the Indian Agricultural Research Institute (Foodtank, 2014), DSR eliminates the need for water for sowing
seeds and reduces the amount of water required for growing rice by about 60%. The planting is sometimes
done by machine, though more often by hand, especially in the developing world. Direct sowing can reduce
labour demands necessitated by transplanting by up to 40% (Pathak et al., 2011). An IFPRI study (Paris et al.,
2015) found that there was a 50% reduction in labour use when farmers used DSR, leading to a loss of income
for poor women who work as hired agricultural workers for transplanting. The reduction in labour benefitted
women from farming households that employ the workers.

64

WWDR 2016

AFRICA

6

WWAP | Stephen Maxwell Kwame Donkor
With contributions from Kalkidan Shawel

Work and childcare in Porto Novo (Benin)
Photo: © Anton_Ivanov/Shutterstock.com

This chapter focuses on the challenges and expected future
developments related to Africa’s water resources, policy frameworks,
economy and jobs, with a focus on jobs in water-dependent sectors.

6.1

Challenges related to Africa’s water
resources

The African fisheries and
aquaculture sectors employed
12.3 million people in 2014
and contributed US$24 billion,
or 1.26% of the GDP of all
African countries

Africa has about 9% of the world’s fresh water
resources and 11% of the world’s population. (World
Bank, n.d.a.). Sub-Saharan Africa faces numerous
water-related challenges that constrain economic
growth and threaten the livelihoods of its people.
African agriculture is mostly based on rainfed farming
and less than 10% of its cultivated land is irrigated
(World Bank, n.d.a.). There is very significant interand intra-annual variability of all climate and water
resources characteristics. The impact of climate
change and variability is thus very pronounced.
The main source of electricity is hydropower, which
contributes significantly to the current installed
capacity for energy. Continuing investment in the
last decade has increased the amount of power
generated.

66

WWDR 2016

6.2

Water, jobs and the economy

Africa has undergone the best decade (2005-2015) for
economic growth since the post-independence period.
The growth, however, has neither been inclusive or
equitable. According to the World Bank, GDP growth
in sub-Saharan Africa averaged 4.5% in 2014, up from
4.2% in 2013, supported by continuing infrastructure
investment, increased agricultural production and
buoyant services (Figure 6.1).

FIGURE 6.1 GDP GROWTH IN AFRICA AND
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES, 2007-2017
8
7
6
5
PER CENT

Solutions to the challenges of water for energy and
food security are hindered by a big gap in water
infrastructure and limited water development and
management capacity to meet the demands of a
rapidly growing population. This is compounded
by the fact the Africa has the fastest urbanization
rates in the world (Rafei and Tabari, 2014). Most
significantly, water development and management
is much more complex due to the multiplicity of
transboundary water resources (rivers, lakes and
aquifers). Around 75% of sub-Saharan Africa falls
within 53 international river basin catchments
crossed by multiple borders (World Bank, n.d.a.).
This particular constraint can also be converted into
an opportunity if the potential for transboundary
cooperation is harnessed in the development of the
area’s water resources. A multi-sectoral analysis of
the Zambezi River, for example, shows that riparian
cooperation could lead to a 23% increase in firm
energy production without any additional investments
(World Bank, n.d.a.). A number of institutional and
legal frameworks for transboundary cooperation
exist exists, such as the Zambezi River Authority, the
Southern African Development Community (SADC)
Protocol, Volta River Authority and the Nile Basin
Commission. However, additional efforts are required
to further develop political will, as well as the financial

capacities and institutional frameworks needed for
win-win multilateral cooperative actions and optimal
solutions for all riparians.

4
3
2
1

0

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
YEAR

Sub-Saharan Africa excluding South Africa
Developing countries excluding China
Sub-Saharan Africa
Source: Chuhan-Pole et al. (2015, Fig. 1, p. 4, © World Bank.
License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO).

FIGURE 6. 2 POPULATION GROWTH IN AFRICA, 1950-2050
East Africa

Central Africa

North Africa

Southern Africa

West Africa

Millions
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

0

1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Note: Medium fertility scenario.

YEAR

Source: AfDB/OECD/UNDP (2015, Fig.6, p. xi).

Africa’s population surpassed the 1 billion mark in
2010 and is projected to double by 2050 (AfDB/
OECD/UNDP, 2015). Demographically, it is expected
to be the fastest growing region in the world with
the growth varying depending on sub region.
Furthermore, the growth is skewed to the young
and that component of the population that will need
jobs is expected to increase rapidly and comprise
910 million out of the projected two billion total
population by 2050 (Figure 6.2). Most of the
growth in workforce will be in Sub-Saharan Africa
(about 90%). Hence, the demand for jobs will be
a major policy issue across the continent, which
is already experiencing high unemployment and
underemployment; moreover, the latter is driving
both migration within the region and emigration
towards Europe and other regions.
Job creation for this anticipated growth in population
is set to be the major challenge for Africa’s structural
economic and social transformation. It is estimated
that in 2015, 19 million young people will be joining
the sluggish job market in Sub-Saharan Africa and
four million in North Africa. The demand for jobs
is expected to increase to 24.6 million annually in

Sub-Saharan Africa and 4.3 million in North Africa
by 2030, representing two thirds of global growth
in demand for jobs (AfDB/OECD/UNDP, 2015). Youth
unemployment has been the trigger for uprisings,
notably in North Africa, and has led to social and
security instability.
The key water-dependent or related sectors with
the potential for meeting part of the current and
projected demand for jobs in Africa are social
services, agriculture, fisheries and aquaculture,
retail and hospitality, manufacturing, construction,
natural resources exploitation (including mining)
and energy production (including hydro, geothermal
and expected fracking for oil and natural gas). All
these sectors depend to a varying extent on the
availability of, access to, and reliability of water
resources. Irresponsible water use by some sectors
can create short-term employment, but result
in negative impacts on the availability of water
resources and jeopardize future jobs in other waterdependant sectors. Climate change, water scarcity
and variability have direct impact on the major sector
outputs and thus ultimately on the overall economy
of most African countries.

AFRICA

67

FIGURE 6.3 INDICATIVE JOB DISTRIBUTION OF VARIOUS SECTORS IN AFRICA (MILLIONS OF JOBS, 20102)
Stable jobs 1

Vulnerable jobs 1

Unemployed

Stable jobs
(%)

Labour force
(%)

Government and social services
Agriculture
Retail and hositality
Manufacturing
Construction
Transport and communication
Finance and business services
Resources
Utilities
Unemployed

Notes:
Stable employment includes wage and salary employees and business owners: vulnerable employment includes subsistence farming,
informal self-employment, and work for a family member.
2
Estimated using data for Algeria, Angola, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Morocco, Mali, Senegal, South Africa and Uganda.
1

Source: McKinsey Global Institute (2012, Exhibit E2, p. 4). © 2012 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.

6.3

Jobs in water-dependent sectors

Currently, the most important water-dependent sector
in Africa is agriculture, which forms the bedrock of
most economies of African states. Both rainfed and
irrigated agriculture are important job providing
sectors in all African countries. Figure 6.3 shows the
following indicative job distribution for the various
sectors in Africa.

6.3.1

Agriculture

The role of agriculture as the main source of
employment is decreasing in many African countries
as a sustained growth in many economies is leading
to increasing standards of living, improved education
and the occurrence of rapid rural-urban migration
of educated youth in search of white collar jobs.
However, for the foreseeable future agriculture will
still be a major source of employment, especially in
non-oil producing African states. There is a rising
paradox of increasing unemployment in the rapidly
urbanizing cities and towns of Africa: labour shortages
in rural areas are leading to significant reduction in

68

WWDR 2016

food production and increased dependence of many
African countries on food imports.
Based on FAO statistics, agriculture was the source
of employment for 49% of Africans by 2010 and is
a reflection of a gradual decline from 2002 to 2010,
which coincides with the period of sustained GDP
growth in most African countries (FAO, 2014e). In
spite of this decline, agriculture is expected to create
eight million stable jobs by 2020 based on the trends
from the McKinsey Global Institute (2012) analysis.
If the continent accelerates agricultural development
by expanding large scale commercial farming on
uncultivated land and shifts production from lowvalue grain production to more labour-intensive and
higher value-added horticultural and bio fuel crops
(a good example is Ethiopia), as many as six million
additional jobs could be created continent-wide by
2020 (McKinsey Global Institute, 2012). However,
such estimates do not take account of the potential
displacement or disappearance of existing jobs. These
would need to be carefully assessed in terms of social,
economic and environmental impacts in the overall
context of responsible agricultural investment.

6.3.2

Fisheries
and the rest were processors (mainly women) or
aquaculturalists (FAO, 2014g). Tables 6.1 and 6.2
show the contributions to Africa’s overall GDP by
fisheries and aquaculture and the employment
generated by various fisheries subsectors.

The African fisheries and aquaculture sector employed
12.3 million people in 2014 and contributed US$24
billion or 1.26% of the GDP of all African countries,
which improved food security and nutrition. About
half of the workers in the sector were fishers

TABLE 6.1 FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE CONTRIBUTION TO GDP IN AFRICA BY SUBSECTOR
Gross value added
(US$ millions)
Total GDPs African countries

Contribution
to GDP (%)

1 909 514

Total fisheries and aquaculture

24 030

1.26

Total inland fisheries

6 275

0.33

Inland fishing

4 676

0.24

Post-harvest

1 590

0.08

8

0.00

Total marine artisanal fisheries

8 130

0.43

Marine artisanal fishing

5 246

0.27

Post-harvest

2 870

0.15

13

0.00

Total marine industrial fisheries

6 849

0.36

Marine industrial fishing

4 670

0.24

Post-harvest

1 878

0.10

302

0.02

2 776

0.15

No. of employees
(thousands)

Share
subsector (%)

Local licences

Local licences

Local licences
Total aquaculture
Source: FAO (2014g, Table 32, p. 41).

TABLE 6.2 EMPLOYMENT BY SUBSECTOR

Total Employment

Share within
subsector (%)

12 269

Total Inland Fisheries

4 958

Fishers

3 370

68.0

Processors

1 588

32.0

Total Marine Artisanal Fisheries

4 041

Fishers

1 876

46.4

Processors

2 166

53.6

Total Marine Industrial Fisheries

2 350

Fishers
Processors
Aquaculture Workers

40.4

32.9

19.2
38.4

901

61.6

1 448
920

7.5

Source: FAO (2014g, Table 44, p. 54).

AFRICA

69

6.3.3

Manufacturing and industry

Solutions to the challenges
of water for energy and food
security are hindered by a big
gap in water infrastructure
and limited water development
and management capacity to
meet the demands of a rapidly
growing population

Many manufacturing industries in Africa are waterdependent. Figure 6.4 indicates the share of various
manufacturing industries in job creation in Africa,
based on the analysis of McKinsey Global Institute
(2012), referring to INDSTAT4 of UNIDO for a sample
of countries (UNIDO, n.d.). The share of jobs is lower
than in agriculture, even though the industries cited
are considered as water intensive.

FIGURE 6.4 JOB CREATION BY WATER-DEPENDENT MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES IN SELECTED AFRICAN COUNTRIES (%)

Other manufacturing

39
4

56
Sierra
Leone
(2007)

42
26

20
19
61

32
Ethiopia
(2008)

Agro-processing1

34

40

42

46

25

14

20
Tanzania
(2007)

Food, beverages and tobacco

Ghana
(2003)

45

35
Uganda
(2000)

Senegal
(2002)

37

47

42

31

20

22

Morocco
(2008)

Egypt
(2006)

66

18
16
South
Africa
(2008)

Notes:
1

Includes textiles, footwear and apparel, leather products, paper and wood products, and rubber products.

Numbers may not add up due to rounding.
Source: McKinsey Global Institute (2012, Exhibit 14, p. 33). © 2012 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission.

6.4

Expected future developments

For Africa to be able to meet the SDGs and
maintain the impressive growth rates of the last 10
years, the basic infrastructures of water, electricity
and transportation are prerequisites. Without
these basics, the African economies will lose the
momentum of the last decade, which will lead to
not only loss of direct water jobs, but also jobs in all
the other sectors dependent on water. An illustrative
example is the case of Ghana which is often cited as
one of the best examples of economic recovery in
Africa (see Box 6.1).

70

WWDR 2016

6.5

African Water Policy Framework
and impact on jobs

The African Policy Framework for the water
sector comprise a series of high-level declarations,
resolutions and programmes of action on the
development and use of the continent’s water
resources for socio-economic development, regional
integration and the environment. These include the
African Water Vision 2025 and its Framework of
Action (UNECA/AU/AfDB, 2000), the African Union
(AU) Extraordinary Summit on Water and Agriculture
(Sirte Declaration) (AU, 2004), the AU Sharm El

Sheikh Declaration on Water and Sanitation (AU,
2008), and most importantly, the Agenda 2063 –
The Africa We Want (AU, 2014).

economic development, regional cooperation
and the environment, and calls for the following
action among others.

These policy instruments are underpinned by
strategies and programmes, including the New
Partnership for African Development Program
(NEPAD), Program for Infrastructure Development
in Africa (PIDA) and many others, which include the
integrated development of Africa’s water resources
for socio-economic development and poverty
alleviation and eradication.

‘Support Young people as drivers of Africa’s
renaissance, through investment in their health,
education and access to technology, opportunities
and capital, and concerted strategies to combat
youth unemployment and underemployment.
Encourage exchange and Pan-Africanism among
young people through the formation of AU
Clubs in all schools, colleges and universities.
Ensure faster movement on the harmonization
of continental admissions, curricula, standards,
programmes and qualifications and raising the
standards of higher education to enhance the
mobility of African youth and talent across the
continent by 2025’ (AU, 2014, p. 17).

The AU Agenda 2063, for example, aspires to a
prosperous Africa based on inclusive growth and
sustainable development. It specifically aims for
an Africa that shall have equitable and sustainable
use and management of water resources for socio-

BOX 6.1 IMPACT OF LOW WATER LEVELS OF THE VOLTA RIVER ON GHANA’S ECONOMIC GROWTH
In 2011, Ghana’s economy grew at 14% with the onset of its first production of oil (GSS, 2011). However, in
2015 the growth rate was expected to be only 3.9% (Okudzeto et al., 2015). This can be attributed to a great
extent to the failure to provide the basic water and energy infrastructure to meet the needs of a rapidly
growing economy. Ghana is mainly dependent on the Akosombo hydroelectric dam on the Volta River for
electricity. Due to reduced inflows from low rainfall, the hydroelectric dam was operating merely at half of its
capacity in 2015 (The Africa Report, 2015). This was exacerbated by disruptions mainly in geothermal plants.
In June 2015, all electricity was being rationed at 12 hours on, and 24 hours off. Though this is extreme, it
reinforces the need for water infrastructure to sustain production and jobs in the nascent African economies.
Anecdotal evidence from Trade Unions and Employers in Ghana indicate that tens of thousands of stable jobs
were lost in 2015 and the investment climate has turned sour, forcing Ghana to seek IMF macro-economic
support again.

AFRICA

71

7

ARAB
REGION

THE

UNESCWA | Carol Chouchani Cherfane

This chapter focuses on
water-dependent and
water sector jobs in the
Arab region as well as the
situation regarding clean
water availability in the
workplace and at home,
and education for better
water-related jobs.

Racks of filters in a desalination plant
Photo: © Paul Vinten/Shutterstock.com

7.1

Background

Of an Arab population of approximately 348 million
in 2010, an estimated 63% were of working age. Of
these, 20% were youth between the ages of 15 and
24 years and 43% were adults between the ages of
25 and 64 years. Given the current youth bulge, it
is expected that the adult working age population
will represent over 50% of the national workforce
by 2050, when the region’s population is projected
to reach 604 million (UNESCWA, 2013a). The Arab
population was already estimated to have grown to
364 million in 2012. At the beginning of this decade,
youth unemployment stood at 23% on average for
the region, which is the highest level in the world
(UNESCWA, 2013a). Unemployment trends have
worsened in recent years as rural income has fallen
in face of low agricultural productivity, drought,
land degradation and depletion of groundwater
resources. These trends have fuelled rural to urban
migration and the expansion of informal settlements
and social unrest. These stressors have been among
the factors contributing to the civil unrest that has
erupted across the region. Unemployment and water
scarcity remain structural challenges that hinder
sustainable development in the region.

7.2

Investments in water use
efficiency and conservation
present more politically
palatable avenues for governments
that must weigh trade-offs
between water sustainability and
employment targets
the Jordan Valley Authority, which is responsible
for supporting socio-economic development and
environmental protection through sustainable water
resources management. The Egyptian Holding
Company for Water and Wastewater has over
100,000 employees and operates over 600 facilities
(UNESCO-UNEVOC, 2012), which appears significant.
These employees are responsible for delivering water
services throughout Egypt but represented less
than 0.002% of a workforce of over 55.4 million
in 2010. Notwithstanding, there are also hundreds
of thousands of water resource managers in Egypt
responsible for irrigation, hydropower, water quality,
agriculture, fisheries, regulations, research, policies
and negotiations on transboundary water resources,
so these figures are not fully reflective of the national
workforce working on water. Nevertheless, more
skilled human resources are needed.

Jobs in the water sectors

The public sector is the dominant employer in the
region, and is largely responsible for the delivery
of basic services, including the provision of water
services. For instance, over 93% of Kuwaiti nationals
work for the public sector (UNESCWA, 2013a).
However, employment in the water sectors remains
relatively limited. For instance, in Bahrain with a
workforce of 977,812 people (UNESCWA, 2013a),
an estimated 3,000 persons have water jobs at the
Electricity and Water Authority (0.3%).16 Similarly,
out of a Jordanian workforce of four million,17 an
estimated 7,000 persons (0.2%) are employed in

16

Personal communication with official at the Electricity and Water
Authority of Bahrain, 14 January 2015.

17

Personal communication with official at the Ministry of Water and
Irrigation of Jordan, 14 January 2015.

The potential growth for jobs in the water supply and
sanitation sector is particularly evident. The WHO/
UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP) figures
show that approximately 55 million people in the
Arab Region (15%) do not have access to improved
drinking water, while 65 million people (18%) do
not have access to improved sanitation (UNESCWA,
2015). However, Arab States suffer from intermittent
access to safe drinking water (LAS/UNESCWA/
ACWUA, 2015), dependency on desalinated
water, high non-revenue water (NRW) losses and
insufficient wastewater treatment (UNESCWA,
2013b). Furthermore, the global desalination market
is estimated to grow at a compounded annual
growth rate of 8.1% between 2014 and 2020 (GWI,
2015), with the largest plants coming on line in the
Middle East. This will generate ancillary water jobs in
engineering, law, finance and the environment.

THE ARAB REGION

73

7.3

Water-dependent jobs

As water scarcity is prevalent in the Arab region,
employment in many sectors is water sensitive. Nearly
50% of the region’s population is based in rural areas,
with a large share formally or informally engaged in
agricultural production or associated value chains.
Thus, water scarcity, poor agricultural productivity and
low levels of irrigation efficiency ranging from 30%
to 40% in the region (AFED, 2011) affect job creation
and retention in rural areas.
Because of this, some argue that the agricultural
workforce will decrease over the coming decades
(Richards and Waterbury, 2008; Chaaban, 2010).
However, the recent turbulence in the region exposes
the political imperative of supporting agricultural
employment as a means of overcoming rural and
urban dichotomies and ensuring social justice. Indeed,
a recent report calls for the revitalization of the
agricultural sector to increase agricultural employment
and improve living standards, arguing that 10 million
new jobs could be generated if more sustainable
agricultural practices were pursued (AFED, 2011).
Similar perspectives are observed at the national level.
In Algeria, which is largely an oil economy, special
measures to promote the agricultural sector through
credit free loans, the write-off of farm debts and new
government purchasing schemes led to a 17% growth
in the sector in 2009 (UN-Habitat, 2012). Egypt has
launched a massive one million feddan (420,000
ha) land reclamation project in Upper Egypt despite
its dependency on external waters, while Somalia is
digging new water channels to support pastoralists
and its water-dependent livestock sector.
Similar trends are observed in the tourism sector,
where governments continue to develop new facilities
to generate revenue and employment, despite the
strains posed on scarce water resources. Hence,
investments in water-use efficiency and conservation
present more politically palatable avenues for
governments that must weigh trade-offs between
water sustainability and employment targets.

74

WWDR 2016

7.4

Clean water for decent jobs and a
healthy workforce

Insufficient access to reliable, accessible and
affordable water resources in Arab States also
affects the creation and maintenance of decent jobs
outside the water sectors. Cost of environmental
degradation studies in selected Arab countries have
assessed labour productivity losses associated with
waterborne illnesses, morbidity and child mortality.
For instance, the cost of environmental degradation
in the Upper Litani Basin of Lebanon is estimated
to represent about 0.5% of the National GDP in
2012, with water resources degradation representing
77% of these total costs, including, in order of
importance, water quantity, water-borne diseases
and water quality (SWIM-SM, 2014).
The lack of access to adequate sanitation facilities
particularly affects women and young girls and
dissuades women from seeking employment in
establishments and institutions that do not provide
gender sensitive facilities (e.g. different washroom
areas for women and men). This has been witnessed
in some government ministries, sports facilities,
schools and hospitals, and contributes to the already
low participation rate of women and girls in national
employment figures (UNESCWA, 2013a). Increasing
pressures to create employment opportunities in
face of the spillover effects of the Syrian conflict led
the Jordanian Government to prepare a National
Resilience Plan for 2014-12016. The plan aims to
create job opportunities for poor and vulnerable
groups (particularly women and youth), while also
pursing heavy investments in water and sanitation
services to enhance the capacity of host communities
to meet the increased demand for these services (The
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 2014).

7.5

Education for better
water-related jobs

There are an increasing number of universities
offering first and second level degrees in water
resources management and engineering, including
programmes focused on water security and
sustainability. Joint academic programmes are also
offering specialized degrees, e.g. the German Jordan
University launched a water and environmental
engineering programme in 2009; the University of
Jordan and Cologne University of Applied Science
offer a joint IWRM Masters Programme; the Arabian
Gulf University in Bahrain offers a professional IWRM
certificate, while the water engineering programme
at Cairo University is expanding at all levels.
Meanwhile, training and certification programmes
for water operators have been launched by the
International Institute for Water and Sanitation
at the state-owned Office National pour l’Eau
Potable (ONEP) of Morocco and the Arab Countries
Association for Water Utilities in the Arab Region
(ACWUA) based in Jordan. Such programmes target
managers, supervisors, skilled workers and unskilled
workers with the aim of upgrading skills and
introducing new technologies to the water sector.
The programmes are being complemented by an
increasing number of researchers working on waterrelated subjects, such as climate change, the waterenergy-food nexus, transboundary water resources
management and strategic R&D sectors related to
desalination, co-generation and non-conventional
energy sources. This is creating a new cadre of
qualified job seekers and potential entrepreneurs and
employers with expertise in the water sectors, which
present a further opportunity for the creation of
decent water jobs.

THE ARAB REGION

75

8

ASIA AND
THE PACIFIC
UNESCAP | Aida N. Karazhanova, with substantial contributions from
Joshua Goodfield, Ram S. Tiwaree and Donovan Storey
ILO | Lurraine Baybay Villacorta

Students wash their hands after using bathroom at Dima Guranda Primary School (Ethiopia)
Training Photo:
for women
plumbers
(Timor Leste)
© UNICEF
Ethiopia/2014/Ose
Photo: © AusAID

This chapter provides an overview of the current situation in Asia and the Pacific region, and
highlights three approaches for generating water-dependent jobs in the region: i) addressing
gaps of water and sanitation through the improvement of water infrastructure; ii) improving
efficiency in water use to contribute to economic growth; and iii) transitioning beyond
sectoral issues and demonstrating the short-, medium- and long-term values and benefits.

With 4.3 billion people, representing 60% of the
world’s population (UNESCAP, 2014a), the Asia and
the Pacific region generates one-third of the world’s
GDP, with continuous prospects for ‘thirsty’ economic
growth and the need to ensure safe and accessible
water, to further address income inequality, poverty
and unemployment.
Over 1.7 billion people in Asia and the Pacific continue
to live without access to improved sanitation (UNICEF,
n.d.) and over 85% of untreated wastewater create
the risk of a ‘silent disaster’ (2nd APWS, 2013a, 2013b)
from the pollution of surface and ground water
resources and coastal ecosystems (UNESCAP, 2010).
As a result of heightened climate change (UNESCAP,
2014b), more than 50% of the world’s recent natural
disasters occurred in Asia-Pacific affecting water
supply infrastructure. Since 1970, more than 4,000
water-related disasters have been reported costing
more than US$678 billion in economic losses. During
the past 12 years, the regional coverage to the water
supply and sanitation services grew by 0.5% and
0.7% respectively, thus improving productivity and
livelihoods (UNESCAP, 2014a).
Traditionally, regional employment has been created
through water resource management and water reuse.
While some specific research has been conducted in
the water-management sector, gaps persist in available
regional data on water-dependent jobs in all the
other sectors that rely on large quantities of water to
perform basic operations and services (UNDP, 2006).
While between 60% to 90% of water is used for
agriculture (UNESCAP, 2011), the employment rates in
this sector are 39% in South-East Asia, and 44.5% in
South and South-West Asia, respectively (ILO, 2014c).
There is tremendous potential to create employment
opportunities in the agricultural sector by increasing
access to water and improving water-use efficiency in
irrigation. Research and development for advanced
technologies in agriculture can also foster employment
opportunities in other sectors.
There is also potential in the industry and service
sectors to create and support water-dependent
jobs, especially through the improvement of water
efficiency, wastewater usage and pollution control.

Most of the industries that are
driving economic growth across
the region depend upon
a reliable supply of freshwater
for large parts of their
production process
In South-East Asia alone, 41% of the labour force
are in the industrial sector and 21% are in the
service sector. In South and South-West Asia, 39%
of the labour force are in the industrial sector and
15% are in the service sector (ILO, 2014c).
Hydropower accounts for the largest proportion of
employment in the renewable energy sector. China
alone accounts for half of the global employment
in small hydropower (209,000) and in large
hydropower (690,000) (IRENA, 2015). Employment
in fisheries and aquaculture in the region supports
approximately 10% to 12% of the world’s
population. In the fisheries and aquaculture industry,
employment has grown rapidly since 1990, with
84% of the approximately 60 million jobs in this
sector now based in Asia (FAO, 2014a).
The key regional responses for generating waterdependent jobs include addressing gaps of water
and sanitation through the improvement of water
infrastructure, increased efficiency in water use to
contribute to economic growth, and a transition
towards IWRM solutions demonstrating the short-,
medium- and long-term values and benefits.

8.1 Addressing gaps in water and
sanitation through the improvement
of water infrastructure
While access to safe water sources in the region
is improving, there are still disparities, particularly
in urban areas, where the number of individuals
without access to improved water is 97%, compared
to 87% in rural areas (UNESCAP, 2014a). However,
there are also disparities within urban areas. In
Dhaka, Bangladesh, almost 60% of the city’s
slums lack effective drainage and are exposed to
floods (UN-Habitat/UNESCAP, 2014). In such a
case, water jobs and ancillary water jobs could be
created through improved facilities and technology
and respective enabling policy frameworks for

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

77

BOX 8.1 DECENTRALIZED WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
The Consortium for DEWATS Dissemination Society is working with South and South-West Asia to
improve the state of the region’s water. The organization has created jobs such as unit coordinators,
sanitation trainers, documentation specialists, project engineers, capacity building programme
assistants, urban planners, and executive management positions all working towards a common
goal of better sanitation in water (India Water Portal, n.d.).

decentralized wastewater treatment systems
(DEWATS) (Box 8.1) (UNESCAP/UN-Habitat/AIT,
2015), which are more flexible on technology,
investment and operational choices.
Indonesia (FAO/Wetlands International/University of
Greifswald, 2012), Nepal (UNESCAP, n.d.) and the
Philippines (UNESCAP, 2012) are facing challenges
in their efforts to provide an adequate water supply
and sanitation services to their rural populations
(UNESCAP, 2014a). Recent policies and activities
carried out towards eco-efficient water infrastructure
through participatory processes are focused on
maximizing the value of water-related services,
optimizing use of natural resources, and minimizing
the negative impacts on ecosystems. On a smaller
scale, investments in DEWATS in Indonesia have
contributed to the environmental rehabilitation of
peat lands, improved rural accessibility and enhanced
rural livelihoods with more Indonesians employed
in jobs to clean and restore the environment (FAO/
Wetlands International/University of Greifswald,
2012). The policies on rainwater harvesting and
DEWATS in Cambodia, Lao People's Democratic
Republic and Viet Nam were developed to restore
deteriorated river quality and to recycle and diversify
water supply sources, which created a number
of new jobs in financial and technical operations
(UNESCAP/UN-Habitat/AIT, 2015). Increased public
awareness and job creation has resulted in 94%
access to public toilets in Viet Nam (UNICEF/WHO,
2008). The Philippines has started adopting an ecoefficient approach to water infrastructure (Box 8.2).

8.2

Improving efficiency in water use to
contribute to economic growth

Less than half of China’s 4,000 water treatment plants
meet the national standard of the quality of the source
water. The government plans to upgrade about 2,000
water plants during its Twelfth Five-Year Plan from 2011
to 2015, and build 2,358 additional water plants with a
combined capacity of 40 million cubic metres per day,
to meet the demands of urbanization. This plan provides
a major opportunity for setting up water treatment
equipment manufacturing and water plants, potentially
bringing more employment in water sector (KPMG,2012).
The Green Jobs Assessment Methodology (ILO, 2013d)
is a step-by-step approach applied in several countries
across the region, such as Indonesia and Malaysia,
to map green jobs in various sectors, including water.
The mapping has revealed 9,960 green jobs, including
the water services sector in Malaysia by 2012 (Figure 8.1).
Of this total, 1,020 people are employed in the water
equipment and chemicals industry, 4,120 in wastewater
treatment and 4,820 in water utilities. Through policy
support modelling, the methodology identifies job
creation potential of policies/measures in different green
jobs sectors, where employment growth rate is higher
than in sectors using brown technologies. Malaysia’s
water management sector aims to transition towards a
minimal pollutant operation. However, current sewage
treatment plants are responsible for 49% of water
pollution, with the manufacturing industry accounting
for an additional 45% (ILO, 2014d).

BOX 8.2 ECO-EFFICIENT WATER INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE PHILIPPINES
Since 2011, the Philippines has taken a unique approach with the idea to construct eco-efficient water
infrastructure and small-scale pilot projects such as the application of sustainable designs for green
school development in Cebu. The objective is to develop an eco-efficiency education curriculum to
emphasize past water-related shortcomings. Green schools inform the workers of tomorrow how to
integrate efficient and sustainable practices into their future careers to ensure the longevity of water
resources (UNESCAP, 2012).

78

WWDR 2016

BOX 8.3 ‘SOFT’ INTERVENTIONS IN VIET NAM
To address the challenge of increasing environmental pollution associated with urbanization in large
cities, the Viet Nam Urban Wastewater Review highlighted key recommendations for the establishment
of a national strategy to apply IWRM principles (Australian Aid/World Bank, 2013), accompanied
with ‘soft interventions’ of capacity building, institutional and financial arrangements. Of the seven
urban field site interventions, 310,639 households have had their water supply improved, enabling
employment. Sanitation coverage percentage ranged from a low of 56% in some areas of Sa Dec town
and a high of nearly 90% in Thang town. Over 90% of Viet Nam’s equipment installed for water and
wastewater engineering systems created opportunities for local enterprises to manufacture pumps,
pipelines, treatment packages, control systems and devices, and operations supports (WSP, 2012).

8.3 Transitioning beyond sectorial issues
and demonstrating the short-, mediumand long-term values and benefits
Using inter-sectorial and inter-disciplinary approaches
in planning, which envisions new market opportunities
and enables more job and income (Rogers and
Daines, 2014), the region is searching for appropriate
technological solutions than can help improve water
infrastructure and water-use efficiency in industry and
agriculture. South-East Asia has demonstrated signs
of smarter decision-making in an attempt to facilitate
economic growth through IWRM solutions (Box 8.3).
Water management within the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act and
the wage employment programme in India (using
participatory rural appraisal methodology) provided
productive green jobs to 52.5 million households

in 2009 and 2010. The water sectors among
others comprised jobs in water conservation, water
harvesting, drought-proofing and irrigation canals
(ILO, 2011b).
Sub-regional capacity to effectively manage water
resources depend on national strategies, executive
plans at the local levels (UNESCWA, 2007), and public
employment programmes (ILO, 2014c). More practical
options need to be further explored, promoted and
up-scaled through enabling policies for PPPs (UNESCAP,
n.d.). The options should create business cases, which
empower communities and generate more waterrelated jobs. Government has a crucial role to play
by creating a conducive environment and developing
legislation and policy frameworks to improve
opportunities for water-related employment that
support sustainable water use and management.

FIGURE 8.1 ESTIMATED CORE ENVIRONMENTAL-RELATED JOBS THROUGH GREEN MAPPING STUDIES IN FOUR
SOUTH-EAST ASIAN COUNTRIES (2010-2012)
Water utilities

Wastewater treatment

Agriculture

Water equipment and chemicals
100%

Waste management

90%

Construction

80%

Water management

70%

Foresty

60%

Manufacturing

50%

Tourism
Fishery
Energy
Transportation
Climate change adaptation
Source: UNESCAP, based on ILO (2013e ,2014d and 2014e).

sh
de
gla sia
n
Ba one
ia
Ind lays
es
a
M ippin
l
i
Ph

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

79

9

EUROPE AND
NORTH AMERICA
UNECE | Annukka Lipponen and Nicholas Bonvoisin

Scientist makes measurements and calculations to analyze water quality in an oil field in Casper, Wyoming (United States)
Photo: © B. Brown/Shutterstock.com

This chapter focuses on the Europe and North America region, and offers an overview of
employment in the water services and water-dependent economic sectors, as well as in
water resources monitoring, and presents specific emerging employment opportunities.

Across most of the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE) region, covering the
pan-European area and North America, management
of the nitrogen and phosphorous cycles, including
handling of nutrients, has been identified as a major
challenge (WWAP, 2015). However, in the European
Union (EU), the most widespread pressure on a
good ecological status of waters originates from
hydromorphological changes to water bodies due to
dams or other construction (EC, 2012).
Deterioration of water supply and sanitation
infrastructure in Eastern Europe and Central Asia
– exemplified by low quality and high levels of
unaccounted-for water – calls for investment and the
improvement of operation, with important implications
for employment.18 In the EU and North America, water
infrastructure is more complete but ageing and thus
repair and maintenance works are the focus.

Many countries in the Caucasus and Central Asia,
in particular, face the challenge of reforming and
developing labour- and water-intensive irrigated
agriculture.19 In the EU, increasing resource efficiency
(including water) and focusing services on green
growth more explicitly aim to achieve a sustainable
recovery from the recent economic crisis and to
respond to pressures on the environment (EC, 2012).
A number of developments can be observed in
the UNECE region that have strongly influenced
employment and education in the field of water
management and water services, as well as
research. Some examples according to subregion are
provided in Table 9.1. In most of the UNECE region,
promotion of standardization and mutual recognition
of professional certifications is an on-going trend,
resulting in a more mobile workforce.

TABLE 9.1 SELECTED TRENDS BY SUBREGION THAT HAVE RESULTED IN CHANGES IN JOBS IN WATER MANAGEMENT OR
WATER SERVICES
North America

European Union

South-Eastern Europe,
Eastern Europe

Caucasus, Central Asia

Increased use of automation
and of remote sensing.
Monitoring less labourintensive but specialized job
niches have developed.

Adoption of the Water
Framework Directive has
transformed assessment
of water resources,
increasing the role of public
consultation, economics and
biological parameters of
water quality.

Investment in water
management and services
infrastructure.

Reduced resources led to
both degraded monitoring
infrastructure and reduced
staffing.

Increased EU-wide
standardization contributes
to exchange of experience
and mobility of the
workforce between EU
member States.

Postponement of key water
infrastructure repairs and
of resulting public health
benefits from improved
hygiene and environmental
health.

Reforming national
administrations and
an increasing use and
modernization of technology
allow more to be done with
limited resources.

In the recent EU accession
countries, implementation
of the Urban Wastewater
Directive required major
investments.*

* This progress comes with significant EU investment support, amounting to EUR 14.3 billion between 2007 and 2013 (EC, 2013a).
Source: UNECE, and cf. EC (2012) and OECD (2007).

18

For an overview of the situation, see OECD (2007).

19

With the exception of Kazakhstan, the share of agriculture of
total annual water withdrawal in the Central Asian former Soviet
republics is around 90% or more (FAO, 2013).

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

81

There is still an enormous
need to repair, modernize and
construct different types
of water infrastructure in
Eastern Europe, the Caucasus
and Central Asia, as well as
in parts of North America
9.1

Employment in water services and
water-dependent economic sectors

The water services sector is a significant provider
of employment in the UNECE region. In the EU, it
includes 9,000 SMEs and 600,000 direct jobs in
water utilities alone (EC, 2012). In recent decades,
the number of people employed by water supply
and wastewater treatment facilities has consistently
decreased, while the level of education and
specialization of personnel has increased. In Finland
in the mid-1980s, the public water and wastewater
works employed some 8,500 people; in 2002 their
number had decreased to 5,000 and by 2011 to
4,000 (Katko, 2013). In Eastern Europe and Central
Asia, there are nine staff per 1,000 connections,
which is more than an order of magnitude higher
than that observed in the best-performing quartile
of utilities worldwide (< 0.6) (Danilenko et al., 2014;
based on IBNET database). In the United States,
the job market outlook for water and wastewater
treatment plant and system operators is positive,
with employment projected to grow by 8% from
2012 to 2020 (US Bureau of Labor Statistics, n.d.).
A significant proportion of ‘green’ jobs in France are
water jobs (Box 9.1)
Some countries suffer from the severe constraint
of skilled workers not willing to live and work in
rural areas (i.e. Serbia), a lack of skilled graduates
(i.e. Tajikistan), a lack of financial resources for staff
costs (i.e. Azerbaijan) or the absence of a human
resource strategy (i.e. Lithuania) (WHO, 2014).
UNECE work with water services operators in Portugal
demonstrates how a focused effort to improve the
awareness and skills of personnel improves the
performance of utilities while contributing to the
realization of the Human Right to Water (see Box 12.3).

82

WWDR 2016

BOX 9.1 GREEN JOBS IN FRANCE
In France in 2010, some 140,000 persons (or
0.5% of the workforce) worked in ‘green’
jobs, and a significant share is linked to
water: four-fifths work in the management
or treatment of wastewater or solid waste
(36%), or in the production and distribution
of water and energy (45%). The remainder
were in posts related to environmental
protection or treatment of pollution, or were
environmental technicians or specialists.
Source: French Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable
Development and Energy (2010).

Irrigated agriculture employs significant numbers
of people in Central Asia and in the Caucasus. In
Central Asia, agriculture accounts for between
26% (Kazakhstan) and 53% (Tajikistan) of national
employment (World Bank, n.d.b.). Farmers and
employees are ageing; young people tend to look
for opportunities in other sectors. Low salaries
further intensify the migration from the countryside.
Guest workers from the Russian Federation
returning to Central Asia as a result of the economic
downturn have put pressure on the countries to find
acceptable solutions for their employment.
In contrast, in the EU, where industrialization
and intensification of agricultural practices have
transformed the agriculture sector, around 10
million people are employed in agriculture,
representing 5% of total employment. At the
same time, some 25 million people were regularly
engaged in farm work in the EU during 2010.
Behind this difference in numbers is – beyond
statistical divergences – the pursuit of agriculture as
a part-time activity and as seasonal work, among
other factors (EC, 2013b). More environmentfriendly practices are being required in agriculture
and this has implications for the skills required.
Support is therefore needed for a new generation of
farmers with different attitudes and abilities.

9.2

Employment in the monitoring
of water resources

Employment and skill requirements in the monitoring
of water resources have been changed by cuts to
in situ monitoring, development of technology and
increased attention to biological parameters.
In Central Asia and the Caucasus, in particular,
monitoring degraded significantly after the breakup of the Soviet Union. In the past decades,
improvements have been made through site-specific
projects, but long-term sustainability of these
projects remains a concern (UNECE, 2011).
Remote sensing is increasingly contributing to
operational monitoring, partially filling some gaps.
For example, the Idaho Department of Water
Resources developed a LANDSAT imagery based
application for monitoring aquifer depletion caused
by the pumping of groundwater for irrigated
agriculture. While some ground-truth data is
necessary, illustrative calculations suggest the costs
to be approximately 10 times less than using power
consumption co-efficients and site energy records,
or more than 40 times less costly than using flow
meters (Morse et al., 2008).
In hydrological monitoring in North America and
Europe, there are indications that the average
number of hydrologists per organization has not
changed since 2002, although the share of women
employees has increased and the education level of
the workforce is higher (Aquatic Informatics, 2012).

9.3

Specific emerging employment
opportunities

Renewable energy:20 There is undeveloped
potential for hydropower and other renewables,
especially in South-Eastern Europe, Eastern
Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia. Given that
many sources of renewables are intermittent, a
corresponding need for pumped storage provides

20

See for example UNECE, 2009; UNECE, 2014a and 2014b.

new employment opportunities. Based on the
modelling of the heat and electricity markets, the
Energy Community assessed the costs and other
implications of the 2020 EU Renewable Energy
Targets for Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, Montenegro, Serbia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo.21 In addition to
the savings in CO2 emissions, potential employment
benefits were predicted, primarily in the electricity
sector, at between 10,000 and 22,000 additional
full-time jobs. Significantly, more jobs would be
created in a scenario involving development of wind
and hydropower (IPA-Energy and Water Economics,
2010).22
Construction, extension, repair and
maintenance of water infrastructure: Even
though investment has increased and water sector
reforms have transformed the provision of services,
there is still an enormous need to repair, modernize
and construct different types of water infrastructure
in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia,
as well as in parts of North America. The investment
need is particularly great in wastewater treatment.
Should the necessary resources for investments
into basic water and sanitation infrastructure be
made, these would translate into both employment
opportunities and favourable effects on public
health. Smart metering, technical and non-technical
innovations, international benchmarking and private
sector participation are among factors that shape
further the water services sector. In other areas of
water infrastructure, growth-representing jobs in
construction works and increased activity could
be achieved in inland waterway transport, if the
bottlenecks of low capacity or non-passable points
between major rivers and canals were to be invested
in (UNECE, 2013).

21

United Nations administered territory under Security Council
Resolution 1244 (UN SC, 1999).

22

The actual job creation (or loss) would depend on the local
manufacturing percentages for each generating technology.
Indirect employment will also be created in secondary industries.

EUROPE AND NORTH AMERICA

83

10

LATIN AMERICA
AND THE CARIBBEAN
UNECLAC | Andrei Jouravlev, with comments from: Eurípides Amaya, David Barkin,
Andrea Bernal, Mario Buenfil, Caridad Canales, Gonzalo Delacámara, Axel Dourojeanni,
Marcelo Gaviño, Daniel Greif, Juan Justo, Terence Lee, Emilio Lentini, Humberto Peña,
Franz Rojas, Carlos Serrentino, Miguel Solanes, Claudia Vargas and Gabriel Zamorano

This chapter focuses
on the Latin America
and the Caribbean
region, and provides
an overview of the
importance of water
in the economy of
the region and of
the various aspects
to address in order
to maximize the
contribution of water
to development and
job creation.

Command room of Itaipu dam on Parana River on the border of Brazil and Paraguay
Photo: © Matyas Rehak/Shutterstock.com

The Latin America and Caribbean region has
abundant water resources, but they vary significantly
across the area. These play a strategic role in regional
socio-economic development and in job creation.
Regional economies rely heavily on the exploitation of
natural resources, particularly on mining, agriculture
(including biofuels), forestry, fisheries and tourism.
Droughts are frequent in the region. Severe droughts
can lead to a noticeable increase in unemployment,
particularly among the rural population. Increasingly,
droughts affect not only agriculture, but also the
urban population, hydroelectric power generation
and industries which use water in their production
processes (UNECLAC, 1987).
In general, there is strong labour demand in waterrelated economic activities. The region is highly
dependent on hydropower which provides over 60%
of electricity generation, in comparison with the world
average of less than 16%, and it still has significant
(74%) undeveloped technical potential (IEA, 2014b).
Although irrigated land is not a large proportion
of arable land (13%), it accounts for almost 67%
of total water withdrawals (FAO, 2015a). In several
countries (e.g. Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico
and Peru), irrigation is responsible for a major part
of agricultural production, particularly for export.
It provides important employment opportunities
for rural populations, as well as in backward- and
forward-linked industries. On the whole, however,
rainfed agriculture accounts for most of crop
production (including biofuels) and employment. Jobs
are shifting from agriculture to services, with industrial
employment remaining stable (ILO, 2014f).
The economies of most countries are export-oriented
and highly dependent on international commodity
prices. Since the beginning of the 2000s, the boom
in international demand for primary goods (minerals,
hydrocarbons and agricultural commodities) has been
instrumental to strong macroeconomic performance
and job creation. The region enjoyed high and labourintensive economic growth, leading to an increase in
the employment rate, rising real wages in the formal
sector, an extension of social protection systems and
a reduction in unemployment (UNECLAC, 2014a).
Rapid job creation in medium- and high-productivity

sectors and advances in labour formalization resulted
in an improvement in the quality of employment.
In addition, they were instrumental in increasing
household consumption and reducing income
inequalities. However, largely because of negative
external conditions, economic growth has slowed
since 2011, as has labour demand.
Most of the regional export products, and related
employment, are water intensive, either because they
use water in the production process (particularly,
irrigated agriculture and mining, food, pulp and
paper, petrochemical and textile industries), depend
on it (as much of the tourism, which represents over
30% of GDP in some of the countries of the region)
or because they use water as a key component of
their final products (i.e. the bottled water industry is
important in a number of countries, mainly because
of deficiencies in water supply services, in terms of
coverage, and especially because of poor service
quality). Although the region has about a third of
the global water supply, the high water intensity of
regional economies and their dependence on natural
resources and international commodity prices pose
important challenges for economic growth and job
creation, such as:
• The pattern of water use is influenced greatly
by the concentration of the population,
urban agglomerations and economic activities
in dry and sub-humid areas. This results in
intense competition for scarce water resources
in concentrated areas or specific seasons,
unsustainable practices of water use, growing
water pollution, not only by sewage but also
increasingly by agriculture and mining, and the
destruction of watersheds. The main threat to
employment and job creation is that these trends
are undermining the environmental sustainability
of economic development. Climate change will
also intensify pressure on water resources. Its
effects are already seen in agriculture, water
availability, forests and biodiversity, coastal areas,
tourism and public health (UNECLAC, 2014b);
• There are signs that economies that are heavily
dependent on natural resources, especially in
combination with low productivity growth, could

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

85

be generating greater relative demand for lowskilled workers and reducing the education wage
premium, thereby discouraging educational
pursuit and skill development (UNECLAC, 2014c);
and
• Water management institutions are weak in most
countries, their capacity for implementation
is extremely limited and rules and norms
are rarely effectively enforced (Solanes and
Jouravlev, 2006). At the same time, with rising
incomes, the emergence of the middle class and
democratization, people are demanding that more
attention be given to environmental conservation,
to the protection of the rights of indigenous
communities and local public interests. This is
accompanied by increased consumption of waterintensive products and services. Both factors have
led to the proliferation of socio-environmental
conflicts, most of them water-related, which block
many large infrastructure and natural resources
development projects, particularly in mining
(Martín and Justo, 2015), that could contribute to
economic development and job creation.
The regional experience permits the identification of
the following key elements that demand constant
attention in order to maximize the contribution of
water to development and job creation (Solanes,
2007; Solanes and Jouravlev, 2006):
• Developing strong, transparent and effective
institutional arrangements for integrated water
management and the provision of water and
sanitation services that protect public interests and
promote economic efficiency, as well as provide
the stability and flexibility necessary to attract
investment to the development of water resources
and related public utility services;
• Increasing the capture of rents from natural
resources and ensure their investment in human
capital, including education and training,
social protection, infrastructure, and science
and technology. In addition, there is a need to
institutionalize long-term mechanisms for the
stabilization, saving and investment of income
from the extractive industries, and to build
the institutional capacity to manage socio-

86

WWDR 2016

•

•
•

•

•

environmental and labour conflicts associated
with the development of these sectors;
Ensuring that accurate, objective, reliable and
timely information on water supply and use
(including the magnitude and distribution of
costs and benefits) is available to the public,
stakeholders and decision-makers;
Preventing water governance from being captured
or manipulated by special interest groups;
Improving water planning and careful assessment,
based on objective criteria, of the economic,
social, labour and environmental impacts of water
policies, publicly financed projects, fiscal subsidies
and government guarantees;
Protecting the ecological integrity and
sustainability of water sources, including the
maintenance of environmental flows; and
Guaranteeing basic human needs are satisfied,
including the protection of the human right to
water and sanitation and the rights of indigenous
peoples.

Other important aspects of the role played by water
resources in relation to employment include the
contribution of water services to health and labour
productivity and employment in the water sector.
Regarding health, the existing levels of provision
of drinking water supply and sanitation services
achieved in the region compare favourably to those
in other developing nations. The focus of public
policies remains firmly on these services: the region
has reached the MDGs for water supply, and it
missed the target for sanitation only by a very small
margin. It has now started to work on the post-2015
development agenda, including the materialization of
the human right to water and sanitation. This means
continuing the expansion of water and sanitation
coverage, especially reducing the deficits in rural and
peri-urban areas, the improvement of service quality
(particularly drinking water quality control) and major
investments in wastewater treatment. These efforts
are an important contribution to employment, both
directly (in the water and sanitation sector itself), and
particularly indirectly (in other economic activities),
through the reduction of morbidity and mortality,
of work and school absenteeism and the burden of

unpaid work of water collection, especially for women
and girls, and an increase of the time available for
work (Hantke-Domas and Jouravlev, 2011). They also
promote social stability and create advantageous
conditions for the development of irrigated –
particularly export-oriented – agriculture, tourism,
coastal and inland fishing. In addition, they reduce
the cost of installing new businesses, help maintain
or improve labour productivity, and facilitate access
to export markets, generating more and better jobs
across the economy (see Box 10.1).
Employment in the water sector remains characterized
by extensive political interference in employment
decisions. Politically motivated nominations and
needless staff rotation (particularly of staff with
management responsibilities) undermine efficiency
orientation, retention of qualified personnel and
the application of technical criteria. It is essential
to avoid political appointments and unnecessary
rotation, as well as to manage conflicts of interest,
control corruption and capture, and encourage
professionalization. There has been a move to
facilitate flexibility in operations, particularly in

Although the region has
about a third of the
global water supply, the
high water intensity
of regional economies
and their dependence on
natural resources and
international commodity
prices pose important
challenges for economic
growth and job creation
water supply services, by removing staff from the
controls of civil service under administrative law
and employing them by contract and under private
law. This trend is a cause of concern because of its
potentially negative impact on accountability and
contradictory incentives for efficiency (Bohoslavsky,
2011). The most interesting advances are related
to the creation of independent water authorities
and autonomous regulatory agencies (Solanes and
Jouravlev, 2006). Regional experience suggests,
however, that their effectiveness depends more on
the general political culture and governance than on
the letter of the law.

BOX 10.1 IMPACTS OF WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
AND EMPLOYMENT
The cholera epidemic that affected the region in 1991 was closely related to the deterioration in water
supply, sanitation and health services influenced by the economic crisis of the 1980s. The epidemic
caused serious losses in employment and economic activity in tourism, agriculture, fishing and exports.
The need to protect access to external markets was one of the factors that motivated important
investments in urban wastewater treatment. For example, in the words of a former President of Chile:
‘If we continued irrigating with wastewaters we were going to have serious problems in placing our
... agricultural products [in external markets]’. As a result, wastewater treatment coverage in the
region doubled from 14% to 28% in the last decade. In particular, in Chile, all urban wastewater
discharges currently receive treatment. Many countries (e.g. Argentina and Peru) are making important
investments in water supply and sanitation services. The benefits of these investments are often
presented not only in terms of public health, quality of life and protection of the environment, but
also as positive effects on the economy and employment. For example, the expansion of wastewater
treatment is expected to make it possible to irrigate more land with clean water; to promote the tourist
industry, because of clean water bodies; to reduce export risk due to possible complaints in relation to
wastewater irrigation; to promote the qualities of pollution-free products in external markets; and to
generate more employment associated with exports and the tourist industry.
Source: Jouravlev (2004 and 2015).

LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN

87

11

INVESTING IN WATER
IS INVESTING IN JOBS
WWAP | Marc Paquin
With contributions from Katherine Manchester and Catherine Cosgrove

This chapter underlines
that water-related
investments are necessary
for economic growth,
jobs and reducing
inequalities. Failure to
invest not only represents
missed opportunities
but also may impede
economic growth and
job creation, effectively
resulting in job losses.

The bridge of Marina Barrage, a government-commissioned dam built across the mouth of Marina Channel (Singapore)
Photo: © Tristan Tan/Shutterstock.com

Water is a crucial and pervasive input for all major
types of production – so much so that estimating
its relationship with economic growth and jobs is
particularly challenging. Countries exhibit a strong
positive correlation between water-related investments
and national income, as well as between water
storage capacity and economic growth (Sadoff et al.,
2015). As discussed in Chapter 1, water investments
are a necessary enabling condition for economic
growth, jobs and reducing inequalities. Failing to
invest in water management not only represents
missed opportunities but may also positively have the
reverse impact and impede economic growth and job
creation, effectively resulting in jobs loss.
Insufficient local investment can have far-reaching
economic impacts. For example, the 2011 floods in
Thailand affected the country’s primary industries
(automotive and electronics) and were also
detrimental to the national economy and to select
global supply chains (Haraguchi and Lall, 2014). In
São Paulo, Brazil, frequent flooding as well as the
severe drought in 2014-2015 had an impact on the
city’s growth and restricted local competitiveness in
domestic and international markets (Haddad and
Teixeira, 2015).
Whether looking at water investment through the
lens of risk reduction (e.g. flooding, drought, disease)
or growth potential (i.g. expanding agriculture,
industry or recreation), the highest returns require
proactive policies that make the most of an
increasingly in-demand resource, particularly given
the uncertainties resulting from climate change.
When making these policy considerations, it is
important to keep in mind that water investments
providing benefits for human well-being may not
necessarily translate into national economic statistics.
For example, improved water access can shift the
time that households spend collecting water to
more productive activities (see Box 5.2), but those
gains may not be measured in the context of an
informal economy (Sadoff et al., 2015). Despite the
complexity of accurately projecting costs and benefits
beyond the project level, these estimates are critical
for maximizing the returns of water investments.

Investments in infrastructure
and operations of water-related
services can provide high
returns for economic growth
and for direct and
indirect job creation
Investments in infrastructure and operations of
water-related services can provide high returns for
economic growth and for direct and indirect job
creation (Box 11.1). In terms of direct job creation
from water investments, the results are highly
context-dependent but may entail some significant
returns. One study found that investing US$1
billion in water supply and sanitation network
expansion in Latin America would directly result
in 100,000 jobs (more than equal investments
in coal-powered energy or rural electrification)
(Schwartz, et al., 2009). Another study in Peru
found that villages with a rehabilitated irrigation
infrastructure hired 30% more agricultural workers
than comparable villages, with greater benefits
accruing to poor farmers (IFC, 2013).
An analysis of ILO data by the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) found that about 1% of
the labour force in both developed and developing
countries work in the water sectors (Estache and
Garsous, 2012). While jobs in the water sector
may sometimes represent only a minor share of
the total employment opportunities, they are a
prerequisite to a large number of other jobs.
As indicated in Chapter 1, poor countries with
greater access to safe water and improved
sanitation have experienced much higher annual
GDP growth, compared to similar countries
with lower levels of access (SIWI/WHO, 2005).
Infrastructure increases growth and decreases
income inequality, while bringing water access into
the analysis is particularly effective for reducing
inequality (Calderon and Servén, 2004 and 2008).
Thus, targeted water investments may contribute
towards reaching growth and poverty alleviation
goals more effectively.

INVESTING IN WATER IS INVESTING IN JOBS

89

BOX 11.1 DIRECT EMPLOYMENT GENERATED
BY INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
At times, infrastructure projects – including
water projects – have been intentionally
designed for high job creation. For instance, the
Mahatma Ghandi National Rural Employment
Guarantee (MGNREG) programme in India,
which provides work opportunities to some
25% of rural households, has largely focused on
water projects, such as water conservation and
harvesting, irrigation and flood, and drought
protection (Government of India, 2012).
Another example is South Korea’s Four Rivers
Restoration Project, which directed some US$86
billion towards the creation of thousands
of jobs in water management following the
economic crisis (Ministry of Environment/Korea
Environment Institute, 2009).

The benefits of water investments – for
employment, economic growth and well-being
– can be remarkable. The US Department of
Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis found
that each job created in the local water and
wastewater industry creates 3.68 indirect jobs in
the national economy (United States Conference
of Mayors, 2008b). Investing US$188.4 billion,
the amount needed to manage stormwater and
preserve water quality in the United States, could
generate US$265.6 billion in economic activity,
create nearly 1.9 million direct and indirect jobs
(e.g. in manufacturing to supply equipment and
machinery) and result in 568,000 additional
(induced) jobs from increased spending (Green
for All, 2011). Furthermore, traditional water
infrastructure is estimated to generate between
10 and 26 direct, indirect and induced jobs per
US$1 million invested (Green for All, 2011; Pacific
Institute, 2013).
Moreover, investments in sustainable water
practices are estimated to generate: between 10
and 15 direct, indirect and induced jobs per US$1

90

WWDR 2016

million invested in alternative water supplies; between
five and 20 direct, indirect and induced jobs per US$1
million invested in stormwater management; between
12 and 22 direct, indirect and induced jobs per US$1
million invested in urban conservation and efficiency;
and between 10 and 72 direct, indirect and induced
jobs per US$1 million invested in restoration and
remediation (Pacific Institute, 2013).
From the global health perspective, one of the
greatest water-related challenges is inadequate
WASH, which is associated with global economic
losses of US$260 billion every year, largely related to
lost time and productivity (WHO, 2012). While costly
to address, the estimated rates of return on water
supply and sanitation investments are striking:
every US$1 invested in WASH could have a return of
US$3-34, depending on the region and technology
involved (Hutton and Haller, 2004).
Investment in agriculture also contributes to
alleviating unemployment and the on-going fight
against poverty. Agricultural growth can increase the
incomes of the three poorest deciles 2.5 times more
than growth in other sectors (World Bank, 2007)
and is the basis for employment creation in other
sectors along the value chain. As noted in Section 3.2,
employment in the agriculture sector accounted for
roughly 30% of the global active workforce in 2014,
but for 60% in sub-Saharan Africa (Table 3.2). In
general, water investments and policy need to be part
of a broader and multi-sectoral dialogue on the future
of farming to meet the aspirations of the farmers
and of society (FAO, 2014d), seeking sustainable and
inclusive development in accordance with principles
for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food
Systems (CFS, 2014).
For any water-related investment, obtaining the
highest return will be highly context-specific, and
its appropriateness will depend on a multitude of
economic, social and environmental factors and
their relative benefits and trade-offs. Public-private
partnerships provide possible solutions to investment
needs. Despite mixed results, PPPs offer the prospect
of much needed investment in water sectors,
including building and operating infrastructure

for irrigation and water supply, distribution
and treatment. However, in many developing
countries, the assistance of the international
donor community may be necessary to catalyse
public-private collaboration, and to promote the
inclusion of relevant social and environmental
safeguards (Rodriguez et. al, 2012).

base, and destroy a region’s industry (e.g. inland
fisheries and aquaculture) and related employment.
In turn, imposing mandatory water-use restrictions
to mitigate the impact of prolonged drought
conditions on an entire population can also lead to
economic downturns in some economic sectors, with
employees losing their jobs.

The strategic planning and management of
water resources at the basin or watershed level is
essential for sustainable economic development
and jobs. In this context, consideration must be
given to ways that maximize job creation and
mitigate job losses or displacement that may
result from the implementation of an integrated
approach to water management, with a view to
promote economic growth, poverty reduction and
environmental sustainability.

Therefore, it is essential that decision-makers and
planners be cognizant of these potential impacts
and make concerted efforts to consult the various
stakeholders. Provisions must also be made to assist
those negatively impacted by the changes, notably
through retraining to seize the new opportunities
water investments generate.

The transition may entail negative consequences
for specific groups or individuals as a result
of investment choices, new sets of policies,
technological innovations, and shifts in business
strategies (ILO, 2015c). For example, a lack
of investment to prevent or mitigate flood
and drought disasters can lead to drastic
displacements, especially among agricultural
populations. In the forestry sector, it is sometimes
necessary to reduce deforestation to avoid water
shortages or excess water flows with negative
impacts on a region, resulting in lay-offs in the
industry. In other instances, excessive water
withdrawal can lead to the loss of a resource

Moreover, in order to maximize positive economic
and employment results it is necessary to plan
water investments in conjunction with relevant
sectors, such as agriculture, energy and industry.
For instance, almost two-thirds of the companies
that provided information to the Carbon Disclosure
Project (CDP) Global Water Report 2015 reported
an exposure to water risk, including from water
scarcity. Conversely, more than 70% of reporting
companies indicated that water offers operational,
strategic, or market opportunities. This indicates that
when it comes to water, businesses share common
interests with governments and communities. This
convergence of interest provides an opportunity for
synergistic water investments beneficial, inter alia, to
local economies and job creation (CDP, 2015).

INVESTING IN WATER IS INVESTING IN JOBS

91

12

ADDRESSING CAPACITY
DEVELOPMENT NEEDS AND
IMPROVING DIALOGUE
UNESCO-IHE | Uta Wehn and Maarten Blokland
With contributions from: Jack Moss (AquaFed); Kees Leendertse and Damian Indij (Cap-Net UNDP);
Francoise-Nicole Ndoume (WIN); Carlos Carrion-Crespo (ILO); Julie Perkins (GWOPA); Álvaro Carvalho (ERSAR);
and Chantal Demilecamps (UNECE)

Students from Tailulu College (Tonga) making the most of new high-speed broadband services
Photo: © Tom Perry/World Bank

This chapter explores policies and actions that will help develop the capacity
and skills required to meet the various water challenges, thus creating an
enabling environment for employment opportunities in general.

The challenges faced by developing countries in their
struggle for economic and social development are
increasingly related to water. Many countries are
shifting their attention to the city level as the locus for
sustainable development. Companies are measured in
terms of their social and environmental performance
and are under public pressure to deliver services at
affordable prices, while consumers are beginning to
understand that they, too, have a role and may need
to become more responsible consumers. Revisiting
frameworks such as IWRM in order to resonate with
these new complexities will be essential. Moreover,
stronger and better-interlinked institutions are
required to handle the increased level of complexity.
While new knowledge, datasets, analytical tools
and consistent data need to be developed, capacity
development and social learning will be critical to
keep up with the evolving challenges (Indij and
Gumbo , 2012).

12.1

Changing capacity needs

The skills, qualities and capacities of the human
resources employed are vital for the successful
performance of the water sector and for the sustained
use, adaptation and development of scientific and
technological innovations (see Chapter 16). This is
particularly salient in view of the broadening of the
fields of expertise that are needed for this sector,
which includes water resources management,
building and managing water infrastructure, and the
provision of water-related services (see Chapter 4).
For example, classic water treatment and network
operation skills, such as management, chemistry,
automation, accounting, laws and human resources,
are still paramount, but the scope of expertise needed
nowadays includes other topics such as biodiversity
assessment, nexus issues (e.g. food and energy) as
well as modelling, information and communication
technologies (ICTs). Human rights-based approaches
and dialogue with stakeholders are emerging as
crucial imperatives. This issue is further compounded
by the rapid sophistication of the majority of the
domains, especially in legal and regulatory matters,
which are more complicated and superimposed on
customary law and practice.

Moreover, in order to reflect the cross-cutting nature
of water, there is a need to broaden academic
curricula, e.g. providing courses on energy and
agriculture to water professionals, and on water
resources management and water operations to
science and engineering students in other fields of
study. Furthermore, awareness-raising activities are
needed to help inform and sensitize decision-makers
outside the water community (e.g. agriculture, energy,
health and safety, and finance) about water-related
challenges and their implications for and interrelations
with these sectors.
Aside from the skills, knowledge and competences
of professionals and civil society, organizational and
institutional capacity is also lacking in many countries
(Wehn and Alaerts, 2013). Such capacity can consist
of several layered and nested levels: the capacity of
individuals, organizations, the enabling environment
and civil society. While the process of strengthening
capacity at one or more of these levels – capacity
development – is the inherent responsibility of people,
organizations and/or society (OECD, 2006), external
sources can also play an important supporting role in
addressing capacity needs. These have to be adjusted
in sync with emerging challenges.
Lack of capacity and the challenges facing the water
sector require design of adequate training tools
and innovative learning approaches to enhance
the competencies of staff as well as strengthen
institutional capacity. This applies to government and
its agencies, river basin organizations as well as other
organizations, including those in the private sector.

12.2

Approaches for addressing capacity
development needs

There is a great need for capacity development in the
water sector, as identified by the IWA among others;
this demand is no longer for doing more of what is
already being done, but is a question of achieving
more in a different and more efficient way.
Traditionally, individual staff development has taken
the shape of apprenticeships, practical training,
induction training for new staff, mentoring and

ADDRESSING CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT NEEDS AND IMPROVING DIALOGUE

93

succession planning. E-learning opportunities
increasingly have a supporting or complementary
role to play. While individual staff development
is certainly necessary, in most cases, it is not
sufficient by itself; therefore, capacity development
increasingly would entail more comprehensive
approaches that extend to other levels of capacity.
Organizational capacity development aiming for
organizational or systemic change may take place
within and between water sector organizations.
Larger water operators that operate through a
variety of PPP models in different municipalities
and countries have developed approaches and
systems that ensure the accumulation of lessons on
knowledge and capacity development so that lessons
learned at one location are shared, adapted and
transferred to other locations (see Box 12.1).

Water operators may
engage in various forms
of collaboration at
local, national and
international levels

Water operators may engage in various forms of
collaboration at local, national and international
levels. The collaborative instruments include
voluntary benchmarking, twinning and water
operator partnerships (WOPs) (see Box 12.2).
In addition, there are learning and knowledgesharing events organized by professional associations
and other bodies, as well as thematic webinars.

BOX 12.1 TRAINING APPROACHES BY PRIVATE OPERATORS
At the beginning of a performance improvement contract, a private operator usually starts with an
in-depth audit that covers the strategies, organizational structure, business processes, organizational
performance and the workforce and managers. The findings usually show that training and
organizational reforms are required to achieve necessary performance improvements. Such reforms
may include a change of corporate culture, enhancement of key processes and working routines,
as well as a change of work ethics and attitudes, and an injection of skills and technology into
management and the labour force. In-depth reform is often undertaken through a multi-year change
management programme that is developed in extensive consultations and negotiations with the local
contracting authority and the workers unions.
These change programmes include a specific training component that runs the entire length of
the contract. All staff and management levels receive appropriate training, including on the job,
classroom training and mentoring. Larger private operators make use of international standards and
practices, and have in-house networks of specialists, campuses, web-based training schemes, as well
as partnership with local knowledge institutions. They aim to continuously develop employee skills
through formal training programmes leading to diplomas, certifications and professional licenses
(AquaFed, 2015).
Contributed by Jack Moss (AquaFed).

94

WWDR 2016

BOX 12.2 WATER OPERATORS’ PARTNERSHIPS (WOPS)
A WOP is a not-for-profit peer support arrangement between water and sanitation utilities. WOPs are
an increasingly common mechanism for building the capacity of public utilities, with over 200 WOPs on
record. These solidarity-based partnerships make use of the knowledge and experience of staff in strong
utilities to support the development of staff in other utilities that need help. In contrast to technical
assistance programmes that rely on external experts to get the job done, WOPs represent more recent
thinking on capacity development: they focus on strengthening the capacity of local water and sanitation
utility staff memberswho will still be there years down the lineproviding services to local populations.
WOPs build the skills of those who work within water and sanitation utilities and improve the way that
employees work together. Partners in WOPs employ a range of learning approaches to strengthen utility
employees’capacity to tackle technical and managerial challenges. Going beyond one-off classroom
training, WOPs apply practical job training and ongoing informal mentorship to help operators anchor
and apply newly acquired skills. In addition to boosting capacity, in studied cases, WOPs have contributed
to improved staff motivation, safer working environments and improved labour-management dialogue.
Contributed by Julie Perkins (GWOPA).

In the case of profound organizational reforms,
it is necessary to foster collaboration and obtain
concurrence and support beyond water sector
organizations, including user organizations,
workers unions, investors and core governance
institutions at the country level. This kind of social
dialogue can be organized at the workplace, or
at local and national levels, serving to promote
water reforms and efficient water management
as an enabler of employment generation by
increasing wide ownership and information
sharing (cf. Ratnam and Tomoda, 2005). Strong
social dialogue, effective coordination among
ministries (including policy coherence), and
improved communication between employers and
training providers are vital for turning the vicious
circle of inadequate education, poor training,
low-productivity jobs and low wages into a
virtuous circle in which improving the quality and
availability of education and training for women
and men fuel innovation, and the growth of not
only more but also better jobs and social cohesion
(ILO, 2008).

In the water sectors worldwide, profoundly new
and transversal themes need to be addressed.
These include water integrity (see Box 12.3), human
rights-based approaches, water diplomacy, water
economics, gender, regulation and the use of
technology. When merged together, they require
embracing a new kind of knowledge configuration
combining the natural sciences and engineering
with social science disciplines, as well as bridging
sectors and multi-stakeholder collaboration.
Raising public awareness about job opportunities
in the water sector and creating attractive working
conditions are vital in order to avoid brain drain to
other sectors. Open, demand-responsive, locallybased and flexible networks are proving to be
drivers for constructing the new social capital that
the water sector is demanding (see Box 12.4).
Interdependence and horizontal relations have
grown in importance, partly as a consequence
of the wide diffusion of ICTs. These approaches
are able to foster peer-to-peer (individual and
institutional) knowledge transfer among water
institutions from different countries, including
NGOs, private sector, unions, river basin agencies,
water operators, communities and universities.

ADDRESSING CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT NEEDS AND IMPROVING DIALOGUE

95

BOX 12.3 NEW THEMES FOR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
Promoting water integrity
The African Water Vision 2025 named inappropriate governance and institutional arrangements as
core human threats to sustainable water management. The vision called for fundamental changes in
policies, strategies and institutional arrangements for the adoption of participatory approaches, as
well as for openness, transparency and accountability in decision-making processes. Specific attempts
to promote water integrity with a coherent approach were taken during the implementation of the
Capacity Building Programme on Water Integrity in the Western African subregion. The participants
from 12 countries – Benin, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Togo – who attended the five regional training workshops organized
in the subregion stemmed from all segments of society (government, business, members of parliament,
representatives of civil society organizations and representatives of the media and river basins
authority). At the end of each workshop, participants drafted a national water integrity action plan to
be submitted for refinement, enrichment, validation and endorsement to a wider group of stakeholders
at the national level.
Even more profound reforms concern the need to enhance the quality of governance in the water
sector as a whole and the need to combat corruption in the water sector in particular. Insufficient
understanding of roles and responsibilities leads to blurred accountability lines and procedures that
can easily be captured by corrupt groups. The institutional fragmentation of the sector exacerbates
corruption risks. To effectively promote integrity in such a context, a comprehensive approach is
required that focuses on creating an enabling environment that fosters transparency, accountability,
participation and anti-corruption.23
Contributed by Françoise-Nicole Ndoume (WIN), based on UNECA/AU/AfDB (2000) and UNDP WGF (2014).

Achieving the human right to water and sanitation
UNECE work with the Portuguese Water and Waste Services Regulation Authority (ERSAR) on improving
equitable access to water and sanitation has shown the crucial role of building capacities of water and
sanitation operators to contribute to the achievement of the human right to water and sanitation. In
2013, ERSAR coordinated the self-evaluation of the equity of access to water and sanitation services
in Portugal, applying the Equitable Access Score-card, developed in the framework of the activities
implemented under the UNECE-WHO/Europe Protocol on Water and Health. The outcomes of this
assessment demonstrated the need to focus efforts on improving awareness and skills of personnel
as a contribution to the realization of the human right to water and sanitation. ERSAR is currently
developing recommendations for practitioners on how to implement these rights in the Portuguese
water sector. ERSAR is also developing a simulator of social tariffs for water and waste services, which
aims to help each Portuguese water and waste utility to find the best-adjusted solutions regarding the
mandatory adoption of social tariff by these utilities.
Contributed by Álvaro Carvalho (ERSAR) and Chantal Demilecamps (UNECE).

23

96

Transparency, Accountability, Participation and Anti-Corruption, often abbreviated as TAPA, are the key elements of Integrity.

WWDR 2016

12.3

National strategies for capacity
development in the water sector
and beyond

Despite many capacity development efforts,
in practice, it remains challenging to strengthen
knowledge and capacity across the board, in
multiple government institutions, civil society, the
private sector and knowledge institutes (Wehn
and Alaerts, 2013). One of the main outcomes of
events24 held at UNESCO-IHE taking stock of the
situation in 2013 was a call for ‘national strategies
for water sector capacity development’. This call
was echoed by IWA’s report on Human Resources
Capacity Gap covering 15 countries in Africa
(IWA, 2014a).

Besides individual skills and capacity, the
organizational capacity needs of various sector
actors also constitute a key focal area of such
water sector capacity development strategies.
These can benefit from a concerted effort following
agreed procedures and combined resources (see
Box 12.5). Such dedicated water sector capacity
development strategies provide a useful framework
for strengthening water-related capacity and
skills in a coherent and coordinated way through
a comprehensive and harmonized approach. In
the process of devising and implementing these
strategies, they can also serve as a platform to foster
dialogue between the many relevant actors in the
water sector, and beyond.

Such sector-wide capacity development strategies
can help to ensure that the knowledge and skills
to maintain water services and water resources
are strengthened where needed (i.e. locally), and
that new system expansions avoid the failures of
the past when focus was entirely on infrastructure.
Some countries have already embarked on
developing and implementing such strategies (i.e.
Uganda) (see Box 12.5), while others are only
beginning to deliberate on their necessity (i.e.
Indonesia). In some countries, capacity development
strategies are (at least in principle) integrated
in their national IWRM Policy (i.e. Colombia),
but their implementation remains challenging.
Lessons with the conceptualization, as well as the
implementation, of such sector-wide strategies are
starting to emerge.

24

Once such event was the 5th Delft Symposium on Water Sector
Capacity Development in May 2013 and a two-day Expert
Workshop on Knowledge and Capacity Development leading up
to the Symposium.

ADDRESSING CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT NEEDS AND IMPROVING DIALOGUE

97

BOX 12.4 CAP-NET: NETWORKS FOR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
More than 10 years of work experience in the Cap-Net UNDP global framework shows that networks are
bringing an important added value for capacity development in water.
This has been proven possible as networks can: (i) create a multi-disciplinary knowledge base
necessary for the introduction and support of complex approaches, such as integrated water resources
management; ii) combine scattered strengths of institutions into a critical mass; (iii) maximize use
of local skills; iv) share knowledge and expertise through communication and collaboration; and (v)
enhance the impact of capacity development activities by coordinating and making use of members’
capacity, skills and experience. Due to their decision-making and operational frameworks, networks
enable capacity development in line with the basic principles of green economy: resources efficiency,
social inclusiveness and low carbon emissions.
Contributed by Kees Leendertse and Damian Indij (Cap-Net UNDP), based on Indij and Gumbo (2012); Indij et al. (2013).

BOX 12.5 UGANDA’S NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT SECTOR
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
In order to help overcome the problem of disparate, overlapping or discontinued capacity development
efforts, the Ministry of Water and Environment in Uganda was supported by the German Development
Cooperation Agency (GIZ) and other donors in the process of devising a national strategy on capacity
development for the water and environment sector. Based on a number of consultation events,
brainstorming and evaluations of ideas at national level, followed by regional, district and local
consultations, the national capacity development strategy was produced in October 2012. The main
objective was for the water and environment sector to generate the capacity to increasingly meet its
targets and undertake its mandate benefitting from a better understanding of its capacity demands:
more effective means of delivering capacity in response to the needs and an increasing ability to
positively influence the enabling environment. With a corresponding institutional structure in place,
the strategy is now being implemented by making use of scarce resources. Focusing on the urban
water supply and sanitation sector first, methods and templates for capacity development plans at the
organizational level are being developed centrally. Next, they will be tested by the actors of this subsector before being rolled out and applied to the remaining five sub-sectors covered by the national
capacity development strategy: rural water supply and sanitation, water for production, water resources
management, environment and natural resources and climate change (Government of Uganda, 2012).
Source: UNESCO-IHE.

98

WWDR 2016

13

IMPROVING
WATER EFFICIENCY
AND PRODUCTIVITY

UNEP DTIE | Maite Aldaya and Elisa Tonda
With contributions from Salman Hussain and Joy Kim (UNEP DTIE); Peter Schulte (Pacific Institute/CEO Water Mandate);
Ramón Llamas (Water Observatory, Botín Foundation); and Josefina Maestu (UN-DPAC)

Irrigation system in raised garden bed
Photo: © Floki/Shutterstock.com

This chapter addresses the importance of improving water efficiency and productivity with a
special focus on rural and urban areas as well as industry. It explores how policies and actions
can boost water efficiency and productivity in order to minimize water use and mitigate impacts
on ecosystems, thereby improving opportunities for socio-economic development and decent
jobs, especially under conditions of water scarcity.

Water efficiency and productivity have different
nuances in different economic sectors. Broadly,
water-use efficiency is the ratio of the water
input to the useful economic/product output of
a system or activity (m3 water per product units)
(UNEP, 2012a). Increased efficiency implies using
less water to achieve the same or more goods and
services. It involves getting the most not only out
of scarce water resources but also out of other
natural, human and financial resources (GWP,
2006). Such an approach has four interrelated
concepts: technical efficiency, productive efficiency,
product-choice efficiency and allocative efficiency
(GWP, 2006).
Water productivity refers to the ratio of the net
benefits to the amount of water used in the
production process (product units per m3 water)
(GWP, 2006). Increased water productivity means
increasing the amount of benefit from a unit of
water input. When the output is monetary it is
referred to as economic water productivity (US$
per m3). This has also been used to relate water use
in agriculture to nutrition, jobs, welfare and the
environment (CAWMA, 2007).
Increasing both water-use efficiency and water
productivity can contribute to improving socioeconomic development and create opportunities
for employment and decent jobs in waterdependent sectors, especially under conditions
of water scarcity (where water supplies may be a
limiting factor to development).
In the broadest sense, productivity reflects the goal
of producing more food, income, livelihood and/
or ecological benefits while minimizing the use
or deterioration of resources at every stage of the
value chain. In the real world, however, there are
generally trade-offs between water-use efficiency
and the provision of other (non-hydrological)
ecosystem services, which may become less
significant if appropriate policies and IWRM are in
place. Understanding and considering the tradeoffs and synergies between water, energy, food,
ecosystems and other issues at the proper scale is
essential for wise management and meeting overall

100

WWDR 2016

sustainability goals. A recent World Bank Group
review (Scheierling, et al., 2014) suggests that most
studies presented in the agricultural productivity and
efficiency literature either analyse field- and basinlevel aspects but focus only on a single input (water),
or they apply a multi-factor approach but do not
address these factors with a basin-level context.
Water-use efficiency improvements are considered
instrumental to address the projected 40% gap
between demand and supply and mitigate water
scarcities by 2030 (UNEP, 2011d). Improving
efficiency, particularly in agriculture, could lead to
making available substantial volumes of water for
reallocation to other sectors and uses, reduce conflicts
among competing water users and facilitate the
attainment of other development targets. Increasing
the productivity per unit of water can help improve
opportunities for economic diversification and
growth, for employment, income generation and
improved nutrition (CAWMA, 2007). However, there
is no global data on the relation between water-use
efficiency and jobs considering net impacts; most
studies of this kind focus on green economies as a
whole (UNEP, 2011d, 2015).
Governments can create a policy framework
to enable, support and reward improvements
in resource-efficiency bringing increased
competitiveness, resilience and security, and new
sources of jobs and growth. By doing so, they can
facilitate significant cost savings for different agents
from improved efficiency, commercialization of
innovations and enhanced water management over
the entire product life cycle. Timely action at the
appropriate level can be enabled if national policies
set clear targets, eventually building on existing
standards; establish measures to advance towards
appropriate water pricing and subsidy reform; invest
in hard, soft, natural and man-made infrastructure
and establish financing incentives to those who
help increase efficiency, including R&D funds for the
sharing of suitable technologies; and support scaling
up and replicate best practices through PPPs.
A significant proportion of these jobs depend on
private initiative and investment that will only take
place if predictable, reliable, secure and efficient water

Increasing both water-use
efficiency and water productivity
can contribute to improving
socio-economic development
and create opportunities for
employment and decent jobs
in water-dependent sectors,
especially under conditions of
water scarcity
management and services are in place. Nevertheless,
the short-term risk and profit analysis characteristic
of the private sector, the increasing expectations
of shareholders, coupled with concerns about
safeguarding intellectual property, might impede the
flow of capital into resource-efficient investments.
The private sector expects that governments and
international organizations will provide reliable signals
and create a robust, predictable, coherent, fair and
flexible framework within which businesses can
operate (UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC, 2008). Proactive business
engagement in public policy processes and with the
local communities can help mitigate contextual risks
in the value chain (CEO Water Mandate, 2010). To
be meaningful, such engagement is oriented toward
shared water goals and public interest outcomes.

13.1

Improving water efficiency and
productivity in rural areas

It is widely recognized that improved efficiency and
productivity produces secondary benefits for the
economy at every level through multiplier effects on
opportunities for employment and income generation
(CAWMA, 2007; UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC, 2008; UNEP,
2011d). However, while increased agricultural
productivity may raise the quality of employment,
it may also decrease the quantity of jobs in that sector
(see Section 3.4.2).
In the agricultural sector, numerous studies show that
investments in irrigation have an overall multiplier
effect on the economy estimated between 2.5 and 4
(CAWMA, 2007; Bhattarai et al., 2007; Hussain and
Hanjra, 2004; Lipton et al., 2003; Huang et al., 2006).
Investments in water management and savings,
such as canal lining or micro irrigation, require a

workforce for producing, installing and maintaining
necessary equipment (UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC, 2008).
This can be a relevant source of employment for the
rural poor (CAWMA, 2007). Increased farm output
also stimulates demand for farm labour in terms
of number of workers and length of employment.
For instance, annual labour use per hectare in the
Ganges-Kobadak irrigation system of Bangladesh
is about 100 days more than that in nearby nonirrigated areas (CAWMA, 2007). Increasing the value
derived per unit of water, especially the opportunities
for employment, income generation, nutrition and
women empowerment, can be important for poverty
reduction (CAWMA, 2007; FAO, 2011a; Polak,
2003). This can be achieved with a combination of
agronomic and water management practices to raise
grain yields in high-potential areas, strategies aimed
at increasing the value per unit of scarce water, or
reducing vulnerability to drought, polluted water, or
loss of water allocations (CAWMA, 2007) (Table 13.1).
However, policies aimed at increasing local wateruse efficiency alone may unintentionally stress
water supplies at a broader basin scale and result
in a rebound or take-back effect (WWAP, 2015).
A rebound effect (or take-back effect) occurs
when the water savings obtained from improved
water-use efficiency are reinvested to increase
production. Therefore, although the process may be
more efficient, total water use does not decrease
(WWAP, 2015). This is the case of the irrigation
modernization process in some areas in Spain,
where switching from traditional surface irrigation
to modern sprinkler systems in the Alto Aragón
increased crop evapotranspiration and non-beneficial
evapotranspiration (mainly wind drift and evaporation
losses) (Lecina et al., 2010). This shows how efficiency
improvements lead to larger water consumption.
Green economy studies in Africa reveal that organic
agriculture, which uses less energy and synthetic
inputs (fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides), is more
labour-intensive and creates more employment.
The reallocation from chemical to organic inputs
also results in lower negative impact on soil quality
in the medium- to long-term and sustained higher
productivity (UNEP, 2015) (Figure 13.1).

IMPROVING WATER EFFICIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY

101

TABLE 13.1 THE IMPACTS OF POTENTIAL AGRICULTURAL WATER MANAGEMENT INTERVENTIONS IN PRODUCTIVITY AND EMPLOYMENT

Potential agricultural
water management
interventions

Production/
productivity

Employment

Consumption
and price

Backward
Non-farm rural
linkages and
output and
second-round employment
output effects
impacts

Income
stabilization

Nutritional
impacts

Multiple use

Large-scale public surface
irrigation

High

Medium

High

High

Diffuse forms of irrigation:
communal or private
operated systems,
groundwater, etc.

High

High

Medium

Fisheries and aquaculture

Medium

High

Multiple use systems:
production plus, domestic
plus

Low

Socio-economic Environmental
effects
and health
impacts

High

Medium

Medium

High

Mixed*

Mixed*

Medium

Medium

High

Medium

High

Mixed*

Mixed*

Low

Low

High

High

High

High

Medium

High

Medium

Low

Low

Low

Low

High

High

High

Medium

Medium

Medium

Medium

Low

High

High

High

High

Medium

Mixed*

Low

Low

Low

Low

Medium

Low

Medium

High

Low

High

Improving agricultural water
productivity

Medium

Medium

Medium

High

Medium

High

Medium

Low

Mixed*

Mixed*

Reversing land degradation

Medium

Low

Medium

Medium

Medium

High

Medium

Low

Low

High

Low

Low

Low

Low

Low

Medium

Mixed*

Low

Mixed*

Mixed*

4. Rainwater management

Medium

Medium

Medium

Medium

Medium

High

Medium

High

Medium

5. Water policies and
institutions

Medium

Low

Low

Low

Low

Medium

Low

High

Medium

1. New systems

Integrating livestock
2. Maintaining ecosystem
resilience

102

Management of
marginal-quality water
resources

WWDR 2016

3. Improving
existing systems

* Mixed positive and negative impacts.
Source: CAWMA (2007, Table 4.3, pp. 166-167, reproduced with permission from IWMI).

FIGURE 13.1 KENYA: AVERAGE AGRICULTURAL YIELD UNDER GREEN ECONOMY AND BAU SCENARIOS
BAU
BAU2%

Tonne per
hectare

Average yield

GE2%

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1980

1990

2000

2010

2020

2030

Year
Notes: Scenarios are projected to 2030.
BAU: Business-as-usual scenario.
BAU2%: Business-as-usual 2% scenario allocates an additional 2% of GDP per annum as investments to the current BAU investment path.
GE2%: Green Economy 2% scenario assumes an additional 2% of GDP per annum as green investments to the baseline.
GETS: Green Economy Target Specific scenario aims at identifying whether policy-makers can achieve the medium- to long-term targets
following green economy interventions in the prioritised sectors.
Source: UNEP (2015, Fig. 11, p. 31).

Adjusting the concept of ‘more crop per drop’
to include ‘more added value per drop’ in
agriculture
Simply increasing the physical value of production
per unit of water is not enough. Policies for
enhancing the value of water used in agriculture
involve not only increasing yields, changing from low
to high-value crops, reallocating water from low to
higher value sectors or lowering the cost of inputs.
They should also optimize the creation of quality
jobs and related environmental aspects. For instance,
policies should achieve more livelihood support per
unit of water (more jobs, nutrition and income for
the same amount of water), while increasing health
benefits and the value of ecological services of
agriculture (CAWMA, 2007).
Targeted water interventions are fundamental to
ensuring that the benefits reach the poor and are

not only captured by more powerful or wealthier
users. These interventions enable the poor and
marginalized people to gain access to water and
manage it effectively (CAWMA, 2007; De Stefano
and Llamas, 2013).
Access to water and water-efficient technologies,
such as rainwater harvesting or water-saving
irrigation techniques, allow smallholders to produce
high-value crops such as vegetables or fruits.
Particularly in regions with low or erratic rainfall,
promoting on-farm soil, water conservation and
water-harvesting structures can greatly improve
the ‘efficiency of rain’. Supplemental irrigation and
water-saving localized irrigation techniques at all
scales can also increase productivity. Microcredit
schemes and private investments are essential to
help smallholders enhance efficiency while lifting
people out of poverty.

IMPROVING WATER EFFICIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY

103

Industry has been investing in
improving water-use efficiency
and hence has had a relevant
role in terms of job creation
Effective cross-sectoral and multi-level coordination
mechanisms are needed to ensure that policies
and objectives are mutually consistent and do not
undermine each other. Innovative policies and
technologies are necessary to address overall resource
productivity and tackle the difficult challenges of
social and environmental sustainability interlinkages
(UNEP, 2012a).

13.2

Improving water efficiency and
productivity in urban areas

Improving water-use efficiency in cities provides
opportunities to address water and job challenges.
For instance, cities can create jobs in low-water
intensive sectors such as solar, wind energy,
wastewater treatment, reuse and recycling.
Key success elements include (UNEP, 2012c):
• Smart urban logistics and spatial planning.
Resource-efficient and low-footprint design
of buildings and infrastructure are essential
elements of successful urban design, such as
dry toilets, use of solar PV, wind and geothermal
energy for power generation, while at the same
time rehabilitating aging water networks and
infrastructure;
• Smart design, finance, technology and skills
transfer and development. Price mechanisms such
as incentives, tariffs, and subsidies can also be
utilized instrumentally to stimulate the uptake
of green technologies and processes. Volumetric
charging through water meters is an effective
means of incentivizing efficient water use (UNEP,
2011d). Pricing approaches have limitations, and
should not be seen as an ultimate panacea;
• Maximized utility of freshwater. One method
is reusing the wastewater generated by one
process in another process with a lesser quality
requirement (UNEP, 2011d). Alternatives can
be also provided to piped water supply, such as
rainwater harvesting for non-drinking purposes;

104

WWDR 2016

Modern urban wastewater treatment plant
Photo: © hxdyl/Shutterstock.com

• Awareness raising and education of local
service providers. One of the keys to success
is developing appropriate educational and
awareness raising tools by local water and
sanitation service providers and supporting
institutional capacity, while enhancing
competences and networks of government,
business and civil society to support innovationbased measures;
• Participatory governance processes. The
incorporation of bottom-up participatory
governance processes in programmes and
projects is essential; these will rely on the
identification of local needs through social
dialogue, including workers, operators as well
as the participation of indigenous peoples in the
case of water infrastructure schemes (see Box
13.1); and
• Rights to use water and the allocation of water to
users. The formal definition of rights to use water
and its allocation to users and the environment
is also very important. Given that the majority of
freshwater is used by agriculture, allocative water
efficiency between cities and agriculture should
be considered, i.e. in some cases, cities can buy
water rights from farmers.

13.3

Increasing industrial water-use
efficiency

Industry has been investing in improving wateruse efficiency and hence has had a relevant role
in terms of job creation, through the adoption of
eco-innovation, cleaner and safer production and
sustainable products development, extending their
influence beyond the company gates to supply chains
(see Box 13.2).

BOX 13.1 SOCIAL DIALOGUE IN THE MAYNILAD WATER DISTRICT, PHILIPPINES
In the Maynilad Water District, the management, unions and workers have successfully cooperated to
reduce the high volume of NRW, defined as the difference between the amount of water put into the
distribution system and the amount of water billed to consumers, thereby increasing water productivity
(UNW-DPAC, 2011). The achievement of reducing NRW was converted into a mutually beneficial
arrangement for both workers and the utility, and also resulted in significant environmental and social
benefits. These include reduced NRW by 28% (from 66% in 2007 to 48% in 2011), which is equivalent
to 560 million litres of treated water saved and redistributed (UN-Water, 2011). Social dialogue served
to smooth potential conflicts during the privatization of the water utility and continues to provide a
platform for the discussion and resolution of disputes between the management and the unions (UNWDPA, 2011). The utility has ensured ongoing employment for workers, employing 87,000 people since
2007, including those hired by contractors and suppliers that rely on Maynilad as their major client.
The company itself employs 2,123 workers (UN-Water, 2011) and has offered new skills and training to
implement leak detection strategies (UNW-DPAC, 2011). This example is now being used in the Metro
Cebu Water District, the largest in the country.
Source: UNW-DPAC (2011); UN-Water (2011).

The private sector has been playing an important role
in the dissemination of the knowledge, techniques
and skills and in scaling up water-use efficiency
approaches. Nestlé Viet Nam's Farmer Connect
Programme currently supports over 12,000 coffee
farmers, providing them technical assistance and
training to increase their productivity and secure jobs
(see Box 13.3).
New resource-efficient technologies as well as
enhanced competitiveness and innovation are
generating shifts in employment and changes in
the workforce worldwide. Increases in employment
originate from new markets being created, such

as waste management and recycling, and from
resource-efficient value chains, such as the
renewable energy ones. This leads to the creation
of indirect jobs upstream and downstream as well
as induced effects through increased demand
(UNEP, 2012d). Recent studies across eight countries
in Africa (Burkina Faso, Egypt, Ghana, Kenya,
Mauritius, Rwanda, Senegal and South Africa)
demonstrate that green economy policies will be
an important source of new jobs. Investments
in low water-intensive options such as solar and
wind capacity can bring employment benefits.
For instance, in Senegal, these energy options are
projected to create between 7,600 and 30,000
additional jobs by 2035 (UNEP, 2015).

BOX 13.2 BUSINESS EVIDENCE ‘DOING MORE WITH LESS’
There is evidence on how enhancing water-use efficiency and productivity is helping businesses reduce
costs by minimizing wasteful practices. For instance, in 2014, Diageo Plc (a beverage company in the
United Kingdom)reduced the volume of its water withdrawals by nearly 1 million cubic meters and
estimated the cost savings associated with this reduction to be approximately US$3.2 million (CDP, 2014).
It may also allow improved access to water for marginalized communities. In some cases, irrigation
modernization coupled with water savings provides opportunities to expand these schemes to supply
water to local communities (FAO, 2011a). Irrigation modernization improves water and agricultural
productivity, which increases farm incomes, generates on-farm employment, lowers food prices, and
has income and employment multipliers beyond the farm. However, the intensification brought by this
modernization may have negative impacts on the ecosystems unless corrective actions are taken.
Source: CDP (2014); FAO (2011a).

IMPROVING WATER EFFICIENCY AND PRODUCTIVITY

105

Recycling makes an important contribution to
reducing land requirement for landfills, as well
as water and energy consumption for goods and
services production, and associated pollution, while
generating employment (Table 13.2). Recycling
is expected to contribute to decent employment
creation. However, it is worthwhile noting that in
some countries, recycling jobs are often dirty and
hazardous (UNEP, 2015).
Research and development in water-efficient and
eco-innovative technologies can have spillover effects
in other areas of the economy. For instance, more
efficient modes of urban wastewater treatment and
farm water use will have an impact on the energy
component (Hardy et al., 2012).

TABLE 13.2 SELECTED EMPLOYMENT ESTIMATES IN
THE RECYCLING SECTOR
Country

Number of jobs
(millions)

All recycling

Aluminium-can

China

10

United States

1.1 – 1.3

Brazil

0.5

Brazil

0.7

China

0.7

recycling
Electronics recycling

Source: UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC (2008, Table E-S4, p. 18).

A macroeconomic analysis of the German industry
demonstrated that even if only half of the existing
material efficiency potentials were realized, there
would still be an increase in GDP and creation of
new business areas of employment (Stiftung and
Beys, 2005, cited in UNEP, 2011e).

BOX 13.3 NESTLÉ VIET NAM'S FARMER CONNECT PROGRAMME
Value to Nestlé
Water is currently recognized as the most critical issue for sustainable coffee growing in Viet Nam, and
Nestlé purchases roughly 20% of total Robusta coffee produced in Viet Nam for its global activities.
Adoption of efficient water practices helps ensure a sustainable and secure supply chain.
Value to society
Nestlé implemented a number of best practices within its Farmer Connect network of 12,000 farmers
working with other key local stakeholders for wider dissemination and scale up. Adoption of best
practices allows improved water-use efficiency, generation of higher income for farmers through cost
reduction linked to labour and energy, and higher yields, compared to the current average. Hence,
farmers reap direct positive impacts on local sustainable drinking water availability.
Source: Nestlé (n.d.).

106

WWDR 2016

14

EMPLOYMENT
IN SUPPORT OF WATER,
SANITATION AND HYGIENE
WWAP | Marc Paquin and Richard Connor
With contributions from Kirsten de Vette and Robert Bos (IWA); and Archana Patkar and Emily Deschaine (WSSCC)

Builder laying sewage pipe on site
Photo: © iStock.com/ezza116

This chapter explores the financial and institutional mechanisms, and related job creation and
human resources development considerations, necessary to the achievement of universal access
to domestic water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), as well as appropriate wastewater
management. It also underlines the importance of a people-centred approach in this regard.

14.1

Financial and institutional
mechanisms for universal access

Universal access to WASH contributes to increased
productivity, to a life of dignity and equality, and
to the creation of livelihoods and decent jobs.
Achieving universal access requires financial and
institutional mechanisms that foster coordination,
cooperation, solidarity and accountability, and that
provide incentives to invest in human resources
for WASH. Ultimately, such investments pay off
through their positive impact on a population’s
health status (see Chapters 1 and 11).
Policy frameworks that support these financial and
institutional mechanisms need to be evidencebased. The adoption of the SDGs provides an
opportunity for governments to review and adjust
their national policy frameworks, including their
water (notably WASH) and human resources
policies and strategies. For WASH, this is also
the opportunity to better reflect the obligations
under the human right to safe drinking water and
sanitation within these policies and strategies.
In most countries there is a dearth of information
on the quantity and quality of human resources
for WASH services, but whatever little evidence
there is suggests a growing deficiency (see Section
4.2). It is in the best interest of governments
to commission the necessary research, from
their own resources or with external support, to
strengthen the evidence base before consolidating
new policies. Extrapolating from the limited
information available in some low- and middleincome countries, new WASH policies should:
support financial flows that rebalance investment
in new infrastructure and services with those in
operation and maintenance (O&M) and other
recurrent expenditure; put a greater emphasis
on sustainable sanitation services (including
decentralized wastewater treatment in urban
conglomerations); and ensure the WASH focus to
shift to development in rural and peri-urban areas.
It is essential that policies include targets and
indicators that are measurable.

108

WWDR 2016

Putting people at the centre
of development solutions is an
essential element of the process
towards achieving sustainable
universal access

The implications for job creation and human resources
development need to be integrated into WASH policies
and strategies, and these should be compatible with
the general human resources development policies
and strategies at the national level. It should thus
‘take due account of stage and level of economic
development and mutual relationships between
employment objectives and other economic and social
objectives’ (ILO, 1964, Article 1). On the one hand,
this will require a deployment of human resources to
different services at all levels of government that is
fit for purpose. In this context, there is a strong need
to ensure that policies of decentralization include
the authority for local decision-making (and related
accountability) regarding the size and composition
of the human resource base for WASH. On the other
hand, human resources development must be guided
by clear criteria that ensure an optimal balance
between professional staff, technical staff and skilled
labour, a rational representation of staff addressing
different technical areas, and a recruitment policy that
takes into account equality and non-discrimination
aimed at achieving, among a number of goals, a just
gender balance.
These changes require, in the first instance, an
evidence-based, equitable and responsive reallocation
of existing resources. In most low-income countries,
such resources are very limited and once a reallocation
has been complete, an increase of additional
financial flows to WASH human resources will have
to be pursued. Any increased investments in human
resources should translate into expanded coverage
and higher service levels, and should include incentives
to improve the stability of the workforce, the decent
nature of jobs and increased productivity through
flexibility in deployment (see Box 14.1).

BOX 14.1 MANAGING MENSTRUATION IN FACTORIES
In Bangladesh, about 80% of the factory workers are young women, and a study by Business for Social
Responsibility (BSR) concluded that 60% of the women workers were using rags from the factory floor as
menstrual cloths. Since these were chemically charged and often freshly dyed, infections were common,
resulting in 73% of women missing work for an average of six days a month. Women had no safe place
to purchase cloth or pads or to change or dispose of them. When women are paid by the piece, these
six days lost present a huge economic challenge to them and also to the business supply chain. An
intervention to change this reportedly saw absenteeism drop to 3%, resulting in significant economic
gains for workers and the factory owner. This scenario can be reproduced in farms and factories, homes
and offices around the world. By addressing women workers’ menstrual needs, workplace practices and
human resource manuals worldwide could achieve measurable productivity gains.
Contributed by Archana Patkar and Emily Deschaine (WSSCC).

The handbook by the UN Special Rapporteur on
the human rights to water and sanitation provides
guidance on the principles, frameworks, financing
and justice system underpinning the rights, which
effectively apply to human resource policies,
strategies and regulations (de Albuquerque, 2014).
The IWA Manual on the Human Rights to Water
and Sanitation provides more detailed guidance
to utilities, operators and regulators of water and
sanitation services, including detailed guidance on
the human resources aspects (IWA, forthcoming).
Corporate human resource and health and safety
policies and procedures should be harmonized
with the broader policy frameworks established by
government and ensure that their own operations
have safeguards in place that guarantee employee
access to WASH. The World Business Council for
Sustainable Development’s (WBCSD) ‘WASH at the
workplace Pledge’ is a tool that companies can
use to ensure that their operations are in line with
national legislation and best practice on WASH at the
workplace.25 The IWA Lisbon Charter for Public Policy
and Effective Regulation of Drinking Water Supply,
Sanitation and Wastewater Management Services
lists among the responsibilities for regulators: ‘… to
facilitate … the development of human resources
with suitable technical and professional training,

25

As of August 2015, 30 multinational companies had signed the
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD)
WASH Pledge, and signatories are taking concrete steps to align
their internal health, safety and environment (HSE)/sustainability
reporting systems with best practice on WASH at the workplace.

fit to carry out essential functions, thus ensuring
increased autonomy of the [drinking water supply,
sanitation and waste water management] services’
(IWA, 2015, p. 11).
Institutional structures will have to provide the
framework within which human resources for WASH
can be optimally managed. With drinking water
and sanitation responsibilities spread over a number
of public sectors, the private sector and, in many
low- and middle-income countries, the informal
sector, it is crucial to establish effective institutional
arrangements. Institutional mandates should be
clearly defined, but not in a way that sustains siloformation, and with incentives to work across sectoral
boundaries. In public sectors, job security may be
relatively good, but mechanisms to (re-)deploy human
resources at levels and in positions where they can
address the greatest needs, emerging issues or the
most vulnerable segments of society are weak.
The private sector often has more flexibility in staff
deployment, but may enhance its contribution to
universal coverage by shifts in the trade-offs between
profitability, coverage expansion, service level
increases and career opportunities for staff.

14.2

Accelerating universal access
through people-centred approaches

Putting people at the centre of development solutions
is an essential element of the process towards
achieving sustainable universal access. Users of WASH
services and facilities can provide an insight into what

EMPLOYMENT IN SUPPORT OF WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE

109

Women have traditionally
been the primary custodians
of collecting and managing
domestic water

WASH market demands and be responsive to
changes in those demands; and consider the
capacity needs to perform the essential teaching
functions effectively with quality teaching staff,
facilities and equipment (IWA, 2014a).

WASH options are socially acceptable, affordable
and technically feasible in their specific socioeconomic context. Sustainability cannot be ensured
without participation from communities, and
especially women, the main users of domestic water
supplies and water managers at the household level
(UNICEF/WHO, 2012).

In addition to professional training, the role of
Technical and Vocational Education and Training
(TVET) for WASH human resource capacity
development should be purposefully expanded.
The WASH sector should take the lead in this
initiative, taking into account the specific needs for
well-trained human resources for the WASH sector.

Due attention to users/clients is one essential
element of a people-centred approach. Investing in
the on-going career development of professional
and technical staff through in-service training is
another. WASH service providers should invest
in improved human resource management
practices, to plan for, attract, recruit and retain
the most talented professionals and technicians.
They should also ensure labour conditions that
include opportunities and incentives for staff
to continuously acquire new knowledge and
develop new skills, including much-needed skills to
participate in multi-disciplinary teams.

Women have traditionally been the primary
custodians of collecting and managing domestic
water and they are often responsible for managing
and making payments for water. Yet, they have
been consistently excluded from entering the
sector in a professional or technical capacity:
15 national human resources assessments found
an average of 17% of staff to be female (IWA,
2014a). Women’s positive role in decision-making
in rural water and sanitation projects is well
documented and more evidence is expected to
come to light through the Women Professionals
in the Urban Water Sector project (IWA, n.d.).
Therefore, gender-focused equal opportunities and
affirmative action must be consistently included in
WASH projects (see Section 5.5).

The speed and level of success by which the range
of foreseen changes in WASH service delivery will
take place critically depends on the way the human
resource base evolves. Trends in the education and
training of young professionals and technicians
score high as key determinants. A successful inflow
of appropriately trained young professionals into
the WASH sector will depend on the development
of curricula that respond to functional needs, are
targeted to meet sector demand, and include the
development of skills to work across disciplinary
and sectoral boundaries. Consultative curriculum
planning must address the specific needs of the
WASH sector, reflect these in the objectives, scope
and focus, and ensure that qualifications match
the needs. It must also: consider the diversity of
needs linked to environmental and social aspects
in different geographical regions, and to emerging
issues; concentrate on curricula responding to

110

WWDR 2016

Creating conditions that help promote community
participation is essential, especially for rural
and peri-urban settings. However, community
participation cannot be imposed and should take
into account the opportunity costs incurred on
individual community members by their voluntary
involvement in, for example, infrastructure work,
as frequently promoted through pro-poor measures
in water utilities.
Many communities have proved to be sufficiently
strong to develop their own initiatives to better
meet their needs. In various parts of the world,
communities have thus initiated provision of
WASH services in a range of different ways. For
example, they have started SMEs, set up water

kiosks or, where the community had been actively
engaged in infrastructure development, they have
taken over asset maintenance and management
(see Boxes 14.2 and 14.3). Such arrangements
frequently function outside of a formal institutional
setting and the associated jobs may not be
recognized as formal employment.

BOX 14.2 VOLUNTEERING SCHEMES IN THE PHILIPPINES
Local Government Units in the Philippines have extensive volumes of personnel engaged in advocacy,
information, communication and promotion campaigns on positive practices for water stewardship,
water conservation, household and community hygiene, environmental sanitation and community
mobilization. The Department of Health’s (DoH) provincial, city and municipal offices have about 600
health officers active in rural provinces and more than 3,000 in urban provinces. A large network of
volunteers works under the auspices of the DoH. This includes the volunteer network of barangay
health workers (around 212,000) and sanitary inspectors.
Source: IWA (2013).

BOX 14.3 SMALL-SCALE PRIVATE OPERATORS – FONCTIONARES PRIVADOS DO AGUA (FPA)
IN MOZAMBIQUE
FPAs are small private providers who invest in boreholes and small distribution networks. They are mainly
found in urban and peri-urban areas that are often underserved by the water utility network. The FPAs
have worked diligently and consistently for over 20 years to respond to increased consumer demand,
particularly in urban areas, where FPAs are critical to service provision. They are also an important source
of livelihood for those who have made the initial investments in equipment and other assets.
Source: USAID-SUWASA (n.d.).

EMPLOYMENT IN SUPPORT OF WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE

111

15

OPPORTUNITIES
FOR WATER SOURCE
DIVERSIFICATION

Aerial view of a sewage treatment plant
Photo: © iStock.com/Mariusz Szczygiel

This chapter examines the economic and job opportunities of developing and using
alternative water sources, including wastewater, for productive activities, especially in
areas experiencing water stress as a result of limited supply, excessive demand, or both.

15.1

Alternative water sources

UNESCO-IHP | Wouter Buytaert, Blanca Jiménez Cisneros,
Anil Mishra and Siegfried Demuth

The increased demand for water in sites where
the resource is scarce or where there is a high
competition for water creates the need for using
so-called ‘non-conventional sources’26 for water, such
as low-yielding wells and springs, rainwater, urban
runoff, stormwater and greywater27, among others.
Various emerging technologies based on new
developments in biological and physiochemical
processes including membrane processes facilitate
the use of such alternative water sources. This
will create jobs not only through technology
development, because it enables new forms of smallscale intensive uses of water such as cultivation of
highly profitable crops in small plots, and but also in
the operation and maintenance of treatment plants
to reclaim water. The use of greywater and municipal
wastewater along with the recycling of water
within industries, as well the recycling of industrial
wastewater, are increasing worldwide.
Use of municipal wastewater can represent up to
35% of the total water extracted for use in some
countries (Jiménez Cisneros and Asano, 2008a). The
reuse of water for irrigation is the most common
strategy for recycling wastewater, especially in China,
Mexico and India. Without treatment, wastewater
use often incurs health risks. Nevertheless, low
cost options exist for pathogen reduction or for
procedures to applying used water while maintaining

26

27

Conventional sources of water are those that in principle are of
high quality and low cost to exploit. Historically, surface water
(river, lakes and dams) and shallow freshwater from the subsoil
have been considered as the conventional sources for water,
making the ocean, brackish water from subsoil or estuaries,
rainwater, water from irrigation drainage, storm water and
very deep aquifers, as the non-conventional sources for water
(Jiménez Cisneros, 2001).
Greywater refers to all wastewater generated in households or
office buildings from streams without faecal contamination (e.g.
used water from baths, sinks and laundry).

the nutrient content, which may hold promise for
farmers in low-income regions (Drechsel et al.,
2010). Other examples are the use of wastewater
for sylviculture and the booming application of
urban wastewater in peri-urban horticulture.
Ideally, the required level of treatment of used water
is tailored to the application, instead of defaulting
water treatment to standards set to protect the
environment. Compounds considered as pollutants,
such as nitrogen, phosphorus and organic matter,
can even be beneficial for their fertilizing effects or
for improving soil properties. For example, in Brazil,
sugarcane is commonly irrigated with effluent from
ethanol distilleries containing a high content of nontoxic organic material. In Mexico, the non-treated
wastewater of Mexico City is used to irrigate around
90,000 hectares of agricultural land, which benefits
around 70,000 farms in an area with limited job
options (Jiménez Cisneros and Asano, 2008a). In
the Mezquital valley close to Mexico City, land with
access to wastewater is rented at a rate two to
three times higher than land without it.
The use of rainwater harvesting, green roofs
and other green infrastructure is gaining interest
in some urban environments. This has a direct
impact on reducing water consumption, in
addition to reducing flood risk through increasing
and decentralizing storage, reducing energy
consumption through evaporative cooling, and
improving the urban environment.
New technologies for water extraction and
purification will enable the use of new water
sources, such as fog interception (Vince, 2010),
rainwater harvesting and desalinisation. The use of
potentially less reliable sources of water, such as
ephemeral streams and small groundwater aquifers,
offer interesting avenues for further exploration.
The distribution of water from a larger variety of
sources to various end-users, including internal
and external recycling, can be made more efficient
and intelligent. Continuous monitoring of water
resources, in combination with weather forecasting
systems, allows for a better forecasting of water

OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SOURCE DIVERSIFICATION

113

supply. This makes it possible to influence demand,
for instance, by promoting temporarily less
water intensive activities (i.e. conventional power
generation instead of hydropower), or to prioritize
those water uses with highest societal or economic
benefit. New methods to optimize the use of natural
resources, such as benefit-sharing mechanisms and
ecosystem services assessments, will be instrumental
in establishing those priorities.
The use of new water sources will create jobs initially
at the research level because of the need to develop
new technologies and methodologies, promoting the
efficient use of resources while stimulating economic
growth in various sectors. Once these technologies
are operational, new jobs will be created for the
operationalization, supervision, and maintenance
and fine-tuning of smart systems.
It is clear that these evolutions will require a different
type of skill sets from workers. There is a tendency
for water resources and risk management to become
more data intensive, and to evolve from using
static infrastructure, to more dynamic, real-time
controlled, observation-based systems. Training the
future workforce to be prepared to assume such
responsibilities will therefore be paramount.

15.2

Wastewater as a resource

WWAP and IWA | Kirsten de Vette, Robert Bos, Marc Paquin
and Richard Connor

Clearly, there is value in used water. Consisting of
99.5% water, used water can also contain energy
(i.e. heat and organic matter), nutrients (i.e. nitrogen
and phosphorous), and other minerals of which
some qualify as rare earths (Meda et al., 2012,
cited in IWA, 2014c). Responding to environmental,
economic and ecological challenges, resource
recovery from used water has gained in popularity in
both research and applications.
Considerable research is being carried out on
novel forms of abstraction of resources from used
water as highlighted, for example, in the Resource
Recovery Compendium (IWA, 2014c). The research

114

WWDR 2016

on wastewater management that has been put into
practice includes water recovery, energy generation
(i.e. biogas), extraction of inorganic/organic
compounds that can be used as fertilizer, and
extraction of rare earth and high-value materials.
Research is also underway to develop models for
scaling up wastewater use in agriculture, which in
low- and some middle-income countries remains
an informal, small-scale enterprise on the periphery
of large cities. Sanitation safety plans (SSP) – an
emerging framework on integrated risk assessment
and management for improved wastewater
management – can be used to investigate hazards,
assess the associated risks and design remedial or
mitigating measures, be aimed at optimizing safety
in the use of wastewater, excreta and grey water in
agriculture and aquaculture (Stedman, 2014).
Examples on practices of recovering resources can
be found in many developed countries and more
are emerging. Singapore has been very successful in
implementing their ‘NEWater’ solution (PUB, n.d.),
while Canada recovers nutrients from municipal
and industrial water streams and transforms them
into a slow release, eco-friendly fertilizer (Water
World, n.d.).
In many developing countries, however, resource
recovery practices remain limited. With most
wastewater being dumped directly back to water
bodies in many countries, there is an obvious
impact on the health of people and ecosystems.
Emerging economies, such as China, have seen the
urgency and importance of wastewater treatment
and recovery, and the government has made
huge investments, which in turn created new job
opportunities. Low-cost and small-scale solutions
are more suitable for countries in development.
One example can be turning sludge into biogas
through anaerobic digestion.
Globally, it has been estimated that between four
to six million hectares (Jiménez Cisneros and Asano,
2008b; Keraita et al., 2008) and 20 million hectares
(WHO, 2006) of land are irrigated with untreated
wastewater (Drechsel et al., 2010). Not only does
the practice provide livelihoods for farming families

and those involved in marketing the products, but
with its expected scaling up and formalization, it
can also create substantial jobs in this sector. The
important occupational health aspects related to
the use of wastewater in agriculture will also require
more regulators and public health personnel. Beyond
the jobs that water reuse will create within the
water, agriculture and public health sectors, it is
also likely to generate jobs in research, agricultural
extension, produce marketing and the cultivation of
non-food crops.
Nonetheless, in order to accelerate innovations
and push the paradigm shifts on resource recovery,
there will be many important actions to consider,
such as creating an interlinkage between research
and market needs; changing public perception
(e.g. towards direct potable reuse); ensuring proper
regulation and governance; and tackling the high
investment needs required to accelerate these
innovations. Among others, these include creating
an interlinkage between research and market needs;
changing public perception (e.g. towards direct
potable re-use); ensuring proper regulation and
governance; and tackling the high investment needs
required to accelerate these innovations. The public
health hazards and risks related to untreated/partially
treated wastewater in agriculture can be overcome
if addressed through strict regulations applying
an integrated risk assessment and management
approach along the chain, from wastewater source
to produce consumption (WHO, 2006).

OPPORTUNITIES FOR WATER SOURCE DIVERSIFICATION

115

16

SCIENTIFIC AND
TECHNOLOGICAL
INNOVATION
UNESCO-IHP, UNESCO-IHE, WMO and IAHS | Uta Wehn, Wouter Buytaert,
Anil Mishra, Siegfried Demuth, Blanca Jiménez Cisneros, Leonardo Alfonso,
Bruce Stewart, Christophe Cudennec and Claudio Caponi

Rainwater treatment plant
Photo: © Cylonphoto/Shutterstock.com

This chapter discusses how innovation impacts water management,
water services and water-dependent sectors as well as water-related
employment opportunities in quantitative and qualitative terms.

Innovation comprises scientific innovation,
technological innovation (enabling new products,
services and processes) as well non-technological
innovation (at the organizational, financial,
management and cultural levels). All these different
forms of innovation contribute to the continuous
improvement of water management, in terms of
efficiency and effectiveness, with the related benefits
of economic development and decent jobs. Scientific
and technological innovations in the water sectors
offer particularly interesting opportunities.
Technological and non-technological innovations
(i.e. those inventions that successfully make it
to operational usage) are changing the direct
management of water resources, the provision of
water services, and water-dependent sectors. In
addition to their potential efficiency, effectiveness
and performance improvements, these innovations
can have important implications for employment
opportunities in quantitative and qualitative terms
in water dependent and water sectors. The number
and nature of jobs are likely to change, but also
the required skill sets and competencies. These
implications need to be better understood so that
appropriate action can be taken at policy levels. This
is particularly important for developing countries
where innovations may often be imposed or
introduced from abroad. This may increase the risk
for a mismatch with locally available skills.
Recently, policy-makers have become more aware
of the importance of water-related innovations,
as is evident by the increasing inclusion of water
innovation in policy and research agendas and
international fora (Wehn and Montalvo, 2015)
as well as from the increasing efforts to facilitate
interactions between relevant actors (see Box 16.1).
Innovation in the water sectors is highly diverse.
On the one hand, new technologies may improve
existing methods and processes and make them
more efficient and cost-effective. On the other hand,
disruptive technologies may fundamentally change
the way that water is used. The latter, in particular,
will require significant investments in R&D. These
technologies are often part of a transformation from
the current ‘predict-and-control’ paradigm in water
resources to a more adaptive and flexible approach

(characterized by self-organization, adaptation,
heterogeneity across scales and distributed control
(Pahl-Wostl et al., 2011).
On the water supply side, biological and
physiochemical processes for water treatment have a
lot of scope for technological improvement. Current
techniques are time and energy intensive and
difficult to apply within production systems and the
built environment. Similarly, the distribution of water
is energy-intensive and can be driven down by using
low-friction materials, intelligent pumping systems
and energy recovery. Improving system reliability will
require intelligent sensor networks, as well as data
processing and control systems.
On the water demand side, technological
breakthroughs will be needed to increase the
efficiency and productivity of industrial and
agricultural water use, to achieve financial and
economic efficiency, and to minimize long-term
cumulative negative environmental impacts. For
instance, new crop varieties are required that are
more resistant to drought, more water efficient
and able to survive on lower quality (i.e. saline)
water. Industrial production needs to pursue further
innovations in water recycling and recovery, and in
the use of water of lower purity grades. For some
applications, such as cooling systems, renewable
energy and transport, it may be possible to
substitute the use of water entirely.
At the household level, the field of sanitary
engineering underwent a major refocus in the
1970’s with the introduction of environmental
engineering, which also dealt with water issues. Now
environmental and sanitary engineering are further
advancing with technological innovations, such
as the provision of smart sanitation for slums and
informal settlements, emergency sanitation provision
following natural and anthropologic disasters,
resource-oriented decentralized sanitation and faecal
sludge management.
Nevertheless, new technologies may also change
the way that the entire water distribution system
is managed. Intelligent monitoring networks,

SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

117

BOX 16.1 ACCELERATING WATER INNOVATION – CASE STUDIES
Ontario, Canada
The Government of Ontario created the Water Technology Acceleration Project (WaterTAP) in 2011 to
help connect companies with the resources they need to successfully enter water technology markets by
facilitating the demonstration, commercialization and adoption of innovative water solutions through
knowledge sharing, attracting investment and developing innovative financial models. Established as a
non-profit organization, WaterTAP champions and supports Ontario’s status as a world water technology
hub. It promotes close cooperation between Ontario’s public and private water industry institutions and
businesses and consists of 100 technology incubators, accelerators and programs. In this ‘knowledge
mobilization’ process, Ontario’s water-related research organizations collaborate closely with university
researchers, government agencies, municipalities and the water industry. Specific water technology
clusters cover biogas energy generation and nutrient recovery from wastewater and stormwater
management and treatment to counteract the heavy rainfall events of climate change, buried pipeline
infrastructure inspection, monitoring and rehabilitation, and ‘smart’ technologies involving the collection
and processing of real-time data. Ontario has a strong track record in producing water-related patents,
where the water industry holds some 22,000 jobs in 100 water-related research organizations, 300 startups, 700 established companies and more than 750 water and wastewater treatment facilities.
Europe
Like other European innovation partnerships, the European Innovation Partnership on Water (EIP Water)
was initiated by the European Commission (EC) to accelerate water innovations, with a specific focus
on those that serve to address societal challenges, foster the EU’s competitiveness and support the
EC’s overarching goal of creating jobs and stimulating economic growth. The EIP Water is intended to
create market opportunities for these innovations (inside and outside of Europe), remove barriers by
advancing and leveraging existing solutions, and initiate and promote collaborative processes for change
and innovation in the water sector across the public and private sector, NGOs and the general public.
The implementation of the EIP Water started in May 2013, and its primary vehicles are voluntary, multistakeholder Action Groups (almost 30 registered in 2015) and an online Market Place on the EIP Water
online platform.
African cities
Commissioned by the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs to run initially from 2014-2017, VIA Water is a
programme that aims to identify innovative solutions for water problems facing cities in seven African
countries: Benin, Ghana, Kenya, Mali, Mozambique, Rwanda and South Sudan. It connects ‘curious
researchers and creative entrepreneurs, innovative NGOs and progressive policy-makers’. VIA Water
financially supports small-scale innovations at the start of the supply chain through the VIA Water
Fund and provides matchmaking between potential partners from the seven VIA Water countries. The
programme shares and enriches the knowledge obtained along the innovation process through its VIA
Water Learning Community.
Contributed by Uta Wehn (UNESCO-IHE), based on WaterTap (n.d.); EIP Water (n.d.); Viawater (n.d.).

118

WWDR 2016

combined with powerful forecasting and
optimization algorithms, may help improve water
distribution as a function of spatiotemporal
variations in the supply and demand. Computer
models, simulation tools and other ICT solutions
will be necessary to anticipate changes in supply
and demand, and to manage storage and
distribution more proactively. Lastly, integration
of local technology and knowledge may allow for
better tailoring of solutions to local conditions
and improve uptake (i.e. through so-called citizenscience) (Buytaert et al., 2014).
Indeed, ICT-based innovations are already being
introduced in many aspects of water security (ADB,
2013). Examples include improved forecasting
systems for floods and drought; smart sensors to
reduce water consumption in households, business
and municipalities; asset management; demand
management; water reuse; and energy saving
(Box 16.2).

Innovations can have important
implications for water dependent
and water sector employment
opportunities in quantitative
and qualitative terms

In summary, innovation originating in or benefitting
the water sectors can both destroy and create jobs,
albeit not always in tandem and affecting differing
levels of competences. Policy mechanisms need to be
in place to draw on relevant research for capturing
the job-creating opportunities in the field of water
innovation and to ensure the supply of required
capacity for the generation and diffusion of waterrelated innovations. Such policies should also address
the risk of technology development and data sources
being monopolized, which could potentially widen
the knowledge gap between (and among) actors in
developed and less-developed regions.

ICT-based advances support various facets of
water supply and demand. These developments
have implications for water-related employment
in terms of quantity (i.e. reduced number of staff
for specific tasks) as well as quality (e.g. relevant
knowledge, skills and capabilities, particularly
ICT-related skills), potentially changing the size
and shape of the capacity ‘gaps’ (see Chapter
12). Specifically, water-related employment is
therefore likely to be directly focused on people
with STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) backgrounds, raising the entry-level
qualifications for professionals in water sectors.
At the same time, new job opportunities are
being created through efforts in R&D and for a
broad range of ICT-professionals and/or ICT-versed
water professionals who will benefit from new
employment opportunities in water organizations.

SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION

119

BOX 16.2 BENEFITS OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES
Over the last decades, ICTs have triggered a number of water innovations that address a broad range
of problems in the water sector as well as sectors relying upon water as a resource. For example, in
the agricultural sector, the combination of remote sensing of crop and soil characteristics with highresolution weather forecasts drives the development of data-intensive applications for precision
agriculture, aiming at improved and better-targeted use of irrigation water, fertilizer and other
agrochemicals. In developing regions, the increasing availability of weather data allows for the
development of weather-index based insurance products, which enable farmers to pursue higher risk
strategies that provide higher gains on the long term. Mobile telephony is a strong example of fast
ICT adoption, enabling farmers’ access to weather forecasts, as well as market data, and information
about better farming practices such as disease control, thus safeguarding their livelihoods.
The following examples present other areas of ICT-enabled ‘smart’ water management that are
emerging which will affect working conditions and require upgrading of staff skills and competencies
to implement these solutions. At the same time, they imply job losses through increased management
efficiencies in water organizations while increasing job opportunities for ICT professionals or ICTversed water professionals.
Case: Attracting youth into agriculture
ICTs are changing the image of farming from a back-breaking, hardly remunerative, labourconsuming task to a much more profitable and decent source of income. ICTs not only improve the
farming sector in general but also the status of young persons using it. According to recent research
into three projects located in Western Kenya (Eldoret, Kakamega and Kisumu), youngsters who
used to see farming as a type of last resort source of income without much perspective now regard
the sector as a potentially strong source of rewarding business. Aside from being able to obtain
information about the best market prices, ICTs also provide young farmers with access to new farming
practices and agricultural (including irrigation) technologies, information on pest and disease control
as well as communication with other farmers. Early adopters of ICTs for farm management receive
recognition from family and community members for their technical knowledge and higher incomes
that inspire others to follow suit in the adoption of ICTs for farming.
Case: WeSenseIt project
The WeSenseIt project explores the concept of citizen water observatories in which citizens and
communities become active participants in data capturing, information evaluation and decisionmaking processes related to water such as flood risk management. Citizens capture hydrological
data using Apps and physical sensors that can connect to portable devices such as smartphones and
tablets. Relevant data is also extracted from the interactions of citizens via social media (Wehn and
Evers, 2015). While water management can become more participatory in this way, new demands are
also being placed on water organizations to integrate ICT-based interactions with citizens in their
workflow, procedures and protocols.
Source: Uta Wehn (UNESCO-IEH), based on IICD (n.d.); WeSenseIt (n.d.).

120

WWDR 2016

17

MONITORING,
ASSESSMENT AND
REPORTING
WWAP | Richard Connor
ILO | Carlos Carrión-Crespo

Soil testing at the source of the Tana River (Kenya)
Photo: © Georgina Smith/International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT)

This chapter identifies: the needs and opportunities for data monitoring, assessment
and reporting on water availability quantity, quality and use in the context of declining
hydrometeorological networks; indicators for monitoring progress on the SDGs; economic
costs and benefits of water-related activities and investments; tracking improvements in water
productivity; and employment statistics in water-dependent economic sectors.

17.1

Challenges

Monitoring the availability and use of water
resources represents a daunting challenge, especially
given their variability over time and space (see
Section 2.1). Reliable and objective information
concerning the state of water resources in terms of
their quantity, quality and vulnerability at the local
or basin level is often poor or lacking, as are specific
metrics for water demand and use by different
economic sectors. Globally, water observation and
monitoring networks are in decline and inadequately
funded. Moreover, traditional statistics assessing the
relative water intensity of major water use sectors
(agriculture, energy, industry and domestic) are
often unsatisfactory for purposes of wisely allocating
local or basin-level water resources to specific users.
These include sizeable irrigation schemes, thermal
power plants or large industrial installations. Some
local studies and national-level assessments can
provide a useful snapshot of the state and use of
water resources at a given time and place, but these
rarely deliver a detailed picture of how the different
dimensions of water are evolving over time in
different parts of the world.
Water resources monitoring can be costly, often
requiring rather large instrumentation that can
literally be ‘washed away’ during extreme flow
events. Some encouraging progress is being made
thanks to technological advances like NASA’s
GRACE satellite that has been monitoring changing
groundwater levels across the planet (see Figure 2.5).
However, while remote sensing is proving to be a
useful tool, it will never substitute ground-truth.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
with a dedicated SDG for water and sanitation (see
Section 5.2), provides a new impetus for monitoring
the entire water cycle. It expands the MDG agenda
of drinking water and sanitation to now cover
more aspects related to water resources, including
wastewater treatment and water quality, water use
and efficiency, IWRM, and water-related ecosystems.
The agenda also includes targets on the enabling
environment for water and sanitation interventions,
such as international cooperation, capacity building
and participation of local communities.

122

WWDR 2016

Economic policy-makers and
leaders in the private
sector now recognize that
water as a resource can have
a significant influence on
national economies
It is clear that countries themselves play a pivotal
role in monitoring progress towards the SDGs, which
in many countries will require both funding and
institutional capacity building. For global monitoring
of water and sanitation, the UN System is building
on its experience from MDG monitoring and by
integrating other existing monitoring efforts in the
water sectors (including the JMP, GLAAS, AQUASTAT,
GEMS/Water, and the IWRM reporting mechanism)
and establishing new/adapted monitoring and
reporting mechanisms, thus expanding its capacity to
cover the entire SDG for water and sanitation.
The SDGs also create opportunities to leverage new
technologies and approaches to increase the quality,
frequency, scale and accessibility of traditional data
collection. In addition to Earth observations, examples
of new data streams include mobile networks,
remote sensing data, smart meters and citizen
science campaigns supported by an ever-growing
capacity to store and process large amounts of data.
‘The applications of this “data revolution” include
robust weather monitoring systems that decrease
the vulnerability of farmers as they plan ahead, early
warning systems to help prepare for and adapt to
water-related natural disasters, river monitoring
advancements that improve decisions on water
release to ensure endangered fish can move upstream
to spawning areas, and smart metering of agricultural
irrigation that improve water allocation across large
watershed systems, especially in times of extreme
events like droughts’ (UN-Water, 2015, p. 2).
Many economic policy-makers and leaders in
the private sector now recognize that water as a
resource can have a significant influence on national
economies and the vulnerability of industrial
development. Indeed, water development spills over
into the entire economy over the long term (WWAP,
2015). As described in Chapters 1 and 11 of this
report, nearly all the data and information regarding
the cost-benefit ratios of water interventions, such as

universal access to water and sanitation and water
saving methodologies and technologies, show that
water development is indeed cost-effective and
essential for sustainable development. However, this
information remains sparse and there are few metrics
available to assess the value-added of investments
in water management or the broader economic
performance of allocating water to different
sectors. For example, data are needed to assess the
productivity of water, in terms of GDP per unit water
used, to enable monitoring of the policy objective
of decoupling economic growth from resource use
(WWAP, 2012).
In terms of jobs and employment, few statistics
reflect the current reality of work. They tend to
simplify the core situation (often due to their
objectives, measurement methods and conceptual
frameworks), resulting in partial coverage,
insufficient detail and an incomplete analysis of
complex topics.
One of the greatest challenges is gathering data and
information concerning informal, part-time and/
or unpaid work. This type of employment situation

It is clear that countries
themselves have to play a
pivotal role in monitoring
progress towards the SDGs,
which in many countries will
require both funding and
institutional capacity building
occurs in developed and developing economies
alike, but tends to be greatest among the poorest
and more marginalized groups, of which women
are disproportionally represented. Although the
global and regional employment statistics presented
in Section 3.2 are sex-disaggregated, these data
do not include informal employment that account
for hundreds of millions of people in highly waterdependent sectors such as agriculture (see Box 17.1).
Another challenge lies in identifying the level of
‘water dependence’ of any given job. As described in
Section 3.3, it is somewhat easier to establish a level
of water dependence of a given sector than for a
given job. In essence, not all jobs in water-dependent
sectors are necessarily water-dependent jobs.

BOX 17.1 DIFFICULTIES AND SPECIFICITIES OF EMPLOYMENT MEASURES IN THE AGRICULTURE
AND FOOD SECTORS
The employment dimensions of the agriculture and food sector are difficult to measure. Most of it
is done through informal self-employment in smallholdings that may not provide a full time source
of employment. An important share of production is self-consumed by the family and its in-kind
contribution may be underestimated. Therefore, employment may be overestimated by data on
agricultural holdings, but underestimated by population census that takes into account the primary
occupation or source of income of people. The problem is especially acute in the fishery sector where
many people are involved in part-time or seasonal fishing activities that are often not recorded in
agriculture or fisheries censuses (FAO, 2010b). On the other hand, waged work is often informal
and casual, undertaken as complementary activity and underestimated in population census (World
Bank, 2007b). Waged worker are often also poor farmers and therefore the figures tend to overlap.
Finally, agriculture generates much indirect work along the food chain but along different sectors,
rarely aggregated to offer the employment picture of the food sector. Another key difficulty relates
to disaggregating employment data according to gender, age, ethnicity and type of households. For
instance, women’s involvement in agriculture often remains underestimated (World Bank, 2007b) due
to the limited availability of sex-disaggregated data, and the situation is even worse when one wants
to evaluate their access to water and land resources.
Source: FAO (2010b).

MONITORING, ASSESSMENT AND REPORTING

123

For example, whereas water can be an essential
input in sectors such as agriculture and power
generation, water is not necessarily essential for
many tasks undertaken by workers in those sectors,
such as administrative or clerical tasks. To date,
no research examining or comparing the ‘water
intensity’ of certain jobs has been undertaken.
Chapter 18 of this report provides further
suggestions on increasing knowledge and
innovation to be able to make decisions based on
robust metrics.

17.2

Opportunities

Input-output (I-O) analysis and social accounting
matrices (SAMs) identify how water is used as an
input by different subsectors, and seek to quantify
the jobs created when a government increases or
improves water supply. This would help develop a
comprehensive mapping of the linkages between
access to water and sanitation and decent jobs
that underscores: (i) the extent and full range of
interactions and (ii) the significance of feedback
effects. This can be used to build a strong case for
an integrated approach to coordinated employment
policies (both at national and local levels). It can
also be used to show the multiplier effects that will
result from better coordination.
Data from the World Input-Output Database
(WIOD) can be analysed to derive evidence on how
dependent the whole economy is on water supply
and how many jobs are created when a government
increases or improves water supply, estimating
backwards and forwards linkages of water supply
and related sectors to calculate total multiplier
effects of potential investments in a given sector.
These investments have several spillover effects,
since they seek not only to improve distribution of
water as a component of national wealth and
well-being but also to increase labour productivity
and reduce diseases and related costs.

124

WWDR 2016

Statistical systems are moving towards measuring new
‘work’ standards, and different forms of work and
labour underutilization indicators (ICLS, 2013). This
should also serve to facilitate construction of waterdependent decent work indicators: National statistical
systems could combine water-related variables and
data from all available/potential sources (i.e. regular/
ad hoc/special modules), such as census, labour
force surveys, household income and expenditure
surveys, demographic and health surveys. Building
statistical baseline data provides impetus to advocate
for government investment in and commitment to
developing and maintaining the public water system.
Indicators for water and indicators for jobs and
employment have something in common: both need
to be appropriate for collection by a regular, national
statistical data collection programme and for the
generation of comparable time-series analysis (even if
infrequent, i.e. every five years).
As previously mentioned in Chapters 4 and 14, there
is a dearth of information on human resources for
WASH services (IWA, 2014a). Commissioning the
necessary research (from their own resources or with
external support) to include numerical and skills gaps
would allow governments to strengthen the evidence
base before consolidating new WASH policies. The
process to help states build a human resource/skills/
capacity building strategy into a coherent national
WASH strategy can thereby focus on the demand side
by identifying sectoral value chains, core occupations,
skills requirements and cross-occupation analyses.

18
POLICY RESPONSES
WWAP | Marc Paquin and Richard Connor

Knowledge learning workshop at the European Parliament
Photo: © Jean-Luc Flemal/European Parliament

In conclusion, this chapter summarizes the report’s policy implications that arise from the water
and jobs nexus. In order to achieve sustainable development based on a healthy environment
and dependable water resources, along with a sound economy that offers opportunities for
decent jobs, countries need to plan, regulate and invest – financially and otherwise – to ensure
the sustainability of their water resources and ecosystems; help develop, operate and maintain
water infrastructure; and plan, build and manage human resources’ capacity. Countries will thus
also continue to be innovative while increasing their knowledge and building expertise.

As this report demonstrates, critical relationships and
essential linkages exist between the management
of water (in its broadest sense) and employment
opportunities in countries at all levels of development.
Water plays a key role in generating and sustaining
direct employment opportunities across a large array
of sectors and in unlocking the potential for indirect
employment creation through its multiplier effect.

The political will to set
and implement water-related
policy objectives that support
sustainable development and job
creation is essential
Sustainable water management in its broadest
sense embraces sound decision-making and policy,
ecosystem management, through infrastructure
development, operation and maintenance, down
to the home, office, factory or field, then to
its ultimate return to the natural environment.
Combined with access to a safe and reliable supply
of water and appropriate sanitation services, this
creates an enabling environment for employment
opportunities to develop and grow across economic
sectors. Such opportunities range from full-time
decent jobs to precarious informal ones – across
a wide range of skill sets. Long-term planning
and investment for improving water resources
management, WASH and wastewater management
are therefore required before enhanced employment
opportunities and other related socio-economic
benefits accrue.

lead to increased benefits in terms of generation of
decent jobs, as well as serve the broader objectives of
sustainable development.
Meeting the described goals in the coming years
requires a coherent approach and a vision shared
by governments and their partners. In this process,
developing water, energy, food, environment, social
and economic policies that are complementary
is a key requirement to a sustainable, integrated
and mutually-supportive water, employment and
economic strategy. The proposed approach could help
respond to the challenges arising from the risks and
opportunities at the water and jobs nexus highlighted
in this report. This ensures that incentives are aligned
for all stakeholders and that impacts are mitigated,
for example, in ensuring future employability of those
displaced in sectors where employment may decrease.
Indeed, managing water for economic growth and
employment is not only a question of resource
availability and money, but also a matter of good,
effective and efficient governance. As such,
strategically increasing investments of their financial
and other resources at the water-job nexus enables
countries to:
• Ensure the sustainability of water resources and
ecosystems;
• Develop, operate and maintain water
infrastructures;
• Plan, regulate and build capacity of human
resources and institutions; and
• Build knowledge and facilitate innovation.

18.1
The political will to set and implement waterrelated policy objectives that support sustainable
development and job creation is essential. However,
there is frequently a low level of appreciation
of the high risks and serious impacts to which
neglect of water issues can lead, often with
catastrophic and extremely costly results. Improving
knowledge and understanding, including among
politicians and policy-makers, of the central role
of water resources, infrastructure and services in
the economy and in employment creation, could

126

WWDR 2016

Ensure the sustainability of water
resources and ecosystems

Population growth and the resulting increase in
water demand for household uses (drinking and
sanitation) and productive uses (e.g. energy and
food), urbanization, and changing demographics
and consumption patterns will put additional stress
on water resources and ecosystems and the services
they provide. This, in turn, will require governments
and others to invest time and energy in strategically
managing water resources.

The allocation of water
resources and the provision of
water services to different
economic sectors will largely
dictate the growth potential
for high quality jobs at
country and local levels
Investment in sustainable water resources and
ecosystems management is a prerequisite to a solid
economy and expanding employment opportunities
in water-dependent sectors, such as agriculture,
fisheries, forestry, energy, industry, tourism and health,
as well as, indirectly, in other economic sectors. Social
dialogue between government units, water operators,
water workers and users can help develop locallyadapted approaches, plans and indicators to ensure
sustainable use of and access to water.

18.2

Develop, operate and maintain
water infrastructure

Vibrant economies, and resulting employment
opportunities, rely on effective water infrastructure.
Investment in and support for the development,
operation and maintenance of water infrastructure
is needed in order to support the development of
sustainable economies and employment opportunities.
Infrastructure that ensures access to safe and reliable
water supply and sanitation services, coupled with
appropriate hygiene, is critical to maintaining a
healthy, educated and productive workforce.
Therefore, government and stakeholders must
recognize that investment in water infrastructure is
essential for economic growth and that greater and
more reliable water access is a prerequisite to seizing
the growth and employment-creation potential of
agricultural and other water-intensive sectors.

18.3

Plan, build and manage capacity of
human resources

Economic activities necessitate water, but they also
require a sufficient number of skilled individuals. As
discussed in this report, important human resources
gaps exist and are widening, either in terms of
quantity (i.e. staff shortages as a result of an ageing
workforce) or in quality (i.e. skills gap). These
growing disparities underline the need for national
strategies for water-related jobs.
Through appropriate national employment policies,
countries can link growth and economic strategies
to decent (and green) employment creation and
the preservation and improvement of existing
jobs. International commitments, most notably
those pertaining to sustainability (i.e. SDGs) and
the human rights to water, sanitation and decent
employment, should guide the development of these
employment policies.
Since water is an enabler of economic activity
leading to more and potentially better employment,
the effective management of water supply and
use chains, including wastewater management,
represents a key element to incorporate into
national employment policies and strategies. A
water-focused employment strategy should also
promote the river basin/aquifer approach as a tool
to assess employment prospects and trade-offs. In
addition, it must take account of costs/benefits, risks/
opportunities and recognize the political trade-offs
involving jobs and water: short-term gains (be they
in economic growth or creation of jobs) have to
be weighed against longer-term losses (pollution,
unsustainable use of resources, jobs abolition, etc.).
Solutions to filling the quantitative and qualitative
human resources gaps include creating an enabling
policy environment for collaborative frameworks
between the education sector, sector employers
(public, private and NGOs) and employees;
developing incentives to attract and retain public
sector staff; strengthening technical and vocational
training; and giving attention to human resources
capacity development in rural areas. In addressing

POLICY RESPONSES

127

the human resources gaps, decision-makers must
be specifically cognizant of the issues raised by
youth unemployment, an ageing workforce,
notably in the WASH sector, leading to a shrinking
labour supply, and weak interest from graduates for
jobs in water sectors.

18.4

Increase knowledge and innovate

In order to ensure greater coherence of policy
objectives, action plans and funding at the waterjobs nexus, governments need to be able to make
their decisions on sound knowledge based on
robust metrics, including information on the:
• Availability and status (quality and vulnerability)
of water resources and their variability over
time (seasonal and year-to-year, including longterm climate projections);
• Water requirements and allocation frameworks,
including the demands and actual usage
(and abuse) of different water use (and major
employment) sectors;
• Level of reliable access to safe water supply and
effective sanitation services;
• Performance (and shortcomings) of existing
water-related infrastructure (financing,
operation, maintenance) and the additional
needs (current and future) in terms of resource
management, service delivery (water supply and
sanitation) and wastewater management;
• Formal and informal employment situation in
the water sectors;
• Potential for employment generation through
water-dependent activities; and
• Status of the WASH and other water sectors’
human resource base.
In addition to investing in the collection and
analysis of relevant data, countries would
benefit from improved change and innovation
management and R&D investment in order to
seize the full potential of their resources, both
human and water, and address potential negative
consequences. For example, in a context of limited
water resources to be shared among sectors and
countries, innovation should lead to improvements

128

WWDR 2016

in the efficient use of all water sources and to
the design of water allocation strategies that
maximize the economic and social returns, while
enhancing the water productivity of all sectors.
Innovation in water efficiency and productivity
also has the potential to lower costs and allow
for the use of unconventional sources of water.
Higher productivity, in turn, is a key driver for
improvements in job quality associated with poverty
reduction, falling shares of vulnerable employment
and growth in the developing world’s emerging
middle class.
While progress is occurring, additional R&D efforts
will be needed for:
• Development, establishment and operation of
new computational systems for monitoring,
predicting, early warning, and risk assessment
and management;
• Development of databases and information
systems, modelling;
• Monitoring: Improved analytical capacities,
remote sensing, expanding use of biological
quality parameters, which enhances water
security and resistance to water-related
disasters;
• Water and wastewater services: Smart metering,
international benchmarking, increased private
sector participation; and
• Green, flexible, multipurpose infrastructure:
provision of smart sanitation for slums and
informal settlements, emergency sanitation
provision following natural and anthropologic
disasters, resource-oriented decentralized
sanitation and faecal sludge management.

18.5

Conclusion

This report calls for concerted long-term decisionmaking to address the core trends and interlinkages affecting the water and jobs nexus.
The international community is already showing
the way, having set long-term goals regarding
water, sanitation, decent work and sustainable
development that offer an action framework for
countries’ development objectives.
It will be important for each country, according
to its own resource base, potential and priorities,
to identify and promote specific and coherent
strategies, plans and policies to achieve the right
sectoral balance and generate the highest possible
output of decent and productive jobs without
degrading the environment and compromising
sustainability of water resources.
In this respect, the allocation of water resources
and the provision of water services to different
economic sectors, combined with higher water-use
efficiency, productivity and value added, will largely
dictate the growth potential for high quality jobs at
country and local levels. Focusing on the economic
sectors that are most relevant for environmental
sustainability and job creation will prove to be the
ultimate key to success.
Revisiting frameworks such as IWRM to resonate
with these new complexities will also be important.
Moreover, stronger, better and more efficient
interlinked institutions will be required to handle
the increased level of complexity.
To effectively achieve these social and political
goals, a comprehensive approach that fosters
integrity, transparency, accountability, participation
and anti-corruption is required. Setting up
participatory and accountability mechanisms such
as community monitoring, social or community
auditing, with an emphasis on gender parity
represents a sound approach to ensuring that
implementation of water and employment actions
result in sustainable and shared benefits.

POLICY RESPONSES

129

REFERENCES
2030 WRG (2030 World Resources Group). 2009. Charting our Water Future: Economic Frameworks to Inform Decisionmaking. 2030 WRG.
2nd APWS (2nd Asia-Pacific Water Summit). 2013a. Chiang Mai Declaration: The Second Asia-Pacific Water Summit. Chiang
Mai, Thailand, 20 May 2013. http://apws2013.files.wordpress.com/2013/05/chiang-mai-declaration.pdf

a

_____. 2013b. A Summary of Focus Area Sessions. Chiang Mai, Thailand, 19 May 2013. http://www.waterforum.jp/jp/what_
we_do/pages/policy_recommendations/APWF/2nd_APWS/doc/2ndAPWS_Summary_of_FASs_r.pdf
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2013. Asian Water Development Outlook 2013: Measuring Water Security in Asia and
the Pacific. Manila, Philippines, ADB. http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/30190/asian-water-developmentoutlook-2013.pdf
Adukia, A. 2014. Sanitation and Education. Harvard University. http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/adukia/files/adukia_sanitation_
and_education.pdf
AfDB/OECD/UNDP (African Development Bank/Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development/United Nations
Development Programme). 2015. African Economic Outlook 2015: Regional Development and Spatial Inclusion. Paris, OECD
Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/aeo-2015-en
AFED (Arab Forum for Environment and Development). 2011. Green Economy: Sustainable Transition in a Changing Arab
World. Beirut, AFED, p. 61. http://afedonline.org/Report2011/PDF/En/Full-eng.pdf
Alcamo, J., Florke, M. and Marker, M. 2007. Future Long-term Changes in Global Water Resources Driven by Socio-economic
and Climatic Changes. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 52(2): 247-275.
Alexandratos, N. and Bruinsma, J. 2012. World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050: The 2012 Revision. ESA Working Paper No.
12-03. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO).
Amarasinghe, U. A. and Smakhtin, V. 2014. Global Water Demand Projections: Past, Present and Future. IWMI Research
Report No.156. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI). http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/IWMI_
Research_Reports/PDF/pub156/rr156.pdf
AquaFed (The International Federation of Private Water Operators). 2015. Private Operators Delivering Performance for Water
Users and Public Authorities: Examples from across the World. Paris, AquaFed.
Aquatic Informatics. 2014. Global Hydrological Monitoring Industry Trends. http://pages.aquaticinformatics.com/Water-ReportIAHS.html
AU (African Union). 2004. Sirte Declaration on the Challenges of Implementing Integrated and Sustainable Development on
Agriculture and Water in Africa. Assembly of the African Union Second Extraordinary Session. Sirte, Libya.
_____. 2008. Sharm El-Sheikh Commitments for Accelerating the Achievement of Water and Sanitation Goals in Africa. Sharm
El-Sheikh Declaration. Assembly of the African Union Eleventh Ordinary Session, Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt.
_____. 2014. Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want. Addis Ababa, AU.

b

Australian Aid/World Bank. 2013. Vietnam Urban Wastewater Review. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://www.
worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/EAP/Vietnam/vn-urbanwastewater-summary-EN-final.pdf
Bel, G., Fageda, X. and Warner, M. E. 2008. Is Private Production of Public Services Cheaper than Public Production? A Metaregression Analysis of Solid Waste and Water Services. Working Papers 2008/04. Barcelona, Spain, Research Institute of
Applied Economics, University of Barcelona. www.ub.edu/irea/working_papers/2009/200923.pdf
Bélières, J. F., Bonnal, P., Bosc, P. M., Losch, B., Marzin, J. and Sourisseau, J. M. 2014. Les agricultures familiales du monde.
Définitions, contributions et politiques publiques. Paris, AFD/CIRAD. (In French.)
Bhattarai, M., Barker, R. and Narayanamoorthy, A. 2007. Who Benefits from Irrigation Development in India? Implication of
Irrigation Multipliers for Irrigation Financing. Irrigation and Drainage, 5(2-3): 207-225.
Boccaletti, G., Grobbel, M. and Stuchtey, M. R. 2009. The Business Opportunity in Water Conservation. McKinsey Quarterly.
McKinsey & Company. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/energy_resources_materials/the_business_opportunity_in_water_
conservation
Boelee, E. (ed.). 2011. Ecosystems for water and food security. Nairobi/Colombo, United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP)/International Water Management Institute (IWMI). http://www.unep.org/pdf/DEPI-ECOSYSTEMS-FOOD-SECUR.pdf
Bohoslavsky, J. P. 2011. Fomento de la eficiencia en prestadores sanitarios estatales: la nueva empresa estatal abierta. United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC) LC/W.381. Santiago, United Nations. (In
Spanish.) http://www.cepal.org/publicaciones/xml/4/42864/Lcw381e.pdf
Borraz, F., González Pampillon, N. and Olarreaga, M. 2013. Water Nationalization and Service Quality. Washington, DC, The
World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12180
Buytaert, W., Zulkafli, Z., Grainger, S., Acosta, L., Alemie, T. C., Bastiaensen, J., De Bièvre, B., Bhusal, J., Clark, J.,Dewulf, A.,
Foggin, M., Hannah, D. M., Hergarten, C., Isaeva, A., Karpouzoglou, T., Pandeya, B., Paudel, D., Sharma, K., Steenhuis, T.
S.,Tilahun, S., Van Hecken, G. and Zhumanova, M. 2014. Citizen Science in Hydrology and Water Resources: Opportunities
for Knowledge Generation, Ecosystem Service Management, and Sustainable Development. Frontiers in Earth Science, 2:26.

130

WWDR 2016

c

Calderón, C. and Servén, L. 2004. The Effects of Infrastructure Development on Growth and Income Distribution. Policy
Research Working Papers. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-3400
_____. 2008. Infrastructure and Economic Development in Sub-Saharan Africa. Policy Research Working Papers. Washington,
DC, The World Bank. http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-4712
Catalyst. 2011. The Bottom Line: Corporate Performance and Women’s Representation on Boards (2004-2008).
http://www.catalyst.org/system/files/the_bottom_line_corporate_performance_and_women’s_representation_on_
boards_%282004-2008%29.pdf
CAWMA (Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture). 2007. Water for Food Water for Life: A
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture, London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water
Management Institute (IWMI). http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/assessment/Publications/books.htm
CDP (Carbon Disclosure Project). 2014. From Water Risk to Value Creation: CDP Global Water Report 2014. London, CDP.
https://www.cdp.net/CDPResults/CDP-Global-Water-Report-2014.pdf
_____. 2015. Accelerating Action: CDP Global Water Report 2015. CDP Worldwide. https://www.cdp.net/CDPResults/CDPGlobal-Water-Report-2015.pdf
CEO Water Mandate. 2010. Guide to Responsible Business Engagement with Water Policy. Oakland, USA, United Nations
Global Compact/Pacific Institute.
CFS (Committee on World Food Security). 2014. Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems. CFS
Forty-first Session: Making a Difference in Food Security and Nutrition. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO). http://www.fao.org/3/a-ml291e.pdf
Chaaban, C. 2010. Job Creation in the Arab Economies: Navigating Through Difficult Waters. Arab Human Development
Report, Research Paper Series. United Nations Development Programme- Regional Bureau for Arab States (UNDP-RBAS),
p.18.
Chuhan-Pole, P., Ferreira, F. H. G., Calderon, C. Christiaensen, L., Evans, D., Kambou, G., Boreux, S., Korman, V., Kubota,
M. and Buitano, M. 2015. Africa’s Pulse 2015. Washington, DC, The World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/21736
CILSS (Permanent Interstates Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel). n.d. CILSS website. Burkina Faso, CILSS: http://
www.cilss.bf/

d

Danilenko, A., van den Berg, C., Macheve, B. and Moffitt, L. J. 2014. The IBNET Water Supply and Sanitation Blue Book 2014:
The International Benchmarking Network for Water and Sanitation Utilities Databook. Washington, DC, The World Bank.
Davidova, S. and Thomson, K. 2013. Family Farming: A Europe and Central Asia Perspective. Background Report for the
Regional Dialogue on Family Farming: Working towards a Strategic Approach to Promote Food Security and Nutrition.
Brussels, 1-80 pp.
Davis, B., Winters, P., Carletto, G., Covarrubias, K., Quinones, E., Zezza, A., Stamoulis, K., Bonomi, G. and Di Giuseppe, S.
2007. Rural Income Generating Activities: A Cross Country Comparison. Background paper written for the WDR 2008.
De Albuquerque, C. 2014. Realising the Human Rights to Water and Sanitation: A Handbook by the UN Special Rapporteur.
Lisbon, UN Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation.
De Albuquerque, C. and Roaf, V. 2012. On the Right Track: Good Practices in Realising the Rights to Water and Sanitation.
UN Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation. http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/
Water/BookonGoodPractices_en.pdf
De Stefano, L. and Llamas, M. R. 2013. Water, Agriculture and the Environment in Spain: Can We Square the Circle? London,
Taylor & Francis Group.
Diouf, K., Tabatabai, P., Rudolph, J. and Marx, M. 2014. Diarrhoea Prevalence in Children under Five Years of Age in Rural
Burundi: An Assessment of Social and Behavioural Factors at the Household Level. Global Health Action, 7: 1-9.
Dobbs, R., Oppenheim, J., Thompson, F. and Zornes, M. 2011. Resource Revolution: Meeting the World’s Energy, Materials,
Food and Water Needs. McKinsey Global Institute, McKinsey & Company. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/energy_
resources_materials/resource_revolution
Döll, P., Jiménez-Cisneros, B. E., Oki, T., Arnell, N. W., Benito, G., Cogley, J. G., Jiang, T., Kundzewicz, Z. W., Mwakalila S. and
Nishijima, A., 2014. Integrating Risks of Climate Change into Water Management. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 60, 4-13.
Dorin, B., Hourcade, J. and Benoit-Cattin, M. 2013. A World Without Farmers? The Lewis Path Revisited. Working Paper No.
47. Paris. Centre International de Recherches sur l’Environnement et le Développement (CIRED).
Dow, K., Carr, E. R., Douma, A., Han, G. and Hallding, K. 2005. Linking Water Scarcity to Population Movements: from Global
Models to Local Perspectives. Stockholm, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI).
Drechsel, P., Scott, C. A., Raschid-Sally, L., Redwood, M. and Bahri, A. 2010. Wastewater Irrigation and Health. London/
Ottawa/Colombo, Earthscan/International Development Research Centre (IDRC)/International Water Management Institute
(IWMI).
Ebila, F. 2006. UGANDA: Mainstreaming Gender into Policy: Examining Uganda’s Gender Water Strategy. United Nations
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), Gender, Water and Sanitation Case Studies on Best Practices. New
York, United Nations, pp. 88-95. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/pdf/un_gender_water_and_sanitation_case_studies_
on_best_practices_2006.pdf

References

131

e

EC (European Commission). 2012. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions: A Blueprint to Safeguard Europe’s Water
Resources. COM/2012/0673 final. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52012DC0673
_____. 2013a. Seventh Report on the Implementation of the Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive, 91/271/EEC. http://eurlex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex:52013DC0574
_____. 2013b. How Many People Work in Agriculture in the European Union? An Answer Based on EUROSTAT Data Sources.
EU Agricultural Economics Briefs No. 8. European Union (EU). http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/rural-area-economics/briefs/
pdf/08_en.pdf
EEA (European Environmental Agency). 2012. Towards Efficient Use of Water Resources in Europe. Report No. 1/2012.
Copenhagen, EEA. http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/towards-efficient-use-of-water
EIP Water (European Innovation Partnership on Water). n.d. EIP Water website. http:/www.eip-water.eu
Ercin, A. E. and Hoekstra, A. Y. 2012. Carbon and Water Footprints: Concepts, Methodologies and Policy Responses. WWDR4,
Side Publication Series No. 04. Paris, United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP), UNESCO. http://
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0021/002171/217181E.pdf
Estache, A. and Garsous, G. 2012. The Scope for an Impact of Infrastructure Investments on Jobs in Developing Countries.
IFC Economics Notes. Note 4. Washington, DC, International Finance Corporation (IFC). http://www.ifc.org/wps/
wcm/connect/32da92804db7555c8482a4ab7d7326c0/INR+Note+4+-+The+Impact+of+Infrastructure+on+Jobs.
pdf?MOD=AJPERES
Evans, B., Bartram, J., Hunter, P., Williams, R. A., Geere, J., Majuru, B., Bates, L., Fisher, M., Overbo, A. and Schmidt, W. 2013.
Public Health and Social Benefits of at-House Water Supplies. Leeds, UK, University of Leeds. http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/
outputs/water/61005-DFID_HH_water_supplies_final_report.pdf

f

Even, M. and Sourisseau, J. 2015. Transformations Agricoles et Agricultures Familiales: Quelques Défis mis en Lumière durant
l’Année Internationale de l’Agriculture Familiale. Cahiers Agricultures, 24(4): 201-203. (In French.)
Falkenmark, M. 1984. New Ecological Approach to the Water Cycle: Ticket to the Future. Ambio, 13(3): 152–160.
Falkenmark, M, and Widstrand, C. 1992. Population and Water Resources: A Delicate Balance. Population Bulletin No. 3.
Washington, DC, Population Reference Bureau. http://www.ircwash.org/sites/default/files/276-92PO-10997.pdf
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2003. Preliminary Review of the Impact of Irrigation on
Poverty: With Special Emphasis on Asia. Rome, FAO.
_____. 2008. Water and the Rural Poor: Interventions for Improving Livelihoods in sub-Saharan Africa. Rome, FAO. ftp://ftp.
fao.org/docrep/fao/010/i0132e/i0132e.pdf
_____. 2010a. State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2010. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1820e/i1820e00.
htm
_____. 2010b. Mapping Systems and Services for Multiple Uses in Bac Hung Hai Irrigation and Drainage Scheme, Vietnam.
Rome, FAO.
_____. 2011a. The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture: Managing Systems of Risk.
London/Rome, Earthscan/FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/solaw/solaw-home/en/
_____. 2011b. The State of Food and Agriculture. Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap for Development. Rome,
FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i2050e/i2050e.pdf
_____. 2012. Coping with Water Scarcity: An Action Framework for Agriculture and Food Security. FAO Water Reports No. 38.
Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/016/i3015e/i3015e.pdf
_____. 2013. Irrigation in Central Asia in Figures: AQUASTAT Survey-2012. FAO Water Report No. 39. Rome, FAO. http://www.
fao.org/docrep/018/i3289e/i3289e.pdf
_____. 2014a. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: Opportunities and Challenges. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.
org/3/a-i3720e.pdf
_____. 2014b. The State of Food and Agriculture: Innovation in Family Farming. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i4040e.
pdf
_____. 2014c. Turning Family Farm Activity into Decent Work. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/fao_ilo/
pdf/FF_DRE.pdf
_____. 2014d. Water and the Rural Poor: Interventions for Improving Livelihoods in Asia. Regional Office for Asia and the
Pacific (RAP) Publication No. 8. Bangkok, FAO. http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3705e.pdf
_____. 2014e. Meeting Farmers’ Aspirations in the Context of Green Development. FAO Regional Conference for Asia and
Pacific Thirty-second Session. Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, FAO. http://www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/030/mj413E.pdf
_____. 2014f. FAO AQUASTAT database. Water Withdrawal by Sector, around 2007. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/
aquastat/tables/WorldData-Withdrawal_eng.pdf (Accessed in 2015)
_____. 2014g. The Value of African Fisheries. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Circular No. 1093. Rome, FAO. http://www.fao.
org/3/a-i3917e.pdf
_____. 2015a FAO AQUASTAT. http://www.fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm (Accessed in 2015)

132

WWDR 2016

_____. 2015b. Handbook for Monitoring and Evaluation of Child Labour in Agriculture: Measuring the Impacts of Agricultural
and Food Security Programmes on Child Labour in Family-based Agriculture. Guidance Material No. 2. Rome, FAO. http://
www.fao.org/3/a-i4630e.pdf
_____. 2015c. FAOSTAT. http://faostat3.fao.org/home/E (Accessed in 2015)
_____. n.d. FAO website. Men and Women in Agriculture: Closing the Gap. http://www.fao.org/sofa/gender/policyrecommendations/en/
FAO/Wetlands International/University of Greifswald. 2012. Peatlands – Guidance for Climate Change Mitigation through
Conservation, Rehabilitation and Sustainable Use. Mitigation of Climate Change in Agriculture Series No. 5. Rome, FAO/
Wetlands International. http://www.fao.org/documents/card/en/c/ec2b1e72-73f8-507c-b1b1-f5b4c6512d21/
FAO/WWC (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Water Council). 2015. Towards a Water and Food
Secure Future: Critical Perspectives for Policy-makers. White Paper. Rome/Marseille, France, FAO/WWC. http://www.fao.
org/3/a-i4560e.pdf
Ferris, J. N. 2000. An Analysis of the Importance of Agriculture and the Food Sector to the Michigan Economy. Department of
Agricultural Economics, Michigan State University. http://ageconsearch.umn.edu/bitstream/11793/1/sp00-11.pdf
Foodtank. 2014. Foodtank website. Going Against the Grain to Use Less Water: Rice Farmers Experiment with Direct-Seeded
Rice. http://foodtank.com/news/2014/03/going-against-the-grain-to-use-less-water-rice-farmers-experiment-with-dire
Forslund, A., Renöfält, B. M., Maijer, K., Krchnak, K., Cross, K., Smith, M., McClain, M., Davidson, S., Barchiesi, S. and Farrell,
T. 2009. Securing Water for Ecosystems and Human Well-being: The Importance of Environmental Flows. Swedish Water
House Report No. 24. Stockholm, Stockholm Water House (SWH). http://www.siwi.org/publications/securing-water-forecosystems-and-human-well-being-the-importance-of-environmental-flows/
French Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy. 2010. Comprendre l’Emploi dans l’Économie Verte par
l’Analyse des Métiers. General Commissary of Sustainable Development, Service of Observation and Statistics. Le Point
sur 188. (In French.) http://www.statistiques.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/fileadmin/documents/Produits_editoriaux/
Publications/Le_Point_Sur/2014/lps-188-emploi-economie-verte-b.pdf

g

Geere, J. L., Hunter, P. R. and Jaglas, P. 2010a. Domestic Water Carrying and its Implications for Health: A Review and Mixed
Methods Pilot Study in Limpopo Province, South Africa. Environmental Health, 9:13.
Geere, J. L., Mokoena, M. M., Jaglas, P., Poland, F. and Hartley, S. 2010b. How Do Children Perceive Health to Be Affected
by Domestic Water Carrying? Qualitative Findings from a Mixed Methods Study in Rural South Africa. Child Care, Health
Development, 36(6): 818-826.
Gore, T., Ozdemiroglu, E., Eadson, W., Gianferrara, E. and Phang, Z. 2013. Green Infrastructure’s Contribution to Economic
Growth: A Review. UK, Defra and Natural England.
Government of India. 2012. Mgnrega Sameeksha: An Anthology of Research Studies on the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, 2006-2012. New Delhi, Orient Black Swan.
Government of Uganda. 2012. UGANDA Water and Environment Sector Capacity Development Strategy 2013-2018. Kampala,
Ministry for Water and Environment (MWE), Government of Uganda.
Green For All. 2011. Water Works: Rebuilding Infrastructure, Creating Jobs, Greening the Environment. Oakland, USA, Green
for All. http://gfa.fchq.ca/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/Green-for-All-Water-Works.pdf
Grobicki, A. 2007. The Future of Water Use in Industry. UNIDO Technology Foresight Summit, Budapest, Hungary, September
2007.
GSS (Ghana Statistical Services). 2012. 2011 Ghana’s Economic Performance: In Figures. Expound on basis of National
Accounts (new series) and selected economic indicators. Accra, GSS. http://www.statsghana.gov.gh/docfiles/GDP/
EconomicPerformance_2011.pdf
Guha-Sapir, D., Hoyois, P. and Below, R. 2014. Annual Disaster Statistical Review 2013: The Numbers and Trends. Brussels,
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED), Institute of Health and Society (IRSS), Université Catholique de
Louvain.
GWI (Global Water Intelligence). 2015. Getting Ready for the Desal Rebound: Urbanisation, Climate Change and a Drop in the
Cost of Energy are Set to Spur a Rebirth of the Flagging Desal Market. Global Water Intelligence Magazine, Vol. 16, No. 4.
http://www.globalwaterintel.com/global-water-intelligence-magazine/16/4/market-profile/getting-ready-desal-rebound
GWP (Global Water Partnership). 2006. Taking an Integrated Approach to Improving Water Efficiency. Technical Committee
(TEC). Technical Brief No. 4.
GWTF (Inter-agency Task Force on Gender and Water). 2006. Gender, Water and Sanitation: A Policy Brief. UN-Water/
Interagency Network on Women and Gender Equality (IANWGE). http://www.unwater.org/downloads/unwpolbrief230606.
pdf

h

Haddad, E. A. and Teixeira, E. 2015. Economic Impacts of Natural Disasters in Megacities: The Case of Floods in São Paulo,
Brazil. Habitat International, 45:106-113.
Hantke-Domas, M. and Jouravlev, A. 2011. Lineamientos de política pública para el sector de agua potable y saneamiento.
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). LC/W.400, Santiago, United
Nations. (In Spanish.) http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/3863/S2011000_es.pdf
Haraguchi, M. and Lall, U. 2014. Flood Risks and Impacts: A Case Study of Thailand’s Floods in 2011 and Research Questions
for Supply Chain Decision Making. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction.

References

133

Hardy. L., Garrido, A. and Juana, L. 2012. Evaluation of Spain’s Water-Energy Nexus. International Journal of Water Resources
Development, 28 (1): 151-170.
HLPE (High Level Panel on Food Security and Nutrition). 2013. Investing in Smallholder Agriculture for Food Security. A Report by
the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security. HLPE Report No. 6.
Rome.
_____. 2015. Water for Food Security and Nutrition. A Report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition
of the Committee on World Food Security. HPLE Report No. 9. Rome.
Hoy, D., Geere, J., Davatchi, F., Meggitt, B. and Barrero, L. 2014. A Time for Action: Opportunities for Preventing the Growing
Burden and Disability from Musculoskeletal Conditions in Low- and middle-income Countries. Best Practice and Research in
Clinical Rheumatology, 28 (3):377-93.
Huang, Q., Rozelle, S., Lohmar, B., Huang, J. and Wang, J. 2006. Irrigation, Agricultural Performance and Poverty Reduction in
China. Food Policy, 31 (1): 30–52.
Hussain, I. and Hanjra, M. A. 2004. Irrigation and Poverty Alleviation: Review of the Empirical Evidence. Irrigation and Drainage,
53(1): 1-15.

i

Hutton, G. and Haller, L. 2004. Evaluation of the Costs and Benefits of Water and Sanitation Improvements at the Global Level.
Geneva, Switzerland, World Health Organization (WHO). http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wsh0404.pdf
ICLS (International Conference of Labour Statisticians). 2013. Resolution Concerning Statistics of Work, Employment and
Labour Underutilization. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---stat/documents/normativeinstrument/
wcms_230304.pdf
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012a. Global Energy Outlook 2012. Paris, IEA. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/
publications/weo-2012/
_____. 2012b. Water for Energy: Is Energy Becoming a Thirstier Resource? Chapter 17. IEA. World Energy Outlook 2012. Paris,
OECD/IEA. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/WEO_2012_Water_Excerpt.pdf
_____. 2014a. World Energy Outlook 2014: Executive Summary. Paris, OECD/IEA. http://www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/world-energy-outlook-2014---executive-summary.html
_____. 2014b. World Energy Outlook 2014. Paris, OECD/IEA. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/weo-2014-en
_____. 2014c. World Energy Outlook 2014 Factsheet. Paris, IEA. http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/
weowebsite/2014/141112_WEO_FactSheets.pdf
IFAD/WFP (International Fund for Agricultural Development/World Food Programme). 2011. Weather Index-based Insurance in
Agricultural Development: A Technical Guide. Rome, IFAD.
IFC (International Finance Corporation). 2013. IFC Jobs Study: Assessing Private Sector Contributions to Job Creation and
Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC, IFC. http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/1c91a5804e6f1b89aceeacfce4951bf6/IFC_
FULL+JOB+REPORT_REV2_JYC.pdf?MOD=AJPERES
IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2002. The Role of Rainfed Agriculture in the Future of Global Food
Production. EPTD Discussion Paper No. 90. Washington, DC, IFPRI.
_____. n.d. IFPRI website. Project on water futures. http://www.ifpri.org/project/water-futures
IICD (International Institute for Communication and Development). n.d. IICD website. http://www.iicd.org/about
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1919. Hours of Work (Industry) Convention, No. 1. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=normlexpub:12100:0::no:12100:p12100_instrument_id:312146:no
_____. 1930. Hours of Work (Commerce and Offices) Convention, No. 30. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/dyn/
normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:312175
_____. 1948. Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, No. 87. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:312232
_____. 1949. Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, No. 98. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/dyn/
normlex/en/f?p=1000:12100:0::no::P12100_Ilo_Code:C098
_____. 1951. Equal Remuneration Convention, No. 100. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NOR
MLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_Ilo_Code:C100
_____. 1958. Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, No. 111. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/
dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C111
_____. 1964. Employment Policy Convention, No. 122. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORM
LEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_INSTRUMENT_ID:312267
_____. 1981. Occupational Safety and Health Convention, No. 155. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
_____. 1995. Safety and Health in Mines Convention, No. 176. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
_____. 2001. Safety and Health in Agriculture Convention, No. 184. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
_____. 2003a. Statistical Definition of Informal Employment: Guidelines Endorsed by the Seventeenth International Conference
of Labour Statisticians. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://ilo.org/public/english/bureau/stat/download/papers/def.pdf

134

WWDR 2016

_____. 2003b. Safety in Numbers: Pointers for a Global Safety Culture at Work. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_protect/---protrav/---safework/documents/publication/wcms_142840.pdf
_____. 2007a. Toolkit for Mainstreaming Employment and Decent Work. Geneva, Switzerland, United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination, International Labour Office. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/--exrel/documents/publication/wcms_172609.pdf
_____. 2007b. The ILO at a Glance. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/public/english/download/glance.pdf
_____. 2008. Conclusions on Skills for Improved Productivity, Employment Growth and Development. International Labour
Conference, 2008. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
_____. 2009. Recovering from the Crisis: A Global Jobs Pact. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/@ed_norm/@relconf/documents/meetingdocument/wcms_115076.pdf
_____. 2011a. Skills for Green Jobs: A Global View: Synthesis Report based on 21 Country Studies. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_159585.pdf
_____. 2011b. Sharing Country Experiences in Social Protection: Cambodia: Increasing Employability of Workers. Jakarta, ILO.
http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---asia/---ro-bangkok/---ilo-jakarta/documents/presentation/wcms_170560.pdf
_____. 2012. Working towards Sustainable Development: Opportunities for Decent Work and Social Inclusion in a Green
Economy. International Labour Office. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/--dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_181836.pdf
_____. 2013a. Sustainable Development, Decent Work and Green Jobs. Report No. 5, International Labour Conference,
102nd Session. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_norm/---relconf/documents/
meetingdocument/wcms_207370.pdf
_____. 2013b. What is a Green Job? Article, 26 August 2013. http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/green-jobs/news/
WCMS_220248/lang--en/index.htm
_____. 2013c. Methodologies for Assessing Green Jobs. Policy brief. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/--emp_ent/documents/publication/wcms_176462.pdf
_____. 2013d. Assessing Green Jobs for Evidence-Based Policy Making: International Research Conference. Conference Report,
Geneva, Switzerland, 9-10 December 2013. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/documents/
meetingdocument/wcms_243581.pdf
_____. 2013e. Green Jobs Mapping Studies in Asia (2010-2012): An Overview. ILO.
_____. 2014a. World of Work Report 2014: Developing with Jobs. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_243961.pdf
_____. 2014b. Creating Safe and Healthy Workplaces for All. Report prepared for the G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial
Meeting. Melbourne, Australia, 10-11 September 2014. Geneva, Switzerland. ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/
public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_305423.pdf
_____. 2014c. Key Indicators of the Labour Market (KILM), 8th edition. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
_____. 2014d. Green Job Mapping Study in Malaysia: An Overview based on Initial Desk Research. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO.
http://apgreenjobs.ilo.org/resources/green-jobs-mapping-study-in-malaysia-1
_____. 2014e. Green Jobs Mapping Study in the Philippines: An Overview based on Initial Desk Research. Bangkok, Regional
Office for Asia and the Pacific, ILO.
_____. 2014f. Global Employment Trends 2014: Risk of a Jobless Recovery? Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/
wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_233953.pdf
_____. 2015a. World Employment and Social Outlook: Trends 2015. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/
groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---publ/documents/publication/wcms_337069.pdf
_____. 2015b. ILO website. International Women’s Day 2015, ILO: Progress on Gender Equality at Work Remains Inadequate, 6
March 2015. http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_348035/lang--en/index.htm
_____. 2015c. Guidelines for a Just Transition towards Environmentally Sustainable Economies and Societies for All: COP
21 – Paris, 2015. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/---emp_ent/documents/
publication/wcms_432859.pdf
_____. n.d.a. ILO website. Sectoral Policies Department (SECTOR). http://www.ilo.org/sector/lang--en/index.htm
_____. n.d.b. ILO website. Safety and Health at Work. http://www.ilo.org/global/topics/safety-and-health-at-work/lang--en/
index.htm
ILO/UNDP WGF (International Labour Organization/United Nations Development Programme Water Governance Facility).
Forthcoming. Women, Informal Work and Water – Drudgery and Risks related to Water-fetching: A Systematic Literature
Review and Secondary Data Analysis (joint research project). Geneva/Stockholm, ILO/UNDP WGF.
India Water Portal. n.d. Job Opportunities with Consortium for DEWATS Dissemination (CDD) Society. http://www.
indiawaterportal.org/opportunities/job-opportunities-consortium-dewats-dissemination-cdd-society
Indij, D. and Gumbo, B. 2012. Capacity Development for a Changing World. R. Ardakanian and D. Jaeger (eds), Water and
the Green Economy: Capacity Development Aspects. Bonn, Germany, UNW-DPC. http://www.unwater.org/downloads/
greeneconomy-capacity-development.pdf

References

135

Indij, D., Gumbo, B. and Leendertse, K. 2013. Capacity Development Networks: A Source of Social Capital for Change.
UNESCO-IHE, Abstracts of papers presented at the 5th Delft Symposium on Water Sector Capacity Development: Developing
Capacity from Rio to Reality, Who’s Taking the Lead? Delft, The Netherlands, UNESCO-IHE. http://cd-symposium.unesco-ihe.
org/sites/cd-symposium.unesco-ihe.org/files/overview_of_abstracts_of_articles_presented_at_the_5th_delft_symposium.pdf
IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2007. Discussion Note: Migration and the Environment. Ninety-fourth session.
http://www.iom.int/jahia/webdav/shared/shared/mainsite/about_iom/en/council/94/MC_INF_288.pdf
_____. 2014. Integrating Migration into Development: Diaspora as a Development Enabler. Summary Report. 2-3 October 2014,
Rome, Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation.
IPA-Energy and Water Economics. 2010. Study on the Calculations of Revised 2020 RES Targets for the Energy Community.
Edinburgh, UK, IPA-Energy and Water Economics.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Field, C. B., V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.
L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, and L. L. White (eds)].
Cambridge/New York, UK/USA, Cambridge University Press, 1132 pp.
IRENA (International Renewable Energy Agency). 2015. Renewable Energy and Jobs: Annual Review 2015. Masdar City, United
Arab Emirates, IRENA. http://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RE_Jobs_Annual_Review_2015.pdf
IWA (International Water Association). 2013. Mapping Human Resource Capacity Gaps in the Water Supply and Sanitation
Sector. Country Briefing Note: Philippines. London, IWA Publishing. http://www.iwa-network.org/downloads/1422744503Briefing-Note-Philippines-final.pdf
_____. 2014a. An Avoidable Crisis: WASH Human Resource Capacity Gaps in 15 Developing Countries. London, IWA Publishing.
http://www.iwa-network.org/downloads/1422745887-an-avoidable-crisis-wash-gaps.pdf
_____. 2014b. YWP Conference: Key Message from IWA International Young Water Professional Conference hosted in Taipei
December 2014.
_____. 2014c. State of the Art Compendium Report on Resource Recovery from Water. IWA Resource Recovery Cluster.
London, IWA Publishing. http://www.iwa-network.org/downloads/1440858039-web%20State%20of%20the%20Art%20
Compendium%20Report%20on%20Resource%20Recovery%20from%20Water%202105%20.pdf
_____. 2015. Lisbon Charter: Guiding the Public Policy and Regulation of Drinking Water Supply, Sanitation and Wastewater
Management Services. London, IWA. http://www.iwa-network.org/downloads/1428787191-Lisbon_Regulators_Charter.pdf
_____. Forthcoming. The Manual on the Human Rights to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation for Water and Sanitation
Practitioners. London, IWA Publishing.

j

_____. n.d. IWA website. Women Professionals in Urban Water. http://www.iwa-network.org/project/women-professionals-inurban-water
Jiménez Cisneros, B. E. 2001. La contaminación ambiental in México: Causas, efectos y tecnología apropiada [Environmental
Pollution: Causes, effects and appropriate technology]. México, Limusa/Colegio de Ingenieros Ambientales de México A.C/
Instituto de Ingeniería de la UNAM y FEMISCA. (In Spanish.)
Jiménez Cisneros, B. E. and Asano T. (eds). 2008a. Water Reuse: An International Survey of Current Practice, Issues and Needs.
Scientific and Technical Report No. 20. London, IWA Publishing.
_____. 2008b. Water Reclamation and Re-use around the World. B. E. Jiménez Cisneros and T. Asano (eds), Water Reuse: an
International Survey of Current Practice, Issues and Needs. London, IWA Publishing.
Jochem, E. S., Barker, T., Catenazzi, G., Eichhammer, W., Fleiter, T., Held, A., Helfrich, N., Jakob, M., Criqui, P., Mima, S., Quandt,
L., Peters, A., Ragwitz, M., Reiter, U., Reitze, F., Schelhaas, M., Scrieciu, S. and Turton, H. 2009. Adaptation and Mitigation
Strategies: Supporting European Climate Policy. Report of the Reference and 2°C Scenario for Europe. Project No. 018476GOCE, Deliverable D-M1.2 of the ADAM project . Karlsruhe, Germany, Fraunhofer Institute for Systems and Innovation
Research (ISI), 231 pp.
Jouravlev, A. 2004. Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Services on the Threshold of the XXI Century. Serie Recursos Naturales
e Infraestructura No. 74. United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). LC/L.2169-P.
Santiago, United Nations. http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/6454/S047591_en.pdf?sequence=1
_____. 2015. Cambios en las condiciones externas e internas y nuevos desafíos. International Seminar: Challenges of Integrated
Water Management in the XXI Century. Valparaiso, Chile, 23-24 March 2015. (In Spanish.)

k

JPMorgan. 2008. Watching Water: A Guide to Evaluating Corporate Risks in a Thirsty World. Global Equity Research. New York,
JPMorgan. http://pdf.wri.org/jpmorgan_watching_water.pdf
Katko T. 2013. Tap! Water Services Evolution and Social Import in Finland. Finnish Water Utilities Association.
Keraita, B., Jiménez Cisneros, B. E., and Drechsel, P. 2008. Extent and Implications of Agricultural Reuse of Untreated, Partly
Treated Diluted Wastewater in Developing Countries. Agriculture, Veterinary Science, Nutrition and Natural Resources, 3(58):
1-15.
Kimwaga, R., Nobert, J., Kongo, V. and Ngwisa, M. 2013. Meeting the Water and Sanitation MDGs: A Study of Human
Resource Development Requirements in Tanzania. Water Policy, 15(S2): 61–78.

136

WWDR 2016

Kingdom, B., Liemberger, R. and Marin, P. 2006. The Challenge of Reducing Non-revenue Water (NRW) in Developing Countries How the Private Sector can Help: A Look at Performance-based Service Contracting. Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Board
discussion paper series No. 8. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2006/12/7531078/
challenge-reducing-non-revenue-water-nrw-developing-countries-private-sector-can-help-look-performance-based-servicecontracting
KPMG. 2012. Water in China, Key Themes and Developments in the Water Sector. KPMG. http://www.kpmg.com/cn/en/
IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/Water-in-China-201202.pdf

l

Lant, C. 2004. Water Resources Sustainability: An Ecological Economics Perspective. Water Resources Update, 127:20-30.
LAS/UNESCWA/ACWUA (League of Arab States/United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia/Arab Countries
Water Utilities Association). 2015. MDG+ Initiative: First Report 2015. Amman. http://www.acwua.org/mdg-initiative
Lecina, S., Isidoro, D., Playán, E. and Aragüés, R. 2010. Irrigation Modernization and Water Conservation in Spain: The Case of
Riegos del Alto Aragón. Agricultural Water Management, 97(10): 1663-1675.
Lipton, M., Litchfield, J. and Faurès, J. M. 2003. The Effects of Irrigation on Poverty: A Framework for Analysis. Water Policy, 5 (5):
413–27.
Lloyd, R., Parr, B. Davies, B. and Cooke, C. 2010. Subjective Perceptions of Load Carriage on the Head and Back in Xhosa Women.
Applied Ergonomics, 41(4):522-529.
Losch, B., Freguin-Gresh, S. and White, E. T. 2012. Structural Transformation and Rural Change Revisited: Challenges for
Late Developing Countries in a Globalizing World. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/
abs/10.1596/978-0-8213-9512-7
Martín, L. and Justo, J. B. 2015. Análisis, prevención y resolución de conflictos por el agua en América Latina y el Caribe. Serie
Recurso Naturales e Infraestructura. United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC).
LC/L.3991. Santiago, United Nations. (In Spanish.) http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/37877/S1500220_es.pdf

m

McKinsey & Company. 2013. Gender Diversity in Top Management: Moving Corporate Culture, Moving Boundaries. Women
Matter 2013. Paris, McKinsey & Company. http://www.mckinsey.com/features/women_matter
McKinsey Global Institute. 2012. Africa at Work: Job Creation and Inclusive Growth. McKinsey & Company. http://www.mckinsey.
com/insights/africa/africa_at_work
Meda, A., Lensch, D., Schaum, C. and Cornel, P. 2012. Energy and Water: Relations and Recovery Potential. V. lazarova, K. H.
Choo and P. Cornel (eds), Water–energy Interactions of Water Reuse. London, IWA Publishing.
Ministry of Environment/Korea Environment Institute. 2009. Four Major River Restoration Project of Republic of Korea. Korea
Environmental Policy Bulletin (KEPB), 3 (2). Gwacheon-si/Seoul, Republic of Korea, Ministry of Environment/Korea Environment
Institute.
Morse, A., Kramber, W. J. and Allen, R. G. 2008. Cost Comparison for Monitoring Irrigation Water Use: Landsat Thermal Data
Versus Power Consumption Data. Proceedings of the 17th Pecora Symposium, Pecora 17: The Future of Land Imaging Going
Operational, 18-20 November 2008, Denver, Colorado, USA. http://www.asprs.org/a/publications/proceedings/pecora17/0025.
pdf
Morton, M., Klugman, J., Hanmer, L. and Singer, D. 2014. Gender at Work: a Companion to the World Development Report
on Jobs. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/02/19790446/gender-workcompanion-world-development-report-jobs
MPI (Migration Policy Institute). 2011. MPI website. Working Hard for the Money: Bangladesh Faces Challenges of Large-Scale
Labor Migration. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/working-hard-money-bangladesh-faces-challenges-large-scale-labormigration
Nestlé. n.d. Nestlé website. More Coffee with Less Water, Country: Vietnam. http://www.nestle.com/csv/case-studies/
AllCaseStudies/coffee-water-vietnam
ODI (Overseas Development Institute). n.d. Post2015.org website. Future Goals Tracker. http://post2015.org/about/
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2006. The Challenge of Capacity Development: Working
towards Good Practice. DAC Guidelines and Reference Series. Paris, OECD.
_____. 2007. Financing Water Supply and Sanitation in EECCA Countries and Progress in Achieving the Water-Related Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). OECD Papers, Vol. 7/3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/oecd_papers-v7-art8-en
_____. 2008. Cost of Inaction on Environmental Policy Challenges: Summary Report. Paris, OECD Publishing. http://www.oecd.org/
environment/ministerial/40501169.pdf
_____. 2011a. Benefits of Investing in Water and Sanitation: An OECD Perspective. Paris, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264100817-en
_____. 2011b. Water Governance in OECD Countries: A Multi-level Approach. OECD Studies on Water. Paris, OECD Publishing.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264119284-en
_____. 2012a. OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Paris, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264122246-en
_____. 2012b. Meeting the Water Reform Challenge. Executive Summary. OECD Studies on Water. Paris, OECD Publishing. http://
www.oecd.org/env/resources/49839058.pdf

References

137

n
o

_____. 2012c. Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences of Inaction. Key Findings on Water. Paris, OECD. http://
www.oecd.org/environment/indicators-modelling-outlooks/49844953.pdf

o

_____. n.d. OECD data. Employment. https://data.oecd.org/emp/employment-by-activity.htm
OHCHR (Office of the High Commissioner for the Human Rights). n.d. OHCHR website. What Are Human Rights? http://www.
ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/WhatareHumanRights.aspx
Okudzeto, E., Mariki, W. A., Senu, S. S. and Lal, R. 2015. African Economic Outlook: Ghana. African Development Bank
(AfDB)/Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)/United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/en/country-notes/west-africa/ghana/

p

Otoo, M. and Drechsel, P. 2015. Resource Recovery from Waste: Business Models for Energy, Nutrient and Water Reuse.
London, Earthscan.
Pacific Institute. 2013. Sustainable Water Jobs: A National Assessment of Water-related Green Job Opportunities. Oakland,
USA, Pacific Institute. http://pacinst.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/21/2014/05/sust_jobs_full_report.pdf
Pahl-Wostl, C., Jeffrey, P., Isendahl, N. and Brugnach, M. 2011. Maturing the New Water Management Paradigm: Progressing
from Aspiration to Practice. Water Resources Management, 25(3): 837-856.
Pangare, V. 2015. Guidelines on How to Collect Sex-disaggregated Water Data. Gender and Water Series. WWAP.
Paris, UNESCO. http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SC/pdf/Guidelines_on_how_to_collect_sex_
disaggregated_water_dat_01.pdf
Paris, T., Pede, V., Luis, J., Sharma, R., Singh, A., Stipular, J. and Villanueva, D. 2015. Understanding Men’s and Women’s
Access to and Control of Assets and the Implications for Agricultural Development Projects: A Case Study in Rice-farming
Households in Eastern Uttar Pradesh, India. Discussion Paper No. 1437. Washington, DC, International Food Policy Research
Institute (IFPRI)/International Rice Research Institute (IRRI). http://ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/129109
Pathak, H., Tewari, A. N., Sankhyan, S., Dubey, D. S., Mina, U., Singh, V. K., Jain, N. and Bathia, A. 2011. Direct-seeded Rice:
Potential, Performance and Problems – A Review. Current Advances in Agricultural Sciences, 3(2): 77-8.
Pearson, J. and McPhedran, K. 2012. A Literature Review of the Non-health Impacts of Sanitation. Waterlines, 27(1): 48-61.
Pfitzer, M. and Ramya, K. 2007. The Role of the Food & Beverages Sector in Expanding Economic Opportunities. Economic
Opportunity Series. Cambridge, USA, FSC Social Impact Advisors/The Fellow of Harvard College. http://www.fao.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/ivc/docs/UnileverandProjectNovella.pdf
Polak, P. 2003. Increasing the Productivity of the World’s Micro-farmers. Smallholder Irrigation Market Initiative. http://www.
siminet.org/images/pdfs/increasing-productivity-pp.pdf
Postel, S. 1999. Pillar of Sand: Can the Irrigation Miracle Last? New York, W. W. Norton & Company.

q
r

PUB (Singapore’s national water agency). n.d. PUB website. NEWater. http://www.pub.gov.sg/about/historyfuture/Pages/
NEWater.aspx
Quadir, M., Quillérou, E., Nangia, V., Murtaza, G., Singh, M., Thomas, R. J. P., Drechsel, P. and Noble, A. D. 2014. Economics
of Salt-induced Land Degradation and Restoration. Natural Resources Forum, 38(4): 282–295.
Rafei, L. and Tabary. M. E. 2014. Africa’s Urban Population Growth: Prospects and Projections. http://blogs.worldbank.org/
opendata/africa-s-urban-population-growth-trends-and-projections
Ramsar Convention Secretariat. 2010. Water Allocation and Management: Guidelines for the Allocation and Management of
Water for Maintaining the Ecological Functions of Wetlands. Ramsar Handbooks for the Wise Use of Wetlands 4th edition,
Vol. 10. Gland, Switzerland, Ramsar Convention Secretariat. http://www.ramsar.org/sites/default/files/documents/pdf/lib/
hbk4-10.pdf
Ratnam, V. and Tomoda, S. 2005. Practical Guide for Strengthening Social Dialogue in Public Service Reform. Geneva,
Switzerland, ILO.
Richards, A. and Waterbury, J. 2008. A Political Economy of the Middle East (3rd Edition). Boulder, USA, Westview Press.
Richey, A. S., Thomas, B. F., Lo, M., Reager, J. T., Famiglietti, J. S., Voss, K., Swenson, S. and Rodell, M. 2015. Quantifying
Renewable Groundwater Stress with GRACE. Water Resources Research, Accepted Article. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/2015WR017349/pdf
Rockström, J., Hatibu, N., Oweis, T. Y. and Wani, S. 2007. Managing Water in Rainfed Agriculture. CAWMA (Comprehensive
Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture), Water for Food Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Rodriguez, D. J., van den Berg, C. and McMahon, A. 2012. Investing in Water Infrastructure: Capital, Operations and
Maintenance. Water Papers. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://water.worldbank.org/sites/water.worldbank.org/files/
publication/water-investing-water-infrastructure-capital-operations-maintenance.pdf
Rogers, P. and Daines, S. 2014. A Safe Space for Humanity: The Nexus of Food, Water, Energy, and Climate. ADB Briefs No. 20.
Manila, Asian Development Bank (ADB). http://www.adb.org/publications/safe-space-humanity-nexus-food-water-energyand-climate
Rogers, P. and Hall, A. W. 2003. Effective Water Governance. TEC Background Paper No. 7. Stockholm, Global Water
Partnership (GWP). http://www.gwp.org/Global/ToolBox/Publications/Background%20papers/07%20Effective%20
Water%20Governance%20%282003%29%20English.pdf

138

WWDR 2016

Rutovitz, J., Dominish, E. and Downes, J. 2015. Chapter 7: Employment Projections – Methodology and Assumptions. S.
Teske, S. Sawyer and O. Schäfe, Energy [R]evolution, A Sustainable World Energy Outlook 2015. 5th Edition. Prepared for
Greenpeace International by the Institute for Sustainable Futures, University of Technology Sydney. Amsterdam/Brussels,
Greenpeace International /Global Wind Energy Council/SolarPower Europe. http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/
international/publications/climate/2015/Energy-Revolution-2015-Full.pdf
SABMiller. n.d.a. SABMiller website. Our Response. http://www.sabmiller.com/sustainability/shared-imperatives/water-resources/
our-response
_____. n.d.b. SABMiller website. Securing Shared Water Resources for our Business and Local Communities. http://www.
sabmiller.com/sustainability/shared-imperatives/water-resources
_____. n.d.c. SABMiller website. Our Impact in Africa.http://www.sabmiller.com/beer-blog/article/our-impact-in-africa
Sadoff, C. W., Hall, J. W., Grey, D., Aerts, J. C. J. H., Ait-Kadi, M., Brown, C., Cox, A., Dadson, S., Garrick, D., Kelman, J.,
McCornick, P., Ringler, C., Rosegrant, M., Whittington, D. and Wiberg, D. 2015. Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: Report
of the GWP/OECD Task Force on Water Security and Sustainable Growth. UK, University of Oxford. http://www.water.ox.ac.
uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/SCHOOL-OF-GEOGRAPHY-SECURING-WATER-SUSTAINING-GROWTH-DOWNLOADABLE.
pdf
Scheffran J., Brzoska M., Brauch H. G., Link, P. M. and Schilling J. (eds). 2012. Climate Change, Human Security and Violent
Conflict. Berlin/New York, Springer.
Scheierling, S. M., Treguer, D. O., Booker, J. F. and Decker, E. 2014. How to Assess Agricultural Water Productivity? Looking for
Water in the Agricultural Productivity and Efficiency Literature. Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS 6982. Washington,
DC, The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/07/19893942/assess-agricultural-water-productivitylooking-water-agricultural-productivity-efficiency-literature
Schewe, J., Heinke, J., Gerten, D., Haddeland, I., Arnell, N. W., Clarke, D. B., Dankers, R., Eisner, S., Fekete, B. M., ColónGonzález, F. J., Gosling, S. N., Kim, H., Liu, X., Masaki, Y., Portmannn, F. T., Satoh, Y., Stacke, T., Tang, Q., Wada, Y., Wisser,
D., Albrecht, T., Frieler, K., Piontek, F., Warszawskia, L. and Kabatt, P. 2014. Multi-model Assessment of Water Scarcity under
Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 111(9): 3245–3250.
Schwartz, J., Andres, L. and Dragoiu, G. 2009. Crisis in Latin America: Infrastructure Investment, Employment and
the Expectations of Stimulus. Washington, DC, The World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
handle/10986/4201/WPS5009.pdf?sequence=1
Seager, J. 2015. Sex-disaggregated Indicators for Water Assessment, Monitoring and Reporting. Technical Paper. Gender and
Water Series. WWAP. Paris, UNESCO. http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SC/pdf/Sex_disaggregated_
indicators_for_water_assessment_monito.pdf
Shiklomanov, I. A. 1997. Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater Resources of the World: Assessment of Water
Resources and Availability in the World. Geneva, World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
Siebert, S., Henrich, V., Frenken, K. and Burke, J. 2013. Update of the Digital Global Map of Irrigation Areas (GMIA) to Version
5. Rome/Bonn, Germany, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)/University of Bonn.
SIWI/WHO (Stockholm International Water Institute/Water Health Organization). 2005. Making Water a Part of Economic
Development: The Economic Benefits of Improved Water Management and Services. Stockholm, SIWI. http://www.who.int/
water_sanitation_health/waterandmacroecon.pdf
Snow, M. and Mutschler, D. 2012. Promoting Entry Career Pathways in the Drinking Water and Wastewater Sector. Lowell
Center for Sustainable Production/ University of Massachusetts Lowell/The Massachusetts Workforce Alliance. http://www.
skill-works.org/documents/DrinkingWaterandWastewaterReport_web_May2012.pdf
Solanes, M. 2007. Editorial remarks. Circular, No. 25, Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management
for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). Santiago, United Nations. http://www.cepal.org/drni/noticias/circulares/0/27520/
Carta25in.pdf
Solanes, M. and Jouravlev, A. 2006. Water Governance for Development and Sustainability. Serie Recursos Naturales e
Infraestructura No. 111. United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). LC/
L.2556-P. Santiago, United Nations. http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/6308/S0600441_en.pdf
Sorenson, S. B., Morssink, C. and Campos, P. A. 2011. Safe Access to Safe Water in Low Income Countries: Water Fetching in
Current Times. Social Science and Medicine, 72(9):1522-1526.
Speed, R., Li, Y., Le Quesne, T., Pegram, G. and Zhiwei, Z. 2013. Basin Water Allocation Planning. Principles, Procedures and
Approaches for Basin Allocation Planning. Paris, UNESCO. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002208/220875e.pdf
Statistics Norway. 2015. Municipal Water Supply, 2014. https://www.ssb.no/en/natur-og-miljo/statistikker/vann_kostra
Stedman, L. 2014. Sanitation Safety Plans: An Emerging Framework for Improved Wastewater Management. Water 21, 14
December 2014, pp.12-14. http://www.iwa.sk/INFORMACIE_IWA/W21/Water21_December2014_sample.pdf
Stevenson, E. G. J., Greene, L. E., Maes, K. C., Ambelu, A., Tesfaye, Y. A., Rheingans, R. and Hadley, C. 2012. Water Insecurity
in 3 Dimensions: An Anthropological Perspective on Water and Women’s Psychosocial Distress in Ethiopia. Social Science and
Medicine, 75 (2):392-400.
Stiftung, A. and Beys, K. 2005. Ressourcenproduktivität als Chance. Ein Langfristiges Konjunkturprogramm für Deutschland.
Aaachen, Aachener Stiftung Kathy Beys. http://www.aachener-stiftung.de/downloads/buch_final.pdf

References

139

s

SWIM-SM (Sustainable Water Integrated Management: Support Mechanism). 2014. EU-funded Project Assists Lebanese
Decision-Makers in Prioritizing Investments to Reduce the Degradation of the Litani River Basin. Press Note, 5 September
2014. http://www.swim-sm.eu/files/COED_LEBANON_PRESS_NOTE_EN.pdf

t

Sy, J., Warner, R. and Jamieson, J. 2014. Tapping the Market: Opportunities for Domestic Investments in Water and Sanitation
for the Poor. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://hdl.handle.net/10986/16538
Teske, S., Sawyer, S. and Schäfe, O. 2015. Energy [R]evolution a Sustainable World Energy Outlook 2015. 5th Edition.
Amsterdam/Brussels, Greenpeace International /Global Wind Energy Council/SolarPower Europe. http://www.greenpeace.org/
international/Global/international/publications/climate/2015/Energy-Revolution-2015-Full.pdf
Thames London. 2014. Corporate Responsibility and Sustainability Report 2013/14. http://www.thameswater.co.uk/cr
The Africa Report. 2015. Electricity: Ghana’s power crisis deepens. http://www.theafricareport.com/West-Africa/electricityghanas-power-crisis-deepens.html
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. 2014. National Resilience Plan 2014-2016: Proposed Priority Responses to Mitigate the
Impact of the Syrian Crisis on Jordan and Jordanian Host Communities. Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation,
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. http://inform.gov.jo/en-us/By-Date/Report-Details/ArticleId/26/2014-2016-NationalResilience-Plan

u

Tushaar, S., Burke, J., Villholth, K., Angelica, M., Custodio, E., Daibes, F., Hoogesteger, J., Giordano, M., Girman, J. Van der
Gun, K., Kendy, E., Kijne, J., Llamas, R., Masiyandama, M., Margat, J., Marin, L., Peck, J., Rozelle, S., Sharma, B., Vincent,
L. and Wang, J. 2007. Groundwater: A Global Assessment of Scale and Significance. CAWMA, Water for Food, Water for
Life: A Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water
Management Institute (IWMI).
UN (United Nations). 1948. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights. United Nations. http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/
_____. 2003. Substantive Issues Arising in the Implementation of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights. General Comment No. 15 (2002). The right to water (arts. 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights). E/C.12/2002/11. UN. http://www2.ohchr.org/english/issues/water/docs/CESCR_GC_15.pdf
_____. 2004. Relationship Between the Enjoyment of Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Promotion of the Realization
of the Right to Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation. Final Report of the Special Rapporteur, El Hadji Guissé. E/CN.4/
Sub.2/2004/20. UN. http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G04/152/26/PDF/G0415226.pdf?OpenElement
_____. 2005. Realization of the Right to Drinking Water and Sanitation. Report of the Special Rapporteur, El HadjiGuissé. E/
CN.4/Sub.2/2005/25. UN.
_____. n.d. MY World 2015 Global Survey. http://data.myworld2015.org/
UN DESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2001. World Population Prospects, The 2000 Revision:
Highlights. New York, Population Division, UN DESA. http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/wpp2000/highlights.pdf
_____. 2008. International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities Revision 4. Statistical Papers Series M. No.
4. New York, United Nations.
_____. 2011. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2011 Revision. New York, United Nations. http://www.un.org/en/development/
desa/population/publications/pdf/urbanization/WUP2011_Report.pdf
_____. 2015. 2015 Revision of World Population Prospects: Key Findings and Advanced Tables. Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP.
241. New York, Population Division, UN DESA. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/Key_Findings_WPP_2015.pdf
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2006. Human Development Report 2006: Beyond Scarcity: Power, Poverty
and the Global Water Crisis. New York, UNDP. http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/reports/267/hdr06-complete.pdf
_____. 2014. Blame It on the Rain?: Gender Differentiated Impacts of Drought on Agricultural Wage and Work in India.
Discussion Paper Series No. 1. Bangkok, UNDP.
UNDP WGF (United Nations Development Programme Water Governance Facility). 2014. Regional Capacity Building
Programme, Promoting and Developing Water Integrity in Sub-Saharan Africa – Interim Programme Report. UNDP.
UNECA/AU/AfDB (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa/African Union/African Development Bank). 2000. African
Water Vision for 2025: Equitable and Sustainable Use of Water for Socieconomic Development. Addis Ababa, UNECA.
UNECE (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe). 2009. Financing Energy Efficiency Investments for Climate Change
Mitigation Project: Investor Interest and Capacity Building Needs. New York/Geneva, United Nations. http://www.unece.org/
fileadmin/DAM/energy/se/pdfs/eneff/eneff_pub/InvestorInt_CapBuilNeeds_ese32_e.pdf
_____. 2011. Second Assessment of Transboundary Rivers, Lakes and Groundwaters. New York/Geneva, United Nations. http://
www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/assessment/English/ECE_Second_Assessment_En.pdf
_____. 2013. Inventory of Most Important Bottlenecks and Missing Links in the E Waterway Network. New York/Geneva, United
Nations. http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/trans/doc/2013/sc3wp3/ECE-TRANS-SC3-159-Rev1e.pdf
_____. 2014a. Access to Energy Services in the ECE Region. ECE/ENERGY/GE.7/2014/INF.2, Discussion Paper No.2. http://www.
unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/energy/se/pdfs/gere/gere1_18.11.2014/ECE_ENERGY_GE.7_2014_INF.2.pdf
_____. 2014b. A Framework for Developing Best Practice Guidelines to Accelerate Renewable Energy Uptake. ECE/ENERGY/
GE.7/2014/INF.3, Discussion Paper No.3. http://www.unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/energy/se/pdfs/gere/gere1_18.11.2014/ECE_
ENERGY_GE.7_2014_INF.3_Revised.pdf

140

WWDR 2016

UNECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and Caribbean). 1987. The Water Resources of Latin America and the
Caribbean: Water-related Natural Hazard. LC/L.415/Rev.1. Santiago, United Nations. http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/
handle/11362/35826/S8700060_en.pdf
_____. 2014a. Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2014: Challenges to Sustainable Growth in a New External
Context. Briefing paper. Santiago, United Nations. http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/11362/37033/1/S1420391_en.pdf
_____. 2014b. The Economics of Climate Change in Latin America and the Caribbean: Paradoxes and Challenges of Sustainable
Development. LC/G.2624. Santiago, United Nations. http://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/37311/S1420655_
en.pdf
_____. 2014c. Compacts for Equality: Towards a Sustainable Future. LC/G.2586(SES.35/3). Santiago, United Nations. http://
repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/11362/36693/1/LCG2586SES353e_en.pdf
UN-EMG (United Nations Environment Management Group). 2011. Working towards a Balanced and Inclusive Green Economy: A
United Nations System-wide Perspective. Geneva, Switzerland, United Nations.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2010. Clearing the Waters: A focus on Water Quality Solutions. Nairobi, UNEP.
http://www.unep.org/PDF/Clearing_the_Waters.pdf
_____. 2011a. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP. www.
unep.org/greeneconomy
_____. 2011b. The Greening of Water Law: Managing Freshwater Resources for People and the Environment. Nairobi, UNEP. http://
www.unep.org/delc/Portals/119/UNEP_Greening_water_law.pdf
_____. 2011c. Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication: A Synthesis for Policy
Makers. Geneva, Switzerland, UNEP. www.unep.org/greeneconomy
_____. 2011d. Water: Investing in Natural Capital. UNEP, Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and
Poverty Eradication. Nairobi, UNEP.
_____. 2011e. Decoupling Natural Resource Use and Environmental Impacts from Economic Growth: A Report of the Working
Group on Decoupling to the International Resource Panel. Fischer-Kowalski, M., Swilling, M., von Weizsäcker, E. U., Ren, Y.,
Moriguchi, Y., Crane, W., Krausmann, F., Eisenmenger, N., Giljum, S., Hennicke, P., Romero Lankao, P., Siriban Manalang, A. and
Sewerin, S. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/resourcepanel/decoupling/files/pdf/Decoupling_Report_English.pdf
_____. 2012a. Measuring water use in a green economy: A Report of the Working Group on Water Efficiency to the International
Resource Panel. McGlade, J., Werner, B., Young, M., Matlock, M., Jefferies, D., Sonnemann, G., Aldaya, M., Pfister, S., Berger, M.,
Farell, C., Hyde, K., Wackernagel, M., Hoekstra, A., Mathews, R., Liu, J., Ercin, E., Weber, J. L., Alfieri, A., Martinez-Lagunes, R.,
Edens, B., Schulte, P., von Wirén-Lehr, S. and Gee, D. Nairobi, UNEP.
_____. 2012b. Greening Economy. Briefing Paper: Finance. Geneva, Switzerland, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy/
Portals/88/documents/GE_FINANCE%202juin.pdf
_____. 2012c. Sustainable, Resource Efficient Cities – Making it Happen! Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/urban_environment/
PDFs/SustainableResourceEfficientCities.pdf
_____. 2012d. Employment Briefing Paper. Geneva, Switzerland, UNEP. http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy/Portals/88/
EMPLOYMENT.pdf
_____. 2015. Building Inclusive Green Economies in Africa: Experience and Lessons Learned, 2010-2015. Nairobi, UNEP
_____. Forthcoming. World Water Quality Assessment Pre-study.
_____. n.d. Water: In the Transition to a Green Economy. A UNEP Brief. www.unep.org/greeneconomy
UNEP/Grid-Arendal. n.d. Green Jobs in the Future. http://www.grida.no/graphicslib/detail/green-jobs-in-the-future_12d2
UNEP/ILO/IOE/ITUC (United Nations Environment Programme/International Labour Organization/ International Organisation of
Employers/International Trade Union Confederation). 2008. Green Jobs: Towards Decent Work in a Sustainable, Low-Carbon
World. Nairobi, UNEP. http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_098504.
pdf
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2010. Water Security – Good Governance
and Sustainable Solutions. Speech presented at the Asia-Pacific Water Ministers’ Forum, Singapore, 28 Jun 2010. http://www.
unescap.org/speeches/water-security-good-governance-and-sustainable-solutions
_____. 2011. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific 2011. Bangkok, United Nations. http://www.unescap.org/stat/data/
syb2011/escap-syb2011.pdf
_____. 2012. Low Carbon Green Growth Roadmap for Asia and the Pacific: Turning Resource Constraints and the Climate Crisis into
Economic Growth Opportunities. Bangkok, United Nations. http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/Full-report.pdf
_____. 2014a. Statistical Yearbook for Asia and the Pacific 2014. Bangkok, United Nations. http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/
files/ESCAP-SYB2014.pdf
_____. 2014b. Disasters in Asia and the Pacific: 2014 Year in Review. Bangkok, United Nations. http://www.unescap.org/sites/
default/files/Year%20In%20Review_Final_FullVersion.pdf
_____. n.d. UNESCAP website. National Workshop on Eco-Efficiency Water Infrastructure for Sustainable Urban Development in
Nepal, 15-16 October 2014, Kathmandu City, Nepal. http://www.unescap.org/events/national-workshop-eco-efficient-waterinfrastructure-sustainable-urban-development-nepal-15

References

141

UNESCAP/UN-Habitat/AIT (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific/United Nations Human
Settlements Programme/Asian Institute of Technology). 2015. Policy Guidance Manual on Wastewater Management with a
Special Emphasis on Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems (DEWATS). UN/AIT. http://www.unescap.org/resources/
policy-guidance-manual-wastewater-management
UNESCO-UNEVOC (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization - International Centre for Technical and
Vocational Education and Training). 2012 Skills Challenges in the Water and Wastewater Industry: Contemporary Issues and
Practical Approaches in TVET. Bonn, Germany, UNESCO-UNEVOC.
UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia). 2007. Guidelines with Regard to Developing
Legislative and Institutional Frameworks Needed to Implement IWRM at the National Level in the ESCWA Region. Beirut,
United Nations. http://www.escwa.un.org/divisions/events/18mar07en_guidelines%20on%20reform%20for%20IWRM.pdf
_____. 2013a. Population and Development Report Issue No.6: Development Policy Implications of Age-Structural Transitions
in Arab Countries. E/ESCWA/SDD/2013/2. New York, United Nations. http://www.escwa.un.org/information/pubaction.
asp?PubID=1504
_____. 2013b. ESCWA Water Development Report 5: Issues in Sustainable Water Resources Management and Water Services.
E/ESCWA/SDPD/2013/4. New York, United Nations. http://www.escwa.un.org/information/pubaction.asp?PubID=1506
_____. 2015. Water Supply and Sanitation in the Arab Region: Looking beyond 2015. E/ESCWA/SDPD/2015/Booklet 1. Beirut,
United Nations.
UNGA (United Nations General Assembly). 1966. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. United
Nations. http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx
_____. 1979. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). United Nations.
_____. 1989. Convention on the Rights of the Child. United Nations.
_____. 2006. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. United Nations. http://www.un.org/disabilities/documents/
convention/convoptprot-e.pdf
_____. 2010a. Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Including
the Right to Development. Report of the independent expert on the issue of human rights obligations related to access to
safe drinking water and sanitation, Catarina de Albuquerque. A/HRC/15/31. United Nations.
_____. 2010b. Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, Civil Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Including the
Right to Development. Human Rights Council. Fifteenth session. Agenda item 3. A/HRC/15/L.14. United Nations.
_____. 2010c. Human Rights and Access to Safe Drinking Water and Sanitation. Resolution adopted by the Human Rights
Council. A/HRC/RES/15/9.
_____. 2014a. Outcome Document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the General Assembly Known as the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples. A/RES/69/2. United Nations. http://www.un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/
RES/69/2&referer=/english/&Lang=E
_____. 2014b. Promotion and Protection of All Human Rights, Civil, Political, Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, Including
the Right to Development. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation,
Catarina de Albuquerque. Common violations of the human rights to water and sanitation. Twenty-seventh session. Agenda
item 3. A/HRC/27/55. United Nations.
_____. 2015. Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. Transforming Our World: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/70 /L.1. Seventieth Session, Agenda item 15 and 16. United Nations. http://www.
un.org/en/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1
UN-Habitat (United Nations Human Settlements Programme). 2012. The State of Arab Cities: Challenges of Urban Transition,
Nairobi, UN-Habitat.
UN-Habitat/UNESCAP (United Nations Human Settlements Programme/United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific). 2014. Pro-poor Urban Climate Resilience in Asia and the Pacific. Nairobi/Bangkok, UN-Habitat/
UNESCAP. http://www.unescap.org/sites/default/files/Quick%20Guide%20for%20Policy%20Makers.pdf
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). n.d. UNICEF website. Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH). http://www.unicef.org/
media/media_45481.html
UNICEF/WHO (United Nations Children’s Fund/World Health Organization). 2008. Progress on Drinking Water and
Sanitation: Special Focus on Sanitation. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/WHO. http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/
resources/1251794333-JMP_08_en.pdf
_____. 2012. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2012 Update. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/WHO. http://www.unicef.
org/media/files/JMPreport2012.pdf
_____. 2014. Progress on Drinking Water and Sanitation: 2014 Update. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/WHO. http://www.wssinfo.
org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP_report_2014_webEng.pdf
_____. 2015. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment. New York/Geneva, UNICEF/
WHO. http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP-Update-report-2015_English.pdf
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2011. Rwanda: Energy Access for Rural Communities. Project
Fact Sheets. Vienna, UNIDO. http://www.unido.org/fileadmin/media/images/worldwide/Fact_sheets_new/RWA_EE_
minihydro_2011.pdf

142

WWDR 2016

_____. 2014. Inclusive and Sustainable Industrial Development: Creating Shared Prosperity - Safeguarding the Environment.
Vienna, UNIDO. http://www.unido.org/en/who-we-are/structure/directorgeneral/vision.html
_____.n.d. UNIDO website. INDSTAT4. https://stat.unido.org/
UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030.
Geneva, Switzerland, UNISDR.
United States Conference of Mayors. 2008a. U.S. Metro Economies: Current and Potential Green Jobs in the U.S. Economy.
Lexington, Mass., USA, Global Insight, Inc. http://www.usmayors.org/pressreleases/uploads/GreenJobsReport.pdf
_____. 2008b. Local Government Investment in Municipal Water and Sewer Infrastructure: Adding Water to the National
Economy. Washington, DC, The U.S. Conference of Mayors. http://www.usmayors.org/urbanwater/documents/
LocalGovt%20InvtInMunicipalWaterandSewerInfrastructure.pdf
UN SC (United Nations Security Council). 1999. Resolution No. 1244. Adopted by the Security Council at its 4011th meeting.
http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N99/172/89/PDF/N9917289.pdf?OpenElement
UNSD (United Nations Sustainable Development). 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3 to 14 June 1992. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/
Agenda21.pdf
______. n.d. UNSD website. Millennium Development Goals Indicators. The official United Nations site for the MDG Indicators.
http://unstats.un.org/unsd/mdg/Metadata.aspx?IndicatorId=0&SeriesId=768
UN-Water. 2011. UN-Water, Chapter 3: Thematic Conference Paper .Conference Book from the UN-Water Conference: Water
in the Green Economy in Practice: Towards Rio+20. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/green_economy_2011/pdf/
watergreenconf_chap3_conference_papers.pdf
_____. 2014. A Post-2015 Global Goal for Water: Synthesis of Key Findings and Recommendations from UN-Water.
_____. 2015. Means of Implementation: A Focus on Sustainable Development Goals 6 and 17. http://www.unwater.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/unwater_new/docs/MoI%20Executive%20Summary_15%20July%202015.pdf
UNW-DPAC (UN-Water Decade Programme on Advocacy and Communication). 2011. A Water Toolbox or Best Practice Guide
of Actions: A Contribution from the UN-Water Conference on “Water in the Green Economy in Practice: Towards Rio+20”.
Zaragoza, Spain, UNW-DPAC. http://www.un.org/waterforlifedecade/green_economy_2011/pdf/water_toolbox_for_rio+20.
pdf
_____. 2012. The Contribution of Water Technology to Job Creation and Development of Enterprises. UNW DPC Publication
Series, Knowledge No. 8. Bonn, Germany, UNW-DPC. http://www.unwater.unu.edu/file/get/539
UN Women. 2015. Progress of the World’s Women 2015-2016: Transforming Economies, Realizing Rights. New York, UN
Women. http://progress.unwomen.org/en/2015/pdf/UNW_progressreport.pdf
USAID-SUWASA (United States Agency for International Development-Sustainable Water and Sanitation in Africa). n.d. USAIDSUWASA website. Support for Sustainable Private Water Operators in Matola and Maputo. http://usaid-suwasa.org/index.
php/projects-and-activities/mozambique
US Bureau of Labor Statistics. n.d. Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2014-15 Edition, Water and Wastewater Treatment Plant
and System Operators. http://www.bls.gov/ooh/production/water-and-wastewater-treatment-plant-and-system-operators.
htm

v

Valodia, I. and Devey, R. 2005. Gender, Poverty, Employment and Time Use: Some Issues in South Africa. Durban, South Africa,
University of KwaZulu-Natal.
van Koppen, B. 2002. A Gender Performance Indicator for Irrigation: Concepts, Tools, and Applications. Research Report
59. Colombo, Sri Lanka, International Water Management Institute (IWMI). http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/IWMI_
Research_Reports/PDF/pub059/Report59.pdf
Veolia and IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2015. The Murky Future of Global Water Quality. A White
Paper by Veolia & IFPRI. https://www.veolianorthamerica.com/sites/g/files/dvc596/f/assets/documents/2015/04/IFPRI_Veolia_
H2OQual_WP.pdf
ViaWater. n.d. ViaWater website. https://www.viawater.nl/

w

Vince, G. 2010. Out of the Mist. Science, 330(6005): 750–751.
Water World. n.d. Water World website. Nutrient Recovery Technology Transforms World’s Largest Wastewater Treatment
Plant. http://www.waterworld.com/articles/print/volume-31/issue-2/features/nutrient-recovery-technology-transforms-worlds-largest-wastewater-treatment-plant.html
WaterAid. n.d. WaterAid website. Gender Aspects of Water and Sanitation. Additional Resources. London, WaterAid. http://
www.wateraid.org/uk/google-search?query=gender-aspects-water-sanitation&refinement=publications
WaterTap (Water Technology Acceleration Project). n.d. WaterTap website. http://www.watertapontario.com/
WAW (World Agriculture Watch). 2014. Implementation of WAW International Typology: Synthesis Report of Seven
National Case Studies (Argentina, Brazil, France, Madagascar, Malawi, Nicaragua, Vietnam). Rome, WAW. http://www.
worldagricultureswatch.org/sites/default/files/documents/synthesis_typology_report.pdf
Wehn, U. and Alaerts, G. 2013. Leadership in Knowledge and Capacity Development in the Water Sector: A Status Review.
Water Policy, 15:1–14.

References

143

Wehn, U. and Evers, J. 2015. The Social Innovation Potential of ICT-enabled Citizen Observatories to Increase eParticipation in
Local Flood Risk Management. Technology in Society, 42:187-198.
Wehn, U. and Montalvo, C. 2015. Exploring the Dynamics of Water Innovation. Journal of Cleaner Production, 87:3-6.
WeSenseIt. n.d. WeSenseIt website. http://wesenseit.eu/
WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic Development.
Report of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. Geneva, Switzerland. WHO. http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/42435/1/924154550X.pdf
_____. 2006. Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater. Volume 1-4. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO.
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/wastewater/gsuww/en/
_____. 2012. Global Costs and Benefits of Drinking-water Supply and Sanitation Interventions to Reach the MDG Target and
Universal Coverage. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/2012/globalcosts.
pdf
_____. 2014. Investing in Water and Sanitation: Increasing Access, Reducing Inequalities. Global Analysis and Assessment of
Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS) Report. Geneva, Switzerland, WHO. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/
glaas/2014
World Bank. 2005. World Development Report 2006: Equity and Development. Washington, DC, The World Bank.
_____. 2007a. Making the Most of Scarcity: Accountability for Better Water Management Results in the Middle East
and North Africa. Mena Development Report. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
INTMNAREGTOPWATRES/Resources/Making_the_Most_of_Scarcity.pdf
_____. 2007b. World Development Report 2008: Agriculture for Development. Washington, DC, The World Bank. https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5990
_____. 2010. Public-private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries. Water
P-Notes No. 41. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2010/04/12550676/publicprivate-partnerships-urban-water-utilities-review-experiences-developing-countries
_____. 2011. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://
siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2012/Resources/7778105-1299699968583/7786210-1315936222006/CompleteReport.pdf
_____. 2012. Hidden Harvest: The Global Contribution of Capture Fisheries. Washington, DC, The World Bank. http://
documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/05/16275095/hidden-harvest-global-contribution-capture-fisheries
_____. 2015. Water Sector Regulation. http://ppp.worldbank.org/public-private-partnership/sector/water-sanitation/lawsregulations
_____. n.d.a. The World Bank website. Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA). www.worldbank.org/en/
programs/cooperation-in-international-waters-in-africa
_____. n.d.b. World Development Indicators. http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators
WSP (Water and Sanitation Program). 2012. Economic Assessment of Sanitation Interventions in Vietnam: A Six-country Study
Conducted in Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Lao PDR, the Philippines and Vietnam under the Economics of Sanitation Initiative
(ESI). Water and Sanitation Program Technical Paper. Jakarta, WSP. https://www.wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSPESI-assessment-Vietnam.pdf
WSSD (World Summit on Sustainable Development). 2002. Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development. Adopted at WSSD, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August-4 September 2002. http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/
documents/WSSD_POI_PD/English/WSSD_PlanImpl
Wutich, A. 2009. Intrahousehold Disparities in Women and Men’s Experiences of Water Insecurity and Emotional Distress in
Urban Bolivia. Medical Anthropology Quarterly, 23(4): 436-454.
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2009. The United Nations World Water Development Report 3:
Water in a Changing World. London/Paris, Earthscan/UNESCO. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001819/181993e.pdf
_____. 2012. The United Nations World Water Development Report 4: Managing Water under Uncertainty and Risk. Paris,
UNESCO. http://www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/wwdr/wwdr4-2012/
_____. 2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014: Water and Energy. Paris, UNESCO. http://unesdoc.
unesco.org/images/0022/002257/225741E.pdf
_____. 2015. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2015: Water and Sustainable World. Paris, UNESCO. http://
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002318/231823E.pdf
WWAP Working Group on Sex-Disaggregated Indicators. 2015. Questionnaire for Collecting Sex-disaggregated Water
Data. Gender and Water Series. WWAP. Paris, UNESCO. http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/SC/pdf/
Questionnaire_for_collecting_sex_disaggregated_water_dat.pdf
WWC/OECD (World Water Council/Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2014. High Level Panel on
Financing Infrastructure for a Water-Secure World. Briefing Note & Issues Paper. Paris, OECD.
_____. 2015. Water: Fit to Finance? Catalyzing National Growth through Investment in Water Security. Report of the High Level
Panel on Financing Infrastructure for a Water-secure World. Marseille, France, WWC. http://www.worldwatercouncil.org/
fileadmin/world_water_council/documents/publications/forum_documents/WWC_OECD_Water-fit-to-finance_Report.pdf

144

WWDR 2016

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
2030 WRG

2030 Water Resources Group

MDG

Millennium Development Goal

AfDB

African Development Bank

MW

Megawatt

ADB

Asian Development Bank

NGO

Non-governmental organization

AU

African Union

NRW

Non-revenue water

BAU

Business-as-usual

OECD

BOD

Biochemical oxygen demand

Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development

CAWMA

Comprehensive assessment of water
management in agriculture

PES

Payment for ecosystem services

PPP

Public-private partnership

CDP

Carbon disclosure project

PV

Photovoltaic

DEWATS

Decentralized wastewater treatment systems

R&D

Research and development

DSR

Direct-seeded rice

SAM

Social Accounting Matrix

EC

European Commission

SDG

Sustainable Development Goal

EIP Water

European Innovation Partnership on Water

SMEs

Small and medium-sized enterprises

ERSAR

Water and Waste Services Regulation Authority

UN

United Nations

EU

European Union

UNDESA

EWR

Environmental water requirements

United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs

FAO

Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNECA

United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

FPA

Fonctionares privados do agua

UNECE

United Nations Economic Commission for Europe

GDP

Gross domestic product

UNECLAC

GLAAS

Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water

United Nations Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean

UNEP

United Nations Environment Programme

GRACE

NASA’s Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment

UNESCAP

ICT

Information and communication technology

United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Asia and the Pacific

IEA

International Energy Agency

UNESCO

United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

IFAD

International Fund for Agricultural Development

UNESCWA

IFPRI

International Food Policy Research Institute

United Nations Economic and Social Commission
for Western Asia

IPPC

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

UNGA

United Nations General Assembly

ILO

International Labour Organization

UN-Habitat

United Nations Human Settlements Programme

I-O

Input-output

UNIDO

United Nations Industrial Development Organization

IOM

International Organization for Migration

UNISDR

United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction

IRENA

International Renewable Energy Agency

WASH

Water, sanitation and hygiene

IWA

International Water Association

WaterTAP

Water Technology Acceleration Project

IWMI

International Water Management Institute

WBCSD

World Business Council for Sustainable Development

IWRM

Integrated water resource management

WFP

United Nations World Food Programme

JMP

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme
for Water Supply and Sanitation

WHO

World Health Organization

WOP

Water operation partnership

LDC

Least developed countries

WWAP

World Water Assessment Programme

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYSM

145

BOXES, FIGURES and TABLES
Boxes
Box 2.1

Water stress, migration and employment

29

Box 3.1

Rural mini-hydro – Clean energy providing jobs

46

Box 3.2

Conserving water and multiplying jobs in Africa

48

Box 3.3

Evolution of water abstractions, value added, employment and environmental costs in waterintensive industries in Sweden’s river basin districts, 2000–2005

49

Box 5.1

Human rights-based approach

57

Box 5.2

Examples of new professions in the water sector

58

Box 5.3

Sustainable Development Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all

59

Box 5.4

Water-related Sustainable Development Goals

60

Box 5.5

Sustainable Development Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic
growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all

60

Box 5.6

Water fetching: Economic and health impacts of women’s unpaid water work

62

Box 5.7

Where there is a will, there is a way

63

Box 5.8

Women water entrepreneurs in Ghana

64

Box 5.9

Green technology can displace women’s manual labour in agriculture

64

Box 6.1

Impact of low water levels of the Volta River on Ghana’s economic growth

71

Box 8.1

Decentralized wastewater treatment systems

78

Box 8.2

Eco-efficient water infrastructure in the Philippines

78

Box 8.3

‘Soft’ interventions in Viet Nam

79

Box 9.1

Green jobs in France

82

Box 10.1

Impacts of water supply and sanitation on economic development and employment

87

Box 11.1

Direct employment generated by infrastructure projects

90

Box 12.1

Training approaches by private operators

94

Box 12.2

A promising approach: Water operators’ partnerships

95

Box 12.3

New themes for capacity development

96

Box 12.4

Cap-Net: Networks for capacity development

98

Box 12.5

Uganda’s National Strategy for Water and Environment Sector Capacity Development

98

Box 13.1

Social dialogue in the Maynilad Water District, Philippines

105

Box 13.2

Business evidence ‘doing more with less’

105

Box 13.3

Nestlé Viet Nam's Farmer Connect Programme

106

Box 14.1

Managing menstruation in factories

109

Box 14.2

Philippines volunteering schemes

111

Box 14.3

Small-scale private operators – Fonctionares Privados do Agua (FPA) in Mozambique

111

Box 16.1

Accelerating water innovation – Case studies

118

Box 16.2

Benefits of information and communication technologies

120

Box 17.1

Difficulties and specificities of employment measures in the agriculture and food sectors

123

146

WWDR 2016

Figures
Figure 2.1

Total renewable water resources (cubic metres per capita per year), 2014

16

Figure 2.2

Percentage of renewable water resources withdrawn

17

Figure 2.3

Annual average water stress based on the withdrawals-to-availability ratio (1981-2010)

17

Figure 2.4

Index of frequency of shortages of water available for use on a month-to-month basis

18

Figure 2.5

Global physical and economic water scarcity

19

Figure 2.6

GRACE -derived groundwater storage anomalies in millimetres per year (as averaged over the
2003-2013 base period)

20

Water quality risk indices for major river basins during base period (2000-2005) compared to
2050 (N index under the CSIRO-medium scenario)

21

Figure 2.8

Global water demand (freshwater withdrawals): Baseline Scenario, 2000 and 2050

23

Figure 3.1

Direct, indirect, induced and growth-related jobs

31

Figure 3.2

Global employment trends, by sector and sex

34

Figure 3.3

Sub-Saharan employment trends, by sector and sex

34

Figure 3.4

East Asia employment trends, by sector and sex

36

Figure 3.5

Developed economies and EU employment trends, by sector and sex

36

Figure 3.6

The multiple interfaces between water and food security and nutrition

41

Figure 3.7

Schematic overview of risks associated with main agricultural production systems

42

Figure 3.8

Direct jobs in renewable energy

46

Figure 3.9

Water, direct jobs and electricity

47

Figure 6.1

GDP growth in Africa, and developing countries, 2007-2017

66

Figure 6.2

Population growth in Africa, 1950-2050

67

Figure 6.3

Indicative job distribution of various sectors in Africa (millions of jobs, 2010)

68

Figure 6.4

Job creation by water-dependent manufacturing industries in selected African countries (%)

70

Figure 8.1

Estimated core environmental-related jobs through green mapping studies in four South-East
Asian countries (2010-2012)

79

Figure 2.7

Figure 13.1

Kenya: average agricultural yield under Green Economy and BAU scenarios

103

Tables
Table 3.1

Employment by sector and sex, world and regions (millions)

33

Table 3.2

Employment by sector and sex, world and regions (%)

35

Table 3.3

Typology of rural households by livelihood strategies in three country types

40

Table 3.4

argeting water interventions to different types of farmers in Asia

44

Table 3.5

World employment and electricity generation between 2010 and 2030

46

Table 3.6

Effects of water scarcity in major industrial sectors

49

Table 6.1

Fisheries and aquaculture contribution to GDP in Africa by subsector

69

Table 6.2

Employment by subsector

69

Table 9.1

Selected trends by subregion that have resulted in changes in jobs in water management or
water services

81

Table 13.1

The impacts of potential agricultural water management interventions in productivity and employment 102

Table 13.2

Selected employment estimates in the recycling sector

106

BOXES, FIGURES AND TABLES

147

PHOTO CREDITS

Executive Summary
p. 1: © Alexander Mazurkevich/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 9
p. 80: © B. Brown/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 1
p. 9: © SergiyN/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 10
p. 84: © Matyas Rehak/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 2
p. 15: © iStock.com/wosabi
p. 25: © Lisa S./Shutterstock.com

Chapter 11
p. 88: © Tristan Tan/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 3
p. 30: © Iryna Rasko/Shutterstock.com
p. 38: © Milos Muller/Shutterstock.com
p. 45: © Vladimir Salman/Shutterstock.com
p. 47: © Avatar_023/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 4
p. 50: © Asian Development Bank flickr.com
CC BY NC ND 2.0
Chapter 5
p. 54: © UNICEF Ethiopia/2014/Ose flickr.com
CC BY NC ND 2.0
p.61: © Achmad Ibrahim/Center for International
Forestry Research (CIFOR) flickr.com
CC BY NC 2.0
Chapter 6
p. 65: © Anton_Ivanov/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 7
p. 72: © Paul Vinten/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 8
p. 76: © AusAID flickr.com
CC BY 2.0

148

WWDR 2016

Chapter 12
p. 92: © Tom Perry/World Bank flickr.com
CC BY NC ND 2.0
Chapter 13
p. 99: © Floki/Shutterstock.com
p. 104: © hxdyl/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 14
p. 107: © iStock.com/ezza116
Chapter 15
p. 112: © iStock.com/Mariusz Szczygiel
Chapter 16
p. 116: © Cylonphoto/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 17
p. 121: © Georgina Smith/International Center for
Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) flickr.com
CC BY NC SA 2.0
Chapter 18
p. 125: © Jean-Luc Flemal/European Parliament flickr.com
CC BY NC SA 2.0

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT
Report
The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

WATER
AND JOBS

UNDESA, UNECE,
UNECLAC, UNESCAP,
UNESCWA

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

ISBN 978-92-3-100146-8
© UNESCO 2016
166 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

ISBN 978-92-3-100080-5
© UNESCO 2015
Set of two reports
216 pages
Price: EUR 45.00
WWDR 2015 Full colour, with photographs, tables, figures,
maps, boxes, notes, references and abbreviations list as well as
Forewords by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova and UN-Water Chair
and WMO Secretary-General Michel Jarraud

WWDR 2016 Full colour, with photographs, tables, figures,
maps, boxes, notes, references and abbreviations list as well as
Forewords by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova and UN-Water Chair
and ILO Director-General Guy Ryder

Case Studies and Indicators Report Full colour, with
photographs, tables, figures, maps, boxes, notes, references
and abbreviations list
To purchase a printed copy of the book, please visit: http://publishing.unesco.org
To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications, please write to: wwap@unesco.org
To download the PDF and e-book (.epub format) formats of the report and associated publications, previous editions of WWDR and media
material, please visit: http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap
USB key content: WWDR 2016, Executive Summary in nine languages, Facts & Figures in five languages and previous editions of WWDR
CD-ROM 2015 content: WWDR 2015, Case Studies and Indicators Report, Executive Summary in 10 languages, Facts & Figures in four languages

ASSOCIATED PUBLICATIONS
Report

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016

WATER AND JOBS

WATER AND JOBS
Facts and Figures

Executive Summary

Executive Summary
of the WWDR 2015

Facts and Figures
from the WWDR 2015

Executive Summary
of the WWDR 2016

Facts and Figures
from the WWDR 2016

8 pages
Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German, Italian,
Korean, Portuguese, Russian
and Spanish

12 pages
Available in English, French,
Spanish and Italian

12 pages
Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, Italian, Hindi,
Portuguese, Russian
and Spanish

12 pages
Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

To download these documents, please visit: http://www.unesco.org/water/wwap

WWDR 2016

UN-WATER REPORTS

UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater-related issues, including sanitation.
It was formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UN-Water is comprised of UN
entities with a focus on, or interest in, water-related issues as Members and other non-UN international organizations as Partners.
The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating synergies
and joint efforts, so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. By doing so, UN-Water seeks to increase the
effectiveness of the support provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving international agreements on water.

PERIODIC REPORTS

World Water Development Report (WWDR)
is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater resource. The report
is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water Members and Partners and it represents
the coherent and integrated response of the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging
challenges. The report production coordinated by the World Water Assessment Programme and the
theme is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day (22 March). From 2003 to 2012, the WWDR
was released every three years and from 2014 the report is released annually to provide the most up to
date and factual information of how water-related challenges are addressed around the world.

UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water (GLAAS)
is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) on behalf of UN-Water. It provides a
global update on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements, human resource base,
and international and national finance streams in support of sanitation and drinking water. It
is a substantive input into the activities of Sanitation and Water for All (SWA).

The progress report of the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)
is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring of progress
towards access to safe drinking-water, and adequate sanitation and hygiene. Monitoring
draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually supported by national
statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria and increasingly draws on
national administrative and regulatory datasets.

Strategic outlook
State, uses and management of
water resources
Global
Regional assessments
Triennial (2003-2012)
Annual (from 2014)
Links to the theme of World
Water Day (22 March)

Strategic outlook
Water supply and sanitation
Global
Regional assessments
Biennial (since 2008)

Status and trends
Water supply and sanitation
Global
Regional and national
assessments
Biennial (1990-2012)
Annual updates (since 2013)

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2016
•
•
•
•

UN-Water Analytical Brief on Water Efficiency
UN-Water Analytical Brief on Water Quality Monitoring
UN-Water Analytical Brief on the Water and Sanitation Interlinkages across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
UN-Water Country Briefs

More information on UN-Water reports at: http://www.unwater.org/publications

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) is hosted and
TheUnited
UnitedWWAP
Nations
World
WaterAssessment
Assessment
Programme
(WWAP)isas
ishosted
hosted
and
Nations
World
Water
Programme
led byThe
UNESCO.
brings
together
the work of 31
UN-Water(WWAP)
Members
well and

ledby
byUNESCO.
UNESCO.
WWAP
bringstogether
together
thework
work
of31
31Development
UN-WaterMembers
Members
aswell
well
WWAP
of
UN-Water
as 38 led
Partners
to publish
the brings
United
Nations the
World
Water
Reportas
as 38
38
Partners to
to publish
publish the
the United
United Nations
Nations World
World Water
Water Development
Development Report
Report
as
Partners
(WWDR)
series.
(WWDR)series.
series.
(WWDR)

UN-Water
Members
and
Partners —
— all
all experts
experts inin their
their fields
fields —
— contribute
contribute with
with
Partners
latest UN-Water
findings
onMembers
a specificand
theme.
latestfindings
findingson
onaaspecific
specifictheme.
theme.
latest

This edition of the World Water Development Report focuses on ‘Water and Jobs’
Thisedition
edition
ofthe
the
WorldWater
WaterDevelopment
Development
Reportthe
focuses
on
‘Waterand
andJobs’
Jobs’
This
of
World
Report
focuses
on
‘Water
and seeks
to
inform
decision-makers,
inside and outside
water
community,

and seeks
seeks to
to inform
inform
decision-makers,
inside and
andthe
outside
the
water
community,
decision-makers,
outside
water
community,
about and
the
importance
of the
water and jobs inside
nexus
for
socialthe
and
economic
about the
the
importance
of the
the
water and
and jobs
jobs
nexus for
for
the
social
and economic
economic
about
of
water
nexus
the
social
and
development
andimportance
environmental
sustainability
of
countries,
rich
and
poor.

WATER AND JOBS

The annual World Water Development Reports focus on strategic water issues.
The annual
annual World
World
Water Development
Development
Reports
focus
on
strategic
water
issues.
The
Reports
water
UN-Water
Members
and Water
Partners
— all experts
in theirfocus
fieldson
—strategic
contribute
withissues.

developmentand
andenvironmental
environmentalsustainability
sustainabilityof
ofcountries,
countries,rich
richand
andpoor.
poor.
development

besubtitled
subtitled
‘Nowater
water
Nojobs’.
jobs’.
Indeed,
greatmajority
majority
ofjobs
jobs
aredependent
dependent
be
‘No
--No
Indeed,
great
of
are
upon water,
and therefore
increasingly
at risk
underaaconditions
of water
scarcity.
This
upon
water,
and
therefore
increasingly
at
risk
under
conditions
of
water
scarcity.
This
upon
water,
and
therefore
increasingly
at
risk
under
conditions
of
water
scarcity.
report also shows the importance for countries to have sufficient and an adequately This

report
alsoshows
shows
theimportance
importance
for
countries
tohave
havesufficient
sufficient
andan
anadequately
adequately
also
the
to
and
trainedreport
water-related
workforce
in orderfor
tocountries
seize development
opportunities
and
trained
water-related
workforce
in
order
to
seize
development
opportunities
and
trained
water-related
workforce
in
order
to
seize
development
opportunities
and
maximize benefits.
maximizebenefits.
benefits.
maximize

The first of its kind to address the multiple aspects of the water and jobs nexus, this
The
firstreveals
ofits
itskind
kind
to
address
themultiple
multiple
aspects
ofanalysis
thewater
water
and
jobs
nexus,this
this
first
of
address
the
aspects
of
the
nexus,
reportThe
further
theto
need
for additional
research
and
toand
gainjobs
a better

reportfurther
further
revealsthe
the
needfor
foradditional
additional
research
and
analysis
togain
gainto
better
report
need
research
and
analysis
to
aabetter
understanding
of thereveals
complex
interactions
between water,
jobs
and
development
understanding
ofthe
the
complex
interactions
betweenwater,
water,
jobsand
and
developmentto
to
understanding
of
complex
between
jobs
development
support
decision-making
pertaining
tointeractions
the sound management
of water,
employment

support
decision-making
pertaining
tothe
thesound
soundmanagement
management
ofwater,
water,employment
employment
to
policysupport
and
thedecision-making
achievement of pertaining
the
Sustainable
Development
Goals.of
policyand
andthe
theachievement
achievementof
ofthe
theSustainable
SustainableDevelopment
DevelopmentGoals.
Goals.
policy

WWAP

This publication is financed by
the Government
of Italy
Regione
Thispublication
publication
financed
by Umbria
This
isisand
financed
by
theGovernment
Governmentof
ofItaly
Italyand
andRegione
RegioneUmbria
Umbria
the

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2016

The importance of ‘water for jobs’ across economies is such that this report could
Theimportance
importance
of
'water
for
jobs'across
across
economies
issuch
such
thatdependent
thisreport
reportcould
could
The
‘water
for
jobs’
economies
this
be subtitled
‘No waterof
- No
jobs’.
Indeed,
a great
majority is
of
jobs that
are

WWDR 2016

9 789231 001468

9 789231 001468

