ater
ment
me

Report
The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

WWDR 2018
here we place

cover

water and
sanitation

water and
sanitation

Sustainable
Development
Goals

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Sustainable
Development
Goals

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

Published in 2018 by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO 2018
This report is published by UNESCO on behalf of UN-Water. The list of UN-Water Members and Partners can be
found on the following website www.unwater.org.
ISBN 978-92-3-100264-9

Suggested citation:
WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme)/UN-Water. 2018. The United Nations World Water
Development Report 2018: Nature-Based Solutions for Water. Paris, UNESCO.
This publication is available in Open Access under the Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO (CC-BY-SA 3.0 IGO) license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/igo/). By using the content of this publication, the users
accept to be bound by the terms of use of the UNESCO Open Access Repository (www.unesco.org/open-access/
termsuse-ccbysa-en).
The present license applies exclusively to the text content of the publication. For the use of any material not
clearly identified as belonging to UNESCO, prior permission shall be requested from: publication.copyright@
unesco.org or UNESCO Publishing, 7, Place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France.
The designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO concerning the legal status of any country,
territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
The ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors; they are not necessarily those
of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization. The contents were contributed by the UN-Water Members
and Partners listed on the title pages of the chapters therein. UNESCO and the United Nations World Water
Assessment Programme (WWAP) are not responsible for errors in the content provided or for discrepancies
in data and content between contributed chapters. WWAP provided the opportunity for individuals to be
listed as authors and contributors or to be acknowledged in this publication. WWAP is not responsible for any
omissions in this regard.
Original cover design by Phoenix Design Aid
Printed by UNESCO, Paris
This publication is printed in vegetable inks on FSC Mixed Sources paper, supporting responsible use of forest
reserves, 100% recycled, acid-free and chlorine-free.
Printed in France

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword											

iv

by Audrey Azoulay									
Director-General of UNESCO									

Foreword											

v

by Gilbert F. Houngbo										
Chair of UN-Water and President of the International Fund for Agricultural Development		

Preface												

vi

by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator							
and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief								

Acknowledgements										

viii

Executive Summary										

1

Prologue: The state of water resources in the context of nature-based solutions

9

i

Chapter 1 | Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water					
1.1

Introduction										22

1.2

Compatible concepts, tools, approaches and terminology				

1.3

How NBS work									25

1.4

Mounting attention to NBS								33

1.5

Assessing NBS in the context of this report						

36

Chapter 2 | NBS for managing water availability						

37

23

2.1

Introduction										38

2.2

Sector and issue-based case studies							40

2.3

The influence of moisture recycling on water availability				

47

2.4

Challenges to enabling NBS for water availability					

48

2.5

NBS, water availability and the SDGs							49

Chapter 3 | NBS for managing water quality						

ii

21

51

3.1

Water quality challenges, ecosystems and sustainable development			

52

3.2

NBS for sustaining or improving water quality						

53

3.3

Nature-based water quality monitoring – biological monitoring			

59

3.4

Co-benefits and limitations of NBS for water quality					

59

3.5

The potential for NBS to contribute to water quality-related SDGs			

61

Chapter 4 | NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change		

63

4.1

NBS in the context of water variability and change, and global sustainable
development agreements								64

4.2

Examples of NBS to moderate risks, variability and change				

4.3

Challenges to enabling NBS in the context of variability
and risk reduction									78

67

Chapter 5 | National and regional experiences with implementation			

79

5.1

Introduction										80

5.2

Implementing NBS at the basin scale							80

5.3

Implementing NBS within urban areas						87

5.4

Regional and national frameworks for NBS						

87

Chapter 6 | Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS						

95

6.1

Introduction										96

6.2

Leveraging financing									97

6.3

Enabling the regulatory and legal environment					

100

6.4

Enhancing intersectoral collaboration and harmonizing policies			

101

6.5

Improving the knowledge base							102

6.6

A common framework and criteria for assessing options				

Chapter 7 | Realizing the potential of NBS for water and sustainable develoment

105

107

7.1

Where are we now?									109

7.2

How much further can we go?								109

7.3

How do we get there?									110

7.4

Achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development through NBS for
water resources management							112

7.5

Coda											113

References											117
Abbreviations and acronyms								135
Boxes, figures and tables									137
Photo credits											139

iii

FOREWORD
by Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO

We need new solutions to managing water resources to offset the rising challenges to water security from
population growth and climate change. This report proposes an innovative response that has, in fact, been
around for thousands of years: nature-based solutions.
Today, more than ever, we must work with nature, instead of against it. Demand for water is set to increase in
all sectors. The challenge we must all face is meeting this demand in a way that does not exacerbate negative
impacts on ecosystems.
The stakes are high. Current trends suggest that around two thirds of forests and wetlands have been lost or
degraded since the beginning of the 20th century. Soil is eroding and deteriorating in quality. Since the 1990s,
water pollution has worsened in almost all rivers in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
These trends pose broader challenges from the increased risk of floods and droughts, which, in turn, has an
impact on our ability to adapt to climate change. We know also that water scarcity can lead to civil unrest,
mass migration, and even to conflict within and between countries.
Goal 6 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development recognises the importance of ensuring the availability
and sustainable management of water and sanitation. Nature-based solutions are essential to meet this goal.
Their impact can be significant: from the small-scale water harvesting structures in Rajasthan, India that
brought water back to 1,000 drought-stricken villages, to the revival of traditional ‘hima’ land management
practices in Jordan’s Zarqa River basin that yield higher quality spring water by not over-exploiting the soil.
These solutions can also contribute to other aspects of sustainable development: from ensuring food security
and reducing disaster risk to building sustainable urban settlements and boosting decent work. Ensuring the
sustainable use of the planet’s resources is vital for ensuring long-term peace and prosperity.
This World Water Development Report does not argue that nature-based solutions are a panacea, but our
conclusion is clear -- they are one of many important tools to shift to a more holistic approach to water
management.
In this spirit, I want to thank the Government of Italy and the Umbria Region for supporting UNESCO’s
World Water Assessment Programme. Coordinated by WWAP, with help from the International Hydrological
Programme, this report is the fruit of continued cooperation by members and partners of UN-Water. I wish to
thank all those involved for their input and their commitment to promoting sustainable water security, which
balances human needs with the future of our planet.

Audrey Azoulay

iv

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

FOREWORD
by Gilbert F. Houngbo, Chair of UN-Water and President of the International Fund for Agricultural Development

More than 2 billion people lack access to safe drinking water and more than double that number lack access
to safe sanitation. With a rapidly growing global population, demand for water is expected to increase by
nearly one-third by 2050. In the face of accelerated consumption, increasing environmental degradation
and the multi-faceted impacts of climate change, we clearly need new ways to manage competing demands
on our precious freshwater resources.
The 2018 edition of the UN World Water Development Report (WWDR2018) suggests that solutions may be
closer than we think.
Since its first edition in 2003, the WWDR has presented the broad perspective of the UN system on water
supply and sanitation issues. Each Report harmonizes up-to-date knowledge and science-based content
with balanced policy messages. This year’s Report, which marks 15 years of UN-Water’s formal existence,
looks both forwards and backwards.
For too long, the world has turned first to human-built, or “grey”, infrastructure to improve water
management. In so doing, it has often brushed aside traditional and Indigenous knowledge that embraces
greener approaches. Three years into the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, it is time for us
to re-examine nature-based solutions (NBS) to help achieve water management objectives.
The WWDR2018 illustrates that working with nature, rather than against it, would enhance natural capital
and support a resource-efficient and competitive circular economy. NBS can be cost-effective, and
simultaneously provide environmental, social and economic benefits. These interwoven benefits, which are
the essence of sustainable development, are central to achieving Agenda 2030.
This flagship publication represents UN-Water’s most substantial contribution to the ‘Nature for Water’
campaign that will begin on 22 March 2018, World Water Day. As the new Chair of UN-Water, I would like to
thank my colleagues for their invaluable contributions. I am also grateful to UNESCO and its World Water
Assessment Programme for their critical role in production.
I am confident this Report will inspire discussions and spur actions at all relevant levels to move towards a
more sustainable management of water resources.

Gilbert F. Houngbo

v

PREFACE
by Stefan Uhlenbrook, WWAP Coordinator
and Richard Connor, Editor-in-Chief

The need to ensure that adequate volumes of water of suitable quality are made available to support and
maintain healthy ecosystems has long been established. But, nature also plays a unique and fundamental
role in regulating different features of the water cycle, in which it can act as a regulator, a cleaner and/or a
supplier of water. As such, maintaining healthy ecosystems directly leads to improved water security for all.
As the fifth in a series of annual, theme-oriented reports, the 2018 edition of the United Nations World
Development Report (WWDR) focuses on opportunities to harness the natural processes that regulate
various elements of the water cycle, which have become collectively known as nature-based solutions
(NBS) for water. This is not merely a ‘good idea’ (which of course it is), but an essential step to ensuring the
long-term sustainability of water resources and of the multitude of benefits that water provides; from food
and energy security to human health and sustainable socio-economic development.
There are several different types of NBS for water, ranging in scale from the micro/personal (e.g. a dry toilet)
to landscape-level applications that include conservation agriculture. There are NBS that are appropriate
for urban settings (e.g. green walls, roof gardens and vegetated infiltration or drainage basins) as well as for
rural environments which often make up the majority of a river basin’s area.
Yet, despite recent advances in the uptake of NBS, water resource management remains heavily dependent
on human-built (‘grey’) infrastructure. The idea is not necessarily to replace grey with green infrastructure,
but to identify the most appropriate, cost-effective and sustainable balance between grey infrastructure
and NBS considering multiple objectives and benefits.
Maximizing nature’s potential in helping to achieve the three main water management objectives –
enhancing water availability, improving water quality and reducing water-related risks – will require
creating an enabling environment for change, including suitable legal and regulatory frameworks,
appropriate financing mechanisms and social acceptance. We remain confident that, with the political will
to do so, current obstacles, such as the lack of knowledge, capacity, data and information about NBS for
water, can be effectively overcome.
As this report points out, there are a number of mechanisms that can be used to accelerate the uptake
of NBS for water. Payment for environmental services schemes and green bonds have been shown to
generate interesting returns on investment while lowering the need (and costs) for larger, often more
expensive infrastructure required for water resources management and the delivery of water supply and
sanitation services.
NBS for water are central to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development because they generate
social, economic and environmental co-benefits, including in the fields of human health and livelihoods,
food and energy security, sustainable economic growth, decent jobs, ecosystem rehabilitation and
maintenance, and biodiversity. The substantial value of these co-benefits can tip investment decisions in
favour of NBS.
Implementation of NBS involves the participation of many different stakeholder groups, thus encouraging
consensus-building and helping to raise awareness about what NBS can truly offer to improve water
security. We have endeavoured to produce a balanced, fact-based and neutral account of the current state
of knowledge, covering the most recent developments pertaining to NBS for water, and the various benefits
and opportunities they offer in terms of improving the sustainable water resources management. Although
primarily targeted at national-level decision-makers and water resources managers, it is hoped that this
report will also be of interest to the broader development community, as well as academics, professionals
and anyone interested in building an equitable and sustainable water future with the support of NBS.

vi

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

This latest edition of the WWDR is the result of a concerted effort between Chapter Lead Agencies FAO,
UNDP, UN Environment, UNESCO-IHP, UNU-INWEH and WWAP, with complementary material on regional
perspectives provided by UNECE, UNECLAC, UNESCAP, UNESCWA and UNESCO Multisectoral Regional
Office in Abuja. The report also benefited from the inputs and contributions of several UN-Water members
and partners, members of WWAP’s Technical Advisory Committee, as well as from numerous scientists,
professionals and NGOs who provided a wide range of relevant data and information.
On behalf of the WWAP Secretariat, we would like to extend our deepest appreciation to the aforementioned agencies, members and partners of UN-Water, and to the writers and other contributors for
collectively producing this unique and authoritative report that will, hopefully, have multiple impacts
worldwide. David Coates deserves specific recognition for having generously shared his knowledge and
wisdom throughout the report’s production process.
We are profoundly grateful to the Italian Government for funding the Programme and to the Regione
Umbria for hosting the WWAP Secretariat in Villa La Colombella in Perugia. Their contributions have been
instrumental to the production of the WWDR.
Our special thanks go to Audrey Azoulay, Director-General of UNESCO, for her vital support to WWAP and
the production of the WWDR. The guidance of Gilbert F. Houngbo, President of the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD), as Chair of UN-Water, has made this publication possible.
Last but not least, we extend our most sincere gratitude to all our colleagues at the WWAP Secretariat,
whose names are listed in the acknowledgments. The report could not have been completed without their
professionalism and dedication.

Stefan Uhlenbrook

Richard Connor

vii

WWDR 2018 TEAM
Director of the Publication
Stefan Uhlenbrook
Editor-in-Chief
Richard Connor
Process Coordinator
Engin Koncagül
Publications Assistant
Valentina Abete
Graphic Designer
Marco Tonsini
Copyeditor
Simon Lobach
WWAP Technical Advisory Committee
Uri Shamir (Chair), Dipak Gyawali (Deputy Chair), Fatma Abdel Rahman Attia, Anders Berntell,
Elias Fereres, Mukuteswara Gopalakrishnan, Daniel P. Loucks, Henk van Schaik, Yui Liong Shie,
Lászlo Somlyody, Lucio Ubertini and Albert Wright

United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) Secretariat in 2018
Coordinator: Stefan Uhlenbrook
Deputy Coordinator: Michela Miletto
Programmes: Richard Connor, Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara, Engin Koncagül and Lucilla Minelli
Publications: Valentina Abete and Marco Tonsini
Communications: Simona Gallese and Laurens Thuy
Administration and support: Barbara Bracaglia, Arturo Frascani and Lisa Gastaldin
IT and Security: Fabio Bianchi, Michele Brensacchi and Francesco Gioffredi

viii

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP) recognizes the valuable
contributions of FAO, UNDP, UN Environment, UNESCO-IHP and UNU-INWEH whose inputs as
chapter lead agencies made the content preparation of this report possible. Sincere appreciation
goes to the Regional Economic Commissions (ECE, ECLAC, ESCAP, ESCWA) and UNESCO
Multisectoral Regional Office in Abuja for contributing to Chapter 5 on national and regional
experiences. We also would like to thank those UN-Water members and partners and all other
organizations and individuals who provided useful contributions and comments throughout
the production process. Furthermore, the WWDR 2018 benefitted from the reviews of WWAP’s
Technical Advisory Committee.
WWAP is grateful for the generous financial contribution from the Italian Government, which
allows for the functioning of the WWAP Secretariat and the production of the WWDR series, and for
the facilities provided by Regione Umbria.
The Spanish version of the Report was made possible thanks to ANEAS (National Association of
Water and Sanitation Utilities) of Mexico and its members. We also would like to acknowledge
the UNESCO Field Offices in Almaty, Beijing, Brasília, Cairo and New Delhi for the translation of
the Executive Summary of the WWDR 2018 into Russian, Chinese, Portuguese, Arabic and Hindi
languages. Thanks to the valuable collaboration between the National Water Agency (ANA) and the
UNESCO Office in Brazil, the Portuguese language has been included in the translation series.

ix

EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY

1

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Wetland in South San Francisco Bay (USA)

Nature-based solutions (NBS) are inspired
and supported by nature and use, or mimic,
natural processes to contribute to the improved
management of water. An NBS can involve
conserving or rehabilitating natural ecosystems
and/or the enhancement or creation of natural
processes in modified or artificial ecosystems. They
can be applied at micro- (e.g. a dry toilet) or macro(e.g. landscape) scales.
Attention to NBS has significantly increased
in recent years. This is evidenced through the
mainstreaming of NBS into a wide range of policy
advances, including in water resources, food
security and agriculture, biodiversity, environment,
disaster risk reduction, urban settlements, and
climate change. This welcome trend illustrates
a growing convergence of interests around the
recognition of the need for common objectives
and the identification of mutually supporting
actions – as illustrated best in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development through its
acknowledgment of the interdependency of its
various Goals and targets.
Upscaling NBS will be central to achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Sustainable
water security will not be achieved through
business-as-usual approaches. NBS work with
nature instead of against it, and thereby provide
an essential means to move beyond business-asusual to escalate social, economic and hydrological
efficiency gains in water resources management.
NBS show particular promise in achieving progress
towards sustainable food production, improved
human settlements, access to water supply and
sanitation services, and water-related disaster risk
reduction. They can also help to respond to the
impacts of climate change on water resources.

2

NBS support a circular economy that is restorative and
regenerative by design and promotes greater resource
productivity aiming to reduce waste and avoid pollution,
including through reuse and recycling. NBS also support
the concepts of green growth or the green economy, which
promote sustainable natural resource use and harness
natural processes to underpin economies. The application
of NBS for water also generates social, economic and
environmental co-benefits, including improved human
health and livelihoods, sustainable economic growth,
decent jobs, ecosystem rehabilitation and maintenance,
and the protection and enhancement of biodiversity. The
value of some of these co-benefits can be substantial and
tip investment decisions in favour of NBS.
However, despite a long history of and growing experience
with, the application of NBS, there are still many cases
where water resources policy and management ignore
NBS options – even where they are obvious and proven
to be efficient. For example, despite rapidly growing
investments in NBS, the evidence suggests that this is
still well below 1% of total investment in water resources
management infrastructure.

The world’s water: Demand, availability,
quality and extreme events
The global demand for water has been increasing at a rate
of about 1% per year as a function of population growth,
economic development and changing consumption
patterns, among other factors, and it will continue to grow
significantly over the next two decades. Industrial and
domestic demand for water will increase much faster than
agricultural demand, although agriculture will remain
the largest overall user. The vast majority of the growing
demand for water will occur in countries with developing
or emerging economies.
At the same time, the global water cycle is intensifying due
to climate change, with wetter regions generally becoming
wetter and drier regions becoming even drier. At present,
an estimated 3.6 billion people (nearly half the global
population) live in areas that are potentially water-scarce
at least one month per year, and this population could
increase to some 4.8–5.7 billion by 2050.
Since the 1990s, water pollution has worsened in almost all
rivers in Africa, Asia and Latin America. The deterioration
of water quality is expected to further escalate over the
next decades and this will increase threats to human
health, the environment and sustainable development.
Globally, the most prevalent water quality challenge is
nutrient loading, which, depending on the region, is often
associated with pathogen loading. Hundreds of chemicals
are also impacting on water quality. The greatest increases
in exposure to pollutants are expected to occur in low-

3

and lower-middle income countries, primarily because of
higher population and economic growth and the lack of
wastewater management systems.
The trends in water availability and quality are
accompanied by projected changes in flood and drought
risks. The number of people at risk from floods is projected
to rise from 1.2 billion today to around 1.6 billion in 2050
(nearly 20% of the world’s population). The population
currently affected by land degradation/desertification and
drought is estimated at 1.8 billion people, making this
the most significant category of ‘natural disaster’ based
on mortality and socio-economic impact relative to gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita.

Ecosystem degradation
Ecosystem degradation is a leading cause of increasing
water resources management challenges. Although about
30% of the global land remains forested, at least two thirds
of this area are in a degraded state. The majority of the
world’s soil resources, notably on farmland, are in only fair,
poor or very poor condition and the current outlook is for
this situation to worsen, with serious negative impacts on
water cycling through higher evaporation rates, lower soil
water storage and increased surface runoff accompanied
by increased erosion. Since the year 1900, an estimated
64–71% of the natural wetland area worldwide has been
lost due to human activity. All these changes have had
major negative impacts on hydrology, from local to regional
and global scales.
There is evidence that such ecosystem change has over
the course of history contributed to the demise of several
ancient civilizations. A pertinent question nowadays is
whether we can avoid the same fate. The answer to that
question will depend at least partly on our ability to shift
from working against nature to working with it – through,
for example, better adoption of NBS.

The role of ecosystems in the water cycle
Ecological processes in a landscape influence the quality of
water and the way it moves through a system, as well as soil
formation, erosion, and sediment transport and deposition
– all of which can exert major influences on hydrology.
Although forests often receive the most attention when
it comes to land cover and hydrology, grasslands and
croplands also play important roles. Soils are critical in
controlling the movement, storage and transformation of
water. Biodiversity has a functional role in NBS whereby
it underpins ecosystem processes and functions and,
therefore, the delivery of ecosystem services.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Ecosystems have important influences on precipitation
recycling from local to continental scales. Rather than
being regarded as a ‘consumer’ of water, vegetation is
perhaps more appropriately viewed as a water ‘recycler’.
Globally, up to 40% of terrestrial rainfall originates from
upwind plant transpiration and other land evaporation,
with this source accounting for most of the rainfall in
some regions. Land use decisions in one place may
therefore have significant consequences for water
resources, people, the economy and the environment
in distant locations – pointing to the limitations of the
watershed (as opposed to the ‘precipitationshed’) as the
basis for management.
Green infrastructure (for water) uses natural or seminatural systems such as NBS to provide water resources
management options with benefits that are equivalent
or similar to conventional grey (built/physical) water
infrastructure. In some situations, nature-based
approaches can offer the main or only viable solution
(for example, landscape restoration to combat land
degradation and desertification), whereas for different
purposes only a grey solution will work (for example
supplying water to a household through pipes and taps).
In most cases, however, green and grey infrastructure can
and should work together. Some of the best examples
of the deployment of NBS are where they improve
the performance of grey infrastructure. The current
situation, with ageing, inappropriate or insufficient
grey infrastructure worldwide, creates opportunities for
NBS as innovative solutions that embed perspectives of
ecosystem services, enhanced resilience and livelihood
considerations in water planning and management.
A key feature of NBS is that they tend to deliver groups of
ecosystem services together – even if only one is being
targeted by the intervention. Hence, NBS usually offer
multiple water-related benefits and often help address
water quantity, quality and risks simultaneously. Another
key advantage of NBS is the way in which they contribute
to building overall system resilience.

and more efficient recharge of groundwater, could be
more sustainable and cost-effective than traditional grey
infrastructure such as dams.
Agriculture will need to meet projected increases in
food demand by improving its resource use efficiency
while simultaneously reducing its external footprint, and
water is central to this need. A cornerstone of recognized
solutions is the ‘sustainable ecological intensification’ of
food production, which enhances ecosystem services in
agricultural landscapes, for example through improved soil
and vegetation management. ‘Conservation agriculture’,
which incorporates practices aimed at minimizing soil
disturbance, maintaining soil cover and regularizing crop
rotation, is a flagship example approach to sustainable
production intensification. Agricultural systems that
rehabilitate or conserve ecosystem services can be as
productive as intensive, high-input systems, but with
significantly reduced externalities. Although NBS offer
significant gains in irrigation, the main opportunities to
increase productivity are in rainfed systems that account
for the bulk of current production and family farming (and
hence provide the greatest livelihood and poverty reduction
benefits). The theoretical gains that could be achievable
at a global scale exceed the projected increases in global
demand for water, thereby potentially reducing conflicts
among competing uses.
NBS for addressing water availability in urban settlements
are also of great importance, given that the majority of
the world’s population is now living in cities. Urban green
infrastructure, including green buildings, is an emerging
phenomenon that is establishing new benchmarks and
technical standards that embrace many NBS. Business
and industry are also increasingly promoting NBS to
improve water security for their operations, prompted by a
compelling business case.

NBS for managing water quality

NBS mainly address water supply through managing
precipitation, humidity, and water storage, infiltration
and transmission, so that improvements are made in
the location, timing and quantity of water available for
human needs.

Source water protection reduces water treatment costs for
urban suppliers, and contributes to improved access to
safe drinking water in rural communities. Forests, wetlands
and grasslands, as well as soils and crops, when managed
properly, play important roles in regulating water quality
by reducing sediment loadings, capturing and retaining
pollutants, and recycling nutrients. Where water becomes
polluted, both constructed and natural ecosystems can help
improve water quality.

The option of building more reservoirs is increasingly
limited by silting, decrease of available runoff,
environmental concerns and restrictions, and the fact
that in many developed countries the most cost-effective
and viable sites have already been used. In many cases,
more ecosystem-friendly forms of water storage, such
as natural wetlands, improvements in soil moisture

Non-point (diffuse) source pollution from agriculture,
notably nutrients, remains a critical problem worldwide,
including in developed countries. It is also the one most
amenable to NBS, as these can rehabilitate ecosystem
services that enable soils to improve nutrient management,
and hence lower fertilizer demand and reduce nutrient
runoff and/or infiltration to groundwater.

NBS for managing water availability

Executive Summary

4

Urban green infrastructure is increasingly being used
to manage and reduce pollution from urban runoff.
Examples include green walls, roof gardens and vegetated
infiltration or drainage basins to support wastewater
treatment and reduce stormwater runoff. Wetlands are
also used within urban environments to mitigate the
impact of polluted stormwater runoff and wastewater.
Both natural and constructed wetlands also biodegrade
or immobilize a range of emerging pollutants, including
certain pharmaceuticals, and often perform better than
grey solutions. For certain chemicals, they may offer the
only solution.
There are limits to how NBS can perform. For example,
NBS options for industrial wastewater treatment depend
on the pollutant type and its loading. For many polluted
water sources, grey-infrastructure solutions may
continue to be needed. However, industrial applications
of NBS, particularly constructed wetlands for industrial
wastewater treatment, are growing.

NBS for managing water-related risks
Water-related risks and disasters, such as floods and
droughts associated with an increasing temporal
variability of water resources due to climate change,
result in immense and growing human and economic
losses globally. Around 30% of the global population
is estimated to reside in areas and regions routinely
impacted by either flood or drought events. Ecosystem
degradation is the major cause of increasing water-related
risks and extremes, and it reduces the ability to fully
realize the potential of NBS.
Green infrastructure can perform significant risk reduction
functions. Combining green and grey infrastructure
approaches can lead to cost savings and greatly improved
overall risk reduction.
NBS for flood management can involve water retention by
managing infiltration and overland flow, and thereby the
hydrological connectivity between system components
and the conveyance of water through it, making space
for water storage through, for example, floodplains.
The concept of ‘living with floods’, which, among other
things, includes a range of structural and non-structural
approaches that help to ‘be prepared’ for a flood, can
facilitate the application of relevant NBS to reduce flood
losses and, most importantly, flood risk.
Droughts are not limited to dry areas, as is sometimes
portrayed, but can also pose a disaster risk in regions that
are normally not water-scarce. The mix of potential NBS
for drought mitigation is essentially the same as those
for water availability and aim to improve water storage
capacity in landscapes, including soils and groundwater,
to cushion against periods of extreme scarcity. Seasonal
variability in rainfall creates opportunities for water

5

storage in landscapes to provide water for both ecosystems
and people over drier periods. The potential of natural
water storage (particularly subsurface, in aquifers) for
disaster risk reduction is far from being realized. Storage
planning at river basin and regional scales should consider
a portfolio of surface and subsurface storage options (and
their combinations) to arrive at the best environmental
and economic outcomes in the face of increasing water
resources variability.

NBS for enhancing water security:
Multiplying the benefits
NBS are able to enhance overall water security by improving
water availability and water quality while simultaneously
reducing water-related risks and generating additional
social, economic and environmental co-benefits. They
allow for the identification of win-win outcomes across
sectors. For example, NBS in agriculture are becoming
mainstream because they deliver increased sustainable
agricultural productivity and profitability but also enhance
overall system-wide benefits, such as improved water
availability and reduced downstream pollution. Watershed
restoration and protection has become increasingly
important in the context of meeting multiple challenges
in sustaining water supplies to rapidly growing cities and
reducing risks in them. Urban green infrastructure can
yield positive results in terms of water availability, water
quality and flood and drought reduction. In the context of
water and sanitation, constructed wetlands for wastewater
treatment can be a cost-effective NBS that provides effluent
of adequate quality for several non-potable uses, including
irrigation, as well as offering additional benefits, including
energy production.

Challenges and limitations
Challenges to upscaling NBS so that they reach their full
and significant potential are somewhat generic across the
sectors and at global, region-specific or place-based scales.
There remains a historical inertia against NBS due to the
continuing overwhelming dominance of grey infrastructure
solutions in the current instruments of the Member States
– from public policy to building codes and regulations. This
dominance can also exist in civil engineering, market-based
economic instruments, the expertise of service providers,
and consequentially in the minds of policy makers and the
general public. These and other factors collectively result
in NBS often being perceived to be less efficient, or riskier,
than built (grey) systems.
NBS often require cooperation among multiple institutions
and stakeholders, something that can be difficult to
achieve. Current institutional arrangements did not
evolve with cooperation on NBS in mind. There is a lack of

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

awareness, communication and knowledge at all levels,
from communities to regional planners and national
policy makers, of what NBS can really offer. The situation
can be compounded by a lack of understanding of how
to integrate green and grey infrastructure at scale, and
an overall lack of capacity to implement NBS in the
context of water. Myths and/or uncertainty remain about
the functioning of natural or green infrastructure, and
about what ecosystem services mean in practical terms.
It is also not entirely clear, at times, what constitutes
a NBS. There is a lack of technical guidance, tools and
approaches to determine the right mix of NBS and
grey-infrastructure options. The hydrological functions
of natural ecosystems, like wetlands and floodplains,
are much less understood than those provided by
grey infrastructure. Consequently, NBS are even more
neglected in policy appraisal and in natural resource
and development planning and management. This
situation is partly compounded by insufficient research
and development in NBS and particularly by the lack
of impartial and robust assessments of current NBS
experience, especially in terms of their hydrological
performance, and cost–benefit analyses in comparison
or conjunction with grey solutions.
There are limits to what ecosystems can achieve and
these need much better identification. For example,
‘tipping points’, beyond which negative ecosystem
change becomes irreversible, are well theorized but
rarely quantified. It is therefore necessary to recognize
the limited carrying capacity of ecosystems and
determine the thresholds where any additional stresses
(e.g. the addition of contaminants and toxic substances)
will lead to irreversible damage to the ecosystem.
The high degree of variation in the impacts of ecosystems
on hydrology (depending on ecosystem type or subtype,
location and condition, climate and management)
cautions to avoid generalized assumptions about NBS.
For example, trees can increase or decrease groundwater
recharge according to their type, density, location, size
and age. Natural systems are dynamic and their roles
and impacts change over time.
An often overstated assumption about NBS is that they
are ‘cost-effective’, whereas this should be established
during an assessment, including consideration of
co-benefits. While some small-scale NBS applications
can be low- or no-cost, some applications, particularly
at scale, can require large investments. Ecosystem
restoration costs, for example, can vary widely from a
few hundred to several millions of US dollars per hectare.
Site-specific knowledge on the field deployment of NBS
is essential yet often inadequate. Now that attention to
NBS has increased, NBS practitioners need to greatly
increase knowledge to support decision making and
avoid overstating NBS performance if this new impetus is
not to be squandered.

Responses – Creating the enabling
conditions for accelerating the uptake
of NBS
The required responses to these challenges essentially
involve creating enabling conditions for NBS to be
considered equitably alongside other options for water
resources management.

Leveraging financing
NBS do not necessarily require additional financial
resources but usually involve redirecting and making
more effective use of existing financing. Investments in
green infrastructure are being mobilized thanks to the
increasing recognition of the potential of ecosystem
services to provide system-wide solutions that make
investments more sustainable and cost-effective over
time. Assessments of the returns on investments in NBS
often do not factor in these positive externalities, just as
those for grey infrastructure often do not take all negative
environmental and social externalities into account.
Payment for environmental services schemes provide
monetary and non-monetary incentives to upstream
communities, farmers and private land owners to protect,
restore and conserve natural ecosystems and to adopt
sustainable agricultural and other land use practices.
These actions generate benefits to downstream water
users in the form of water regulation, flood control,
and erosion and sediment control, among others,
thus ensuring a constant, high-quality water supply,
and helping reduce water treatment and equipment
maintenance costs.
The emerging ‘green bond’ market shows promising
potential for mobilizing NBS financing and, notably,
demonstrates that NBS can perform well when assessed
against rigorous standardized investment performance
criteria. The private sector can also be further stimulated
and guided to advance NBS in the areas in which it
operates. Building in-house expertise and awareness of
the effectiveness of NBS will facilitate this.
Transforming agricultural policy represents a significant
pathway for financing the further uptake of NBS. This
requires overcoming the fact that the vast majority of
agricultural subsidies, and probably the majority of
public funding and almost all private sector investment
in agricultural research and development, support
the intensification of conventional agricultural, which
increases water insecurity. Mainstreaming the concept
of sustainable ecological intensification of agricultural
production, which essentially involves deploying NBS (e.g.
improved soil and landscape management techniques),
is not only the recognized way forward in order to achieve
food security, but would also be a major advance in NBS
financing for water.

Executive Summary

6

Assessing co-benefits of NBS (through a more holistic
cost–benefit analysis) is an essential step in achieving
efficient investments and tapping into financial resources
across multiple sectors. All benefits, not just a narrow set
of hydrological outcomes, need to be factored into an
assessment of investment options. This requires a detailed
systematic approach, but evidence shows it will lead to
significant improvements in decision making and overall
system performance.

general requirement in its own right. NBS are not only a
beneficiary of such harmonization but also a means to
achieve it, because of their ability to deliver multiple, and
often significant, co-benefits beyond just hydrological
outcomes. Clear mandates from the highest policy level can
significantly accelerate NBS uptake and foster improved
intersectoral cooperation.

Creating an enabling regulatory and legal
environment

Improving the knowledge base on NBS, including in some
cases through more rigorous science, is an essential
overarching requirement. Established evidence helps
convince decision makers of the viability of NBS. For
example, a frequently raised concern is that NBS take
a long time to achieve their impact, implying that grey
infrastructure is quicker. However, the evidence shows
that this is not necessarily the case and timescales to
deliver benefits can compare favourably to those of greyinfrastructure solutions.

The vast majority of current regulatory and legal
environments for water management were developed
largely with grey-infrastructure approaches in mind.
Consequently, it can often be challenging to retrofit NBS
into this framework. However, rather than expecting drastic
changes in regulatory regimes, much can be achieved
by promoting NBS more effectively through existing
frameworks. In places where enabling legislation does
not yet exist, identifying where and how NBS can support
existing planning approaches at different levels can be a
useful first step in this process.
National legislation to facilitate the implementation of
NBS at the local level is particularly crucial. A small but
growing number of countries have adopted regulatory
frameworks promoting NBS at the national level. In
Peru, for example, a national legal framework was
adopted to regulate and monitor investment in green
infrastructure. Regional frameworks can also stimulate
change. The European Union, for instance, has significantly
increased opportunities for NBS deployment through the
harmonization of its legislation and policies regarding
agriculture, water resources and the environment.
At the global level, NBS offer Member States a means to
respond to and use the various multilateral environmental
agreements (especially the Convention on Biological
Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands,
the Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction, agreed
frameworks for food security and the Paris Agreement
on Climate Change), while also addressing economic and
social imperatives. An overarching framework for promoting
NBS is the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development with
its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Improving the knowledge base

Traditional or local-community knowledge of ecosystem
functioning and the nature–society interaction can be a
significant asset. Improvements need to be made in the
incorporation of this knowledge into assessments and
decision making.
A priority response is the development and implementation
of common criteria against which both NBS and other
options for water resources management can be assessed.
Common general criteria for an assessment of water
resources management options (e.g. green versus grey
solutions) can be developed on a case-by-case basis. The
full inclusion of all hydrological benefits, other co-benefits
and the entire range of the costs and benefits of ecosystem
services (for any option) is a key requirement. This in turn
will require consensus building across the various relevant
stakeholder groups.

The potential contribution of NBS
for water management to achieving
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development

NBS can require much greater levels of cross-sectoral
and institutional collaboration than grey-infrastructure
approaches, particularly when applied at landscape scale.
However, this can also open opportunities to bring those
groups together under a common approach or agenda.

NBS offer high potential to contribute to the achievement of
most of the targets of SDG 6 (on water). Areas in which this
contribution translates into particularly striking positive
direct impacts on other SDGs are with regards to water
security for underpinning sustainable agriculture (SDG 2,
notably Target 2.4), healthy lives (SDG 3), building resilient
(water-related) infrastructure (SDG 9), sustainable urban
settlements (SDG 11) and disaster risk reduction (SDG 11
and, as related to climate change, SDG 13).

In many countries, the policy landscape remains highly
fragmented. Better harmonization of policies across
economic, environmental and social agendas is a

The co-benefits of NBS are particularly significant in relation
to the ecosystem/environment-related SDGs, including the
reduction of land use pressures on coastal areas and the

Improving cross-sectoral collaboration

7

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

oceans (SDG 14) and the protection of ecosystems
and biodiversity (SDG 15). Some other areas where
the co-benefits of NBS deliver particularly high
rewards in terms of achieving the SDGs include
other aspects of agriculture; energy; inclusive and
sustainable economic growth; full and productive
employment and decent work for all; making cities
and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and
sustainable; ensuring sustainable consumption and
production patterns; and combating climate change
and its impacts.

Moving forward
Increased deployment of NBS is central to meeting
the key contemporary water resources management
challenges of sustaining and improving water
availability and quality, while reducing water-related
risks. Without a more rapid uptake of NBS, water
security will continue to decline, and probably
rapidly so. NBS offer a vital means to move beyond
business-as-usual. However, the necessity and
opportunities for increased deployment of NBS
remain underappreciated.
World Water Development Reports have consistently
argued for transformational change in how
water is managed. The inadequate recognition of
ecosystems’ roles in water management reinforces
the need for transformational change, and increased
uptake of NBS provides a means to achieve it. This
transformational change can no longer just be
aspirational – the shift needs to rapidly accelerate
and, more importantly, translate into fully
operationalized policy, with improved action at site
level. The objective needs to be to minimize costs and
risks, and maximize system returns and robustness,
while providing optimal ‘fit-for-use’ performance. A
role of policy should be to enable the right site-level
decisions to be taken in these regards. We have made
a good, if somewhat belated, start in this process but
there is a long way yet to go.

Coda
As humankind charts its course through the
Anthropocene, and tries to avoid the tragedies
of the past, adopting NBS is not only necessary
for improving water management outcomes and
achieving water security, it is also critical for ensuring
the delivery of co-benefits that are essential to all
aspects of sustainable development. Although NBS
are not a panacea, they will play an essential role in
building a better, brighter, safer and more equitable
future for all.

Executive Summary

8

PROLOGUE
THE STATE OF WATER
RESOURCES IN THE CONTEXT
OF NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS

WWAP | David Coates and Richard Connor
With contributions from: International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis (IIASA)

The mangrove forest in Phang-Nga Bay (Thailand)

Current trends in the state of water resources are largely
as assessed and identified in previous World Water
Development Reports. The world continues to face multiple
and complex water challenges that are expected to intensify
in the future. This Prologue expands on two aspects of
these water resources challenges of particular relevance to
nature-based solutions (NBS). Firstly, it includes a globallevel assessment of the current status and trends in water
demand and availability, extreme water-related events and
water quality, recognizing that the sustainable management
of food, energy and water are deeply interconnected
and that these linkages need to be assessed. Secondly, it
describes how the impacts of ecosystem change on water
resources clearly show the need to include ecosystems in
this food–energy–water nexus.

Water demand
Global water use has increased by a factor of six over
the past 100 years (Wada et al., 2016) and continues to
grow steadily at a rate of about 1% per year (AQUASTAT,
n.d.). Water use is expected to continue increasing at the
global level, as a function of population growth, economic
development and changing consumption patterns, among
other factors.
The world population is expected to increase from 7.7
billion in 2017 to between 9.4 and 10.2 billion by 2050, with
two thirds of the population living in cities. More than half
of this anticipated growth is expected to occur in Africa
(+1.3 billion), with Asia (+0.75 billion) expected to be the
second largest contributor to future population growth
(UNDESA, 2017). Over the same period (2017–2050), global
gross domestic product (GDP) is expected to increase by a
factor of 2.5 (OECD, n.d.), although with large differences
among and within countries. Global demand for agricultural
and energy production (mainly food and electricity), both
of which are water-intensive, is expected to increase by
roughly 60% and 80% respectively by 2025 (Alexandratos
and Bruinsma, 2012; OECD, 2012). At the same time, the
Photo
@ Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet for a supadupa long text

10

Global water demand
will continue to grow
significantly over the
next two decades

global water cycle is intensifying due to global warming,
with wetter regions generally becoming wetter and drier
regions becoming even drier (IPCC, 2014). These aspects
of global change illustrate the need for swift planning
and execution of strategic, reasonable and effective
management and countermeasures against deteriorating
water security1 (Burek et al., 2016).
Contemporary global water demand has been estimated
at about 4,600 km3 per year and projected to increase by
20%–30% to between 5,500 and 6,000 km3 per year by
2050 (Burek et al., 2016). However, “estimations at the
global scale are complicated because of limited available
observational data and the interactions of a combination
of important environmental, social, economic, and political
factors, such as global climate change, population growth,
land use change, globalization and economic development,
technological innovations, political stability and the
extent of international cooperation. Because of these
interconnections, local water management has global
impacts, and global developments have local impacts.”
(Wada et al., 2016, p. 176).
Agriculture accounts for about 70% of global water
withdrawals, the vast majority of which are used for
irrigation. Yet global estimates for annual irrigation water
demand are fraught with uncertainty. This is not merely
due to a lack of monitoring and reporting on water used for
irrigation, but also to the inherently erratic nature of the
practice itself. The amounts of water used for irrigation at
any given time will vary with crop type and their various
growing seasons, and also depend on cropping practices
and variability in local soil and climatic conditions, not
to mention any changes in the land area equipped for
irrigation. The efficiency of different irrigation techniques
will also have a direct impact on overall water use. This is
what makes projecting future water demand for irrigation
so difficult. For example, whereas Burek et al. (2016)
have projected increases in global crop irrigation water
requirements for 2050 to be somewhere between 23%
1

Water security is defined as “the capacity of a population to safeguard
sustainable access to adequate quantities of acceptable quality water
for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-economic
development, for ensuring protection against water-borne pollution and
water-related disasters, and for preserving ecosystems in a climate of
peace and political stability” (UN-Water, 2013).

11

and 42% above the level in 2010, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2011a) estimated a
5.5% increase in water withdrawals for irrigation from 2008 to
2050. Citing anticipated increases in irrigation water efficiency,
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD, 2012) predicted a slight decrease in water use for
irrigation through the period 2000–2050.
Regardless of any increase in water demand for agriculture,
meeting the estimated 60% increase in food demand will
require the expansion of arable land under business-as-usual.
Under prevailing management practices, intensification of
production involves increased mechanical disturbance of soil
and inputs of agrochemicals, energy and water. These drivers
associated with food systems account for 70% of the predicted
loss of terrestrial biodiversity by 2050 (Leadley et al., 2014).
However, these impacts, including requirements for more land
and water, can largely be avoided if further intensification of
agricultural production is based on ecological intensification
that involves improving ecosystem services to reduce external
inputs (FAO, 2011b).
Water use by industry, which account for roughly 20% of global
withdrawals, is dominated by energy production, which is
responsible for approximately 75%, with the remaining 25%
of industrial water withdrawals being used for manufacturing
(WWAP, 2014). Projections by Burek et al. (2016) suggest the
overall water demand from industry will increase across all the
regions of the world, with the exception of Northern America
and Western and Southern Europe. Industrial demand could
increase with up to eight times (in relative terms) in regions
such as Western, Middle, Eastern and Southern Africa, where
industries currently account for a very small proportion of total
water use. Industrial demand should also increase significantly
(up to two and a half times) in Southern, Central and Eastern
Asia (Burek et al., 2016). According to the OECD (2012), water
demand for manufacturing is projected to increase by 400%
over the period 2000–2050. Global water withdrawals for
energy production have been projected to rise by one-fifth
over the period 2010–2035, whereas water consumption
would increase by 85% driven by the shift towards more
efficient power plants with more advanced cooling systems
(that reduce water withdrawals but increase consumption)
and increased production of biofuels (IEA, 2012). Chaturvedi
et al. (2013) suggest that restricting bioenergy production to
non-irrigated marginal or abandoned cropland might alleviate
negative impacts on food production and prices, water use,
and biodiversity.
Domestic water use, which roughly accounts for the
remaining 10% of global water withdrawals, is expected to
increase significantly over the 2010–2050 period in nearly all
regions of the world, with the exception of Western Europe
where it remains constant. In relative terms, the greatest
increases in domestic demand should occur in African and
Asian sub-regions where it could more than triple, and
it could more than double in Central and South America
(Burek et al., 2016). This anticipated growth can be primarily
attributed to an anticipated increase in water supply services
in urban settlements.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 1

Physical water scarcity in 2010 (upper figure) and projected change in water scarcity* by 2050 		
(lower figure) based on the middle-of-the-road scenario**

Water scarcity 2010
No data
No water scarcity
Water scarcity
Severe water scarcity

Change in water scarcity,
2010–2050
From no water scarcity to severe water scarcity
From water scarcity to severe water scarcity
From no water scarcity to water scarcity
No change
From water scarcity to no water scarcity
From severe water scarcity to water scarcity
From severe water scarcity to no water scarcity

*Regions are considered water scarce when total annual withdrawals for human use are between 20 and 40% of the total available renewable surface
water resources, and severely water scarce when withdrawals exceed 40%.
**The scenarios used for this modelling exercise are based on ‘water extended shared socio-economic pathways’. The middle-of-the-road scenario
assumes world development is progressing along past trends and paradigms, such that social, economic, and technological trends do not shift
markedly from historical patterns (i.e. business-as-usual).
Source: Burek et al. (2016, fig. 4–39, p. 65).

In summary, global water demand will continue to grow
significantly over the next two decades. Industrial and
domestic demand for water will likely grow much faster
than agricultural demand, although agriculture will remain
the largest overall user. Rosegrant et al. (2002) forecasted
that for the ‘first time in world history’ absolute growth in
non-agricultural demand for water will exceed growth in
agricultural demand, resulting in a fall in agriculture’s share
of total water consumption in developing countries from
86% in 1995 to 76% in 2025. These projections highlight
the importance of addressing water challenges facing
agriculture where agricultural demand for water, and
competition for it, are both set to increase. The agricultural
development options adopted will be the most critical factor
in determining the future for water security in agriculture
and other sectors.

Water availability
Available surface water resources at continent level should
remain relatively constant as opposed to the development
of population, GDP or water demand. At the sub-regional
level, any change would be small, ranging from -5 to +5%,
due to climate change effects, but changes can be much
more pronounced at the country level (Burek et al., 2016).
Many countries are already undergoing pervasive water
scarcity conditions and will likely have to cope with lower
surface water resources availability in the 2050s (Figure 1).
At present, almost all countries in a belt around 10 to 40
degrees north, from Mexico to China and to Southern Europe
are affected by water scarcity, together with Australia,
Western South America and Southern Africa in the Southern

Prologue

12

Figure 2 Crop-specific contribution to groundwater depletion worldwide in 2010

RUS

IRQ
ITA

SPA

USA

GRE

TUR

KAZ
CHI

BAR

IRN

MOR
MEX

ALG

LYB
EGY

SAU

OMA

IND

YEM

TUN
UAE

ARG

Groundwater stress index*
>1
<1

PAK

SAF

AUS

Groundwater depletion for irrigation
>30 km3 yr-1
10-30 km3 yr-1
2-10 km3 yr-1
1-2 km3 yr-1
<1 km3 yr-1

Wheat
Maize
Rice
Sugarcane

Cotton
Fodder grasses
Other

*The groundwater stress index is the calculated ratio of the groundwater footprint (defined more formally as GF = A[C/(R − E)], where C, R and
E are respectively the area-averaged annual abstraction of groundwater, recharge rate, and the groundwater contribution to environmental
streamflow; and A is the areal extent of any region of interest where C, R and E can be defined) to the aquifer area (AA). GF/AA > 1 indicates areas where
unsustainable groundwater consumption could affect groundwater availability and groundwater-dependent surface water and ecosystems.
Note: The pie charts show fractions of groundwater depletion for irrigation (GWD) of major crops by country, and their sizes indicate total GWD
volume. The background map shows groundwater stress index (corresponding to overexploitation when larger than one) of major aquifers. Some
countries have overexploited aquifers but no pie chart is shown because groundwater use is not primarily related to irrigation. Areas shaded grey
represent zones with no major groundwater-dependent crop production.
Source: Dalin et al. (2017, fig. 1, pp. 700–704). © 2017 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

Hemisphere (Veldkamp et al., 2017). Throughout the
early-mid 2010s, about 1.9 billion people (27% of the
global population) lived in potential severely waterscarce areas and in 2050 this could increase to some
2.7–3.2 billion. However, if monthly variability is taken
into account, 3.6 billion people worldwide (nearly half
the global population) are already living in potential
water-scarce areas at least one month per year and
this could increase to some 4.8–5.7 billion in 2050.
About 73% of the affected people live in Asia (69% by
2050). Factoring in adaptive capacity, 3.6–4.6 billion
people (43–47%) will be under water stress in the
2050s with 91–96% living in Asia, mainly Southern and
Eastern, and 4–9% in Africa, mainly in the north (Burek
et al., 2016).
Groundwater use globally, mainly for agriculture,
amounts to 800 km3 per year in the 2010s, with India,

13

the United States of America (USA), China, Iran and Pakistan
(in descending order) accounting for 67% of total abstractions
worldwide (Burek et al., 2016). Water withdrawals for
irrigation have been identified as the primary driver of
groundwater depletion worldwide (Figure 2). A large surge in
groundwater abstractions amounting to 1,100 km3 per year
has been predicted to occur by the 2050s, corresponding to a
39% increase over current levels (Figure 3).
The importance of current water availability challenges can
only be fully understood by comparing water withdrawal to
their maximum sustainable levels. At about 4,600 km3 per
year, current global withdrawals are already near maximum
sustainable levels (Gleick and Palaniappan, 2010; Hoekstra
and Mekonnen, 2012) and, as noted in previous World Water
Development Reports, global figures mask more severe
challenges at regional and local scales. A third of the world
biggest groundwater systems are already in distress (Richey

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 3 Groundwater abstractions in 2010 (upper figure) and increases in groundwater abstraction 		
by 2050 above 2010 levels (lower figure) based on the middle-of-the-road scenario*

Groundwater abstraction
2010
[km3/year]
< 1 or no data
< 10
< 50
< 100
< 500
< 1 000
< 2 000
> 2 000

Groundwater abstraction
increase from 2010 to 2050
[km3/year]
-90 to -10
< 10
< 50
< 100
< 500
< 1 000
> 1 000

*The scenarios used for this modelling exercise are based on ‘water extended shared socio-economic pathways’. The middle-of-the-road scenario
assumes world development is progressing along past trends and paradigms, such that social, economic and technological trends do not shift
markedly from historical patterns (i.e. business-as-usual).
Source: Burek et al. (2016, fig. 4–29, p. 55).

et al., 2015). The above-mentioned groundwater trends also
assume increasing withdrawals from non-renewable (fossil)
groundwater – indisputably an unsustainable path.
There is high competition for marginal, degraded and
abandoned cropland for food production, urban expansion
and restoration of natural ecosystems, negating the
suggestion that these lands offer a reasonable alternative for
irrigated bioenergy production (SCBD, 2014). Furthermore,
improving the efficiency of irrigation water use may actually
lead to an overall intensification of water depletion at
basin level through increases in the total evaporation
from crops and reductions in return flows (Huffaker, 2008).

Water efficiency gains in irrigation should therefore be
accompanied by regulatory measures on water allocations
and/or irrigation areas (Ward and Pulido-Velazquez, 2008).
The Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management
in Agriculture (2007) already noted that the scope for the
expansion of irrigation worldwide is limited, with some
regional exceptions, and that attention needs to shift
away from surface water allocations to improving rainfed agriculture. The option of building more reservoirs
is increasingly limited by silting, available runoff,
environmental concerns and restrictions, and the fact that
most cost-effective and viable sites in developed countries
have been identified and used. In certain areas, more

Prologue

14

Figure 4 Water quality risk indices for major river basins during the base period (2000–2005) 		
compared to 2050 (nitrogen index under the CSIRO*-medium-scenario**)

No data
Low (0-2)
Moderate (2-5)
Elevated (5-15)
High (>15)

2000–2005 Base period

No data
Low (0-2)
Moderate (2-5)

2050

Elevated (5-15)
High (>15)

*Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization
**This scenario takes account of a drier future (as projected by the CSIRO climate change model) and a medium level of socio-economic growth.
Source: Veolia/IFPRI (2015, fig. 3, p. 9).

ecosystem-friendly forms of water storage, such as natural
wetlands, soil moisture and more efficient recharge of
groundwater could be more sustainable and cost-effective
than traditional infrastructure such as dams (OECD, 2016).

Water quality
The main areas that are subject to water quality threats
are largely correlated to population densities and areas of
economic growth, with the future scenarios determined
largely by the same factors (Figure 4). Since the 1990s, water
pollution has worsened in almost all rivers in Africa, Asia
and Latin America (UNEP, 2016a). The deterioration of water

15

quality is expected to escalate over the next decades and
this will increase threats to human health, the environment
and sustainable development (Veolia/IFPRI, 2015).
An estimated 80% of all industrial and municipal
wastewater are released to the environment without any
prior treatment, resulting in a growing deterioration of
overall water quality with detrimental impacts on human
health and ecosystems (WWAP, 2017).
Globally, the most prevalent water quality challenge
is nutrient loading, which depending on the region is
often associated with pathogen loading (UNEP, 2016a).
The relative contribution of nutrients from point source
wastewater versus diffuse sources varies by region. Despite

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 5 Percentage share of agriculture in total emissions of nitrates and phosphorus in OECD countries, 2000–2009
% share of agriculture in total emission of:

Nitrates

Phosphorus

Ireland

82

Denmark

80

70

New Zealand

75

United Kingdom

62

20

Belgium

60

29
51

Finland
Norway

17
42

Netherlands
Czech Republic

58

40

30

Switzerland

62

45

40

22

United States

36

Austria

35

30

41

33
33

Sweden

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Note: Countries are ranked in descending order of highest share of nitrates in surface water.
For nitrates, the figures presented correspond to the year 2000 for Austria, the Czech Republic, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland and the USA;
2002 for Denmark; 2004 for Finland and Ireland; 2005 for Belgium (Wallonia); 2008 for the United Kingdom (UK); and 2009 for the Netherlands and
Sweden.
For phosphorus, the figures presented correspond to the year 2000 for Austria, the Czech Republic, Norway, Switzerland and the USA; 2002 for
Denmark; 2004 for Finland; 2005 for Belgium (Wallonia); and 2009 for the Netherlands, Sweden and the UK.
Source: OECD (2013, fig. 9.1, p. 122).

decades of regulation and large investments to reduce point
source water pollution in developed countries, water quality
challenges endure as a result of under-regulated diffuse
sources of pollution. Managing diffuse runoff of excess
nutrients from agriculture, including into groundwater,
is regarded as the most prevalent water quality-related
challenge globally (UNEP, 2016a; OECD, 2017). Agriculture
remains the predominant source of reactive nitrogen
discharged into the environment and a significant source
of phosphorus (Figure 5). Economic development alone is
not a solution to this problem. Almost 15% of groundwater
monitoring stations in Europe recorded that the standard for
nitrates established by the World Health Organization (WHO)
were exceeded in drinking water, and monitoring stations
recorded that approximately 30% of rivers and 40% of lakes
were eutrophic or hypertrophic in 2008–2011 (EC, 2013a).

Hundreds of chemicals, in addition to nutrients, are
also implicated in impacting water quality. Agricultural
intensification has already increased chemical use
worldwide to approximately two million tonnes per year
with herbicides accounting for 47.5%, insecticides for
29.5%, fungicides for 17.5% and others for 5.5% (De et al.,
2014). The impacts of this trend are largely unquantified
and there are serious data gaps: for example, Bünemann
et al. (2006) found no data available for the effects on soil
biota, among first non-target organisms exposed, for 325
of 380 active constituents of pesticides registered for use
in Australia. A recent report of the Special Rapporteur
on the right to food (UNGA, 2017) draws attention to the
urgency of improved pesticide use policies. Contaminants
of emerging concern are continually evolving and
increasing, and often detected at concentrations higher

Prologue

16

Globally, the most
prevalent water
quality challenge is
nutrient loading
than expected (Sauvé and Desrosiers, 2014). Examples
include pharmaceuticals, hormones, industrial chemicals,
personal care products, flame retardants, detergents,
perfluorinated compounds, caffeine, fragrances,
cyanotoxins, nanomaterials and anti-microbial cleaning
agents and their transformation products. Impacts on
people and biodiversity will be mainly delivered via water
and are largely unknown (WWAP, 2017).
Climate change will affect water quality in various ways.
For example, changes in spatial and temporal patterns
and variability of precipitation affect surface water flows
and hence dilution effects, while increases in temperature
cause higher evaporation from open surfaces and soils,
and increased transpiration by vegetation potentially
reduce water availability (Hipsey and Arheimer, 2013).
Dissolved oxygen will deplete faster because of higher water
temperatures and it can be expected that higher contents of
pollutants will flow into water bodies following extreme rain
events (IPCC, 2014).
The greatest increases in exposure to pollutants are
expected to occur in low- and lower-middle income
countries, primarily because of higher population and
economic growth in these countries, especially those
in Africa (UNEP, 2016a), and the lack of wastewater
management systems (WWAP, 2017). Given the
transboundary nature of most river basins, regional
cooperation will be critical to addressing projected water
quality challenges.

Extreme events
The trends in water availability are accompanied by
projected changes in flood and drought risks. One
particular concern is that the increasing flood risk occurs in
some traditionally water-scarce areas (e.g. in Chile, China
and India, as well as the Middle East and North Africa)
where local coping strategies for flood events are likely to
be poorly developed. Economic losses due to water-related
hazards have risen greatly over the past decades. Since
1992, floods, droughts and storms have affected 4.2 billion
people (95% of all people affected by all disasters), causing
US$1.3 trillion of damage – 63% of all disaster-related
damage worldwide (UNESCAP/UNISDR, 2012).

17

According to the OECD, “the number of people at risk from
floods is projected to rise from 1.2 billion today to around 1.6
billion in 2050 (nearly 20% of the world’s population) and the
economic value of assets at risk is expected to be around US$45
trillion by 2050, a growth of over 340% from 2010” (OECD, 2012,
p. 209). Floods have accounted for 47% of all weather-related
disasters since 1995, affecting a total of 2.3 billion people.
The number of floods rose to an average of 171 per year over
the period 2005–2014, up from an annual average of 127
in the previous decade (CRED/UNISDR, 2015). Examples of
costs of flooding include 39 and 11% of GDP in the People’s
Democratic Republic of Korea and Yemen, respectively (CRED/
UNISDR, 2015).
The population currently affected by land degradation/
desertification and drought is estimated at 1.8 billion
people, making this the most significant category of ‘natural
disaster’ based on mortality and socio-economic impact
relative to GDP per capita (Low, 2013). Drought is also a
chronic, long-term problem compared to the short-term
impacts of flooding, and droughts are arguably the greatest
single threat from climate change. Changes in future rainfall
patterns will alter drought occurrence, and consequently,
soil moisture availability for vegetation in many parts of the
world (Figure 6). The predicted longer duration and severity
of droughts can be alleviated by more water storage, which
requires upscaling of infrastructure investments that can
have significant trade-offs for society and the environment.
Therefore, water storage in the environment (‘green
infrastructure’) must be part of location-specific solutions.
The impacts of droughts will be worsened by the increasing
withdrawals in response to the increasing water demand.

Trends in ecosystem change that affect
water resources
All major terrestrial, and most coastal, ecosystem types or
biomes influence water availability, quality and risks (see
Chapter 1). Trends in the extent and condition of these
ecosystems are, therefore, particularly relevant to this
report because they indicate the extent to which ecosystem
conservation and/or restoration can contribute to meeting
water resources management challenges.
About 30% of the global land area is forested, but at least 65%
of this area is already in a degraded state (FAO, 2010). However,
the rate of net forest area loss has been cut by over 50% in the
past 25 years and in some regions planting is off-setting the
loss of natural forest (FAO, 2016). Grasslands are among the
most extensive biomes in the world and, when croplands and
areas with trees but dominated by grass are included, their area
exceeds that of forests. Grasslands naturally occur in regions
where the climatic conditions are either too dry or too cold
for other vegetation types such as forests, but large areas of
forests and wetlands have also been converted into grasslands,
especially for livestock grazing or the production of crops.
Likewise, vast areas of natural grasslands have been ‘improved’
(i.e. altered for livestock grazing). Trends in area and condition
are therefore more difficult to quantify.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 6 Predicted future changes in the mean soil moisture content in the top 10 cm layer in percentage change*
from 1980–1999 (upper figure) to 2080–2099 (lower figure)
a

75

15

60

12

45

9
6
3

15

0

0

¬3

–15

b

¬6

–30

¬9

–45

¬12

–60
–180

–120

–60

0
Longitude (° E)

60

120

180

5

60

4

45

3
2

30
Latitude (° N)

¬15

75

1

15

0

0

–1

–15

–2

–30

–3

–45

–4

–60
–180

(%)

Latitude (° N)

30

–120

–60

0
Longitude (° E)

60

120

180

–5

*Based on multi-model ensemble predictions simulated by 11 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) models under the
representative concentration pathways (RCP) 4.5 emissions scenario.
Source: Dai (2013, fig. 2, p. 53). © 2013 Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd.

Wetlands (including rivers and lakes) cover only 2.6% of
land but play a disproportionately large role in hydrology
per unit area. The best estimate of reported global loss
of natural wetland area due to human activity averages
between 54% and 57%, but loss may have been as high
as 87% since 1700, with a 3.7 times faster rate of wetland
loss during the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries,
equating to a loss of 64–71% of wetlands extent since
that existing in 1900 (Davidson, 2014). Losses have
been larger and faster for inland than for coastal natural
wetlands. Although the rate of wetland loss in Europe
has slowed down, and in North America has remained
low since the 1980s, the rate of loss has remained
high in Asia, where large-scale and rapid conversion
of coastal and inland natural wetlands is continuing.
Some of these losses are off-set by the expansion of
artificial or managed wetlands, principally reservoirs
and rice paddies. The vast majority of reviews concluded
that wetlands either increase or decrease a particular

component of the water cycle (Bullock and Acreman,
2003). The extent of their loss, therefore, has significant
implications for hydrology. However, different wetlands
have different hydrological properties and quantifying
the impact of this global change on water resources is
challenging.
Direct human-induced land use and land use change
(LULUC) have major impacts on hydrology from local to
regional and global scales (see Chapter 1, Section 1.3.3).
There is compelling evidence that trends in LULUC have
impacted basin-scale water balances, for example in the
upper Mississippi River Basin (Schilling and Libra, 2003;
Zhang and Schilling, 2006) or in the middle reaches of the
Yellow River Basin (Sun et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2015). In
addition to affecting the water balance dynamics within a
catchment, LULUC can also affect precipitation and runoff
patterns in other catchments, due to the vegetation’s role as
‘water recycler’ and the effects of atmospheric circulation.

Prologue

18

Human activities that lead to hydrological changes
in grasslands are now widespread (Gibson, 2009).
Overgrazing, soil degradation and surface compaction
are leading to higher evaporation rates, lower soil
water storage and increased surface runoff, all of which
are considered detrimental to the water-provisioning
services of grasslands, including water quality (McIntyre
and Marshall, 2010), and the attenuation of flood and
drought risks (Jackson et al., 2008). Significant impacts
are increasingly manifest when grassland management is
associated with regular burning, which tends to increase
water use through vegetation regrowth, and thus reduce
water yield (Sakalauskas et al., 2001). Soil compaction
and the associated reductions of infiltration capacity
caused by grazing are increasingly documented in the
literature (Bilotta et al., 2010). About 7.5% of grassland
worldwide has been degraded because of overgrazing
alone (Conant, 2012).
The most extensive knowledge regarding the current
status of, and trends in, ecosystem change and impacts
on water resources exists in the domain of soils, or land
degradation. The soil–vegetation layer is the most critical
interface between water, ecosystems and human needs
(see Chapter 1, Section 1.3.2). The 2015 assessment of
the Status of the World’s Soil Resources, undertaken by
the Intergovernmental Technical Panel on Soils (FAO/
ITPS, 2015a), concluded that the majority of the world’s
soil resources are in fair, poor or very poor condition
and the current outlook is for this situation to worsen.
Table 1 presents a global summary of the condition and
trend for the top-ten threats to soils. The most significant
threats to the natural capital of soil at the global scale
are soil erosion, loss of soil organic carbon, nutrient
imbalance and loss of biodiversity, and these are strongly
interdependent (as are the other functions impacted by
most other threats) and impact water resources.
Land degradation is linked with impaired ecosystem
services and low water productivity (Bossio et al., 2008),
including in irrigated systems (Uphoff et al., 2011). Soil
erosion from croplands carries away 25–40 billion tonnes
of topsoil every year, significantly reducing crop yields and
the soil’s ability to regulate water, carbon and nutrients,
and transporting 23–42 million tonnes of nitrogen and
15–26 million tonnes of phosphorus off land, with major
negative effects on water quality (FAO/ITPS, 2015a). The
global loss of the soil organic carbon pool since 1850 is
estimated at about 66 ± 12 billion tonnes; a significant
contribution to the increased concentration of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, but also a major factor
undermining crop water availability (FAO/ITPS, 2015b).
Soil salinity and sodicity are becoming a significant
problem worldwide in both irrigated and non-irrigated
areas, taking an estimated 0.3–1.5 million ha of farmland
out of production each year and decreasing the production
potential of another 20–46 million ha (FAO/ITPS, 2015a).
An estimated 60 million ha of irrigated land (or 20% of the
total) is affected by soil salinity (Squires and Glenn, 2011).

19

About 30% of the global
land area is forested,
but at least 65% of
this area is already in a
degraded state

There is ample evidence that ecosystem change has
increased risks and vulnerability and in many cases is the
primary factor setting risk levels (Renaud et al., 2013).
Land use change, soil degradation and erosion, and
wetlands loss are all implicated in increasing disaster
risk (Wisner et al., 2012). There is a vicious spiral between
climate change impacts, ecosystem degradation and
increased risk of climate-related disasters (Munang et al.,
2013). Reversing the trend in ecosystem degradation is
a key policy response for climate-proofing food security
(FAO, 2013a). It is well established that intact coastal
wetlands, including mangroves, can protect coastal
communities from extreme weather events (and sea
level rise) and their loss increases risk and vulnerability.
Although increasing sediment loads are a problem for
water quality worldwide, natural levels of sediment
transport downstream can become interrupted when
sediments become trapped behind dams, undermining
sediment flows required to sustain the integrity of
coastal wetlands. In the Mississippi Delta, for example,
the loss of wetlands and their related storm and flood
protection services, due to reduced sediment inputs
from dam construction and operation upstream, was a
primary factor contributing to the severity of the impacts
of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 (Batker et al., 2010). Many
major urban settlements and most megacities are located
in deltas with similar, if not higher, levels of risk through
similar (mis-)management approaches to land and water.
The question is not whether most of these will be similarly
impacted – but when.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 1

Global condition and trend for soil threats excluding Antarctica

Condition and trend

Threat to soil function
Very poor

Poor

Fair

Good

A
LAC
SSA

E
NA
SP

A
E
LAC
NENA
SSA

NA
SP

Nutrient imbalance

A
E
LAC
SSA
NA

SP

NENA

Salinization and sodification

A
E
LAC

NENA
SSA

NA
SP

A
E

LAC
NA

=SSA
SP

NENA
LAC

A
E
SSA

NA
SP

A
E

LAC

SSA
NA
SP

Acidification

A
E
SSA
NA

LAC
SP

NENA

Compaction

A
LAC
NENA

E
NA
SP

=SSA

A
E
=LAC

NENA
=SSA
NA
SP

Soil erosion

NENA

Organic carbon change

Soil sealing and land take

NENA

Loss of soil biodiversity

Contamination

NENA

Waterlogging

Stable =

Variable 

Improving 

Very good

Deteriorating 

Note: NA: North America; E: Europe; NENA: Near East and North Africa; LAC: Latin America and the Caribbean; SSA: Sub-Saharan Africa;
SP: Southwest Pacific; and A: Asia.
Source: FAO/ITPS (2015b, table 8, p. 67).

Prologue

20

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS (NBS)
AND WATER

WWAP | David Coates and Richard Connor
With contributions from: Giuseppe Arduino
(UNESCO-IHP) and Kai Schwaerzel (UNU-FLORES)2

Mangrove reforestation

1.1 Introduction
Nature-based solutions (NBS) are inspired and supported by
nature and use, or mimic, natural processes to contribute to
the improved management of water. The defining feature of an
NBS is, therefore, not whether an ecosystem used is ‘natural’
but whether natural processes are being proactively managed
to achieve a water-related objective. An NBS uses ecosystem
services to contribute to a water management outcome. An NBS
can involve conserving or rehabilitating natural ecosystems
and/or the enhancement or creation of natural processes in
modified or artificial ecosystems. They can be applied at micro(e.g. a dry toilet) or macro- (e.g. landscape) scales.
In this report, nature-based approaches are articulated as
‘solutions’ to flag their current, and potential, contribution
to solving or overcoming the major contemporary water
management problems or challenges – a key focus of the
World Water Development Report series. However, they can also
have utility where no critical local water problem or challenge
exists, for example by delivering improved co-benefits of water
resources management or simply as an aesthetic choice, even
where gains in productivity are marginal.
Recognition of the role of ecosystems and the concept and
application of NBS in water management are certainly not
new. The role of ecosystems has been entrenched in modern
hydrological sciences for decades. NBS terminology emerged
probably around 2002 (Cohen-Shacham et al., 2016), but the
application of natural processes to manage water probably spans
millennia. Previous editions of the World Water Development
Report series have only briefly touched on NBS (usually using
alternative terminology). However, there has been rapidly
increasing attention to NBS in both policy forums and the
technical literature, partly in response to the view that their
potential is underestimated.

 	 The views expressed in this chapter are those of the author(s). Their inclusion
does not imply endorsement by the United Nations University.

2

22

The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with its
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), has reflected
this in the adoption of Target 6.6 (“By 2020, protect and
restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains,
forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes”) to support the
achievement of SDG 6 (“Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all”), including with
regards to its other targets on drinking water, sanitation,
water quality, water use efficiency and integrated water
resources management (IWRM). In response, the 2018
edition of the World Water Development Report is devoted
to NBS and pays particular attention to their role in
contributing to this agenda.
There are important lessons from ancient history that
help frame the context of this report. The precarious
nature of the relationship between ecosystems, hydrology
and human well-being is evidenced, for example, by
the collapses of the early ‘great river civilizations’ of the
Tigris-Euphrates, the Nile, the Indus-Ganges and the
Yellow River (Ito, 1997) that were initiated by hydrological
changes and reductions in rainfall of up to 30% in a tract
of the globe extending from Europe to the Indus River
(Cullen et al., 2000; Weiss and Bradley, 2001). In some
cases, desertification initiated by hydro-meteorological
changes may have been accelerated by changes in land use,
including overgrazing by livestock, as migratory populations
sought more favourable agricultural conditions (Weiss
et al., 1993). A similar history can be traced back to the Maya
Civilization (250–950 AD) of Central America (Peterson and
Haug, 2005). Certainly, over the past two to three millennia,
wherever humankind has altered landscapes, chiefly
for agriculture, degradation of the natural capital base
has ensued and invariably led to a loss in the productive
capacity of the land, often leading to desertification and
abandonment (Montgomery, 2007). Parallels can be drawn
to today. A growing body of evidence (as discussed in the
Prologue) suggests that, as humankind began to chart its
course through the Anthropocene, fundamental shifts in the
state and functioning of the Earth systems started to exceed
the range of variability experienced in the Holocene (Steffen
et al., 2015).

1.2 Compatible concepts, tools,
approaches and terminology
There are a number of other concepts, tools, approaches or
terminology in use among various stakeholder groups or
forums that are the same as, similar to or compatible with
NBS. All of these aim to balance a more technocratic, builtinfrastructure approach that has tended to dominate water
resources management, by recognizing the contribution
that ecosystems can make. Ecohydrology is an integrative
science that focuses on the interaction between hydrology
and biota (Box 1.1). The ecosystem approach is a conceptual
framework for resolving ecosystem issues, adopted by
the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD, 1992) and
compatible with the wise use of wetlands concept of the

23

Ramsar Convention on Wetlands (1971). Ecosystem-based
management and ecosystem-based adaptation or mitigation
involve the conservation, sustainable management and
restoration of ecosystems. Environmental flows describe
the quantities, quality and patterns of water flows required
to sustain freshwater and estuarine ecosystems and the
ecosystem services they provide. Eco-, phyto- and bioremediation are concepts that use ecosystem restoration to
reinstate a diverse system of plant communities in a particular
ecosystem so that its buffering or remediation capacities are
enhanced. Other concepts, tools and approaches partly related
to NBS include ecological restoration, ecological engineering,
forest landscape restoration, green or natural infrastructure,
ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction (DRR) and climate
adaptation ecosystem services (Cohen-Shacham et al., 2016).
NBS support a circular economy that promotes greater
resource productivity aiming to reduce waste and avoid
pollution, including through reuse and recycling, and is
restorative and regenerative by design, in contrast to a linear
economy which is a ‘take, make, dispose’ model of production.
NBS also support the concepts of green growth or green
economy, which promote sustainable natural resource use and
harness natural processes to underpin economies.
NBS recognize ecosystems as natural capital, or the stock
of renewable and non-renewable natural resources (e.g.
plants, animals, air, water, soils and minerals) that combine
to yield a flow of benefits to people (adapted from Jansson
et al., 1994; Atkinson and Pearce, 1995). The Natural Capital
Protocol3 is being increasingly recognized by a wide range
of stakeholders, including business, and supports the use of
NBS by highlighting the flow of benefits that can be derived
from using nature. Through a robust and structured process,
the framework helps organize, identify, measure and value
impacts and dependencies on natural capital and can catalyse
investment in NBS.
NBS are also consistent with, if not essential to, numerous
religious, cultural or totemic beliefs that emphasize
conceptions about nature rather than management decisions
driven by a technocratic approach. NBS reflect a global
paradigm adopted by secular and spiritual leaders that
generally state that to trespass natures’ boundaries is a sin
(or equivalent). For example, values found in most religions,
including Islam, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism, Judaism and
Christianity, advocate equity between man and nature and
appropriate use instead of over-use and purification after
use (Taylor, 2005). Likewise, Mother Earth or Mother Nature
are common metaphorical expressions for the Earth and its
biosphere as the giver and sustainer of life. Such concepts can
be locally, nationally or regionally important and can trump
science and technology-driven approaches. Since this report
argues that NBS should also be based on sound science and
economics, they offer a bridge between these traditional
and modern paradigms. Among other things, this can make
religious, cultural and totemic leaders powerful allies in the
deployment of NBS.
3

More information on Natural Capital and the Natural Capital Protocol can
be found at naturalcapitalcoalition.org/protocol/.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 1.1

ECOHYDROLOGY
Ecohydrology is an integrative science that focuses on the interaction between hydrology and biota. It seeks
to reinforce ecosystem services in modified landscapes to reduce anthropogenic impacts. Holistic approaches
that manage hydrology and biota aim to achieve sustainability in both ecosystems and human populations and
improve IWRM. Ecohydrology provides basic knowledge and applied tools for the achievement of the SDG 6 on
water.

Ecohydrology promotes the integration of a catchment and its biota into a single entity and the use of ecosystem properties
becomes a management tool within which ecohydrology can address fundamental aspects of water resources management.
It provides a sound scientific basis for adopting a watershed as the basic planning unit. By incorporating the concept of
improved ecosystem resilience as a management tool, ecohydrology strengthens the rationale for adopting a preventive and
holistic approach to the watershed – as opposed to the reactive, sectoral and site-specific approach typical of present practices
in water resources management. At the same time, ecohydrology stresses the importance of eco-technological measures as an
integral component of water management, complementing standard engineering approaches (Zalewski, 2002). Furthermore,
Mitsch and Jørgensen (2004) have developed the application of ecological engineering, e.g. the management of wetlands for
water purification from excessive nutrient loads based on ecological theory and mathematical modelling.
Ecohydrology acts as an accelerating factor for the transition from descriptive ecology, restrictive conservation and overengineered management of aquatic ecosystems to analytical/functional ecology and creative management and conservation
of freshwaters (Zalewski et al., 1997).
Since 2011, UNESCO’s International
Hydrological Programme (UNESCOIHP) has promoted the establishment
of various demonstration sites
around the world to apply systemic
ecohydrology solutions in watersheds
across all scales. A demonstration site
applies ecohydrology in its objectives
of dealing with issues such as
pollutant and nutrient concentrations,
water quality improvement, flood
mitigation, loss of retention capacity
of vegetation, etc. Hydrological and
ecological processes are studied from
molecular (microbial processes) to
catchment scales in aquatic habitats
like wetlands, marshes, mangroves
and rivers from headwaters to plains
and coastal zones, in order to find
long-term solutions that integrate
social components. The demonstration
sites include the concept of enhanced
ecosystem potential, through the
application of ecohydrological
strategies, to achieve sustainability
of water-related ecosystems to
improve IWRM. This is termed WBSRC
(W-water, B-biodiversity, S-ecosystem
services, R-resilience, C-culture or
social dimension), containing the five
elements that should be taken into
consideration while trying to reinforce
the carrying capacity of modified
ecosystems.
Contributed by UNESCO-IHP.

Figure | Ecohydrology: Past, present, future

PAST
1.

Hydrology focused on control of catastrophic events and water supply

2.

Descriptive ecology

3.

Restrictive conservation of aquatic ecosystem

4.

Over-engineered management of aquatic environment

Generation of sustainability concept

PRESENT
Ecohydrology
Integration of ecology + hydrology and improvement of
predictive abilities of large-scale, long-term processes as a
background of sustainable management

FUTURE
1.

Ecohydrology as a tool for sustainable use of aquatic resources

2.

Analytical/functional ecology

3.

Integrated and creative conservation of freshwater resources

4.

Predictive planning and ecologically sound management

Operational stage of sustainable management of freshwater resource

Source: Zalewski et al. (1997, fig. 2, p. 13).

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

24

NBS tend to be in harmony with customary laws and
traditional/local knowledge that can be important locally.
The human rights-based approach for water resources
management and governance can also be consistent with
NBS, especially if focusing on customary laws. Additional
rights issues that need to be considered include the
recognition of indigenous people’s collective rights to the
lands and territories, the natural resources that they have
traditionally occupied and used, their right to development
and the impacts of climate change adaptation and
mitigation (the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of
Indigenous Peoples).

soil conservation than reforestation in that location (Chen
et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2015). Natural grasslands also
tend to produce high-quality water. However, in the case
of manured grasslands (as in Western Europe and the USA,
for example), elevated nitrogen and phosphorus loads in
surface runoff form a major issue (Hahn et al., 2012). This
calls for the adoption of a landscape approach to hydrology
where land cover and management are the focus of
attention and both are considered with regards to desired
landscape performance. Above all, bare land (unless
natural, as in deserts or the ice caps, for example) needs
to be avoided since this is a significant contributor to soil/
land degradation, including increased erosion and reduced
water productivity (FAO/ITPS, 2015a).

1.3 How NBS work

Soils

Vegetation

Soils play a major, and often underestimated, role in the
movement, storage and transformation of water. Soils
involve complex living systems and their hydrobiological
processes are closely linked to their ecological health.
How much water infiltrates, evaporates from or percolates
through land depends not only on vegetation and climate,
but also on the geometry of the soil pore space, and
therefore on soil structure. Moreover, the conditions at the
soil surface (vegetation cover, soil structure, etc.) control the
partitioning of rainfall into surface runoff and infiltration. In
the root zone, infiltrated water is then partitioned between
evaporation and transpiration on the one hand and deep
percolation on the other. It is well known that changes in
management and land cover affect the soil structure and
hence modify these soil properties. For example, in an
extreme case, soil sealing by roads and other infrastructure
in cities completely undermines soil hydrology, resulting in
the loss of infiltration and hence precipitation is diverted to
overland flow, often contributing to flooding. In addition,
the health of soils, and in particular their ability to support
nutrient cycling, has a major influence on water quality,
particularly in farming systems (FAO, 2011b).

Landscapes tend to include a variety of vegetation cover
categories, each of which can have different degrees of
influence on the water cycle, which is also influenced by
the management regime in place. Forests, for example,
often receive the most attention regarding land cover and
hydrology, but grasslands and croplands are also very
important. Although forests are widely used successfully
as restoration solutions, the restoration of grasslands and
shrubs in the Loess Plateau in China have been found to
bring greater improvements in soil moisture storage and

The soil–vegetation system is the first receiver of the
precipitation and energy that fall on land. The zone
between the upper ranges of the groundwater table (or
basement rock) to that just above the soil-vegetative
layer is critical in controlling terrestrial water quantity
and quality (FAO/ITPS, 2015a). Approximately 65% of the
water falling on land is either stored within or evaporated
from the soil and plants (Oki and Kanae, 2006). Of the
water stored on land, over 95% is stored in the vadose
(shallow) and saturated zones (groundwater) of the soil,
excluding the water still retained in glaciers (Bockheim
and Gennadiyev, 2010). Although soil water in the upper,
more biologically active layer of soils comprises only
0.05% of the world’s store of freshwater (FAO/ITPS, 2015a),
the upward and downward fluxes of water and energy
through the soil are vast and strongly linked. These figures
clearly indicate the importance of soil water for the Earth’s
land–water–energy balance, including the interchange
between soil water and precipitation via transpiration, and
a potential positive feedback as the climate warms in the
future (Huntington, 2006).

1.3.1

The role of ecosystems in the water cycle

1.3.2

Major ecosystem components involved

The physical, chemical and biological properties of
ecosystems affect all the hydrological pathways in the
water cycle (Figure 1.1). Biological processes in a landscape,
and especially in soils, influence the quality of water as it
moves through a system, as well as soil formation, erosion
and sediment transport and deposition – all of which can
exert major influences on hydrology. There are also large
energy fluxes associated with this nature-driven cycle: for
example, the latent heat involved with evaporation can
exert a cooling effect and is a basis for NBS for regulating,
for example, urban climates.

All major terrestrial, and most coastal, ecosystem types
or biomes influence water. The bulk of NBS applications,
including in urban landscapes, essentially involve the
management of vegetation, soils and/or wetlands
(including rivers and lakes).

Plants cover about 72% of the global land mass (FAO/ITPS,
2015a). Plant stems and leaves intercept precipitation (rain
or snow) or cloud moisture. Plants affect water availability
and climate through transpiration functions and hence
remove water from soils and sometimes groundwater. Plant
roots contribute to soil structure and health and hence
influence soil water storage/availability, infiltration and
percolation to groundwater. In all but the driest or frozen
landscapes, natural plant senescence builds up a critical
layer of organic matter covering soil, regulating erosion and
evaporation from land.

25

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

HYDROLOGICAL PATHWAYS

Figure 1.1		 Generalized hydrological pathways in a natural landscape (top) and an urban setting (bottom)

A
B

C,D
CLOUD FORMATION

LAKE STORAGE

FROM OCEAN

TRANSPIRATION

FROM SOIL

FROM VEGETATION

FROM SURFACE WATER

EVAPORATION

F

G

E

H
L

I
I
J

K

SURFACE
RUNOFF

FLOODPLAIN

INFILTRATION
GROUNDWATER
FLOW
LATERAL
FLOW

INFILTRATION
OCEAN
PERCOLATION

ROCK

SOIL

A

H

F

LEGEND

B

D

L

E
I

Source: WWAP.

GROUNDWATER

C

G

DEEP SOIL
ROCK BASE

J
K

ABCDEFGHI-

Rainfall and/or snowfall
Horizontal precipitation capture
Interception/evaporation
Transpiration
Throughfall and stemflow
Infiltration excess overland flow
Infiltration
Lateral subsurface flow in soil strata
Lateral subsurface flow in unconsolidated
rock and/or solid rock
J - Saturation overland flow
K - Riverflow (or channel flow)
L - Lateral groundwater flow

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

26

Wetlands

Although only about 2.6% of land is covered by inland water
bodies (FAO/ITPS, 2015b), wetlands, including rivers and
lakes,4 play a disproportionately large role in hydrology per
unit area. The case for wetland conservation is often made
in terms of hydrological processes, including groundwater
recharge and discharge, flood flow alteration, sediment
stabilization and water quality (Maltby, 1991). Coastal
wetlands also play an important role in water-related DRR:
mangroves, for example, and to a lesser extent saltmarshes,
can reduce the energy of waves and currents, stabilizing
sediment with their roots and reducing flood risk from
storm surges.

1.3.3

Land use and land use change

Direct human-induced land use and land use change
(LULUC) considers the influences of the terrestrial
components (including land cover – e.g. natural forest
versus croplands) of ecosystems, and in some cases
wetlands, on hydrology. LULUC is an important determinant
of local, regional and continental-scale water cycles.
Ecosystems make important contributions to precipitation
recycling from local to continental scales. Globally, up
to 40% of terrestrial rainfall originates as upwind land
evaporation, with this source accounting for over half of
rainfall in some regions; the remainder originates from the
oceans (Keys et al., 2016). The contribution of vegetation
to local precipitation can be much higher. There are even
areas where vegetation is the main or only source of local
surface water, as in the case of vegetation capturing water
from clouds in the seasonal absence of local precipitation
(Hildebrandt and Eltahir, 2006). Rather than being regarded
as a ‘consumer’ of water, vegetation is perhaps more
appropriately viewed as a water ‘recycler’ (Aragão, 2012).
At the local scale, crop and soil management in fields have
a major influence on local field hydrology (FAO, 2011b).
Notably, apart from its extent, all cropland and pasture is
under active and usually intensive management. Factors
influencing cropland hydrology include the type of crop
and the use of chemicals, crop spacing, crop rotation and
particularly soil disturbance through tillage, among other
interventions. These can all be adjusted to manage crop
water availability, groundwater recharge, evaporation
rates, surface runoff, erosion and plant nutrient availability,
among other factors, and exert significant effects on water
availability and quality both within and off farms, including
at landscape scales (FAO, 2011b).

4

The Ramsar Convention on Wetlands (1971) adopts an extremely broad
definition of wetlands as “areas of marsh, fen, peatland or water, whether
natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static
or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water, the
depth of which at low tide does not exceed six metres” (Article 1). This
definition is also adopted by the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD,
1992) and is therefore the one used in this report. ‘Wetlands’ therefore
include rivers, lakes, reservoirs, mangroves and permanently saturated
soils (notably peatlands), among other types. However, terminology
varies between countries and user groups, with many regarding wetlands
only as natural shallow, heavily vegetated areas, such as ‘swamps’, ‘mires’
and ‘fens’ etc. Therefore, care needs to be taken if referring to ‘wetlands’
generally or a subset of wetlands – with qualification as appropriate.

27

Precipitation recycling at continental scales is illustrated
in Figure 1.2. Other examples include evaporation in the
Congo River Basin, which is a major source of rainfall for
the Sahel region, and the Rio de la Plata Basin in Uruguay
and Argentina, where 70% of the rainfall originates as
evaporation from the Amazon forest (Van der Ent et al.,
2010). As such, deforestation and other LULUC affecting
the Amazon water cycle threaten agricultural production
outside the Amazon (Nobre, 2014). Similarly, the Gulf
of Guinea and moisture from across Central Africa play
an important role in generating flows for the Nile via
the Ethiopian Highlands (Viste and Sorteberg, 2013).
Vegetation removal probably has the most severe impacts
on rainfall in drier areas, contributing to increased water
scarcity, land degradation and desertification in those
areas (Keys et al., 2016).
Land use decisions in one place may therefore have
significant consequences for water resources, people,
the economy, and the environment in distant locations.
Precipitation recycling creates interdependencies among
countries that need not necessarily be adjacent to each
other nor share the same basin (Figure 1.3). The influence
of LULUC on the movement of moisture and subsequent
precipitation challenges the ‘watershed’ as being the
common unit of management. The watershed as a unit
applies best to surface and groundwater management, but
recent advances in hydrology have revealed ‘atmospheric
watersheds’ – otherwise known as ‘precipitationsheds’
(Keys et al., 2017).

1.3.4

Variations in hydrology within and 		
between ecosystem types

There is a high degree of variation in the impacts of
ecosystems on hydrology both within and between
ecosystem types or subtypes, their location and condition,
climate and management. This cautions to avoid
generalized assumptions about NBS, as site-specific
knowledge on their field deployment is required. For
example, trees can increase or decrease groundwater
recharge according to tree type, density and location
(Borg et al., 1988; Ilstedt et al., 2016). The tree–soil and
moisture–groundwater relationships are also dependent
on the size and age of the trees in question (Dawson,
1996). Forests typically have much greater evaporation
rates than grasslands where rainfall exceeds 2,000 mm
per year, but comparable rates where rainfall is less than
500 mm per year (Zhang et al., 2001). Wetlands are widely
reported to ‘act like a sponge’, thus reducing floods and
preventing droughts, but some headwater wetlands can
increase downstream flooding (Bullock and Acreman,
2003). The hydrological performance of soils also varies
widely between soil types, their condition and their
management (FAO/ITPS, 2015a). It should not be assumed
that ‘natural’ ecosystems are necessarily better in terms of
hydrology. Much depends on what is required from an area
or landscape, including non-hydrological benefits and how
these may measure up to the overall management costs.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 1.2		 Continental precipitation recycling, 1999–2008
Continental precipitation recycling ratio ρc = ρc,i + ρc,t
(a)

Continental precipitation recycling ratio for interception ρc,i = ρc - ρc,t
(b)

Continental precipitation recycling ratio for transpiration ρc,t = ρc - ρc,i
(c)

Note: The colour scale of (b) ends at 0.41, which is the global average fraction of direct evaporative fluxes (interception); the colour scale of (c) ends at
0.59, which is the global average fraction of delayed evaporative flux (transpiration). The arrows in (a) indicate the vertically integrated moisture fluxes.
Source: Van der Ent et al. (2014, fig. 2, p. 477).

1.3.5

The role of biodiversity

Biodiversity is relevant to NBS in two ways. Firstly,
biodiversity has a functional role in NBS whereby it
underpins ecosystem processes and functions and,
therefore, the delivery of ecosystem services (Hooper et al.,
2005). Soil biota, for example, constitute an important living
community in the soil system, providing a wide range of
essential soil services by shaping metabolic capacity and
soil functions (Van der Putten et al., 2004). Reductions in
soil biodiversity tend to be associated with negative impacts
on soil organic carbon, soil moisture and infiltration, and
therefore runoff, erosion and groundwater recharge (FAO,
2011b). Collectively, these impact water quality, notably
in relation to nutrient loads and sedimentation (FAO/ITPS,
2015a). Similarly, forests, grasslands and wetlands in their
natural state tend to be more biodiverse, have different
hydrological profiles and deliver better overall ecosystem
services than in a managed or disturbed state. Biodiversity
also enhances resilience, or a system’s capacity to recover
from external pressures such as droughts or management
mistakes (Fischer et al., 2006).

Secondly, biodiversity is relevant to NBS in the sense
of achieving biodiversity ‘conservation’ objectives,
irrespective of its functional role regarding water. Since NBS
are based on enhancing ecosystem extent, condition or
health, as a general rule they tend to support biodiversity
conservation as a significant co-benefit. However, this is not
necessarily always the case. For example, using an existing
natural wetland to deal with excess nutrient loads would
certainly change its ecological character and therefore
the biodiversity it supports. Whether this should be done
depends on the potential carrying capacity of the wetland,
possible ecosystem tipping points and what the desired
characteristics and uses of the wetland are (WWAP, 2017).
In Europe, restoring underused farmland to more natural
areas, for example as riparian zones protecting rivers or
for improving watershed services, can lead to the loss of
unique biodiversity in cases where farming was required
to sustain it (CBD, 2015). Such observations caution for the
need, where appropriate, to include biodiversity in NBS
impact assessments and, where indicated, biodiversity
safeguards in NBS applications.

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

28

5. The sources of precipitation for the East Asian Study region. See Fig. 3, for how to
Figure 1.3		 Sources ofFig.
precipitation
for the Sahel region
interpret the ﬁgure.

tre
a
Eri

Som

alia

Somaliland*

can study region. The width of the
ved in the country. The color of a
e ﬂow falls as precipitation. When
e color of that ﬂow corresponds to
. Figure will appear in color in the

ia

n
ea
Oc

op

hi
Et

an

Sud

South Sudan

Chad

O

d

an

rL

the

Nig
er

Mauritania

Burk

ina F
aso

ne
gal
Se

a

ri
ge

Ni
i

Mal

Fig. 6. The sources of precipitation for the Sahel region. See Fig. 3, for how to interpret
Note: The width of the flow corresponds
the fraction
of precipitation
received inare
thelisted
country/[territory].
The colour
a flow corresponds to the
the ﬁgure.toStarting
from
the ocean, countries
clockwise from
east toofwest.
country/[territory] in which that moisture flow falls as precipitation. When two countries/[territories] exchange moisture with one another, the colour
of that flow corresponds to the country with the larger (net) fraction received as rainfall. Starting from the ocean, countries/[territories] are listed
clockwise from East to West. while 14% of Canada's rainfall is provided by the USA. Thus, the ﬂow is

red,
corresponding
totothe
largerFederal
ﬂow Government.
towards Canada. We also
* Somaliland
is an
region
of Somalia, subject
the Somali
rican study region.
See Fig.
3, autonomous
for
widthbyof
each from
country
Source: Keys et al. (2017, fig. 6,the
p. 18).radial
© 2017 Reprinted
permission
Elsevier. is the same, to both

note that
ease the
comparison within the dependency wheel, and for visual aesthetics.
The dependency wheel diagrams contain a large amount of infororigin of evaporation that
mation, but we will primarily report on the overall patterns, to distill
The width of the ﬂow
if not all,
and issues: water
availability (supply or
1.3.6 Ecosystem functions,
process
and 		classiﬁcation
insights for
the typology
forsectors
our governance
discussion.
n received in the country.
quantity), water quality and moderating risk and extremes
benefits to people
(ecosystem
services)
Since dependency wheels can present diﬀerent types of information, we
ntry with the
larger
fractionprocesses
(including water-related disaster risk). Hence, Chapters 2, 3
The
water-related
and functions of ecosystems
explain an example of what is shown
in Figs. 3–6, using Canada as an
the ﬂow between
the USA
and 4 of this report explore how NBS contribute ecosystem
can be managed
to deliver benefits to people as ‘ecosystem
example.
First,
Canada
receives
about
62%
of its
annual
precipitation
nfall is provided
by All
Canada,
services
to help
manage
water
in each of these three areas
services’.
ecosystem services are dependent on water, but
from
the ocean.
Second,
Canada receives
of its contributions
precipitation
and make17%
significant
to from
key water resources
there are specific ecosystem
services
that directly
influence
the availability and quality of water, which are variously
referred to as, for example,
watershed services (Stanton et al.,

2010), water services (Perrot-Maître and Davies, 2001) or waterrelated ecosystem services (Coates et al., 2013). Some of these
key services are listed in Table 1.1.
For simplicity, water-related ecosystem services can be
grouped into those that relate to the movement of water (e.g.
evaporation, overland flow and infiltration into the ground),
the storage of water (principally in soils, groundwater and
wetlands) or the transformation of water, including its quality
(Acreman and Mountford, 2009). Together these underpin
the three dimensions of water resources challenges of most,

29

management challenges, including: drinking water quality;
sanitation and hygiene (WaSH); water security for food
security and sustainable agriculture; building sustainable
urban settlements; managing wastewater; DRR; land
degradation, drought and desertification; and climate
change adaptation (and mitigation).
Water-dependent ecosystem services include products
directly obtained from ecosystems (e.g. food, fibre and
energy), benefits derived from ecosystem processes (e.g.
air quality and climate regulation), supporting services (e.g.
nutrient cycling and soil formation) and cultural services
(e.g. recreation).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 1.1		 Examples of ecosystem services and some functions they perform
Ecosystem service category

Example ecosystem functions and benefits
Water-related ecosystem services*

Provisioning services – Products obtained from ecosystems
Freshwater supply

Providing freshwater for human consumption and human needs

Regulating services – Benefits obtained from the regulation of ecosystem processes
Water regulation

Regulating the presence of water over time and space – surface waters and groundwater
discharge/recharge

Erosion regulation

Soil stabilization (links to natural hazard regulation and supports provisioning services)

Sediment regulation

Regulating the water-driven formation and flow of sediments through the system, including
deposition to maintain coastal wetlands and built land

Water purification and waste
treatment

Nutrient and pollution uptake, processing and retention, particle deposition

Natural hazard regulation

Water-related disaster risk reduction

- Coastal protection

- Attenuates/dissipates waves, buffers winds

- Flood protection

- Stores water or slows water flows to reduce flood peaks

- Drought protection

- Provides sources of water during drought periods

Climate regulation/moisture
recycling

Influencing local and regional precipitation and humidity and local/regional cooling effects
through evaporation
Water-dependent ecosystem services (other services or co-benefits)**

Provisioning services – Products obtained from ecosystems
Food and fibre

Fisheries, agricultural products, non-timber forest resources

Energy

Hydropower and bioenergy

Genetic resources

Source of genetic materials, e.g. for agriculture, medicines

Biochemicals, natural medicines,
pharmaceuticals

Chemicals, medicines and pharmaceuticals derived from living biota

Regulating services – Benefits obtained from the regulation of ecosystem processes
Air quality regulation

Carbon dioxide and oxygen cycling, air pollution control

Climate regulation

Carbon sequestration – regulation of greenhouse gas emissions and atmospheric loadings

Pest and disease regulation

Influencing the existence, extent and severity of human, plant and animal pests and diseases
Integrated pest management that enhances natural pest regulation can reduce pesticide use
– improving water quality and soil condition and its role in water cycling

Pollination

Sustaining animal pollination of plants to support crop production and biodiversity

Supporting services – Services that are necessary for the provision of all other services
Nutrient cycling

Maintains overall ecosystem functioning

Primary production

Supports all life on earth

Soil formation

Maintains the regular production of soil to support most other terrestrial ecosystem services

Cultural services – Non-material benefits that people can derive from ecosystems
Spiritual, religious and totemic
values

Beliefs held that depend on the existence of ecosystems (nature)

Aesthetic values

Benefits derived through ecosystems being considered beautiful, appealing or visually
appreciated etc.

Recreation and eco-tourism

Socio-economic benefits (e.g. livelihoods) based on tourism and recreation, including sport
(e.g. recreational fishing)

*Water-related ecosystem services are those that directly influence the quantity and quality of water and therefore underpin NBS.
**Water-dependent ecosystem services are those that rely on water but play no, or a limited, role in the quantity or quality of water and are among
the co-benefits of NBS.
Source: Based on Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005) and Russi et al. (2012).

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

30

Figure 1.4		 Natural, or green, infrastructure solutions for water management across a landscape

Conserving and protecting water sources
(ie. protected areas)

Establishing flood bypasses to
reduce downstream flooding
Forest landscape restoration to reduce
flood impacts, stabilise slopes and
provide clean water
* Capturing
rainwater with
green roofs

Growing crops across slopes
to reduce erosion and
increase infiltration

Connecting rivers to floodplains and aquifers

* Improving infiltration
using urban run-off
(ie. permeable pavements)

* Providing infiltration
and bio-retention
(urban green spaces)

Purifying wastewater
and alleviating flooding
(healthy wetlands)

Providing riparian buffers
to maintain water quality
and reduce erosion
Protecting and restoring mangroves,
coastal wetlands and dunes

* Water harvesting

Conserving and restoring wetlands
Protecting and restoring reefs for
coastal protection and habitat

Natural or semi-natural infrastructure provides services for water
resources management with equivalent or similar benefits to
conventional (built) 'grey' water infrastructure.

Hybrid solutions that contains built
elements that interact with natural
features and seek to enhance their
water related ecosystem services

The composition, structure, and function of natural infrastructure assets
in river basins, and the way they interplay with built 'grey' infrastructure
will determine the primary services and co-benefits produced.
Further information can be found in UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC (2014).

Source: Infographic ‘Natural Infrastructure for Water Management’, © IUCN Water 2015.

The social and economic contexts within which ecosystem
services are set are important in terms of designing
NBS that meet societal needs but can also be effectively
implemented. For example, where ecosystem restoration
is proposed to rectify a problem caused by the previous
loss of ecosystem services, it is essential to know what
drivers, both direct and indirect, caused such loss. Unless
these drivers can be addressed it is unlikely that the NBS
will succeed.

1.3.7

Green infrastructure

Green infrastructure (for water) refers to the natural or seminatural systems that provide water resources management
options with benefits that are equivalent or similar to
conventional grey (built/physical) water infrastructure.
Green infrastructure is the application of an NBS. The
terms ecological and natural infrastructure are often used
to describe similar assets. Typically, green infrastructure
solutions involve a deliberate and conscious effort to utilize
ecosystem services to provide primary water management
benefits as well as a wide range of secondary co-benefits,
using a more holistic approach (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC,

31

2014). Green infrastructure is becoming increasingly
recognized as an important opportunity for addressing
the complex challenges of water management and can be
used to support goals in multiple policy areas (Table 1.2). If
deployed over larger areas, green infrastructure can deliver
landscape-scale benefits (Figure 1.4).
The question whether green or grey infrastructure
solutions are to be preferred has been subject to debate
(Palmer et al., 2015). The ‘grey’ perspective argues that
the broad links between grey water infrastructure and
economic development are well established, that socioeconomic development is curtailed in countries that have
insufficient grey infrastructure to manage water, that many
developing countries are consequently ‘held hostage to
their hydrology’, and that therefore more grey infrastructure
is needed (Muller et al., 2015). An NBS approach has been
advocated partly because of the adverse environmental
and social impacts associated with large-scale grey
infrastructure. In this case, the argument offered is that
a redesign of conventional approaches is needed, one
that works with natural systems rather than against

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 1.2		 Green infrastructure solutions for water resources management

Coastal

Urban

Green Infrastructure solution

Floodplain

Water management issue
(primary service to be provided)

Watershed

Location

Corresponding Grey
Infrastructure solution
(at the primary service
level)

Re/afforestation and forest conservation
Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Water supply regulation (incl.
drought mitigation)

Dams and
groundwater pumping
Water distribution systems

Wetlands restoration/conservation
Constructing wetlands
Water harvesting*
Green spaces (bioretention and infiltration)
Permeable pavements*
Re/afforestation and forest conservation
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Water purification

Water treatment plant

Wetlands restoration/conservation
Constructing wetlands
Green spaces (bioretention and infiltration)
Permeable pavements*
Re/afforestation and forest conservation

Erosion control

Reinforcement of slopes

Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Water quality
regulation

Re/afforestation and forest conservation
Riparian buffers

Biological control

Water treatment plant

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains
Wetlands restoration/conservation
Constructing wetlands
Re/afforestation and forest conservation
Riparian buffers

Water temperature
control

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Dams

Wetlands restoration/conservation
Constructing wetlands
Green spaces (shading of water ways)
Re/afforestation and forest conservation
Riparian buffers

Riverine flood
control

Reconnecting rivers to floodplains

Dams and levees

Wetlands restoration/conservation
Constructing wetlands

Moderation
of extreme
events (floods)

Establishing flood bypasses
Green roofs

Urban stormwater
runoff

Green spaces (bioretention and infiltration)
Water harvesting*

Urban stormwater
infrastructure

Permeable pavements*

Coastal flood
(storm) control

Protecting/restoring mangroves, coastal
marshes and dunes

Sea walls

Protecting/restoring reefs (coral/oyster)

*Built elements that interact with natural features to enhance water-related ecosystem services.
Source: UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC (2014, table 1, p. 6).

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

32

The bulk of NBS
applications, including
in urban landscapes,
essentially involve the
management of vegetation,
soils and/or wetlands
(including rivers and lakes)
them, with NBS providing alternatives or complements
to grey infrastructure, as these can be equally or more
cost-effective and provide many co-benefits that are
often forgotten when water management becomes too
narrowly defined and implemented (Palmer et al., 2015).
The green versus grey infrastructure debate is, however, a
false dichotomy (McCartney and Dalton, 2015). It suggests
that it is necessary to choose one or the other, whereas in
reality the choice is usually which blend of each is most
appropriate and at what scale. There are examples where
nature-based approaches offer the main or only viable
solution (for example, landscape restoration to combat
land degradation and desertification) and examples where
only a grey solution will work (for example supplying
water to a household through pipes and taps), but in
most cases green and grey infrastructure can and should
be working together. In any event, water management is
already based on a combination of green and grey, since
ecosystems are always the origin of the water that is
subsequently managed through grey infrastructure. Some
of the best examples of the deployment of NBS are the
ways it can be used to improve the performance of grey
infrastructure. For example, the economic life expectancy
of the Itaipu Hydropower Dam in Brazil/Paraguay, one
of the world’s largest, was increased six-fold by applying
improved landscape management and farming practices
in the catchment to reduce sedimentation in the reservoir,
whilst simultaneously improving farm productivity and
farmer’s incomes (Kassam et al., 2012).

1.3.8

Co-benefits of NBS

A key feature of NBS is that they tend to deliver groups
of ecosystem services (Table 1.1) together – even where
only one is the target of management. NBS usually offer
multiple water-related benefits and often help address
water quantity, quality and risks simultaneously. In
addition, NBS often offer co-benefits beyond water-related
ecosystem services. For example, constructed wetlands
used for wastewater treatment can provide biomass
for energy production (Avellán et al., 2017). Ecosystem
creation or restoration can create or improve fisheries,
timber and non-timber forest resources, biodiversity,
landscape values and cultural and recreational services,
which in turn can lead to added socio-economic benefits

33

that include improved livelihoods and poverty reduction
as well as new opportunities for employment and the
creation of decent jobs (WWAP, 2016). The value of some
of these benefits can be substantial and tip investment
decisions in favour of NBS. Another key advantage of NBS
is the way in which they contribute to building overall
system resilience.

1.4 Mounting attention to NBS
1.4.1

Environment, development and water

1.4.2

The business case for NBS

1.4.3

The multilateral environment 			
agreements and global frameworks on
food security, disaster risk reduction 		
and climate change

In the early stages of the modern development agenda,
the relationship between development and environment
tended to be characterized as one of trade-offs, and
particularly so regarding water. Environmental impacts
were well known but regarded as an acceptable cost
of development. More recently, the dialogue on water
and environment has significantly shifted towards the
ways in which the environment can be managed to
support human water needs (Figure 1.5). A similar shift
in attention can be traced in the business community
and various policy forums. The net result has been
a significant shift towards NBS in recent times and
particularly so within the past ten years.

Businesses are increasingly interested in investing in
natural capital and NBS, driven by a convincing business
case.5 Business drivers for NBS include: resource
limitations; regulatory requirements; climate change
and severe weather events; stakeholder concerns; direct
financial benefits; operational, financial and reputational
gains from environmental co-benefits; and operational,
financial and reputational gains from social co-benefits.

A timeline can be traced through the research agenda,
with attention to NBS or similar terminology emerging
around 1990 (coinciding with the 1992 United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development, from which
emerged the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD,
1992), the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification (UNCCD, 1994) and the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC,
1992)), and escalating from 2000–2005 onwards
(Figure 1.6). A key factor was increasing attention to
the concept of ecosystem services from about 2000
onwards and improved efforts to value these, enabling
better engagement with policymakers. A milestone was
the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005).

 	 For a detailed overview of the business case, please visit the
Natural Infrastructure for Business platform at
www.naturalinfrastructureforbusiness.org/.

5

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 1.5		 Evolving approaches to the water–ecosystem nexus. Emphasis has shifted from looking at impacts on
		 ecosystems to managing ecosystems to achieve water management objectives
OLD APPROACHES:
Water management
Water use and built infrastructure

Water management goals

Impacts

Ecosystem/biodiversity (natural infrastructure)
Considered an unfortunate but necessary “cost”
(actually increased risk through unplanned and unmanaged impacts on water-related goals)

NEW PARADIGM:
Water management
(including land management)

Manages

Water use;
built and natural infrastructure

Delivers/Sustains

Management goals: Sustained ecosystem benefits
- Water for direct human use
(e.g. drinking, sanitation, food production)
- Other ecosystem services underpinned by water
(e.g. disaster risk reduction, nutrient cycling, coastal zone protection, fisheries, recreation, etc.)

Source: Coates and Smith (2012, fig. 2, p. 171).

Prior to 2010, the Convention on Biological Diversity
addressed freshwater largely through the lens of
mitigating the impacts of water management on
biodiversity. But in parallel with broader efforts to
link biodiversity more explicitly with development, a
significant milestone was the adoption of reference to
water-related ecosystem services under Aichi Biodiversity
Target 14, “By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential
services, including services related to water, and contribute
to health, livelihoods and well-being, are restored and
safeguarded…” (CBD, 2010, para. 13). This was the
precursor to the first explicit expression of the positive
relationship between ecosystems and water in the

global sustainable development agenda in the outcome
document of the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable
Development (Rio+20) (UNCSD, 2012), The Future We
Want, in its paragraph 122: “We recognize the key role that
ecosystems play in maintaining water quantity and quality
and support actions within respective national boundaries
to protect and sustainably manage these ecosystems.”
NBS are also increasingly and more explicitly recognized
in other forums. They are at the heart of preventive and
restorative measures to combat land degradation under
the UNCCD: in 2015, its twelfth Conference of the Parties
linked implementation to the SDGs and particularly

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

34

Figure 1.6		 Trends in the number of research papers mentioning NBS and related approaches, 1980–2014

Ecological and environmental engineering
Ecosystem and ecological restoration

Number of publications

Forest landscape restoration
Green and natural infrastructure
Ecosystem-based adaptation
Ecosystem-based management
Ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction
Climate adaptation services
Nature-based and natural solutions

Year of publication
Note: ‘Nature-based’ and ‘natural’ solutions are terms not in wide use in the academic community and trends in their use are therefore not well
reflected there.
Source: Cohen-Shacham et al. (2016, fig. 8, p. 23, based on data from Web of Science).

its Target 15.3: “By 2030, combat desertification, restore
degraded land and soil, including land affected by
desertification, drought and floods, and strive to achieve a
land degradation-neutral world”. Nature-based approaches
for DRR have long been recognized (Renaud et al., 2013).
However, the role of ecosystems in DRR has only recently
received significant attention in global frameworks, as
illustrated by the increased attention to ecosystems in the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030
compared to its predecessor, the Hyogo Framework for
Action 2005–2015 (UNEP, 2015). The current global agenda
on food security has also further embraced the central
role of NBS as captured, for example, by The Reviewed
Strategic Framework 2010–2019 of the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, endorsed by
the FAO Conference in June 2013 (FAO, 2014a). NBS-like
approaches have also recently been embedded in the
Voluntary Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture
and Food Systems approved by the Committee on World

35

Food Security in October 2014; for example, its Principle 6:
“to conserve and sustainably manage natural resources,
increase resilience, and reduce disaster risks” (CFS, 2014).
NBS are central to addressing climate change. UN-Water
stressed that the impacts of climate change are largely
on hydrology and water resources (UN-Water, 2010). The
changing water cycle is central to most of the climate
change-related shifts in ecosystems and human wellbeing and the impacts of climate change arising from
ecosystem change (SEG, 2007; IPCC, 2014). This implies
that ecosystem-based management should be the primary
means of climate change adaptation – and this largely
involves using NBS for water. NBS are already recognized
in the climate change agenda. National Adaptation
Programmes of Action, under the UNFCCC, often highlight
ecosystem-based adaptation approaches. The strong
interdependencies between the carbon and water cycles
also create significant synergies between climate change

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

mitigation and adaptation. For example, Reducing
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation
(REDD+) is the application of a nature-based approach
for managing the global climate, primarily for climate
change mitigation, but the role of trees in hydrology
creates substantial links to adaptation. Also, around
25% of greenhouse gas emissions arise from land use
change (FAO, 2014b) and water loss is implicated in many
trends in land degradation; peatlands, for example,
play a significant role in local hydrology, but this type
of wetlands also stores twice the carbon of the entire
world’s forests and when drained, peatlands are a source
of massive greenhouse gas emissions (Parish et al., 2008).

1.4.4

Linking NBS with the 2030 Agenda for 		
Sustainable Development and its SDGs

NBS embody the three basic principles of implementing
the SDGs: indivisibility (one goal cannot be achieved
at the expense of any others), inclusion (leave no one
behind) and acceleration (by focusing on actions that
have multiple development dividends).
Aichi Biodiversity Target 14 and the outcomes of
Rio+20 (as above) contributed to the incorporation
of ecosystems into SDG 6 through its Target 6.6 (“By
2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems,
including mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers
and lakes”) in recognition of the role of ecosystems
in the achievement of the overarching water goal
(SDG 6) and its other targets. In addition to Target 6.6,
SDG 14 (Oceans) and particularly SDG 15 (Terrestrial
Ecosystems), ecosystems are also mentioned in the SDGs
with regards to food security in Target 2.4 and also with
reference to water (“By 2030, ensure sustainable food
production systems and implement resilient agricultural
practices that increase productivity and production, that
help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for
adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought,
flooding and other disasters and that progressively
improve land and soil quality”). Even within SDGs 14 and
15, only Target 15.3 is specific about why ecosystems
should be safeguarded or restored, and it refers, again,
to water (land degradation, drought and flooding). NBS
can contribute to achieving many other SDGs and their
Targets, even if currently not explicitly mentioned. Such
linkages are explored further in subsequent chapters and
summarized in Chapter 7.

1.5 Assessing NBS in the context of this
report
It is clear that there is increasing recognition of NBS in the
water agenda. Chapters 2, 3 and 4 of this report consider
NBS for managing water availability, quality and risks,
respectively. Chapter 5 provides examples of experiences
with NBS at regional levels. Each provides further details
of NBS, including sector-based examples.

Ecosystem-based
management should
be the primary means
of climate change
adaptation – and this
largely involves using
NBS for water

However, despite a long history of, and growing
experience with, application of NBS, there are still many
cases where water resources policy and management
ignore NBS options – even where they are obvious and
proven to be efficient. There are also still too many cases
where NBS are deployed based on uncertain science and
then do not deliver on their stated impacts. Chapter 6,
therefore, considers known constraints to applying NBS
based on experience from assessments in Chapters 2 to 5,
plus other sources of information, and ways and means to
overcome these. All of these essentially centre on creating
the right enabling conditions for the consideration of NBS
on a more level playing field across the water agenda,
where they can be fairly assessed against other options.
Chapter 7 draws conclusions and potential responses,
paying particular attention to the opportunities that NBS
provide to help Member States (and other stakeholders)
to achieve their water resources management and related
sustainable development objectives, including with
regards to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The previously referenced lessons from history beg
pertinent questions: Can the same catastrophes that
beset earlier civilizations be avoided? Are societies
any better placed in the twenty-first century than
millennia ago? The current status of ecosystems (see
Prologue, for example) certainly does not bode well. The
knowledge about how the water–food–energy–ecosystem
relationship can be managed, especially when it comes
to influencing socio-political drivers of change, remains
incomplete. Much will depend on the balance that can
be achieved between the degradation, conservation
and restoration of water-related ecosystems and how
ecosystem hydrological processes can be better managed
to help achieve multiple water management objectives.
Irrespective of whether catastrophe looms, there is an
imperative to escalate social, economic and hydrological
efficiency gains in water resources management, in which
NBS will certainly play an important role. This report sets
out to assess how this can be done.

Chapter 1 Nature-based solutions (NBS) and water

36

NBS FOR
MANAGING
WATER
AVAILABILITY

FAO | Amani Alfarra and Antony Turton
With contributions from6: David Coates and Richard Connor
(WWAP); Marlos De Souza and Olcay Ünver (FAO); UNIDO
Industrial Resource Efficiency Division and John Payne
(John G. Payne & Associates Ltd); Matthew McCartney (IWMI);
Ben Sonneveld (ACWFS-VU); Rebecca Welling (IUCN);
Tatiana Fedotova (WBCSD); and Daniel Tsegai (UNCCD)

Pantanal wetlands (Brazil)

2.1 Introduction
Most Member States are challenged by an induced scarcity
of water, at least locally if not nationally, exacerbated by
the failure to expedite policy-directed solutions. Water
scarcity is influenced by both demand and supply. Although
there are examples of how NBS can influence demand (for
example reducing crop water requirements in irrigation),
they mainly address water supply through managing
water storage, infiltration (sorptivity) and transmission so
that improvements are made in the location, timing and
quantity of water available for human-related needs. An NBS
approach is a key means for addressing overall water scarcity
through supply-side management, not least because the
approach is recognized as the main solution for achieving
sustainable water for agriculture (see Section 2.2.1) – by far
the most critical need for achieving overall water resources
sustainability because of its dominance in current water
demand and for future challenges (see Prologue).
Water availability (particularly scarcity) is influenced by water
quality. For example, improving water quality enables its reuse. Disastrous floods and droughts represent the extremes
of variation in water availability. The current chapter focuses
on how NBS can help Member States achieve their national
water availability challenges, apart from those related to
water quality and extremes, which are covered in Chapters 3
and 4, respectively, although relevant linkages remain.
Ecosystems exert a major influence on the quantity of water
available in time and space (see Chapter 1). Most notably
the soil–vegetation interface is the key determinant of the
fate of precipitation by influencing infiltration from the
land surface, and hence groundwater recharge, surface
runoff and soil moisture retention in the plant root zone (of
particular importance to agriculture), and finally recycling

6

Authors would like to thank Sarah Davidson of WWF-US for helpful
comments.

38

water back to the atmosphere through evaporative fluxes.
NBS essentially involve managing these pathways, either
through ecosystem conservation or rehabilitation, and
through various land use and management approaches,
whether at small or landscape scales or in urban or rural
settings. In addition, structural approaches involving
physical changes in the landscape, such as creating small
depressions for water harvesting or tapping underexploited

water in landscapes (Box 2.1), have been presented as
NBS, although some of these arguably function simply
as small-scale grey infrastructure. Structural approaches
are included here particularly where they are deployed
in conjunction with managing the living components of
landscapes. Depending on interpretations, they can be
viewed as NBS or examples of hybrid (but small-scale)
green/grey infrastructure approaches.

BOX 2.1

NATURE-BASED WATER STORAGE IN DRY RIVERS IN AFRICA
The riverbeds of many seasonal (also known as ephemeral) rivers and streams that crisscross arid and
semi-arid lands form shallow groundwater reservoirs, which are recharged every time the rivers flow.
Communities can draw water from these alluvial aquifers during the dry season, using a variety of
simple means. Yet, despite its high storage potential, this storage solution is currently under-utilized
in many regions of Africa, in particular for productive purposes such as agriculture (Lasage et al., 2008;
Love et al., 2011).

The Shashe, Tuli and Sashane Rivers in the arid south of Zimbabwe exemplify the large potential of this type of water
storage. Even after the exceptionally dry 2015–16 rainy season, the riverbeds of these seasonal rivers contained
sufficient water for irrigation. Yet tapping into this resource for productive purposes remains a major challenge
(Critchley and Di Prima, 2012).
‘Sand dams’ (i.e. walls across the river in the sand) have been used in the Sashane irrigation gardens in southern
Zimbabwe in conjunction with low-cost, low-lift solar-powered pumps. The ‘sand dams’ gradually increase the
thickness of the sediment layer in the river (through heightening the dam in stages), thus increasing both the volume
of water stored and its accessibility. The technology allows farmers to access water for supplementary irrigation and
mitigate the risks related to water availability. It can also enable farmers to extend the cropping season into the dry
period and harvest a second (cash or staple) crop, providing opportunities for enhancing income and livelihoods.

Figure | A schematic of a sand dam

Source: Based on www.metameta.nl

The sustainable use of this nature-based storage can be supported by the creation of a community monitoring
device that ensures that all water users have correct and symmetrical information on actual groundwater levels – a
critical element in sustainably managing such a common pool resource (Ostrom, 2008).
Considering that one-fifth of Africa consists of arid and semi-arid lands, and assuming that 1% of these lands are
suitable for agriculture and suitably located near a sand river, sand rivers could potentially provide water storage for
up to 60,000 km2 of irrigated land in Africa. This is significant when compared with the 130,000 km2 of irrigated land
that existed in 2010 (You et al., 2010), and more so because they are located in areas where moisture deficits are a
major recurring challenge.
Contributed by Annelieke Duker (IHE Delft), Eyasu Yazew Hago (Mekelle University), Stephen Hussey (Dabane Water Workshops), Mieke Hulshof
(Acacia Water), Ralph Lasage (Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM) of the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam), Moses Mwangi (South Eastern
Kenya University) and Pieter van der Zaag (IHE Delft).

39

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

There are a few examples where either NBS or grey
(built) infrastructure is the only option to improve water
availability, but usually both should be considered,
designed and operated in harmony. Each approach
should leverage the benefits of the other in order
to harness synergies in improving overall system
performance (Figure 2.1).

2.2 Sector and issue-based case studies
2.2.1

Agriculture

Given the importance of water to food security,
sustainable agriculture and nutrition (HLPE, 2015),
the challenge of feeding growing populations will
increasingly become a central issue in most national
development policies. While almost 800 million people
are currently hungry, by 2050 global food production
would need to increase by 50% to feed the more than
9 billion people projected to live on our planet (FAO/
IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/WHO, 2017). It is now accepted that
this increase cannot be achieved through businessas-usual and that transformational change in how
we produce food is required (FAO, 2011b; 2014a).
Agriculture will need to meet projected increases in
production through improved resource use efficiency
whilst simultaneously reducing its external footprint,
and water is central to this process. This topic has
been analysed in considerable depth. A cornerstone of
solutions is the ‘sustainable ecological intensification’
of food production that enhances ecosystem services in
agricultural landscapes, for example through improved
soil and vegetation management (FAO, 2014a). The
approach is now mainstream as reflected, for example, in
the Reviewed Strategic Framework 2010–2019 of the Food
and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO,
2013b).7 Its Strategic Objective 2 highlights the critical role
of biodiversity and ecosystem services in the achievement
of the objectives of this framework, including “to take
advantage of the potential of the bioeconomy to increase
the contributions of agriculture, and forestry and fisheries
to economic development, while generating income and
employment and providing livelihood opportunities for
family farms and the more general population in the
rural areas. Production systems must meet this challenge

7

BOX 2.2

The case study of Tarun Bharat Sangh in Rajasthan, India,
presents an excellent example of the way in which lowcost community-led landscape approaches can improve
both groundwater recharge and surface water availability
through combining the management of soil, vegetation
and structural (physical) interventions. The NBS approach
delivers significant socio-economic gains across multiple
sectors and interests, and also illustrates how landscape
management can improve local climates, including
precipitation patterns (Box 2.2).

NBS BENEFITS AT SCALE –
LANDSCAPE RESTORATION TO
IMPROVE WATER SECURITY IN
RAJASTHAN, INDIA

Unusually low rainfall in 1985–86,
combined with excessive logging, led
to the worst droughts in the history of
Rajasthan. The district of Alwar, one of the poorest
in the State, was severely affected. The groundwater
table had receded below critical levels and the State
declared parts of the area ‘dark zones’, which meant
the severity of the situation warranted restrictions
on any further groundwater extractions. Tarun
Bharat Sangh, a non-governmental organization
(NGO), supported local communities to undertake
landscape-scale restoration of local water cycles
and water resources. With leadership provided
by women, who customarily take responsibility
for providing their families with safe freshwater,
traditional local initiatives for water were revived
by bringing people together on the issues of
management of forests and water resources.
Activities centred on the construction of smallscale water harvesting structures combined with
the regeneration of forests and soils, particularly in
upper catchments, to help improve the recharge of
groundwater resources.
The impact has been significant. For example,
water was brought back to a 1,000 villages across
the State; five rivers that used to run dry after the
annual monsoon season are now flowing again
and fisheries in them re-established; groundwater
levels have risen by an estimated six metres;
productive farmland increased from 20% to 80%
of the catchment; crucial forest cover, including in
farmlands, which helps to maintain the integrity and
water-retaining capacity of the soil, has increased
by 33%; and the return of wildlife such as antelope
and leopard has been observed. Everard (2015)
undertook a science-based assessment of the
programme confirming its claimed socioeconomic
benefits.
These innovative water solutions improved water
security in rural India (SIWI, 2015).
Source: Singh (2016).

Adopted by the 38th Session of the FAO Conference in June 2013 in its
decision C 2013/7.

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

40

Figure 2.1

The relationship between built infrastructure and ecosystem services
UPSTREAM

DOWNSTREAM
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BENEFITS
HYDROPOWER AND IRRIGATION

NATURAL INFRASTRUCTURE

RUNOFF GENERATION

RIVER FLOW

NATURAL
INFRASTRUCTURE

BUILT
INFRASTRUCTURE
"NOVEL ECOSYSTEMS"

FLOODPLAIN
GRAZING

RIVER FLOW
RESERVOIR
FISHERIES
GROUNDWATER
RECHARGE

EROSION
CONTROL

RECESSION AGRICULTURE

RIVER AND
ESTUARY
FISHERIES

FLOODPLAIN FISHERIES

TYPE 2 - ECOSYSTEMS INFLUENCED BY BUILT INFRASTRUCTURE
(I.E. PRESENCE AND OPERATION)

TYPE 1 - ECOSYSTEMS INFLUENCE
THE PERFORMANCE OF BUILT INFRASTRUCTURE

Source: CGIAR WLE (2017, fig. 1, p. 5, developed using some results from WISE-UP to Climate).

through innovations that increase agricultural productivity
and efficiency in a context of a sustainable use of natural
resources, reduced contamination, cleaner energy utilization,
and increased mitigation of, and adaptation to, climatic
change, as well as the delivery of environmental services.”
(FAO, 2013b, item 53).
Water is not considered independently in this approach,
which looks at improving overall ecosystem performance,
for example nutrient cycling (and hence fertilizer use
efficiency and therefore water quality), pest and disease
regulation, pollination, and prevention of soil erosion.
Improvements in water cycling (water regulation) are a
central and cross-cutting requirement and outcome.
Previous attention to water use in agriculture has tended
to focus on irrigation due to its high levels of water
withdrawal. However, the Comprehensive Assessment
of Water Management in Agriculture (2007) pointed out
that the main opportunities to increase productivity are
in rainfed systems that account for the bulk of current
production and family farming (and hence livelihood and
poverty reduction benefits).
The benefits of NBS can apply to farming at all scales,
from small-scale family farming (FAO, 2011b) to largescale ‘industrial’ agriculture. Economic viability and
ecosystem sustainability are two sides of the same coin
(Scholes and Biggs, 2004). For example, a recent study of

41

highly simplified and intensive mono-cropping systems
demonstrated that landscape diversification not only
delivers improved water, nutrient, biodiversity and
soil management, but simultaneously increases crop
production (Liebman and Schulte, 2015). Agricultural
systems that conserve ecosystem services by using
practices such as conservation tillage, crop diversification,
legume intensification and biological pest control perform
as well as intensive, high-input systems (Badgley et al.,
2007; Power, 2010). The ability to resist and recover from
various forms of stress, including droughts and floods,
as well as pests and disease, are among the effects of
increased biological diversity in agricultural systems noted
in a recent review (Cardinale et al., 2012). These approaches
are also a fundamental strategy for improving the resilience
of agriculture in the face of climate change (FAO, 2014a).
The World Overview of Conservation Approaches and
Technologies (WOCAT, 2007) undertook a detailed analysis
of 42 in-depth case studies of soil and water conservation
initiatives worldwide, mainly but not exclusively related to
agriculture. Soil and water conservation measures can be
grouped into:
•

Conservation agriculture – characterized by systems
incorporating three basic principles: minimum soil
disturbance, a degree of permanent soil cover, and crop
rotation.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

•

Manuring/composting – where organic manures
and composts are intended to improve soil fertility
and simultaneously enhance soil structure (against
compaction and crusting) and improve water infiltration
and percolation.

•

Vegetative strips/cover – for example using grasses
or trees in various ways. In the case of strips, these
often lead to the formation of bunds and terraces due
to ‘tillage erosion’ – the downslope movement of soil
during cultivation. In the other cases, the effects of
dispersed vegetation cover are multiple, including
increased ground cover, improved soil structure and
infiltration, as well as decreased erosion by water and
wind.

•

Agroforestry – describes land use systems where
trees are grown in association with agricultural crops,
pastures or livestock. Usually, there are both ecological
and economic interactions between components
of the system. There is a wide range of potential
applications, from shelterbelts, to trees with coffee, to
multi-story cropping.

•

Three structural approaches that are often supported
by living landscape components:
•

Water harvesting – which involves the collection
and concentration of rainfall runoff for crop
production, or for improving the performance
of grass and trees, in dry areas where moisture
deficit is the primary limiting factor.

•

Gully control – which encompasses a set of
measures that address this specific and severe
type of erosion, where land rehabilitation is
required. There is a whole range of different and
complementary measures, but structural barriers
dominate – often stabilized with permanent
vegetation. Commonly, such technologies are
applied over a whole sub-catchment.

•

Terraces – with a wide variety of different terrace
types, from forward-sloping terraces to level or
backward-sloping bench terraces, with or without
drainage systems.

Of these technologies, conservation agriculture (Box 2.3)
has become the flagship of an alternative agricultural
paradigm for intensifying crop production that not only
improves and sustains productivity but also delivers
important environmental services (Kassam et al., 2009;
2011a; FAO, 2011c).
Opportunities for improved on-farm management practices
that target green water8 (rainfed crops) can significantly
improve water availability for crop production. Using
moderate estimates (25%) for reductions in soil evaporation

 	 Green water is water from precipitation that is stored in the root zone
of the soil and evaporated, transpired or incorporated by plants. It is
particularly relevant for agricultural, horticultural and forestry products.
For more details, see: waterfootprint.org/en/water-footprint/what-iswater-footprint/.

8

There are a few
examples where either
NBS or grey (built)
infrastructure is the
only option to improve
water availability, but
usually both should be
considered, designed
and operated in harmony

and improved water harvesting through modifying tillage
regimes or mulching in a dynamic global vegetation and
water balance model, Rost et al. (2009) estimated that
global crop production could be increased by nearly
20% from on-farm green water management practices
alone. This translates into a water use benefit of about
1650 km3 per year (based on increases in net primary
productivity). Falkenmark and Rockström (2004) suggested
an improvement of green water productivity by 1530 km3
per year through a combination of similar techniques.
Although these authors consider their estimates to
be conservative, these predictions remain uncertain.
Nevertheless, they are a useful indication of the scale of
potential benefits on offer. For example, the latter figures
suggest that potential gains are roughly equivalent to
crop production from 50% of current irrigation water
withdrawals, or 35% of total water withdrawals. That
is, more than the projected increase in global water
demand between now and 2050. Where combined with
other measures to improve sustainability, these benefits
are even more impressive. For example, a review of
agricultural development projects in 57 low-income
countries found that more efficient use of water, reduced
use of pesticides and improvements in soil health had led
to average crop yield increases of 79% (Pretty et al., 2006).
There are also significant opportunities for NBS to improve
water use efficiency in irrigation and this can have a high
impact due to the fact that irrigation accounts for 70% of
current water withdrawals (HLPE, 2015). NBS for increasing
water use efficiency in irrigation are based on improving
catchment management to enhance groundwater and
reservoir recharge (Box 2.1), including through reduced
siltation that increases reservoir storage capacity and
improved soil health (as for rain-fed systems) through
increased soil moisture retention, for example. Better
management of the soil ecosystem in irrigated fields can
also yield significant water savings (Box 2.4).

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

42

BOX 2.3

CONSERVATION AGRICULTURE – AN APPROACH TO SUSTAINABLE PRODUCTION
INTENSIFICATION

Conservation agriculture involves the simultaneous application of three practical principles based on
locally formulated practices (Friedrich et al., 2008; Kassam et al., 2011a): minimizing soil disturbance
(no-till seeding); maintaining a continuous soil cover of organic mulch and/or plants (main crops and
cover crops including legumes); and cultivation of diverse plant species that, in different farming
systems, can include annual or perennial crops, trees, shrubs and pastures in associations, sequences
or rotations, all contributing to enhanced system resilience. The elimination or minimization of
mechanical soil disturbance avoids or reduces the shattering of topsoil structure and pores, as well as the loss of soil
organic matter and the soil compaction that occur with tillage. Stagnari et al. (2009) concluded that, when compared
to conventional tillage agriculture, conservation agriculture results in “improved soil structure and stability; increased
drainage and water-holding capacity; reduced risk of rainfall runoff (see Figure below) and reduced pollution of
surface waters with pesticides of up to 100% and fertilizers up to 70%; and about one quarter to one half lower energy
consumption and lower CO2 emissions”.

Figure | The same field with sections under tillage (right) and conservation agriculture/no tillage (left)
immediately after a heavy rainstorm

Note: Soil compaction and loss in water infiltration ability caused by regular soil tillage leads to impeded drainage and flooding in
the ploughed field (right) and no flooding in the no-till field (left). Photograph taken in June 2004 in a plot from a long-term field trial
‘Oberacker’ at Zollikofen close to Berne, Switzerland, started in 1994 by SWISS NO-TILL.
Photos: Wolfgang Sturny

The economic benefits of conservation agriculture have been established in various systems around the world, from
smallholder agricultural systems in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa to large-scale commercial production
systems in Brazil and Canada (reviewed in Govaerts et al., 2009). Currently, about 1.8 million km2 of croplands are
under conservation agriculture, representing about 12.5% of global cropland extent, an increase of 69.2% since
2008/09 (Kassam et al., 2017). However, uptake is highly variable between regions. For example, in some South
American countries 70% of croplands are under conservation agriculture, in others the area is negligible. Differences
appear to have more to do with perceptions, agricultural policies, farmer field support and incentives rather than biogeological-climatic factors, suggesting that the enabling policy environment is a key factor constraining further uptake
(Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009).

The environmental co-benefits of these, and other,
NBS approaches to increasing sustainable agricultural
production are substantial – mediated largely through
decreased pressures on land conversion and reduced
pollution, erosion and water requirements. For example,
food systems (meaning both food consumption patterns
and methods of food production) account for 70% of the
projected loss of biodiversity by 2050 under business-asusual (Leadley et al., 2014).

43

NBS also offer opportunities to reduce conflicts between
sectors over water use through improved system
performance. For example, tensions have been rising
between mining and agriculture interests in the Limpopo
Province of South Africa where the Njelele Dam, used
primarily for agriculture, is likely to be totally silted up
within a decade due to the nearby Makhado Colliery.
However, a planned open-pit mine of 20 km long and 1 km
wide provides an opportunity to use waste rock to build an

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

2.2.2

Urban settlements

NBS for addressing water availability in urban settlements
are of great importance, given that the majority of the
world’s population is now urbanized. Managing water flows
through urban landscapes can improve water resources
availability (Lundqvist and Turton, 2001). A wide range of
options is available for consideration. Many NBS are multifunctional, addressing water availability (scarcity/supply),
water quality and risks. They can be grouped into:
• Catchment management outside urban areas that
improve the supply into urban areas (including surface
water and groundwater sources) – almost always in
conjunction with improved water quality.
• Improved recycling of water within urban water cycles,
for example wastewater re-use enabled through NBS to
improve wastewater quality (see Chapter 3 and WWAP,
2017).
• The deployment of green infrastructure within urban
boundaries.
Catchment measures to improve water supplies to cities
are covered in further detail in Chapters 3 and 5, which
emphasize their impact on improving water quality.
However, these measures can also directly improve the
quantity of water available to urban users by utilizing
the ability of the natural infrastructure of catchments to
naturally store and release water, and in particular regulate
downstream flows (and groundwater recharge). This is
particularly beneficial as it helps to regulate variations in
supply and to reduce water scarcity during dry periods.
These attributes of natural landscapes usually work in
harmony with, and improve, grey-infrastructure approaches
to urban water supply (Box 2.5).
Urban green infrastructure is becoming increasingly
popular, as witnessed by escalating investment, for example
(Bennett and Ruef, 2016). Green infrastructure (see Chapter
1, Section 1.3.7) is retrofitted to improve the hydrological
performance of older urban landscapes or incorporated in
the design of new areas, due to its cost-effectiveness and its
multiple benefits (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC, 2014). Examples
of measures to regulate water supply for urban settlements
include reforestation, the restoration or construction of
wetlands, new connections between rivers and floodplains,
water harvesting, permeable pavements and green spaces
(bioretention and infiltration). Urban green infrastructure
essentially reinstates and manages the hydrological
pathways at the land/water interface and hence the fate of
precipitation, including runoff and groundwater recharge.

BOX 2.4

engineered aquifer to replace the function of Njelele Dam as
a storage device, thereby reducing possible conflict (Turton
and Botha, 2013). The area is also affected by climate
change with some models showing a potential 5 °C increase
in ambient temperature (Scholes et al., 2015), causing
massive evaporative losses from a reservoir and highlighting
the need for subsurface storage instead (Box 2.1). This helps
align the needs of society, creating a new social licence to
mine in a water-constrained area.

THE SYSTEM OF RICE
INTENSIFICATION (MORE
PRODUCTIVITY WITH LESS
WATER)

Rice is a staple for nearly half the
world’s population. Irrigated,
lowland rice cultivation, which
covers about 56% of the total rice-cropped area,
produces about 76% of the world’s total rice crop
(Uphoff and Dazzo, 2016). The system of rice
intensification (SRI) is an approach that includes
re-establishing the ecological and hydrological
functioning of soils, based on modifications in
standard crop and water management practices
rather than relying on the introduction of new
varieties or on the use of ever more agrochemical
inputs. It has taken root at an international scale,
moving far beyond its origins in Madagascar
(Kassam et al., 2011b). Of particular interest here
is the SRI practice keeping the soil moist but
not continuously flooded so that soil status is
mostly aerobic rather than always saturated and
anaerobic. Results vary considerably between
regions, but SRI can become labour-saving over
time, while saving water (by 25–50%) and seed (by
80–90%), reducing costs (by 10–20%), and raising
paddy output by at least 25–50%, often 50–100%
and sometimes even more (Uphoff, 2008). Zhao et
al. (2009) confirm the positive effect of SRI on rice
yield and on nitrogen and water use efficiency.
Gathorne-Hardy et al. (2013) showed that SRI
methods increased paddy yields by a substantial
58%, while reducing water applications. At the
same time, SRI offers opportunities for significant
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions as a result
of the shift from anaerobic to aerobic conditions
in the soil that results in reduced methane
emissions (that are not offset by increased N2O
emissions) and reduced embodied emissions in
the electricity used to pump water for irrigation
(Gathorne-Hardy et al., 2013; Dill et al., 2013). In
addition to improving rice production efficiency,
including crop water requirements, the benefits
of SRI collectively make rice production more
environmentally friendly (Uphoff and Dazzo,
2016). They also increase resilience and therefore
are a key approach for adaptation to climate
change (Thakur et al., 2016). Perception of climate
change and the need for moisture-conserving
technology is a key driver for SRI adoption,
particularly in drylands (Bezabih et al., 2016).

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

44

BOX 2.5

LANDSCAPE RESTORATION IMPROVES MULTIPLE WATER OUTCOMES FOR THE
TANA RIVER, KENYA

The Tana River in Kenya provides 80% of the drinking water for Nairobi, generates 70% of the
country’s hydropower and irrigates about 645 km2 of farmland. Steep hillsides and areas adjacent
to rivers have been converted to agriculture, resulting in erosion. Sedimentation has reduced
the capacity of reservoirs and increased the costs of water treatment for Nairobi. A US$10 million
investment in sustainable land management will be disbursed over 10 years, leading to a return of
US$21.5 million in economic benefits over a 30-year timeframe. Interventions include: improved
riparian management, the terracing of hillslopes, the reforestation of degraded lands, measures to encourage grass
strips in farms, and the mitigation of road erosion. In terms of water supply, the storage capacity of reservoirs will
be maintained as a consequence of reduced sedimentation. Revenues for the hydropower company will improve
as a direct result of this action. The Nairobi City Water and Sewerage Company has also benefited from avoided
filtration, lowered energy consumption and reduced sludge disposal costs. The benefits of reduced sedimentation
are maintained across a range of climate change scenarios.
Sources: Baker et al. (2015); TNC (2015); and Simmons et al. (2017).

This regulation of urban water flows particularly increases
urban water storage and therefore resilience to variations
in water availability, whether for flood management or
as a buffer against water scarcity. Urban food gardens
also help increase the use of urban rainfall and reduce
agricultural water demand in rural areas whilst also
shortening food supply chains, translating into further
water savings through avoided food waste. Urban green
infrastructure can also significantly improve urban
climates through shading and the cooling effects of
evaporation – thus enhancing the quality of life for citizens
as a co-benefit.
Green buildings are an emerging phenomenon that is
developing new benchmarks and technical standards
that embrace many NBS solutions. Crucial in this regard is
the alignment of regulatory requirements to incentivize,
or even mandate, NBS as the new normal (discussed
further in Chapter 6). China’s ‘sponge city’ concept and
programme represents a good example of NBS improving
urban water supplies at scale, based largely on deploying
green infrastructure approaches in urban landscapes,
primarily to improve water availability (Box 2.6).
In terms of supporting the expansion of NBS in cities,
UNESCAP (2017), for example, has provided a self-paced
e-learning course on Shifting Towards Water-Resilient
Infrastructure and Sustainable Cities. Interlinkages
between SDGs 6, 8, 11 and 13 are presented with an
overview of the best practices, policy briefs, holistic
strategies and approaches to good urban governance.
This course was designed to sensitize policy makers and
to foster utilization of the full benefits of water-resilient
infrastructure, in order to achieve inclusive, safe and
sustainable cities with SDG-readiness.

2.2.3

Energy and industry

Biofuels and hydropower are particularly relevant in
terms of NBS for water supply in the context of energy

45

production. Biofuel crops potentially use large amounts
of water and can increase water scarcity, among other
impacts (Mielke et al., 2010). However, NBS for biofuel
crops are essentially the same as those for agriculture,
as described earlier in Section 2.2.1. Applications of NBS
for improving water supply for hydropower essentially
involve improved catchment management approaches
that regulate water supplies to hydropower installations
(usually via reservoirs), and reductions in the sediment
loads to reservoirs in order to increase dam storage
efficiency (and power plant operational costs). Box 2.5
provides a case study of the Tana River watershed (Kenya)
where benefits of NBS approaches include increased
revenues for the hydropower company as a result of
improved water supply to the reservoir. The benefits of
NBS to improve hydropower dam operation efficiency can
be substantial and represent good examples of how green
and grey infrastructure can be complementary (Box 2.7).
The relationship of ecosystems to the water–energy nexus
and the possible responses to challenges through an
IWRM/ecosystem approach, using tools such as payment
for environmental services (PES), sustainable dam
management and strategic water basin investment, were
explored more fully in Chapter 9 of WWAP (2014), which
provided additional details and references.
Industry is increasingly investing in NBS to improve water
security for its operations. The World Business Council
for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) has collected
case studies from companies investing in such solutions
(WBCSD, 2015a). For example, the Volkswagen Group
in Mexico operates a production plant in the Puebla
Tlaxcala Valley where water supply is insufficient for the
growing city of Puebla. The company partnered with the
Comisión Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas (National
Commission for Protected Natural Areas) to secure a
reliable water supply. Analysis found that groundwater
replenishment in the valley was highly contingent upon

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 2.6

CHINA’S ‘SPONGE CITY’ CONCEPT
The central Government of China recently initiated the ‘sponge city’ project for the purpose of
improving water availability in urban settlements. The ‘sponge city’ concept uses a combination of
NBS and grey infrastructure to retain urban runoff for eventual reuse. The project’s objective is “70%
of rain water to be absorbed and reused through improved water permeation, retention and storage,
purification and drainage, as well as water saving and reuse. This goal should be met by 20% of urban
areas by the year 2020 and by 80% of urban areas by the year 2030”’ (Embassy of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands in China, 2016, p. 1). Through the ‘sponge city’ project, the negative impacts of urban
construction on natural ecosystems are expected to be mitigated.
“The city-wide deployment of nature-based solutions such as green roofs, pervious pavements and bioremediation
along with the restoration of urban and peri-urban wetlands and rivers lie at the heart of the national initiative”’ (Xu
and Horn, 2017, p. 1).
By 2020, 16 pilot ‘sponge cities’ will be constructed across an area of over 450 km2, with over 3,000 planned
construction projects and total investments of RMB 8.65 billion (about US$1.25 billion) (Embassy of the Kingdom
of the Netherlands in China, 2016). Initial results include alleviation of urban waterlogging, improvement of
water-related ecosystems, promotion of industrial development and improved overall public satisfaction. The
central policy planning, actively aligned with the local-level implementation, has integrated the ‘sponge city’
concept in urban regulatory planning and ecological restoration at city and district levels in Shenzhen and
Guangdong provinces.
Examples of measures include the installation of green roofs, walls and permeable pavement, as well as the
revitalization of degraded lakes and wetlands, which absorb excessive rainwater. Raingardens and bioretention
swales are then used to collect runoff and remove certain pollutants. Some of this water is then sent back to the
natural system and stored to ensure availability of water for irrigation and cleaning purposes during periods of
drought (Xu and Horn, 2017).
Contributed by UNESCAP.

Photo: © Syrnx/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

46

In 2013, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) led the Lima Declaration on Inclusive
and Sustainable Industrial Development (ISID), with
Point 7 calling for the promotion of “the sustainable use,
management and protection of natural resources and the
ecosystem services they provide” (UNIDO, 2013, item 7). This
built momentum on the topic, leading up to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and particularly Targets 6.4
and 6.6 on water scarcity and ecosystems, respectively
(WWAP, 2015). It provides an example of how NBS are being
mainstreamed into relevant policy reform arenas.

2.2.4

Combating desertification

2.2.5

Water, sanitation and hygiene

Desertification is driven by multiple pressures, but
the process is a direct result of (if not defined by)
the degradation of the ability of land to retain water.
Desertification and the associated land degradation and
drought, as natural disasters, are covered further in Chapter
4, but examples provided here of NBS that restore water
in landscapes, including groundwater and agricultural
soils, are recognized approaches to combat desertification
(and land degradation and drought) when applied in
relevant vulnerable areas. Since ecosystem degradation is
the underlying cause of desertification, NBS present the
only feasible means to combat it at any large scale. NBS
are, therefore, at the forefront of efforts to restore land
productivity in affected areas. For example, the UNCCD
promotes NBS as a central means for combating land
degradation (UNCCD Science-Policy Interface, 2016). Critical
to these approaches are moisture recycling, soil water
retention and enhanced infiltration benefits of landscape
restoration.

Although the contribution of NBS to improving WaSH
outcomes are mainly related to water quality (see Chapter
3), WaSH goals are also much more easily achieved when
there is adequate water supply for all uses – domestic,
industrial and agricultural – as well as supply being
effectively managed to prevent contamination. Mitigating
the impacts of desertification, land degradation and
drought is just one example by which NBS support
WaSH outcomes through improving water resources
availability and accessibility. Benefits of NBS often favour
the most disadvantaged and vulnerable, such as minority
communities, rural communities and women. An NBS
approach can improve public health, particularly in
developing countries, by helping to ensure safe water and
adequate sanitation (Brix et al., 2011).

47

BOX 2.7

the functionality of the ecosystems and that deforestation
on the volcanic slopes had increased water runoff, thereby
reducing aquifer recharge. Over six years, tree planting,
pits and earthen banks have enabled more than 1.3 million
m³ per year of additional water for aquifer recharge – more
water than the Volkswagen Group in Mexico consumes
annually (WBCSD, 2015b).

WATERSHED SERVICES PROVIDE
A FIVE-FOLD INCREASE OF
THE OPERATIONAL LIFE
EXPECTANCY OF THE ITAIPU
HYDROPOWER DAM IN THE
PARANÁ RIVER BASIN IN BRAZIL

Efficient hydropower generation from the Itaipu
Dam reservoir in the Paraná III Basin, located in
the western part of Paraná State, Brazil, on the
Paraguayan border, is affected by soil management
in the watershed. Sediments entering the reservoir
reduce storage and shorten the reservoir’s life, while
increasing maintenance costs and therefore electricity
generation costs, providing a financial incentive to
improve watershed management. The programme
Cultivando Água Boa (cultivating good water) has
established a partnership with farmers to achieve
mutual goals of sustainability (Mello and Van Raij,
2006; Itaipu Binacional, n.d.). A cornerstone of the
Cultivando Água Boa programme is the partnership
developed through the Brazilian No-Till Federation
(FEBRAPDP) that includes measuring impacts of farm
management through a scoring system indicating
how much each farm is contributing to improving the
water conditions (Laurent et al., 2011). This enables
farmers to be considered as ‘water producers’ by the
National Water Agency, which assigns values to the
ecosystem services generated by farms participating
in the programme and compensates farmers for
their proactive approach (ANA, 2011). Overall, the life
expectancy of the dam complex has been increased
from its original figure of some 60 years when the
dam was built to some 350 years now. Additionally,
other environmental benefits are delivered (such
as reduced nutrient runoff) and, importantly, farm
productivity and sustainability have increased –
presenting a win-win scenario for farmers and the
hydropower company.

2.3 The influence of moisture recycling
on water availability
Chapter 1 (see Section 1.3.3) highlights the important
influence of evaporative fluxes on regional and global
moisture recycling and subsequent precipitation. This
influence on water availability can be substantial: for
example, 70% of the rainfall for the Río de la Plata
Basin in Argentina/Uruguay originates as evaporation
from the Amazon forest (Van der Ent et al., 2010). Land
use decisions in one place may therefore significantly
influence water availability in distant locations. This
is particularly important considering that vegetation
removal probably has the most severe impacts on rainfall

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

in drier areas, contributing there to increased water
scarcity, land degradation and desertification (Keys et al.,
2016).
The influence of LULUC on the movement of moisture,
and subsequent precipitation, challenges the ‘watershed’
as being the common unit of management, indicating
that ‘atmospheric watersheds’ – otherwise known as
‘precipitationsheds’ (Keys et al., 2016) – should also
be considered. However, this presents considerable
challenges to governance of water resources availability
(Keys et al., 2017). There are few efforts currently
to address this aspect of managing water resources
availability but some examples do exist. The Global
Environment Facility is supporting a multi-functional
landscape-scale programme that recognizes the critical
role the Amazon Basin plays in climate regulation
regionally and globally, with an investment cost of US$683
million, including co-financing (GEF, 2017). The programme
is designed to improve policies, investments in protected
areas and integrated landscape management, in order to
avoid, among other things, the high risk of the Amazon
ecosystem as a whole reaching a tipping point of runaway natural forest dieback due to drought and fire. Such
an event would be immensely difficult to stop and have
massive socioeconomic consequences through reduced
water availability for, among other things, dependent
agriculture (located mainly outside the basin) and the life
expectancy of regional energy infrastructure (i.e. dams).

2.4 Challenges to enabling NBS for
water availability
The main challenges to upscaling NBS applications
for most actors, including regulatory authorities, local
government, industry, business, agriculture and civil
society include:
Enabling policy environments. Policy environments often
discourage, and in some cases prohibit, NBS uptake. An
enabling policy environment is needed to promote NBS
adoption where warranted. For example, in agriculture,
subsidies and incentives provided to farmers often
need to be realigned to support sustainability, including
the adoption of NBS. NBS should also become further
integrated across a broader range of corporate best
practices and harness different branding opportunities on
offer, entering new markets or shifting public perceptions
about good corporate citizenship (WBCSD, 2015a).
Awareness/perceptions. Much needs to be done to build
a better information base and awareness of NBS. Water
shortages and extremes (floods and droughts) create
moments when awareness is heightened, increasing the
opportunity to consider NBS options. Civil society is a key
player in influencing policy environments and investment,
and can be better informed. Small and medium enterprises

have a large cumulative impact and need to become more
informed and involved.
Technical. Many stakeholders are often risk-averse,
typically preferring tried and tested solutions, creating a
barrier for the adoption of alternative (non-conventional)
engineering solutions. Since the effectiveness of NBS
varies greatly at the local level (Burek et al., 2016), it is
essential that they are carefully planned, designed and
built to help planners/engineers select the right location
and correct NBS option to unlock the maximal benefit.
This in turn requires a reliable assessment of expected
performance during the design phase, resulting in a
more accurate cost–benefit analysis. There is a strong
business case to be made for partnering with nature
but this generally needs to be proven, because it is
often considered “alternative” rather than mainstream.
However, where large corporations make detailed
assessments and proceed to implement NBS, the
results can be significant, as demonstrated by the water
footprinting initiative initiated in 2009 by SAB-Miller in
conjunction with the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF).9
Now that NBS are clearly more visible in some policy
agendas, they run the risk of being downgraded through
more misapplications where performance does not meet
expectations. To counter this, a much better knowledge
base on NBS is required, including expanded and
impartial science-based evaluations of their performance.
Some NBS can take time and many stakeholders prefer
more guaranteed faster results. Moreover, NBS are also
poorly integrated in supporting disciplines, such as civil
engineering, resulting in a skill shortfall.
Financial. Good data may be lacking to inform evidencebased investment options. NBS have inherent variability,
depending on location and other factors that need
to be understood, if adoption is to be sufficiently derisked. Financial incentives and improved market-based
instruments to adopt NBS (see Sections 5.2.2 and 6.2)
would help strengthen the business case and facilitate
decision making.
Institutional. NBS often require high levels of crosssectoral and institutional cooperation. This should be
encouraged to accelerate actions, with consideration
being given to stewardship of resources as a mechanism
for engagement. An enabling policy environment can
go a long way to promote cooperation. Mandating that
NBS be considered in investment choices, for example,
can stimulate cooperation between those with NBS
knowledge and those making investment choices.
Standards, regulations, guidelines and incentives
governing NBS are not common or uniform across
national economies. This also constrains industry, which
prefers certainty.

 	 For more details, please see www.wwf.org.uk/updates/wwf-andsabmiller-unveil-water-footprint-beer.

9

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

48

Although included in
IWRM principles in
theory, in practice NBS
are not well integrated in
IWRM approaches and
are often absent
NBS call for improved landscape-scale approaches to water
resources management. IWRM has been an aspiration for
decades (Allan, 2003) but has often failed due to entrenched
sectoral interests, political and governance barriers (JønchClausen, 2004), and the lack of collective responsibility
(Goldin et al., 2008). In addition, although included in
IWRM principles in theory, in practice NBS are not well
integrated in IWRM approaches and are often absent. For
example, water managers typically function in isolation,
but integrated land and water management is necessary
(Bossio et al., 2010). The concept of integrated land and
water resource management continues to gain currency
around the world with growing emphasis on the inclusion
of ecosystem services as quantifiable benefits. Given that
NBS are scale-dependent and involve multiple ecosystem
services in addition to water regulation, it is usually
necessary to take scale into consideration (Hanson et al.,
2012). This also requires improved attention to managing
the impacts of land and water use on coastal zones and
marine resources. The ‘source to sea’ (S2S) model (Box 2.8) is
an approach that promotes such landscape-scale integrated
governance arrangements that can balance development
objectives across sectors, taking ecosystem service flows
into account and enabling coordination and integration
across the different management objectives (Granit et al.,
2017). Such approaches also need to link cycles of water,
waste and energy (FAO, 2014c).

2.5 NBS, water availability and the SDGs
Sustainable resource use cross-cuts the SDGs, as does
water availability. Without sufficient water, most economic
and social progress is constrained. Water and sanitation
linkages across the SDGs and their targets were explored
by UN-Water (2016a). NBS for water availability contribute
to all targets in SDG 6 (on water) that in turn translate into
the improved benefits of water availability in general.
There are, however, many approaches to managing water
availability, including through demand-side management,
the improvement of water quality, and re-use and
improvement of grey infrastructure, in addition to NBS.
Linkages between NBS and the SDGs for water quality and
risk reduction are covered in Chapters 3 and 4, respectively,

49

while Chapter 7 provides a general assessment of overall
opportunities. The fact that so many SDGs are interlinked
by water-related issues makes it difficult to isolate NBS for
water scarcity from broader land and water management.
This Section, therefore, highlights only some of the areas
where NBS provide promising opportunities to address
water availability vis-à-vis other options, bearing in mind the
complexities of this topic.
By far the greatest potential for NBS to improve water
availability, compared to other options, is in agriculture,
through efficiency gains in rainfed and irrigate systems. This
is, therefore, a key element of achieving SDG 2 (“End hunger,
achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture”) and in particular a fundamental
need to achieve its Target 2.4 (“… ensure sustainable food
production systems and implement resilient agricultural
practices that increase productivity and production, that
help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for
adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought,
flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve
land and soil quality”), underpinning the achievement of
other targets in SDG 2, which, in turn, reinforce numerous
other improvements in human well-being (including health,
poverty reduction and environmental sustainability). NBS
for addressing water availability in, and for, urban areas form
another promising area, compared to alternative options,
and are therefore contributing to SDG 11 (“Make cities and
human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable”).
The co-benefits of NBS for water availability, and most
notably their capability to improve the external impacts of
agriculture on ecosystems, provide significant opportunities
to make major contributions to SDG 12 (“Ensure sustainable
consumption and production patterns”) and 15 (“Protect,
restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems,
sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt
and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss”).
Particular note is made of NBS being the most feasible
means to combat desertification and therefore achieving
Target 15.3 (“Combat desertification, restore degraded land
and soil, including land affected by desertification, drought
and floods, and strive to achieve a land degradation-neutral
world”). Insofar as NBS mitigate downstream impacts into
coastal/marine areas they also offer significant potential to
achieve SDG 14 (“Conserve and sustainably use the oceans,
seas and marine resources for sustainable development”). As
most NBS involve improving system resilience, and in many
cases increasing carbon storage (notably through soil and
vegetation management), they also contribute significantly
to SDG 13 (“Take urgent action to combat climate change and
its impacts”).
Many more interlinkages could be pointed out, some also
with high potential for the application of NBS for water
availability. This topic is explored further in Chapter 7.
For current purposes, it is concluded that NBS for water
availability has very promising potential to contribute to the
achievement of the SDGs, either in conjunction with or as an
alternative to other approaches.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 2.8

THE S2S APPROACH
The ‘source to sea’ (S2S) approach integrates and respects interdependencies between upstream
land and water management and downstream quality of deltas and coastal areas, interconnected
through surface, subsurface flows, rivers, canalized networks and infrastructural routings.

S2S considers the dynamic interface between land and oceans – that captures a key development
and environmental challenge of our time – to address the increasing pressures on, and degradation
of, the land and water resource base that especially affect the poor who cannot compensate
through adopting expensive measures. Direct and indirect drivers of land and water resources upstream translate
into increasing pressures downstream, including through estuaries and into coastal areas and beyond to oceans.
Downstream communities are most often unable to influence or manage these upstream drivers. Moreover,
countries that share watersheds require close international collaboration to consolidate concerted land and
water management that assures long-term deliveries of cross-border water flows against required quality. S2S
provides one approach to managing these threats, as it accounts for land and water uses in up- and lowland
areas as well as the needs of those dependent on coastal and marine resources.

Figure | Key flows of water, sediment, pollution and material connect geographical segments from S2S

Land and
terrestrial ecosystems

Water sediment pollution material
Freshwater systems
(lakes, rivers
and aquifers)

Estuaries and deltas

Open ocean
Nearshore coast

Adjoining sea and
continental shelf

Source: Adapted from Granit et al. (2017, fig. 1, p. 5).

Chapter 2 NBS for managing water availability

50

NBS FOR
MANAGING
WATER QUALITY

UN Environment | Elisabeth Mullin Bernhardt
UNESCO-IHP | Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa, Giuseppe Arduino and
Blanca Jiménez-Cisneros
With contributions from: UNIDO Industrial Resource
Efficiency Division and John Payne (John G. Payne &
Associates Ltd); Sara Marjani Zadeh (FAO); Michael McClain
and Ken Irvine (IHE Delft); Mike Acreman and Christophe
Cudennec (IAHS); Priyanie Amerasinghe and Chris Dickens
(IWMI); Emmanuelle Cohen-Shacham (IUCN); Tatiana
Fedotova (WBCSD); Christopher Cox (UN Environment GPA);
Maija Bertule (UNEP-DHI); David Coates and Richard Connor
(WWAP); Emily Simmons and Jorge Gastelumendi (TNC); and
Maria Teresa Gutierrez (ILO)

Constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment plant

3.1 Water quality challenges, ecosystems
and sustainable development
The serious challenges of water pollution and deteriorating
water quality worldwide result in risks to human and
ecosystem health, while reducing the availability of
freshwater resources for human needs, as well as the ability
of water-related ecosystems to provide goods and services,
including natural water purification. Driven by population
growth and urbanization, industrialization, the expansion
and intensification of agriculture, and the impacts of
climate change, evidence of the extent of freshwater quality
degradation is widespread (see Prologue). Particularly
concerning is the pollution of freshwater ecosystems, and
ultimately coastal and marine ecosystems. Major types
of pollutants include chemicals and nutrients. Increasing
salinity levels and rising water and air temperatures can
also have significant impacts (UNEP, 2016a). The global loss
of freshwater wetlands, which have a unique capacity to
filter and improve water quality, is of particular concern; it
is estimated that 64–71% of wetland extent has been lost
since 1900 (Davidson, 2014).
Agricultural runoff is the principal source of nutrient loading
and other pollutants, such as pesticides. Inadequate
management of municipal and industrial wastewater
accounts for another major source of water pollution
(UNESCO, 2015a), particularly in low-income countries
where only an estimated 8% of this type of wastewater
undergoes treatment of any kind (Sato et al., 2013).
Unsafely managed sanitation has led to the contamination
of drinking water sources by pathogenic pollutants,
causing waterborne diseases (UNEP, 2016a). Polluted
urban stormwater runoff, effluents from mining and
extractive industries, including industrial spills, sediment
loading and solid waste transport into water bodies, also
have direct impacts on the quality of surface waters and

52

3.2 NBS for sustaining or improving
water quality

Declining water quality
and increasing water
pollution will hamper the
prospect of achieving
many of the SDGs, as
well as other international
agreements

groundwater, sometimes causing severe chemical and
heavy-metal pollution. Emerging pollutants (including
antibiotics, hormones and other pharmaceuticals, personal
care products, household and industrial chemicals)
present new water quality challenges. For example, multiresistant waterborne pathogens and endocrine-disrupting
compounds may pose significant risks to human health and
ecosystems (UNESCO, 2015b). Specific data on the extent of
pollution and water quality degradation are often lacking,
further amplifying the challenges related to water quality
management (UN-Water, 2016a).
Climate change also contributes to the degradation of water
quality by affecting the seasonal quantity of water available
(or lack thereof) and its temperature, thus modifying its
physico-chemical and biological parameters (Delpla et al.,
2009). More frequent and intense flooding can lead to the
dispersal of contaminants through runoff, and sea level
rise can lead to higher salinity. Increases in water scarcity
and changes to the hydrological cycle affect the spatial
extent, productivity and function of freshwater ecosystems,
including their ability to provide ecosystem services, with
effects often reaching far downstream or into coastal areas
(Parry et al., 2007). Changes to precipitation and stream
flows that lower the amount or availability of water also lead
directly to reduced water quality (Finlayson et al., 2006). The
resulting lower water quality levels, in effect, are themselves
a form of scarcity when water is no longer directly usable for
many productive uses (Aylward et al., 2005).
The degradation of water quality translates directly into
environmental, social and economic risks, impacting human
health, limiting food production, reducing ecosystem
functionality and hindering economic growth (UNESCO,
2015a). Water quality is thus central to the concept of
sustainable development, which was brought to the
forefront of action through the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the SDGs and is addressed in more detail
in Section 3.5, below. Declining water quality and increasing
water pollution will hamper the prospect of achieving many
of the SDGs, as well as other international agreements such
as the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.

53

3.2.1

Protecting source water quality

Healthy watersheds collect, store, filter and deliver water to
communities of all sizes. Source water protection reduces
water treatment costs for urban suppliers, contributes to
improved access to safe drinking water in rural communities,
and can potentially also provide water of adequate quality
for other uses such as agricultural irrigation.
The potential benefits of watershed protection for enhancing
the quality of water available for human settlements, and
cities in particular, are massive. For example, a recent
modelling exercise by Abell et al. (2017) estimated that
land conservation and/or restoration activities (such as
forest protection, reforestation and the use of cover crops
in agriculture) could lead to a 10% (or more) reduction in
sediments or nutrients (phosphorus) in watersheds that
currently cover 37% of the world’s ice-free terrestrial surface
(4.8 million km2). More than 1.7 billion people (over half of
the world’s urban population) living in the 4,000 cities in the
area covered by this study could therefore potentially benefit
from improved water quality as a result of NBS applied to
their source watersheds, including “780 million people who
live in watersheds located in countries in the bottom-tenth
percentile of the Human Development Index (as of 2014)”
(Abell et al., 2017, p. 71).
Forests, wetlands and grasslands, as well as soils and
crops, when managed properly, provide high-value ‘green
infrastructure’ for enhancing source water protection.
They play important roles in regulating water flows and
maintaining water quality by reducing sediment loadings,
through the prevention of soil erosion and by capturing and
retaining pollutants (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC, 2014). Forested
riparian buffers serve to prevent pollution of rivers while
providing shade that helps to reduce thermal pollution
(Parkyn, 2004). Grasslands are widely used to manage
water quality and can sometimes provide water of a better
quality than forests (Chapter 1). Upstream wetlands can
also provide significant water quality benefits, due to their
natural ability to facilitate effluent filtration and pollutant
absorption (TEEB, 2011).
Rehabilitating landscapes, in particular restoring
functionality in agricultural systems, is now a widespread
approach promoted at scale. It is not only effective in
improving water quality but also provides multiple benefits
(Box 3.1).
Various land management interventions to protect or restore
catchments are available and usually adopted together,
depending on local circumstances (Table 3.1). They are
usually supported by diverse financial and other incentives
such as, for example, payments for environmental services
(PES) schemes (see Section 5.2.2), often using innovative
public–private partnerships, for example various water funds
(Box 3.6) that operate in several countries.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 3.1

THE US CONSERVATION RESERVE PROGRAM TO PROTECT WATER QUALITY
The Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) aims
to remove environmentally sensitive private land from agricultural production and to re-establish grass
and trees to protect water quality, reduce erosion and increase wildlife habitat. As of August 2016, nearly
100,000 km2 were enrolled in a CRP contract.

Participation in the programme by farmers is voluntary as it involves actions on land they legally own.
Farmers offer their land for enrolment in the programme and the Farm Service Agency evaluates and ranks the offers
using an environmental benefits index. Factors considered in the index include wildlife habitat cover benefits, water
quality benefits from reduced erosion, runoff and leaching, on-farm benefits of reduced erosion, enduring benefits,
air quality benefits, and cost.
In exchange for setting aside and revegetating lands, participating farmers receive rental payments and cost-share
assistance in contracts ranging from 10 to 15 years. Rental rates are paid annually and are based on local dryland
cash rental rates for farmland. Cost-share assistance is available to pay up to 50% of the costs of establishing
approved practices to achieve the conservation goals. Each year the programme pays out roughly US$2 billion to
farmers in rents and cost-share.
The programme has been shown to reduce runoff of nitrogen and phosphorus from farms by more than 90% and
80%, respectively. More than 110,000 km2 of wetlands have been restored and soil erosion was reduced by 180
million tonnes per year. In addition, carbon sequestration is calculated at an average of 49 million tonnes of CO2
equivalent per year. The approach also improves farm resilience, sustainability and productivity.
Sources: USDA Farm Service Agency (2008; 2016).
Contributed by Michael McClain (IHE Delft).

Nature-based source water protection measures are often
less costly than managing impacts downstream (e.g.
water treatment at point of use; see Chapter 6). A higher
quality of source water translates into water treatment
cost savings (Gartner et al., 2013) and potentially avoided
capital costs of expanding or building new treatment
facilities (TEEB, 2009).

3.2.2

Reducing the impacts of agriculture on
water quality

The two pathways through which agriculture influences
water quality are through point and non-point (diffuse)
pollution. Point source pollution, such as the impacts
of untreated (or insufficiently treated) wastewater from
intensive livestock rearing or food-processing facilities, lies
more in the realm of industrial operations and is covered in
Section 3.2.4.
Non-point source pollution from agriculture remains by
far the greater problem worldwide, including in developed
countries (see Chapter 1). However, it is also the one most
amenable to NBS. Pollution from this source mainly arises
due to two interrelated causes (FAO, 2011b). Firstly, the
over-application of agrochemicals that subsequently
infiltrate into groundwater or runoff to surface water, often
encouraged by perverse subsidies. Secondly, ‘modern’
mechanical farming techniques, and in particular the
removal of vegetation and intensified ploughing, which
degrades the soil/vegetation layer ecosystem and reduces
its ability to deliver several ecosystem services that
are important to maintain water quality. For example:
reduced nutrient cycling in soils leads to increased

fertilizer leaching and runoff, and reduced fertilizer use
efficiency, which in turn promotes increased application
of fertilizer to compensate. Similarly, reduced pest and
disease regulation services in farming landscapes encourage
increased pesticide application, which in turn further erodes
the ecosystem through impacts on non-target organisms,
promoting increased pesticide application. Exposing
bare soil to the elements in farming systems, particularly
on slopes, drastically increases erosion and subsequent
impacts on water quality (see Chapter 1). These impacts
perpetuate a detrimental, and costly, cycle that goes against
the interests of farmers: they do not benefit from, and in
fact pay for, the loss of fertilizers and/or pesticides from
their fields and farmers recognize the importance of keeping
soil on their farms for their own livelihood sustainability. It
has become well accepted that the key approach that will
enable agriculture to increase its production while becoming
more sustainable is the concept of sustainable ecological
intensification (FAO, 2011b; 2014b). This essentially involves
reinstating ecosystem services in landscapes to underpin
sustainable productivity increases whilst simultaneously
bringing external impacts within acceptable limits. Improved
water quality will be one of these important benefits.
There has been much progress in this approach in recent
years, helped by the fact that farmers, through improved
farm productivity and sustainability, and other stakeholder
groups can mutually benefit. For example, ‘conservation
agriculture’, which incorporates practices aimed at
minimizing soil disturbance in order to ensure a degree
of permanent soil cover and regular crop rotation, is a
flagship approach to sustainable production intensification,

Chapter 3 NBS for managing water quality

54

Table 3.1		 Categories of common source water protection activities
Source water
protection
activity

Description

Targeted land
protection

Targeted land protection is a term that broadly
encompasses all of the conservation activities
undertaken to protect targeted ecosystems, such as
forests, grasslands or wetlands. Agroforests — where
trees or shrubs are grown among crops or pastureland
— may also be the focus of protection.

Source water
protection
activity
Ranching best
management
practices
(BMPs)

Targeted land protection is typically undertaken as a
preventative measure that reduces the risk of adverse
environmental impacts in the future, such as through
increased sediment or nutrient loadings that may result
from changing land uses. Accordingly, these types
of conservation activities differ from those that are
focused on reducing the current loading of pollutants.

Revegetation

Revegetation involves the restoration of natural forest,
grassland or other habitat through planting (direct
seeding) or by enabling natural regeneration; includes
pastureland reforestation (active or passive forest
restoration on grazing lands).

Fire risk
management

Revegetation restores the ability of nature to: 1) hold
soil in place and reduce erosion, 2) naturally filter
pollutants from overland flow and 3) help infiltrate
runoff water into the soil.

Riparian
restoration

Riparian restoration involves restoring natural habitat
that is at the interface between land and water along
the banks of a river, stream or lake. These strips are
sometimes referred to as riparian buffers.
Riparian zones comprise the area where land and a
river, stream or lake interface. Riparian restoration
seeks to reestablish riparian functions and related
physical, chemical and biological linkages between
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (Beschta and
Kauffman, 2000). The key features of healthy riparian
areas are native trees with deep, soil-binding roots.
Grass and shrubs are also important ground covers and
bio-filters. Riparian buffers are especially important as
they are the last defence against pollutants flowing into
streams. They can provide critical habitat at the water’s
edge, and through shading, they can help reduce water
temperatures. Temperature regulation has important
implications for the ability of water to maintain
adequate levels of dissolved oxygen, can be critical for
the survival of aquatic species and is linked to reduced
incidence of algal blooms (Halliday et al., 2016).

Agricultural
best
management
practices
(BMPs)

Agricultural BMPs are changes in agricultural land
management that can be channelled towards achieving
multiple positive environmental outcomes.

Ranching BMPs are changes in land management practices
on ranchlands that can be channelled toward achieving
multiple positive environmental outcomes. Silvopasture
is the practice of combining trees with forage pasture and
livestock.
Ranching BMPs are normally implemented to maintain
or improve the quality of water and soils through the
improvement of grazing management practices, range
structures (e.g. access roads, fencing, grade stabilization), or
land treatments (e.g., brush management, range seeding,
edge of field treatments). These types of improvements
typically seek to reduce sediment and nutrient loadings
(e.g. phosphorus, nitrogen), as well as potentially harmful
pathogens from livestock waste.
Fire risk management involves the deployment of
management activities that reduce forest fuels and thereby
reduce the risk of catastrophic fire. Also commonly referred
to as “forest fuel reduction”, fire risk management seeks to
achieve fuel reduction goals through mechanical thinning
and/or controlled burns.
Fire risk management is typically employed in areas where
forests are prone to catastrophic wildfires. The abrupt
removal of forest cover and damage to ground cover and
soils from catastrophic fires can be particularly problematic
when the fire is followed by a large rainstorm, as these
events can cause large-scale erosion of unsecured hillsides.
Accordingly, similar to targeted land protection, fire risk
management seeks both to preserve the integrity of healthy
forests and reduce the future risk of increased sediment and
nutrient transport, which differs from other activities that
are aiming to reduce current annual loadings of pollutants.

Wetland
restoration and
creation

Wetland restoration and creation involves the reestablishment of the hydrology, plants and soils of former
or degraded wetlands that have been drained, farmed or
otherwise modified, or the installation of a new wetland to
offset wetland losses or mimic natural wetland functions.
Wetlands are areas where water covers soil all or part of
the time. Wetlands protect and improve water quality,
provide fish and wildlife habitat, store floodwaters and
maintain surface water flow during dry periods. Accordingly,
the holistic nature of wetland restoration, including
the reintroduction of animals, is important. Typically, a
wetland is created through the excavation of upland soils to
elevations that will support the growth of wetland species
through the establishment of an appropriate hydrology.
Wetlands may be installed or restored via this or other
approaches such as removing underground drainage tiles,
installing dykes or plugging open ditches.

Road
management

A wide variety of agricultural BMPs exist, including
practices such as cover crops, conservation tillage,
precision fertilizer application, irrigation efficiency,
contour farming and agroforestry. In the context of
existing water funds, agricultural BMPs are primarily
in reference to modifying land management practices
on croplands, specifically those focused on reducing
erosion and nutrient runoff. These practices can help
protect drinking supplies, as well as help to protect
other uses such as recreation, animal habitat, fisheries
and agricultural uses such as irrigation and stock
watering.

Source: Adapted from Abell et al. (2017, table 2.4, p. 39).

55

Description

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Road management involves the deployment of a range of
avoidance and mitigation techniques that aim to reduce the
environmental impacts of roads, including those impacts
related to negative effects on soils, water, species and
habitats.
The environmental effects of roads include displaced and
compacted soils; altered conditions that change soil pH,
plant growth and the vegetative community structure;
reconfigured landforms that can result in changed
hydrologic regimes; and/or the increased number and extent
of landslides and debris flows, which can affect terrestrial
and aquatic systems. Mitigation techniques for managing
roads may include site-level actions to reduce erosion and
improve road-stream crossings, or implementing access
management and closing and decommissioning roads.

the adoption of which is rapidly spreading (see Chapter
2, Box 2.3). The approach is multifunctional but one of
its important benefits is improved water quality through
improved nutrient cycling, and hence reduced fertilizer use
and soil erosion. A range of other nature-based management
interventions is widely used to reduce the impacts of
agriculture on water quality, such as:
Riparian grass and tree buffers along rivers and lake edges
are a common and cost-effective approach in reducing
the nutrient and sediment runoff from agricultural land
to aquatic ecosystems. These vegetated areas have
well-developed root systems, organic surface layers and
understory vegetation that serve as physical and biological
filters for runoff water and sediment that may be laden with
nutrients and other agrochemicals.
Field borders and buffer strips, which are vegetated strips
along agricultural fields, can help reduce water pollution
from agricultural land (Box 3.2) by immobilizing sediment
and nutrient transport in overland runoff and increasing
infiltration to minimize the runoff volume eventually carried
to watercourses.
Vegetative waterways (wet buffer strips and other types
of wet zones) are drainage channels that remain under
the vegetation cover where runoff conveyed from fields is
filtered of sediment, nutrients and other agro-chemicals
through the physical contact with the vegetation and the
filtering effect of the subsoil and underlying soil in the
channel.
In most cases, the efficiency of these interventions depends
on the vegetation type and other factors such as runoff
velocity and infiltration rates, as well as the maintenance
from erosion or clogging by sediment, in the case of
drainage channels.
Water and sediment control basins (generally over steeper
land slopes) are designed to divert runoff and to temporarily
detain and release water through a piped outlet or through
infiltration. They contribute to reducing erosive overland
flows that may entrain sediment and nutrients, allowing for
increased infiltration. A commonly used type of such basins
is dry detention basins, which are grassed depressions or
basins created by excavation into which runoff is channelled

Wetlands in agricultural landscapes are effective at reducing
nutrient and suspended sediment loads from agricultural
areas to downstream receiving waters, providing habitat
mosaics and offering various ecosystem services and benefits
to the landscape function. A review of on-farm wetlands in
the United Kingdom (UK) and Ireland (Newman et al., 2015)
indicated that all types of agricultural wetland systems, with
the exception of nitrate in integrated constructed wetland
systems (open ponds), offer high levels of removal for many
pollutants, including total nitrogen, ammonium/ammonia,
nitrate and nitrite, total and soluble reactive phosphorus,
chemical oxygen demand, biological oxygen demand and
suspended solids. Agricultural wetlands, however, require
careful planning and maintenance in order to perform their
optimum design function over a prolonged period of time.
Ecohydrology (see Chapter 1, Box 1.1) is an approach that
integrates consideration of the water–biota interplay from
molecular to catchment scale, using many of the abovementioned approaches, among others, to improve the
ways in which water is managed across landscapes. It is
especially relevant for reducing pollution from agriculture
(UNESCO, 2016).

BOX 3.2

In most cases green
and grey infrastructure
can and should be
working together

that facilitates the slow filtration of sediment and nutrient
uptake by the vegetation. Another type is bioretention
structures, which are typically pits backfilled with soil,
mulch and vegetation used to retain runoff for infiltration
through the filter bed components, with reliance on
biological and biochemical reactions within the soil matrix
and around the root zones of the plants.

WATER QUALITY
IMPROVEMENT USING
BUFFER STRIPS IN
EUROPEAN FARMLANDS

Cross-Compliance requirements in
the Common Agricultural Policy of the
European Union (EU) have, since 2005,
required that all farmers receiving
direct payments comply with standards on good
agricultural and environmental condition of land
by establishing buffer strips along watercourses.
In 2015, approximately 90% of European farmland
(1.56 million km2) conformed with the standards
(EC, 2017a). There has been, however, no
systematic analysis of the impacts of buffer strips
across European farms on water quality. Nutrient
loads to European rivers have decreased due to
a suite of nutrient reduction measures required
under the EU Nitrates Directive and other policy
actions, and it is difficult to isolate the contribution
of riparian buffers alone.
Contributed by Michael McClain (IHE Delft).

Chapter 3 NBS for managing water quality

56

There is rapidly growing
interest in incorporating
green infrastructure in
urban planning and design
to manage and reduce
pollution from urban runoff

Where land is taken out of agricultural production, some of
these interventions can reduce the cropping area. However,
this need not reduce overall production since systemwide improvements may ensue. For example, landscape
diversification in simplified highly intensive monocropping systems not only delivers improved water quality
outcomes, among others, but simultaneously increases
crop production in remaining areas to compensate for the
area lost to crops (Liebman and Schulte, 2015). Agricultural
systems that conserve ecosystem services by using
practices, such as conservation tillage, crop diversification,
legume intensification and biological pest control, have
been shown to perform as well as intensive, high-input
systems (Badgley et al., 2007; Power, 2010).

3.2.3

Improving water quality in human 		
settlements

There is rapidly growing interest in incorporating green
infrastructure in urban planning and design to manage and
reduce pollution from urban runoff (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC,
2014). Examples include using green walls, roof gardens,
trees in streets and vegetated infiltration or drainage basins
to support wastewater treatment and reduce stormwater
runoff. Wetlands and other sustainable drainage features
are also widely used within urban environments to mitigate
the impact of polluted stormwater runoff and wastewater
(Scholz, 2006; Woods Ballard et al., 2007). However, instream water quality can fail to significantly improve if
elements are not joined up using a holistic approach to
managing water in urban environments (Lloyd et al., 2002;
Gurnell et al., 2007).
These approaches provide further co-benefits improving
the quality of life for residents (Cohen-Shacham et al.,
2016). Ecohydrology-based approaches, such as the
integrated planning and management of green areas and
waterways in urban areas, known as ‘Blue–Green’ networks
(University of Łódź/City of Łódź, 2011), can help improve
water quality in urban areas. For instance, the development
of a sequential sedimentation/biofiltration system for urban
stormwater purification is used for the enhancement of
water retention in urban areas for adaptation to climate
change, while improving health and quality of life for urban
dwellers (Zalewski, 2014).

57

Constructed wetlands that mimic the functionality of
natural wetlands are among the most commonly used
NBS for treating domestic wastewater. They use wetland
vegetation, soils and their associated microbial functions
to remove excess nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and
organic pollutants. Both natural and constructed wetlands
also biodegrade or immobilize a range of emerging
pollutants. Among 118 pharmaceuticals monitored in
conventional wastewater treatment influents and effluents,
nearly half were removed only partially with an efficiency
of less than 50% (UNESCO/HELCOM, 2017). Studies have
demonstrated that constructed wetlands can provide an
alternative solution for the removal of emerging pollutants
from domestic wastewater and thereby effectively
complement conventional wastewater treatment systems.
The effectiveness of constructed wetlands to remove
various pharmaceuticals has been demonstrated in Ukraine
(Vystavna et al., 2017; UNESCO, forthcoming) (Box 3.3), as
well as by other studies at pilot scale (Matamoros et al.,
2009; Zhang et al., 2011) and full scale (Vymazal et al., 2017;
Vystavna et al., 2017). These results suggest that, for some
of these emerging pollutants, NBS work better than grey
solutions and in certain cases may be the only solution.
NBS can also increase the quality of reclaimed water
through managed aquifer recharge (MAR) (see Section
4.2.3), where the quality of partially treated wastewater is
improved by biophysical processes as it infiltrates through
soils and sediment (Box 3.4).

3.2.4

Reducing the impacts of industry on
water quality

The opportunities for NBS for industrial wastewater
treatment depend on the pollutant type and its loading.
For many polluted water sources, grey infrastructure
solutions may continue to be needed. However, industrial
applications of NBS, particularly constructed wetlands
for industrial wastewater treatment, are growing. A
review of 138 applications in 33 countries made clear that
constructed wetlands have been used for many types of
industrial effluents (Vymazal, 2014). During the last two
decades, constructed wetlands applications for wastewater
treatment have been demonstrated on industrial effluents
like petrochemical, dairy, meat processing, abattoir,
and pulp and paper factory effluents. Applications to
wastewaters from breweries, tanneries and olive mills have
been recently added (Vymazal, 2014; De la Varga et al.,
2017).
Constructed wetlands have gained a place in dairy
wastewater treatment as being particularly suitable for
the treatment of wastewater from dairy parlours, cheese
production, other food industries and wineries (De la Varga
et al., 2017). NBS for managing industrial wastewater often
provide a ‘win-win’ situation for industry and stakeholders,
by creating a number of socio-economic co-benefits (see
Section 3.4).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 3.3

REMOVAL OF PHARMACEUTICALS IN A CONSTRUCTED WETLAND IN UKRAINE

A study on the removal of pharmaceuticals in a pilot-scale constructed wetland in Ukraine, under
the UNESCO International Initiative on Water Quality case study on Emerging Pollutants in Water
and Wastewater of East Ukraine: Occurrence, Fate and Regulation, indicates the high potential of
constructed wetlands to remove pharmaceuticals from wastewater, with removal rates for different
pharmaceuticals ranging from 5 up to 90% (see Figure). The study furthermore examined the
relationship between pollutant removal rates and operating conditions of the wetland, by comparing
measurements at the beginning of the wetland operation in 2012 and three years later in 2015, after changing
its operational settings (the increase of the water residence time, the growth of the macrophytes cover and the
installation of the aeration system). After the change of the operational settings, the removal efficiency of most
pharmaceuticals increased (see Figure).

Figure | Removal rates for different pharmaceuticals in a pilot-scale constructed wetland in different 		
operating conditions in 2012 and 2015

2012

2015

Ibuprofen
Paracetamol
Carbamazepine
Diclofenac
Ketoprofen
Androstenedione
Estrone
Triclosan
Caffeine
Venlafaxine
Propranolol
Naproxen
0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

80

100

Mass removal (%)
Mass in outlet from constructed wetland (%)
Source: Based on UNESCO (Forthcoming).

The constructed wetland was even more efficient in removing difficult compounds such as carbamazepine and
diclofenac – pharmaceuticals that are among those detected in highest concentrations in treated wastewater. Since
such a high removal efficiency could also be attributable to different management parameters of the wetland,
further studies are needed to establish the relationships between the constructed wetland maturation and the
pollutant removal rate.
Sources: Vystavna et al. (2017); UNESCO (Forthcoming).

BOX 3.4

Contributed by Yuliya Vystavna (Czech Academy of Sciences), Yuriy Vergeles (National University of Urban Economy, Ukraine) and Sarantuyaa
Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP).

ENHANCING GROUNDWATER SUPPLIES AND WATER QUALITY BY USING SOILS
FOR TERTIARY TREATMENT OF WASTEWATER IN ISRAEL

The secondary-treated effluent of the Shafdan wastewater treatment plant is infiltrated into the sandy
coastal plain of Israel where its quality improves further as it infiltrates into the aquifer for subsequent
recovery. Annually, about 110–130 million m3 of effluent are diverted to five infiltration basins (each
with about ten sub-basins) that are flooded in cycles of three to five days, with a drying period of one
day. The effluent is then recovered from two rings of production wells surrounding the infiltration
basins. Through soil aquifer treatment, the water quality is significantly improved and used for unrestricted
irrigation, increasing thus the water availability in the arid regions of Israel.
Source: Goren (2009).
Contributed by Catalin Stefan (Technical University of Dresden, through GRIPP: gripp.iwmi.org/).

Chapter 3 NBS for managing water quality

58

BOX 3.5

3.3 Nature-based water quality
monitoring – biological monitoring
Although not strictly an NBS as specifically defined in this
report (see Chapter 1), biological monitoring is an important
and useful tool that uses aquatic organisms (invertebrates,
algae and fish) and changes in their behaviour, resulting
from external pressures such as a change in the quality of
water, to monitor water quality, thus contributing to the
achievement of water quality management objectives.
Biological monitoring provides relatively low-cost solutions
for water quality monitoring that can help to fill water
quality data and information gaps. Biological monitoring, or
biomonitoring, using indicator species sensitive to a wide
range of stressors such as pollutants, can be highly effective
in supporting local water management. Biomonitoring tools
have over the years been included as part of water resource
management practice, not only for water quality monitoring
but also as indicators of general aquatic ecosystem health.
Biomonitoring is also integrated in modern water quality
monitoring techniques (Box 3.5).
Being a direct measure of the health of the ecosystem,
biomonitoring is highly intuitive to the lay public and
can thereby also contribute to awareness-raising among
communities (Aceves-Bueno et al., 2015). In South Africa,
for example, the mini-stream assessment scoring system
(mini-SASS)10 is used for community-based water quality
monitoring and stewardship, supporting participatory
management of water resources (Graham et al., 2004). It
also provides a tool for citizen monitoring, which together
with traditional knowledge is gaining increasing attention
in water management, particularly as developments in
sending technology, data processing and visualization have
improved (Lansing, 1987; Huntington, 2000; Minkman et al.,
2017; Buytaert et al., 2014).
South Africa provides an example where biomonitoring
has been used extensively. Based primarily on monitoring
of invertebrates using the SASS index (Dickens and
Graham, 2002), supplementary biological indicators have
been developed based on fish, riparian vegetation and
diatoms, which have been incorporated into South Africa’s
River Eco-Status Monitoring Programme, involving two
government departments, a research agency and a number
of civil society organizations, thereby providing an example
of the participatory management of water resources
(DWA, n.d.). Biological indicators are furthermore used in
South Africa for river health monitoring; reporting on the
state of the environment; as input for the determination
of environmental flows or water requirements; for the
classification of water resources into management classes;
and for setting resource quality objectives which are
legally binding on all government departments. Biological
measures of ecosystem health have also been included in
SDG Target 6.6 on water-related ecosystems.

10

For more information, see www.minisass.org.

59

USING DAPHNIA AND ALGAE
TO MONITOR WATER TOXICITY
AND EARLY DETECTION OF
POLLUTION SURGES – RHINE
WATER QUALITY STATION IN
WORMS, GERMANY

Aquatic organisms are used to monitor
the overall health status and water
quality of the Rhine River, both in the river water
(in situ) and in laboratory analyses (ex situ) in the
Rhine Water Quality Station, Germany. A freshwater
crustacean Daphnia is used in ‘alarm’ water toxicity
monitoring for its toxicological reactions to water
pollutants. As toxicological reactions of Daphnia to
a particular pollutant, or to a high pollution load,
is relatively quick, it allows for an early detection
of unusual pollution incidents. Early detection of
such water pollution is important for immediate
measures needed for the protection of the drinking
water supplies and ecosystems from toxic or high
pollution loads. The Rhine water quality control
station also uses algae as a biotest for an online
(30-minutes interval) monitoring of toxic substances
such as herbicides.
Contributed by Sarantuyaa Zandaryaa (UNESCO-IHP)*.

*

Personal communication with the Rhine Water Quality Station
team. For more information, see www.rheinguetestation.de/

3.4 Co-benefits and limitations of NBS
for water quality
3.4.1

Environmental and socio-economic
co-benefits

Mainstreaming NBS in water quality management provides
not only promising cost-effective solutions, but also
additional environmental and socio-economic benefits
from the same investments.
Environmental co-benefits of NBS for water quality
include protecting and enhancing biodiversity,
and reducing or reversing the trend in the loss and
degradation of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and
their services (enhanced water availability and ecosystem
services). Improved water quality offers environmental
benefits that can extend into downstream coastal areas,
which can suffer from eutrophication linked to excess
nutrients in upstream watersheds, and often beyond by
supporting improved ocean health. NBS for water quality
offer also additional functionality and services, including
habitat improvement, carbon sequestration, soil
stabilization, groundwater recharge and flood mitigation
(Haddaway et al., 2016).
The socio-economic benefits of improved water quality
are related to reducing public health risks and enhancing
economic development and/or sustainable livelihoods

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

– especially for rural areas and communities – thus
contributing to the reduction of social inequalities
affecting women, disadvantaged groups, the poor and
people living in slums/informal settlements. In general,
the poorest people may have the most to gain from NBS
for improved water quality, especially where they lack
access to improved water sources and are at risk of food
insecurity. However, implementing NBS for water quality
management generates additional co-benefits that would
not necessarily be provided by grey solutions alone. One
example is job creation, including jobs that are directly
linked to the implementation of the NBS themselves.

3.4.2

Technical limitations of NBS
are their limited capacity to
remove certain pollutants,
especially in industrial
and mining applications
where effluents have high
concentrations

Limitations of NBS for water quality

NBS provide promising applications as alternative or
complementary water quality management interventions.
Yet, there are still challenges and limitations, which
can hamper their widespread use in some applications.
Technical limitations of NBS are their limited capacity
to remove certain pollutants, especially in industrial
and mining applications where effluents have high
concentrations. While there is evidence, for example, that
wetlands can remove 20–60% of metals in water and trap
and retain 80–90% of sediment from runoff, there is less
information on the capacity of many wetland plants to
remove some toxic substances associated with pesticides,
industrial discharges and mining activities, although some
wetland plants have been found to accumulate heavy
metals in their tissues at 100,000 times the concentration
found in the surrounding water (Skov, 2015). It is therefore
necessary to recognize the limited carrying capacity of
ecosystems and to determine the thresholds where the
addition of contaminants and toxic substances will lead to
irreversible damage.
Another limitation can be the longer retention time
required to remove some pollutants. Research shows
that the relatively slow passage of water through
wetlands can provide sufficient time for pathogens to
lose their viability or to be consumed by other organisms
in the ecosystem. However, there is also the potential
for accumulation for toxic substances in wetlands, in
effect turning wetlands into potential ‘hotspots’ where
high levels of contamination can prove detrimental to
wetland ecosystem functioning and health (Skov, 2015).
Consequently, hybrid approaches, where NBS complement
conventional water treatment technologies, can provide
suitable solutions, especially to reduce heavy nutrient
loading. As NBS may require longer retention times,
they need to be balanced with the rate of conventional
treatment, maybe involving larger ecosystems areas, and
corporate and regulatory requirements (see Chapter 6).
NBS can support the delivery of water services in
ways that are complementary and integrated with
conventional water infrastructure (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/
TNC, 2014). Therefore, it is important that NBS, both for
water quality and other water management goals, are
considered in conjunction with other options, based on
standardized approaches to potential costs and benefits.
This should include due consideration to the wide array of

environmental and socio-economic co-benefits (including
the increased capacity to adapt to a changing climate)
that NBS deliver in addition to the primary water quality
benefits. Combining NBS and grey infrastructure in water
management plans also enhances the sustainability of the
grey water infrastructure.
Broader stakeholder involvement and community
participation is important in the implementation of NBS,
especially the involvement of those whose livelihoods
depend on the goods and services provided by landscapes.
As NBS for water quality and their specific applications
depend on many factors, there is a challenge related to the
lack of well-established historic evidence of positive impacts
of NBS, allowing for comparisons with other solutions.
This may increase the perceived risk or level of uncertainty
of such projects, compared to the well-established
performance of conventional water treatment technologies
(UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC, 2014). Filling this information gap
is key for enabling NBS for water quality to stand on equal
footing with that of conventional alternatives.
These limitations of NBS in water quality management
applications can be reduced by:
•

improving the knowledge base and promoting
research and innovation on NBS for managing water
quality, including testing NBS in different hydrological,
environmental, socio-economic and management
conditions;

•

enhancing capacity by sharing and disseminating
knowledge and developing educational programmes
focusing on NBS as an integral part of water quality
management;

•

incorporating NBS in policies and legal and regulatory
frameworks on water quality management, encouraging
investment in and implementation of NBS;

•

promoting private sector investment in NBS through
examples that make the business case for NBS for
managing water quality (Box 3.6; see also Section 5.2.2);
and

•

collaborating with civil society to raise awareness on
the potential of NBS for water quality management,
advocating for policy changes supporting NBS and
promoting NBS to political leaders.

Chapter 3 NBS for managing water quality

60

The range of benefits and ‘co-benefits’ provided by NBS
for managing water quality have significant potential
to contribute to the achievement of the SDGs, enabling
societies to transition to sustainability. Because
improving water quality also improves water availability
(for multiple uses), and in some cases reduces waterrelated risks, there are many potential links across most
of the SDGs and their targets.
Table 3.2 provides an overview of only the most obvious
and direct linkages between improved water quality and
the SDGs where NBS offer particular promise.
SDG 6 Ensure availability and sustainable management
of water and sanitation for all: NBS for managing water
quality support the achievement of all targets of SDG 6.
A wide range of NBS, such as watershed protection
for improving water quality in source watersheds and
constructed wetlands in order to reduce nutrients and
other pollution from different sources, are essential for
achieving Target 6.3. NBS may contribute to Targets 6.1
and 6.2 by reducing the human health risks of unsafe
drinking water and sanitation through, for example,
source water protection and alternative solutions to
sanitation, such as ecological sanitation. All NBS for
managing water quality are means to implement Target
6.6 in the context of SDG 6.
NBS are particularly prominent in improving the impacts
of agricultural systems on water quality and therefore
key to achieving SDG 2 (to promote sustainable
agriculture, inter alia), since reducing impacts on
water quality is a key determinant of sustainability in
agriculture, particularly regarding Target 2.4. The health
benefits (SDG 3) of NBS contributions to improve water
quality are self-evident. Likewise, this and other NBS
approaches to reducing land-based pollution make
a major contribution to conserving and sustainably
using the oceans, seas and marine resources (SDG 14),
most notably by reducing nutrient inputs (Target 14.1).
Green infrastructure (NBS) is an integral part of building
resilient infrastructure (SDG 9). In a similar vein, green
infrastructure is an essential component of building
safe, resilient and sustainable cities (SDG 11).
The environmental co-benefits of NBS to improve water
quality are particularly relevant as they contribute to
supporting biodiversity and ecosystems in general
(SDG 15, in addition to SDG 14 mentioned above).
Terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems are intricately
connected. Particularly, NBS using ecosystem functions
and services through watershed protection, natural
or artificial wetlands, reforestation, and buffer land
directly support Targets 15.1, 15.2 and 15.4. NBS
for water quality, such as buffer strips and riparian

61

BOX 3.6

3.5 The potential for NBS to contribute
to water quality-related SDGs

WATER FUNDS AS A MEANS TO
IMPLEMENT NBS FOR SOURCE
WATERSHED PROTECTION

Water funds are institutional
platforms developed by cities and
conservation practitioners that can
address governance issues by bridging
scientific, jurisdictional, financial and
implementation gaps. Research over the past 15
years has demonstrated their ability to enable
downstream users to invest in upstream habitat
protection and land management to improve
water quality and quantity, with successful cases,
for example, in Quito, San Antonio (Texas) and
recently in Nairobi (Abell et al., 2017). The Nairobi
Water Fund aims to demonstrate how investments
in NBS in the Upper Tana watershed, which covers
approximately 1.7 million ha and supplies 95%
of Nairobi’s drinking water, can create a twofold
return on investment. A business case found that a
US$10 million investment in water fund activities,
such as riparian buffers, reforestation and
implementation of improved agricultural practices,
could be expected to return an estimated US$21.5
million in economic benefits over a 30-year
timeframe (TNC, 2015).
Contributed by Elisabeth Mullin Bernhardt (UN Environment).

vegetative areas, contribute to Targets 15.3 and 15.5
on combatting desertification and land degradation
and reducing habitat and biodiversity loss. The
implementation of NBS for water quality contributes
also to Target 15.9: to integrate ecosystem and
biodiversity values into development strategies.
Additional linkages can be made to SDG 7 (clean
energy). As most NBS require very little (if any)
external energy, they can reduce energy demands of
conventional wastewater treatment technologies. The
NBS that improve nutrient and chemical use efficiency
in agriculture are particularly relevant to SDG 12
(‘Responsible consumption and production’), and
similarly NBS to manage urban runoff (heavy metals
and chemicals) contribute in particular to Target
12.4 (to reduce the release of hazardous chemicals
to water and soil). The environmental and socioeconomic benefits resulting from NBS for managing
water quality also support SDG 1 (end poverty),
and other aspects of SDG 2, through, for example,
enhancing livelihoods, especially in rural areas.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 3.2		 Water quality in the SDGs
SDG

Target

SDG 6
Water and sanitation

6.1

Achieve universal and equitable access to safe and affordable drinking water for all

6.2

Achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene for all and end
open defecation, paying special attention to the needs of women and girls and those in
vulnerable situations

6.3

Improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and minimizing
release of hazardous chemicals and materials, halving the proportion of untreated
wastewater and substantially increasing recycling and safe reuse globally

6.6

Protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands,
rivers, aquifers and lakes

SDG 1
Poverty

1.4

Ensure that all men and women, in particular the poor and the vulnerable, have equal
rights to economic resources, as well as access to basic services, ...

SDG 2
... promote sustainable
agriculture

2.4

... ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural
practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems ...
and that progressively improve land and soil quality

SDG 3
Health

3.3

End the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and
combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases

3.9

Substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and
air, water and soil pollution and contamination

SDG 7
Clean energy

7.3

Double the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency

SDG 9
Build resilient
infrastructure...

9.4

... upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased
resource-use efficiency and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound
technologies and industrial processes ...

SDG 11
Sustainable cities

11.3

... enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization ...

11.6

... reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities ...

SDG 12
Sustainable consumption
and production

12.4

Achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes
throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed international frameworks, and
significantly reduce their release to air, water and soil in order to minimize their adverse
impacts on human health and the environment

SDG 14
Conserve and sustainably
use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for
sustainable development

14.1

... prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from landbased activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution

SDG 15
Ecosystems

15.1

Ensure the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of terrestrial and inland
freshwater ecosystems and their services, in particular forests, wetlands, mountains and
drylands, in line with obligations under international agreements

Source: Adapted and updated from UNESCO (2015a, p. 7).

Chapter 3 NBS for managing water quality

62

NBS FOR
MANAGING
WATER-RELATED
RISKS, VARIABILITY
AND CHANGE

63

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

UNU-INWEH | Vladimir Smakhtin, Nidhi Nagabhatla,
Manzoor Qadir and Lisa Guppy
With contributions from11: Peter Burek (IIASA);
Karen Villholth, Matthew McCartney and Paul Pavelic (IWMI);
Daniel Tsegai (UNCCD); Tatiana Fedotova (WBCSD); and
Giacomo Teruggi (WMO)

Flooded wastewater treatment plant after Hurricane Harvey (USA)

4.1 NBS in the context of water variability
and change, and global sustainable
development agreements
Water resources variability has a significant impact on
development (Hall et al., 2014). Around 30% of the global
population is estimated to reside in areas and regions
routinely impacted by either flood or drought events – the
major water-related disasters through which water variability
manifests itself. According to the International Disaster
Database of the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology
of Disasters (CRED, n.d.), who analysed the data for the
ten-year period of 2006–2015 as summarized in the World
Disasters Report (IFRC, 2016), about 140 million people are
affected, and worldwide close to 10,000 people die from
water-related disasters annually (Figure 4.1). If extreme
temperatures are combined with droughts, or storms with
floods, the numbers of casualties almost triples. To put this
in context, the average number of annual water-related
disaster deaths from floods and droughts together is in the
same range as the number of annual deaths from terrorism,
while the number of people affected by floods and droughts
(displaced, having lost their income or home, etc.) is about
five times more that the number of people living with HIV.
Average global economic loss from floods and droughts
is over US$40 billion per year across all economic sectors.
Storms add another US$46 billion in economic losses
annually, on average. The number of deaths, affected
people, and economic losses varies significantly by year and
continent, with Africa and Asia being the most affected in
terms of all three indicators. These numbers are projected to
increase to US$200–400 billion by 2030, according to various
estimates. Such losses strongly affect water, food and energy
security and consume most of the current total development
aid flow (OECD, 2015a).

11

Authors would like to thank Sarah Davidson of WWF-US for helpful
comments.

64

Figure 4.1		 Average annual impacts of droughts and floods globally, 2006–2015

100 000

100 000

90 000

90 000

80 000

80 000

70 000

70 000

60 000

60 000

50 000

50 000

40 000

40 000

30 000

30 000

20 000

20 000

10 000

10 000

0
Average number of
people killed
per year
Droughts

0

Average number of
people affected
per year (in thousands)

Average economic
damage per year
(million US$)

Floods

Source: Based on data from CRED (n.d.).

Climate change modifies (and has already modified)
the pattern of global runoff (Milly et al., 2005), with
some studies suggesting an increase of global runoff of
approximately 4% by 1 °C global temperature rise (Labat
et al., 2004). But most importantly, climate change
increases the frequency, intensity and severity of extreme
weather events (O’Gorman, 2015), which may result in
increasing frequency and magnitude of water-related
extremes (IPCC, 2012; Mazdiyasni and AghaKouchak,
2015). Although the uncertainties associated with climate
projections do not yet in many cases allow for robust
quantitative statements about climate change impacts on
water at large, and on water variability in particular, some
historic evidence and projections suggest that flood hazards
may intensify, particularly in parts of South, South-East
and North-East Asia, as well as tropical Africa and South
America – due to changes in precipitation patterns affecting
the hydrological cycle. Hirabayashi et al. (2008) illustrated
that the frequency of floods will increase in most regions,
except for North America and central to western Eurasia.
The frequency of droughts is also projected to increase
globally, with only northern high latitudes, eastern Australia
and eastern Eurasia showing decrease or no significant
changes. Several regions are projected to have increases in
both flood and drought frequency.

65

Not all water resources variability arises from natural
climate variability or anthropogenic climate change. As
noted in the Prologue, ecosystem degradation, through
for example land use change, wetlands loss and land
degradation, is an important driver of increasing waterrelated risk and in many cases the leading cause of risk
and disasters. This implies that ecosystem restoration
should be a primary response to reducing those risks,
through applying NBS.
Agriculture is perhaps the economic sector that is most
affected by increasing variability of water resources
globally, and certainly the most vulnerable in socioeconomic terms due to the dependency of rural
communities in developing countries. It absorbs on
average 84% of adverse economic impacts of droughts,
and 25% of all damages from climate-related disasters
(FAO, 2015). Scientists, farmers and even the business
community consider variability, casted as ‘extreme
weather events’, as one of the most likely production risks
over the next ten years (WEF, 2015). The welfare gains
obtained from only mitigating hydrological variability at
large by securing water to existing irrigators globally was
assessed at US$94 billion for 2010 (Sadoff et al., 2015).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Damages to various industries and urban infrastructure,
particularly from catastrophic flooding, are equally
significant. The US$43 billion in economic losses and US$16
billion insured losses due to the 2011 flooding in Thailand
had a pronounced impact on the insurance industry and on
foreign direct investment (Munich Re, 2013). Uncertainties
in flood damage estimates, however, can be large
(Wagenaar et al., 2016).
At the same time, water variability (i.e. the natural seasonal
flow regime and the flooding associated with it) provides
significant socio-ecological benefits, for capture fisheries
and flood recession agriculture, for example. These benefits
in large deltaic systems, such as the Mekong Delta, may be
one or two orders of magnitude higher than annual costs
of damage from extreme floods (MRC, 2009). Similarly, it is
the seasonal variability in rainfall that creates opportunities
for water storage, using either green or grey infrastructure,
to provide water for both ecosystems and people over
drier periods. Hence, managing variability is not about
eliminating it, but rather minimizing damages and
maximizing the opportunities it provides. This dichotomy
is best addressed through NBS. In addition, climate
change exerts its impacts primarily through ecosystems
and hydrology. Therefore, the primary response to both
progressive change and variability of water resources and
flows is ecosystem-based adaptation – a concept that
translates into a range of NBS.
Some recent trends, like increasing water surface
storage development on the one hand, and ageing water
infrastructure on the other, point to a need for innovative
solutions that embed ecosystem services’ perspectives,
resilience and livelihood considerations more prominently
in planning and management processes that explicitly
address water variability. These needs are exacerbated
by rapid population growth, urbanization and other
increasing pressures on water resources. Large grey water
infrastructure is seen by many countries as the solution
to dealing with water resources variability, particularly
as climate change-induced increases in variability are
anticipated. Hence, more large grey infrastructure (such as
dams and flood protection embankments) is being built
and planned. The ageing existing grey infrastructure adds
an additional challenge – that it might not be in line with
the vision according to which it was designed, nor effective
since the hydrological parameters on which it was designed
are now changing. The appropriate response is to recognize
the significant risk reduction benefits that ecosystems and
green infrastructure offer and to design green and grey
infrastructure in tandem to maximize system performance
and achieve greater benefits for people, nature and the
economy. Such is the essence of an NBS approach.
Many SDG targets address various aspects of water-related
disaster management and variability, either explicitly or
implicitly. Target 1.5 aims to “build the resilience of the poor
and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure
and vulnerability to ... shocks and disasters”. Targets 2.4 and
9.1 focus on ‘resilient agricultural practices’ and ‘resilient

infrastructure’, respectively. Target 11.5 aims to “reduce
the number of deaths and the number of people affected, …
decrease the direct economic losses … caused by disasters,
including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting
the poor and … vulnerable”. Target 13.1 is to “strengthen
resilience and adaptive capacity to climate-related hazards
and natural disasters ...”, while Target 15.3 aims to “restore
degraded land…, including land affected by desertification,
drought and floods”. There are obvious synergies between
these targets (UN-Water, 2016b) and these synergies may only
become stronger if NBS are seen as the supporting concept to
all of them.
Many international policy fora and initiatives noted the
need to move away from a reactive approach to floods to
pre-emptive ones, i.e. risk reduction. It is in the flood risk
reduction area that NBS are perceived to excel. The concept
of ‘living with floods’, which, among other things, includes
a range of structural (and non-structural) approaches that
help to ‘be prepared’ for a flood, can facilitate application of
relevant NBS to reduce flood losses and, most importantly,
risk (see Section 5.4). In addition to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030) also calls on relevant UN
agencies to strengthen existing and implement new global
mechanisms to raise awareness and improve understanding
of water-related disaster risks and their impact on society,
and to advance strategies for DRR (UNISDR, 2015). This
framework also recognizes the need to shift from primarily
post-disaster planning and recovery to proactive reduction
of risks to prevent disasters taking place. It stipulates that
strategies should also consider a range of ecosystem-based
solutions. If widely implemented, NBS could therefore shift
the way water resources are managed, especially in the
context of high-impact floods and droughts. The primary
role of NBS here is to increase resilience in order to reduce
the likelihood that a disaster will happen, although they can
also play a role in post-disaster recovery. NBS should be part
of the planning and preparatory actions that are required for
decreasing disaster risk, vulnerability and exposure, and for
increasing societal resilience when and after disaster strikes.
NBS are also reflected upon in the New Urban Agenda (NUA),
a framework for urban sustainability adopted in 2016 in
the awareness that by 2050, urban populations will double
and expand to 70% of the global population. The NUA aims
to influence how cities are planned, designed, financed,
developed, governed and managed. Specifically citing links
to the SDGs, NUA touches on water and NBS: e.g. paragraph
101 references water and NBS, while paragraph 157 references
nature-based innovation (UNGA, 2016). However, how exactly
this complex agenda can and will be managed, rolled out
and implemented remains to be seen. Finally, the 2015 Paris
Agreement on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2015) puts a very
significant emphasis on adaptation, which by all means will
not be possible without rolling out a range of NBS that deal
with increasing water variability and extremes induced by
changing climate.

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

66

Figure 4.2		 Changes in benefit flows with ecosystem modification

Long-term benefits

Total

Benefits from managed system

Benefits from natural system

Natural

Highly managed

Source: Acreman (2001, fig. 3).

4.2 Examples of NBS to moderate risks,
variability and change
Most of the water resources management interventions
have an element of NBS in them (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC,
2014) and the same is true for interventions that deal
with management of water variability and change. When
a natural (e.g. aquatic) ecosystem is modified, some of
the ‘natural benefits’ extracted from it are lost, but can be
replaced by benefits from modifications. However, there
is a ‘tipping point’ (which is very difficult to identify) in
this process where the sum of all benefits reaches the
maximum, and further modifications will only decrease
the total flow of benefits (Acreman, 2001; Figure 4.2).
Accordingly, NBS may be located in any part of this
spectrum ranging from ‘purely natural’ (an unmodified
wetland that may have a natural, even if limited, capacity
to regulate flows), to a concrete dam built across a natural
river, but with ecologically relevant components and
operating rules, like dedicated releases for environmental
purposes.

for flood risk management. It suggests that flood risk
management measures should be site-specific, integrated
and balanced across all sectors concerned, and based on
the concept of integrated flood management defined by the
Associated Programme on Flood Management (WMO, 2009),
a joint programme of the World Meteorological Organization
(WMO) and the Global Water Partnership (GWP). The key
principles of the FGG are:
•

design flood management methods to maximize the net
benefits of floodwaters while minimizing flood risk, since
flooding can be a natural and beneficial process;

•

apply flood risk management with a watershed
perspective to understand how a particular community’s
flood risk relates to the rest of the watershed;

•

consider non-structural methods in flood management,
and then if needed include structural, natural, naturebased or hard engineering, as part of an integrated
approach;

•

recognize the multiple social, economic, environmental
and political aspects affected by flood management in a
watershed;

Various NBS exist at various stages of development and
implementation, ranging from conceptual approaches
and general guidelines to commonly adopted practices.
They are all important and useful in their own right as they
either have already demonstrated their potential, or will
demonstrate it when adopted.

•

integrate flood risk reduction and adaptation to a
changing climate into flood recovery and reconstruction,
so that flood recovery improves community resilience
to future extreme events, avoids introduction of new
social or environmental vulnerabilities, and enhances
community adaptation capacity to climate uncertainties;

4.2.1

•

support social equity and comply with local/national
laws and institutions, including informal social norms
and customs during decision-making processes; and

•

strengthen resilience processes and livelihoods, and
empower women and/or disadvantaged social groups.

NBS for flood management

One example of a holistic NBS framework is the WWF’s
Natural and Nature-Based Flood Management: A Green
Guide (or Flood Green Guide – FGG; WWF, 2017). FGG
supports communities at a local level in using NBS

67

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 4.3		 An illustration of the WMO SPR concept

Reduction of
flood hazard
Wetlands restoration
Green infrastructure

Watershed management
River and coastal management
Urban (re)development
Transportation

Risk reduction

Flood protection
Embankments
Flood barriers

Land use planning
Urban planning

Land use regulation
Setback lines
Building restrictions
Flood proofing

Integrated
Flood Risk
Management

Raising preparedness
Early warning systems
Evacuation plans
Flood hazard maps

Disaster management
Poverty reduction

Residual risk mitigation
Emergency response
Insurances / Relief funds
Recovery plans

Source

Pathway

Receptor

Source: Adapted from WMO (2017, fig. 4, p. 14). Courtesy of Giacomo Teruggi (WMO).

Flood management, as any type of disaster management,
considers several interlined components: vulnerability and
exposure to floods, combined with the hazard, result in the
overall flood risk. One way to illustrate this is the WMO source
to pathway to receptor (SPR) concept (WMO, 2017). The SPR
allows the distinction between flood hazards, pathways
resulting in exposure of ‘receptors’, and consequences
of floods to people and property. NBS can play a role in
the source (e.g. through wetland restoration or land use
practices) and in the pathway (e.g. through various ways of
increasing conveyance and storage capacity) (Figure 4.3).
Burek et al. (2012) is an example of a large-scale, regional
analysis of the potential that NBS may have in flood risk
reduction. Using a simulation modelling approach, the
study evaluated the effectiveness (in terms of flood peak
reduction) of a large range (25) of Natural Water Retention
Measures (NWRM) in Europe, aggregating them into several
major scenarios/portfolios. The cost of implementation
was also assessed. The study illustrated that NBS could
reduce 1:20 year flood peaks by up to 15% locally, although
at a regional level, peak flow reductions of only 4% were
observed. Although at first sight such reductions might
seem small, only a few percentage points can make the
difference between a flood and a disaster. NBS were found
to be able to reduce flood peaks more effectively for smaller
catchments and for lower return periods (floods that occur
more frequently). At the same time, the study noted cases
when NBS could locally increase flood peaks. This points to
the need for NBS to be carefully located and designed.

For the UK, the most effective measures were found to
be the ‘green city’ scenario (a combination of measures
in urban areas like green infrastructure, green roofs,
rain gardens, park depressions and infiltration devices),
followed by improved ‘crop practices’ (a combination of
methods such as mulching and tillage). For the Rhine and
Rhone regions, the most effective scenarios were those that
reduce the flood peaks along the river, e.g. polders. For the
Elbe to Ems region, afforestation, closely followed by crop
practice and grassland, were found to be the most effective
measures, since a lot of the area has a high potential for
land use conversion. For the Po and the Baltic regions remeandering has the most potential to reduce flood peaks,

Flood management
policies in some
countries started to look
more closely at solutions
that involve working with
natural processes

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

68

Figure 4.4		 Most effective regional NBS measures to reduce flood peaks for a 20-year flood

Source: Burek et al. (2012, fig. VI-1, p. 90).

and it was also found to be quite effective for almost all
the other regions. Crop practices was the most effective
measure for Iberia, Atlantic France, the Danube River
Basin, the Balkan, Southern Italy and Greece. Crop practice
was also a quite successful measure for Denmark and
Northern Germany (Figure 4.4). Clearly, these examples
illustrate that the choice of NBS is, unsurprisingly,
dependent on the predominant land use type and social,
ecological and hydrological settings.
Flood management policies in some countries started
to look more closely at solutions that involve working
with natural processes. ‘Natural flood management’
in the UK, for example, seeks to restore or enhance
catchment processes that have been affected by human
intervention. Dadson et al. (2017) analysed over 20 types
of flood management measures, grouped into three
main categories: i) water retention through management
of infiltration and overland flow, ii) managing the
hydrological connectivity between system components
and the conveyance of water through it, and iii) making
space for water storage through, for example, floodplains

69

(Table 4.1). The authors summarize the evidence available
at present for each of the measures, and attempted a
semi-quantitative analysis of the impacts of several flood
management interventions on the reduction of flood risk
(Figure 4.5).
The summary concludes, among other things, that i)
appropriately chosen land-use and land cover interventions
can reduce local peak water flows after moderate rainfall
events; ii) the evidence does not suggest that these
interventions will have a major effect on nearby downstream
flood risk for the most extreme events; iii) the evidence
available for the downstream effects of upstream land-use
changes at large catchment scales is more limited, but at
present it does not suggest that realistic land-use changes
will make a major difference to downstream flood risk; iv)
long-term monitoring is needed to separate the effects of
land management from those of climatic variability, without
this it is unwise to extrapolate the findings from individual
studies to larger scales, or to settings with different soil and
vegetation types. (Dadson et al., 2017).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 4.1		 Catchment-based measures that contribute to flood management
Flood risk management theme

Specific measure

Retaining water in the landscape: Land use changes
water retention through
management of infiltration and
overland flow
Arable land use practices

Arable to grassland conversion, forestry and woodland
planting, restrictions on hillslope cropping (e.g. silage maize),
moorland and peatland restoration
Spring cropping versus winter cropping, cover crops,
extensification, crop rotation

Livestock land practices

Lower stocking rates, restriction of the grazing season

Tillage practices

Conservation tillage, contour/cross slope ploughing

Field drainage
(to increase storage)

Deep cultivations and drainage to reduce impermeability

Buffer strips and buffer zones

Contour grass strips, hedges, shelter belts, bunds, riparian
buffer strips, controls on bank erosion

Machinery management

Low ground pressures, avoiding wet conditions

Urban land use

Increased permeable areas and surface storage

Retaining water in the landscape: Management of hillslope
managing connectivity and
connectivity
conveyance
Buffer strips and buffering
zones to reduce connectivity

Making space for water:
floodplain conveyance and
storage

Examples

Blockage of farm ditches and moorland grips
Contour grass strips, hedges, shelter belts, bunds, field
margins, riparian buffer strips

Channel maintenance

Modifications to maintenance of farm ditches

Drainage and pumping
operations

Modifications to drainage and pumping regimes

Field and farm structures

Modifications to gates, yards, tracks and culverts

On-farm retention

Retention ponds and ditches

River restoration

Restoration of river profile and cross-sections, channel
realignment and changes to planform pattern

Upland water retention

Farm ponds, ditches, wetlands

Water storage areas

On- or off-line storage, washlands, polders,
impoundment reservoirs

Wetlands

Wetland creation, engineered storage scrapes, controlled
water levels

River restoration/retraining

River reprofiling, channel works, riparian works

River and water course
management

Vegetation clearance, channel maintenance and riparian
works

Floodplain restoration

Setback of embankments, reconnecting rivers and
floodplains

Source: Dadson et al. (2017, table 1, p. 4).

The same is probably true for any other region. Since
monitoring programmes are expensive and require long
time-frames, some insights on the possible impacts of land
use change on flood impacts and risks may be drawn form
analyses of a ‘shocking land use’ change, e.g. associated
with warfare (Lacombe and Pierret, 2013). Such studies
suggest that large-scale land use change impacts have
profound and durable hydrological effects. This knowledge
also helps predict the potential impacts that NBS may have
on risk reduction, by reversing negative land use change
through land restoration.

4.2.2

NBS for drought management

Drought is on the other end of the spectrum of water-related
variability. Droughts are usually chronic (building up and
persisting in the long term), as opposed to floods, which are
acute (short-term and abrupt). Droughts do not only occur
in drylands, as is sometimes portrayed, but can also pose a
disaster risk in regions that are normally not water-scarce
(Smakhtin and Schipper, 2008). Drought is very complex and
its global pattern can be described by a range of indicators
(Eriyagama et al., 2009). Carrão et al. (2016) is perhaps
the most recent and comprehensive analysis of drought

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

70

Figure 4.5		 Effect of different NBS interventions on flood peak reduction (left) and combined effect of basin-wide
		 interventions with flood magnitude (right)

Increasing scale

Large

Small ponds

r
ve
co
nd
La

La
nd
m
an
ag
em
en
t

Floodplain storage

Floodplain
roughness

Small

Reduction in flood peak (%)

Increasing flood magnitude

Maximum effect
Minimum effect

Small

Large
Flood magnitude

Source: Dadson et al. (2017, fig. 3, p. 18).

risk at the global scale, identifying three independent
determinants: hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Drought
hazard was derived from historical precipitation deficits,
exposure is based on an aggregation of gridded indicators
of population and livestock densities, crop cover, and water
stress; and drought vulnerability has been computed as
the composite of high-level factors of social, economic and
infrastructural indicators, collected at both the national and
sub-national levels. The maps of hazard and risk (Figure 4.6)
illustrate that with proper measures to reduce exposure
and vulnerability, drought risk can be considerably reduced
even in very drought-hazardous regions like Australia and
the Southern USA. It is in these contexts that the role of NBS
can be most significant.

Droughts do not only
occur in drylands, as is
sometimes portrayed, but
can also pose a disaster
risk in regions that are
normally not water-scarce

71

In recent decades, the frequency, intensity and duration
of droughts have been steadily increasing, in part due
to climate change. In 2015–16, the El Niño weather
phenomenon caused the worst and most damaging
droughts around the world. According to the USA’s National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), 2016
smashed the record for the hottest year since reporting
began in 1880. This was due in large part to one of the
strongest El Niño events ever recorded (NASA, 2017).
International response to drought focused on ‘stop and
go’ measures which are aimed at reacting. A shift to more
proactive and risk-based measures must be promoted
(Wilhite et al., 2007). NBS that help alleviate the adverse
impacts of droughts are normally multipurpose and may
be used in contexts beyond just managing variability and
change (Table 4.2). In fact, the mix of potential NBS for
drought mitigation is essentially the same as those for
water availability (see Chapter 2).

4.2.3

NBS for managing multiple risks

NBS can be used to manage more than one risk and be
applicable to both flood and drought risks, for example.
As already mentioned earlier (e.g. Table 4.1), wetlands –
both natural and constructed – can play a role in reducing
disaster risk. Both natural and constructed wetlands
demonstrate a capacity for flood management and flood
and storm risk mitigation by acting as natural barriers,
working as a natural sponge trapping rain and surface
runoff, mitigating land erosion and the impact of storm
surges (often by diverting surface water into underlying
aquifers) or protecting coastlines from storms. As the

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Latitude

Figure 4.6		 Global maps of drought hazard (top) and risk (bottom)

Longitude
No data

More hazardous

Latitude

Less hazardous

Longitude
No data

Lower risk

Higher risk

Source: Adapted from Carrão et al. (2016, figures 3 and 9, pp. 115 and 120).

frequency of natural hazards increases, understanding
the functions of wetlands as NBS can help to augment
resilience, both locally and at larger scales.
One example of the massive wetlands’ potential as NBS
is the case of Yangtze River Basin in China, home to 400
million people, which recorded a large torrential storm
in 1998, resulting in 4,000 causalities and US$25 billion in
damage. The highlight of the policy response ‘32 Character
Policy’ of the Chinese government was to restore 2,900
km2 of floodplains with the capacity to hold 13 billion m3
(i.e. 13 km3) of water (Wang et al., 2007) as a disaster risk
management strategy. A wetland conservation network
was established across the Yangtze River Basin to manage
the water quality, preserve local biodiversity and expand
wetland-based nature reserves (Pittock and Xu, 2010).

Another example is the case of the earthquake and tsunami
that struck Chile in 2010, resulting in US$30 billion loss and
severely impacting the assets and livelihoods of the coastal
wetland communities (Yali National Reserve, ValparaÍso)
(OECD/UNECLAC, 2016). Post this event, the government
announced the protection of the majority of these coastal
wetlands as a Ramsar site, acknowledging the largescale benefits of wetland ecosystems in DRR. Yet another
example is Hurricane Katrina, which made history in the
USA as the deadliest disaster event (80% of the city flooded;
1,500 casualties and nearly 900,000 people displaced)
and highlighted the failure of existing DRR strategies that
growingly focused on the city’s floodwalls and levees
– entirely grey infrastructure. As noted in the Prologue,
wetlands loss in the Mississippi Delta, through sediment
trapping in upstream dams, was a major factor contributing

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

72

Table 4.2		 NBS for managing drought risks in the Horn of Africa
Case studies

Interventions – NBS

Outcomes

Improving food and water
security in the Abreha
we-Atsebeha watershed
(Ethiopia)

• Soil and stone bunds, trenches and
percolation pits
• Erosion gullies converted in water
harvesting sites
• Springs developed as sources of drinking
water
• Fruit trees and naturally occurring
species planted

• Community food self-sufficiency by
transforming degraded land into productive
farmland
• Improved irrigation systems through water
harvesting and storing
• Enhanced vegetation cover resulting in
better soil quality

Sustainable water resources
and livelihoods in the
Lake Haramaya watershed
(Ethiopia)

• Soil and water conservation measures
• Water user regulations, allocation and
pricing
• Diversified livelihood options
• Enhanced agricultural productivity
through better seeds, fertilizers and
efficient irrigation

• Reduction of water disputes and conflicts
through the establishment of water laws to
regulate water use
• Improved crops and livestock productivity
through ponds and higher water use
efficiency through drip irrigation
• Enhanced societal resilience and
vulnerability to drought

Water harvesting for economic
empowerment in Kitui County
(Kenya)

• Small-scale irrigation
• Sunken sand dams
• Water storage and distribution structures

• Increased water supply benefited health and
livelihoods
• Biodiversity conservation and enriched
ground water through the construction of
sunken sand dams
• Reduced potential for conflict over water

Building drought resilience in
Aswa-Agago sub-catchment
(Uganda)

•
•
•
•

• Improved water quality resulted in a
decrease in water-borne diseases
• Increased knowledge of environmental
conservation measures such as planting
multipurpose trees

Restoring water quality in
Lake Kako
(Uganda)

• Catchment management
• Planting trees and other vegetation

Improved water point infrastructures
Water harvesting structures
Environmental conservation
Emergency revolving fund and water user
committees

• Enhanced capacity to use local material to
create technology
• Acquired skills in catchment management
and conservation of land

Source: Based on GWPEA (2016).

to elevated impacts of the hurricane. Post Katrina, the State
of Louisiana Legislature established the Coastal Protection
and Restoration Authority, and the City of New Orleans
reformulated its building codes to benefit from the risk
reduction services of wetlands (Jacob et al., 2008; Rogers
et al., 2015).
However, the hydrological functions of natural ecosystems,
like wetlands and floodplains, are much less understood
than those provided by grey infrastructure. Consequently,
they are even more neglected in policy appraisal and
natural resource and development planning and
management. Natural systems can, in some circumstances,
help buffer the negative impact of extreme hydrological
events, reducing the risks for people. They do this in two
ways. First, by attenuating the immediate physical impacts,
and second, by helping people survive and recover in the
aftermath of significant events. However, the role that
natural systems play is complex. Their effects on water
flows and storm surges depend on many factors, including
other land features, which vary widely across locations.
Moreover, natural systems are dynamic, meaning that their

73

role may change over time. Sometimes, they might mitigate
hazards, while under other circumstances they might
contribute to the natural processes that generate hazards.
For example, headwater wetlands in Southern Africa have
been shown to attenuate flood flows at the start of the rainy
season when they are relatively dry, but generate runoff and
contribute to flood flows later in the wet season when they
are saturated (McCartney et al., 1998). The lack of a detailed
quantitative understanding of the regulating functions
of natural systems and the ways to interpret them in the
context of DRR remains the major science gap. It is often
unclear which functions exactly are performed and how
those functions change over time (i.e. between seasons and
between years – cf. Bullock and Acreman, 2003). The lack of
both quantitative information and a recognized method to
incorporate regulating functions into DRR-related decisionmaking processes, makes it difficult to develop NBS around
them. The added complexity is that it is increasingly
difficult to define or even identify ‘natural’ ecosystems.
Most of the ecosystem services in play in DRR processes are
coming from managed landscapes – which may or may not
include ‘natural’ elements.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

These complexities are illustrated by a recent attempt
to evaluate the flow regulating functions of natural
ecosystems (i.e. wetlands, floodplains and miombo
woodland) in the Zambezi Basin by McCartney et al. (2013).
The method developed in this study utilizes observed
streamflow records and standard hydrological techniques
“to derive a simulated time series of flow in the absence of
an ecosystem. This can then be compared with an observed
time series to evaluate the impact of the ecosystem on the
flow regime. The method has been applied to 14 locations
in the basin. Results indicate that the different ecosystems
affect flows in different ways. Broadly: i) floodplains decrease
flood flows and increase low flows; ii) headwater wetlands
increase flood flows and decrease low flows; iii) miombo
forest, when covering more than 70% of the catchment,
decreases flood flows and decreases low flows. However,
in all cases there were examples which produce contrary
results and simple correlations between the extent of an
ecosystem type within a catchment and the impact on
the flow regime were not found.” (McCartney et al., 2013,
p. vii). “This confirms that effects on flow are a function not
just of the presence/absence of different ecosystem types,
but also of a range of other biophysical factors, including
topography, climate, soil, vegetation and geology. Hence,
the hydrological functions of natural ecosystems depend,
to a large extent, on location-specific characteristics that
make it difficult to generalize” (McCartney et al., 2013, p. 26).
To a large extent, the same applies to grey infrastructure,
managed ecosystems/landscapes and to hybrid green–grey
infrastructure applications.
Constructed wetlands (see Chapters 3 and 5) – another
range of NBS or hybrid solutions – are increasingly used
for stormwater treatment, restoration of the natural
hydrology of urban catchments, reduction of downstream
erosion from stormwater flows and, more recently, as a
disaster risk management strategy (Tidball, 2012). It is
argued that restoring the floodplains and constructing
new wetlands could help manage hydroclimatic variability
and change, and that it has extensive environmental
and socio-economic co-benefits, as it helps to safeguard
against extreme climate events and disasters (Benedict and
McMahon, 2001; Beatley, 2011; Haase, 2016). Constructed
wetlands are purposely built to perform some specific

ecological services like treatment of municipal, industrial
and agricultural wastewater, or to provide for recreational
spaces and management of urban and rural runoff
(TEEB, 2011 and Box 4.1). They therefore have significant
relevance to the New Urban Agenda, as they may be
applied to moderate the impacts of climate change and
climate extremes in urban environments, and protection
of low-lying urban areas. Singapore has exemplified this
argument to design its climate adaptation and mitigation
plan with constructed wetlands and green corridors
(Newman, 2010).

BOX 4.1

Restoring the floodplains
and constructing new
wetlands could help manage
hydroclimatic variability
and change, and that whas
extensive environmental and
socio-economic co-benefits

WATER MANAGEMENT AND
FLOOD PREVENTION IN FRANCE
– LafargeHolcim

LafargeHolcim – a large building
materials company – demonstrated
how quarries can be leveraged as water
reserves during flood conditions, and
that storage capacity in both restored and purposely
designed areas in active quarries reduces or prevents
flooding. The company worked for over 15 years with
the municipality of Bellegarde in the South of France
to expand the flood prevention infrastructure and
create wetlands that became fully operational in 2015.
The extracted quarry areas have been converted into
stormwater reservoirs with a total capacity of 2.5
million m3, reducing the risk of flooding in the local
communities (see Figure). LafargeHolcim’s experience
shows that developing quarry rehabilitation schemes
with local authorities and communities results in a
win-win situation: flood damage is averted, wetland
areas that are rich in biodiversity are created, and
community recreational areas are developed (WBCSD,
2015c).

Figure | LafargeHolcim quarries in the 		
municipality of Bellegarde, Southern France,
converted into stormwater reservoirs

Photo: WBCSD

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

74

Figure 4.7		 Water storage continuum

SUBSURFACE

SURFACE

ACCESS

Reservoirs

Increasing capital, environmental and social costs
and management complexity

Small

Large

Direct, buckets,
pumps

Ponds and tanks

Boreholes, deep/
shallow wells, etc.

Aquifers
Deep

Dam outlets, pumps,
off-take towers

Shallow

Soil moisture

Planting crops

Natural wetlands (lakes, swamps, etc.)
Increasing storage reliability

All of the above

Increasing storage reliability

Source: Adapted from McCartney and Smakhtin (2010, fig. 2, p. 5).

The discussions above allude to the need to revisit
the overall concept of water storage in the contexts of
green and grey infrastructure and DRR. McCartney and
Smakhtin (2010) introduced the concept of the water
storage continuum (Figure 4.7), suggesting that storage
planning at river basin and regional scales should consider
a portfolio of surface and subsurface storage options (and
their combinations) to arrive at the best environmental
and economic outcomes in the face of increasing water
resources variability. The NBS concept was an integral
component of this approach as the range of storage options
considered included various forms of natural storages, such
as wetlands and aquifers. Sayers et al. (2014) also recognize
that wetlands, dunes, upland storage and infiltration are
all legitimate flood management infrastructure and should
be used to manage flood waters alongside ‘conventional’
grey infrastructure, such as embankments and gates.
Natural flood management measures will not necessarily
provide protection from most extreme events on their own,
but can moderate more frequent (and smaller) ones, and
reduce the cost of conventional (grey) infrastructure, if
used in conjunction with it. At the same time, initial results
from a catchment in the UK illustrated that conventional
flood defence and natural flood management may deliver
comparable benefits, and that benefits attributable to
natural flood management interventions increase in more
extreme climate futures (Sayers et al., 2014). Overall, a
combination of nature-focused, or nature-embedded
solutions (such as land use management, wetland storage

75

and floodplain reconnection) and selective “hard path”
measures (such as bypass channels, controlled storage,
etc.) offers opportunities to simultaneously manage risk
and promote ecosystem services.
Groundwater and aquifer-related NBS hold major
unrealized potential for alleviating adverse impacts of both
floods and droughts in the same region/basin, and impacts
of progressive climate change overall. Groundwater has
an important environmental role of sustaining river flows
and ecosystem services. Groundwater is also becoming an
increasingly important resource for human development
and economies. Groundwater is more accessible for
poor communities than river flow, for example, and less
vulnerable to impacts of climate change, such as increasing
temperatures. A related aspect is the role of improved
soil management (an NBS) for managing infiltration, and
therefore both runoff and groundwater recharge, as well as
soil moisture retention, which is a particularly important
factor regarding water security for crop production.
Aquifers may have a large water storage capacity. This
capacity does not only include groundwater already in
the aquifers, but also additional water. A groundwater
aquifer is a unique buffer to overcome fluctuations of the
natural water supply. For example, in areas coping with
high seasonal variations, the excess water in wet periods
can be stored underground to subsequently improve
freshwater availability during dry periods. Underground

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 4.8		 A schematic summary of the underground taming of floods for irrigation (UTFI) concept

Wet season – without UTFI

Plan view – with UTFI

Wet season – with UTFI

Dry season – with UTFI

Source: Based on Pavelic et.al. (2012).

storage, enhanced through simple or more technically
advanced spreading, recharge or injection methods,
provides additional freshwater storage that can increase
water security. Such techniques that intentionally enhance
natural groundwater recharge by building infrastructure
and/or modifying the landscape are collectively known
as managed aquifer recharge (MAR). This NBS has the
potential to serve various purposes (Dillon et al., 2009;
Gale et al., 2006), including maximizing water storage,
replenishing depleting aquifers, improving water quality,
improving soil quality and providing ecological benefits
such as groundwater-dependent plant communities or
enhanced downstream river flows.
Aquifer-centric NBS, such as large-scale MAR interventions,
may be applied in certain physiographic conditions to
alleviate the risks of both floods and droughts in the same
river basin. Such sustainable, cost-effective and scalable
solutions may be especially relevant in the developingcountry context where the vulnerability to water-related
disasters and impacts of climate change remains
unprecedented. An innovative solution called ‘underground
taming of floods for irrigation’ (UTFI) has been developed
specifically for such cases (Pavelic et al., 2012; 2015).
UTFI involves facilitating aquifer recharge to store wetseason high flows in catchments, thus mitigating local
and downstream flooding and simultaneously coping with
droughts by making additional groundwater available for

all human needs, including the intensification of irrigated
crop production (Pavelic et al., 2012; 2015). UTFI is a
specific application putting the well-established practice
of MAR into a much larger-scale perspective, and enabling
surface water and groundwater resources within a basin to
be managed more holistically. UTFI makes use of natural
infrastructure (aquifers) at an unprecedented scale, and
hence essentially represents a large-scale ‘NBS programme’.
Figure 4.8 illustrates this NBS concept by showing the
intended transformation from the existing situation
(uncontrolled excess runoff during wet periods, which often
results in catastrophic downstream flooding – top left),
through a range of diversions and MAR structures in a river
basin (top right – plan view) that capture this excess water
in the aquifers and reduce downstream flooding, avoiding
catastrophes (bottom left), and creating a ‘flood and
drought-free’ basin (bottom right), where the excess water
captured during wet season and stored in the aquifers is
used for irrigation in subsequent drier years.
UTFI aims to transform these risks into societal and
environmental benefits in terms of:
•

increased water security/drought resilience;

•

reduced public/private costs in terms of flood relief and
damages;

•

increased food security, agricultural production,
employment and farmer income; and

•

increased dry-season base flows to rivers and wetlands.

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

76

BOX 4.2

UTFI CONCEPT ASSESSMENT IN CHAO PHRAYA RIVER BASIN, THAILAND

The Chao Phraya River Basin (160,400 km2) regularly experiences major flooding in the upper and lower
reaches as well as El Niño-related droughts. Water resources are heavily allocated across economic sectors,
eliminating any possibility of new large-scale reservoirs – grey water storage infrastructure. An analysis of
the flow records shows that, on average, 28% of the wet-season flows that discharge into the Gulf of Thailand
(3.37 billion m3 per year) could be harvested by peak cutting without significantly impacting the water use
from existing large to medium storages, nor the riverine or coastal ecosystem. Field trials with specifically
constructed recharge basins revealed that this water could be readily recharged and accommodated within the vast shallow
alluvial aquifers in the central plains, situated upstream of the major flood-prone areas. This would also offset the decline
in groundwater levels in the agricultural plains due to year-round pumping to irrigate high-water crops. Capturing peak
flows would take place largely in the wetter years and requires converting around 200 km2 of land for groundwater recharge
– the equivalent of about 0.1% of the basin area. This would not only reduce the magnitude and costs of flooding, but also
generate around US$200 million of agricultural income per year to boost the livelihoods of thousands of farming households
as a result of additional water made available in drier periods. Capital investments could be recouped over time-frames
of a decade or less. Careful governance is needed to underpin the system’s success. For example, farmers would need to
be encouraged to utilize their land for recharge and thereby become ‘stewards’ who manage infrastructure for the benefit
of downstream communities. Water resources managers and flood protection authorities would need to provide overall
coordination, capacity building and incentives for effective adoption by farmers. Bringing this study to reality in the Chao
Phraya would require detailed investigations to determine the areas where environmental conditions are suitable for aquifer
recharge, as well as analyses to identify workable institutional arrangements (Pavelic et al., 2012).

Figure | Maintaining a pond created under UTFI

Photo: Prashanth Vishwanathan/IWMI

Achieving this aim requires careful site selection, system
design, setup and operating capital costs, local governance
and knowledge of potential environmental impacts to
ensure that implementation is responsive to local demand,
conditions and constraints. This is exemplified through an
examination of UTFI prospects in the Chao Phraya River
Basin of Thailand (Box 4.2).
This case study shows that NBS such as UTFI can reduce
both flood and drought-related risks, and thus deliver
multiple benefits. It is clear also from the above that the

77

socio-ecological benefits of UTFI become most concrete
when implemented at large scales, e.g. catchments of
thousands of km2. To develop evidence that supports UTFI
implementation in India, UTFI is currently being piloted in
the Ganges. Even though large-scale groundwater recharge
programmes have been operating in India for decades, the
focus has been on water-scarce areas with no real emphasis
on flood risk management. Highly flood-prone basins such
as the Ganges are now showing clear signs of groundwater
depletion (Shah, 2009). To support the introduction of UTFI
in India, a four-step approach is being carried out (Pavelic

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

et al., 2015). It includes: i) an opportunity assessment
that already established that almost 70% of the Gangetic
plain has high to very high suitability for UTFI; ii) a pilot
trial, initiated in the Rampur district of Uttar Pradesh
State, which involved the renovation of village ponds, the
installation of recharge structures and the continuous
monitoring of impacts; iii) stakeholder engagement from
the inception and throughout the pilot trial, including
local farming communities and officials from the irrigation
and agriculture sectors, the private sector and the media,
to ensure community ownership; and iv) convergence
with policy, registering the pilot trial under the flagship
Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Scheme (enabling the
community to be remunerated to participate in the UTFI
pilot) and in the national Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee
Yojana Scheme (which aims at providing each farm with
water access), as well as inclusion of UTFI in the District
Irrigation Plan for Rampur. Currently, the establishment of a
broader set of demonstration sites within the Ganges Basin
is being planned, in order to create more diverse experience
and stronger guidance on operational modalities to support
wider implementation. The UTFI approach, if rolled out
in a large-basin scale like the Chao Phraya or Ganges,
essentially becomes an NBS alternative to conventional
large surface dams.

4.3 Challenges to enabling NBS in
the context of variability and risk
reduction
There are numerous challenges for wide adoption and
implementation of NBS. They are both global and generic,
region-specific or place-based, and often applicable to
NBS at large, rather than to NBS in the context of just risk
reduction and variability management. Challenges include
but are not limited to:
•

The overwhelming dominance of grey infrastructure
solutions for water variability-related risks in the current
instruments of governments – from public policy to
building codes (WMO, 2007). Similarly, this dominance
exists in the orientation of economic markets, expertise
of service providers, and consequentially in the
minds of policy makers and the general public. These
factors collectively result in a general inertia against
the development and use of NBS and a bias against
NBS, which are often perceived as being less efficient
than anthropogenic/built systems. In other words, as
an example, an image of a concrete wall or levee that
precludes water from coming in dominates the minds
and current practices. This leads to a lack of incentives,
financial resources and other enabling requirements for
NBS that can be developed and applied in the context
of variability management, water-related disaster risks
and change. Related to this inertia and contributing to
it is the lack of documentation, communication and
recognition of the costs saved when NBS helped reduce
extreme event damage to grey infrastructure, people
and the economy. Also, all too often, the value of NBS

and the increased costs of extreme water events only
become clearer when ecosystems (and the services
they provide) have been significantly deteriorated and
when conventional practices turn out to be insufficient.
•

A lack of awareness, communication and knowledge
of what NBS can really offer to reduce water variability
risks compared to ‘conventional’ grey solutions at
all levels, from communities to regional planners
and national policy makers (WMO, 2006). This is also
partially caused by the insufficient level of research
and development in DRR-related NBS, especially in
terms of cost–benefit analyses of NBS performance in
comparison or conjunction with grey solutions.

•

A lack of understanding of how to integrate natural
and built infrastructure for mitigating risks of floods,
droughts and water variability at large, and an
overall lack of capacity on how to implement NBS in
the context of water-related risk reduction, even in
those cases where there is willingness to implement
NBS. For example, large-scale basin-wide NBS like
UTFI, described above, have not reached the stage
of documented manuals, and are only being piloted.
This issue is possibly typical to all new/emerging
technologies, if NBS can be seen as a ‘technology’. Also,
disincentives occur when a poorly designed NBS fails,
and they contribute to the bias mentioned above.

•

Myths and/or uncertainty about how natural
infrastructure functions (e.g. in relation to forests,
wetlands and aquifers), what ecosystem services mean
in practical terms (and in particular how flow-regulating
services – the most relevant ecosystem service in the
context of risk and variability management – manifest
themselves). The above translates into a lack of
quantitative knowledge on what positive impact can be
achieved – reducing flood peaks or drought severity, for
example.

•

Difficulties in providing clear evaluations of the
performance of NBS-related projects in the context
of risk reduction. It is also not entirely clear, at times,
what constitutes an NBS and what is a hybrid solution.
There is a lack of technical guidelines, tools and
approaches to determine the right mix of NBS and grey
infrastructure options.

•

The use of land for NBS can create tension and possible
conflict with alternative land uses. However, in fairness,
it needs to be noted that grey infrastructure is also
often directly land-consuming or has indirect adverse
impacts on land. At the same time, some NBS (e.g.
UTFI) only require a small proportion of a river basin
area to achieve the basin-wide effect of reducing the
impacts of both floods and droughts.

•

A more implicit but real challenge is the remaining
dominance of a reactive rather than proactive approach
to water-related disaster management. A reactive
approach deals with the consequences of disasters,
and in such context the use of NBS is limited. NBS
may have a much greater potential if ‘switched on’ in
the planning and implementation of risk reduction
measures – before disaster strikes.

Chapter 4 NBS for managing water-related risks, variability and change

78

NATIONAL AND
REGIONAL
EXPERIENCES
WITH
IMPLEMENTATION

WWAP | Richard Connor and David Coates
With contributions from12 : Andrei Jouravlev (UNECLAC);
Aida Karazhanova and Stefanos Fotiou (UNESCAP); Simone
Grego (UNESCO Multisectoral Regional Office in Abuja);
Carol Chouchani Cherfane and Dima Kharbotli (UNESCWA);
Chris Zevenbergen (IHE Delft); Rebecca Welling (IUCN); Chris
Spray (University of Dundee, Centre for Water Law Policy and
Science (under the auspices of UNESCO)); Tamara Avellán
(UNU-FLORES)13 ; Dragana Milovanović (ISRBC); Franco A.
Montalto (Drexel University); Anne Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig
(ICPR); Marta Echavarria (EcoDecision); Shreya Kumra
(UNESCAP); and Pablo Lloret (EPMAPS)

Wooden bridge in Wuyuanwan Wetland Park in Xiamen (China)

5.1 Introduction
Whereas the previous chapters examined opportunities for
the implementation of NBS in the context of the three critical
water management objectives – improving water availability,
enhancing water quality, and disaster risk reduction – this
chapter takes a broader view of assessing relevant aspects of
implementation of NBS for multiple water-related benefits
and co-benefits across different countries and regions,
showcasing good examples and lessons learned.
Different regions (and sub-regions) can face similar or
different water-related challenges at varying intensities,
which stem from a combination of physical hydrological
conditions as well as the state of overall water resource
management, including governance, capacity, economics
and finance. Although this may result in a different mix – and
level of implementation – of NBS, certain similarities can
emerge and thus lessons learned in one country or region can
help inform the implementation of NBS in another.

5.2 Implementing NBS at the basin scale
5.2.1

Watershed management

As described in Section 1.3, the biological and geophysical
characteristics of a river basin directly affect the quantity
and quality of water flowing downstream over time and
space. Any significant changes in these characteristics (i.e.
LULUC) can alter these hydrological features. Improved land
management can therefore be seen to include an ensemble
of NBS that can collectively enhance water security. There
are examples of such practices across all regions.

12

Authors would like to thank Alexander Belokurov, Sonja Köeppel and
Annukka Lipponen of UNECE for the input.

13

The views expressed in this chapter are those of the author(s). Their
inclusion does not imply endorsement by the United Nations University.

80

In Saudi Arabia, the hima practice dates back 1,500 years as
an organized approach to protect land and water resources.
Under this scheme, stakeholders collectively control the
use of rangeland and are responsible for preserving the
land, seed stocks and water resources. The weakening of
the tribal structures accompanied with land use changes
in the region resulted in the phasing out of the hima
management scheme over time. However, initiatives
have been undertaken to revive hima as a management
scheme to support land and natural resources conservation
(AEDSAW, 2002). Similar initiatives to revive these ancient
land management practices and the traditional/cultural
knowledge that comes with them are also underway in other
countries of the Arab region, including Jordan (Box 5.1).
Watershed restoration and protection becomes increasingly
important in the context of sustaining water supplies to
rapidly growing cities. Many watersheds are increasingly
affected by deforestation, land use change, intensive
agriculture, mining, population growth and climate change.
Watershed degradation negatively impacts water supply,
particularly for the urban population, reducing water
availability at least in certain seasons, aggravating urban
flooding in others, impairing water quality, and hence
increasing the costs of urban water supply and treatment.
The impacts of watershed degradation are exemplified
by the situation in Kenya’s Upper Tana Basin (see Boxes
2.5 and 5.4), which provides 95% of Nairobi’s drinking
water and 50% of Kenya’s hydropower. Over the past 45
years, some of the forests in the basin have been replaced
with agricultural fields, and demand for water to support
horticulture production has increased. Encroachment
on natural wetlands that once stored runoff water
and recharged aquifers has reduced dry-season flows.
Agricultural expansion along with soil erosion and
landslides has increased sediments in local rivers. These
factors have decreased the water yields during dry periods
and increased sediment in streams. The resilience of the
system to cope with droughts decreased and equipment
disruptions due to sediment-laden runoff during the wet
season increased water treatment costs, in some cases by
more than 33% (Hunink and Droogers, 2011; TNC, 2015).

81

BOX 5.1

Improved land
management can
be seen to include
an ensemble of NBS
that can collectively
enhance water security

RESTORING HIMA SYSTEMS
IN JORDAN

A project to revive traditional hima
land management practices was
implemented in the Zarqa River
basin, which is home to half of
Jordan’s population. Inappropriate
land and resource management and
unsustainable development has resulted in land
degradation and the overexploitation of groundwater
resources. Traditionally, hima land management
practices were followed, which basically consisted of
setting land aside to allow for the land to naturally
regenerate itself. In tandem, this would reduce stress
on groundwater resources from both a water quality
and water quantity perspective. However, as a result
of growing population and the demarcation of interstate borders that constrained mobility, the practice
was replaced by continuous intensive agriculture.
Research has also shown that the shift from hima
to these unsustainable land management practices
was further exacerbated by changes in the land
tenure from tribal to private land ownership and the
issuance of government subsidies for dry-season
cropping. Under the framework of the project of
reviving hima land management practices, efforts
were pursued to empower local communities by
transferring management rights to them. Results
also demonstrated an increase in economic growth
(e.g. through the cultivation of indigenous plants
of economic value) and conservation of natural
resources in the Zarqa River Basin.
Within the framework of the project implementation,
government and community partnerships were also
established. Capacity-building workshops were
conducted to exchange information on lessons
learned and challenges, as well as awareness
campaigns to promote the issues at stake. Based
on the success of this initiative, the National
Rangeland Strategy of Jordan (2014) incorporated
the hima approach as an effective means to address
governance of national rangelands.
Sources: Cohen-Shacham et al. (2016) and Ministry of Agriculture
of Jordan (2014).
Contributed by Carol Chouchani Cherfane (UNESCWA).

This situation explains the growing interest of water supply
and sanitation sector authorities, local governments
and water utilities in the application of NBS, particularly
watershed management, for the protection of urban
water supply sources, especially regarding water quality
(mainly non-point source pollution by fertilizers, herbicides
and insecticides from intensive agriculture, bacteria
and nutrients from livestock production, and sediments
from deforestation). Increased attention to watershed
management – particularly, land protection, reforestation

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 5.1		 A typical watershed PES scheme

Upstream community
Stewards and providers
of watershed services

Project

Balances upstream and
downstream interests

$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$

Incentives
e.g. cash, assistance,
materials

Payments
Downstream community
Beneficiaries of watershed services

Watershed services
e.g. water purification,
flood risk mitigation,
aquifer recharge,
erosion minimization

Source: Adapted from Bennett et al. (2013, fig. 7, p. 1).

and riparian restoration – is expected to help reduce
operation and maintenance costs of urban water utilities,
improve service quality and delay the need for expensive
capital investment in capacity expansion (Echavarria et al.,
2015). Watershed management is not only seen as a costeffective complement to built or ‘grey’ infrastructure, but
also as a way to generate other important benefits, namely
local economic development, job creation, biodiversity
protection and climate resilience (LACC/TNC, 2015).

5.2.2

Payments for environmental services

The case of maintaining the water supply system for New
York City, initiated in 1997, is one of the best known and
documented examples of the implementation of NBS
for watershed protection. This was also one of the first
recognized successful payment for environmental services
(PES) schemes. Today, three protected watersheds provide
New York City with the largest unfiltered water supply in
the USA, saving the city more than US$300 million per year
on water treatment operation and maintenance costs.
The programme also serves as an alternative to building a
water treatment plant which would have cost between an
estimated US$8 and 10 billion (Abell et al., 2017).
PES schemes provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to
landowners or farmers in exchange for sustainable land use
practices (agriculture, forestry, etc.). The objective is that
those who benefit (e.g. a water utility) from environmental
services (e.g. better water quality in a river) should pay

for their provision (e.g. for better pesticide and fertilizer
use management or for preservation of the forest cover)
to those, usually upstream, who can provide them (e.g.
farmers or landowners), in order to ensure their continued
production (Figure 5.1).
The Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) region has a
wealth of experience in implementing watershed PES
schemes – also known as ‘investment in watershed services
schemes’ (Bennett et al., 2013). In 2013, the Association of
Water and Sanitation Regulatory Entities of the Americas
(ADERASA) created a working group devoted specifically to
green infrastructure (Herrera Amighetti, 2015). Its mission
is to systematize and analyse experiences of the countries
of Latin America in investment in green infrastructure as
a means to improve water availability and prevent water
quality deterioration. These investments can take various
institutional forms, but usually are implemented as PES.
This interest in PES is in large part explained by the fact
that governments across the LAC region, as elsewhere,
often have limited and weak control, monitoring and
enforcement capacities (Stanton et al., 2010; Embid and
Martín, 2015) – especially for water resources management,
land use, and pollution control and solid waste disposal –
particularly outside of the larger cities. Also, in countries
where the provision of water supply and sanitation services
has been decentralized to the municipal level, it is not
uncommon that the water sources of one municipality are
located in the jurisdiction of another, further complicating
water source protection (Jouravlev, 2003).

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

82

PES schemes are often implemented through conservation
and water funds, financed through government subsidies
and contributions paid by large water users (such as urban

BOX 5.2

Successful examples of PES schemes have also been
documented in other regions of the world, including
Asia-Pacific (Box 5.2) and Africa (Box 5.3). In the Mekong
River Basin alone, PES schemes with watershed protection
components have been documented in Cambodia, Laos,
Thailand and Vietnam, although Vietnam is the only
country in South-East Asia to have a formal national
PES plan (Tacconi, 2015). The Asian Development Bank
(ADB) estimates that, at the very least, US$59 billion
in investments for water supply and US$71 billion for
improved sanitation are needed to cover basic needs in
the region. It is also estimated that as much as 70–90% of
household and industrial wastewater is released without
any prior treatment (ADB, 2013), leading to further
ecosystem degradation. Spending a proportion of this
required investment on watershed protection and other
relevant NBS is increasingly accepted as an appropriate
way forward in addressing these challenges.

EXPERIENCE WITH PES IN THE
ASIA-PACIFIC REGION

Financial deficiencies and other
challenges related to watershed
protection are being addressed in
Vietnam through a 2008 pilot policy
framework on payment for forest
environmental services (Forest PFES,
Decision 380), which has focused on water supply
and landscape conservation for tourism purposes
through local contracts. In 2009, the local revenue
derived from service buyers, mostly hydropower and
water supply companies, was about US$4 million.
Due to this instrumental active policy, in 2013 water
users, operators and utilities had collectively paid
US$54 million to forest-based communities for the
watershed services they were providing (To et al.,
2012).
Contributed by Aida Karazhanova and Stefanos Fotiou
(UNESCAP).

BOX 5.3

PES SCHEME AT LAKE NAIVASHA, KENYA
Lake Naivasha in Kenya has been recognized as a ‘wetland of international importance’ under the
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. Both small-scale agriculture and intensive commercial horticulture,
including flower farming, have poor land use practices within the watershed, resulting in the
degradation of ecosystem services, economic losses, worsening poverty and reduction of biodiversity.

A water-centred PES scheme has gathered partners such as ecosystem service ‘sellers/providers’
(mainly smaller upstream farmers) and ‘buyers/users’ (including the major horticultural industry
around the lake), as well as the principal national and local agencies involved in the regulation of these services
through contractual agreements negotiated between ecosystem stewards and beneficiaries.
Intensive information and awareness-raising activities were conducted at highly localized levels (e.g. workshops and
seminars, both on- and off-farm) to enhance understanding and buy-in by the community and all stakeholders.
Changes to land management practices aimed at improving downstream water quality and quantity included:
•

rehabilitation and maintenance of riparian zones;

•

establishment of grass strips/terraces to reduce runoff and erosion on steep slopes;

•

reduced use of fertilizers and pesticides; and

•

agroforestry and the planting of native trees and high-yielding fruit trees and cover crops for improved farm
productivity, reduced runoff/erosion and increased biodiversity.

The project also included training to farmers by the Ministry of Agriculture and Horticultural Crops Development
Authority on issues such as soil and water conservation techniques to boost farm productivity, improve fodder
storage techniques and the use of more productive/high-value crop varieties.
The use of economic incentives for both ecosystem service buyers and sellers helped achieve significant land and
water management improvements, while delivering tangible livelihood benefits.
Source: Chiramba et al. (2011).
More information is available at: www.gwp.org/en/learn/KNOWLEDGE_RESOURCES/Case_Studies/Africa/Kenya-Shared-risks-andopportunities-in-water-resources-Seeking-a-sustainable-future-for-Lake-Naivasha/

83

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 5.4

UPPER TANA-NAIROBI WATER FUND
The Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund was launched in March 2015 to provide residents in the basin with
the opportunity to mitigate the threats associated with watershed degradation. In addition, the fund
aims to secure Nairobi’s water supplies while improving agricultural livelihoods, maintaining dryseason flow in selected watersheds, and thus contributing to resilience to droughts.

The fund is a public–private partnership and, in the first four years of development, it was able to
mobilize US$4 million through voluntary contributions. There are important multilateral funders,
including the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which aims to contribute US$7 million during the course of the
fund validity. It brings together multiple stakeholders, such as county government, the water resource authority, the
forest service, the regional council of governors, the Nairobi water utility and private sector actors.
.
"

M
ME
ER
RU
U

LL A
A II K
K II P
P II A
A

Ho n i

Aberdare
National
Park

TT H
HA
AR
RA
AK
KA
A -- N
N II TT H
H II

Mt. Kenya
Forest Reserve

N
NY
YE
ER
R II
"
.

Nyeri

Ch ania

Gura/Sagana
Gu

E
EM
MB
BU
U

ra

Embu

.
"

K
K II R
R II N
NY
YA
AG
GA
A

ga
na

N
NY
YA
AN
ND
DA
AR
RU
UA
A

Aberdare
Forest
Reserve

Sasumua
Reservior

Math

M
MU
UR
RA
AN
NG
G '' A
A

Thib a

Mar a gua
n
Ta

Thika

#
0

Sab
a

k

#
0

Sab
a

Ch

an

Ngethu
treatment
plant

ia

Thika

.
"

K
K II A
AM
MB
BU
U

Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund

Et hi op ia

Kiambu

So m al ia

Ug an da

Masinga
Hydropower
Reservoir

a

T hi

So ut h
Su dan

Sagana

.
"
Muranga

Maragua
#
0Reservior

Mwagu
Intake

ioy a

.
"

#
0 Thika/
Chania

.
"

Ken ya

AREA
ENLARGED

Contributed by Simone Grego (UNESCO
Multisectoral Regional Office in Abuja) and
Rebecca Welling (IUCN).

Mt. Kenya
National
Park

a

The Water Fund’s business case
indicated that a US$10 million
investment in Water Fund-led
conservation interventions would likely
return US$21.5 million in economic
benefits over a 30-year timeframe
from increases in power generation, in
agricultural crop yields for smallholders
and larger producers, and from savings
in water and wastewater treatment
(TNC, 2015).

Figure | Location of the proposed Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund

Sa

The Water Fund uses in-kind
compensation mechanisms to
encourage farmers to adopt agricultural
best management practices, restore
riparian buffers, install efficient
irrigation and reforest. These in-kind
compensation packages include water
pans, capacity building and training
around agricultural production, seeds,
equipment, and livestock such as dairy
goats. The water fund also focuses
on reducing sediment from unpaved
rural roads. To date, the water fund
has worked with over 15,000 farmers
by collaborating with local partners,
including the Green Belt Movement and
the Kenya National Farmers Federation
(Abell et al., 2017).

Tan zan ia

K
KA
A JJ II A
AD
DO
O

Water supply
pipeline

Priority watersheds

Rivers
Roads

Nairobi water
supply watersheds

N
NA
A II R
RO
OB
B II

_Nairobi
^

Water fund boundary

#
0

Key water supply
infrastructure

Counties
0 km

5

10

°

Source: TNC.

water utilities, hydropower generation plants, and bottled
water or soft drink companies) located in the lower areas of
a river basin, to support watershed management activities
in the high- and medium- altitude zones of the basin
(Calvache et al., 2012; Jouravlev, 2003). They are essentially
private–public partnerships in many cases.
Water funds are used to provide monetary and nonmonetary incentives to the communities, farmers and
private landowners located upstream (Box 5.4) to protect,

restore and conserve natural ecosystems (forests, wetlands,
etc.) that provide benefits to downstream water users in
the form of water regulation, flood control, and erosion and
sediment control, among others, thus ensuring a constant,
high-quality water supply, and helping reduce water
treatment and equipment maintenance costs (Box 5.5).
The funds are usually governed by a contract among
founding members, which designates an independent
institution to manage the financial resources and to ensure
that they are spent on watershed protection activities in

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

84

PES schemes provide
incentives (monetary or
otherwise) to landowners
or farmers in exchange
for sustainable land use
practices (agriculture,
forestry, etc.)
compliance with the objectives of the fund (Stanton et al.,
2010). There are already more than 20 of such water funds in
operation in the LAC region alone (Echavarria et al., 2015).

BOX 5.5

According to Ecosystem Marketplace by Forest Trends,
governments, water utilities, companies and communities
spent nearly US$25 billion in payments for green
infrastructure for water in 2015, positively affecting 487
million ha of land (Bennett and Ruef, 2016). Transactions
grew by about 12% per year between 2013 and 2015,
suggesting a rapid increase in the level of uptake. Funding
for the vast majority of these PES schemes (US$23.7
billion) is derived from national governments (Figure 5.2),

and in Europe from the European Commission. Much of
the remaining investment (about US$650 million) was
categorized as ‘user-driven watershed investments’ led by
large programmes in China and Vietnam, whereby cities,
companies or water utilities acting on behalf of their
customers paid landholders for stewardship of watercritical landscapes (Bennett and Ruef, 2016).
In the drinking water supply and sanitation sector as
a whole, NBS appear to be severely underfunded in
comparison with grey infrastructure. In the countries of the
LAC region, water utilities are investing less than 5% of their
budgets in green infrastructure (with the possible exception
of some cities in Peru), although these allocations appear
to be on the rise (Echavarria et al., 2015; Bennett and
Ruef, 2016). In England, watershed management activities
generally account for less than 1% of water company
expenditure. A recent report estimated that £100 billion will
be spent in English catchments between 2015 and 2030
“to address issues including the continued provision of water
and waste water services, water quality, farming and on
flood protection and maintenance” of which “over £30 billion
will be spent in England in meeting the requirements of the
EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) and in maintaining
current standards of water and waste water treatment”.
Of this £30 billion for the WFD, the report estimates that
“between £300 million to £1 billion of cost would be avoided
by the adoption, by the water sector, of wider catchment
approaches” (Indepen, 2014, p.1). Taking account of the

THE QUITO WATER CONSERVATION FUND (FONDO PARA LA CONSERVACIÓN
DEL AGUA – FONAG)

The Water Conservation Fund (FONAG) in Ecuador is the first and perhaps one of the most successful
water funds in the LAC region. The watersheds that supply water to the capital city of Quito are
threatened by inadequate agricultural, livestock and forestry practices. In response to this situation,
in 2000, the Municipality of Quito, through its water utility (EPMAPS) and with the cooperation of The
Nature Conservancy (TNC), created FONAG (Lloret, 2009). FONAG is a trust fund designed to operate for
a period of 80 years. It is financed by contributions from its members which include most of the large
water users of the area (water and electric utilities, a brewery, a bottled water company, etc.). The objectives of
FONAG are to support the conservation, restoration and preservation of the watersheds that provide water to Quito
and surrounding areas (FONAG, n.d.). Its intervention is in the form of both long-term programmes (communication,
recovery of vegetation cover, water management, environmental education, and surveillance and monitoring of
priority areas) and short-term projects, which range from support for production activities with an environmental
focus, to applied research. FONAG works with the active participation of different community stakeholders, local
authorities, governmental and non-governmental organizations, and educational institutions.
“FONAG has an endowment of more than US$10 million and an annual budget of more than US$1.5 million. As the
oldest official water fund, FONAG has been successful in protecting and restoring over 40,000 hectares of páramo
and Andean forests through a variety of strategies, including working with more than 400 local families. … Rather
than make direct payments for conservation, restoration and sustainable agriculture, the water fund utilizes in-kind
compensation like home gardens and support for community projects. In addition to direct source water protection
activities, FONAG focuses on strengthening watershed alliances, environmental education and communication to
mobilize additional watershed actors in watershed protection. FONAG has also established a rigorous hydrologic
monitoring program to communicate and improve outcomes of investments in collaboration with several academic
institutions” (Abell et al., 2017, p. 115).
Contributed by Andrei Jouravlev (UNECLAC).

85

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figure 5.2

Public subsidies for watershed protection in 2015: Countries with public subsidies programmes and the
total share of each contributor, by region

$6,179M

$3,655M

$12,994M

$56.1M

$113.6M
$6.3M

Countries with active public subsidies for watershed protection
Contributor level
Supranational government

National government

State/Regional/Provincial government

Note: Based on US$23 billion in transactions in 2015. For another US$727 million in public subsidies in 2015, it was not possible to determine the
relative contributions of national and subnational governments.
Source: Adapted from Bennett and Ruef (2016, Map 2, p. 14).

wider co-benefits to biodiversity, flood risk reduction and
carbon management, which were not accounted for in the
report, would further enhance the financial argument for
watershed management.
Both the cases of the UK and the LAC countries suggest
that cities, companies and water utilities could invest
much more in NBS. There is mounting evidence that such
investments are cost-effective and make good business
sense, while at the same time generating co-benefits such
as biodiversity conservation, community benefits, climate
change adaptation, and jobs and training. Obviously,
there will usually be a threshold beyond which further
expenditure in watershed management and NBS ceases
to provide adequate returns on investments, even if
the co-benefits from green infrastructure are included.
However, the same can also be said for grey infrastructure.
Therefore, identifying these thresholds, and the optimum
mix of green–grey approaches, requires a common
analytical framework (i.e. common performance indicators)
for assessing the cost–benefits of both grey and green
infrastructure in terms of the relevant water management
and other objectives in question.
Designing and implementing PES for watershed-scale land
management schemes requires clearly establishing the
cause-and-effect relationships between upstream land and

water use practices and the provision of watershed services
for downstream users, identifying and organizing the
stakeholders who have effective control of these practices,
and reaching a sustainable agreement under the constantly
changing market as well as the political and social
conditions. There is always the question of whether, and to
what extent, it is appropriate to reward compliance with the
law and good practices.
This in turn requires a common conceptual framework
for assessing the value and benefits of investments in
both green and grey infrastructure, which can be difficult,
especially for water utilities and service providers –
particularly in small and medium cities – that still do not
fully recover the costs of service provision and therefore
depend on governmental budgets for investments, and in
some cases, even for operation and maintenance. Limited
experience with and knowledge of NBS (and their longterm sustainability), coupled with the preference for built
or ‘grey’ infrastructure on the part of many engineers
and politicians, can pose an additional challenge. With
extremely limited control, monitoring and enforcement
capacities for water resources management and land use
control, it is not surprising that the expenditure of water
utilities for watershed activities is generally low – when it
even exists. Acceptance of, support for, and participation
in NBS and PES schemes among a broader range of

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

86

In the drinking water supply
and sanitation sector as
a whole, NBS appear to
be severely underfunded
in comparison with grey
infrastructure

stakeholders is therefore imperative, but still not enough.
Landowners, for example, require insurances of longterm financial support. Strong legal backing to assess,
integrate and implement NBS across multiple policy
objectives (agriculture, climate change, green energy,
etc.) can be equally critical (e.g. Box 5.6).
In terms of overseas investments, financial institutions
and enterprises can play an important and influential
role in supporting and financing NBS and PES schemes.
Entities engaged in overseas investment do not only
have the responsibility to adhere to the environmental
laws, regulations and standards of host countries, they
should also adhere to the UN Principles for Responsible
Investment, which include taking full account of
environmental, social and governance factors (PRI,
2006). The Environmental Risk Management Initiative
for China’s Overseas Management Initiative, which also
supports ‘green’ trade financing across the supply chain,
takes these principles one step further by encouraging
financial institutions and enterprises “to quantify the
environmental costs and benefits of overseas investment
projects, including different types of pollutant discharge,
energy consumption and water use, as a basis for decisionmaking. ... To ensure the applicability of the quantitative
analysis, the calculation of environmental costs and
benefits should take into consideration such factors as
the host country’s level of technology development and
environmental situation, while international standards
should be used as benchmarks where appropriate” (GFC/
IAC/CBA/AMAC/IAMAC/CTA/FECO, 2017, p. 3).

5.3 Implementing NBS within urban
areas
Accelerating urbanization is exacerbating water
management challenges for a large number of cities
across most regions. In the LAC region, the most
urbanized region in the developing world, nearly 80%
(2014) of the population lives in urban areas, a ratio that
is projected to grow to 86% by 2050. Although Asia and

87

Africa remain mostly rural, these regions are experiencing
the most rapid urbanization rates, evaluated at 1.5% and
1.1% per year, respectively (UNDESA, 2015).
Watershed management, as described above, offers a
wide range of potential benefits for these growing urban
settlements. The implementation of localized NBS within
the cities themselves offer additional opportunities for
meeting multiple water management objectives. In the
case of New York City, for example, measures taken to
enhance grey infrastructure with green infrastructure
were shown to have been cost-effective while providing
substantial co-benefits (Box 5.6).
Urban green infrastructure, from the revegetation of
impermeable surfaces to green roofs and constructed
wetlands, can yield positive results in terms of water
availability, water quality and flood reduction, as
exemplified by China’s ‘sponge city’ project (see Box 2.6).
In the context of water and sanitation, constructed
wetlands for wastewater treatment can be a costeffective NBS that provides effluent of adequate quality
for several non-potable uses, including irrigation, as
well as offering additional benefits, including energy
production (Box 5.7). With over 80% of all wastewater
released to the environment without any prior
treatment globally, and over 95% in some developing
countries (WWAP, 2017), constructed wetlands can
provide great opportunities for communities of all sizes.
Such systems already exist in nearly every region of the
world, including the Arab region (Box 5.8) and Africa –
they are relatively common in East Africa.

5.4 Regional and national frameworks
of NBS
Although most often driven by local stakeholders, such as
large water users and municipalities, to achieve specific
water management outcomes, broader frameworks
and partnerships at national and regional levels play a
critical role in fostering implementation of NBS. National
legislation to facilitate and oversee implementation of
NBS is particularly critical.
The European Commission’s Water Framework Directive
(WFD) (Directive 2000/60/EC) provides an overarching
framework for many other legislative, governance and
even NGO-focused activities to take a lead. Europe has
been moving towards a holistic, sustainable, risk-based,
whole-catchment approach. Increasingly, this has also
been characterized by consideration of the value of
and impact on a wide range of ecosystem services, with
recognition of the importance of delivering multiple
benefits and engaging with stakeholders at national,
regional and local levels (Box 5.9). Water quality, and in

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 5.6

NBS IN URBAN SETTINGS: NEW YORK CITY

In New York City (NYC), a variety of nature-based approaches deploying green infrastructure have been
implemented since the 1990s, in response to regulations regarding water quality, public interest in sustainability,
and evolving paradigms in urban land management. Formalized in 1972, the Clean Water Act (CWA) establishes
regulations regarding the discharge of pollutants into surface water bodies of the USA. Under the CWA, it became
unlawful to discharge pollutants without obtaining a permit through the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System programme. Amendments to the original CWA require cities like New York to develop long-term plans to
control combined sewer overflows (CSO), triggered when urban runoff enters the city’s sewer system (US EPA, n.d.).
Building upon new strategies in natural resource, land and infrastructure management made in PlaNYC, the City’s first
comprehensive sustainability plan, the NYC Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) released its Green Infrastructure Plan
in 2010. This plan integrates nature-based and traditional ‘grey’ approaches to the capture and treatment of urban runoff (DEP,
2010). The plan was based on cost-effectiveness calculations, performed in 2008 during the development of the City’s Sustainable
Stormwater Management Plan. These calculations compared green and grey approaches to stormwater management in terms
of construction cost per volumetric unit of stormwater detained or retained in the facility. The lower costs of green infrastructure
compared to conventional CSO retention facilities ultimately lead the City to propose the capture of the first 25 mm of runoff
generated over 10% of the impervious areas served by combined sewers with rain gardens, bioswales, green roofs, constructed
wetlands and other nature-based approaches (The City of New York, 2008).
The Green Infrastructure Plan is implemented principally by DEP, with funds generated by water rate payers, but also leverages
other capital infrastructure investments made by other city agencies and makes grants to private property owners so as to
maximize application of green infrastructure on different urban land uses. The principal challenges to implementation have been
associated with appropriately siting facilities away from low-permeability soils, underground infrastructure and street furniture,
and in maintaining system performance through time.
Publicly funded stormwater green infrastructure systems such as Bioswales and Stormwater Capture Greenstreets are typically
sized to accommodate all runoff generated within their tributary areas during approximately 90% of all wet weather events
occurring annually (e.g. 25–30 mm of daily precipitation). However, ongoing field-based monitoring suggests that these systems
may provide significant co-benefits. Green infrastructure are believed to enhance biodiversity, reduce air temperature through
shading, beautify communities and create opportunities for ecological stewardship. Under certain conditions, these same systems
may also reduce flood risks. Utilizing four years of field data, De Sousa et al. (2016), for example, found that a 125 m2 bioretention
facility located in a flood-prone Section of Queens, NYC, captures 70, 77 and 60% of all runoff generated within a tributary area four
times its own size during all events (n = 92), just the non-extreme events (n = 78) and just the extreme events (n = 14), respectively.
Green infrastructure systems designed for stormwater capture may also provide thermal benefits due to the latent heat of
vaporization of evaporated water. The 2.7-ha Jacob K. Javits Convention Center Green Roof (photo) in Manhattan, NYC, the second
largest in the USA, retains more than half of event precipitation that occurs during the growing season, and evaporates, on average,
3.2 mm of water per day (over the same period), reducing the urban heat island intensity and considerably lowering its exterior
surface temperature compared to a conventional black membrane roof (Alvizuri et al., 2017; Smalls-Mantey, 2017).
Contributed by Franco A. Montalto (Drexel University).

Photo: © Felix Lipov/Shutterstock.com

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

88

particular diffuse pollution, is a key target often linked
to the need to improve drinking water catchments.
The second main focus area is flooding.The EU
Floods Directive (Directive 2007/60/EC) promotes the
potential of NBS to help reduce flood risk through
coastal defences (saltmarshes, beach renourishment,
managed retreat, etc.) as well as rural catchment
‘natural flood management’ and sustainable urban
drainage systems (SUDS). Another major focus area
concerns countering the loss of biodiversity. The EU
Biodiversity Strategy to 2020 recognizes this and calls
for “integrating ecosystems services into decisionmaking” (EC, 2017b, p. 6).
Ecosystem-based interventions can be especially
advantageous from a transboundary perspective.
They rarely have negative transboundary impacts,
but instead can have numerous co-benefits for the
entire basin, for example through the maintenance
and enhancement of ecosystem services crucial for
livelihoods and human well-being, such as clean
water, water regulation and habitat, recreational
opportunities, and food. The UNECE Convention on
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses
and International Lakes (the ‘Water Convention’)
provides a global legal and intergovernmental
framework for supporting transboundary cooperation
in promoting NBS. All UN Member States have
been able to accede to the Convention since March
2016. The Water Convention itself promotes an
ecosystem approach since it obliges Parties to
prevent, control and reduce transboundary impacts,
ensure conservation and, where appropriate, restore
ecosystems. Several ecosystem-based activities have
been implemented under the Convention.
Transboundary basin organizations can also provide
pragmatic opportunities for promoting the uptake
of NBS among riparian countries. For example,
the International Commission for the Protection
of the Rhine (ICPR), which pre-dated the WFD by

89

BOX 5.7

Urban green infrastructure,
from the revegetation of
impermeable surfaces to
green roofs and constructed
wetlands, can yield positive
results in terms of water
availability, water quality and
flood reduction

MOVING BEYOND
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
– MULTIFUNCTIONALITY OF
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS

Domestic wastewater is made up of three
basic components: water, carbon and
nutrients. These are useful components for
various purposes such as growing food or producing bioenergy (WWAP, 2017).
One NBS to domestic wastewater treatment is the use of
constructed or man-made wetlands. As most treatment
systems, they are intended to reduce organic matter and
pathogens to a minimum, but are of varying efficiency
when it comes to nitrogen and phosphorus reduction.
Since humans produce about 4.5 kg of nitrogen and 0.6 kg
of phosphorus per person per year (Mateo-Sagasta et al.,
2015), the effluent leaving constructed wetlands can have
relatively high levels of these nutrients, making it a highly
suitable source of water for irrigation.
Constructed wetlands are also among the world’s most
productive ecosystems, capable of producing relatively
large quantities of biomass, depending on the type of
plant used (most commonly either Phragmites australis or
Typha spp.) and the climate of the location (Vymazal, 2013;
Zhang et al., 2014; Mekonnen et al., 2015). This biomass
can be harvested at regular intervals to be used as biofuel.
The caloric value of most of these plants is also similar to
traditional combustion fuels such as Acacia spp. (Morrison
et al., 2014). Even less explored is their potential for biogas
production, which shows some promising initial research
results. In particular, when using A. donax, also known
as giant reed, methane yields surpass that of corn or
sorghum in some cases (Corno et al., 2016). It is estimated
that about 12% of the cooking fuel needs of a 60-person
village in sub-Saharan Africa can be supplied from the
biomass of a constructed wetland (Avellán et al., 2017).
Using these NBS can thus serve multiple purposes and
indirectly impact other aspects, such as increased forest
conservation through a reduced reliance on wood fuels
and enhanced energy security.
Contributed by Tamara Avellán (UNU-FLORES).

decades, already had NBS at the core of the activities and
programmes that have been implemented by its member
states (Box 5.10).
Since its inception, the WFD has stimulated the
establishment of more recent transboundary basin
organizations within which NBS play a central role. The
Sava River Basin in South-Eastern Europe is one such

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 5.8

CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS IN EGYPT AND LEBANON
Egypt has a history of using constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment. A pilot project tested the
feasibility of building constructed wetlands in Bilbeis, 55 km north of Cairo. The constructed wetlands
resulted in a secondary-level treated wastewater effluent, which was used to irrigate Eucalyptus trees for
the manufacture of packaging boxes. Hence, the project has contributed to water conservation and the
preservation of groundwater resources.

This nature-based system has also proven to be cost-effective over extended periods of time since both the
construction and operating costs were lower than the conventional wastewater treatment systems. As a result, it was
decided to extend the scheme to other areas within the municipality.
The Litani River in Lebanon is highly polluted due to the discharge of untreated agricultural, industrial and domestic
wastewater discharges. Wastewater treatment plants in the region are either non-functional or only partially operated.
This has resulted in soaring concentrations of nutrients and pathogens in the river. A constructed wetland system
has been designed to treat water flows in the Litani River and removed between 30% and 90% of the pollutant mass,
resulting in wetland effluent quality that falls within the range permitted by international environmental standards.
The treated water effluents are directed through a discharge channel back to the Litani River.*
Contributed by Carol Chouchani Cherfane (UNESCWA).

Evidence provided by Difaf (Lebanon), based on a project supported by USAID.

BOX 5.9

*

NBS AND THE EU WFD: EXPERIENCES FROM PILOT PROJECTS IN THE NORTH SEA
REGION

The EU WFD aims to promote sustainable water use through the protection and enhancement of aquatic
ecosystems. Since 2013, NBS have been actively promoted by the European Commission to restore
degraded ecosystems in order to secure long-term availability of water resources and safeguard benefits
from aquatic ecosystems. Although the WFD supports the application of NBS, its practical application is
hampered by a lack of evidence, methodologies and guidelines. A common transnational evidence base
is needed to justify investments and optimize the effectiveness of NBS solutions (EC, 2015). In 2016 and
2017, the Commission launched a targeted research and innovation agenda and published calls for proposals for largescale NBS demonstration projects to develop this base.
NBS have gained momentum in several member states. Emphasis has been laid on the uptake of NBS in cities and
specifically for urban regeneration to improve the quality of life of EU citizens and to reduce the risk of disasters in
EU cities. The Horizon 2020 Framework Programme has been particularly relevant in promoting the wider adoption
of NBS in the urban domain (Faivre et al., 2017). The WFD provides member countries with a shared overarching
legislative framework for sustainable water use. Despite the efforts of policy-makers and practitioners to communicate
on their purpose and use, NBS are still unknown to the larger public and often remain in experimental stages
(Voulvoulis, et al., 2017). In addition, it differs from country to country to what extent and in what manner NBS have
been incorporated into legislation, and what roles and responsibilities have been given to different organizations for
their promotion and delivery.
The project Building with Nature, which is part of the Interreg Vb Programme 2014–2020 for a ‘Sustainable North
Sea Region’,* aims to support the practical implementation of NBS in natural catchments and coastal areas of the EU
through the exchange of pilot test results and the development of guidelines or tools. Some first conclusions drawn
from these pilots are: (i) as opposed to traditional infrastructural systems, the performance of NBS changes over time
and is dependent on local physical and ecological conditions – hence, NBS call for a tailor-made approach requiring
a detailed understanding of local conditions, (ii) the continuous involvement of local communities and stakeholders
in the planning, design and maintenance phases has demonstrated to be conditional for the successful initiation and
implementation of the pilots, and (iii) the monitoring of NBS performance and the evaluation of ongoing pilots are
crucial to build the evidence base to support wider uptake. However, a practical and meaningful set of performance
indictors is still lacking (Di Giovanni and Zevenbergen, 2017).
Contributed by Chris Zevenbergen (IHE Delft).

*

For more information, please see archive.northsearegion.eu/ivb/project-ideas/ and www.northsearegion.eu/sustainable-nsr/

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

90

There are also examples of regulatory frameworks
promoting NBS at the national level, as exemplified
by the experience in Peru (Box 5.12), where a national
legal framework was adopted to regulate and monitor
investment in green infrastructure.
A key advantage of NBS is also the way in which
they contribute to building overall system resilience.
Assessments of the returns on investments in NBS
often do not factor in these positive externalities, just
as those for grey infrastructure rarely take negative
environmental and social externalities into account.
Indeed, single-purpose, built infrastructure for
water supply in one location can even result in a loss
of supply or quality in other hydrologically linked
locations, as has been witnessed with China’s Three
Gorges Dam (Zhang et al., 2014).
Large-scale national-level implementation of NBS as
part of a broader policy framework for achieving a
specific water management objective – in this case
flood management – with complementary objectives
such as spatial planning and environmental protection
is exemplified by the Netherlands’ ‘Room for the
River’ programme. Initiated in 2009 with a budget of
€2.5 billion, the programme was designed to restore
the natural floodplains of rivers (an NBS) along
certain non-vulnerable stretches, diverting rivers
and creating water storage areas, in order to protect
the most developed riparian areas. The restored
wetlands both provided additional storage and
safeguarded biodiversity, while enhancing aesthetic
and recreational opportunities. The programme also
serves as an example of ‘multi-level governance’, which
is based on close collaboration between national
and local authorities during both the planning and
implementation stages of projects (Room for the River,
n.d.a., n.d.b.).
NBS provide a mechanism for realizing participatory
approaches to water and land use management,
facilitating the exchange of information and in some
cases drawing upon traditional knowledge and
historically tested natural resource management
approaches (e.g. Boxes 5.1 and 5.5). They can assist
in formalizing and activating partnerships among
disparate groups at the community level, including
national and local government, local stakeholders and
community-based organizations, the private sector,
and donor agencies, thus empowering community
members to implement, monitor and report on
investments, successes and lessons learned.

91

BOX 5.10

example, where the implementation of NBS is also
generating several co-benefits through ecosystem
services, from flood mitigation and the protection of
biodiversity to economic growth related to ecotourism
and improved navigation (Box 5.11).

NBS IN WATER MANAGEMENT
AND WATER SERVICES
IN THE CONTEXT OF THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE EU
WFD: THE RHINE RIVER BASIN

The Rhine, one of the largest rivers in Europe,
has undergone a history of tremendous
pollution in the period 1950–1970 and impressive
restoration in the last four decades. What started with the
development of a joint monitoring strategy in the 1950s and
60s under the International Commission for the Protection
of the Rhine (ICPR) has developed into a comprehensive
integrated management strategy for achieving sustainable
development, comprising aspects of water quality,
emissions reduction, ecological restoration and flood
prevention and mitigation.
Since the beginning of the 1990s, the work of the ICPR has
triggered the integrated water policy in the EU. Integrated
river basin management was developed within the ICPR
step by step: The ICPR has been dealing with the reduction
of water pollution since 1950, with ecosystem improvement
since 1987, with water quantity issues since 1995 (Action
Plan on Floods) and with groundwater issues since 1999.
Today, basin-wide and transboundary approaches in water
management and the required cooperation between all
countries in a catchment is a European obligation.
The EU WFD has set new standards in water policy for
EU Member States. Running waters, lakes, and coastal
and transitional waters within a river catchment (river
basin district) are to be considered as an ecosystem, and
aspects of protection and use are to be harmonized as far
as possible. The WFD and the Floods Directive (Directive
2007/60/EC) provide for a revised management plan every
six years.
Key elements of the Floods Directive for NBS are illustrated
by the implementation of several measures convened in
1998 within the Action Plan on Floods of the Rhine that are
considered as win-win and no-regret measures that not
only have a positive effect on flood prevention, but also on
water quality and ecology. Among them are measures such
as water retention in the entire catchment, maintaining and/
or extending floodplains, dyke relocations, restauration
measures, less intensive agricultural soil use, creation of
retention areas, etc.
“Based on the experiences and achievements of the
ICPR, it could be argued that a process driven by political
commitments is more effective and flexible than an approach
using legally binding measures. ... However, both elements
are required and finding a good balance between political
commitment and legal enforceability is a continuous and
iterative process.” (Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig, n.d., p. 9).
Contributed by Anne Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig (ICPR).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 5.11

THE VALUE OF NATURAL ASSETS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF
TRANSBOUNDARY COOPERATION IN THE SAVA RIVER BASIN
The Framework Agreement on the Sava River Basin, ratified by Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Serbia and Slovenia entered into force in 2004. The key objective of the Agreement is to promote
the sustainable development of the region through transboundary water cooperation, with
particular objectives regarding the establishment of an international navigation regime and the
sustainable management of water and hazards, thus linking the development of navigation and
environmental protection.

The Sava River Basin is of significance due to its outstanding biological and landscape diversity. It hosts the
largest complexes of alluvial riparian hardwood forests in Europe. A large portion of these floodplains are still
intact and support flood alleviation and biodiversity, performing a variety of ecosystem services. The large
retention areas of the Sava are among the most effective flood control systems in Europe.
The seven Ramsar sites in the Sava River Basin are recognized as focal points for ecotourism development.
Suitably managed, they can boost local and regional economies while protecting ecologically sensitive areas.
Protected areas and ecosystem services of the Sava River Basin were integrated into the first Sava River Basin
Management Plan (2014), the main strength of which it is that it closely matches the requirements of the WFD,
including full recognition of NBS in addressing all major water management issues.
The Sava River Basin is rich in valuable water-dependent ecosystems both within and beyond borders of
the protected areas. The vast lowland and alluvial forests serve multiple functions and are of economic
significance: they provide valuable timber, store a significant amount of climate-relevant carbon and
prevent soil erosion. However, if the groundwater level drops, these forests and their ecosystem services
deteriorate. Similarly, the outstanding retention capacity of floodplain wetlands provides a host of benefits
to people as long as they enjoy a proper water regime. The retention volume of the Sava wetlands is
outstanding and lowers flood peaks when water levels are high, with large positive transboundary impacts
on the flood regime. These wetlands are also a source of water during droughts, which is of growing
importance as a result of climate change. The Sava wetlands also purify water, a benefit that should not
be underestimated as effective treatment plants are in short supply. These functions would be very costly
to replace with ‘grey’ infrastructure. Effective management of these areas provide a win-win solution by
achieving the WFD environmental objectives as well as multiple water management objectives.

BOX 5.12

Contributed by Dragana Milovanović (ISRBC).

COMPENSATION MECHANISMS FOR ECOSYSTEM SERVICES LAW (PERU)

Peru’s Compensation Mechanisms for Ecosystem Services Law of 2014 is the first national-level
regulatory framework specific for green infrastructure investment in the drinking water supply
and sanitation sector in Latin America. The main objective of this law is to promote, regulate
and monitor remuneration mechanisms for ecosystem services, which are defined as systems,
instruments and incentives for generating, channelling, transferring and investing economic
resources, when the stewards of ecosystems enter into an agreement with those paying for their
services, or for the conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable use of the sources of these services (UNECLAC,
2015). The purpose of remuneration mechanisms is to ensure that the benefits generated by ecosystems
endure into the future. Under this law, the stewards of ecosystem services can receive remuneration that is
contingent on the implementation of measures for the conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable use of
sources of ecosystem services. This may be the conservation of natural areas, the rehabilitation of an area that
has suffered environmental harm or degradation, or measures to switch the sources of ecosystem services
to a sustainable use. At present, 12 cities have already approved tariffs that include watershed investments
(Bennett and Ruef, 2016).

Chapter 5 National and regional experiences with implementation

92

BOX 5.13

Although many relevant frameworks either mandate
or enable NBS to be considered, the final decisions
will often depend on a more detailed consideration
of the costs and benefits of various options. A
notable feature of recent legal/regulatory/framework
development is their emphasis (whether legally
mandated or not) that all benefits, and not just a
narrow set of hydrological outcomes, need to be
factored into assessment of investment options. This
requires a detailed systematic approach to evaluating
costs and benefits, which is possible and will lead
to improved decision making and overall system
performance (Box 5.13).

A key advantage of
NBS is also the way in
which they contribute
to building overall
system resilience

HOLISTIC AND QUANTITATIVE ASSESSMENTS THAT ENABLE COMPARABLE
INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT OPTIONS CAN FAVOUR NBS

The South Africa 2013 National Water Resources Strategy explicitly considers ecological and built
infrastructure as mutually supportive elements of an integrated approach to managing water.
However, investing in ecological infrastructure requires a thorough understanding of how, when and
where society gains the greatest benefits from the hydrological cycle and the services provided by
catchment areas. In order to obtain better quantitative information on the performance of various
options, two ecological infrastructure options (removing large stands of invasive alien plants, planting trees and
rehabilitating indigenous grassland and woodland) were compared to grey-infrastructure performance in and
between two catchments in South Africa.
Previous investment had targeted rehabilitation of indigenous sub-tropical thicket on hillslopes that had been
denuded by livestock grazing. Increasing vegetation cover in a catchment can reduce the annual average water
supply due to increased evaporation. However, plot-scale observations demonstrated that rehabilitating thicket
increases canopy interception, soil infiltration and conductivity, and soil moisture retention, and can also have
significant desirable downstream impacts, such as decreased flood intensities, potentially increased baseflow and
thus more sustained, reliable, valuable flows during the dry season. Rehabilitating thicket on degraded hillslopes
can reduce surface runoff by half and hill-slope sediment loss six-fold, indicating that there are significant
hydrological gains to be made through specific interventions to rehabilitate, maintain and protect priority
ecological infrastructure.

The above only assessed the benefits of investing in ecological infrastructure in terms of water supply (quantity)
and reduced sediment loads. A significant advantage of rehabilitating and protecting functioning ecosystems is
the multiple additional benefits that ecosystems provide when compared to single-purpose built infrastructure
installations. Improving ecological infrastructure can also improve water quality, pollination services to adjacent
cropland, grazing values, and access to medicinal plants, while reducing flood intensities and damages, removing
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, increasing game and livestock productivity, and providing ecotourism
opportunities and improved recreational and cultural spaces.
The detailed assessments undertaken, using consistent hydrological and economic comparisons between water
resources infrastructure investment options, show that rehabilitating ecological infrastructure could result in
improved water security, support built infrastructure and simultaneously provide other benefits, including job
creation potential that has not yet been realized and is financially viable and cost-effective.
Source: Mander et al. (2017).

93

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Vertical forest building in Milan (Italy)

The methodology to try to obtain quantitative information to compare options used unit reference values for
the economic costs of quantified increased water supply. These ranged from ZAR1.17 to ZAR2.50 for ecological
infrastructure, depending on the rehabilitation measures chosen and their location, compared to ZAR0.46–ZAR3.79
costs for existing dams but ZAR4.56–ZAR9.01 for new alternative grey infrastructure to increase supply. Significant
gains in water supply were achieved through ecological infrastructure and, importantly, the increases in baseflow
contributed to more valuable dry-season supply.

National and regional experiences with implementation

94

ENABLING
ACCELERATED
UPTAKE OF NBS

UNDP-SIWI WGF | Josh Weinberg
UNDP | Marianne Kjellén
WWAP | David Coates
With contributions from14: Florian Thevenon and Lenka
Kruckova (WaterLex); Christopher Raymond (Swedish
Agricultural University); John H. Matthews (AGWA); Tatiana
Fedotova (WBCSD); Maria Teresa Gutierrez (ILO); Håkan Tropp
and Sofia Widforss (SIWI); and Aida Karazhanova (UNESCAP)

Collecting rainwater data in the Tana River watershed (Kenya)

6.1 Introduction
This chapter assesses challenges to implementing NBS that
constrain them reaching their full potential to contribute to
the sustainable management of water. These challenges were
considered when preparing Chapters 2 to 5 of this report and
were fairly consistent among them. Consequently, information
from Chapters 2 to 5 is amalgamated in this chapter together with
information from other reviews of the topic, including Davis et al.
(2015), Bennett and Ruef (2016) and other sources as referenced
below. These challenges are global/generic, region-specific and
place-based, and often applicable to NBS at large. They include:
•

Overwhelming dominance of grey-infrastructure solutions for
water management in the current instruments of governance.
This dominance also exists in the orientation of economic
markets, expertise of service providers, and consequentially
in the minds of policy makers and the general public. These
factors collectively result in a general inertia against the
development and use of NBS and in bias against NBS, which
are often perceived to be less efficient than built (grey)
systems. The imbalance is significant. For example, although
accurate figures are unavailable, data presented in Chapter 5
suggest that, despite increasing allocations to NBS in certain
countries and regions, current direct investments in NBS
appear to be less than 1% (globally), and probably closer
to the order of only 0.1%, of the total investment in water
resources infrastructure and management.

•

A lack of awareness, communication and knowledge of
what NBS can really offer to reduce water variability risks
and to improve water quality and availability, compared to
‘conventional’ grey solutions – at all levels from communities
to regional planners and national policy makers.

14

Authors would also like to thank Penny Stock, Lisa Farroway and Saskia
Marijnissen of UNDP, and Neil Coles of the University of Leeds for their
precious comments.

96

NBS do not necessarily
require additional financial
resources but usually
involve redirecting and
making more effective use
of existing financing

•

A lack of understanding of the ways to integrate green
and grey infrastructure at scale, and an overall lack of
capacity to implement NBS in the context of water.

•

Myths and/or uncertainty about how natural
infrastructure functions, and what ecosystem services
mean in practical terms.

•

Difficulties in providing clear evaluations of the
performance of NBS-related projects. It is also not
entirely clear, at times, what constitutes an NBS and
what is a hybrid solution. There is a lack of technical
guidelines, tools and approaches to determine the
right mix of NBS and grey-infrastructure options.

•

There is also an issue of land used by some NBS and
the likelihood of tension and possible conflict with
alternative land uses, even though grey infrastructure
is also often directly land-consuming or can have
indirect adverse impacts on land, and some NBS
require (estimated) negligible proportions of a river
basin area to achieve basin-wide effects. This also
requires the involvement of many stakeholders, such
as independent landowners, which can add to the
complexity of implementation.

The required responses to the challenges identified
essentially involve creating the right enabling conditions
for NBS to be considered equitably alongside other
options for water resources management. Interrelated
areas where enabling conditions need to be improved
include financing, the regulatory and legal environment,
intersectoral collaboration including harmonizing
policies across development areas, and the knowledge
base underpinning NBS. The implementation of NBS
will have to fit within the existing (or newly adapted)
governance structures of the locations where they are
being implemented. Strong enabling environments are
needed, with supporting policies, plans and financing.
Legal and regulatory frameworks should be supportive or
at least neutral to enable promising NBS to be adopted.
National frameworks can already have provisions
encouraging ecosystem-based approaches or sustainable
actions that can support increased implementation of
NBS. Cross-sectoral cooperation (e.g. between ministries)
is essential for implementation of most NBS at any scale.

97

An improved knowledge base, and in some cases a more
robust science base, is an important requirement in most
areas. Knowledge needs to be translated and disseminated
into a user-appropriate form: for example, guidelines that
enable specific NBS interpretations in the application of
existing regulations. The development of new or the reform
of existing policies, regulations and plans can help advance
this process.

6.2 Leveraging financing
NBS do not necessarily require additional financial resources
but usually involve redirecting and making more effective
use of existing financing. It is estimated that approximately
US$10 trillion will be required in water resources
infrastructure between 2013 and 2030 (Dobbs et al., 2013). A
key issue, therefore, is how NBS can contribute to reducing
this investment burden through improved economic,
environmental and social efficiencies in investment
outcomes. However, there are indications of increasing
investments in NBS (see Section 5.2.2). For example, an
estimated US$25 billion was invested in green infrastructure
for water worldwide in 2015, with an estimated annual
increase in investment of more than 11% over the previous
year (Bennett and Ruef, 2016). A trigger for this progress
is the increasing recognition that deploying nature-based
approaches can create system-wide solutions by optimizing
the generation of ecosystem services to make investments
more sustainable and cost-effective over time. Hence, as
evidenced in previous chapters, there is growing interest
from the science, political and financing communities
to refine knowledge on how to design NBS and scale up
investment capital to put them into place. An essential
ingredient in achieving this outcome will be improved, more
holistic and innovative approaches to financing.
Davis et al. (2015) noted a lack of specific financing
mechanisms for investment in NBS. However, a diversity
of financing instruments and approaches is being created
to make investments in NBS that provide value to society.
Several examples of financing approaches based on
payments for watershed services were presented in Chapter
5. Bennett and Ruef (2016) found that investment in
watersheds is predominantly done locally, with nearly 90%
of those investments coming via government programmes
to subsidize landholders directly with payments to take
actions for watershed protection. An emerging ‘green
bond’ market shows promising potential for mobilizing
NBS financing and, notably, demonstrates that NBS can
perform well when assessed against rigorous standardized
investment performance criteria (Box 6.1). In this field, the
Climate Bonds Initiative (CBI)15 has noted that the global
green and climate bonds markets could have an expanded
role in influencing, capacitating and helping to leverage
private capital to invest in NBS and green infrastructure.

15

The CBI is an international, investor-focused not-for-profit organization.
See www.climatebonds.net/about.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

BOX 6.1

FINANCING WATER RESILIENCE: THE EMERGENCE OF GREEN AND CLIMATE
BONDS FOR WATER

In 2007, the European Investment Bank and the World Bank began issuing ‘green bonds’ (which
have also come to be known as ‘climate bonds’) as a loan mechanism to demonstrate the economic
advantages of environment-positive investments and assets. A ‘green bond’ is different from a regular
bond in that it signifies a commitment to use the funds raised exclusively to finance or refinance
environmentally beneficial projects, assets or business activities (ICMA, 2015), while a climate
bond more specifically refers to an asset or project that has a climate mitigation or adaptation focus. Many water
infrastructure projects at national and subnational levels are financed through bonds. In the developed world, single
bonds for entities such as city water utilities can easily amount to several hundreds of millions of US dollars.
As an investment category, green and climate bonds remained relatively niche markets with limited impact until
about 2013. That year, issuances tripled to about US$10 billion after commercial finance and corporate institutions
began promoting the market. These trends accelerated in 2014 (US$35 billion) and passed US$80 billion in 2016,
which looks favourable in the light of the Paris Agreement’s UNFCCC call for reaching US$100 billion for climate
finance by 2020 (CBI, 2017). While the market pool has grown rapidly, most bonds were initially offered with limited
evidence of safeguards. Moreover, the sensitivity of water-related investments to climate impacts highlighted the
need for these investments to demonstrate robustness and climate adaptation efficacy. In 2014, a consortium of NGOs
– Ceres, the CBI, the World Resources Institute, the CDP*, the Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI) and the
Alliance for Global Water Adaptation (AGWA) organized a series of technical and industry working groups that defined
scoring criteria for issuers and verifiers to provide investor confidence in the climate and green bonds market, making
use of more than one hundred experts in aquatic ecosystems, engineering, governance, environmental economics
and hydrology. These criteria score the climate-adaptive potential of the bonds in addition to their environmental
impact based on the most recent evidence and science for evaluating robust and flexible water management solutions
(Walton, 2016).
Phase one of the work targeted traditional ‘grey’ water infrastructure investments with the exclusion of hydropower,
while phase two focused on the use of NBS as well as on hydropower criteria. In many ways, these criteria serve
to bridge knowledge and awareness gaps between the technical water management community and finance and
investor audiences. As such, the criteria serve as a powerful communication tool about the issues surrounding
resilience and water assets (Michell, 2016). The successful issuance in 2016 of the first bond scored against the
standard represents a vivid shift in investor awareness,** with dramatic reactions from the development finance,
investor and water management press (Lubber, 2016), as well as major public institutions (e.g. the USA’s promotion of
the CBI standard for 2016 World Water Day***). Within a year of finalizing the phase-1 criteria, more than US$1 billion
had been issued against the standard, including the first African issuance from Cape Town, with scoring supported
by KPMG. The standard has gone some distance towards filling gaps between the climate change, water and finance
communities.
Contributed by John H. Matthews (AGWA).

*

Formerly known as the Carbon Disclosure Project

**

www.waterworld.com/articles/2016/05/san-francisco-public-utilities-commission-issues-world-s-first-certified-ggeen-bond-for-water-infrastructure.html
www.ooskanews.com/story/2016/03/agwa-presents-two-new-initiatives-white-house-water-summit_170615

***

Improving the understanding within the financial sector of
the ways to execute this remains a critical challenge, but
there is evidence that a shift is taking place in this regard.
The private sector can also be further stimulated and
guided to advance NBS in the areas in which it operates.
Businesses are increasingly interested in investing in
natural capital and NBS driven by a convincing business
case. Business drivers for NBS include resource limitations,
regulatory requirements, changing climate and severe
weather events, stakeholder concerns, direct financial
benefits, and operational, financial and reputational gains
from environmental and social co-benefits (WBCSD, 2015a).
NBS recognize ecosystems as natural capital, which the

Natural Capital Protocol16 defines as the stock of renewable
and non-renewable natural resources (e.g. plants, animals,
air, water, soils and minerals) that combine to yield a
flow of benefits to people. The Natural Capital Protocol
provides a standardized but fit-for-purpose method, used
by numerous firms worldwide, to measure, value and
integrate natural capital into business processes in order
to support them to develop strategies and investment and
action plans. However, companies often lack in-house
expertise and sometimes may not even be aware of NBS

16

For more information on Natural Capital and the Natural Capital
Protocol, see naturalcapitalcoalition.org/protocol/.

Chapter 6 Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS

98

An emerging ‘green bond’
market shows promising
potential for mobilizing
NBS financing and, notably,
demonstrates that NBS
can perform well when
assessed against rigorous
standardized investment
performance criteria

and the effectiveness of those solutions. To overcome
such barriers, companies can train staff, either together
with an independent organization or using guides targeted
for corporations. For example, the Natural Infrastructure
for Business training course,17 developed by the World
Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD)
in collaboration with UN Environment and with support
from Wetlands International, Arcadis and Shell, is a
useful, freely available resource derived from concrete
business experience in working with NBS. Companies
can also develop an organizational framework for NBS
that can be applied across different business functions
(e.g. operations, finance, investor relations, etc.) to
identify how they can contribute to NBS. This can help
facilitate understanding of NBS across functions and its
potential added value, including direct financial benefits.
Business can also expand partnerships to co-develop NBS.
Collaboration with neighbouring communities and NGOs
can help companies secure their social license to operate
and multiply the social and environmental co-benefits that
can be derived from NBS.
The Natural Capital Financing Facility is a financial
instrument that combines European Investment Bank
financing and European Commission funding under the
LIFE Programme, the EU’s funding instrument for the
environment and climate action.18 The Facility provides
financial support to projects focused on biodiversity and
ecosystem services that generate revenue or save costs.
In doing so, the Facility aims to convince the market and
potential investors of the attractiveness of biodiversity
and climate adaptation operations in order to promote
sustainable investments from the private sector.

17

For more information on the Natural Infrastructure for Business
training course, see www.naturalinfrastructureforbusiness.org/
resources/#training.

18

For more information on the Natural Capital Financing Facility, see
www.eib.org/products/blending/ncff/index.htm

99

Improving ecosystem and natural resource valuation
methods are providing the necessary tools to mainstream
NBS in decision making. For example, the wealth accounting
and valuation of ecosystem services (WAVES) approach
provides better-informed decisions regarding infrastructure
and the regulation of water quality and quantity in national
accounting systems (World Bank, n.d.).
Agriculture represents a significant area for financing
further uptake of NBS. However, it is difficult to assess
current and potential investments, because they are
usually part and parcel of broader investments in improving
agricultural sustainability. Collectively, the OECD countries
alone transferred an annual average of US$601 billion
to agricultural producers in the years 2012–14 and they
spent an additional US$135 billion on general services that
support the overall functioning of the sector. Some large
emerging economies have begun to reach the average level
of support provided by OECD countries (OECD, 2015b).
However, the vast majority of agricultural subsidies, and
probably the majority of public funding and almost all
investment by the private sector for agricultural research
and development, support conventional agricultural
intensification that increases water insecurity (FAO, 2011b).
Mainstreaming the concept of sustainable ecological
intensification of agricultural production, which essentially
involves deploying NBS (improved soil and landscape
management techniques), is not only the recognized way
forward in order to achieve food security (FAO, 2014a), but
would also be a major advance in NBS financing.
Finance can do more than just channel investments. It can
also guide project development towards bankable and
suitable NBS. Governments regularly provide guidance to
state investment funds, sovereign wealth funds and similar
instruments to create investment filters that will support
a sustainable economy. The same can apply to green
investments. By putting green mandates in place, policy
makers signal to bond issuers that there is robust demand
for their green bond issuance (CBI, n.d.). The experiences
from market and blended instruments with green bonds can
be useful for other financial sector actors to join or replicate
worldwide so they become pilots themselves, testing
different options for investment tools that can effectively
support NBS in different settings. The further coordination,
knowledge sharing and co-development of similar standards
among green and other bonds or instruments would have a
profound positive impact in accelerating flows of available
financial capital into NBS and likely make those investments
provide better returns and greater value to society.
Assessing co-benefits of NBS (through a more holistic
cost–benefit analysis) is an essential step in achieving
efficient investments and tapping into financial resources
across multiple sectors. For example, NBS are a key
solution to meeting shortfalls in the projected needs for
financing biodiversity conservation through redirecting
existing investments, particularly in water management
infrastructure and agricultural development (UNDP/BIOFIN,
2016). All benefits, not just a narrow set of hydrological

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

outcomes, need to be factored into assessments of
investment options. This requires a detailed systematic
approach, but will lead to significant improvements in
decision making and overall system performance. For
example, Mander et al. (2017) provide a useful tool or
methodology for more holistic valuations of hydrological
and other outcomes of investment options that can greatly
benefit investment choices, showing that the co-benefits of
NBS can often swing investments decisions in their favour
(see Box 5.13).
Nonetheless, there is still a considerable gap between
how the business and finance communities assess the
importance of support to wise investment in NBS, and
their current ability to mobilize investment into concrete
projects and development planning (CBI, 2017). An
enormous challenge, seen at all scales (national, regional
and global), is the gap between available potential capital
for investment and bankable projects supported by
capable implementation bodies to perform them. This
is often partially a result of a mismatch in knowledge
and capacity between stakeholder groups – those with
technical knowledge of NBS often do not themselves
have the knowledge about available financing and the
requirements to access it, and vice versa, finance specialists
often do not recognize or appreciate NBS. Clearly, improved
communication between these two groups will be key to
accelerated progress.

6.3 Enabling the regulatory and legal
environment
6.3.1

National and regional regulations and
frameworks

Davis et al. (2015) noted that current regulatory and legal
environments for water were developed largely with greyinfrastructure approaches in mind. Consequently, it can
often be challenging to retrofit NBS into this framework.
Achieving progress in the full deployment of NBS, therefore,
requires that governments assess, and where necessary
modify, their legal and regulatory regimes to remove
barriers to NBS uptake. For example, the city of Basel in
Switzerland has developed the largest area of green roofs
per capita in the world, through investment in incentive
programmes to provide subsidies for their installation, and
extended this by passing a Building and Construction Law
requiring green roofs on all new developments with flat
roofs, including an amendment that stipulates associated
design guidelines to maximize their contribution to
biodiversity (Kazmierczak and Carter, 2010; EEA, 2016).
Drastic changes in regulatory regimes may not necessarily
be required and much can be achieved by promoting
NBS more effectively through existing frameworks. For
example, the European Commission in 2013 adopted the
Green Infrastructure Strategy (EC, 2013b) to promote the
development of green infrastructure in rural and urban
areas in the EU.

In places where enabling legislation does not yet exist,
identifying where and how NBS can support existing planning
approaches at different levels can be a useful first step in this
process. For example, the European Commission produced
a policy document on ‘natural water retention measures’
(EC, 2014), highlighting both their potential contribution to
the implementation of multiple directives (water, floods,
habitat, etc.) as well as to river basin management plans.
While it does not mandate their use, it has been followed
by the creation of regional support networks and new
communities of practice in major river basins.
In some cases, direct policy levers can enable easier
uptake of NBS or remove direct barriers. Bennett and Ruef
(2016) provide several examples: in California, a new law
was introduced in 2016 that allows forests and meadows
to qualify as water infrastructure, which in turn enables
available water infrastructure financing to be used to
protect or restore landscapes that are used for water
supply; Peru directly mandates utilities to allocate revenues
from water tariffs to invest in green infrastructure and
NBS for climate adaptation; and in the EU, the Common
Agricultural Policy includes a target for spending 30% of the
direct payments provided through EU farm subsidies for the
improved use of natural resources (i.e. ‘greening’ measures,
which include multiple possible farm-level NBS). These
policies provide public authorities with a vehicle to access
new or existing processes that allow them to select, fund
and implement NBS.
For cities to be able to adopt a wide range of NBS, they
generally need to fall under a specific plan or strategy,
or NBS need to be integrated into the overarching
development plan (Kremer et al., 2016). Each city, region
or country will find different options that make sense
within their existing plans and financing mechanisms.
In Barcelona, for example, a ‘Green Infrastructure
and Biodiversity Plan’ was adopted, which suggested
programmes for implementation and a ‘catalogue of
potential actions’ that included a range of NBS (Oppla,
n.d.). In China, large national investments to support
demonstration cities to create ‘sponge city’ (see Box 2.6)
planning and design is a similar avenue to test and expand
NBS within SUDS schemes (Horn and Xu, 2017).

6.3.2

Leveraging international and global 		
frameworks

At the global level, NBS offer Member States a means to
respond to and use various multilateral environmental
agreements, such as the Convention on Biological Diversity,
the UNFCCC and the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, as
well as the Sendai Framework on Disaster Risk Reduction,
which includes food security (see Chapter 1 for further
details), and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, whilst
also addressing economic and social imperatives. Each
of these should be incorporated into relevant national
regulations and policies that influence decision making
at provincial and local scales and involve mainstreaming
NBS. Since many NBS are implemented at the local level,
Member States can review their overall policy framework,

Chapter 6 Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS

100

ensuring that at the appropriate decision-making level
the correct incentives and supporting policy-making
environment are in place enabling the adoption of NBS
where justified. An overarching framework for promoting
NBS is the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the SDGs (discussed further in Chapter 7).

6.4 Enhancing intersectoral
collaboration and harmonizing
policies
6.4.1

Intersectoral collaboration

A well-documented challenge is that NBS can require
much greater levels of intersectoral collaboration than
grey-infrastructure approaches, particularly when applied
at landscape scale. NBS often cross many sectoral areas
of interest (for example between those working with
water management, agriculture, forestry, urban planning,
ecological protection, etc.) and stakeholders have
different perspectives and priorities for any proposed
NBS (Nesshöver et al., 2017). However, this can also open
opportunities to bring those groups together in a common
project or agenda.
An NBS can come across as more useful to a planner when
the discussion focuses on a clearly identified problem and
is presented as an alternative or complement to other
options (Barton, 2016). This will help strengthen uptake
of NBS within the overall design of policies, measures or
actions to address diverse challenges. For an NBS to be
brought forward successfully, it should be clear what it will
offer, how much it will cost, how it should be managed and
who will be able to do it.
A set of ‘green infrastructure case studies’ involving
businesses have been collected and evaluated by
participating companies (Dow Chemical Company/
Swiss Re/Shell/Unilever/TNC, 2013). These range from
constructed wetlands and stormwater management to
treatment, decontamination and erosion control. Key
lessons relate to time perspectives, where a long-term
view favours NBS over grey solutions, and the need to set
boundaries that are sufficiently large to include ecosystem
services and, importantly, upper management buy-in along
with a champion to push the project.
The agriculture sector has also been making advances: for
example, the rapid uptake and spread of croplands under
low tillage or conservation agriculture more than tripled
from an estimated 45 million ha of croplands in the 1990s to
about 157 million ha today (AQUASTAT, n.d.), representing
just over 1% of land currently under permanent crops.
Moreover, uptake is highly variable between regions and
differences appear to have more to do with enabling
environments than with economic or biogeologicalclimatic factors. Notably the existence of an institutional,
political and commercial interest bias that works contrary
to sustainable solutions seems to be a decisive factor

101

(Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009). A key ingredient of the
success of conservation agriculture has been the recognition
by farmers that the approach delivers improved farm
productivity and sustainability, in addition to off-farm
environment benefits. This illustrates that win-win outcomes
of NBS need to be better identified and promoted to
encourage broader stakeholder engagement and to promote
improved coordination. Where there are losers, these need
to be identified and where necessary compensated.

6.4.2

Harmonizing policies across multiple 		
agendas

Harmonizing multiple policy areas at global, international,
national, provincial and local scales is a key need
for sustainable development. NBS offer a means to
operationalize policy across scales and economic,
environment and social dimensions. This is also, in a sense,
a key means of promoting intersectoral collaboration
through the development of consensus on policy objectives
in a particular situation.
In many countries, the policy landscape remains highly
fragmented. Better harmonization of policies across
economic, environment and social agendas is a general
requirement in its own right, but particularly important
regarding NBS because of their ability to deliver multiple,
and often significant, co-benefits beyond just hydrological
outcomes. The social impacts of green-space management
strategies, for example, contribute to a range of public
health and well-being outcomes that can also drive public
interest or bolster political support for their implementation.
These include positive effects of green spaces on residents
through psychological relaxation, stress relief, enhanced
opportunities for physical activity, reduced depression and
improved mental and physical health (Raymond et al., 2017).
The European Commission’s NWRM (EC, 2014) also provide
recommendations to coordinate planning and financing
within other policy arenas such as the WFD and the Floods
Directive. In Germany, an assessment identified the precise
policy targets set out by the government where investments
in NBS could be directed to help achieve them, including
its climate change mitigation goal, as well as its national
strategies for adaptation, biodiversity and forest protection
(Naumann et al., 2014). Four different ministries with a
different thematic emphasis collaborate closely to ensure
an integrated approach for the successful implementation
of China’s ‘sponge city’ approach (see Box 2.6). The National
Development and Reform Commission provides specially
allocated funds on sponge city construction, the Ministry
of Finance promotes private–public partnerships and
direct financial support, the Ministry of Urban and Housing
provides systemic guidance on objectives, technological
standards and evaluation, and the Ministry of Water
Resources provides functional guidance and supervision on
water conservation aspects (Embassy of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands in China, 2016; Xu and Horn, 2017).
Clear mandates from the highest policy level can
significantly accelerate NBS uptake and foster improved
intersectoral coordination. In the USA, for example,
a 2015 Presidential Memorandum (The White House,

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

2015) mandated federal agencies to consider green
infrastructure in their decision making and launched
a natural resource investment centre. In response, the
Department of Energy and the Environment in Washington
DC provides training and guidance on the use of green
infrastructure for stormwater reduction, including training
on General Compliance, Generation and Certification
of Storm-water Retention Credits and Discounts on
Storm-water Impervious Fees, Green Area Ratio and
Best Management Practices for Green Infrastructure
Construction and Inspection.19 The United States
Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) has a series
of factsheets that describe “how EPA and state permitting
and enforcement professionals can incorporate green
infrastructure practices and approaches into National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System wet weather
programs, including storm water permits, Total Maximum
Daily Loads, combined sewer overflow long-term control
plans and enforcement actions.” (US EPA, 2015, p. 2).
Two commonly used key tools to assist more integrated
approaches to water resources management, including
addressing multiple stakeholder groups, are integrated
land use planning and IWRM. However, in practice, both
often fail to adequately include the water–ecosystem
dimension: land use planning often fails to fully factor
in land use implications for water resources and IWRM
(in practice) is often over-focused on managing surface
and groundwater allocations and neglects ecosystem
influences, including the impacts of land use change. Both
tools also too often fail to consider ecosystem services
as a framework for assessment, leading to significant
omissions of important impacts of management choices.
A key response, therefore, is the full integration of
ecosystems and ecosystem services into land and water
use planning.

6.5 Improving the knowledge base
6.5.1

Improving knowledge and dispelling 		
myths

The subject of the interaction between the natural
environment and water is plagued by myths,
misinterpretations and too hasty generalizations (Bullock
and Acreman, 2003; Andréssian, 2004; Chappell, 2005;
Tognetti et al., 2005). This does not help build confidence
in NBS applications. Inferences or assumptions are
made, often mistakenly, about the hydrological functions
operating in ecosystems and thus how effectively they
may alter the hydrological cycle and provide benefits to
people. As noted in Chapter 1, there is a wide variation in
the hydrological and other services delivered by different
ecosystem types. This means that NBS applications
need to be based less on generalized assumptions,
and better assessed and designed specifically for local
applications. A contributing factor is often a lack of rigour,

19

For more information, see doee.dc.gov/node/619262

An NBS can come across
as more useful to a planner
when the discussion focuses
on a clearly identified
problem and is presented as
an alternative or complement
to other options
if not misunderstanding, regarding the precise hydrological
pathways in play and how these are influenced, or not, by
ecosystem management interventions. Raymond et al.
(2017) summarized key knowledge gaps in the assessment
of impacts from NBS (focused on urban areas), noting
that the impacts of NBS on the environment are well
understood, but their cost-effectiveness and the sustained
delivery of different benefits is often unclear. An improved
knowledge base, including in some cases more rigorous
science, is an essential overarching need. Established
evidence helps convince decision makers of the viability of
NBS. Perceptions of uncertainty around their performance
and cost-effectiveness, limited access to information and
guidance on their design, implementation, monitoring and
assessment, as well as fear of high implementation costs, are
all identified constraints to implementing NBS (Davis et al.,
2015). The most fundamental requirement is the capacity to
instil confidence that an NBS can provide the primary water
service objective it is meant to fulfil; although consideration
of the non-hydrological co-benefits may still tip decisions in
their favour (Mander et al., 2017). Also, disincentives occur
when a poorly designed NBS fails. This contributes to the
bias towards grey solutions.
However, criticism of the evidence base for NBS is another
illustration of how differently green and grey approaches
are treated. For example, the hydrological and socioeconomic evidence underpinning some grey infrastructure
sets a very low bar against which NBS might be judged.
The World Commission on Dams (2000), for example,
dispelled the perception that mega-infrastructure projects
are always built on solid scientific, economic and technical
foundations, with large dam projects exhibiting a high
degree of variability in projected benefits, often falling short
of physical and economic targets, and having significant
cost overruns, while their true profitability remains elusive
since their environmental and social costs have often been
poorly accounted for in economic terms. The Commission
was also “disturbed to find that substantive evaluations
of completed projects are few in number, narrow in scope,
poorly integrated across impact categories and scales, and
inadequately linked to decisions on operations” (The World
Commission on Dams, 2000, p. xxxi). The World Commission
on Dams country study on India concluded that a century
or more of large-scale water development had resulted in

Chapter 6 Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS

102

NBS applications need
to be based less on
generalized assumptions,
and better assessed and
designed specifically for
local applications

major social and ecological impacts, including substantial
human displacement, soil erosion and widespread
waterlogging while, contrary to stated objectives, achieving
only limited food security benefits (Rangachari et al., 2000).
Nevertheless, NBS are required to have a strengthened
science and knowledge base to support their accelerated
uptake. NBS are indeed often not as predictable as
conventional grey-infrastructure solutions. While there
is a wealth of historical cost-and-benefit data on built
infrastructure for water resource management, this is
generally not the case for NBS options (UNEP-DHI/IUCN/
TNC, 2014). The best way forward is to embrace continual
innovation and research during implementation and to
adaptively manage NBS in a scientifically rigorous manner,
acknowledging that ecosystems are dynamic and complex
(Mills et al., 2015).
Another frequently raised concern is that NBS take a
long time to achieve their impact, implying that grey
infrastructure is quicker. This is not necessarily the case. For
example, fitting a local sustainable urban drainage facility
or a green roof can be done within days, with immediate
impacts. Applying these at scale may indeed take longer,
but not necessarily longer than grey alternatives. Shifting
cropland management to more sustainable low tillage
(‘conservation agriculture’) can yield benefits in two to
three years (Derpsch and Friedrich, 2009). Landscape-scale
deployment of NBS, through ecosystem restoration for
example, can take longer, but significant impacts can be
achieved in about ten years (see Box 2.2). By comparison,
large dams on average take 8.6 years to be physically
constructed (not including the time required for design,
planning and financing) and eight out of ten large dams
suffer a schedule overrun (Ansar et al., 2014).
Another often overstated assumption about NBS is that
they are ‘cost-effective’, whereas this should be established
during an assessment, including consideration of cobenefits. Also, whilst some small-scale NBS applications can
be low- or no-cost, some applications, particularly at scale,
can require large investments: for example, ecosystem
restoration costs vary widely from a few hundred to several
millions of US dollars per hectare (Russi et al., 2012).

103

While there is little debate that humans receive invaluable
services from ecosystems and are highly dependent upon
them, the methods to identify and value these services
and integrate valuation into planning and decision-making
processes is still a large governance challenge (Kremer
et al., 2016). Different forms of multi-criteria analysis can
be used to better inform decision making on NBS projects
(Liquete et al., 2016). These are most useful when they can
evaluate a possible NBS against alternative options, which
may include grey or hybrid grey–green infrastructure or
maintaining a current situation.
NBS, naturally, are closely aligned with traditional and
local knowledge, including that held by indigenous and
tribal peoples, in the context of water variability and
change. Indigenous and tribal peoples care for an estimated
22% of the Earth’s surface, and protect nearly 80% of the
remaining biodiversity on the planet, while representing
only close to 5% of the world’s population (ILO, 2017).
For NBS to adequately benefit from contributions of
indigenous and tribal peoples, and other sources of
knowledge, it is imperative that their socio-economic and
environmental vulnerabilities are addressed, and their
rights are respected. The Indigenous and Tribal Peoples
Convention 169 of the International Labour Organization
(ILO, 1989) is an international treaty that provides guidance
for ensuring indigenous peoples’ empowerment and
promotes their traditional knowledge, cultures and ways
of life. Increasingly, global international processes, such
as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change are recognizing the
valuable role that indigenous peoples and their traditional
knowledge make towards building resilient societies.
Traditional ecological or local-community knowledge of
ecosystem functioning and the nature–society interaction
can be invaluable, but there are frequent constraints to
its incorporation into assessments and decision making.
Traditional knowledge is also threatened by the conflict of
commercial uses of natural resources and by the delicate
social fabric of some societies (Tinoco et al., 2014). One
response to this is to ensure that the holders of knowledge
are fully and effectively involved in assessments, decision
making, implementation and management. More generally,
awarding community-driven NBS is a way to highlight how
such solutions can fit into locally sustainable development
(Box 6.2).
Equally important to knowledge itself is the means by
which it is communicated. Methods to test the capacity
of NBS to provide water services, for example, can be
translated into manuals, which can be understood by both
engineers and ecologists but targeted to provide guidance
to policy makers and local managers and contractors who
would implement a given NBS in practice (Hulsman, 2011).
The knowledge challenge can be even more important in
many developing countries where technical capacity for
implementing alternative approaches is often lower than
in developed countries (Narayan, 2015; Jupiter, 2015).
However, there are sources for learning and approaches to
emulate. For example, in the Mekong region the ADB and

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

More diverse examples of delivery against performance
indicators could support a stronger evidence base to make
the case for NBS more convincing. Tailored information
suited to the needs of stakeholders is needed and may have
to encompass the economic value presented, possible risk
reduction, benefits generated etc., as well as a broad range
of social and cultural values related to ecosystems and
their management across different spatial scales (Brown
and Fagerholm, 2015; Plieninger et al., 2015; Raymond and
Kenter, 2016). In addition to a diagnosis of the potential
value proposition and the barriers to investment in,
and implementation of, the specific NBS, attention to
community engagement in the valuation, design and
delivery of NBS are also essential parts of this process.

6.5.2

Information and research gaps

Some clear information gaps and research needs have
been identified in preparing this report. These include
improving the:
•

understanding of the hydrological performance of
different ecosystem types and sub-types, including
under different management regimes, to enable
improved projections of NBS performance in locally
specific sites;

•

knowledge of the hydrology of LULUC, particularly its
impacts at scale;

•

understanding of the impacts of ecosystem loss and
degradation on hydrology;

•

understanding of the links between ecosystems, water
and ecosystem services to better underpin predictions
of the impacts of (positive or negative) ecosystem
change on human well-being;

•

assessments of the hydrological and socio-economic
performance of NBS applications, and sharing this
knowledge, including of NBS failures. Raymond et al.
(2017) suggest a potential roadmap for assessing the
performance of NBS;

•

indicators for the effectiveness and efficiency of NBS and
in particular those that enable ecosystems, hydrology,
and economic and social outcomes to be linked;

•

guidelines for conducting holistic cost–benefit analyses
that include non-water-related co-benefits;

•

communication tools for NBS;

•

integration of ecosystems into land use planning and
IWRM; and

•

understanding of the socio-political drivers of
water resources policy and management to better
understand and identify effective triggers to stimulate
transformational change.

BOX 6.2

the International Centre for Environmental Management
created a seven-volume toolkit to support city authorities,
infrastructure engineers, environmental assessment
specialists, decision makers, urban planners, flood and
drought specialists, and local community representatives to
better understand where and how they can incorporate NBS
in sustainable and resilient town planning (ADB, 2015).

THE EQUATOR INITIATIVE:
ADVANCING NBS INVOLVING
INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES

The Equator Initiative is a partnership
that brings together the United Nations,
governments, academia and civil
society organizations ranging from
international NGOs to grassroots and indigenous
peoples’ organizations to build capacity and raise the
profile of efforts that advance NBS to local sustainable
development in several countries. The related Equator
Prize is awarded biennially to recognize outstanding
community efforts to reduce poverty through the
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity. The
Equator Initiative’s Knowledge Center also holds an NBS
database and interactive map.
Several projects involve the rediscovery of ancestral water
management systems as well as traditional rainwater
harvesting techniques to improve the quality of drinking
water. Reinstitution of rainwater harvesting may be
necessary because of new pressures, such as oil spills and
wastewater dumping that inhibited the use of some rivers
in the case of Ecuador, or because of saline water intrusion
in the case of the coastal city of Barisal in Bangladesh.
Water harvesting at the broader scale can also be
important for sustaining livelihoods and habitats. The
Centre for Development in India supports community
education on ancestral survival systems. For this, a
demonstration project with community governance
structures involving the regeneration and maintenance
of village committees, combined with increased incomes
and livelihood security, was developed, with the potential
of replication, to improve the balance between humans
and nature.
Watershed management also involves the preservation
and rehabilitation of the native vegetation cover, as in the
River Ethiope in Nigeria, where such initiatives have helped
to mitigate the impacts of erosion and channel siltation in
headwaters streams, and to reconnect fragmented stream
sections and native vegetation reserves.
The community-based projects working particularly with
indigenous peoples show feasible ways to address future
challenges of increasing unreliability of water sources
due to pollution or other changes in water regimes. The
community-driven water projects can foster a more
diverse and locally adapted set of solutions to water and
natural resources management, and taps into existing
and increasingly disappearing knowledge about the local
environment and how to sustainably make use of its
resources through solutions that are inherently naturebased.
Source: Equator Initiative (n.d.).
Contributed by Marianne Kjellén (UNDP).

Chapter 6 Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS

104

As noted in all previous editions of the World Water
Development Report, there are needs for improved data
across the board regarding water availability, quality
and risks, and no less so as these relate to NBS and their
benefits. Better data are required for the status and trends
of all water-related ecosystems. However, particular note
is made of the very poor data availability for soils in view
of their influence on hydrology, their importance to food
security and in particular the extended time-frame for
their formation and consequently for their replenishment,
in comparison to other ecosystem types, which can span
centuries (FAO/ITPS, 2015a). However, an improved
scientific basis for water management, regulation and
policy will not come merely from obtaining more data and
information on more indicators but from acknowledging
that a perceptual shift to larger temporal, spatial and
organizational scales is equally necessary (Bedford and
Preston, 1988).

6.6 A common framework and criteria
for assessing options

Common general criteria for an assessment of water
resources management options (e.g. green versus
grey solutions) can be developed on a case-by-case
basis. The full inclusion of all hydrological benefits and
other co-benefits and the full range of the costs and
benefits of ecosystem services (for any option) would
be a key requirement. However, it is likely that more
detailed criteria for applications in key areas (e.g. urban
infrastructure, agriculture and DRR) would also be needed.
This will require consensus building across the various
relevant stakeholder groups and, therefore, further details
are not proposed here. A common framework and criteria
for assessing any option will form essential contributions
to the achievement of sustainability and equity in water
resources management outcomes.

105

Polder landscape in the Netherlands

A well-recognized challenge to uptake of NBS is that
various water sectors or sub-sectors tend to use their
own specific individual methods for assessment,
monitoring and evaluation, including for assessing the
return on investment over time. The development and
implementation of common criteria against which both
NBS and other options for water resources management
can be assessed is a priority requirement for enabling
an equitable consideration of the costs and benefits of
options. Cohen-Shacham et al. (2016) provide suggestions
for criteria to assess the viability of NBS, whilst Raymond
et al. (2017) provide a detailed review of indicators for NBS
assessment and monitoring, many of which would also be
relevant for other water management options. Ongoing
work on developing common criteria and standards for
assessing potential NBS investments, compared to greyinfrastructure options, was briefly discussed in Section 6.2
(see also Box 6.1).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Enabling accelerated uptake of NBS

106

REALIZING THE
POTENTIAL OF
NBS FOR WATER
AND SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT

WWAP | David Coates, Richard Connor,
Angela Renata Cordeiro Ortigara,
Stefan Uhlenbrook and Engin Koncagül

Green skyscraper building in Sydney (Australia)

This World Water Development Report concludes that there
is great potential for NBS to make significant, and in many
areas unique and essential, contributions to achieving
sustainability of water resources and meeting various
water management objectives. This fact is currently widely
underappreciated.
This chapter draws conclusions regarding the three key
questions concerning NBS:
•

What is the current status of NBS applications?

•

What is the potential for their further application?

•

What needs to change to realize that potential?

Drawing upon conclusions and lessons learned from
previous chapters, an overview of the current status of
how NBS contribute to water resources management is
presented, followed by an assessment of their potential
contribution to meeting contemporary and future water
resources management challenges. This is followed by a
description of the key changes required to achieve the full
potential of NBS. The chapter concludes by demonstrating
how NBS for water also contribute to achieving the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SDGs.
Although this report has assessed NBS for improving water
availability, quality and risks in separate chapters (2, 3 and 4,
respectively), whilst recognizing the linkages between them,
a key point is that most NBS deliver benefits in all three
areas simultaneously. It is rare for NBS to be deployed for a
single purpose and usually they are favoured because they
improve overall system performance, including increasing
resilience. In addition, all previous chapters have highlighted
the significant co-benefits that NBS usually deliver beyond
direct water-related outcomes, such as improved biodiversity
outcomes, landscape values, social and economic benefits
and system sustainability. Such co-benefits often tip
individual assessments of options in favour of NBS and
certainly argue for their strengthened consideration overall.

108

7.1 Where are we now?
Although there has been no comprehensive quantitative
assessment of the current application of NBS worldwide,
two points are well established.
Firstly, there has been considerable application of
NBS in water management throughout history, across
all three of its dimensions – water availability, water
quality and water-related risks. The topic is not new.
There are existing knowledgeable, experienced and
enthusiastic communities of practice across many sectors
or fields. In most cases, NBS are not primarily driven by
environmental lobbyists. There are notable examples
of where NBS innovations, and upscaling, have been
led by sectoral interests. This bodes well for expanded
uptake as it demonstrates their accepted utility. For
example: in agriculture, applications are widespread and
led by farmers and/or their support institutions and the
integration of NBS into agricultural policy frameworks
has demonstrably been led by agricultural agencies;
NBS are already mainstreamed into some business
sector approaches because of how they contribute to
a sustainable business model; and green infrastructure
has a long history of deployment led by enlightened civil
engineers and traditional community-based initiatives.
Environmental institutions, particularly at national
level, are uniquely qualified to proactively come forward
with NBS that also address the challenges faced by
other sectors and to cooperatively identify win-win
outcomes. This requires broadening their historical
focus on the conservation of the ‘natural’ environment
through rules and regulations, to also increase support
for environmentally sustainable progress in managed or
highly modified systems.
Secondly, there is ample evidence that attention to NBS
is increasing. For example: investments in PES schemes,
implemented through, for example, conservation and
water funds, are increasing (see Chapters 3 and 5); rapidly
escalating investments in urban green infrastructure
demonstrate increasing uptake; and emerging ‘green
bond’ markets show promising potential for mobilizing
NBS financing and, notably, demonstrate that NBS can
perform well when assessed against rigorous standardized
investment performance criteria (Chapters 5 and 6). As might
be expected, NBS have become mainstream in multilateral
environmental agreements as they transition towards more
explicitly linking environment to sustainable development
and particularly so within the last ten years (Chapters 1 and
6). Importantly, NBS are now becoming mainstreamed into
other relevant policy forums, including for food security and
sustainable agriculture (Chapter 2), disaster risk reduction
(Chapter 4), and financing (Chapter 6).
There is clear evidence across all chapters that the
costs and benefits of NBS can compare favourably with
alternative grey-infrastructure options, especially when

109

considering the multiple co-benefits they deliver over
the medium and longer term, although Chapter 6 points
out that this is not always well established, and improved
assessment, monitoring and evaluation of NBS are required
if progress in the field is not to be undermined.
Although the optimum balance between green and grey
investment is not well established and highly site-specific,
the limited data available suggest that investment in green
infrastructure remains only a fraction (possibly less than
1%) of total investment in water resources management. In
addition, there remain many examples of policies, financing
and management interventions where NBS are absent,
even where they present an obvious option. Overcoming
the significant challenges to upscaling NBS, which vary
from the overwhelming dominance of ‘conventional’ greyinfrastructure solutions to an overall lack of awareness
and understanding of what NBS can offer, essentially
involves creating the right enabling environment for NBS
to be assessed, and where appropriate financed and
implemented, across a more level playing field (Chapter 6).
NBS practitioners must play their role through improving
the knowledge base, including demonstrating more robust
assessments of NBS, in order to increase confidence in NBS
and the capacity to evaluate and implement them.

7.2 How much further can we go?
This report concludes that increased deployment of NBS is
central to meeting the key contemporary water resources
management challenges of sustaining and improving water
availability and its quality, while reducing water-related
risks. It is well established in both the scientific literature
and through policy consensus that, without a more rapid
uptake of NBS, water security will continue to decline, and
probably rapidly so. Assessing the relative potential for
green versus grey approaches can not only be challenging
but also distracting. As this report has argued, both are
already, and should be, mutually supportive. Nevertheless,
NBS are essential to achieving progress in a number of
water resources challenge areas and are the only viable
option to meet some major challenges over the long term.
Previous World Water Development Reports, among others,
have consistently argued that sustainable water security
will not be achieved through business-as-usual approaches.
NBS offer a key means to move beyond business-as-usual.
However, the necessity for increased deployment of NBS is
currently underappreciated. Justification for such claims
arises from many factors, including:
•

Ecosystem conservation and restoration is the primary
response to reverse current trends in ecosystem
degradation and their impacts on water, which have
become a primary factor determining the current
negative state of water resources (Prologue) – including
mitigating water-related disaster risks, which are
exacerbated by climate change and other global
changes (Chapter 4).

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

•

The assessment of the potential for NBS to address
water scarcity in agriculture perhaps presents the most
compelling example of their importance. Potential gains
through better management of the soil–vegetation
interface are massive. Restoring the ecological basis of
crop and livestock production as a means to improve
water security for farming and to moderate its watermediated externalities is regarded as the priority
approach to bring agriculture within sustainable
limits and to achieve food security (FAO, 2011b;
2014a). Assessments cited in Chapter 2 suggest that
the expanded application of NBS (primarily involving
improved soil, vegetation and landscape management)
to existing rainfed crop systems offers projected gains
equivalent to about 50% of current crop production
from irrigation. From a water footprint perspective,
this translates to an improvement equivalent to
35% of current total water withdrawals worldwide.
Therefore, and putting it somewhat simplistically,
water savings from these NBS alone could account
for more than the projected increased demand for
water by 2050 (Prologue), simultaneously solving (at
the global level) not only the water security for food
security challenge, but also freeing up water supplies
for other uses, and potentially reducing overall global
water demand. Associated socio-economic benefits
are also substantial, since most farming families in
developing countries rely on rainfed crops. Similar NBS
approaches offer opportunities to further improve crop
water use efficiency in irrigated systems. In addition,
such NBS approaches usually improve water quality,
while strengthening system resilience and hence
reducing risks. Rainfed crops rely on little (if any) grey
infrastructure. Therefore, this example alone lays to rest
any notion that NBS are somehow a minor supplement
to grey-infrastructure solutions; the progress is achieved
by simply managing ecosystem components (in this
case, soils and land cover) better so that rainwater gets
and stays where it is needed – in the plant root zone.

•

NBS are the main, if not the only feasible, means
to address land degradation and drought at scale
(Chapters 2 and 4 – although in practice many NBS
actually use similar approaches for this purpose as for
improving rainfed agriculture as above). This makes
NBS central to, for example, sustaining livelihoods in
dryland areas and combating desertification through
rehabilitating land productivity – a priority sustainable
development and poverty reduction challenge.

•

The key impacts of climate change on humans are
mediated through water (UN-Water, 2010) and occur
mainly through climate-induced water-related shifts
in ecosystems (IPCC, 2014). This implies that the key
means for adapting to climate change is through
ecosystem-based adaptation that improves the
resilience of ecosystems to these climate-induced
water-related shifts – that is, deploying NBS. Hence
the increasing attention to NBS in climate change
adaptation measures. Chapters 2, 3 and 4 all provide
examples of NBS for addressing water availability,

quality and risks, respectively, most of which are also
a climate change adaptation response. In addition,
because many NBS for climate change adaptation
involve restoring carbon in landscapes (e.g. soil carbon
or forests) they also contribute to climate change
mitigation – not an inconsequential benefit considering
that land use change has been responsible for
approximately 25% of global anthropogenic greenhouse
gas emissions to date (FAO, 2014b).
•

Deploying urban green infrastructure is now widely
recognized as having great potential. There is significant
scope to expand the retrofitting of green infrastructure
or for incorporating it in an initial planning stage,
together with improved urban and peri-urban
landscape management, to achieve sustainable urban
settlements with a proven track record of making
significant contributions to urban water management
and resilience, including risk reduction (Chapters 3, 4
and 6).

WaSH is another area where NBS offer significant potential
although achieved primarily through improved water
availability and access to it (Chapter 2), improved water
quality (Chapter 3) and reduced water-related risks (Chapter
4). For example, ecosystem degradation is recognized as
a major constraint to achieving universal access to safe
drinking water and hence there is recognition of the scope
for ecosystem restoration as a key way forward (World
Bank, 2009). NBS that involve eco-sanitation approaches,
such as dry toilets, also offer promise to practically
eliminate water use requirements in many situations.
NBS contribute to improved and more sustainable jobs
through creating overall direct benefits of improved water
resources management, thus generating employment
opportunities across a large array of sectors and unlocking
the potential for indirect employment creation through
its multiplier effect (WWAP, 2016). They can, however,
also create jobs and livelihoods directly. For example, PES
schemes enable financing for water resources management
to be dispersed and shared among a larger range of
beneficiaries – notably poor communities in rural areas
(Chapter 5). NBS that contribute to improved profitability,
resilience and sustainability of agriculture offer significant
potential to improve in particular small-scale family farming
– widely regarded as one of the most important means of
lifting people out of poverty in most developing countries.

7.3 How do we get there?
If business-as-usual were a possible option, we would not
need World Water Development Report series or indeed the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Previous World
Water Development Reports have consistently argued for
transformational change in how we manage water. Most
related policy forums agree on this point. This edition
of the report reiterates the same conclusion, but notes

Chapter 7 Realizing the potential of NBS for water and sustainable development

110

that NBS offer a major means to achieve the required
transformational change. It argues that the absence of
adequate recognition of the role of ecosystems in water
management is a key factor that reinforces the need for
transformational change. This transformational change can
no longer just be aspirational – the shift needs to rapidly
accelerate and, more importantly, translate into fully
operationalized policy and action. This report concludes
that we have made a good, if somewhat belated, start in
this process but there is a long way yet to go.
This transformational change needs to be built upon a
much more holistic, systems-based approach to the ways
we manage water. Business-as-usual perspectives hold that
water is a linear problem (upstream–downstream) that has
largely to do with managing surface water and groundwater
supply and demand, usually separately and principally
for direct human use. Trade-offs with ecosystems are
recognized but are considered to be secondary to water
for people. Water is managed for a subset of its values,
not its delivery of maximum system-wide benefits. The
conventional response to improving water supply and
quality, addressing climate change and reducing disaster
risk has been to build more grey infrastructure and, where
recognized, NBS are considered a fringe benefit, not core
business. An ecosystems approach, however, recognizes
that water moves through and between landscapes in a
series of interconnected cycles from small to regional/
global scales and many of these challenge an upstream–
downstream perspective. For example, it highlights the
current gap in attention to managing the impacts of land
use change on moisture recycling from outside the basin,
thus challenging the notion of a watershed being the single
most appropriate unit of management (Chapters 1, 2 and
6) – although the watershed boundaries certainly remain far
more appropriate than administrative units, which are still
commonly used in water resources management. The NBS
focus is on managing systems, including integrated green–
grey infrastructure approaches, and maximizing systemwide benefits. For example:

those limitations and increase the hydrological and
economic performance of grey options while offering
opportunities for enhancing social benefits;
•

water storage is not seen purely as maximizing the
performance of artificial structures but from the
perspective of how water storage is best managed
across both rural and urban landscapes, focusing on
interconnected systems (e.g. reservoirs, wetlands
and aquifers) that integrate both natural and artificial
storage features – the priority is storing water where
it is safest and can be utilized for various uses with
an emphasis on resilience of systems, and not overfocussing on artificial storage capacity;

•

building resilience is paramount; approaches to
managing risks, including disaster and climate changemediated risks, should focus on addressing systemic
root causes of such risks: ecosystem change;

•

not just water-related outcomes should be considered,
but overall system-wide benefits, including co-benefits
of all options collectively;

•

systems are best managed through multi-stakeholder
involvement and use NBS to achieve consensus on winwin outcomes while managing trade-offs; and

•

addressing drivers is a way of dealing with underlying
causes as opposed to symptoms – an understanding
of the direct and indirect drivers of ecosystem
degradation and loss is crucial to identify opportunities
where a focus on ecosystem services can help improve
the management of water resources.

•

using ecosystems to get water back where it is needed,
where it is safest; reducing water quality issues at
source; and delivering improved overall system-wide
socio-economic benefits, including sustainability and
resilience;

•

ambient water availability for human needs in
landscapes is not seen as predetermined by climatic
factors beyond our influence, but can be managed, for
example through land cover management to influence
moisture recycling or through improvements in soil
management;

•

the issue is not simply allocation among competing
uses; water availability, quality and risks for some users
can be improved whilst simultaneously improving
benefits to others;

Business-as-usual perpetuates fragmented ineffective
policies – a death knell for sustainable water outcomes
identified in most previous editions of the World Water
Development Report. Many policy forums have recognized
the need to integrate policies across multiple policy areas
and scales, not just among water-related agendas but with
regards to how these relate to, support or conflict with
other social, economic and environmental needs. This
trend has culminated in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development that has a much improved integrated
approach as compared to its precursor, the Millennium
Development Goals, by recognizing that interlinked
goals and targets need to be achieved collectively. NBS
offer Member States a mechanism, among others, to
achieve such integrated approaches through linking the
environmental, economic and social pillars of sustainable
development. The technical approach to assessing and
articulating such interdependency is through using
an ecosystem services framework. It is critical that
governments respond by not only harmonizing policy and
regulations across policy areas, but also review policy at
scale to ensure that policy guidance, or regulations, are
clear and support, rather than constrain, implementation
of improved decision making down to local levels.

•

the role of and need for grey infrastructure is recognized
but so are its limitations, including how it can
significantly increase risks; one role of NBS is to address

Implementation of NBS can involve the participation of many
different stakeholder groups, from governments to NGOs
and citizen groups (e.g. local farmer associations, landowner

111

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

groups, private sector interests, etc.). Institutional constraints
to promoting intersectoral dialogue are well known (Chapter
6) and have been well recognized in many previous editions of
the World Water Development Report. Achieving the required
institutional change remains challenging, and no less so for
NBS. However, importantly, NBS offer a means to encourage
such change through consensus-building on overall system
objectives and the identification of win-win outcomes among
multiple interests. NBS offer a bridge between the sectors and
their interests.
Moving investments towards green approaches will
be necessary in order to achieve improved investment
efficiency and to sustain the performance and investment
returns of grey infrastructure. An opportunity, therefore, is
to transform investments so that NBS can fully contribute
to efficiency gains, including maximizing co-benefits and
potential system-wide improvements. Chapter 6 highlights
some promising developments in this regard, including
the emergence of rigorous assessments of the comparative
financial performance of green and grey investments.
It is promising that these have often identified green
approaches as a viable investment, further strengthening
the case for the efficacy of NBS approaches.
Whilst transformational change is required at various
policy and financing levels, sooner or later decisions about
water management interventions will be mostly made
at site level. The objective needs to be to minimize costs
and risks, maximize system returns and robustness, while
providing optimal ‘fit-for-use’ performance. A role of policy
should be to enable the right site-level decisions to be
taken in these regards. A continuing bias towards greyinfrastructure approaches points at the need for recognition
of the synergies between green and grey infrastructure,
and the need for a common framework under which to
assess available options (Chapters 1 and 6). Only under a
common framework can it be determined what option, or
most usually what blend of options, is most appropriate.
This requires the use of common criteria, indicators and
methodologies for assessments, comparisons and decisionmaking. Developing such a common framework, and
the tools and capacity to support it, is a priority need to
translate transformational policy change into delivery of
optimal solutions at local level.
Agriculture stands out as a key sector where opportunities
for transformational change stand out, due to its
dominance in water use, links between water and food
security, potential for poverty reduction, and opportunities
for further deployment of NBS. The water security for
food security dialogue needs to fully expand beyond
its business-as-usual over-focus on irrigation. The
opportunities to improve irrigation water use efficiency
through grey-infrastructure approaches (e.g. drip irrigation)
and demand-side measures (such as growing more localityappropriate crops, unlocking opportunities to address
virtual water in food trade, improvements in crop water
productivity through genetic improvement, etc.) are well
recognized, as is the scope for irrigation expansion in

some areas. But, as above, the greater opportunities lie
in improving water availability/supply through the more
widespread uptake of NBS, particularly in rainfed systems,
with complementary gains achieved in improved water
quality and risk reduction outcomes. Whilst some policy
forums recognize these opportunities (FAO, 2011b; 2014a),
others continue to underemphasize the importance of
ecosystems. The ‘water–energy–food nexus’ dialogue (FAO,
2014c) is a conspicuous example where ecosystems need
to be more explicitly integrated (as a ‘water–ecosystem–
energy–food nexus’), because ecosystems determine many
of the key interlinkages between water, energy and food,
and NBS offer a key means to reconcile the potentially
competing interests involved (Prologue and Chapter 2).
Scenario analyses have consistently shown that, in many
areas, the path towards not only improved sustainability
but also longer-term economic prosperity is through
fully integrating environmental sustainability. A very
positive outcome of the preliminary water resources
scenario analysis undertaken by Burek et al. (2016) is that
the sustainability20 pathway delivers not only improved
environmental, water and food security outcomes, but
also, contrary to some beliefs, the highest and fastest
mid-term benefits in terms of economic development. For
example, under the alternative regional rivalry21 scenario,
global GDP peaks at US$220 trillion by the year 2100 but
is US$570 trillion under the middle-of-the-road22 scenario
and US$650 trillion under the sustainability scenario, with
a similar pattern for GDP per capita. This is consistent with
contemporary conclusions that environmental sustainability
is not a constraint to social and economic development, but
a requirement to achieve it. NBS offer an understandable
and practical means to operationalize water resources policy
and management to achieve this end.

7.4 Achieving the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development
through NBS for water resources
management
This report concludes that NBS have high potential to meet
contemporary and future water resources management
challenges, as reflected in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the SDGs and their targets.

20

The sustainability scenario depicts a world making relatively good
progress towards sustainability, with sustained efforts to achieve
development goals, while reducing resource intensity and fossil fuel
dependency.

21

In the regional rivalry scenario, the world is separated into regions
characterized by extreme poverty, pockets of moderate wealth and a
bulk of countries that struggle to maintain living standards for a strongly
growing population. Countries focus on achieving energy and food
security goals within their own region, and international trade, including
energy resource and agricultural markets, is severely restricted.

22

The middle-of-the-road scenario assumes world development is
progressing along past trends and paradigms, such that social, economic
and technological trends do not shift markedly from historical patterns
(i.e. business-as-usual).

Chapter 7 Realizing the potential of NBS for water and sustainable development

112

Lake Naivasha (Kenya)

A summary of the findings from Chapters 1 to 5 with respect
to the potential for NBS to contribute to the SDGs and
their targets is provided in Tables 7.1 and 7.2. Table 7.1
summarizes the potential contribution of NBS to each of
the water targets under the SDG 6 for Water and Sanitation
vis-à-vis non-NBS options to achieve the same target. Since
water underpins most social and economic aspects of the
SDGs, it is widely recognized as cross-cutting most of the
SDGs and their targets. Therefore, the contributions of NBS
to SDG 6 translate into further water-related benefits for
other SDGs and their targets, alongside contributions from
non-NBS interventions. These linkages are too complex to
include in Table 7.1 but are reviewed further by UN-Water
(2016a) and in the forthcoming UN-Water Synthesis Report
on SDG 6 (to be published in mid-2018). The non-waterrelated co-benefits that NBS also provide, and the ways in
which these help to achieve other SDGs and their targets,
are summarized in Table 7.2.
NBS offer high potential to contribute to the achievement
of most of the targets of SDG 6 (Table 7.1). Areas in which
this contribution translates into particularly striking
positive impacts on other SDGs are with regards to water
security for underpinning sustainable agriculture (SDG 2,
notably Target 2.4), healthy lives (SDG 3), building resilient
(water-related) infrastructure (SDG 9), sustainable urban
settlements (SDGs 11), and disaster risk reduction (SDG 11
and, as related to climate change, 13).
A significant advantage of NBS is the co-benefits they
offer, beyond immediate water management outcomes.
These include improving overall system resilience and the
social and economic benefits associated with improved
economic, cultural, recreational and aesthetic values of
improved landscapes, as well as nature conservation. These
benefits can be substantial and need to be factored into
assessments, cost–benefit analyses and, consequently,

113

policy and decision making. Some areas where these
co-benefits deliver particularly high rewards in terms
of achieving the SDGs (Table 7.2) are with regards to:
other aspects of promoting sustainable agriculture (SDG
2); sustainable energy (SDG 7); promoting sustained,
inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and
productive employment and decent work for all (SDG 8);
other aspects of making cities and human settlements
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable (Goal 11);
ensuring sustainable consumption and production
patterns (SDG 12); taking urgent action to combat climate
change and its impacts (SDG 13); and in particular through
promoting improved overall environmental outcomes and
halting and reversing land degradation and biodiversity
loss (SDGs 14 and 15). NBS also offer significant
opportunities to strengthen the means of implementation
and revitalizing the global partnership for sustainable
development (SDG 17).

7.5 Coda
The nature of the relationship between ecosystems,
hydrology and human well-being needs not be as
precarious as evidenced in certain cases of ancient and
recent history. As humankind charts its course through
the Anthropocene, adopting NBS is not only necessary for
improving water management outcomes and achieving
water security, it is also critical for ensuring the delivery of
co-benefits that are essential to all aspects of sustainable
development. Although NBS are not a panacea, they will
play an essential role in building a better, brighter, safer
and more equitable future for all.

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Table 7.1

The potential contribution of NBS to meeting targets of SDG 6 on water and sanitation and their potential
for contributing to other targets*

SDG 6: Ensure availability and
sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all

Potential NBS
contribution
to the target

Examples of NBS

Potential NBS
contribution to
other SDG 6 targets

6.1 Achieve universal and equitable
access to safe and affordable drinking
water for all

High

Watershed management, including conservation
agricultural practices; water harvesting; urban
green infrastructure

High

6.2 Achieve access to adequate and
equitable sanitation and hygiene for all
and end open defecation, paying special
attention to the needs of women and
girls and those in vulnerable situations

Medium

Dry toilets, constructed wetlands

Medium

6.3 Improve water quality by reducing
pollution, eliminating dumping and
minimizing release of hazardous
chemicals and materials, halving the
proportion of untreated wastewater and
substantially increasing recycling and
safe reuse globally

High

Constructed wetlands, urban green infrastructure, Medium
watershed management (including agricultural
land management), riparian buffers, vegetated
6.1, 6.4 (where
waterways and wetlands
wastewater is
reused), 6.6

6.4 Substantially increase water-use
efficiency across all sectors and ensure
sustainable withdrawals and supply of
freshwater to address water scarcity
and substantially reduce the number of
people suffering from water scarcity

Very high

NBSs that improve soil water availability for
rainfed crops (e.g. conservation agriculture etc.)

Very high

Water harvesting, conjunctive uses of
groundwater and surface water, enhanced
groundwater recharge through improved land
management, urban green infrastructure (e.g.
permeable pavements, sustainable urban
drainage systems)

High

6.5 Implement integrated water
resources management at all levels,
including through transboundary
cooperation as appropriate

High

Implementation of larger-scale NBSs that
High
promote collaboration between stakeholders, e.g.
river basin restoration
6.1, 6.3, 6.6

6.6 Protect and restore water-related
ecosystems, including mountains,
forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and
lakes

-

All. Target 6.6 is mainly the application of NBS

Targets

6.1, 6.3, 6.6

High

6.1, 6.3, 6.6

6.1, 6.3, 6.6

-

SDG Targets refer to their respective Goals.
Therefore, in this context, the primary purpose
of protecting and restoring water-related
ecosystems is to support the availability and
sustainable management of water and sanitation
for all. That is, Target 6.6 refers to deploying NBS
as defined in this report. Protecting and restoring
ecosystems for other objectives, beyond water
resources outcomes, is covered under co-benefits
of NBS in Table 7.2.

High
6.a By 2030, expand international
cooperation and capacity-building
support to developing countries in
water- and sanitation-related activities
and programmes, including water
harvesting, desalination, water efficiency,
wastewater treatment, recycling and
reuse technologies
6.b Support and strengthen the
participation of local communities
in improving water and sanitation
management

6.3, 6.4, 6.6

NBS as a key focus of capacity-building support
and expanding international cooperation

High

-

-

*Potential is assessed with respect to how NBS can contribute vis-à-vis other means of achieving the same target.
Chapter 7 Realizing the potential of NBS for water and sustainable development

114

Table 7.2

The potential contribution of NBS (for water) to some other SDGs and their targets through delivering
non-water related co-benefits

SDG and Target

Potential
co-benefit
achieved
through NBS

Examples

SDG 1. End poverty in all its forms everywhere

High

NBS deliver non-water-related ecosystem
services that help build resilience of the poor
and overall system resilience; for example,
reforestation reduces landslides, ecosystems
provide food sources during times of crisis

Very high

The non-water-related co-benefits of NBS
for water supply in agriculture (e.g. through
conservation agriculture and landscape
restoration) are significant and include pest
and disease regulation, nutrient cycling,
soil regulation, pollination etc. All improve
overall system resilience, sustainability and
productivity

Modest

Healthy ecosystems, promoted through NBS,
help regulate human water-borne diseases and
parasites

Modest

NBS for improving water quality reduce energy
requirements for subsequent water treatment

High

NBS applied at scale reinstate positive
feedbacks between economic growth and
environment

High

NBS promote green infrastructure, which
increases resource use efficiency and clean
and environmentally sound technologies. An
approach particularly suited to countries with
low capacity and limited financial resources

High

Green infrastructure within urban areas.
Deploying NBS in urban catchments to link
urban and peri-urban (and catchment-scale)
planning for safe, resilient and sustainable
settlements – particularly appropriate for
developing countries

1.5 ... build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable
situations and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to
climate-related extreme events and other economic, social
and environmental shocks and disasters
SDG 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture
2.4 ... ensure sustainable food production systems and
implement resilient agricultural practices that increase
productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems,
that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change,
extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and
that progressively improve land and soil quality
SDG 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all
at all ages
3.3 ... end the epidemics of ... malaria and ... combat waterborne diseases ...
SDG 7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable
and modern energy for all
7.3 ... double the global rate of improvement in energy
efficiency
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable
economic growth, full and productive employment and
decent work for all
8.4 Improve progressively, through 2030, global resource
efficiency in consumption and production and endeavour to
decouple economic growth from environmental degradation ...
SDG 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and
sustainable industrialization and foster innovation
9.4 ... upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make
them sustainable, with increased resource use efficiency
and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound
technologies and industrial processes, with all countries
taking action in accordance with their respective capabilities
SDG 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient and sustainable
11.7 ... provide universal access to safe, inclusive and
accessible green and public spaces ...
11.a ... support positive economic, social and environmental
links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by
strengthening national and regional development planning
11.b ... substantially increase the number of cities and human
settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies
and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation
and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and
develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, holistic disaster risk
management at all levels
11.c Support least developed countries, including through
financial and technical assistance, in building sustainable and
resilient buildings utilizing local materials

115

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

SDG 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production
patterns

High

NBS are a key means to implement the 10-Year
Framework. They are particularly effective
in promoting sustainable consumption of
resources (e.g. of chemicals, fertilizers and
land) in farming.

High

In addition to significant contributions to
strengthening resilience to water-related
hazards (covered under Goal 6 in Table 7.1),
NBS help improve overall system resilience
and adaptive capacity. NBS also help
mitigate climate change through improved
sequestration of carbon through, for example,
reforestation and the rehabilitation of soil
organic carbon. They also help integrate
climate change policies, strategies and
planning across sectors.

Medium to
high

NBS for reducing impacts of pollution from
land-based activities are high and as these
are mediated through water, they are covered
under Goal 6 above – a notable example being
reducing nutrient inputs from agriculture.
NBS applied in coastal areas, for example
coastal forest and/or wetlands restoration,
has significant potential for improving the
resilience of coastal ecosystems.

Very high

One of the most important co-benefits of NBS
is the way in which they support Goal 15 by
supporting the conservation, restoration and
sustainable use of ecosystems (target 15.1),
including forests (target 15.2) and mountains
(target 15.4), while they are the principle
means to combat desertification (target
15.3), safeguard natural habitats (target 15.5),
support integration of biodiversity values
(target 15.9) and are the major means to
mobilize finance for biodiversity conservation
(targets 15a and 15b).

Medium

NBS promote integration across stakeholder
interests, thereby promoting partnerships
and helping identify mutually reinforcing
links between the social, economic and
environmental pillars of sustainable
development.

12.1 Implement the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns ...
12.2 ... achieve the sustainable management and efficient use
of natural resources
12.5 ... substantially reduce waste generation through
prevention, reduction, recycling and reuse ...
12.7 ... public procurement practices that are sustainable, in
accordance with national policies and priorities
SDG 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and
its impacts
13.1 ... strengthen resilience and adaptive capacity to climaterelated hazards and natural disasters in all countries
13.2 ... integrate climate change measures into national
policies, strategies and planning

SDG 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development
14.1 ... prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of
all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including
marine debris and nutrient pollution ...
14.2 ... sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal
ecosystems ... strengthening their resilience, and take action
for their restoration ...
SDG 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat
desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and
halt biodiversity loss
All targets

Multi-stakeholder partnerships
17.16 ... enhance the Global Partnership for Sustainable
Development, complemented by multi-stakeholder
partnerships ...
17.17 ... encourage and promote effective public, publicprivate and civil society partnerships, building on the
experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships

Chapter 7 Realizing the potential of NBS for water and sustainable development

116

REFERENCES
A

Abell, R., Asquith, N., Boccaletti, G., Bremer, L., Chapin, E., Erickson-Quiroz, A., Higgins, J., Johnson, J., Kang, S., Karres, N., Lehner,
B., McDonald, R., Raepple, J., Shemie, D., Simmons, E., Sridhar, A., Vigerstøl, K., Vogl, A. and Wood, S. 2017. Beyond the Source:
The Environmental, Economic, and Community Benefits of Source Water Protection. Arlington, Va., The Nature, USA, The Nature
Conservancy (TNC). www.nature.org/beyondthesource.
Aceves-Bueno, E., Adeleye, A. S., Bradley, D., Brandt, W. T., Callery, P., Feraud, M., Garner, K. L., Gentry, R., Huang, Y., McCullough,
I., Pearlman, I., Sutherland, S. A., Wilkinson, W., Yang, Y., Zink, T., Anderson, S. E. and Tague, C. 2015. Citizen science as an
approach for overcoming insufficient monitoring and inadequate stakeholder buy-in in adaptive management: Criteria and
evidence. Ecosystems, Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 493–506. doi.org/10.1007/s10021-015-9842-4.
Acreman, M. 2001. Ethical aspects of water and ecosystems. Water Policy, Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 257–265.
doi.org/10.1016/S1366-7017(01)00009-5.
Acreman, M. C. and Mountford, J. O. 2009. Wetland management. R. Ferrier and A. Jenkins (eds.), Handbook of Catchment
Management. Oxford, UK, Blackwell Publishing.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2013. Asian Water Development Outlook 2013: Measuring Water Security in Asia and the
Pacific. Mandaluyong City, Philippines, ADB. www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/30190/asian-water-developmentoutlook-2013.pdf.
______. 2015. Nature-Based Solutions for Sustainable and Resilient Mekong Towns, Volume 1 of the Resource Kit for Building
Resilience and Sustainability in Mekong Towns. Prepared by the International Centre for Environmental Management (ICEM) for
the Asian Development Bank and Nordic Development Fund. Manila, ADB. www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/215721/
nature-based-solutions.pdf.
AEDSAW (Association for Environmental and Developmental Studies in the Arab World). 2002. AEDSAW Activities at WOCMES 2002,
Mainz, Germany. AEDSAW website. almashriq.hiof.no/general/300/360/363/363.7/aedsaw/wocmes-2002.html.
Alexandratos, N. and Bruinsma, J. 2012. World Agriculture Towards 2030/2050: The 2012 Revision. ESA Working paper No. 12-03.
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). www.fao.org/docrep/016/ap106e/ap106e.pdf.
Allan, J. A. 2003. IWRM/IWRAM: A New Sanctioned Discourse? Occasional Paper No. 50. London, School of Oriental and African
Studies (SOAS), Water Issues Study Group, University of London.
Alvizuri, J., Cataldo, J., Smalls-Mantey, L. A. and Montalto, F. A. 2017. Green roof thermal buffering: Insights derived from fixed and
portable monitoring equipment. Energy and Buildings, Vol. 151, pp. 455–468. doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.06.020.
ANA (Agéncia Nacional de Água). 2011. ANA abre seleção para projetos de conservação de água e solo [ANA calls for projects on
water and soil conservation]. ANA website. www2.ana.gov.br/Paginas/imprensa/noticia.aspx?id_noticia=9304. (In Portuguese.)
Andréssian, V. 2004. Waters and forests: From historical controversy to scientific debate. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 291, No. 1–2,
pp. 1–27. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2003.12.015.
Ansar, A., Flyvbjerg, B., Budzier, A. and Lunn, D. 2014. Should we build more large dams? The actual costs of hydropower
megaproject development. Energy Policy, Vol. 69, No. 43–56. doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.069.
AQUASTAT. n.d. AQUASTAT website. FAO. fao.org/nr/water/aquastat/main/index.stm (Accessed July 2017).
Aragão, L. E. O. C. 2012. Environmental Science: The rainforest’s water pump. Nature, Vol. 489, pp. 217–218.
doi.org/10.1038/nature11485.
Atkinson, G. and Pearce, D. 1995. Measuring sustainable development. D. W. Bromley (ed.), Handbook of Environmental Economics.
Oxford, UK, Wiley-Blackwell
Avellán, C. T., Ardakanian, R. and Gremillion, P. 2017. The role of constructed wetlands for biomass production within the watersoil-waste nexus. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 75, No. 10, pp. 2237–2245. doi.org/10.2166/wst.2017.106.
Aylward, B., Bandyopadhyay, J. and Belausteguigotia, J. 2005. Freshwater ecosystem services. Millenium Ecosystem Assessment,
Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Policy Responses. Washington DC, Island Press. www.millenniumassessment.org/
documents/document.312.aspx.pdf.

B

Badgley, C., Moghtader, J., Quintero, E., Zakem, E., Chappell, M. J., Aviles-Vazquez, K., Samulon, A. and Perfecto, I. 2007. Organic
agriculture and the global food supply. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 86–108.
doi.org/10.1017/S1742170507001640.
Baker, T., Kiptala, J., Olaka, L., Oates, N., Hussain, A. and McCartney, M. 2015. Baseline Review and Ecosystem Services Assessment
of the Tana River Basin, Kenya. Working Paper No. 165. Colombo, International Water Managmenet Institute (IWMI).
doi.org/10.5337/2015.223.

117

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Barton, M. A. 2016. Nature-Based Solutions in Urban Contexts: A Case Study of Malmö, Sweden. Master thesis.
Lund, Sweden, International Institute for Industrial Environmental Economics (IIIEE). lup.lub.lu.se/luur/
download?func=downloadFile&recordOId=8890909&fileOId=8890910.
Batker, D., De la Torre, I., Costanza, R., Swedeen, P., Day, J., Boumans, R. and Bagstad, K. 2010. Gaining Ground. Wetlands, Hurricanes and
the Economy: The Value of Restoring the Mississippi River Delta. Earth Economics Project Report. Tacoma, Wash., Earth Economics.
Beatley, T. 2011. Biophilic Cities: Integrating Nature into Urban Design and Planning. Washington DC, Island Press.
Bedford, B. L. and Preston, E. M. 1988. Developing the scientific basis for assessing cumulative effects of wetland loss and degradation
on landscape functions: Status, perspectives, and prospects. Environmental Management, Vol. 12, No. 5, pp. 751–771.
doi.org/10.1007/BF01867550.
Benedict, M. A. and McMahon, E. T. 2001. Green Infrastructure: Smart Conservation for the 21st Century. Washington DC, Sprawl Watch
Clearinghouse. www.sprawlwatch.org/greeninfrastructure.pdf.
Bennett, G., Nathaniel, C. and Hamilton, K. 2013. Charting New Waters: State of Watershed Payments 2012. Washington DC, Forest
Trends. www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_3308.pdf.
Bennett, G. and Ruef, F. 2016. Alliances for Green Infrastructure: State of Watershed Investment 2016. Washington DC, Forest Trends’
Ecosystem Marketplace. www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_5463.pdf.
Beschta, R. L. and Kauffman, J. B. 2000. Restoration of riparian systems: Taking a broader view. J. P. J. Wigington and R. L. Beschta
(eds.), Riparian Ecology and Management in Multi-Land Use Watersheds. Middleburg, Va., American Water Resources Association
(AWRA), pp. 323–328.
Bezabih, M., Ruhinduka, R. and Sarr, M. 2016. Climate Change Perception and System of Rice Intensification (SRI) Impact on
Dispersion and Downside Risk: A Moment Approximation Approach. Leeds/London, UK, Centre for Climate Change Economics and
Policy/Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment. www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/
uploads/2016/11/Working-Paper-256-Bezabih-et-al.pdf.
Bilotta, G. S., Krueger, T., Brazier, R. E., Butler, P., Freer, J., Hawkins, J. M. B., Haygarth, P. M., Macleod, C. J. and Quinton, J. 2010.
Assessing catchment-scale erosion and yields of suspended solids from improved temperate grassland. Journal of Environmental
Monitoring, Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 731–739. doi.org/10.1039/b921584k.
Bockheim, J. G. and Gennadiyev, A. N. 2010. Soil-factorial models and earth-system science: A review. Geoderma, Vol. 159, No. 3-4, pp.
243–51. doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2010.09.005.
Borg, H., Stoneman, G. L. and Ward, C. G. 1988. The effect of logging and regeneration on groundwater, streamflow and stream salinity
in the southern forest of Western Australia. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 99, No. 3–4, pp. 253–270.
doi.org/10.1016/0022-1694(88)90052-2.
Bossio, D., Geheb, K. and Critchley, W. 2010. Managing water by managing land: Addressing land degradation to improve water
productivity and rural livelihoods. Agricultural Water Management, Vol. 97, No. 4, pp. 536–542. doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2008.12.001.
Bossio, D., Noble, A., Molden, D. and Nangia, V. 2008. Land degradation and water productivity in agricultural landscapes. D.
Bossio and K. Geheb (eds.), Conserving Land, Protecting Water. Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture
Series 6. Wallingford, UK/Colombo, Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience (CAB) International/International Water Management
Institute (IWMI). www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/CABI_Publications/CA_CABI_Series/Conserving_Land_Protecting_Water/
protected/9781845933876.pdf.
Brix, H., Koottatep, T., Fryd, O. and Laugesen, C. H. 2011. The flower and the butterfly constructed wetland system at Koh Phi Phi:
System design and lessons learned during implementation and operation. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 37, No. 5, pp. 729 –735.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2010.06.035.
Brown, G. and Fagerholm, N. 2015. Empirical PPGIS/PGIS mapping of ecosystem services: A review and evaluation. Ecosystem Services,
Vol. 13, pp. 119–133. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.10.007.
Bullock, A. and Acreman, M. C. 2003. The role of wetlands in the hydrological cycle. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, Vol. 7, No. 3,
pp. 75–86. doi.org/10.5194/hess-7-358-2003.
Bünemann, E. K., Schwenke, G. D. and Van Zwieten, L. 2006. Impact of agricultural inputs on soil organisms: A review. Australian
Journal of Soil Research, Vol. 44, pp. 379–406. doi.org/10.1071/SR05125.
Burek, P., Mubareka, S., Rojas, R., De Roo, A., Bianchi, A., Baranzelli, C., Lavalle, C. and Vandecasteele, I. 2012. Evaluation of the
Effectiveness of Natural Water Retention Measures: Support to the EU Blueprint to Safeguard Europe’s Waters. JRC Scientific and
Policy Reports. Luxembourg, European Commission/Joint Research Centre/Institute for Environment and Sustainability (EC/JRC/
IES). ec.europa.eu/environment/water/blueprint/pdf/EUR25551EN_JRC_Blueprint_NWRM.pdf.
Burek, P., Satoh, Y., Fischer, G., Kahil, M. T., Scherzer, A., Tramberend, S., Nava, L. F., Wada, Y., Eisner, S., Flörke, M., Hanasaki, N.,
Magnuszewski, P., Cosgrove, B. and Wiberg, D. 2016. Water Futures and Solution: Fast Track Initiative (Final Report). IIASA Working
Paper. Laxenburg, Austria, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). pure.iiasa.ac.at/13008/.

References

118

Buytaert, W., Zulkafli, Z., Grainger, S., Acosta, L., Alemie, T. C., Bastiaensen, J., De Bièvre, B., Bhusal, J., Clark, J., Dewulf, A., Foggin,
M., Hannah, D. M., Hergarten, C., Isaeva, A., Karpouzoglou, T., Pandeya, B., Paudel, D., Sharma, K., Steenhuis, T., Tilahun, S., Van
Hecken, G. and Zhumanova, M. 2014. Citizen science in hydrology and water resources: Opportunities for knowledge generation,
ecosystem service management, and sustainable development. Frontiers in Earth Science, Vol. 2, No. 26.
doi.org/10.3389/feart.2014.00026.

C

Calvache, A., Benítez, S. and Ramos, A. 2012. Water Funds: Conserving Green Infrastructure. A Guide for Design, Creation and
Operation. Bogotá, Latin American Water Funds Partnership/The Nature Conservancy (TNC)/FEMSA Foundation/Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB). www.nature.org/media/freshwater/latin-america-water-funds.pdf.
Cardinale, B. J., Duffy, J. E., Gonzalez, A., Hooper, D. U., Perrings, C., Venail, P., Narwani, A., Mace, G. M., Tilman, D., Wardle, D. A.,
Kinzing, A. P., Daily, G. C., Loreau, M., Grace, J. B., Larigauderie, A., Srivastava, D. S. and Naeem, S. 2012. Biodiversity loss and its
impact on humanity. Nature, Vol. 486, pp. 59–67. doi.org/10.1038/nature11148.
Carrão, H., Naumann, G. and Barbosa, P. 2016. Mapping global patterns of drought risk: An empirical framework based on subnational estimates of hazard, exposure and vulnerability. Global Environmental Change, Vol. 39, pp. 108–124.
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.04.012.
CBD (Convention on Biological Diversity). 1992. Convention on Biological Diversity. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5 June 1992.
www.cbd.int/convention/text/default.shtml.
_____. 2010. Decision Adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity at its Tenth Meeting. Nagoya,
Japan, 18–29 October 2010. www.cbd.int/doc/decisions/cop-10/cop-10-dec-02-en.pdf.
_____. 2015. Strategic Scientific and Technical Issues related to the Implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020:
Biodiversity, Food Systems and Agriculture. Nineteenth meeting of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific, Technical and Tecnological
Advice. Montreal, PQ, CBD. www.cbd.int/doc/meetings/sbstta/sbstta-20/information/sbstta-20-inf-49-en.pdf.
CBI (Climate Bonds Initiative). 2017. Green Bonds Policy: Highlights from 2016. CBI. www.climatebonds.net/files/reports/cbi-policyroundup-2016.pdf.
_____. n.d. Boosting Demand: Mandates for Domestic Funds, Quantitative Easing. CBI website. www.climatebonds.net/policy/policyareas/boosting-demand.
CFS (Committee on World Food Security). 2014. Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food Systems. CFS fortyfirst session: Making a difference in food security and nutrition. Rome, CFS. www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/cfs/Docs1314/rai/
CFS_Principles_Oct_2014_EN.pdf.
CGIAR WLE (CGIAR Research Program on Water, Land and Ecosystems). 2017. Re-Conceptualizing Dam Design and Management
for Enhanced Water and Food Security. Towards Sustainable Intensification: Insights and Solutions Brief No. 3. Colombo,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI)/CGIAR. doi.org/10.5337/2017.212.
Chappell, N. A. 2005. Water pathways in humid forests: Myths vs. observations. Suiri Kagaku, Vol. 48, No. 6, pp. 32–46.
Chaturvedi, V., Hejazi, M., Edmonds, J., Clarke, L., Kyle, P., Davies, E. and Wise, M. 2013. Climate mitigation policy implications for
global irrigation water demand. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, pp. 1–16.
Chen, L., Wang, J., Wei, W., Fu, B. and Dongping, W. 2010. Effects of landscape restoration on soil water storage and water use in the
Loess Plateau Region, China. Forest Ecology and Management, Vol. 259, No. 7, pp. 1291–1298.
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2009.10.025.
Chiramba, T., Mogoi, S., Martinez, I. and Jones, T. 2011. Payment for Environmental Services Pilot Project in Lake Naivasha Basin,
Kenya: A Viable Mechanism for Watershed Services that Delivers Sustainable Natural Resource Management and Improved
Livelihoods. Presented at the UN-Water International Conference “Water in the Green Economy in Practice: Towards RIO+20”,
Zaragoza, Spain, 3–5 October 2011. www.imarisha.le.ac.uk/sites/default/files/PES%20%28UN-WATER%2c2011%29.pdf.
Coates, D. and Smith, M. 2012. Natural infrastructure solutions for water security. R. Ardakanian and D. Jaeger (eds.), Water and the
Green Economy: Capacity Development Aspects. Bonn, Germany, UN-Water Decade Programme on Capacity Development (UNWDPC), pp. 167–188.
Coates, D., Pert, P. L., Barron, J., Muthuri C., Nguyen-Khoa, S., Boelee, E. and Jarvis, D. I. 2013. Water-related ecosystem services
and food security. E. Boelee (ed.), Managing Water and Agroecosystems for Food Security. Comprehensive Assessment of Water
Management in Agriculture Series No. 10. Wallingford, UK/Boston, USA, Centre for Agriculture and Bioscience (CAB) International,
pp. 29–41.
Cohen-Shacham, E., Walters, G., Janzen, C. and Maginnis, S. (eds.). 2016. Nature-Based Solutions to Address Global Societal
Challenges. Gland, Switzerland, International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN).
portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/files/documents/2016-036.pdf.
Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture. 2007. Water for Food, Water for Life: A Comprehensive Assessment
of Water Management in Agriculture. London/Colombo, Earthscan/International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Conant, R. T. 2012. Grassland soil organic carbon stocks: Status, opportunities, vulnerability. R. Lal, K. Lorenz, R. F. Hüttl, B. U.
Schneider and J. von Braun (eds.), Recarbonization of the Biosphere. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer, pp. 275–302.

119

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Corno, L., Pilu, R., Cantaluppi, E. and Adani, F. 2016. Giant cane (Arundo donax L.) for biogas production: The effect of two ensilage
methods on biomass characteristics and biogas potential. Biomass and Bioenergy, Vol. 93, pp. 131–136.
doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2016.07.017.
CRED (Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disaster). n.d. EM-DAT The International Disaster Database. Brussels, CRED.
www.emdat.be.
CRED/UNISDR (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disaster/United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2015.
The Human Costs of Weather Related Disasters 1995–2015. Brussels/Geneva, CRED/UNISDR. www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
publications/46796.
Critchley, W. and Di Prima, S. (eds.) 2012. Water Harvesting Technologies Revisited. Deliverable 2.1 of the FP7 Project Water Harvesting
Technologies: Potentials for Innovations, Improvements and Upscaling in Sub­Saharan Africa. Amsterdam, Vrije Universiteit.
Cullen, H. M., deMenocal, P. B., Hemming, S., Brown, F. H., Guilderson, T., and Sirocko, F. 2000. Climate change and the collapse of
the Akkadian empire: Evidence form the deep sea. Geology, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 379–382.
doi.org/10.1130/0091-7613(2000)28<379:CCATCO>2.0.co;2.

D

Dadson, S. J., Hall, J. W., Murgatroyd, A., Acreman, M., Bates, P., Beven, K., Heathwaite, L., Holden, J., Holman, I. P., Lane, S. N.,
O’Connell, E., Penning-Rowsell, E., Reynard, N., Sear, D., Thorne, C. and Wilby, R. 2017. A restatement of the natural science
evidence concerning catchment-based ‘natural’ flood management in the UK. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, Vol. 473, No. 2199. doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2016.0706.
Dai, A. 2013. Increasing drought under global warming in observations and models. Nature Climate Change, Vol. 3, pp. 52–58.
doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1633.
Dalin, C., Wada, Y., Kastner, T. and Puma, M. J. 2017. Groundwater depletion embedded in international food trade. Nature, Vol. 543,
pp. 700–704. doi.org/10.1038/nature21403.
Davidson, N. C. 2014. How much wetland has the world lost? Long-term and recent trends in global wetland area. Marine and
Freshwater Research, Vol. 65, No. 10, pp. 934–941. doi.org/10.1071/MF14173.
Davis, M., Krüger, I. and Hinzmann, M. 2015. Coastal Protection and SUDS: Nature-Based Solutions. RECREATE Policy Brief No.
4. Berlin, Ecologic Institute. ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/green_semester/pdf/Recreate_PB_2015_NBS_final_
druck10-02-2016.pdf.
Dawson, T. E. 1996. Determining water use by trees and forests from isotopic, energy balance and transpiration analyses: The roles
of tree size and hydraulic lift. Tree Physiology, Vol. 16, No. 1-2, pp. 263–272. doi.org/10.1093/treephys/16.1-2.263.
De, A., Bose, R., Kumar, A. and Mozumdar, S. 2014. Targeted Delivery of Pesticides Using Biodegradable Polymeric Nanoparticles.
Springer Briefs in Molecular Science. New Delhi, Springer India. doi.org/10.1007/978-81-322-1689-6.
De la Varga, D., Van Oirschot, D., Soto, M., Kilian, R., Arias, C. A., Pascual, A. and Álvarez, J. A. 2017. Constructed wetlands for
industrial wastewater treatment and removal of nutrients. Á. Val del Rio, J. L. Campos Gómez and A. M. Corral (eds.), Technologies
for the Treatment and Recovery of Nutrients from Industrial Wastewater. Advances in Environmental Engineering and Green
Technologies (AEEGT) Book Series. Hershey, Pa., IGI Global, pp. 202–230.
Delpla, I., Jung, A.-V., Baures, E., Clement, M. and Thomas, O. 2009. Impacts of climate change on surface water quality in relation to
drinking water production. Environment International, Vol. 35, No. 8, pp. 1225–1233. doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2009.07.001.
DEP (New York City Department of Environmental Protection). 2010. NYC Green Infrastructure Plan: A Sustainable Strategy for Clean
Waterways. New York, DEP. www.nyc.gov/html/dep/pdf/green_infrastructure/NYCGreenInfrastructurePlan_LowRes.pdf.
Derpsch, R. and Friedrich, T. 2009. Global Overview of Conservation Agriculture Adoption. Paper presented to the 4th World Congress
on Conservation Agriculture, New Delhi, February 2009.
De Sousa, M. R. C., Montalto, F. A. and Gurian, P. 2016. Evaluating green infrastructure stormwater capture performance under
extreme precipitation. Journal of Extreme Events, Vol. 3, No. 2. doi.org/10.1142/S2345737616500068.
Dickens, C. W. S. and Graham, P. M. 2002. The South African Scoring System (SASS) Version 5: Rapid bioassessment method for
rivers. African Journal of Aquatic Science, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp. 1–10. doi.org/10.2989/16085914.2002.9626569.
Di Giovanni, G. and Zevenbergen, C. 2017. ‘Upscaling’: Practice, policy and capacity building. Insights from the partners’ experience.
Building with Nature Report, Interreg Vb Programme 2014–2020 for a Sustainable North Sea Region.
Dill, J., Deichert, G. and Thu, L. T. N. (eds.). 2013. Promoting the System of Rice Intensification: Lessons Learned from Trà Vinh Province,
Viet Nam. German Agency for International Cooperation/International Fund for Agricultural Development (GIZ/IFAD).
Dillon, P., Kumar, A., Kookana, R., Leijs, R., Reed, D., Parsons, S. and Ingleton, G. 2009. Managed Aquifer Recharge: Risks to
Groundwater Dependent Ecosystems – A Review. Water for a Healthy Country Flagship Report. Land & Water Australia. Canberra,
CSIRO. publications.csiro.au/rpr/download?pid=procite:9701153f-4d82-4e68-a435-e652103c73a9&dsid=DS1.
Dobbs, R., Pohl, H., Lin, D., Mischke, J., Garemo, N., Hexter, J., Matzinger, S., Palter, R. and Nanavatty, R. 2013. Infrastructure
Productivity: How to Save $1 Trillion a Year. McKinsey Global Institute. www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-andinfrastructure/our-insights/infrastructure-productivity.

References

120

Dow Chemical Company/Swiss Re/Shell/Unilever/TNC (The Nature Conservancy). 2013. Green Infrastructure Case Studies: Case
Studies Evaluated by Participating Companies for Creation of the White Paper “The Case for Green Infrastructure”
www.nature.org/about-us/working-with-companies/case-studies-for-green-infrastructure.pdf.
DWA (Department of Water and Sanitation of South Africa). n.d. River Eco-status Monitoring Programme. DWA website.
www.dwa.gov.za/IWQS/rhp/default.aspx.

E

EC (European Commission). 2013a. Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the Implementation
of Council Directive 91/676/EEC concerning the Protection of Waters against Pollution caused by Nitrates from Agricultural
Sources based on Member State Reports for the Period 2008–2011. Brussels, EC. eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52013DC0683.
_____. 2013b. Green Infrastructure (GI): Enhancing Europe’s Natural Capital. Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, The Council, The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. COM/2013/0249
final. Brussels, EC. eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52013DC0249.
_____. 2014. EU Policy Document on Natural Water Retention Measures by the Drafting Team of the WFD CIS Working Group
Programme of Measures (WG PoM). Technical Report 2014 No. 082. Luxembourg, Office for Official Publications of the European
Communities. doi.org/10.2779/227173.
_____. 2015. Towards an EU Research and Innovation Policy Agenda for Nature-Based Solutions & Re-Naturing Cities. Final Report
of the Horizon 2020 Expert Group on ‘Nature-Based Solutions and Re-Naturing Cities’. Brussels, EC. publications.europa.eu/en/
publication-detail/-/publication/fb117980-d5aa-46df-8edc-af367cddc202.
_____. 2017a. Report on the Implementation of Direct Payments [Outside Greening] – Claim Year 2015. EC.
_____. 2017b. An Action Plan for Nature, People and the Economy. Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions. COM(2017) 198 final.
Brussels, EC. ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/legislation/fitness_check/action_plan/communication_en.pdf.
Echavarria, M., Zavala, P., Coronel, L., Montalvo, T. and Aguirre, L. M. 2015. Green Infrastructure in the Drinking Water Sector in Latin
America and the Caribbean: Trends, Challenges, and Opportunities. EcoDecisión/Forest Trends/The Nature Conservancy (TNC).
www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_5134.pdf.
EEA (European Environment Agency). 2016. Green Roofs in Basel, Switzerland: Combining Mitigation and Adaptation Measures
(2015). Climate-ADAPT, European Climate Adaptation Platform, EEA. climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/metadata/case-studies/
green-roofs-in-basel-switzerland-combining-mitigation-and-adaptation-measures-1.
Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands in China. 2016. Factsheet Sponge City Construction in China. Beijing, Kingdom of the
Netherlands. www.nederlandenu.nl/binaries/nl-netherlandsandyou/documenten/publicaties/2016/12/06/2016-factsheetsponge-cities-pilot-project-china.pdf/2016-factsheet-sponge-cities-pilot-project-china.pdf.
Embid, A. and Martín, M. 2015. La experiencia legislativa del decenio 2005-2015 en materia de aguas en América Latina [The
Legislative Experience from the Decade 2005–2015 in terms of Water in Latin America]. Santiago, United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC). repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/38947/1/
S1500777_es.pdf. (In Spanish.)
Equator Initiative. n.d. Equator Initiative website. www.equatorinitiative.org.
Eriyagama, N., Smakhtin, V. and Gamage, N. 2009. Mapping Drought Patterns and Impacts: A Global Perspective. IWMI Research
Report No. 133. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI). www.iwmi.cgiar.org/publications/iwmi-researchreports/iwmi-research-report-133/.
Everard, M. 2015. Community-based groundwater and ecosystem restoration in semi-arid north Rajasthan (1): Socio-economic
progress and lessons for groundwater-dependent areas. Ecosystem Services, Vol. 16, pp. 125–135.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2015.10.011.

F

Faivre, N., Fritz, M., Freitas, T., De Boissezon, B. and Vandewoestijne, S. 2017. Nature-Based Solutions in the EU: Innovating with
nature to address social, economic and environmental challenges. Environmental Research, Vol. 159, pp. 509–518.
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.08.032.
Falkenmark, M. and Rockström, J. 2004. Balancing Water for Humans and Nature: The New Approach in Ecohydrology. London,
Earthscan.
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 2010. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2010: Main report. FAO
Forestry Paper No. 163. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1757e/i1757e.pdf.
_____. 2011a. The State of the World’s Land and Water Resources for Food and Agriculture: Managing Systems at Risk. Rome/
London, FAO/Earthscan. www.fao.org/docrep/017/i1688e/i1688e.pdf.
_____. 2011b. Save and Grow: A Policy Maker’s Guide to the Sustainable Intensification of the Smallholder Crop Production. Rome,
FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/014/i2215e/i2215e.pdf.
_____. 2011c. Why Invest in Sustainable Mountain Development? Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/015/i2370e/i2370e.pdf.

121

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

_____. 2013a. Climate Smart Agriculture Sourcebook. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/018/i3325e/i3325e.pdf.
_____. 2013b. Reviewed Strategic Framework. Thirty-eighth session. Rome, 15–22 June 2013. www.fao.org/docrep/meeting/027/
mg015e.pdf.
_____. 2014a. Building a Common Vision for Sustainable Food and Agriculture: Principles and Approaches. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/a-i3940e.pdf.
_____. 2014b. Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use Emissions by Sources and Removals by Sinks. FAO Statistics Division Working
Paper Series ESS/14-02. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/docrep/019/i3671e/i3671e.pdf.
_____. 2014c. The Water–Energy–Food Nexus: A New Approach in Support of Food Security and Sustainable Agriculture. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/a-bl496e.pdf.
_____. 2015. The Impact of Natural Hazards and Disasters on Agriculture and Food Security and Nutrition: A Call for Action to Build
Resilient Livelihoods. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i4434e.pdf.
_____. 2016. Global Forest Resources Assessment 2015: How are the World’s Forests Changing? Second edition. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/a-i4793e.pdf.
FAO/IFAD/UNICEF/WFP/WHO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/International Fund for Agricultural
Development/United Nations Children’s Fund/World Food Programme/World Health Organization). 2017. The State of Food
Security and Nutrition in the World 2017: Building Resilience for Peace and Food Security. Rome, FAO.
www.fao.org/3/a-I7695e.pdf.
FAO/ITPS (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/Intergovernmental Technical Panel on Soils). 2015a. Status of
the World’s Soil Resources (SWSR) – Main Report. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i5199e.pdf.
_____. 2015b. Status of the World’s Soil Resources (SWSR) – Technical Summary. Rome, FAO. www.fao.org/3/a-i5126e.pdf.
Finlayson, C. M., Gitay, H., Bellio, M. G., Van Dam, R. A. and Taylor, I. 2006. Climate variability and change and other pressures on
wetlands and waterbirds: Impacts and adaptation. G. C. Boere, C. A. Galbraith and D. A. Stroud (eds.), Waterbirds around the
World: A Global Overview of the Conservation, Management and Research of the World’s Waterbirds Flyways. Edinburgh, UK, The
Stationery Office. pp. 88–97.
Fischer, J., Lindenmayer, D. B. and Manning, A. D. 2006. Biodiversity, ecosystem function, and resilience: Ten guiding principles
for commodity production landscapes. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 80–86. doi.org/10.1890/15409295(2006)004[0080:BEFART]2.0.CO;2.
FONAG (Fondo para la Protección del Agua). n.d. Fund for Water Protection — FONAG. FONAG website. www.fonag.org.ec/?page_
id=1580.
Friedrich, T., Kassam, A. H. and Shaxson, F. 2008. Agriculture for Developing Countries. Annex 2, Case Study Conservation Agriculture.
Science and Technology Options Assessment (STOA) project. Karlsruhe, Germany, European Technology Assessment Group.
www.itas.kit.edu/downloads/projekt/projekt_meye08_atdc_annex2.pdf.

G

Gale, I. N., Macdonald, D. M. J., Calow, R. C., Neumann, I., Moench, M., Kulkarni, H., Mudrakartha, S. and Palanisami, K. 2006.
Managed Aquifer Recharge: An Assessment of its Role and Effectiveness in Watershed Management. Final report for DFID KAR
project R8169, Augmenting groundwater resources by artificial recharge: AGRAR. British Geological Survey Commissioned
Report CR/06/107N. Keyworth, UK, British Geological Survey/Department for International Development.
Gartner, T., Mulligan, J., Schmidt, R. and Gunn, J. (eds.). 2013. Natural Infrastructure: Investing in Forested Landscapes for Source
Water Protection in the United States. Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI). www.wri.org/sites/default/files/wri13_
report_4c_naturalinfrastructure_v2.pdf.
Gathorne-Hardy, A., Reddy, D. N., Venkatanarayana, M. and Harriss-White, B. 2013. A life cycle assessment (LCA) of greenhouse gas
emissions from SRI and flooded rice production in SE India. Taiwan Water Conservancy, Vol. 61, No. 4, pp. 110–125.
GEF (Global Environment Facility). 2017. GEF-6 Program Framework Document (PFD). Amazon Sustainable Landscapes Program.
www.thegef.org/sites/default/files/project_documents/GEF-6_PFD_Amazon_Revised_Sept_10_FINAL.pdf.
GFC/IAC/CBA/AMAC/IAMAC/CTA/FECO (Green Finance Committee of China Society for Finance and Banking/Investment
Association of China/China Banking Association/Asset Management Association of China/Insurance Asset Management
Association of China/China Trustee Association/Foreign Economic Cooperation Office of the Ministry of Environment
Protection). 2017. Environmental Risk Management Initiative for China’s Overseas Investment. September 5, 2017. unepinquiry.
org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/Environmental-Risk-Management-Initiative-for-China---s-Overseas-Investment.pdf.
Gibson, D. J. 2009. Grasses and Grassland Ecology. Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
Gleick, P. H. and Palaniappan, M. 2010. Peak water limits to freshwater withdrawal and use. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, Vol. 107, No. 25, pp. 11155–11162. doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1004812107.
Goldin, J., Rutherford, R. and Schoch, D. 2008. The place where the sun rises: An application of IWRM at the village level.
International Journal of Water Resource Development, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 345–356. doi.org/10.1080/07900620802127283.

References

122

Goren, O. 2009. Geochemical Evolution and Manganese Mobilization in Organic Enriched Water Recharging Calcareous-Sandstone
Aquifer; Clues from the Shafdan Sewage Treatment Plant. Phd thesis, Jerusalem, Israel, Hebrew University/Ministry of National
Infrastructures of Israel/Geological Survey of Israel. www.gsi.gov.il/_uploads/ftp/GsiReport/2009/Goren-Orly-GSI-12-2009.pdf.
Govaerts, B., Verhulst, N., Castellanos-Navarrete, A., Sayre, K. D., Dixon, J. and Dendooven, L. 2009. Conservation agriculture and
soil carbon sequestration: Between myth and farmer reality. Critical Reviews in Plant Science, Vol. 28, No. 3, pp. 97–122.
doi.org/10.1080/07352680902776358.
Graham, P. M., Dickens, C. W. S. and Taylor, R. J. 2004. MiniSASS– miniSASS – A novel technique for community participation in
river health monitoring and management. African Journal of Aquatic Sciences, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 25-35.
Granit, J., Liss Lymer, B., Olsen, S., Tengberg, A., Nõmmann, S. and Clausen, T. J. 2017. A conceptual framework for governing and
managing key flows in a source-to-sea continuum. Water Policy, Vol. 19, No. 5, pp. 673–691. doi.org/ 10.2166/wp.2017.126.
Gurnell, A., Lee, M. and Souch, C. 2007. Urban rivers: Hydrology, geomorphology, ecology and opportunities for change.
Geography Compass, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 1118–1137. doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-8198.2007.00058.x.
GWPEA (Global Water Partnership Eastern Africa). 2016. Building Resilience to Drought: Learning from Experience in the Horn of
Africa. Entebbe, Uganda, Integrated Drought Management Programme in the Horn of Africa.
www.droughtmanagement.info/literature/GWP_HOA_Building_Resilience_to_Drought_2016.pdf.

H

Haase, D. 2016. Nature-Based Solutions for Cities: A New Tool for Sustainable Urban Land Development? Urbanization and Global
Environmental Change (UGEC) Viewpoints. ugecviewpoints.wordpress.com/2016/05/17/nature-based.
Haddaway, N. R., Brown, C., Eggers, S., Josefsson, J., Kronvang, B., Randall, N. and Uusi-Kämppä, J. 2016. The multifunctional
roles of vegetated strips around and within agricultural fields. A systematic map protocol. Environmental Evidence, Vol. 5, No. 1,
pp. 18. doi.org/10.1186/s13750-016-0067-6.
Hahn, C., Prasuhn, V., Stamm, C. and Schulin, R. 2012. Phosphorus losses in runoff from manured grassland of different soil P
status at two rainfall intensities. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Vol. 153, pp. 65–74. doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.03.009.
Hall, J. W., Grey, D., Garrick, D., Fung, F., Brown, C., Dadson, S. G. and Sadoff, C. W. 2014. Coping with the curse of freshwater
variability: Institutions, infrastructure, and information for adaptation. Science, Vol. 346, No. 6208, pp. 429–430.
doi.org/10.1126/science.1257890.
Halliday, S. J., Skeffington, R. A., Wade, A. J., Bowes, M. J., Read, D. S., Jarvie, H. P. and Loewenthal, M. 2016. Riparian shading
controls instream spring phytoplankton and benthic algal growth. Environmental Science: Processes & Impacts, Vol. 18, pp.
677–689. doi.org/10.1039/C6EM00179C.
Hanson, C., Ranganathan, J., Iceland, C. and Finisdore, J. 2012. The Corporate Ecosystem Services Review: Guidelines for Identifying
Business Risks and Opportunities Arising from Ecosystem Change. Version 2.0. Washington DC, World Resources Institute (WRI).
www.wri.org/publication/corporate-ecosystem-services-review.
Herrera Amighetti, C. 2015. Grupo de Infraestructura Verde [Green Infrastructure Group]. Lima, Association of Water and Sanitation
Regulatory Entities of the Americas (ADERASA). www.sunass.gob.pe/fiar/aderasa/1cherrera.pdf. (In Spanish.)
Hildebrandt, A. and Eltahir, E. A. 2006. Forest on the edge: Seasonal cloud forest in Oman creates its own ecological niche.
Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 33, No. 11. doi.org/10.1029/2006GL026022.
Hipsey, M. R. and Arheimer, B. 2013. Challenges for water-quality research in the new IAHS decade on: Hydrology Under Societal
and Environmental Change. B. Arheimer et al. (eds.), Understanding Freshwater Quality Problems in a Changing World.
Wallingford, UK, International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS) Press, pp. 17–29.
Hirabayashi, Y., Kanae, S., Emori, S., Oki, T. and Kimoto, M. 2008. Global projections of changing risks of floods and droughts in a
changing climate. Hydrological Sciences Journal, Vol. 53, No. 4, pp. 754–772. doi.org/10.1623/hysj.53.4.754.
HLPE (High-Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition Committee on World Food Security). 2015. Water for Food
Security and Nutrition: A Report by the High-Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition. Rome, HLPE.
www.fao.org/3/a-av045e.pdf.
Hoekstra, A. Y. and Mekonnen, M. M. 2012. The water footprint of humanity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol.
109, No. 9, pp. 3232–3237. doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1109936109.
Hooper, D. U., Chapin III, F. S., Ewel, J. J., Hector, A., Inchausti, P., Lavorel, S., Lawton, J. H., Lodge, D. M., Loreau, M., Naeem, S. and
Schmid, B. 2005. Effects of biodiversity on ecosystem functioning: A consensus of current knowledge. Ecological Monographs,
Vol. 75, No. 1, pp. 3–35. doi.org/10.1890/04-0922.
Horn, O. and Xu, H. 2017. Nature-Based Solutions for Sustainable Urban Development. ICLEI Briefing Sheet. Bonn, Germany, ICLEI
– Local Governments for Sustainability. unfccc.int/files/parties_observers/submissions_from_observers/application/pdf/778.pdf.
Horwitz, P., Finlayson, C. M. and Weinstein, P. 2012. Healthy Wetlands, Healthy People: A Review of Wetlands and Human Health
Interactions. Ramsar Technical Report No. 6. Gland/Geneva, Switzerland, Secretariat of the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands/
World Health Organization (WHO). archive.ramsar.org/pdf/lib/rtr6-health.pdf.

123

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Huffaker, R. 2008. Conservation potential of agricultural water conservation subsidies. Water Resources Research, Vol. 44, No. 7.
doi.org/10.1029/2007WR006183.
Hulsman, H., Van der Meulen, M. and Van Wesenbeeck, B. 2011. Green Adaptation: Making Use of Ecosystems Services for
Infrastructure Solutions in Developing Countries. Delft, The Netherlands, Deltares. www.solutionsforwater.org/wp-content/
uploads/2012/01/Deltares-Report-2011-Green-Adaptation.pdf.
Hunink, J. E. and Droogers, P. 2011. Physiographical Baseline Survey for the Upper Tana Catchment: Erosion and Sediment Yield
Assessment. Prepared for the Water Resources Management Authority (WRMA) of Kenya. Wageningen, The Netherlands, Future
Water. www.futurewater.nl/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/2011_TanaSed_FW-1121.pdf.
Huntington, H. P. 2000. Using traditional ecological knowledge in science: Methods and applications. Ecological Applications, Vol. 10,
No. 5, pp. 1270–1274. doi.org/10.1890/1051-0761(2000)010[1270:UTEKIS]2.0.CO;2.
Huntington, T. G. 2006. Evidence for intensification of the global water cycle: Review and synthesis. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 319,
No. 1–4, pp. 83–95. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.07.003.

I

ICMA (International Capital Market Association). 2015. Green Bond Principles, 2015: Voluntary Process Guidelines for Issuing Green
Bonds, March 27, 2015. www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Regulatory/Green-Bonds/GBP_2015_27-March.pdf.
IEA (International Energy Agency). 2012. Chapter 17. Water for energy: Is energy becoming a thirstier resource? World Energy Outlook
2012. Paris, IEA. www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WEO2012_free.pdf.
IFRC (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies). 2016. World Disasters Report – Resilience: Saving Lives
Today, Investing for Tomorrow. Geneva, IFRC. www.ifrc.org/Global/Documents/Secretariat/201610/WDR%202016-FINAL_web.pdf.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 1989. Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention No. 169. Convention concerning Indigenous
and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries (Entry into force: 05 Sep 1991). Geneva, 76th ILC session (27 June 1989).
www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::p12100_instrument_id:312314.
_____. 2017. Indigenous Peoples and Climate Change: From Victims to Change Agents through Decent Work. Geneva, ILO.
www.ilo.org/global/topics/indigenous-tribal/WCMS_551189/lang--en/index.htm.
Ilstedt, U., Bargués Tobella, A., Bazié, H. R., Bayala, J., Verbeeten, E., Nyberg, G., Sanou, J., Benegas, L., Murdiyarso, D., Laudon, H.,
Sheil, D. and Malmer, A. 2016. Intermediate tree cover can maximize groundwater recharge in the seasonally dry tropics. Scientific
Reports, Vol. 6, No. 21930. doi.org/10.1038/srep21930.
Indepen. 2014. Discussion Paper on the Potential for Catchment Services in England – Wessex Water, Severn Trent Water and South
West Water. London, Indepen Limited.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2012. Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge,
UK/New York, Cambridge University Press. www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srex/SREX_Full_Report.pdf.
_____. 2014. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Working Group II Contribution to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK/New York, Cambridge University Press.
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/.
Itaipu Binacional. n.d. Cultivando água boa [Cultivating Good Water]. Itaipu Binacional website. www.itaipu.gov.br/meioambiente/
cultivando-agua-boa. (In Portuguese.)
Ito, S. 1997. A framework for comparative study of civilizations. Comparative Civilizations Review, Vol. 36, No. 36, Art. 4.

J

Jackson, B. M., Wheater, H. S., McIntyre, N. R., Chell, J., Francis, O. J., Frogbrook, Z., Marshall, M., Reynolds, B. and Solloway, I. 2008.
The impact of upland land management on flooding: Insights from a multiscale experimental and modelling programme. Journal
of Flood Risk Management, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 71–80. doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-318X.2008.00009.x.
Jacob, B., Mawson, A. R., Payton, M. and Grignard, J. C. 2008. Disaster mythology and fact: Hurricane Katrina and social attachment.
Public Health Reports, Vol. 123, No. 5, pp. 555–566. doi.org/10.1177/003335490812300505.
Jansson, A. M., Hammer, M., Folcke, C. and Costanza, R. (eds.). 1995. Investing in Natural Capital: The Ecological Economics Approach
to Sustainability. Washington DC, Island Press.
Jønch-Clausen, T. 2004. “…Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and Water Efficiency Plans by 2005” Why, What and
How? TEC Background Papers No. 10. Stockholm, Global Water Partnership (GWP). www.gwp.org/globalassets/global/toolbox/
publications/background-papers/10-iwrm-and-water-efficiency-plans-by-2005.-why-what-and-how-2004.pdf.
Jouravlev, A. 2003. Los municipios y la gestión de los recursos hídricos [Municipalities and water resources management]. Serie
recursos naturales e infraestructura 66. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
(UNECLAC). repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/6429/1/S0310753_es.pdf. (In Spanish.)
Jupiter, S. 2015. Policy Brief: Valuing Fiji’s Ecosystems for Coastal Protection.

K

Kassam, A., Friedrich, T. and Derpsch, R. 2017. Global Spread of Conservation Agriculture: Interim Update 2015/16. Extended abstract
for the 7th World Congress on Conservation Agriculture, 1–4 August 2017, Rosario, Argentina.

References

124

Kassam, A., Friedrich, T., Shaxson, F. and Pretty, J. 2009. The spread of Conservation Agriculture: Justification, sustainability and
uptake. International Journal of Agriculture Sustainability, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 292−320.
Kassam, A., Friedrich, T., Shaxson, F., Reeves, R., Pretty, J. and De Moraes Sá, J. C. 2011a. Production systems for sustainable
intensification: Integrated productivity with ecosystem services. Technikfolgenabschatzung – Theorie und Praxis, Vol. 20, No. 2,
pp. 39−45.
Kassam, A., Mello, I., Bartz, H., Goddard, T., Friedrich, T., Laurent, F. and Uphoff, N. T. 2012. Harnessing Ecosystem Services in Brazil
and Canada. Abstract presented at the Planet Under Pressure Conference, London, 26–29 March 2012.
Kassam, A., Stoop, W. and Uphoff, N. 2011b. Review of SRI modifications in rice crop and water management and research issues
for making further improvements in agricultural and water productivity. Paddy and Water Environment, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp.
163–180. doi.org/10.1007/s10333-011-0259-1.
Kazmierczak, A. and Carter, J. 2010. Adaptation to Climate Change using Green and Blue Infrastructure: A Database of Case Studies.
Manchester, UK, University of Manchester.
Keys, P. W., Wang-Erlandsson, L. and Gordon, L. J. 2016. Revealing invisible water: Moisture recycling as an ecosystem service.
PLoS ONE, Vol. 11, No. 3, e0151993. doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0151993.
Keys, P. W., Wang-Erlandson, L., Gordon L. J., Galaz, V. and Ebbesson, J. 2017. Approaching moisture recycling governance. Global
Environmental Change, Vol. 45, pp. 15–23. doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.04.007.
Kremer, P., Hamstead, Z., Haase, D., McPhearson, T., Frantzeskaki, N., Andersson, E., Kabish, N., Larondelle, N., Lorance Rall, E.,
Voigt, A., Baró, F., Bertram, C., Gómez-Baggethum, E., Hansen, R., Kaczorowska, A., Kain, J., Kronenberg, J., Langemeyer, J.,
Pauleit, S., Rehdanz, K., Schewenius, M., Van Ham, C., Wurster, D. and Elmqvist, T. 2016. Key insights for the future of urban
ecosystem services research. Ecology and Society, Vol. 21, No. 2, Art. 29. doi.org/10.5751/ES-08445-210229.

L

Labat, D., Goddéris, Y., Probst, J. L. and Guyot, J. L. 2004. Evidence for global runoff increase related to climate warming. Advances
in Water Resources, Vol. 27, No. 6, pp. 631–642. doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2004.02.020.
LACC/TNC (Latin America Conservation Council/The Nature Conservancy). 2015. Natural Infrastructure: An Opportunity for Water
Security in 25 Cities in Latin America. Invest in Nature to Increase Water Security. LACC/TNC.
laconservationcouncil.org/publico/files/news/Top-25-Opp-Cities-Report---2015.pdf.
Lacombe, G. and Pierret, A. 2013. Hydrological impact of war-induced deforestation in the Mekong Basin. Ecohydrology, Vol. 6, No.
5, pp. 901–903. doi.org/10.1002/eco.1395.
Lansing, J. S. 1987. Balinese ‘water temples’ and the management of irrigation. American Anthropologist, Vol. 89, No. 2, pp.
326–341. doi.org/10.1525/aa.1987.89.2.02a00030.
Lasage, R., Aerts, J., Mutiso, G.-C. M. and De Vries, A. 2008. Potential for community based adaptation to droughts: Sand dams in
Kitui, Kenya. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, Vol. 33, No. 1–2, pp. 67–73. doi.org/10.1016/j.pce.2007.04.009.
Laurent, F., Leturcq, G., Mello, I., Corbonnois, J. and Verdum, R. 2011. La diffusion du semis direct au Brésil, diversité des pratiques
et logiques territoriales: l’exemple de la región d’Itaipu au Paraná [The spread of direct seeding in Brazil, diversity of practices
and territorial approaches: The example of the Itaipu region in Paraná]. Confins, Vol. 12. confins.revues.org/7143. (In French.)
Leadley, P. W., Krug, C. B., Alkemade, R., Pereira, H. M., Sumaila, U. R., Walpole, M., Marques, A., Newbold, T., Teh, L. S. L., Van
Kolck, J., Bellard, C., Januchowski-Hartley, S. R. and Mumby, P. J. 2014. Progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity Targets: An
Assessment of Biodiversity Trends, Policy Scenarios and Key Actions. CBD Technical Series No. 78. Montreal, PQ, CBD (Secretariat
of the Convention on Biological Diversity). www.cbd.int/doc/publications/cbd-ts-78-en.pdf.
Liebman, M. and Schulte, L. A. 2015. Enhancing agroecosystem performance and resilience through increased diversification of
landscapes and cropping systems. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, Vol. 3, No. 41.
doi.org/10.12952/journal.elementa.000041.
Liquete, C., Udias, A., Conte, G., Grizzetti, B. and Masi, F. 2016. Integrated valuation of a nature-based solution for water pollution
control: Highlighting hidden benefits. Ecosystem Services, Vol. 22 (Part B), pp. 392–401. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2016.09.011.
Lloret, P. 2009. FONAG, a Trust Fund as a Financial Instrument for Water Conservation and Protection in Quito, Ecuador. Network
for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management for Sustainable Development in Latin America and the Caribbean,
Circular No. 29. Santiago, United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UNECLAC), pp. 5–6.
repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/39403/1/Carta29_en.pdf.
Lloyd, S. D., Wong, T. H. F. and Chesterfield, C. J. 2002. Water Sensitive Urban Design: A Stormwater Management Perspective.
Victoria, Australia, Cooperative Research Centre for Catchment Hydrology, Monash University.
Love, D., Van der Zaag, P., Uhlenbrook, S. and Owen, R. 2011. A water balance modelling approach to optimising the use of water
resources in ephemeral sand rivers. River Research and Applications, Vol. 27, No. 7, pp. 908–925. doi.org/10.1002/rra.1408.
Low, P. S. (ed.). 2013. Economic and Social Impacts of Desertification, Land Degradation and Drought. White Paper I. UNCCD 2nd
Scientific Conference, prepared with the contributions of an international group of scientists. Paris, United Nations Convention
to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).

125

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Lubber, M. 2016. Ceres Q&A with Monika Freyman: ‘This market will continue to evolve quickly’. Forbes, 14 October 2016.
www.forbes.com/sites/mindylubber/2016/10/14/ceres-qa-with-monika-freyman-this-market-will-continue-to-evolvequickly/#eddb6c2339ca.
Lundqvist, J. and Turton, A. R. 2001. Social, institutional and regulatory Issues. Č. Maksimović and J. A. Tejada-Guibert (eds.),
Frontiers in Urban Water Management: Deadlock or Hope? London, International Water Association (IWA) Publishing.

M

Maltby, E., 1991. Wetland management goals: Wise use and conservation. Journal of Landscape and Urban Planning, Vol. 20, No.
1–3, pp. 9–18. doi.org/10.1016/0169-2046(91)90085-Z.
Mander, M., Jewitt, G., Dini, J., Glenday, J., Blignaut, J., Hughes, C., Marais, C., Maze, K., Van der Waal, B. and Mills, A. 2017. Modelling
potential hydrological returns from investing in ecological infrastructure: Case studies from the Baviaanskloof-Tsitsikamma and
uMngeni catchments, South Africa. Ecosystem Services, Vol. 27 (Part B), pp. 261–271. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.03.003.
Matamoros, V., Arias, C., Brix, H. and Bayona, J. M. 2009. Preliminary screening of small-scale domestic wastewater treatment
systems for removal of pharmaceutical and personal care products. Water Research, Vol. 43, No. 1, pp. 55–62.
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2008.10.005.
Mateo-Sagasta, J., Raschid-Sally, L. and Thebo, A. 2015. Global wastewater and sludge production: Treatment and use. P. Drechsel,
M. Qadir and D. Wichelns (eds.), Wastewater: Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer, pp.
15–38.
Mazdiyasni, O. and AghaKouchak, A. 2015. Substantial increase in concurrent droughts and heatwaves in the United States.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 112, No. 3, pp. 11484–11489. doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1422945112.
McCartney, M., Cai, X. and Smakhtin, V. 2013. Evaluating the Flow Regulating Functions of Natural Ecosystems in the Zambezi River
Basin. IWMI Research Reports Series No. 148. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
doi.org/10.5337/2013.206.
McCartney, M. and Dalton, J. 2015. Built or Natural Infrastructure: A False Dichotomy. Thrive Blog. CGIAR Research Program on Water,
Land and Ecosystems (WLE) website. wle.cgiar.org/thrive/2015/03/05/built-or-natural-infrastructure-false-dichotomy.
McCartney, M. P., Neal, C. and Neal, M. 1998. Use of deuterium to understand runoff generation in a headwater catchment
containing a dambo. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 65–76. doi.org/10.5194/hess-2-65-1998.
McCartney, M. and Smakhtin, V. 2010. Water Storage in an Era of Climate Change: Addressing the Challenge of Increasing Rainfall
Variability. Blue Paper. Colombo, International Water Management Institute (IWMI). doi.org/10.5337/2010.012.
McIntyre, N. and Marshall, M. 2010. Identification of rural land management signals in runoff response. Hydrological Processes, Vol.
24, No. 24, pp. 3521–3534. doi.org/10.1002/hyp.7774.
Mekonnen, A., Leta, S. and Njau, K. N. 2015. Wastewater treatment performance efficiency of constructed wetlands in African
countries: A review. Water Science and Technology, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 1–8. doi.org/10.2166/wst.2014.483.
Mello, I. and Van Raij, B. 2006. No-till for sustainable agriculture in Brazil. Proceedings of the World Association for Soil and Water
Conservation, P1, pp. 49–57.
Michell, N. 2016. How to Plug the Gap in Water Investments. Development Finance. news.devfinance.net/how-to-plug-the-gap-inwater-investments?utm_source=160613&utm_medium=newsletter&utm_campaign=devfinance.
Mielke, E., Diaz Anadon, L. and Narayanamurti, V. 2010. Water Consumption of Energy Resource Extraction, Processing, and
Conversion: A Review of the Literature for Estimates of Water Intensity of Energy-Resource Extraction, Processing to Fuels, and
Conversion to Electricity. Energy Technology Innovation Policy Discussion Paper No. 2010–15. Cambridge, Mass., Belfer Center for
Science and International Affairs/Harvard Kennedy School, Harvard University. www.belfercenter.org/sites/default/files/legacy/
files/ETIP-DP-2010-15-final-4.pdf.
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Synthesis. Washington DC, Island Press.
www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.356.aspx.pdf.
Milly, P. C. D., Dunne, K. A. and Vecchia A. V. 2005. Global pattern of trends in streamflow and water availability in a changing climate.
Nature, Vol. 438, pp. 347–350. doi.org/10.1038/nature04312.
Mills, A. J., Van der Vyver, M., Gordon, I. J., Patwardhan, A., Marais, C., Blignaut, J., Sigwela, A. and Kgope, B. 2015. Prescribing
innovation within a large-scale restoration programme in degraded subtropical thicket in South Africa. Forests, Vol. 6, No. 11, pp.
4328–4348. doi.org/10.3390/f6114328.
Ministry of Agriculture of Jordan. 2014. Updated Rangeland Strategy for Jordan. Amman, Directorate of Rangelands and Badia
Development, MOA. moa.gov.jo/Portals/0/pdf/English_Strategy.pdf.
Minkman, E., Van der Sanden, M. and Rutten, M. 2017. Practitioners’ viewpoints on citizen science in water management: A case
study in Dutch regional water resource management. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 153–167.
doi.org/10.5194/hess-21-153-2017.
Mitsch, W. and Jørgensen, S. 2004. Ecological Engineering and Ecosystem Restoration. Hoboken, NJ, John Wiley & Sons.
Montgomery, D. R. 2007. Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations. Berkeley/Los Angeles, Calif., University of California Press.

References

126

Morrison, E. H. J., Banzaert, A., Upton, C., Pacini, N., Pokorný, J. and Harper, D. M. 2014. Biomass briquettes: A novel incentive for
managing papyrus wetlands sustainably? Wetlands Ecology and Management, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 129–141.
doi.org/10.1007/s11273-013-9310-x.
MRC (Mekong River Commission). 2009. Annual Mekong Flood Report 2008. Vientiane, MRC. www.mrcmekong.org/assets/
Publications/basin-reports/Annual-Mekong-Flood-Report-2008.pdf.
Muller, M., Biswas, A., Martin-Hurtado, R. and Tortajada, C. 2015. Built infrastructure is essential. Science, Vol. 349, No. 6248, pp.
585–586. doi.org/10.1126/science.aac7606.
Munang, R., Thiaw, I., Alverson, K., Liu, J. and Han, Z. 2013. The role of ecosystem services in climate change adaptation and
disaster risk reduction. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 47–52.
doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2013.02.002.
Munich Re. 2013. Severe Weather in Asia: Perils, Risks, Insurance. Munich, Germany, Munich Re.

N

Narayan, S., Cuthbert, R., Neal, E., Humphries, W., Ingram, J. C. 2015. Protecting against Coastal Hazards in Manus and New Ireland
Provinces, Papua New Guinea: An Assessment of Present and Future Options. WCS PNG Technical Report. Goroka, Papua New
Guinea, Wildlife Conservation Society. programs.wcs.org/png/About-Us/News/articleType/ArticleView/articleId/8335/CoastalHazards-Assessment-report-released.aspx.
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration). 2017. NASA, NOAA Data Show 2016 Warmest Year on Record Globally.
Press release. Washington DC, NASA. www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-noaa-data-show-2016-warmest-year-on-recordglobally.
Naumann, S., Kaphengst, T., McFarland, K. and Stadler, J. 2014. Nature-Based Approaches for Climate Change Mitigation and
Adaptation: The Challenges of Climate Change – Partnering with Nature. Bonn, Germany, German Federal Agency for Nature
Conservation (BfN).
Nesshöver, C., Assmuth, T., Irvine, K. N., Rusch, G. M., Waylen, K. A., Delbaere, B., Haase, D., Jones-Walters, L., Keune, H., Kovacs,
E., Krauze, K., Külvik, M., Rey, F., Van Dijk, J., Vistad, O. I., Wilkinson, M. E. and Wittmer, H. 2017. The science, policy and practice
of nature-based solutions: An interdisciplinary perspective. Science of The Total Environment, Vol. 579, pp. 1215–1227.
doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.11.106.
Newman, P. 2010. Green urbanism and its application to Singapore. Environment and Urbanization Asia, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 149–170.
doi.org/10.1177/097542531000100204.
Newman, J. R., Duenas-Lopez, M., Acreman, M. C., Palmer-Felgate, E. J., Verhoeven, J. T. A., Scholz, M. and Maltby, E. 2015. Do
On-Farm Natural, Restored, Managed and Constructed Wetlands Mitigate Agricultural Pollution in Great Britain and Ireland?:
A Systematic Review. London, UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). nora.nerc.ac.uk/509502/1/
N509502CR.pdf.
Nobre, A. D. 2014. The Future Climate of Amazonia: Scientific Assessment Report. São José dos Campos, Brazil, Articulación
Regional Amazónica (ARA)/Earth System Science Center (CCST)/National Institute of Space Research (INPE)/National Institute of
Amazonian Research (INPA). www.ccst.inpe.br/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/The_Future_Climate_of_Amazonia_Report.pdf.

O

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2012. OECD Environmental Outlook to 2050: The Consequences
of Inaction. Paris, OECD Publishing. doi.org/10.1787/9789264122246-en.
______. 2013. OECD Compendium of Agri-Environmental Indicators. Paris, OECD Publishing. doi.org/10.1787/9789264186217-en.
_____. 2015a. Table 1: Net Official Development Assistance from DAC and Other Donors in 2014. OECD website.
www.oecd.org/dac/stats/documentupload/ODA%202014%20Tables%20and%20Charts.pdf.
_____. 2015b. Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2015: Highlights. Paris, OECD Publishing.
www.oecd.org/tad/agricultural-policies/monitoring-evaluation-2015-highlights-july-2015.pdf.
_____. 2016. Mitigating Droughts and Floods in Agriculture: Policy Lessons and Approaches. Paris, OECD Publishing.
doi.org/10.1787/9789264246744-en.
_____. 2017. Diffuse Pollution, Degraded Waters: Emerging Policy Solutions. Paris, OECD Publishing.
doi.org/10.1787/9789264269064-en.
_____. n.d. OECD Data: GDP Long-Term Forecast (Indicator). data.oecd.org/gdp/gdp-long-term-forecast.htm (Accessed July 2017).
OECD/UNECLAC. 2016. OECD Environmental Performance Reviews: Chile 2016. Paris, OECD Publishing.
doi.org/10.1787/9789264252615-en.
O’Gorman, P. A. 2015. Precipitation extremes under climate change. Current Climate Change Reports, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 49–59.
doi.org/10.1007/s40641-015-0009-3.
Oki, T. and Kanae, S. 2006. Global hydrological cycles and world water resources. Science, Vol. 313, No. 5790, pp. 1068–1072.
doi.org/10.1126/science.1128845.
Oppla. n.d. Barcelona: Nature-Based Solutions (NBS) Enhancing Resilience to Climate Change. Oppla website, case studies.
oppla.eu/casestudy/17283.

127

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Ostrom, E. 2008. The challenge of common-pool resources. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, Vol. 50,
No. 4, pp. 8–21. doi.org/10.3200/ENVT.50.4.8-21.

P

Palmer, M. A., Liu, J., Matthews, J. H., Mumba, M. and D’Odorico, P. 2015. Water security: Gray or green? Science, Vol. 349, No. 6248,
pp. 584–585. doi.org/10.1126/science.349.6248.584-a.
Parkyn, S. 2004. Review of Riparian Buffer Zone Effectiveness. MAF Technical Paper No. 2004/05. Wellington, Ministry of Agriculture
and Forestry (MAF) of New Zealand. www.crc.govt.nz/publications/Consent%20Notifications/upper-waitaki-submitter-evidencemaf-technical-paper-review-riparian-buffer-zone-effectiveness.pdf.
Parish, F., Sirin, A., Charman, D., Joosten, H., Minayeva, T., Silvius, M. and Stringer, L. (eds.). 2008. Assessment on Peatlands,
Biodiversity and Climate Change: Main Report. Petaling Jaya, Malaysia/Wageningen, The Netherlands, Global Environment
Centre/Wetlands International.
Parry, M. L., Canziani, O. F., Palutikof, J. P. and co-authors. 2007. Technical Summary. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P.
J. van der Linden and C. E. Hanson (eds.). Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK, Cambridge University
Press, pp. 23–78. www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/wg2/ar4-wg2-ts.pdf.
Pavelic, P., Brindha, K., Amarnath, G., Eriyagama, N., Muthuwatta, L., Smakhtin, V., Gangopadhyay, P. K., Malik, R. P. S., Mishra, A.,
Sharma, B. R., Hanjra, M. A., Reddy, R. V., Mishra, V. K., Verma, C. L. and Kant, L. 2015. Controlling Floods and Droughts through
Underground Storage: From Concept to Pilot Implementation in the Ganges River Basin. IWMI Research Report No. 165. Colombo,
International Water Management Institute (IWMI). doi.org/10.5337/2016.200.
Pavelic, P., Srisuk, K., Saraphirom, P., Nadee, S., Pholkern, K., Chusanathas, S., Munyou, S., Tangsutthinon, T., Intarasut, T. and
Smakhtin, V. 2012. Balancing-out floods and droughts: Opportunities to utilize floodwater harvesting and groundwater storage
for agricultural development in Thailand. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 470–471, pp. 55–64. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2012.08.007.
Perrot-Maître, D. and Davis, P. 2001. Case Studies of Markets and Innovative Financial Mechanisms for Water Services from Forests.
Washington DC, Forest Trends, The Katoomba Group. www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_134.pdf.
Peterson, L. C. and Haug, G. H. 2005. Climate and the collapse of Maya civilization. American Scientist, Vol. 93, No. 4, pp. 322–329.
Pittock, J. and Xu, M. 2010. Controlling Yangtze River Floods: A New Approach. World Resources Report Case Study. Washington DC,
World Resources Institute. www.wri.org/sites/default/files/uploads/wrr_case_study_controlling_yangtze_river_floods.pdf.
Plieninger, T., Bieling, C., Fagerholm, N., Byg, A., Hartel, T., Hurley, P., López-Santiago, C. A., Nagabhatla, N., Oteros-Rozas, E.,
Raymond, C. M., Van der Horst, D. and Huntsinger, L. 2015. The role of cultural ecosystem services in landscape management and
planning. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, Vol. 14, pp. 28–33. doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2015.02.006.
Power, A. G. 2010. Ecosystem services and agriculture: Tradeoffs and synergies. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, Vol.
365, No. 1554, pp. 2959–2971. doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0143.
Pretty, J. N., Noble, A. D., Bossio, D., Dixon, J., Hine, R. E., Penning de Vries, F. W. and Morison, J. I. 2006. Resource-conserving
agriculture increases yields in developing countries. Environmental Science and Technology, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 1114–9.
doi.org/10.1021/es051670d.
PRI (Principles for Responsible Investment). 2006. Principles for Responsible Investment. New York, PRI.
www.unglobalcompact.org/library/290.

R

Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. 1971. Convention on Wetlands of International Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat. Ramsar,
Iran, 2 February 1971. www.ramsar.org/sites/default/files/documents/library/scan_certified_e.pdf.
Rangachari, R., Sengupta, N., Iyer, R., Baneri, P. and Singh, S. 2000. Large Dams: India’s Experience. Cape Town, World Commission
on Dams.
Raymond, C. M., Berry, P., Breil, M., Nita, M. R., Kabisch, N., De Bel, M., Enzi, V., Frantzeskaki, N., Geneletti, D., Cardinaletti, M.,
Lovinger, L., Basnou, C., Monteiro, A., Robrecht, H., Sgrigna, G., Muhari, L. and Calfapietra, C. 2017. An Impact Evaluation
Framework to Support Planning and Evaluation of Nature-Based Solutions Projects. Report prepared by the EKLIPSE Expert
Working Group on Nature-based Solutions to Promote Climate Resilience in Urban Areas. Wallingford, UK, Centre for Ecology and
Hydrology (CEH). www.eklipse-mechanism.eu/apps/Eklipse_data/website/EKLIPSE_Report1-NBS_FINAL_Complete-08022017_
LowRes_4Web.pdf.
Raymond, C. M. and Kenter, J. O. 2016. Transcendental values and the valuation and management of ecosystem services. Ecosystem
Services, Vol. 21 (Part B), pp. 241–257. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2016.07.018.
Renaud, F. G., Sudmeier-Rieux, K. and Estrella, M. (eds.). 2013. The Role of Ecosystems in Disaster Risk Reduction. Tokyo, United
Nations University Press.
Richey, A. S., Thomas, B. F., Lo, M. H., Reager, J. T., Famiglietti, J. S., Voss, K., Swenson, S. and Rodell, M. 2015. Quantifying renewable
groundwater stress with GRACE. Water Resources Research, Vol. 51, No. 7, pp. 5217–5238. doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017349.
Rogers, J. D., Kemp, G. P., Bosworth, H. J. and Seed, R. B. 2015. Interaction between the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the
Orleans Levee Board preceding the drainage canal wall failures and catastrophic flooding of New Orleans in 2005. Water Policy,
Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 707–723. doi.org/10.2166/wp.2015.077.

References

128

Room for the River. n.d.a. Dutch Water Programme Room for the River. Factsheets. The Netherlands, Room for the River.
www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl/english/.
_____. n.d.b. Making room for the Dutch approach. Factsheets. The Netherlands, Room for the River.
www.ruimtevoorderivier.nl/english/.
Rosegrant, M. W., Cai, X. and Cline, S. A. 2002. World Water and Food to 2025: Dealing with Scarcity. Washington DC, International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). ebrary.ifpri.org/cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/92523.
Rost, S., Gerten, D., Hoff, H., Lucht, W., Falkenmark, M. and Rockström, J. 2009. Global potential to increase crop production through
water management in rainfed agriculture. Environmental Research Letters, Vol. 4, No. 4.
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/4/4/044002.
Russi, D., Ten Brink, P., Farmer, A., Badura, T., Coates, D., Förster, J., Kumar, R. and Davidson, N. 2012. The Economics of Ecosystems
and Biodiversity for Water and Wetlands. London/Brussels/Gland, Switzerland, Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP)/
Secretariat of the Ramsar Convention. www.teebweb.org/publication/the-economics-of-ecosystems-and-biodiversity-teeb-forwater-and-wetlands/.

S

Sadoff, C. W., Hall, J. W., Grey, D., Aerts, J. C. J. H., Ait-Kadi, M., Brown, C., Cox, A., Dadson, S., Garrick, D., Kelman, J., McCornick,
P., Ringler, C., Rosegrant, M., Whittington, D. and Wiberg, D. 2015. Securing Water, Sustaining Growth: Report of the GWP/OECD
Task Force on Water Security and Sustainable Growth. Oxford, UK, University of Oxford. www.water.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2015/04/SCHOOL-OF-GEOGRAPHY-SECURING-WATER-SUSTAINING-GROWTH-DOWNLOADABLE.pdf.
Sakalauskas, K. M., Costa, J. L., Laterra, P., Hidalgo, L. and Aguirrezabal, L. A. N. 2001. Effects of burning on soil-water content and
water use in a Paspalum quadrifarium grassland. Agricultural Water Management, Vol. 50, No. 2, pp. 97–108.
doi.org/10.1016/S0378-3774(01)00095-6.
Sato, T., Qadir, M., Yamamoto, S., Endo., T. and Zahoor, M. 2013. Global, regional, and country level need for data on wastewater
generation, treatment, and use. Agricultural Water Management, Vol. 130, pp. 1–13. doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2013.08.007.
Sauvé, S. and Desrosiers, M. 2014. A review of what is an emerging contaminant. Chemistry Central Journal, Vol. 8, No. 15.
doi.org/10.1186/1752-153X-8-15.
Sayers, P., Galloway, G., Penning-Rowsell, E., Yuanyuan, L., Fuxin, S., Yiwei, C., Kang, W., Le Quesne, T., Wang. L. and Guan, Y. 2014.
Strategic flood management: Ten ‘golden rules’ to guide a sound approach. International Journal of River Basin Management, Vol.
13, No. 2, pp. 137–151. doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2014.902378.
SCBD (Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity). 2014. Global Biodiversity Outlook 4: A Mid-Term Assessment of Progress
towards the Implementation of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–2020. Montreal, PQ, SCBD. www.cbd.int/gbo4/.
Schilling, K. E. and Libra, R. D. 2003. Increased baseflow in Iowa over the second half of the 20th century. Journal of the American
Water Resources Association, Vol. 39, No. 4, pp. 851–860. doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2003.tb04410.x.
Scholes, R. J. and Biggs, R. 2004. Ecosystem Services in Southern Africa: A Regional Assessment. Pretoria, Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (CSIR).
Scholes, R. J., Scholes, M. and Lucas, M. 2015. Climate Change: Briefings from Southern Africa. Johannesburg, South Africa, Wits
University Press.
Scholz, M. 2006. Wetland Systems to Control Urban Runoff. Amsterdam, Elsevier Science.
Schulte-Wülwer-Leidig, A. n.d. From an Open Sewer to a Living Rhine River. Koblenz, Germany, ICPR (International Commission for the
Protection of the Rhine).
SEG (Scientific Expert Group on Climate Change). 2007. Confronting Climate Change: Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the
Unavoidable. Report prepared for the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (UNCSD). Research Triangle Park
(NC)/Washington DC, Sigma XI/United Nations Foundation. www.globalproblems-globalsolutions-files.org/unf_website/PDF/
climate%20_change_avoid_unmanagable_manage_unavoidable.pdf.
Shah, T. 2009. Taming the Anarchy: Groundwater Governance in South Asia. Washington DC/Colombo, Resources for the Future/
International Water Management Institute (IWMI).
Singh, R. 2016. Water Security and Climate Change: Challenges and Opportunities in Asia. Keynote speech at the Asian Institute of
Technology, Bangkok, 29 November–1 December 2016.
SIWI (Stockholm International Water Institute). 2015. Rajendra Singh – The Water Man of India Wins 2015 Stockholm Water Prize. SIWI
website. www.siwi.org/prizes/stockholmwaterprize/laureates/2015-2/.
Simons, G., Buitink, J., Droogers, P. and Hunink, J. 2017. Impacts of Climate Change on Water and Sediment Flows in the Upper Tana
Basin, Kenya. Wageningen, The Netherlands, Future Water. www.futurewater.nl/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Tana_CC_FW161.pdf.
Skov, H.. 2015. UN Convention on Wetlands (RAMSAR): Implications for Human Health. S. A. Elias (ed.), Reference Module in Earth
Systems and Environmental Sciences. Amsterdam, Elsevier. doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-9.09347-7.23

 	Despite of the title of this published work, RAMSAR is not a UN Convention. RAMSAR is an intergovernmental treaty that provides the framework
for national action and international cooperation for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources.

23

129

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Smakhtin, V. U. and Schipper, E. L. 2008. Droughts: the impact of semantics and perceptions. Water Policy, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp.
131–143. doi.org/10.2166/wp.2008.036.
Smalls-Mantey, L. 2017. The Potential Role of Green Infrastructure in the Mitigation of the Urban Heat Island. PhD dissertation.
Philadelphia, Pa., Drexel University. idea.library.drexel.edu/islandora/object/idea%3A7596.
Squires, V. R. and Glenn, E. P. 2011. Salination, desertification and soil erosion. V. R. Squires (ed.), The Role of Food, Agriculture,
Forestry and Fisheries in Human Nutrition. Paris/Oxford, UK, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO)/Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS).
Stagnari, F., Ramazzotti, S. and Pisante, M. 2009. Conservation Agriculture: A different approach for crop production through
sustainable soil and water management: A review. E. Lichtfouse (ed.), Organic Farming, Pest Control and Remediation of Soil
Pollutants. Sustainable Agriculture Reviews, Vol. 1. Dordrecht, The Netherlands, Springer, pp. 55–83.
Stanton, T., Echavarria, M., Hamilton, K. and Ott, C. 2010. State of Watershed Payments: An Emerging Marketplace. Ecosystem
Marketplace. www.forest-trends.org/documents/files/doc_2438.pdf.
Steffen, W., Broadgate, W., Deutsch, L., Gaffney, O. and Ludwig, C. 2015. The trajectory of the Anthropocene: The great acceleration.
The Anthropocene Review, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 81–98. doi.org/10.1177/2053019614564785.
Sun, G., Zhou, G. Y., Zhang, Z. Q., Wei, X. H., McNulty, S. G. and Vose, J. M. 2006. Potential water yield reduction due to forestation
across China. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 328, No. 3–4, pp. 548–558. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.12.013.

T

Tacconi, L. 2015. Regional Synthesis of Payments for Environmental Services (PES) in the Greater Mekong Region. Working Paper No.
175. Bogor, Indonesia, Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR). doi.org/10.17528/cifor/005510.
Taylor, B. R. (ed.). 2005. Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature. Two volumes. London, Theommes.
TEEB (The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity). 2009. TEEB in National and International Policy Making. London/Washington
DC, Routledge. img.teebweb.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/TEEB-for-Policy-Makers_Website.pdf.
_____. 2011. TEEB Manual for Cities: Ecosystem Services in Urban Management. www.teebweb.org/publication/teeb-manual-forcities-ecosystem-services-in-urban-management/.
Thakur, A. K., Kassam, A., Stoop, W. A. and Uphoff, N. 2016. Modifying rice crop management to ease water constraints with
increased productivity, environmental benefits, and climate-resilience. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, Vol. 235, pp.
101–104. doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.10.011.
The City of New York. 2008. PlanNYC: Sustainable Stormwater Management Plan 2008. A Greener, Greater New York. New York,
Mayor’s Office of Long-Term Planning and Sustainability. www.nyc.gov/html/planyc/downloads/pdf/publications/nyc_
sustainable_stormwater_management_plan_final.pdf.
The White House. 2015. Presidential Memorandum: Mitigating Impacts on Natural Resources from Development and Encouraging
Related Private Investment. Washington DC, The White House. Office of the Press Secretary. obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/thepress-office/2015/11/03/mitigating-impacts-natural-resources-development-and-encouraging-related.
Tidball, K. G. 2012. Urgent biophilia: Human-nature interactions and biological attractions in disaster resilience. Ecology and
Society, Vol. 17, No. 2, Art. 5. doi.org/10.5751/ES-04596-170205.
Tinoco, M., Cortobius, M., Doughty Grajales, M. and Kjellén, M. 2014. Water co-operation between cultures: Partnerships with
indigenous peoples for sustainable water and sanitation services. Aquatic Procedia, Vol. 2, pp. 255–62.
doi.org/10.1016/j.aqpro.2014.07.009.
TNC (The Nature Conservancy). 2015. Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund: A Business Case. Version 2. Nairobi, TNC.
www.nature.org/ourinitiatives/regions/africa/upper-tana-nairobi-water-fund-business-case.pdf.
To, P. X., Dressler, W. H., Mahanty, S., Pham, T. T. and Zingerli, C. 2012. The prospects for Payment for Ecosystem Services (PES) in
Vietnam: A look at three payment schemes. Human Ecology Interdisciplinary Journal, Vol. 40, No. 2, pp. 237–249.
doi.org/10.1007/s10745-012-9480-9.
Tognetti, S. S., Aylward, B. and Mendoza, G. F. 2005. Markets for watershed services. M. G. Anderson (ed.), Encyclopaedia of
Hydrological Sciences. Chichester, UK, Wiley.
Turton, A.R. and Botha, F. S. 2013. Anthropocenic aquifer: New thinking. S. Eslamien (ed.), Handbook for Engineering Hydrology
(Volume 3): Environmental Hydrology and Water Management. London, CRC Press.

U

UNCCD (United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification). 1994. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa. Paris, 17 June 1994.
www2.unccd.int/sites/default/files/relevant-links/2017-01/UNCCD_Convention_ENG_0.pdf.
UNCCD Science-Policy Interface. 2016. Land in Balance: The Scientific Conceptual Framework for Land Degradation Neutrality
(LND). Science-Policy Brief No. 2. Bonn, Germany, UNCCD. www.uncclearn.org/sites/default/files/inventory/18102016_spi_pb_
multipage_eng_1.pdf.
UNCSD (United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development). 2012. The Future We Want. Outcome of the Conference, Agenda
item 10. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 20–22 June 2012. rio20.un.org/sites/rio20.un.org/files/a-conf.216l-1_english.pdf.pdf.

References

130

UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs). 2015. World Urbanization Prospects: The 2014 Revision. ST/
ESA/SER.A/366. New York, UNDESA, Population Division. esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Publications/Files/WUP2014-Report.pdf.
_____. 2017. World Population Prospects: Key Findings and Advance Tables – The 2017 Revision. Working Paper No. ESA/P/WP/248.
New York, UNDESA, Population Division. esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2017_KeyFindings.pdf.
UNDP/BIOFIN (United Nations Development Programme/Global Biodiversity Finance Initiative). 2016. BIOFIN Workbook: Mobilizing
Resources for Biodiversity and Sustainable Development. New York, UNDP. www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/
environment-energy/ecosystems_and_biodiversity/biofin-workbook.html.
UNECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). 2015. Peru’s Compensation Mechanisms
for Ecosystem Services Act. Network for Cooperation in Integrated Water Resource Management for Sustainable Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean, Circular No. 41. Santiago, UNECLAC. repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/37850/
S1421023_es.pdf.
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2015. Promoting Ecosystems for Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change
Adaptation: Opportunities for Integration. Discussion Paper. Geneva, UNEP, Post-Conflict and Disaster Management Branch.
postconflict.unep.ch/publications/Eco-DRR/Eco-DRR_Discussion_paper_2015.pdf.
_____. 2016a. A Snapshot of the World’s Water Quality: Towards a Global Assessment. Nairobi, UNEP. uneplive.unep.org/media/
docs/assessments/unep_wwqa_report_web.pdf.
_____. 2016b. River Partners: Applying Ecosystem-Based Disaster Risk Reduction (Eco-DRR) in Integrated Water Resource
Management (IWRM) in the Lukaya Basin, Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nairobi, UNEP. postconflict.unep.ch/publications/
DRCongo/DR_Congo_Eco_DRR_case_study_2016.pdf.
UNEP-DHI/IUCN/TNC (United Nations Environment Programme–DHI Partnership/International Union for Conservation of Nature/
The Nature Conservancy). 2014. Green Infrastructure Guide for Water Management: Ecosystem-Based Management Approaches
for Water-Related Infrastructure Projects. UNEP. web.unep.org/ecosystems/resources/publications/green-infrastructure-guidewater-management.
UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific). 2017. Shifting towards Water-Resilient
Infrastructure and Sustainable Cities. ESCAP Knowledge Hub for Sustainable Development. E-learning course. sustdev.unescap.
org/course/detail/9 (Accessed July 2017).
UNESCAP/UNISDR (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific/United Nations Office for Disaster
Risk Reduction). 2012. Reducing Vulnerability and Exposure to Disasters. The Asia-Pacific Disaster Report 2012. UNESCAP/UNISDR.
www.unisdr.org/files/29288_apdr2012finallowres.pdf.
UNESCO. 2015a. International Initiative on Water Quality: Promoting Scientific Research, Knowledge Sharing, Effective Technology
and Policy Approaches to Improve Water Quality for Sustainable Development. Paris, UNESCO.
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002436/243651e.pdf.
_____. 2015b. Emerging Pollutants in Wastewater Reuse in Developing Countries. UNESCO-IHP International Initiative on Water
Quality (IIWQ) 2014–2018. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002352/235241E.pdf.
_____. 2016. Ecohydrology as an Integrative Science from Molecular to Basin Scale: Historical Evolution, Advancements and
Implementation Activities. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002455/245512e.pdf.
_____. Forthcoming. Emerging Pollutants in Water and Wastewater of East Ukraine: Occurrence, Fate and Regulation. UNESCO
Emerging Pollutants in Water Series. Paris, UNESCO.
UNESCO/HELCOM (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization/Baltic Marine Environment Protection
Commission – Helsinki Commission). 2017. Pharmaceuticals in the Aquatic Environment in the Baltic Sea Region: A Status Report.
UNESCO Emerging Pollutants in Water Series, Vol. 1. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002478/247889E.pdf.
UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change). 1992. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change. United Nations. unfccc.int/files/essential_background/background_publications_htmlpdf/application/pdf/conveng.pdf.
_____. 2015. Adoption of the Paris Agreement. Proposal by the President. Conference of the Parties, Twenty-first session, Paris, 30
November–11 December 2015. unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf.
UNGA (United Nations General Assembly). 2016. Draft Outcome Document of the United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III). United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development
(Habitat III), Quito, 17–20 October 2016. nua.unhabitat.org/uploads/DraftOutcomeDocumentofHabitatIII_en.pdf.
_____. 2017. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food. Human Rights Council Thirty-fourth session, 27 February–24
March 2017. Document A/HRC/34/48. United Nations. documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G17/017/85/PDF/G1701785.
pdf?OpenElement.
UNIDO (United Nations Industrial Development Organization). 2013. Lima Declaration: Towards Inclusive and Sustainable
Industrial Development. Adopted by the 15th Session of the General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, Lima, 2 December 2013. www.unido.org/fileadmin/Lima_Declaration.pdf.

131

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

UNISDR (United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction). 2015. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030. Geneva,
UNISDR. www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/43291.
University of Łódź/City of Łódź Office. 2011. Implementation of the Blue-Green Network Concept: Final Demonstration Activity Report
WP – The City of Łódź 2006-2011 – Annex 4. Łódź, Poland, University of Łódź/City of Łódź Office.
UN-Water. 2010. Climate Change Adaptation: The Pivotal Role of Water. Policy Brief. www.unwater.org/publications/climatechange-adaptation-pivotal-role-water/.
_____. 2013. Analytical Brief on Water Security and the Global Water Agenda. Hamilton, Ont., United Nations University (UNU).
www.unwater.org/publications/water-security-global-water-agenda/.
_____. 2016a. Towards a Worldwide Assessment of Freshwater Quality: A UN-Water Analytical Brief. UN-Water.
www.unwater.org/app/uploads/2017/05/UN_Water_Analytical_Brief_20161111_02_web_pages.pdf.
_____. 2016b. Water and Sanitation Interlinkages across the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Geneva, UN-Water.
www.unwater.org/app/uploads/2016/08/Water-and-Sanitation-Interlinkages.pdf.
Uphoff, N. 2008. The system of rice intensification (SRI) as a system of agricultural innovation. Jurnal Tanah dan Lingkungan, Vol.
10, No. 1, pp. 27–40. journal.ipb.ac.id/index.php/jtanah/article/view/2397/1403.
Uphoff, N. and Dazzo, F. B. 2016. Making rice production more environmentally-friendly. Environments, Vol. 3, No. 2, Art. 12.
doi.org/10.3390/environments3020012.
Uphoff, N., Kassam, A. and Harwood, R. 2011. SRI as a methodology for raising crop and water productivity: Productive
adaptations in rice agronomy and irrigation water management. Paddy and Water Environment, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 3–11.
doi.org/10.1007/s10333-010-0224-4.
USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) Farm Service Agency. 2008. Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) Benefits: Water
Quality, Soil Productivity and Wildlife Estimates. Fact Sheet. Washington DC, USDA.
www.fsa.usda.gov/Internet/FSA_File/crpbennies.pdf.
_____. 2016. The Conservation Reserve Program: 49th Signup Results. Washington DC, USDA. www.fsa.usda.gov/Assets/USDA-FSAPublic/usdafiles/Conservation/PDF/SU49Book_State_final1.pdf.
US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency). 2015. General Accountability Considerations for Green Infrastructure.
Green Infrastructure Permitting and Enforcement Series: Fact Sheet No. 1. US EPA.
www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-10/documents/epa-green-infrastructure-factsheet-1-061212-pj-2.pdf.
_____. n.d. Summary of the Clean Water Act. US EPA website. www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/summary-clean-water-act.

V

Van der Ent, R. J., Savenije, H. H. G., Schaefli, B. and Steele-Dunne, S. C. 2010. Origin and fate of atmospheric moisture over
continents. Water Resources Research, Vol. 49, No. 9, W09525. doi.org/10.1029/2010WR009127.
Van der Ent, R. J., Wang-Erlandsson, L., Keys, P. W. and Savenije, H. H. G. 2014. Contrasting roles of interception and transpiration in
the hydrological cycle – Part 2: Moisture recycling. Earth System Dynamics, Vol. 5, pp. 471–489. doi.org/10.5194/esd-5-471-2014.
Van der Putten, W. H., Anderson, J. M., Bardgett, R. D., Behan-Pelletier, V., Bignell, D. E., Brown, G. G., Brown, V. K., Brussaard,
L., Hunt, H. W., Ineson, P., Jones, T. H., Lavelle, P., Paul, E. A., St. John, M., Wardle, D. A., Wojtowicz, T. and Wall, D.H. 2004. The
sustainable delivery of goods and services provided by soil biota. D.H. Wall (ed.), Sustaining Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
in Soils and Sediments. San Francisco, Calif., Island Press, pp. 15–43.
Veldkamp, T. I. E., Wada, Y., Aerts, J. C. J. H., Döll, P., Gosling, S. N., Liu, J., Masaki, Y., Oki, T., Ostberg, S., Pokhrel, Y., Satoh, Y. and
Ward, P. J. 2017. Water scarcity hotspots travel downstream due to human interventions in the 20th and 21st century. Nature
Communications, No. 15697. doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15697.
Veolia/IFPRI (International Food Policy Research Institute). 2015. The Murky Future of Global Water Quality: New Global Study
Projects Rapid Deterioration in Water Quality. Washington DC/Chicago, Ill., IFPRI/Veolia. www.ifpri.org/publication/murky-futureglobal-water-quality-new-global-study-projects-rapid-deterioration-water.
Viste, E. and Sorteberg, A. 2013. The effect of moisture transport variability on Ethiopian summer precipitation. International
Journal of Climatology, Vol. 33, No. 15, pp. 3106–3123. doi.org/10.1002/joc.3566.
Voulvoulis, N., Arpon, K. D. and Giakoumis, T. 2017. The EU Water Framework Directive: From great expectations to problems with
implementation. Science of the Total Environment, Vol. 575, pp. 358–366. doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.09.228.
Vymazal, J. 2013. Emergent plants used in free water surface constructed wetlands: A review. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 61 (Part
B), pp. 582–592. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2013.06.023.
_____. 2014. Constructed wetlands for treatment of industrial wastewaters: A review. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 73, pp. 724 –751.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2014.09.034.
Vymazal, J., Březinova, T. D., Koželuh, M. and Kule, L. 2017. Occurrence and removal of pharmaceuticals in four full-scale
constructed wetlands in the Czech Republic – the first year of monitoring. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 98, pp. 354–364.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2016.08.010.

References

132

Vystavna, Y., Frkova, Z., Marchand, L., Vergeles, Y. and Stolberg, F. 2017. Removal eﬃciency of pharmaceuticals in a full scale
constructed wetland in East Ukraine. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 108 (Part A), pp. 50–58. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2017.08.009.

W

Wada, Y., Flörke, M., Hanasaki, N., Eisner, S., Fischer, G., Tramberend, S., Satoh, Y., Van Vliet, M. T. H., Yillia, P., Ringler, C., Burek, P.
and Wiberg. D. 2016. Modelling global water use for the 21st century: The Water Futures and Solutions (WFaS) initiative and its
approaches. Geoscientific Model Development, Vol. 9, pp. 175–222. doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-175-2016.
Wagenaar, D. J., De Bruijn, K. M., Bouwer, L. M. and De Moel, H. 2016. Uncertainty in flood damage estimates and its potential
effect on investment decisions. Natural Hazards Earth System Science, Vol. 16, pp. 1–14. doi.org/10.5194/nhess-16-1-2016.
Walton, B. 2016. Investors will see a Tighter Connection between Water and Climate. Circle of Blue. www.circleofblue.org/2016/
world/2016-preview-investors-will-see-tighter-connection-between-water-and-climate/.
Wang, Y., Li, L., Wang, X., Yu, X. and Wang, Y. 2007. Taking Stock of Integrated River Basin Management in China. Beijing, Science Press.
Ward, F. A. and Pulido-Velazquez, M. 2008. Water conservation in irrigation can increase water use. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol., 105, No. 47, pp. 18215–18220. doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805554105.
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable Development). 2015a. The Business Case for Natural Infrastructure.Geneva/New
York/New Delhi, WBCSD. www.naturalinfrastructureforbusiness.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/WBCSD_BusinessCase_
jan2016.pdf.
_____. 2015b. Iztia-Popo – Replenishing Groundwater through Reforestation in Mexico. WBCSD Natural Infrastructure Case Study.
Geneva/New York/New Delhi, WBCSD. www.naturalinfrastructureforbusiness.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Volkswagen_
NI4BizCaseStudy_Itza-Popo.pdf
_____. 2015c. Water Management and Flood Prevention in France. WBCSD Natural Infrastructure Case Study. Geneva/New York/
New Delhi, WBCSD. www.naturalinfrastructureforbusiness.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/LafargeHolcim_NI4BizCaseStudy_
WaterManagementFloodPrevention.pdf.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2015. Global Risks Report 2015. 10th edition. Geneva, WEF. reports.weforum.org/global-risks-2015/.
Weiss, H. and Bradley, R. S. 2001. What drives societal collapse? Science, Vol. 291, No. 3304, pp. 606-610.
doi.org/10.1126/science.1058775.
Weiss, H., Courty, M. A., Wetterstrom, W., Guichard, F., Senior, L., Meadow, R. and Curnow, A. 1993. The genesis and collapse of
Third Millenium North Mesopotamian Civilization. Science, Vol. 261, No. 5124, pp. 995–1004.
doi.org/10.1126/science.261.5124.995.
Wilhite, D. A., Svoboda, M. D. and Hayes, M. J. 2007. Understanding the complex impacts of drought: A key to enhancing drought
mitigation and preparedness. Water Resources Management, Vol. 21, No. 5, pp. 763–774. doi.org/10.1007/s11269-006-9076-5.
Wisner, B., Gaillard, J. C. and Kelman, I. (eds.). 2012. Handbook of Hazards and Disaster Risk Reduction and Management. London,
Routledge.
WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2006: Social Aspects and Stakeholder Involvement in Integrated Flood Management.
WMO/Global Water Partnership (GWP) Associated Programme on Flood Management (APFM) Technical Document No. 4,
WMO No. 1008. Geneva, WMO. www.floodmanagement.info/publications/policy/ifm_social_aspects/Social_Aspects_and_
Stakeholder_Involvement_in_IFM_En.pdf.
_____. 2007. Economic Aspects of Integrated Flood Management, WMO/Global Water Partnership (GWP) Associated Programme
on Flood Management (APFM) Technical Document No. 5, WMO No. 1010. Geneva, WMO. www.floodmanagement.info/
publications/policy/ifm_economic_aspects/Economic_Aspects_of_IFM_En.pdf.
_____. 2009. Integrated Flood Management: Concept Paper. WMO/Global Water Partnership (GWP) Associated Programme on
Flood Management (APFM), WMO No. 1047. Geneva, WMO. www.floodmanagement.info/publications//concept_paper_e.pdf.
_____. 2017. Selecting Measures and Designing Strategies for Integrated Flood Management: A Guidance Document. Geneva, WMO.
www.floodmanagement.info/publications/guidance%20-%20selecting%20measures%20and%20designing%20strategies_e_
web.pdf.
WOCAT (World Overview of Conservation Approach and Technologies). 2007. Where the Land is Greener: Case Studies and Analysis
of Soil and Water Conservation Initiatives Worldwide. CTA/FAO/UNEP/CDE on behalf of WOCAT.
Woods Ballard, B., Kellagher, R., Martin, P., Jefferies, C., Bray, R. and Shaffer, P. 2007. The SUDS Manual. London, Construction
Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA).
World Bank. 2009. Convenient Solutions to an Inconvenient Truth: Ecosystem-Based Approaches to Climate Change. Washington DC,
World Bank. siteresources.worldbank.org/ENVIRONMENT/Resources/ESW_EcosystemBasedApp.pdf.
_____. n.d. WAVES (Wealth Accounting and the Valuation of Ecosystem Services) website. www.wavespartnership.org (Accessed
July 2017).
World Commission on Dams. 2000. Dams and Development: A New Framework for Decision-Making. The Report of the World
Commission on Dams. London/Sterling, Va., Earthscan. www.internationalrivers.org/sites/default/files/attached-files/world_
commission_on_dams_final_report.pdf.

133

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

WWAP (United Nations World Water Assessment Programme). 2014. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2014:
Water and Energy. Paris, UNESCO. unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002257/225741E.pdf.
_____. 2015. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2015: Water for a Sustainable World. Paris, UNESCO.
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002318/231823E.pdf.
_____. 2016. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2016: Water and Jobs. Paris, UNESCO.
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002439/243938e.pdf.
_____. 2017. The United Nations World Water Development Report 2017. Wastewater: The Untapped Resource. Paris, UNESCO.
www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/environment/water/wwap/wwdr/2017-wastewater-the-untapped-resource/.
WWF (World Wide Fund for Nature). 2017. Natural and Nature-Based Flood Management: A Green Guide. Washington DC, WWF.
www.worldwildlife.org/publications/natural-and-nature-based-flood-management-a-green-guide.

X

Y

Z

Xu, H. and Horn, O. 2017. China’s Sponge City concept: Restoring the Urban Water Cycle through Nature-Based Solutions. ICLEI
Briefing Sheet. Bonn, Germany, ICLEI. www.iclei.org/fileadmin/PUBLICATIONS/Briefing_Sheets/Nature_Based_Solutions/
ICLEI_Sponge_City_ENG.pdf.
You, L., Ringler, C., Nelson, G. C., Wood-Sichra, U., Robertson, R. D., Wood, S., Guo, Z., Zhu, T. and Sun, Y. 2010. What is the Irrigation
Potential for Africa? A Combined Biophysical and Socioeconomic Approach. IFPRI Discussion Paper. Washington DC, International
Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). www.ifpri.org/publication/what-irrigation-potential-africa.
Zalewski, M. (ed.). 2002. Guidelines for the Integrated Management of the Watershed: Phytotechnology and Ecohydrology.
Freshwater Management Series No. 5. UNEP. www.unep.or.jp/ietc/Publications/Freshwater/FMS5/.
_____. 2014. Ecohydrology and hydrologic engineering: Regulation of hydrology-biota interactions for sustainability. Journal of
Hydrologic Engineering, Vol. 20, No. 1. doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)HE.1943-5584.0000999.
Zalewski, M., Janauer, G. and Jolánkai, G. (eds.). 1997. Ecohydrology: A New Paradigm for the Sustainable Use of Aquatic Resources.
Paris, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, International Hydrological Programme (UNESCO-IHP).
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0010/001062/106296e.pdf.
Zhang, D. Q., Jinadasa, K. B. S. N., Gersberg, R. M., Liu, Y., Ng, W. J. and Tan, S. K. 2014. Application of constructed wetlands
for wastewater treatment in developing countries: A review of recent developments (2000–2013). Journal of Environmental
Management, Vol. 141, pp. 116–131. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.03.015.
Zhang, D. Q., Tan, S. K., Gersberg, R. M., Sadreddini, S., Zhu, J. and Tuan, N. A. 2011. Removal of pharmaceutical compounds in
tropical constructed wetlands. Ecological Engineering, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 460–464. doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2010.11.002.
Zhang, L., Dawes, W. R. and Walker, G. R. 2001. Response of mean annual evapotranspiration to vegetation changes at catchment
scale. Water Resources Research, Vol. 37, No. 3, pp. 701–708. doi.org/10.1029/2000WR900325.
Zhang, L., Podlasly, C., Feger, K. H., Wang, Y. and Schwärzel, K. 2015. Different land management measures and climate change
impacts on the discharge: A simple empirical method derived in a mesoscale catchment on the Loess Plateau. Journal of Arid
Environment, Vol. 120, pp. 42–50. doi.org/10.1016/j.jaridenv.2015.04.005.
Zhang, Y. K. and Schilling, K. E. 2006. Increasing streamflow and baseflow in Mississippi River since the 1940s: Effect of land use
change. Journal of Hydrology, Vol. 324, No. 1–4, pp. 412–422. doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2005.09.033.
Zhao, L., Wu, L., Li, Y., Lu, X., Zhu, D. and Uphoff, N. 2009. Influence of the system of rice intensification on rice yield and nitrogen
and water use efficiency with different N application rate. Experimental Agriculture, Vol. 45, No. 3, pp. 275–286.
doi.org/10.1017/S0014479709007583.

References

134

ABBREVIATIONS
AND ACRONYMS
ACWFS-VU		
Amsterdam Centre for World Food Studies, Vrije Universiteit
AGWA		
Alliance for Global Water Adaptation
CBD		
Convention on Biological Diversity
CRED		
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters
CRP		
Conservation Reserve Program (USA)
CSO		
combined sewer overflows
CWA		
Clean Water Act (USA)
DEP		
Department of Environmental Protection (New York City)
DRR

disaster risk reduction

EC		
European Commission
EPMAPS

Empresa Pública Metropolitana de Agua Potable y Saneamiento – Public Metropolitan 			
Enterprise for Drinking Water and Sanitation (Quito)

EU		
European Union
FAO		
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FONAG		
Fondo para la Protección del Agua – Water Conservation Fund (Ecuador)
GDP		
gross domestic product
GPA		
Global Programme of Action
GWD		
groundwater depletion for irrigation
HIV		
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IAHS		
International Association of Hydrological Sciences
ICPR		
International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine
IHE		
Delft Institute for Water Education
IHP		
International Hydrological Programme
IIASA		
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
ILO		
International Labour Organization
IUCN		
International Union for Conservation of Nature
ISRBC		
International Sava River Basin Commission
IWMI		
International Water Management Institute
IWRM		
integrated water resources management
LAC		
Latin America and the Caribbean
LULUC

land use and land use change

MAR		
managed aquifer recharge
MoU		
memorandum of understanding
NBS		
nature-based solutions
NGO

135

non-governmental organization

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

NUA		
New Urban Agenda
NYC		
New York City
NWRM		
Natural Water Retention Measures
OECD		
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
PES		
payment for environmental services
SASS		
stream assessment scoring system
S2S		
source to sea
SDGs		
Sustainable Development Goals
SIWI		
Stockholm International Water Institute
SPR		
source to pathway to receptor
SRI		
system of rice intensification
SUDS		
sustainable urban drainage systems
TNC		
The Nature Conservancy
UK		
United Kingdom
UN		
United Nations
UNCCD		
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNECE		
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNECLAC		
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
UNEP		
United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCAP		
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
UNESCO		
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNESCWA		
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
UNFCCC		
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNIDO		
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
UNU		
United Nations University
USA		
United States of America
USAID		
United States Agency for International Development
US EPA		United States Environmental Protection Agency
UTFI		
underground taming of floods for irrigation
WaSH		
water, sanitation and hygiene
WBCSD		
World Business Council for Sustainable Development
WFD		
Water Framework Directive of the EU
WMO		
World Meteorological Organization
WWAP		
World Water Assessment Programme
WWDR		
World Water Development Report
WWF		
World Wide Fund for Nature

Abbreviations and acronyms

136

BOXES, FIGURES
AND TABLES
Boxes

137

Box 1.1

Ecohydrology

24

Box 2.1

Nature-based water storage in dry rivers in Africa

39

Box 2.2

NBS benefits at scale – Landscape restoration to improve water security in Rajasthan, India

40

Box 2.3

Conservation agriculture – An approach to sustainable production intensification

43

Box 2.4

The system of rice intensification (more productivity with less water)

44

Box 2.5

Landscape restoration improves multiple water outcomes for the Tana River, Kenya

45

Box 2.6

China’s ‘sponge city’ concept

46

Box 2.7

Watershed services provide a five-fold increase of the operational life expectancy of the Itaipu
Hydropower Dam in the Paraná River Basin in Brazil

47

Box 2.8

The S2S approach

50

Box 3.1

The US Conservation Reserve Program to protect water quality

54

Box 3.2

Water quality improvement using buffer strips in European farmlands

56

Box 3.3

Removal of pharmaceuticals in a constructed wetland in Ukraine

58

Box 3.4

Enhancing groundwater supplies and water quality by using soils for tertiary treatment of 			
wastewater in Israel
58

Box 3.5

Using Daphnia and algae to monitor water toxicity and early detection of pollution surges – 			
Rhine Water Quality Station in Worms, Germany
59

Box 3.6

Water funds as a means to implement NBS for source watershed protection

61

Box 4.1

Water management and flood prevention in France – LafargeHolcim

74

Box 4.2

UTFI concept assessment in Chao Phraya River Basin, Thailand

77

Box 5.1

Restoring hima systems in Jordan

81

Box 5.2

Experience with PES in the Asia-Pacific region

83

Box 5.3

PES scheme at Lake Naivasha, Kenya

83

Box 5.4

Upper Tana-Nairobi Water Fund

84

Box 5.5

The Quito Water Conservation Fund (Fondo para la Conservación del Agua – FONAG)

85

Box 5.6

NBS in urban settings: New York City

88

Box 5.7

Moving beyond wastewater treatment – Multifunctionality of constructed wetlands

89

Box 5.8

Constructed wetlands in Egypt and Lebanon

90

Box 5.9

NBS and the EU WFD: Experiences from pilot projects in the North Sea region

90

Box 5.10

NBS in water management and water services in the context of the implementation of the EU WFD: 			
The Rhine River Basin
91

Box 5.11

The value of natural assets and the importance of transboundary cooperation in the Sava River Basin

92

Box 5.12

Compensation Mechanisms for Ecosystem Services Law (Peru)

92

Box 5.13

Holistic and quantitative assessments that enable comparable infrastructure investment options can 			
favour NBS
93

Box 6.1

Financing water resilience: The emergence of green and climate bonds for water

98

Box 6.2

The Equator Initiative: Advancing NBS involving indigenous communities

104

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

Figures
Figure 1

Physical water scarcity in 2010 and projected change in water scarcity by 2050 based on
the middle-of-the-road scenario

12

Figure 2

Crop-specific contribution to groundwater depletion worldwide in 2010

13

Figure 3

Groundwater abstractions in 2010 and increases in groundwater abstraction by 2050 above 2010
levels based on the middle-of-the-road scenario

14

Figure 4

Water quality risk indices for major river basins during the base period (2000–2005) compared to 2050 			
(nitrogen index under the CSIRO-medium-scenario)
15

Figure 5

Percentage share of agriculture in total emissions of nitrates and phosphorus in OECD countries,
2000–2009

Figure 6

16

Predicted future changes in the mean soil moisture content in the top 10 cm layer in percentage 			
change from 1980–1999 to 2080–2099
18

Figure 1.1 Generalized hydrological pathways in a natural landscape and an urban setting

26

Figure 1.2 Continental precipitation recycling, 1999–2008

28

Figure 1.3 Sources of precipitation for the Sahel region

29

Figure 1.4 Natural, or green, infrastructure solutions for water management across a landscape

31

Figure 1.5 Evolving approaches to the water–ecosystem nexus. Emphasis has shifted from looking at impacts
on ecosystems to managing ecosystems to achieve water management objectives

34

Figure 1.6 Trends in number of research papers mentioning NBS and related approaches, 1980–2014

35

Figure 2.1 The relationship between built infrastructure and ecosystem services

41

Figure 4.1 Average annual impacts of droughts and floods globally, 2006–2015

65

Figure 4.2 Changes in benefit flows with ecosystem modification

67

Figure 4.3 An illustration of the WMO SPR concept

68

Figure 4.4 Most effective regional NBS measures to reduce flood peaks for a 20-year flood

69

Figure 4.5 Effect of different NBS interventions on flood peak reduction and combined effect of 			
basin-wide interventions with flood magnitude
71
Figure 4.6 Global maps of drought hazard and risk

72

Figure 4.7 Water storage continuum

75

Figure 4.8 A schematic summary of the underground taming of floods for irrigation (UTFI) concept

76

Figure 5.1 A typical watershed PES scheme

82

Figure 5.2 Public subsidies for watershed protection in 2015: Countries with public subsidies programmes
and the total share of each contributor, by region

86

Tables
Table 1

Global condition and trend for soil threats excluding Antarctica

20

Table 1.1

Examples of ecosystem services and some functions they perform

30

Table 1.2

Green infrastructure solutions for water resources management

32

Table 3.1

Categories of common source water protection activities

55

Table 3.2

Water quality in the SDGs

62

Table 4.1

Catchment-based measures that contribute to flood management

70

Table 4.2

NBS for managing drought risks in the Horn of Africa

73

Table 7.1

The potential contribution of NBS to meeting targets of SDG 6 on water and sanitation and
their potential for contributing to other targets

114

The potential contribution of NBS (for water) to some other SDGs and their targets through
delivering non-water related co-benefits

115

Table 7.2

Boxes, figures and tables

138

PHOTO
CREDITS
Executive Summary
p. 1
© Sundry Photography/Shutterstock.com
Prologue
p. 9
© Komjomo/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 1
p. 21 © Phanuwat Nandee/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 2
p. 37 © Uwe Bergwitz/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 3
p. 51 © Leoni Meleca/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 4
p. 63 © DIIMSA Researcher/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 5
p. 79 © Trabantos/Shutterstock.com
p. 94 © Naeblys/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 6
p. 95 © Georgina Smith/CIAT, www.fickr.com CC BY-NC-SA 2.0
p. 106 © Ruud Morijn Photographer/Shutterstock.com
Chapter 7
p. 107 © Olga Kashubin/Shutterstock.com
p. 113 © Anna Om/Shutterstock.com

139

The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT

Report

Report
The United Nations World Water Development Report 2018

ThePRIMARY
United Nations
World Water Development Report 2017
PALETTE

AVENIR NEXT COND

WASTEWATER
THE UNTAPPED RESOURCE
Color Codes
CMYK : C009 M020 Y010
K000
RGB : R235 G196 B028

Water management remains heavily dominated by traditional,
human-built (i.e. ‘grey’) infrastructure and the enormous potential
for NBS remains under-utilized. NBS include green infrastructure
that can substitute, augment or work in parallel with grey
infrastructure in a cost-effective manner. The goal is to find the
most appropriate blend of green and grey investments to maximize
benefits and system efficiency while minimizing costs and trade-offs.

Y

SECONDARY COLOR SYSTEM

NBS for water are central to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development because they also generate social,
economic and environmental co-benefits, including human health
and livelihoods, food and energy security, sustainable economic
growth, decent jobs, ecosystem rehabilitation and maintenance,
and biodiversity. Although NBS are not a panacea, they will play an
essential role towards the circular economy and in building a more
equitable future for all.

CM

MY

Color Codes
CMYK : C060 M000 Y048
K000

CY

Color Codes
CMYK : C032 M093 Y049
K015

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER
DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2018

CMY

This publication is financed by
the Government of Italy and Regione Umbria

WWAP

K

WWDR 2018

UNECE, UNECLAC,
UNESCAP, UNESCWA
Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2018

THE UNITED NATIONS WORLD WATER DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2017

M

Color Codes
CMYK : C002 M074 Y065
K000

The annual World Water Development Reports focus on strategic
water issues. UN-Water Members and Partners as well as other
experts contribute the latest knowledge on a specific theme.
The 2018 edition of the World Water Development Report seeks
to inform policy and decision-makers, inside and outside the water
community, about the potential of nature-based solutions (NBS)
to address contemporary water management challenges across all
sectors, and particularly regarding water for agriculture, sustainable
cities, disaster risk reduction and improving water quality.

C

GRADIENTS COLOR

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
is hosted and led by UNESCO. WWAP brings together the work of
numerous UN-Water Members and Partners to produce the United
Nations World Water Development Report series.

NATURE-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR WATER

WASTEWATER
THE UNTAPPED RESOURCE

Color Codes
CMYK : C024 M012 Y009
K000

World Water
Assessment
Programme

ISBN

United Nations
Educational, Scientiﬁc and
Cultural Organization

water and
sanitation

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

water and
sanitation

United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

World Water
Assessment
Programme

Empowered lives.
Resilient nations.

Sustainable
Development
Goals

Sustainable
Development
Goals

ISBN 978-92-3-100201-4
© UNESCO 2017
200 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

ISBN 978-92-3-100264-9
© UNESCO 2018
156 pages
Price: EUR 45.00

WWDR 2017 Full colour, with Lexicon, boxes, figures, maps,
tables, notes, photographs, references and list of abbreviations and
acronyms, as well as Forewords by UNESCO Director-General Irina
Bokova and UN-Water Chair and ILO Director-General Guy Ryder

WWDR 2018 Full colour, with boxes, figures, maps, tables, notes,
photographs, references, and list of abbreviations and acronyms, as
well as Forewords by UNESCO Director-General Audrey Azoulay and
UN-Water Chair and IFAD President Gilbert F. Houngbo

To purchase a printed copy of the book, please visit: publishing.unesco.org
To request a CD-ROM containing the report and associated publications, please write to: wwap@unesco.org
To download the PDF format of the report and associated publications, WWDR previous editions and media material, please visit:
www.unesco.org/water/wwap
USB key content: WWDR 2018, Executive Summary in nine languages, Facts and Figures in five languages and WWDR previous editions

ASSOCIATED PUBLICATIONS

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2017

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2017

Executive Summary of
the WWDR 2018

Facts and Figures from
the WWDR 2018

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

12 pages

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German,
Hindi, Italian, Portuguese,
Russian and Spanish

Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

Available in Arabic, Chinese,
English, French, German,
Hindi, Italian, Portuguese,
Russian and Spanish

Available in English, French,
Italian, Portuguese and Spanish

To download these documents, please visit: www.unesco.org/water/wwap

WWDR 2018
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization

World Water
Assessment
Programme

UN-WATER REPORTS
UN-Water is the United Nations (UN) inter-agency coordination mechanism for freshwater related issues, including
sanitation. It was formally established in 2003 building on a long history of collaboration in the UN family. UN-Water is
comprised of UN entities with a focus on, or interest in, water-related issues as Members and other non-UN international
organizations as Partners.
The main purpose of UN-Water is to complement and add value to existing programmes and projects by facilitating
synergies and joint efforts, so as to maximize system-wide coordinated action and coherence. By doing so, UN-Water
seeks to increase the effectiveness of the support provided to Member States in their efforts towards achieving
international agreements on water.

PERIODIC REPORTS
World Water Development Report (WWDR)
is the reference publication of the UN system on the status of the freshwater
resource. The Report is the result of the strong collaboration among UN-Water
Members and Partners and it represents the coherent and integrated response of
the UN system to freshwater-related issues and emerging challenges. The report
production coordinated by the United Nations World Water Assessment Programme
of UNESCO and the theme is harmonized with the theme of World Water Day
(22 March). From 2003 to 2012, the WWDR was released every three years and from
2014 the Report is released annually to provide the most up-to-date and factual
information of how water-related challenges are addressed around the world.

P Strategic outlook
P State, uses and
management of water
resources
P Global
P Regional assessments
P Triennial (2003-2012)
P Annual (since 2014)
P Links to the theme of World
Water Day (22 March)

UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water
(GLAAS)

P Strategic outlook

is produced by the World Health Organization (WHO) on behalf of UN-Water. It
provides a global update on the policy frameworks, institutional arrangements,
human resource base, and international and national finance streams in support
of sanitation and drinking water. It is a substantive input into the activities of
Sanitation and Water for All (SWA).

P Global

The progress report of the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP)

P Status and trends

is affiliated with UN-Water and presents the results of the global monitoring
of progress towards access to safe drinking water, and sanitation and hygiene.
Monitoring draws on the findings of household surveys and censuses usually
supported by national statistics bureaus in accordance with international criteria
and increasingly draws on national administrative and regulatory datasets.

P Global

P Water supply and sanitation
P Regional assessments
P Biennial (since 2008)

P Water supply and sanitation
P Regional and national
assessments
P Biennial (1990-2012)
P Annual updates (since 2013)

UN-WATER PLANNED PUBLICATIONS 2018
•

SDG 6 Synthesis Report 2018 on Water and Sanitation
The SDG 6 Synthesis Report 2018, prepared by a Task Force of 13 UN-Water Members and Partners, will be published in June 2018
ahead of the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development where Member States will review the Sustainable Development Goal
6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all – in-depth. The report will show the global status
for all SDG 6 targets and indicators based on SDG 6 monitoring mechanisms; provide an analysis of intralinkages and interlinkages and
suggest policy relevant messages aiming to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

•

Update of UN-Water Policy Brief on Water and Climate Change

•

UN-Water Policy Brief on the Water Conventions

•

UN-Water Analytical Brief on Water Efficiency

More information on UN-Water Reports at: www.unwater.org/publications

The United Nations World Water Assessment Programme (WWAP)
is hosted and led by UNESCO. WWAP brings together the work of
numerous UN-Water Members and Partners to produce the United
Nations World Water Development Report series.
The annual World Water Development Reports focus on strategic
water issues. UN-Water Members and Partners as well as other
experts contribute the latest knowledge on a specific theme.
The 2018 edition of the World Water Development Report seeks
to inform policy and decision-makers, inside and outside the water
community, about the potential of nature-based solutions (NBS)
to address contemporary water management challenges across all
sectors, and particularly regarding water for agriculture, sustainable
cities, disaster risk reduction and water quality.
Water management remains heavily dominated by traditional,
human-built (i.e. ‘grey’) infrastructure and the enormous potential
for NBS remains under-utilized. NBS include green infrastructure
that can substitute, augment or work in parallel with grey
infrastructure in a cost-effective manner. The goal is to find the
most appropriate blend of green and grey investments to maximize
benefits and system efficiency while minimizing costs and trade-offs.

WWDR 2018

NBS for water are central to achieving the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development because they also generate social,
economic and environmental co-benefits, including human health
and livelihoods, food and energy security, sustainable economic
growth, decent jobs, ecosystem rehabilitation and maintenance,
and biodiversity. Although NBS are not a panacea, they will play an
essential role towards the circular economy and in building a more
equitable future for all.

here we place

back cover

This publication is financed by
the Government of Italy and Regione Umbria

9 789231 002649

